THE JESUIT'S MEMORIAL, FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF THE Church of England.

THE JESUIT'S MEMORIAL, For the Intended Reformation of England, Under their
First POPISH PRINCE.

PUBLISHED From the Copy that was presented TO THE Late KING JAMES II.

WITH An INTRODUCTION, and some ANIMADVERSIONS, BY EDWARD GEE, Rector of St.
Benedict Paul's-Wharf, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of S. ASAPH, Lord
Almoner to Their MAJESTY'S.
My Lord,
IT was a very easy thing for me to determine, to whom I should present the
following Discourses; as it was from your Lordship's Sermon before Their
Majesty's the last 5th of November that I had the hint of your Lordship's
having seen the Memorial, that we had sought, but in vain, so earnestly after
in the late King's Time; so it was by your Lordship's Interest that I obtained
not only the happiness of seeing it, but the permission to publish it from the
most authentic, if not the only Copy in England, from that which had been
presented by the Jesuits to the late King James himself.

And since, my Lord, Decency requires the concealing from whose hands your
Lordship received this Copy of the Memorial, and the Leave for me to publish
it; it was necessary for me to address it to your Lordship, from whose hands I
received it, that thereby any Objections against my Fidelity or Truth herein
may be prevented; as all will, when my Lord Almoner's Name is seen at the Head
of it.

Some indeed will wonder to see a Jesuit's Book dedicated by a Minister of the
Church of England to a Bishop, that has been always most zealous against
Popery, and especially against the Jesuits Order; to such persons I hope this
Apology will be sufficient, I am sure it will be to your Lordship, that I
publish this Jesuit's Memorial, because I am fully persuaded that I am by it
doing a greater service to the Protestant Interest against Popery, than I was
ever able to do by any thing I wrote against Popery during the Controversy in
the late Reign.

In this Memorial we have naked Jesuitism, and the several Projects laid down,
by which our Protestant Religion was not only to have been rooted out of
England, but the very possibility of its ever reviving here prevented: and this
I hope will teach some of the discontented People among us to acknowledge at
least, that our danger from the Jesuits Faction in the last Reign was as great
as we made it, and that our Deliverance by their present Majesty's was a far
greater blessing upon the account of our Protestant Establishment, than they
have hitherto been pleased to believe it.

I have had so much experience of your Lordship's goodness toward me, that I
do not in the least suspect your pardoning me the trouble of this Address. Had
I had no other reasons to make it, the many favors I have received at your
Lordship's hands, would have engaged me to make this public acknowledgment for
them, since I cannot but reckon it one of the greatest blessings of my Life,
that I have the honor to be known to your Lordship, who are so eminent for
your extraordinary Learning, Piety, Charity and Moderation; I mention your
Lordship's Moderation, because some Men of late have been pleased to be very
angry with your Lordship for it: had your Lordship, and those Eminent Persons
that continued of your Judgment, been as willing to part with Episcopacy as
with the Apocrypha, and as desirous to lay aside the whole Liturgy, as they
were to improve it; I should have excused their anger against you, for which I
can see no other reason in the World, but that your Lordship, and those of your
Mind could not forget so fast and so entirely, as some others did their
discourses, their promises and intentions about accommodating matters with the
Moderate Dissenters, as well as giving ease to the rest of them.

That your Lordship may be blessed with a long continuance of health, and
enabled thereby to finish those excellent Designs that you have under your
hands; that you may long continue an Ornament to the Church of England, and to
Protestant Episcopacy, and may be blessed with success in your endeavors for the
Establishment and Glory of both these, is the most sincere Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obliged, and most obedient Servant EDWARD GEE.

THE INTRODUCTION.
SINCE the Jesuit, that was Author of the following Memorial, has made so much
noise in the World, and was infamous for his Treasonable Practices during the
Reigns he lived in; and has by his seditious writings laid the Foundation of
perpetual trouble to the Kingdom of England as long as there are or shall be
either Papists in England, or English Papists beyond Seas: it will not be
improper to furnish the Reader with the History of him, that thereby he may be
enabled to read and pass a truer Judgment upon the following Memorial for
rooting out our Protestant establishment, and replanting again their Popish
Religion in England.

The World is not agreed either about his Name or Parentage; for the Name of
Parsons, or Persons as he writes it himself, they will have it to be given him
upon a scandalous reason, while the true name of his supposed Father was
Cowback or Cubbuck. He was born not at Stockersey in Somersetshire, as the
Secular Priests affirm against him, but at Nether-Stowey in that County; and
notwithstanding the meanness of his Parentage, had the advantage of a liberal
Education, and was fitted for the University, whither he was sent, and admitted
into Baliol College in Oxford; he was afterward made Fellow of the same
College, and entered into Holy Orders, and became a noted Tutor, having the
greatest number of Pupils in the College.

But notwithstanding his setting out so very well, he was afterward turned out
of his Fellowship and the College with disgrace; he was not expelled indeed,
but forced to resign, with leave to keep his Chambers and Pupils a while
longer: but this grace was quickly crossed out; the occasion of which the
Writers of those times, and of his own Society, are very much divided about.
Father Morus the Jesuit, and Author of the History of the Jesuits Mission into
England, will have it to be, because he was not only suspected of inclining to
Popery, but as he will have it, palam de Religione aliter judicaret Morus
Historia Missionis Anglicanae Soc. Jesu. l. 2. p. 39.
and loqueretur, quam regni jura definierant, etc. both thought and spoke
openly for the Romish Religion, and therefore that it was an unfit and a
dangerous thing to trust such a Man with the Education of so many Youth as he
generally had under his care.

But this cannot be the true reason; since Father Persons behaved himself as a
good Protestant, and conversed especially with such Men (Mr. Squire and Dr.
Hide for example then famous Men and zealous Protestants) as might instruct and
confirm him in the Protestant Religion, for which he was afterward, when he
was College-Bursar, so very zealous that he changed a great many old Books and
Manuscripts for Protestant Books, and did first put Protestant Writers into
their College-Library: and after his disgraceful putting out of the College,
when an old Friend of his, a Gentleman of the Inner Temple, declared to him
that he had doubts concerning his Religion, he did not only protest to the
Gentleman, but offered to take his Oath upon it, That he was no Papist, nor did
ever intend to be.

Others will have his turning out of his Fellowship to be occasioned by his
being a turbulent and lewd Man, guilty of Forgery and Knavery and suchlike
crimes as made him unfit for a Society: and Dr. Bagshaw (who had been of the
same College, and afterward turned Papist also, and became a Seminary Priest)
affirms, that he was accused of falsifying his College-Accounts by Stancliffe
his Brother Bursar: and this is often objected to him by the Secular Priests,
who have treated him with severity enough, though not with more than his Pranks
after he became a Jesuit did deserve.

Others assign other reasons of his being discharged the College, but to set
aside at once the reasons offered by his Brethren the Jesuits, and those
objected by his severer Adversaries the Secular Priests, the matter may be
truly decided by the Testimonies of two unexceptionable Witnesses, who both
knew him, and one of them was Fellow of the same College with Persons;
Archbishop Abbot, and Mr. Camden the Historian: the Archbishop has written a
large Letter about this very business, which I shall transcribe hither out of
Mr. Foulis, who says he did transcribe it from the Original, with the marginal
Notes upon it.

To my worshipful loving Friend, Mr. Dr. Hussye, at Mr. Haiden's House, who
dwells at the Sign of the Tunn in Watlingstreet; give these. YOU write unto
me, to know what is in record any way against Mr. Parsons; and I return you
here enclosed word for word, so much as is in the Register of Baliol College.
In the Resignation, as you may see, he had written sponte and coactus, but now
it is sponte non coactus [ and] being blotted out, and [ non] being set over
Thus non and
. Which I am deceived if it be not altered by some body else of late, in as
much as I am verily persuaded, that since my coming to the College, I have seen
it sponte and coactus; which although it carry a Contradiction, yet intimates,
that he resigned against his will. The particular reasons whereof no Man can
tell better than Dr. Turner now dwelling in Fetterlane; or Dr. In the Proctor's
Book I find one Tho. Hyde proceeded Master of Arts the same year with Rob.
Parsons, viz. 1573.
Hide of Sarum; for, as I take it, they were both present at his removing.

The causes and manner of his giving over, as far as I could ever comprehend,
were these: Bagshaw being a smart young man, and one who thought his penny good
Silver, after that he had his Grace to be Christopher Bagshaw admitted Fellow
1572. left the College 1582. was made Priest in France, lived a while in the
English College at Rome; proceeded Doctor, some say, at Padua [ A.P. Reply, p.
156.] others at Paris; and was one of the Faculty at Sorbonne. He was active
against the Archpriest in the stirs at Wisbich: he lived to be very old.
Bachelor of Arts, was with some despite swindged by Parsons, being Dean of
the College; hoc manet alta mente repostum: And Bagshaw afterward coming to be
Fellow, was most hot in Persecution against Parsons. It was the more forwarded
by Dr. Squire's displeasure, who was then Master of Baliol College, and thought
himself to have been much bitten by vile Libels, the Author whereof he
conceived Parsons to be, who in truth was a Man at that time wonderfully given
to scoffing, and that with bitterness, which also was the cause that none of
the company loved him.

Now Dr. Squire and Bagshaw being desirous of some occasion to trim him, this
fell out: in the year 1572. Parsons had been Bursar: and being joined in Office
with one Stancliff, a very simple fellow, he took the advantage of the weakness
of his Colleague, and falsified the Reckonings much to the damage of the
College; as also deeply polling the Commoners Names, whereof there was store in
the College; and withal, not sparing his own Scholars: by all which means it
was thought, that he had purloin'd one hundred Marks.

His Office expired at St. Luke's Tide, there were some that between that and
February 1573. scanned over the Books, being moved thereunto by the secret
complaints of some of the Commoners their Scholars; and finding it apparent, as
also being now certified, that he was a Bastard; whereas it is the first
quality there required by Statute, that every Fellow should be Legitimo Thoro
natus; they proceeded to have his Expulsion solemnly. Where, by the way, you
may add, that Parsons was not of the best fame concerning Incontinency, Dr.
Sutclif's Blessings on Mount Gerizim, p. 288.
as I have heard some say who lived in Oxon at that time; but whether that were
then objected against him, I have not heard.

Parsons being put to this push in the College-Chapel, and ways sufficient
concurring to expel him, and in truth no Man standing for him, makes humble
request, That he might be suffered to resign, which with some a-do was yielded
to him; and then he wrote as you have here enclosed.

Afterward, before the Assembly broke up, he entreated that his giving over
might be concealed, by reason that it would be disgraceful unto him with all
Men, but especially with his Scholars and their Friends; and for these causes
humbly prayed, that he might keep his Scholars, Chamber, etc. and be reputed as
a Fellow in the House, the matter being concealed from all the Boys and the
younger sort in the House; which then in words was yielded unto, and that other
Decree, which now you see razed, was enacted for the time, but afterward was
soon crossed, as you may behold.

And soon after their coming out of the Chapel, by Bagshaw's means, a Peal of
Bells was rung at Magdalen Parish Church, being the Parish wherein Baliol
College stands; the reason of which ringing, as it was imparted to some few,
to be to ring out Mr. Parsons; so generally it was not known to the World or in
the College, which gave occasion to this farther Jest.

When Parson's was Expelled, he was one of the Deans of the College, and so by
his Place was to keep Corrections in the Hall on the Saturdays. The next time
therefore of Corrections, which was the day of Parsons his Exclusion, or soon
after, Dr. Squire causes Parsons to go into the Hall as Dean, and to call the
Book and Roll, etc. And then comes Dr. Squire himself in, and as if it had
been in kindness to countenance him (but in truth, more profoundly to deride
him) he calls him at every word Mr. Dean, and desires him often to have a
strict care to the good government of the Youth, and not only for a fit, but
all the time of his year that he was to continue in Office.

Some of the Commoners knew all this Pageant, and laughed the more sweetly; and
Parsons in the end spied how he was scorned, and nothing concealed; nay,
understanding all his Knell which was rung out for him, for very shame got him
away to London; and there not knowing what course at first to take, at length
resolved to try his Fortune beyond Sea, purposing, as it should seem at his
departure, to study Physic; but afterward when he came into Italy, resolving
rather to study the Civil Law; which he did for a time at Bononia, as himself
in that place told Mr. Davers, Brother to the late Sir John Davers, as the said
Mr. Davers has himself told me; but afterward belike, wanting means of
continuance, he turned to be a Jesuit.

Presently upon his departure out of England, he sent a Letter, or rather a
notable Libel to Dr. Squire; and he had so ordered the matter, that many Copies
of the Letter were taken, and abroad in the hands of others, before the Letter
came to the Doctor; which was the true cause that many lewd things were falsely
reported of Dr. Squire, although in truth, he was such a man as wanted not
faults, etc.

February 1. 1601. at University Where he was then Master.
College. Your very Loving Friend, George Abbot.


The enclosed Resignation mentioned in the Letter, runs thus:

Ego Robertus Parsons Socius Collegii de Balliolo, Resigno omne meum jus and
clameum, quem habeo vel habere potero Societatis meae in dicto Collegio; quod
non quidem facio sponte and coactus, die decimo tertio Mensis Februarii Anno
Dom. 1573.

Per me Rob. Parsons. The enclosed Decree [about keeping his Chamber and
Pupils] mentioned in the Letter was this:

Eodem tempore decretum est unanimi Consensu Magistri and reliquorum Sociorum,
ut Magister Robertus Parsons nuperrime Socius retineat sibi sua Cubicula and
Scholares quousque voluerit, and Communia sua de Collegio habeat usque ad
Festum Paschatis immediate sequentis. In this Letter we find the true account
of the Proceedings at Baliol College against our Parsons, that he was outed for
falsifying the College-Accounts, cheating the Commoners, and for incapacity,
being illegitimo Thoro natus as appeared it seems to the College by Certificate.

With the Archbishop's account Mr. Camden's does very exactly agree, who
speaking of Parsons (when become a Jesuit) and Campian's coming privately into
England in 1580. gives this Character of them both. Camden's Elizabeth Book 2.
p. 246.
This Parsons was of Somersetshire, a violent, fierce-natur'd man, and of a
rough behavior. Campian was a Londoner, of a sweet disposition, and a
well-polished man. Both of them were by Education Oxford men, whom I my self
knew, being of their standing in the University. Campian, being of St. John's
College, bore the Office of Proctour of the University in the Year 1568, and
being made Deacon, made a show of the Protestant Religion, till he withdrew
himself out of England. Parsons was of Baliol College, wherein he openly
professed the Protestant Religion, until he was for his loose Carriage expelled
with disgrace, and went over to the Papists.

From the account of this matter from such plain evidence, and such impartial
unexceptionable Witnesses, one ought to learn what little regard is to be given
to one Jesuit's History or Character of another. The Jesuit Morus in his
account of Father Parsons leaving Baliol College says, it was for his Religions
sake, and his honesty; and not for Sedition and a Contentious temper, which
Morus says, others had made the Father's crime: and therefore that he had
enlarged upon that business of the Resignation, to cut off that Calumny that
had been raised long after against the Innocent Honest Father. Qua singillatim
(says the Jesuit) a me percensenda fuerunt, quo calumniae praecidatur tela,
quam multis Morus Historia Missionis p. 40.
post annis eadem haec invidia contexuit, non Religionis ac probitatis defensae
causa cessisse Personium, sed cum reus commotae (si Diis placet) Seditionis
ferri diuturnius non potuisset.

It requires the Pen and the Face of a Jesuit to write, that a man was turned
out of his College for being an honest man, and for standing up for Probity,
when it appears from the authentic evidence of the College Books, and those
who were upon the same place, that it was for direct knavery, for cheating the
College and Scholars while he was Bourfer to the value of an hundred Marks: And
the other branch of the Jesuit's account, is just as true about his owning and
asserting the Popish Religion, whenas Mr. Camden, who was his Contemporary, and
those who were of the same College, show that he not only made profession of
the Protestant Religion while he continued there, but was zealous for it; and
another adds to this, That after he had so disgracefully left the College, he
declared to him that he neither was, nor ever would be a Papist; and which was
a very wise thing, offered to swear it too.

Quickly after this Resignation Parsons left Baliol College and Oxford also;
notwithstanding the Liberty that was allowed him of continuing in his Chambers
and at Commons, and having Pupils. It seems Guilt and Disgrace made that
University too uneasy to him, to take the benefit of that allowance; and
therefore he hurries up to London, but makes a very short stay there, finding
it best for a man in his condition vertere solum, to travel beyond Seas,
whither though the guilt of his false and unquiet behavior would go with him;
yet the disgrace might not get after him, and so his life might not be too
great a Burden to him.

Beyond Sea his first design was to study Physic, but that soon altering, he
betook himself to the Study of the Civil Laws at Bononia: and this also soon
went off. For within a year after his going beyond Seas, we find him admitted
at Rome into the Jesuits College by Mercurianus the General of their Order at
that time. It is very probable, that as Vexation and Discontent (those great
Reconcilers of People to the Catholic Faith and Church of Rome, then and now
in fashion) made him to turn Papist, for all his Protestation to Mr. Clarke his
Friend of the Inner Temple to the contrary; so Poverty, and want of
Conveniences necessary to the Study and Profession either of Civil Law or
Physic, and his natural temper did make him enter himself into the Jesuits
Order. This is certain, that he was by Nature and Inclination every way fitted
to make a complete Jesuit, he was fierce, turbulent, and bold, which are the
three main Qualifications of a Jesuit: he had indeed one great fault, I cannot
tell whether I should call it a defect, that he was too learned for that
Society; but perchance Ignorance was not then in Father Parson's days so
peculiar, and so essential to Jesuitism, as our Age, and especially our Nation
has convinced the World that it is.

He was entered into the Jesuits College in July 1575. what progress in matters
of Learning and Piety, or whether he made any at all, I do not find. The active
politic part seems to have employed him wholly from the time of his writing
Jesuit, and in that he has taken very large steps: he was quickly taken notice
of as a man very promising in those affairs, and did not deceive their
expectations, being fierce and zealous in promoting their Cause. He seems to
have over-acted his part, since he quickly drew upon himself no very favorable
Opinion from the General of their Order, who found him too turbulent, busy,
and meddling, and therefore complained, That he was more troubled with one
English man (meaning our Father Parsons) than with all the rest of his Society.

He was however after having been but five years among them pitched upon to be
one of the Jesuits that should be sent in their first Mission into England, and
perhaps his unquiet and boisterous temper might be the best reason their
General had to send him away. Cardinal Allen was the person that first motioned
such a mission of Jesuits into England, and named Father Parsons not only for
one, but to be the Superior.

The picking out such a man does tell the World as plain as words themselves
could, what the true business was, upon which these Jesuits were first sent
into England. The great pretense, and what was published every where was, that
they were only sent into Christ's Vineyard to serve the necessities of the
remaining Catholics in England, and to recover others from their Heresies and
Schism; but Cardinal Allen knew other things, and another sort of a design, a
design that required such men as Father Parsons himself was. Had their sending
been only and purely about Spiritual matters, and the Salvation of Souls, of
all men living he would not have singled out our Jesuit, whom he looked upon to
be a man very violent, and of an unquiet Spirit, and therefore more likely to
cause Breaches and Divisions, than to heal them.

And therefore some people who were not let into the Secret, were very much
disturbed when they heard that Father Parsons was sending amongst them,
expecting no good, but a great deal of mischief to all the Catholics left in
England, from the management of such a violent, not, choleric, and domineering
Superior; even Blackwel himself, that was afterward Archpriest, and so much
at Father Parson's Devotion, bewailed the coming of Parsons into England to a
Friend of his, saying: That the President at Rhemes (meaning Dr. (after
Cardinal) Allen) played a very indiscreet part to send him hither: as being an
unfit man to be employed in the Causes of Religion. And being asked by that
Friend, why Father Parsons was unmeet for that Employment, his answer was,
because his casting out of Baliol College, and other Articles and Matters
depending upon it betwixt him and Dr. Squire (then living) were very likely to
be renewed; and so to work great discredit both to him and to the Catholic
Cause.

And indeed one cannot but wonder how a man who had left England so lately, and
upon such very scandalous accounts, should have the face not only to come, but
to put himself forward upon such an Employment: It confirms the Character of
Mr. Camden and others of him, that he was a man of confident boldness; but it
does not prove either Policy or Discretion in hi^^ except he had brought
himself to believe that the Absolution he got in the Church of Rome, when he
turned Apostate, had blo^ted his false tricks and knavish pranks o^ of all
Peoples Memories, as well as out of Heavens Records.

However to do them justice who were for sending him into England against all
those complainers against him and them, such a man as Father Parsons was
necessary for such a work as he was sent hither upon; and what that work was we
shall hear very quickly.

He and Father Campian were appointed for this Mission, and parted from Rome on
the Sunday after Easter 1580. with the Pope's Benediction: Their Dispatches
were given them there before they set out, by Everard Mercurianus the General
of their Order, which Morus in his History of this Mission makes to be in short
some Commands about faithfully discharging their Ministerial Function, Acceptis
ab Everardo mandatis de re Catholicae per nostri instituti ministeria
diligenter procuranda, atquo non minori diligentis vita^^a (...) rerum quae ad
regni publica negotia pertinerent seu verbo seu scripto trabatione. Mor. Hist.
Min. l. 3. p. 61.
and by no means, either by Word or Writing to meddle with the Public Affairs
of the Kingdom of England.

I was very careful not to omit the putting down these (dispatches for the two
Jesuits according to Father Moor's ^^count of them, because I shall show by and
by how wonderfully these do agree with another dispatch (which, though Father
Moor leave it out of his History, I will not leave out of mine) and with the
Practices of both these Jesuits as soon as they were got into this Kingdom.

Father Moor tells us, that the two Jesuits, with their Companions, took Geneva
in their way from Rome, and made a visit to Beza, with whom they had some
Conference, but no victory it seems, because the poor ignorant Man took the
advantage of the shutting in of the Evening to break off the Discourse, and to
conceal his ignorance: a piece of History this that Father Moor ought not to
expect to be credited in by any Body that has ever heard of learning or
learned Men, or by any one but a Jesuit and a Jesuit's Fellow.

First Parsons set sail from Calice, (the two Sparks being unwilling to venture
two such Treasures in one Bottom) after Midnight, which was the properest time
for such works of darkness, as he w^^ going about, and got safe to Canterbury
(as Campian acquaints their General in his Letter to Rome) in the disguise of
Soldier, but so gaudy, and so airy, th^^ he must be a very nice Man, that co^^
^hen suspect or find Piety or Modesty under such a dress and mien; ay, or
without that dress I dare add, for who ever heard otherwise of Father Parson's
Modesty or Piety either?

After this he got as safe to London, where he stayed for his Companion Father
Campi^n, who likewise escaped the strict search that was made for them, their
Pictures as well as the time of their setting out from Rome being got into
England before them.

I must leave these Jesuits in their disguises for a while, and look back to
the State Queen Elizabeth was in with the Bishops of Rome. Pius Quartus had a
mind to attempt her by fair speeches, and to persuade her to submit her Scepter
to his Crosier by fair Promises, for which purpose by his Agent Parpaglia he
wrote a very ^mooth Letter unto her, giving her assurance of every thing she
could desire from him. But Queen Elizabeth was too prudent to be caught by such
a gilded bait, or to part with her Supreme Power for a few good Words, and
therefore would have nothing to do with the Bishops of Rome; so that all this
Pope's hopes of her were lost. Pius Quintus seeing his Predecessor's mild ways
unsuccessful, resolved upon harsher methods, and made it his chief business to
contrive, and encourage Plots against her; and not content with this (...) slow
and unsuccessful way of destroying her, he, without giving warning or sending
Admonition to her, lets fly his Bull of Excommunication and Deprivation against
her, and causes it by an impudent Wretch Felton, to be fixed upon the Bishop of
London's Gates; the Title of which (to trouble the Reader with no more of it)
is this: The sentence Declaratory of our holy Lord, Pope Pius Quintus against
Elizabeth Queen of England, and the Heretics adhering to her: wherein also all
her Subjects are declared to be absolved from the Oath of Allegiance, and
whatever other duty they owe unto her: and those which from henceforth shall
obey her, are involved in the same Curse or Anathema.

But as terrible as this Title, and as much more terrible as the Bull it self
was, it did no ways answer the Pope's Expectation: it was so far from raising
all the Papists in the Nation against her which was his Expectation as well
(...) his command, that it was contemned and slighted by most, and instead of
alie^^ting their duty and their affections from the Queen, it did alienate them
both from him, who was so ill advised, as by such hasty, unreasonable and
ridiculous provocations to bring the severity of Laws and Trouble upon them,
who had hitherto been suffered quietly to enjoy in private the exercise of
their Religion; but now had no reason to expect it any longer, being made every
one of them so obnoxious and suspicious to the Government by reason of this his
declaratory Bull against the Queen.

In this Condition the Queen and Realm were, when our two Jesuits were sent
over, and as no wise Man, nor sober Man among the Papists themselves ever
doubted that this Excommunication and Deposition of Queen Elizabeth was oweing
to the false suggestions and traitorous and importunate solicitations of the
Jesuits Faction; so it is as little to be questioned that the Jesuits undertook
to make this Bull effectual, and to raise not only the Papists, but all others
that they could buy into their interest to depose the Queen, and reduce the
Realm to the Pope's Obedience; and that for this very purpose their first
Mission came over hither.

They pretended indeed, that they came over only to minister in Spiritual
things to the necessities of the remaining Catholics in England, and to
propagate their Catholic Religion, as they call it, for the saving of Men's
Souls, and that their business was not to stir up Sedition against the Queen,
or to meddle with matters of State: but whatever their pretenses were, or
whatever Father Moor has devised for them in his account of their Mission into
England, this we are sure of, that the private Instructions (here following)
given these two Jesuits by Pope Gregory XIII. for their coming hither, together
with their practices immediately after their getting into England, prove the
direct contrary upon them.

We must understand that as by the damnatory Bull of Pius V. Queen Elizabeth
and all her Adherents were cursed, and deposed from all Power and Authority; so
by the last clause but one of it, the Papists, themselves were put under the
same Curse, and Anathematized, if they continued to obey her. Praecipimusque
and interdicimus universis and singulis, etc. And we command and forbid all and
every the Noblemen, Subjects, People, and others aforesaid, that they presume
not to obey her, or her Monitions, Mandates, or Laws; and for those who shall
do otherwise than here commanded, we do involve them in the same Sentence of
Anathema.

This was very hard upon the Papists themselves, since how unable soever they
might be to depose the Queen, and how certain soever their Ruin would be upon
the least attempt toward it, yet attempt it they must, and disobey her and her
Laws they must, or else be put into the very same Condition with the Heretical
Queen her self: and therefore the Jesuits (or their Friends) who were to come
over, foreseeing this great inconvenience that the English Papists were not
allowed to wait a favorable opportunity of deposing the Queen, but must do it
out of hand, though it was absolutely impossible for them, obtained faculties
from this Pope's Successor Gregory XIII. to free the Romanists in England from
the Curse of that Declaratory Bull for the present, till things were riper, and
a more favorable Juncture offered it self, which Faculties were taken about
one of these two Jesuits Accomplices, immediately after Campian's Execution, and
run thus:

Facultates Concessae P. P. Roberto Parsonio, and Edmundo Campiano, pro Anglia,
die 14o Aprilis, 1580.

PEtatur a Summo Domino nostro Explicatio Bullae. Declaratoriae per Pium
Quintum contra Elizabethum and ei adhaerentes, quam Catholici cupiunt intelligi
hot modo, ut obliget semper illam and haereticos, Catholicos vero nullo modo
obliget rebus sic stantibus, sed tum demum, quando publica ejus them Bullae
executio fieri poterit. Then followed (as my Lord Burleigh's now stand, but
hereafter, when the public Execution of the said Bull may be had or made, etc.
The Pope has granted these foresaid Graces to Father Robert Parsons, and
Edmond Campion, who are now to go into England; the 14 th. day of April, 1580.
Present the Father Oliverius Manarcus assistant.

Faculties granted to the Two Fathers, Robert Parsons, and Edmond Campian, for
England, the 14th of April, 1580.

LET it be desired of our most Holy Lord the Explication of the Bull
Declaratory made by Pius the Fifth against Elizabeth, and such as do adhere to
or obey her; which Bull the Catholics desire to be understood in this manner,
That the same Bull shall always oblige her and the Heretics, but the
Catholics it shall by no means bind as affairs do Tract concerning Execution
for Treason and not for Religion tells us Page 12, 13.
) many other Petitions of Faculties for their further Authorities, which were
all concluded thus: Has praedictas Gratias concessit summus Pontifex Patri
Roberto Personio and Edmondo Campiano in Angliam profecturis, die 14o Aprilis
1580. Praesente Patre Oliverio Manarco assistente.

Thus furnished Father Parsons set out for England upon his true business,
which was not to read Mass, and take Confessions and the like; but to put this
Bull of Deposition in Execution against his lawful Queen, as soon as matters
were a little riper, and when the Jesuits thought fit to speak out.

And as his Instructions were such, so his behavior was every whit answerable
to them; he made it his whole business to alienate the Papists he conversed
with from their Allegiance, and went about the Kingdom in his several disguises
upon the same traitorous errand, one while in the habit of a Soldier, another
while in that of a Gentleman, sometimes in the habit of a Minister, again in
that of an Apparitor, a very Proteus; Sedition and Treason was his business
hither, and he presently upon his arrival in England fell to his Jesuitical
courses: and so belabored both himself and others in matters of State (which
the Jesuit Moor would fain have the World to believe they were charged in their
Dispatches not to meddle in neither by word nor writing) how he might set her
Majesty's Crown upon another Head (as appears by a Letter of his own
Important Considerations, p. 40.
to a certain Earl) That the Catholics themselves threatened to deliver him
into the hands of the Civil Magistrate, except he desisted from such kind of
practices.

This Account of Father Parson's turbulent and seditious behavior immediately
upon his arrival in England, is confirmed by our great Historian Mr. Camden,
who had it from some of the Papists themselves, and speaks it upon their own
credit, that they had thoughts of delivering him into the Magistrates hands on
this account.

But notwithstanding the Intentions and Threats of those more peaceable
Papists, we see Father Parsons went on in his own way, wherein he made so good
progress, that though he came into England but in June that year, viz. 1580.
yet before Christmas all things seemed ready for an Insurrection, the Papists
being taught (and that under pain of Damnation) to renounce the Queen, who had
now no more Authority over them, being deposed by the sentence of the
Infallible Pope at Rome; and the Popes and King of Spain's Countenance and
Assistance promised them, if they would but rise and make a Rebellion.

That the Papists by that time were generally come over to Father Parson's
Party, and looked upon the Queen as no longer their Sovereign by reason of her
Deposition by Pius the Fifth, and Gregory the Thirteenth, who sent the first
Mission of these Jesuits into England, is plain from the Confession of Heart one
of their Fellows, who was taken about that time wherein he acknowledged (to put
it in his own words) That the Bull of Pius Quintus (for so much as it is
against the Queen) is holden among the English Catholics for a lawful
sentence, Hart's Confession taken December 31. 1580. in Lord Burleigh's Tract,
p. 14.
and a sufficient discharge of her Subjects fidelity, and so remains in
forte; but in some points touching the Subjects, it is altered by the present
Pope [ viz. Gregory XIII.] For where in that Bull all her Subjects are
commanded not to obey her, and she being excommunicate and deposed, all that do
obey her are likewise innodate and accursed, which point is perilous to the
Catholics: for if they obey her, they be in the Pope's Curse, and if they
disobey her, they are in the Queen's danger; therefore the present Pope to
relieve them has altered that part of the Bulls, and dispensed with them to
obey and serve her, without peril of Excommunication; which Dispensation is to
endure but till it please the Pope to determine it otherwise.

This was a strange Alteration to be made in so short a time; that the Bull of
Pius Quintus should be generally despised when it was first published among the
English Catholics; and that Parsons who came over to encourage and exhort to
the putting that damnatory Bull in Execution against the Queen should be in
danger of being delivered up into the Magistrates hands for his traitorous
designs; and yet within half a year that the Bull of this Pope should be holden
among those English Catholics for a lawful sentence, and a sufficient
discharge of the Subjects fidelity.

This shows that these Jesuits and the Seminary Priests did ply this matter
very close, and made it their chief, if not their whole business to gain this
point upon the English Papists, that so they might be in a greater readiness to
join in any foreign attempts against their Country, or to rise here against
her, whom (by these new Apostles) they were taught, and did now believe to have
no authority at all over them.

And as these two Jesuits business was to fill their credulous Peoples Heads
with this sort of Seditious Doctrine, so they themselves had the boldness to
assert and maintain it publicly, when they thought it necessary for their
purposes: Campian, our Father Parsons Brother-Missioner, was taken at
Lyford-House in Barkshire the next year, and being brought to his Trial, and
Convicted of High Treason, received his Sentence accordingly; after his
Condemnation, being asked, Whether Queen Elizabeth were a Right and Lawful
Queen? He refused to answer; and being a second time asked, Whether he would
take part with the Queen, or the Pope if he should send Forces against the
Queen, he openly professed, and testified under his hand, that he would stand
for the Pope: and yet this Jesuit must be a Martyr in the Popish Calendar, and
dyed purely for Religion, and for being a Priest of the Catholic Roman Church:
whereas if there can be such a thing as Treason against any Government in the
World, Campian was certainly guilty of it.

And so his Brother Robert Parsons, though he had not such an opportunity of
testifying his Faith and making Confession of his Opinion in the face of
Magistracy it self, Campian's Execution frighting him away out of England: yet
by his writing he showed to the World* that his Brother Campian and he were
perfectly of the same mind, as to the Pope's power, and Queen Elizabeth's
Authority in England.

In his Book written on occasion of a Proclamation of this Queen against them,
and called generally Philopater from the feigned Name of Andreas Philopater,
under which Father Parsons disguised himself, he does very frankly discover how
much a Subject he looked upon himself to be to his Lawful Queen even before the
Pope's Sentence of Deposition against her. Hinc etiam infert Vniversa
Theologorum and Jurisconsultorum Ecclesiasticorum ( and est certum and de fide)
etc. It is certain (says he) and what we ought to believe, and it is the
Opinion of all Divines, and Ecclesiastical Lawyers, that if any Christian
Prince fall from the Catholic Faith, and would have others to follow him, he
himself thereby does forthwith, ^oth by Divine and Humane Law, yea though ^he
Pope the Supreme Judge has not issued forth any censure against him, fall from
all ^is Authority and Dignity, and his Subjects ^re freed from all their Oaths
of Allegiance, which they swear to him as a Lawful Prince; and they may, nay,
and ought (if they have ^orce enough to overcome) to pull him down from his
Throne as an Apostate, Heretic, a ^orsaker of Christ, and an Enemy to the
^ommonwealth Andreas Philopa^ Responsio ad Edictum Reginae Angliae, p. 106,
107. in Fouli`s History of ^^pish Treasons, p. 77.
. And so fond is Father Parsons of this Notion of the Lawfulness of Deposing
Princes merely for Religion, that to make it go down the easier with his Popish
Friends he was dealing with, he makes it to be the certain, determined, and
undoubted opinion of all Learned men, and plainly agreeable and consonant to
the Apostolic Doctrine: After which he is not content with its being only
lawful to Depose their Prince upon this account of falling from their Popish
Religion, but will have it that they are all obliged and bound to do so (if
they have strength and power) upon their Consciences, and utmost danger and
pain of their Souls.

If this Jesuit was not a Doctor fit for a Papal Mission into England, I am
very much mistaken; he that could in Print vent such Doctrine to the World, as
well as teach it in private among his Followers and Confidents; what work, and
what progress must be expected from him, when he came furnished also with the
Pope's Thundering Sentence of Excommunication and Deposition against the already
despised and deposed Queen.

As to the Fruits of Father Parson's Doctrine in these points, and his restless
and seditious Practices against his Native Country upon them, I will inquire
after them by and by. Soon after his coming into England a Controversy was
raised, and most probably by himself and fellow-Jesuit Campian, about the
Catholics frequenting the Protestant Churches, a thing which had been
constantly and generally practiced from the accession of the Queen to the
Crown. It is certain that abundance of people were drawn from their Popish
Opinions and Superstitions by it, and it is probable, that the remaining Roman
Catholics would in time have come over entirely into the Communion of the
Church of England, and have brought their Hearts and Affections as well as
their Bodies thither; for it could not have been otherwise, but that the Light,
and Plainness, and Reasonable Service of the Protestant Church would have
prevailed (by God's Blessing) upon every honest well-meaning Papist, and have
saved the Pope the trouble of detaching his Incendiaries and Seminary Priests
hither.

Since therefore this Practice would have made their Seminaries useless, and
their whole Craft was endangered by it, it was these new Jesuits Interest, and
they made ^t their business to oppose and exclaim against it every where, and
upon all occasions: And they pretended that they had very good Authority for
it, no less than that of the Council of Trent, which though it did not in open
Council decree against, and forbid all Catholics the frequenting the
Protestant Churches, because this would have alarmed the Government of England,
and would have caused great mischiefs and disturbance to all the remaining
Catholics there, yet did appoint a Committee of twelve Bishops and others to
consider, determine, and give answer in the Name of the Council of Trent, to
the Petition that was either sent (but without Name,) or pretended to be sent
to that Council from the Catholics of England, wherein it was desired, that
they might be resolved in this point, Whether the Laws enjoining all Peoples
going to their Parish Churches under a strict Penalty, they might do it without
danger of their Souls, or offending God.

I put the sense of the Postulation in Father Moor's words in his History of
the Mission, the answer to which, he makes to be, that after Commendations of
the English Papists for their constancy in the Catholic Religion, and their
having not (during those troublesome times in England) never bowed their Knees
before Baal; (as if forsooth the Church of England had had Images, and
Relics, and a Wafer Host for their Members to bow to) they declared to them
with one consent, that they ought not to be present at our Impious Worship, nor
can appear there without Sin, and offending God, and giving Scandal to the
Church of God every where. I know nothing worth the observing, in that tedious
dull determination of these twelve Delegates out of the Council of Trent, which
is so far from being worth transcribing, that it is not worth reading, except
the good words they give our Protestant Worship throughout it, which is one
while Impious, then most Profligate, then Nefarious, and, which is the best
Jest of all, Idolatrous, and what not. It would be too great a disparagement of
our Divine and Excellent way of Worshipping God, to enter the lists in defense
of it against such Sottish and Wretched Calumnies; this I will only say
concerning it, That if to put into the Mouths of Minister and People Devout and
Fervent Prayers to God for his Grace to enable them to repent of their sins, to
resist Temptations, and to lead true Christian Lives in Piety, Justice, and
Sobriety, be Wicked and Nefarious, then I will own that our Church Service does
deserve this hard Character of being Nefarious: That if to put the Prayers into
such a Language, as that the Unlearned as well as the Learned part of the
Congregation may join with understanding in them; and offer them up together
with fervency of Spirit to God, be Impious, then I must again own that our
Common Prayer is Impious: that if to offer up all the Prayers and Praises in
our Divine Service to God the Father, through the alone Merits and Mediation of
Jesus Christ our alone Mediator as well as Redeemer be Idolatrous, and I know
nothing else in our service so likely for those Delegates to fix the Idolatry
upon, then I will own, and subscribe too that our Protestant Worship is
Idolatrous, Impious, Profligate, and Nefarious, and what else, or worse, these
Trent Fathers should have been pleased to call it.

It was very hard for men that did pretend to be Christians, and were some of
them men of great Figure in the Romish Church, to give out such hard words
against a Form of Divine Worship, which probably never a one of them had ever
seen, or inquired into, they being all Foreigners, and perfect Strangers to
this Church, that were employed in this Affair.

I would ask one of that Persuasion, Whether, if Queen Elizabeth had come to
terms with Pope Pius Quartus that sent her a flattering Letter by Parpalia his
Nuncio, and if that Pope (as he offered her) had confirmed the English Liturgy
by his Authority, and granted the use of the Sacraments to us English under
both kinds; this bare. Confirmation of the Pope would have made our Worship to
be holy, pure, and Christian, which without it, as they said, was impure,
wicked, and Idolatrous: If the Pope's power be so great as to make Wickedness,
Innocence, and Vice Virtue, its the better for them who live under him; if it
be not, either the Pope was grievously out in offering to confirm; or these
doughty Delegates at Trent, in giving such a Character of our Church of
England-Worship.

Whether this whole business of the Delegates and their Determination, be not
an Invention of the Jesuits themselves, I cannot affirm. But if it was a real
thing, either it was not heard of much, or had little effect among the English
Catholics, since we see that eighteen years after its making, the English
Papists went to Church when Father Parsons came over, and the thing was
disputed among them in 1580, which it could not easily have been, had the
Council of Trent by twelve Delegates determined so strictly against it, as the
Jesuits say they did in 1562. eighteen years before.

Father Parsons labored with all his might to break the Catholics of that
custom of frequenting the Protestant Churches, which he did easily foresee
would be the ruin of Popery in England, and betook himself to his Pen, and
under the seigned Name of Howlet published Reasons why Catholics refuse to go
to Church: Vertumnus Romanas.
But a Brother Romish Priest tells us, That all this care and concern was
merely for Temporal ends and designs, and shows, that no body was a gainer by
this Recusancy so violently urged by the Jesuits above all others, excepting
that Society, whose rich Colleges and abundance of Treasure made it apparent
quickly to the World, that some were great gainers, while the poor
Lay-Catholicks were made great sufferers by that Recusancy.

Upon Campian's Execution, England grew too hot for our Father Parsons, and
notwithstanding the mighty zeal he pretended for the Conversion of England, yet
he was for saving one, and getting out of harms way, and therefore slips away
back into France under the Pretext of conferring with Doctor Allen about the
Seminaries, and of Printing some Books, which could not be done in England; and
never returned hither, though he continued Superior of the Jesuits Mission after
this.

But though the Kingdom was delivered from such a Firebrand, yet he continued
diligent beyond Seas in his Seditious Designs, and was to the last a constant
Enemy to his Native Country. As he had labored in the promoting the Popish
Recufancy, and getting the English Papists to be governed by the Jesuits; so he
now employs all his Arts and all his interest to get Seminaries erected for the
supplying England from time to time with Priests to keep up that Recufancy, and
to prepare the Papists here, to join with any Invasion that they abroad should
procure against their own Country.

As Soon as he was got hence to Roan in France, he dealt with the Duke of Guise
to erect a Seminary for such a purpose in Normandy; after which he goes into
Spain, and prevails with King Philip to encourage and erect such in Spain, so
that in a short time they could not only boast of their Seminaries at Rome, and
at Rhemes; but of those at Valladolid, at Sevil, at St. Lucars in Spain, at
Lisbon in Portugal, at Doway and St. Omers in Flanders, in all which their
Youth were educated with violent Prejudices against their own Native Country,
and their minds were formed to all the Purposes and Designs which this chief
Incendiary Parsons had in his head.

Father Moor, the Author of the History of the Mission does indeed tell us,
That Father Parsons was for having the Youth that were entered into these
Seminaries to take an Oath about faithfully answering the End and Benefit of
their Education there, but says not a word of their being forced to subscribe
the Infanta of Spain's Title, against the True Title of the then King of Scots,
King James the First.

The Oath was this,

IN. N. considering with how great benefits God has blessed me, etc. do
promise (by God's assistance) to enter into Holy Orders as soon as I shall be
fit for them, and to return into England to Convert my Contrymen there,
whenever it shall please the Superior of this House to command me. But when
once Father Parsons (being puffed up with his Familiarity with the King and
Court of Spain) had devoted his Soul and Body both to the service of that
aspiring Crown, then he was for having the Youth in the Seminaries to subscribe
to the Spanish Title (which was of his own inventing) to the Crown of England;
then he was for speaking out his design against his Native Country.

And that he dealt in such traitorous designs, after his getting out of England
is proved upon him by their own Writers. As touching the Colleges (says Clark
the Priest concerning him) and Pensions that are maintained and given by the
Spaniard, which he so often inculcateth, we no whit thank him for them, as
things are handled, and occasions thereby ministered of our greater Persecution
at home, by reason of Father Parson's treacherous practices, thereby to promote
the Spanish Title to our Country, and his hateful Stratagems with such Scholars
as are there brought up, enforcing them to subscribe to Blanks, and by public
Orations to fortify the said wrested Title of the Infanta, meaning Isabella
Clara Eugenia, Daughter to Philip the Second of Spain, whose Right to the
English Crown was maintained in a Book by this Parsons made, but published by
him under the false name of Doleman.

As this Priest gives us an account of the zeal of Father Parsons for the
Infanta; so Watson, another Romish Priest, helps us to another of his knavery
about the same affair; That Parsons earnestly moving the young Students in
Spain to set their hands to a Schedule that they would accept the Lady Infanta
for Queen of England after the decease of her Majesty (to wit, Queen Elizabeth)
that now is; but finding them altogether unwilling to intermedle with these
State Affairs belonging nothing to them, and most hurtful to both their Cause
and Persons; used this cunning shift to draw on the innocent and simple youths,
to pretend, forsooth, to them of Valladolid, that the Students in Sevil had
done it already; no remedy then but they must follow. And that having thus
craftily gotten their names, he showed them to the Students in Sevil for an
example of their fact and forwardness, which he required them to imitate.

Though these are sufficient Evidences of the use Father Parsons put the
erected Seminaries to; yet I cannot but add that great and wise Cardinal, the
Cardinal d'Ossat's account of these very Seminaries in his Letter to the King
of France, Henry the Fourth, Lettres Card. d'Ossat, Part 2. l. 7.
about the Spaniards and Father Parsons Design against England. For this
purpose also (says he) were the Colleges and Seminaries erected by the
Spaniards for the English at Doway, and at St. Omers, wherein the young
Gentlemen of the best Families in England are entertained, thereby to oblige
them, and by them their Paren^^ and Kindred and Friends. The principal care
which these Colleges and Seminaries have, is to catechize and bring up these
young English Gentlemen in this Faith and firm Belief, that the late King of
Spain had, and that his Children now have, the true Right of Succession to the
Crown of England; and that this is advantageous and expedient for the Catholic
Faith, not only in England, but wherever Christianity is.

And when these young English Gentlemen have finished their Humanity-Studies,
and are come to such an age, then to make them thoroughly Spaniards, they are
carried out of the Low Countries into Spain, where there are other Colleges for
them, wherein they are instructed in Philosophy and Divinity, and confirmed in
the same Belief, and holy Faith, that the Kingdom of England did belong to the
late King of Spain, and does now to his Children. After that these young
English Gentlemen have finished their courses, those of them that are found to
be most Hispaniolized, and most courageous and firm to this Spanish Creed, are
sent into England to sow this Faith among them, to be Spies, and give advice to
the Spaniards of what is doing in England, and what must and ought to be done
to bring England into the Spaniards hands; and if need be to undergo Martyrdom
as soon or rather sooner for this Spanish Faith, than for the Catholic
Religion.

In this Cardinal we find to what excellent purposes the Seminaries were
erected, that Father Parsons labored so much about, and of which he glories so
much up and down his Writings. These Seminaries were the Nurseries of the
Conspiracies and Treasons which were from time to time set on foot and carried
on against the Queen and Realm of England; and Father Parson's whole Life from
his leaving the Mission in England appears to me to have been one continued Act
of Treason against his Natural Queen and Native Country.

To mention some of his Treasons that are come to light; he was very grateful
to the Duke of Guise, whom he had persuaded to set up a Seminary in France for
the English that should come thither, for with him he conspires against his own
Queen, how to depose her, and set up in her room Popery and the Queen of Scots:
He endeavored for this purpose (as we are told Jesuits Reasons Unreasonable,
p. 65.
to make a List of Catholics, which under the conduct of the Duke of Guise,
should have changed the State of the Kingdom, using for it the pretense of the
Title of Queen Mary of Scotland: But that her Council at Paris, which
understood business better, were so sensible of his boldness, that they took
from him the Queen's Cipher, which he had purloyned, and commanded him never
more to meddle in her affairs.

But notwithstanding these People would not let our Father Parsons have any
thing further to do in those treasons, which were really carried on at that
time for the Queen of Scots; yet he pretended to mighty merit upon her and her
Son's Account in his Letter to Father Chreyton the Jesuit Morus Hist. Miss.
Jesuit. l. 4. p. 122.
telling him how many long and tedious journeys he had taken for their sakes,
and how much Money he had procured for them; at one time twenty four thousand
Crowns from the King of Spain, at another time the same sum; and from Pope
Gregory XIII. four thousand Crowns: he confesses indeed that things had not
succeeded for them as he had wished; but wonders that any body should make him
to be an Enemy to the King of Scots, who had been so very serviceable to him
and his Mother.

I suppose Father Parsons was disgusted at this sleighting of his faithful
services to the Queen of Scots, by her Ministers, and to be revenged of her and
them, betakes himself wholly into the Spanish Interest, which he espoused so
far as not only to solicit and encourage their open attempts by Invasion
against England, but after the ill success of that, to set up their sham Title
to the Kingdom of England. He and Cardinal Allen (whom Parsons had by his
Interest with the King of Spain procured to be made a Cardinal) two Brethren in
iniquity were mighty forward for the famous Spanish Invasion in 1588. and to
make it more successful wrote in defense of it a Tract, which Allen was
persuaded to own, though Parsons had as great, if not a greater hand in it than
himself. In this Admonition to the Nobility and People of England the Queen's
Government is called impious and unjust, her self an Usurper, obstinate, and
impentinent; and it is affirmed, that for this reason Pope Sixtus Quintus moved
by his own and his Predecessors zeal, and the vehement desire of some principal
Englishmen, had used great diligence with diverse Princes, especially with the
Spanish King to use all his force, that she might be turned out of her
Dominions, and her Adherents punished for a great many Reasons there laid
together, after which it proceeds thus* Wherefore seeing these Offenses, some
of them rendering her incapable of the Kingdom, others unworthy to live; his
Holiness by the power of God and the Apostles renews the Censures of Pius V.
and Gregory XIII. against her, excommunicates and deprives her of all Royal
Dignity, Titles, Rights and Pretenses to England and Ireland, declares her
Illegitimate and an Usurper of the Kingdoms, and absolves all her Subjects from
their Obedience and Oaths of Allegiance due to her.

And expressly commands All, under pain and penalty of God's Wrath, to yield
her no obedience, aid or favor whatsoever; but to employ all their power
against her, and to join themselves with the Spanish Forces, who will not hurt
the Nation, nor alter their Laws or Privileges, only punish the wicked
Heretics. And by the same Presents it was declared not only lawful but
commendable to lay hands on the said Usurper, and other her Adherents; for
doing of which they should be well rewarded. And lastly, to all these Roman
Assistants is liberally granted a plenary Indulgence and Remission of all their
Sins.

But this unerring Thunderbolt, as well as the Spanish Invincible Armado, did
very shamefully miscarry, to the no small disappointment of our good Father
Parsons; who was not discouraged at that defeat, though a worse Man than
himself (if any such could be) would have seen the Finger of God plainly in it;
but labors with the King of Spain a while after for a second Invasion, and
after that for a third, plotting and devising all ways to bring the King of
Spain, to it, and the Papists of England both those at home and the fugitives
abroad, to join and assist the King of Spain in it; but all his pains was lost
about these Invasions from abroad; and therefore he next sets himself to raise
a Rebellion in England it self, and deals with Ferdinand Earl of Derby to
appear in, and ^ead it; which because he declined to do, he was poisoned, by
Father Hesketh's procurement, who had been sent to him by Father Parsons. But
failing here also, of the desired success, the poor Father was now at a loss
what to do with this Kingdom of England, and since he saw all miscarried that
he had plotted against Queen Elizabeth, who descended to her Grave full of
years, and honor; his next business was to keep out King James, who was a
Protestant also from succeding her.

For this purpose he wrote his Doleman or Conference about the next Succession
to the Crown of England, the chief design of which was to exclude the Scotch
Title, as well the Lady Arabella's as King James's, and to set up the Spanish
Infanta. I know Mr. Camden will have Cardinal Allen and Sir Francis Inglefield
to have their shares in this Book; but Cardinal d'Ossat, who had far better
opportunities of finding out the Author, makes it to be Parson's own, and in
one of his Letters to the King of France gives that King an account of it,
Pitsaeus also makes him to be the Author of it.
wherein he gives our Jesuit the true Character he deserved of being a fellow
that regarded neither truth nor reason.

One thing I cannot but remark here, that though this Jesuit had the Impudence
to meddle in these matters, and to set up forged Titles against the Royal Line
of Scotland; yet when King James contrary to their Popish designs as well as
Expectations, did quietly succeed to the Crown of England, he had the greater
Impudence to deny his ever intending to exclude that King: this is in the
Preface to his Three Conversions of England added upon the news of the Queens
Death, and Succession of the King of Scotland to the Crown of England; And as
for the person (says he to the English Catholics) now advanced, I know most
certainly, that there was never any doubt or difference among you, but that
ever you desired his advancement above all others, as the only Heir of that
renowned Mother, for whom your fervent zeal is known to the World, and how much
you have suffered by her adversaries for the same. Yet do I confess, that
touching the disposition of the person for the place and manner of his
advancement, all zealous Catholics have both wished and prayed, that he might
first be a Catholic and then our King, this being our bounded duty to wish,
and his greatest good to be obtained for him. And to this end and no other I
assure my self has been directed, whatsoever may have been said, written or
done by any Catholic, which with some others might breed disgust.

Thus the Jesuit thought to pacify King James's Court by a piece of Impudence
to be met with only in a Jesuit, whoever will be at the pains to compare
Parson's Doleman, with this Preface, cannot but declare him to be the greatest
Villain that ever set Pen to Paper, and to have lost all sense of Modesty,
Truth and Justice.

Amidst these his Projects for the Spanish Interest, he had hopes upon the
death of Cardinal Allen to be made by the Spanish Interest a Cardinal for
England, and there was set about in Flanders by Holt the Jesuit and
Worthington, Watson's Quodlibet. p. 120.
a Petition to the King of Spain for that purpose subscribed by the Common
Soldiers, Laborers, Artizans and Pensioners, nay, Scullions and Laundresses,
as well as by those of better rank and quality. Upon this Father Parsons makes
haste out of Spain to Rome to hinder it, as the Jesuits say for him; when he
came thither, upon a day set him, he waited on the Pope, and acquainted him how
the City was full of the discourse of his being shortly to be made a Cardinal,
and that Spain and Flanders rung with it too, and therefore begged of him that
he would not think of making him a Cardinal, who might be more serviceable in
the condition he was now in to the affairs of England. Morus Hist. Miss. Jes.
l. 6. p. 234, 235.
The Pope told him, That the King of Spain had not written, a syllable to him
about any such thing, and that he must not mind foolish Reports, and bid him go
and mind his studies.

I cannot but think that this neglect in the King of Spain lost him Father
Parsons, who soon after, though he could not leave of plotting, went on other
designs, four of which he seems to have had on foot together for the Exclusion
of King James from the Crown of England. The most improbable one was that of
the Peoples rising and setting up a popular Government, he had furnished them
with Principles in several of his Books for this purpose. In the Second and
Third he dealt with the Pope either about making (if his Purse and Interest
were large enough) his Kinsman the Duke of Parma King, or in joining with the
Lady Arabella's Interest, and marrying her to the Duke's Brother the Cardinal
Farnese (whom he had made upon the death of Cardinal Cajetan Protector of
England, thereby to ingratiate him with the Clergy and Laity of this Kingdom.)
Cardinal d'Ossat gives a very large account of both these Projects in the
Letter whcih I have already quoted to the King of France.

And in another Lettres Card. d'Ossat Part 2. l. 8. n. 162.
of his Letters he gives an account of the fourth Project wherein he himself
had been dealt with by Parsons then Rector of the College of Jesuits at Rome,
which was that the Pope, the King of France, and King of Spain, should agree
among themselves of a Successor for England, that should be a Catholic, and
that they should join their Forces to settle him in the Throne of England.

Thus we see how Plotting and Treason was the whole business of this Jesuit's
Life, in which he was so notorious, that Pasquin set him forth thus at Rome: If
there be any Man that will buy the Kingdom of England, let him repair to a
Merchant in a black square Cap in the City, and he shall have a very good
penniworth thereof.

While he thus filled his head with designs and hopes of a Popish Prince to be
set up in England by some of these foreign Princes it was, that he drew up the
following Memorial for that his Prince, his Directions to whom are like his
other Counsels and Actions. I will trouble the Reader with no more of his
History. As I take the Jesuits to be the very worst of Men, so I think the
preceding accounts have proved Father Parsons to be the very worst of Jesuits.

A MEMORIAL OF THE REFORMATION of ENGLAND: CONTAINING Certain Notes, and
Advertisements, which seem might be proposed in the First Parliament, and
National Council of our Country, after God, of his mercy, shall restore it to
the Catholic Faith, for the better Establishment and Preservation of the said
Religion.
Gathered and set-down by R.P. 1596.

THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR, SHOWING How and why these Notes were gathered, and
the principal Parts to be treated.
THE Notes and Observations of this Memorative following, were gathered and
laid together in time of Persecution, when there was no place to execute, or
put them in ure: and it is no more than seventeen or eighteen Years past that
the Gatherer began first to put some of them in writing, and having had the
experience of the Years which have ensued since, and his part also in the
Catholic affairs of his Country, and the Practice of diverse other Catholic
Nations abroad, he was desirous in case that himself should not live to see the
desired day of the Reduction of England, yet some of his Cogitations and
Intentions for the public good thereof might work some effect after his Death,
and that thereby other Men might be the sooner moved to enter into more mature
Considerations of these and such like Points; yea, and also to descend unto
many more particulars, than here are set down. For that the Gatherer's meaning
was only to open the way, and to insinuate certain general and principal Heads
that might serve for an awaking, and remembrance at that happy day of the
Conversion of our Country, unto such Persons as shall be then able and desirous
to further the common good, and to advance Almighty God's Glory with a Holy
Zeal of perfect Reformation, who perhaps may be so entangled with multitudes of
other business and Cogitations at that time, as they will not so easily enter
into these, except they be put in mind thereof, by some such Memorials and
Advertisements as here are touched. And what is said in this Treatise for the
Kingdom of England, is meant also for Ireland, so far as it may do good, seeing
the Author desires as much benefit for God's Service, and the good of that
Nation, to the one Country, as to the other.

And for that the principal Members and Branches whom this Memorial may
concern, are Three, to wit, the whole Body of the Realm jointly, and then the
Crgy, and Temporalty apart; Therefore the same order shall be observed for more
perspecuity's sake, in treating matters that are to be handled, according to
these three parts, First, of things that appertain to the whole Body of the
Realm in general, and then to the Clergy and Laity in particular's dividing
each one of these two latter Members, into his particular branches also, as
namely the Clergy and Spiritualty into Bishops, Priests and Religious; and the
Laity, and Temporalty into the Prince with his Council, the Nobility and
Commons, making of every one of these chief Members, their particular Chapters
also apart, as in Prosecution of this Treatise shall appear.

And to the performance of this, the Author was encouraged, especially by two
points, which for diverse Years he has been persuaded in.

The First, That God will most certainly at his time appointed restore the
Realm of England to the Catholic Faith again, as may appear by the evident hand
he holds now in the work.

The other, That England being once converted, may be made the Spectacle of all
the World, and an Example of Perfection to all other Catholic Countries and
Churches round about it, if want of Zeal and good will do not hinder it in
those that God shall bring to that blessed day, which the Gatherer of this
Memorial hops will not, and with this hope he sets down the Notes and
Advertisements ensuing.

A Table of the Chapters of this MEMORIAL.
PART I. Touching the whole Body. CHAP. I. SOme special Reasons why England,
above all other Realms, ought to procure a perfect Reformation, when time shall
serve. CHAP. II. What manner of Reformation is needful in England after so long
a storm of Persecution, which is declared by the Example of Gold coming out of
the Furnace, and of a Garden newly planted, after the Weeds and Thorn are
consumed by Fire. CHAP. III. How this happy Reformation may be best procured,
and what Disposition of Mind is needful for it in all parts. CHAP. IV. How all
sorts of People, to wit, Catholics, Schismatics and Heretics may be
charitably dealt withal to their most profit, at the neat change of Religion.
CHAP. V. The forwardness that ought to be in all Men for the appeasing of God's
Wrath, about the rapine of Ecclesiastical Lands and Livings, and with what
facility and case a good Composition, and reasonable Satisfaction may be agreed
upon without the overburdening of any Party, and how the said Livings may be
disposed of. CHAP. VI. Of the many great and singular Benefits that would ensue
to the Church and Realm of England, by this manner of Restitution Agreement,
and Disposition of Ecclesiastical Livings. CHAP. VII. Of a Council of
Reformation to be ordained by the Authority of the Prince and Parliament, with
consent of the Sea Apostolic, and wherein they are principally to be occupied
for the raising up of our Churches again, and first of all in gathering up, and
profitably bestowing of these Church Livings that shall be restored. CHAP.
VIII. Of diverse other great Points that will belong to the Council of
Reformation to deal in for the bringing of our English Church to its former
Perfection. CHAP. IX. There ensue yet more matters that appertain to the
Council of Reformation for beautifying our Church above the beauty that it had
before, and above the rest of all Christian Churches. CHAP. X. Of the
Parliament of England, and what were to be considered, or reformed, about the
same, both in it self and other.
PART II. Touching the Clergy. CHAP. I. OF the Clergy in general, what they are
and ought to do, at the next change, and how soundly united with the Laity.
CHAP. II. Of Bishops and Bishoprics of England; what is to be restored, and
what continued, what reformed. CHAP. III. Of Deans, Canons, Pastors, Curates,
and the rest of the Clergy; what is needful to make them flourish. CHAP. IV. Of
Seminaries, Colleges, Universities, and Schools, for restoring and increase of
our Clergy. CHAP. V. Of Universities more at large, and of the Government,
Discipline, and manner of proceeding of our English Universities, and in what
Points they do differ from other Universities abroad, and what is to be
increased, added, and altered, or established, to make them absolutely the best
in the World. CHAP. VI. How Offices, Preferments, Fellowships, Scholarships,
and other said places were to be provided in our Universities, to avoid
infinite inconveniences, and of diverse other Points to this purpose. CHAP. VII.
Of Religious Men and Women, and matters appertaining unto them, and their
Estate; and how England may be furnished with them in far better sort than any
other Catholic Nation in the World.
PART III. Touching the Laity. CHAP. I. OF the Laity and Temporalty in general,
and of the agreement and concurrence with the Clergy for both their good; with
the Difference of both their States. CHAP. II. Of the Prince and his Council,
and matters belonging to them for the public benefit. CHAP. III. Of the
Nobility and Gentry of England, and matters appertaining to their Estates, for
the bettering the same every way. CHAP. IV. Of the Inns of Court, and Studies
of the Common Laws of England, and of the Laws themselves; what is to be
considered, amended, or bettered in each part. CHAP. V. Of the Commons of
England, and of matters appertaining to them; how tenderly they are to be cared
for, cherished and maintained, with diverse Advertisements for their public
Commodity.

The FIRST PART of this MEMORIAL OF THE Reformation of England: Wherein are
touched Points that do belong to the whole Body of the Realm, as before in the
Preface has been declared, and is the Ground of the other Parts that ensue.
CHAP. I. Some special Reasons why England, above all other Realms, ought to
procure a perfect Reformation, when time shall serve.
IF ever Nation under Heaven were bound to show themselves grateful to Almighty
God, and to turn heartily and zealously unto him, and to seek his highest
glory, by a perfect Reformation of their Country, when his Divine Majesty shall
open the way; it is the English Nation, for the Reasons following:

First, For that no other Nation in the World, on whom God has laid the
scourge of Heresy, has received so many helps and graces to resist the same,
as England has done, See Animadversions.
which is evident by the ( b) multitudes and valor of English Martyrs, by the
fortitude and zeal of so many and such Confessors, by their Constancy, Patience
and Fervor at home, by the store of Seminaries abroad, and by the Spirit of
Priests brought up in them, and many other Favors and Privileges used toward
the English Nation in these our days; all which do require an extraordinary
Demonstration of forwardness of English Catholics, when the time shall serve,
to be answerable in some sort to these extraordinary Benefits.

Secondly, We do both see and feel the inestimable damages that ensued to our
Commonwealth, and to all Christendom besides, for that this perfect Reformation
was not made in Queen Mary's time. All wise and Godly Men attribute the loss of
Religion again in our Country to this error, and ingratitude toward Almighty
God, which that it may not happen any more, Et ne postrema fiant pejora
prioribus, most careful diligence is to be used by all, whenever the Mercy of
God shall offer occasion ( c) the second time, that the former error be well
amended.

Thirdly, It seems that as Almighty God in his Justice has used England for a
scourge to the other Countries round about it, both for the infecting them with
Heresy, as also by afflicting them by Sword, Sedition and other Infestations;
so again in his mercy he means to help and comfort them by means of England
once reduced, as may appear by that which abroad he has begun to work in
Scotland and Ireland by Executions of English Catholic Priests sent unto those
Kingdoms: wherefore to the end that this Holy Intention of our Savior be not
let by us, and England may be a Light and a Lantern to other Nations near
unto it, the Reformation must needs in reason be made first very exact and
exemplar in England it self.

Fourthly, The ( d) Facility and Commodity that there is and will be in England
to make this perfect Reformation, whenever God shall reduce that Country,
does greatly conjure and oblige us to the same; for we shall not find that
difficulty and resistance, by the grace of God, in England, which good Men do
find in other Catholic Countries for bringing in of any Reformation, that is
attempted, and that which the very Prophets ever found amongst the Jews, and
that Christ himself did find amongst the Scribes and Pharisees; to wit, the
repugnancy of corrupt Livers, and stubborn People, that will contradict and
resist their own benefit: We are not like to find, I say, (the infinite mercy
of our Savior be blessed for it) either backward Bishops and dissolute
Priests, or Licentious Religious Men or Women to oppose themselves against so
Holy a designment as this our Reformation is; or if any one such creep in
amongst the rest, he would not dare to show himself, nor should he find
followers: all is now zeal and integrity in our new Clergy (Almighty God be
thanked for it) and no less in our Laity and Catholic Gentlemen of England
that have born the brunt of Persecution for so many Years; so if we should want
the effects of true and sound Reformation, at the change again, it would be for
want of some zealous godly Men, to solicit and procure the same: ( d) For in
the behalf of the Realm and Country, I persuade my self most certainly, that
there will be no difficulty, which ought to convince such as feel the Zeal of
God's Glory within their breast, to join hands together, as St. Luke says, all
Apostolical Men did in the Primitive Church, and each to seek above other to
have a part in the happy Procuration of so holy and important a Work.

And, Lastly, for our more encouragement hereunto, it seems that the sweet
and high Providence of Almighty God has not been small, in conserving and
holding together a good portion of the material part of the old English
Catholic Church, above all other Nations, that have been overrun with
Heresy, for that we have yet on foot many principal Monuments that are
destroyed, in other Countries, as namely we have our Cathedral Churches and
Bishoprics yet standing, our Deanries, Canonries, Archdeaconries, and other
Benefices not destroyed, our Colleges and Universities whole, so that there
wants nothing, but a new form to give them ( e) Life and Spirit by putting
good and virtuous Men into them, which is a great advantage before other
Kingdoms, where all is ruined and desolate, and none, or ^^^tle means left, by
reason of poverty to raise them up or repair them again, but in many Years, and
with repugnance of many potent Persons for their particular Interest: whereas
in England, there are and will be less resistance, more easy and abundant
means to restore and amend all that is wanting, without over-burdening of any
Man, by the means that after shall be declared, which is a very great and
important point, and a Token of God's sweet disposition for this effect, and
ought to encourage every true Catholic Man to concur the more willingly to the
work, and to help, wherein he may, to this holy and perfect Reformation that is
pretended.

Animadversions on Chap. I.
A Memorial of the Reformation, etc.] This Memorial is a plain Instance to the
World of what they have always changed the Order of the Jesuits with, that they
have been much greater dealers in Politics than in Divinity: and this Memorial
is as clear a proof of the Jesuits being as great Bunglers at Politics, as
ever any that pretended to then. Notwithstanding the Author hereof was one of
the most subtle Men the Jesuits ever had, and not only by his being born and
having lived long in his Native Country; but by the Experience and Observations
which his Converse and familiar access to the greatest Men in Foreign Countries
did afford him, might he supposed to have studied and understood the Genius and
Temper of the People of England: yet he appears to have been out in his
measures, as will be easily showed in the following Animadversions. He lays
mighty stress upon some things, which can no way bear it, other things he takes
to be most easy to his Popish Prince, which reason would have told him then,
as Experience has told his Brethren since, to be insuperable difficulties: and
his cruel and barbarous advices up and down the Memorial are so contrary to the
temper of the honest Englishman, as if the Design of the Memorial had been more
to show the Politics and the Spirit of the Jesuit's Order, than to convert
England to Popery.

( b) Multitudes of Martyrs, etc.] If the worst of Criminals must be nick-nam'd
Martyrs, we can then allow the Jesuit that there were some the later part of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign; but how to make Multitudes of them, is beyond all the
skill that I can obtain either from our own or their Historians. It is agreed
on both hands, (striking off such Scandalous Writers out of the rank of
Historians as Sanders) that for several Years in the beginning of that glorious
Queen's Reign great Mildness and Clemency was used toward the Roman
Catholics, and that no manner of Severity was used toward them, till the
Bishop of Rome by his Bull of Excommunication and Deposition of that Queen had
justly incensed her and her Parliament to make several Laws against Popery; and
even after that, most if not every one of those Roman Catholics that suffered
during her Reign suffered for Rebellion or Treason, and not for Religion. I
will not vouch our Historians for the Truth hereof, but take it in the words of
their own Secular Priests who writ the Important Considerations Anno Dom. 1601.
which ought (to put it down in their own words Important Considerations: in a
Collection of several Treatises concerning the Reasons and Occasions of the
Penal Laws, p. 31.
) to move all true and sound Catholics, who are not wholly Jesuited, to
acknowledge without all Equivocations, Ambiguities, or Shiftings, that the
Proceedings of her Majesty, and of the State with them, Since the beginning of
her Highnesses Reign, have been has Mild and Merciful.

And what they say here by way of Preface, they prove more at large in their
Book, It cannot be denied (say the Secular Priests) but that for the first ten
years of her Majesty's Reign, the State of Catholics in England was tolerable,
and after a sort in some good quietness. Such as for their Consciences were
imprisoned in the beginning of her coming to the Crown, were very kindly and
mercifully used, the State of things then considered. Some of them were
appointed to rem^^^ with such their Friends as they themselves made choice of.
Others were placed, some with Bishops, some with Deans, and had their Diet at
their Tables, with such convenient Lodgings and Walks for their Recreation, as
did well content them. They the were in the ordinary Prisons, had such liberty
and other commodities as the places would afford, not inconvenient for (...)
that were in their cases. p. 34.
But that our Brethren of the more fiery and Jesuitial humor may not snuff
here at: we have thought it meet to cool their heat, with some of Mr. Parsons,
and his fellow Master Creswel more gentle delays (than are usual with them) who
in one of their Books do confess as much is effect, as here we have set down,
if not more: thus these Emperour-like Jesuits do speak to her Majesty. In the
beginning of thy Kingdom thou did deal something more gently with Catholics:
none were then urged by thee, or pressed either to thy Sect, or to the denial
of their Faith. All things (indeed) did seem to proceed in a far milder course:
no great complaints were heard of: there were seen no extraordinary contentions
or repugnancies. Some there were that to please and gratify you, went to your
Churches. But when afterward, thou did begin to wrong them, etc. And when
was that, our great Monsigneurs? Surely whenever it was (to answer for you)
we our selves (certain Catholics of all sorts) were the true causes of it.
Thus far have I been able to vindicate the beginning of Queen Eliz. Reign out
of the Mouths of Romish Priests themselves, and by their help, out of our
Jesuit's own Mouth, who has the face notwithstanding in this Memorial to talk
of Multitudes of their Martyrs. For the Executions during the rest of her
Reign, let us but see in short what those Papists died for, and we shall be far
from believing them Martyrs whom the Jesuit falsely calls so and brags of in
this Chapter. This we may learn from the Pen of the same Secular Priests, who
thus conclude their Important Considerations p. 55.56.
. We are fully persuaded in our Consciences, and as men besides our Learning,
who have some Experience, that if the Catholics had never sought by indirect
means to have vexed her Majesty with their designments against her Crown: if
the Pope and King of Spain had never plotted with the Duke of Norfolk: if the
Rebels in the North had never been heard of: if the Bull of Pius Quintus had
never been known: if the said Rebellion had never been justified: if neither
Stukely nor the Pope had attempted any thing against Ireland: if Gregory the
Thirteenth had not renewed the said Excommunication: if the Jesuits had never
come into England: if the Pope and King of Spain had not practiced with the
Duke of Guise for his attempt against her Majesty: if Parsons and the rest of
the Jesuits, with other our Countrymen beyond the Seas, had never been Agents
in those traitorous and bloody designments of Throckmorton, Parry, Collen,
York, Williams, Squire and such like: if they had not by their Treatises and
Writings endeavored to defame their Sovereign, and their own Country,
laboring to have many of their Books translated into diverse Languages, thereby
to show more their own disloyalty: if Cardinal Alane and Parsons had not
published the Renovation of the said Bull by Xistus Quintus: if thereunto they
had not added their Scurrilous and Unmanly Admonition, or rather most profane
Libel against her Majesty: if they had not sought by false Persuasions, and
ungodly Arguments to have allured the hearts of all Catholics from their
Allegiance: if the Pope had never been urged by them to have thrust the King of
Spain into that barbarous Action against the Realm: if they themselves with all
the rest of that Generation had not labored greatly with the said King for the
Conquest and Invasion of this Land by the Spaniards, who are known to be the
cruellest Tyrants that live upon the Earth: if in all their Proceedings, they
had not from time to time depraved, irritated, and provoked both her Majesty
and the state with these and many other such like their most ungodly and
unchristian practices -- most assuredly the State would have loved us, or at
least born with us: where there is one Catholic, there would have been ten:
there had been no Speeches amongst us of Racks and Tortures, nor any cause to
have used them; for none were ever vexed that way simply, for that he was
either Priest or Catholic, but because they were suspected to have had their
hands in some of the same most traitorous designments.

This is sufficient from the Mouths of Popish Priests to vindicate the
Execution of Justice during Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and to convince the Reader
that Father Parsons was very much in the wrong to make Martyrs of such
Criminals, but much more to pretend to Multitudes. It is however somewhat
pardonable in him to give such wicked Traitors the glorious name of Martyrs,
since he had been the chief Incendiary, and Encourager of most of those Rebels
and Traitors, and does deserve, according to the Secular Priests Character of
him in these Important Considerations, the Title of Arch-traitor for himself.

(c) Offer occasion the second time, etc.] This passage ought not only to be a
warning to our Protestant Nation to provide by all ways lawful to keep Popery
from gaining strength or power amongst us, but to be the occasion of many
hearty thanksgivings to God for having delivered us out of the b^^^^ and danger
of Jesuit Reformers, whose fury we see must not stop till we are clear rooted
out, or, to speak more properly in the Jesuit's own Dialect, till we are burnt
up. Who can without horror read this Jesuit's complaint of the Imperfect
Deformation, and the great coldness and lukewarmness in Queen Mary's Restorers
of Popery, and recollect what numbers of innocent Protestants, Old and Young,
Men and Women, Cl^^ly and Laity were burnt at Stakes up and down the Nation
during that short but bloody Reign?

(d) Fourthly, the facility, etc. and a little lower, For in the behalf of the
Realm and Country, I persuade my self most certainly, that there will be no
difficulty] Here our Jesuit was much out in his Observations, which are not
only contrary to the Experience of our Age, but of his own; as for the late
Attempts to replant Popery in England, I appeal to the Popish Priests employed
in the Mission, whether it appeared or proved to be so very easy a thing to
bring Popery into the good esteem of the English Nation; and for Father Parsons
own Age, notwithstanding the Protestant Religion had so short a time as the
Reign of the Young King Edward to spread it self in; yet when Queen Mary had a
Mind to restore Popery, she was forced upon arts much below her Station in the
World, to promise what she was far from performing, that none of her Subjects
should be forced in Conscience, that she would in particular preserve to the
Suffolk and Norfolk Men (who had been so great instruments in her advancement
to the Throne) that Reformation begun in her Brother's days for which they were
zealous, and never make any innovation or change of the then established
Reformed Religion, but would content her self with the private exercise of her
own Religion. Such assurances do not make the Restitution of Popery even then
to be so easy a thing as the Jesuit things; and when the Queen broke her Faith
with these Suffolk Heretics, and was for setting up Popery again with all the
haste she could, yet her first Parliament would not do her business for her,
though very dishonorable and base practices were used to make them fit for the
restoring Popery effectually, though in many places (as an Historian of that
time informs the World) of the Country, some were chosen by force and threats;
and in-other places those employed by the Court did with violence hinder the
Commons from coming to choose; in others false Returns, and after all, some
unserviceable for such violent purposes were violently turned out of the House
of Commons: So that that cunning Politician Gardener was forced to dismiss this
Parliament, and by Bribes and Corruptions buy and pension another, before they
could get their Popery made the established Religion, but with such abatements
and defects in the business of Abbey Lands particularly, as make our Jesuit
complain and be ashamed of them. Did such Experience then give any grounds for
our Jesuit to be so confident of the facility of bringing in Popery again. This
shows that a Jesuit can be very zealous both against Reason, and against even
his own as well as all other People's Experience. God be thanked that upon a
second trial of their skill under a Popish King, and managed by Jesuits too, it
is found that it is not only a difficult, but an impossible thing to replain:
Popery in England.

(e) Life and Spirit by putting good and virtuous Men] We should be so far from
angry, that we ought to thank the Jesuit for making this Reflection upon our
Cathedrals and Universities. Had he commended them, I should have suspected
them to have been such as himself was when he was turned out of his College at
Oxford, for Immorality. Mr. Camden, our famous Historian, says our Jesuit was
his contemporary in Oxford, that he was Fellow of Baliol College, and ^^de open
Profession of the Protestant Religion, until he was for his loose carriage
expelled with disgrace Camden. Elizabeth. B. 2. 150.
and then went over to the Papists. It was great Pity therefore that when our
Jesuit was in the Chapter providing that good and virtuous Men (upon the
re-establishment of Popery) should be put into our Colleges, he took no
particular care for his own College Baliol, that especial care might be taken
there above all others, that if any of those ill Men were alive then, who had
been so wicked as to expel out of their College, the sober, pious and chaste
Mr. Parsons, they should be removed with disgrace, for an example to all other
Colleges.

CHAP. II. What manner of Reformation is needful in England.
HAving spoken of a perfect Reformation, if any Man would ask what manner of
Reformation this is, I could answer him no better, to the purpose, considering
the present State of England, under Persecution, than to say, That it ought to
be as the Reformation or Purification of Gold is when it comes out of the
fiery Furnace, to wit, pure, simple, perfect, without corruption, dregs or
rust: for so God himself compares his True Church, and all his Elect after
their probation by the Fire of Tribulation; And again, I may compare it to the
State of a Garden which being overgrown with Weeds and Thistles, the Owner
thereof puts fire to the whole, and when all is consumed, then begins he
to plant chosen and sweet Herbs at his pleasure. And the like is God's desire
to do with this English Garden, if we will cooperate with his holy designment.
Hereof then it follows that the Reformation of England, Perfect Reformation.
after this long and sharp Persecution, ought to be very perfect, full and
complete, not respecting so much what some cold Catholics use to do in other
Countries, where Spirit is decayed, and Corruption crept in, as what may be
done or ought to be done in England: or if we will needs cast our eyes upon the
Example of others, let us look upon the Apostles and their Successors, and upon
the Primitive Church that had the force of Christ's Spirit stirring and hot in
them; which long continuance of time afterward did both weaken and cool, and in
many a one has been quite extinguished.

And to come to some particulars, Council of Trent.
the whole World knows how that the (1) late Holy Council of Trent, when it
came to matters of Reformation of Manners, it was constrained to accommodate it
self in many things to the capacity of that decayed State of Christendom which
then they found, and so to set down those Decrees, which they might suppose
would be received generally in the Church; as the Physician does in tempering
his Medicine, according to the strong complexion, and disposition of his
Patient, though not so effectually many times as the Disease it self in rigor
would require. Th^^ those Holy Fathers of the Council moderating many of their
Decrees in this behalf of manners according to the weakness of this our Age,
and omitting many other points of more rigor and perfection, suggested to them
by diverse holy and learned Men, and this yet notwithstanding we set with what
difficulties, delays, unwillingness, cautels, protestations, restraints, and
exceptions, this part of the Council touching Reformation has been received in
diverse Countries that otherwise are Catholic, by reason of the general
Corruption grown into Men's Lives and Customs, for purging whereof even unto
the quick, it is supposed that God has sent this Fire of Heresy into
Christendom, and is feared by many that it will never cease until all be
cleansed.

England then having passed now this Fire, ought to make Declaration by her
works, when time shall serve, how much she has profited by this Purgation, and
to receive not only the forelaid Council of Trent entirely and fully without
Limitation or Restraint; but to embrace also, and to put it in ure, where
occasion and place is offered such other points of Reformation, as tend to the
perfect restitution of Ecclesiastical Discipline that were in use, in the
ancient Christian Church, though afterward decayed for want of Spirit, and not
urged now again, nor commanded for the Council of Trent for the causes before
by me alleged: for better Declaration whereof we may consider, that the
Council of Trent, touching Reformation of Manners, had to repair an old ancient
House, whereof many parts were sore weakened by Corruptions, and some perished,
but yet the whole could not be changed, nor built anew; but necessarily the
reparation must be made according to the State and Condition of the other parts
that yet remained, and so those good Fathers could not frame all points to
their own likeing, nor yet according to the Rules of perfect Ecclesiastical
Architecture.

State of England.
But now in England no doubt but that the State of things will be far otherwise,
whenever the change of Religion shall happen: For then it will be lawful for
a good Catholic Prince that God shall send, and (2) for a well affected
Parliament, which himself and the time will easily procure to begin of new and
to build from the very foundation the external face of our Catholic Church,
and to follow the Model which themselves will choose, and if that will be a good
and perfect Model, it will endure at least for a time, and be a pattern of true
Christianity to the rest of the World; but if it be but ordinary, and of the
meaner sort at the beginning, it will quickly slide back to the old Corruptions
wherein it was before, and so the benefit of this Probation and Tribulation
will soon be lost both before God and Men: which Jesus forbid, for that it is
and will be the greatest Crown that ever England has had since her first
Conversion to the Christian Faith, and according to this account must our
purpose be of Reformation whenever God shall restore us to Liberty and Peace,
lest we lose in Peace that which we gained in War, as Eusebius Caesariensis
says, that some did in ancient Persecutions, and it ought to be a warning to
us to take heed by their Examples. And this is so much, as in this behalf
seems needful to be remembered.

Animadversions on Chap. II.
(1) THE late Council of Trent] The Jesuit in the former Chapter was
complaining of the coldness and imperfect Reformation of Queen Mary's Reign,
and here he is as severe upon the Council of Trent it self, which,
notwithstanding its being directed and assisted by the Holy Ghost; (as this
Jesuit as well as the rest of their Writers will have it to be when they are
engaged in Controversy against the Reformed) and notwithstanding the
Infallible Vicar at Rome presided in it by his Legates, and did from time to
time influence and direct all its Consultations and Determinations; yet was so
base and cowardly (according to our fierce Jesuit) as to truckle to the humors
of the Age, and make a very lame and imperfect Reformation out of compliance
with the lukewarmness and iniquity of that Age.

But the rest of the World were not of our Jesuit's Mind, but did easily see
that no Temporal Prince could submit to that Council (which by the bye was
nothing but a mere Western Conventicle of Italian Bishops, and the Pope's own
Creatures, who had sworn to be true and faithful to him, and to preserve to him
those which he and they call the Rights and Honors of S. Peter before ever
they came within the Walls of that assembly) without wrong to himself, and to
his People. However our Jesuit is for having his Popish Prince in England to
receive the Council of Trent entirely and fully without Limitation and
Restraint, though the Prince that does it makes himself feudatory to the Popes,
and leaves his Country to their disposal, when they think fit to have it
escheat to them; this no body can doubt of it, that will but examine what that
Council at Trent has determined about the Matter of Duels in any Princes
Countries: and this without Question is one of the Reasons why the Gallican
Church could not then, nor can be to this day persuaded to admit the Council of
Trent entirely, but refuse it as to the Canons about Discipline, which encroach
upon the Prince's Right, and the Churches Authority. By what I can observe from
our Jesuit, he is for overdoing the whole World, and while he brands others
with the name of Cold Catholics, would, I suppose, have a Council of Jesuits
to reform their Church, and then I am sure it will be done to purpose.

(2) For a well affected Parliament, which himself and the time will easily
procure] Here is an Instance of a fatal mistake in our Jesuit's Politics and
Foresight. The Papists in England, by God's Permission, have had a Popish
Prince, and a Prince governed by Jesuits too. and as zealous as our Jesuit
himself could either imagine or wish him to be; and yet after all he was not
able to get a well affected Parliament, that is, a Parliament that would have
settled Popery effectually among us. That Prince came to the Crown with greater
advantages than one of his Persuasion could well have been supposed to have
done, he was no sooner fixed in his Throne, than he had the good success to
break and suppress two very dangerous Rebellions, and appeared to the World to
have the love of all his Subjects, who gratified him in his first Parliament
with every thing, that they could either with Honor or Conscience give. But
when tempted I am afraid by the reading of this Jesuit's Memorial, and by the
strange success against the two Insurrections he began to pull off the Vizard,
and was for breaking in upon the National Protestant security by keeping up a
standing Army with a great many Popish unqualified Officers, and thought it
would prove (...) easy matter to bring in his Popery, we see how miserably he
was out in his Measures; that very Parliament that had been so kind as to
settle a greater Revenue upon him than ever King of England had (by six hundred
thousand Pounds a Year, as I have been informed, for some Years) and to give
him great Supplies and to Vo^^ him more, and that did stand by him with their
Fortune^ and Lives, were yet for standing by their Religion and their Laws, and
were neither so tame nor foolish as to be either complemented or hectored out
of either of them.

This dissolved that Parliament, and showed how gra^^ful a Popish Prince could
be to the best and kindest Parliament. And when this Parliament was dissolved,
and Popery made every day larger steps than before, and the whole Constitution
was laid to sleep in favor of Fanati^ and Papists, did he or time procure a
more kind or well affected Parliament? Indeed all the care imaginable w^ taken,
all ways were tried, and some very mean ones, (...) was forced to be (for so I
cannot but in compa^^^ word it) Ungrateful to his best Friends, to turn all the
Honest Nobility and Gentry of the Nation out of all Commissions, of Trust or
Profit, to discard his two Brothers who had been so faithful to his Interest in
the worst of times, and serviceable to him at all times; to snatch away
Charters, to regulate and model them by thrusting out honest substantial Men,
and filling their Places with the Vilest and Offscouring of all places, for so
I must look upon all those Protestants to be (though they have wiped their
Mouth since) that would engage to choose such Parliament men as would take off
the Penal Laws and Test; to undertake the mean Office himself of closetting
Nobility and Gentry, and yet all would not do, he and our Jesuit were equally
mistaken, he could not get a Parliament to his Mind.

CHAP. III. How this Reformation may best be procured, and what Disposition of
Minds is needful for it in all Parties.
FOR that the grace and good Motion to take in hand and to go through with so
great a work as is this desired Reformation, must come from Heaven; therefore
the first sure step unto it must be by (3) the true reconciliation of the Realm
unto God and to his Church; and as the first of these two proceeds, so will
the second; and for that the first was hudled up in Queen Mary's Days (I mean
the Reconciliation) by a certain general Absolution only, without due search
and consideration of what had been committed, or what satisfaction was to be
made to God and Man; so was the other shuffled up with like negligence, and
only the external part was plastered without remedying the Root, the renewing
the Spirit, which should have been the ground of all; many Priests that had
fallen and married in King Edward's Days, were admitted presently to the Altar,
without other satisfaction than only to send their Concubines out of Men's
sight, and of some it is thought they did not so much as confess themselves
before they said Mass again; Others that had preached against Catholics, were
admitted presently to preach for them; and others that had been Visitors and
Commissioners against us, were made Commissioners against the Protestants, and
in this Queen's time were Commissioners again of the other side against ours;
so as the matter went as a Stage Play, where Men do change their Persons and
Parts, without changing their Minds or Affection: many or rather all that had
Abby-Lands, the good Queen Mary herself and some very few others excepted,
remained with the same, as with a prey well gotten, and he that was most
scrupulous would but send for a Bull of Toleration to Rome upon false
Information, to the end that he might not be troubled; and with this he thought
himself safe in Conscience, and bound to no more; yea, he was taken for a great
Catholic, that would so much as ask for a Bull. And matters passing in this
manner, who will wonder that the Benefit of Religion remained so little a
while; or that the second scourge of Heresy has been so sharp and heavy
since, as we have proved. To amend the error, the way must be, that our
Reconciliation, and turning to Almighty God, be True, Sincere, Hearty, and as
it ought to be, with Sorrow and Contrition for what is past, and with full
purpose of amendment for the time to come, and to do that satisfaction both to
God and Man, that shall be thought necessary, and lies in us conveniently to
perform; for without this disposition, the matter goes not well. This is
necessary to be performed both by Clergy and Laity, and the more sincerely this
business is wrought, the more permanent will it be. It will import also
greatly, and is to be procured by all good means possible, That these two
principal Members of our Commonwealth, I mean the Clergy and Temporalty, do
join and unite themselves well in this greatest Action of all others, for the
good and re-establishing of Religion and Piety in the Realm; and so much the
more carefully is this to be sought for at this time, for that it is very
probably presumed, that one principal cause of their ruin, has been the
Emulation and Disunion of these two Estates in England, which ordinarily is
wont to follow, where Spirit and Charity waxes cold. But now both Parties
having tasted the smart of this error, and seen the deceit of the Devil
therein, they may the easier be brought to detest it, and to note for wicked
Men, and devilish Instruments, all such as any ways shall be known to favor,
enkindle or nourish that Division.

And the best means to settle this Union substantially, and form the heart,
will be for each Party with all Indifferency, to consider not only the harms
that have and will ensue by this disunion to both sides; but also, and
principally, how necessary and profitable the one of these two Members is to
the other, as namely the Clergy to the Laity for Direction of their Souls,
which without them must needs perish; and the Temporalty to the Ecclesiastical,
for their defense and maintenance, so as the one without the other cannot
stand, and God his Holy Ordination is, that both should join together in his
Church, and one part help the other to his service, and to the attaining of
Heaven and Eternal Salvation. And for that the Frailty of Man is great, and
prone to fall into Emulation and Contention, (as brittle Vessels, (to use the
Comparison of St. Austin,) that knock out one the others sides) great heed is
to be taken, as much as may be, at the very beginning of this our Reformation
to remove all occasions that are wont to breed strife and breach between the
Clergy and Laity, as namely about Jurisdiction, Possessions, Revenues, Duties,
Prerogatives, Exemptions, and the like; all which are to be settled with
consent and good liking of all Parties, as near as may be, and that which is
said of this, may be understood also of taking away all occasions of jarrs and
disagreeing between Bishops and their Chapters, Religious Men and Priests, one
Order of Religion with another, and such like Persons or Communities of diverse
States, Condition or Habit, in whom the Law of Charity and True Zeal of God's
Service, and help of our Country ought to prevail, more especially at this
time, than any Passion, humane infirmity, or particular respect whatsoever.

This mutual Concord and hearty good will being once well settled between the
Clergy and Temporalty, it will be a great Foundation for all good effects to
follow, especially if both parties do rectify also their Intentions, in this
great Action, as they ought to do, to desire nothing but God's Glory, and this
without any evil affection toward any, of Envy, Malice, Revenge, or the like;
and without respect of particular interest. And for that there will be two
sorts of People to be dealt withal by the better sort of Catholics, to wit,
(4) weaker Catholics which are commonly known in England by the name of
Schismatics and Heretics that have been Enemies to both these sorts, there is
to be used true Love, Piety, and Christian Charity, with the Prudence and
Direction that is also convenient. And for the first, since they are our
Brethren, we ought to have sincere Compassion of their weakness and fall,
animating them hereby to rise and stand hereafter; And unto the second, for
that by God's Grace they may be our Brethren, we must use all Charity in like
manner, seeking their true and sincere Conversion, with that Caution
notwithstanding that is expedient for theirs, and the public good; of all
which I shall lay down some particular Notes in the Chapter following, though
it must be the Direction of Almighty God, and Unction of the Holy Ghost, which
must guide our Prince, Parliament, and Magistrates, and namely our Bishops in
this point of dealing with Heretics, which will be a point of great moment,
and wherein will consist much for the True Reformation which we seek, and for
the assurance of Religion, and wherein it is thought the error of Queen Mary's
time was as pernicious, as in any other thing whatsoever, and therefore the
more carefully to be remedied now.

Animadversions on Chap. III.
(3) THE true Reconciliation of the Realm unto God and to his Church] There is
not only here but in several other places an appearance of Zeal for Piety and
the Honor of God in this Jesuit; but that it is no more than a bare appearance
without any thing of the substance of Godliness, will be more plain to him that
will read the Memorial throughout: this is not my conjecture, but of several
Writers of their own Church of Rome, who look upon the Jesuits generally as the
greatest dissemblers and hypocrites upon the face of the Earth, that the
obtaining more Wealth to their Order and Gain is all the Godliness that they
have; and therefore when they meet with a Jesuit talking about Piety or the
Glory of God, they treat him with Derision, as knowing that True Religion is
the least part of that Society's business, and that the Piety they make show of
in their Writings is only for a cover to their politic designs, and like true
Pharisees to devour and eat up silly Recusants Estates, and to ruin others, to
make their Society rich and splendid. Thus in Queen Elizabeth's time our Jesuit
himself that talks so gravely sometimes in this Memorial of the Glory of God
and Reconciliation with God, was one of those that made such a pudder about
restoreing their Catholic Religion, and rooting Heresy out of England,
whereas their true business was to betray their Country to the Spaniards, to
plot with them (as it was always this traitorous Jesuit's practice) to invade
our Nation, and thereby to obtain, as they did from the Spanish King, Gifts and
Benevolences to their Order, and Seminaries erected and endowed for them.

This was the Jesuit's true aim, which without some face of Zeal for God, and
pretense of Piety could not be so easily compassed; it is that wise and great
Man the Cardinal d'Ossat's Observation of Parsons in that Letter from Rome,
wherein he gave the King of France an account of Parsons's Book about
Succession, That Parsons was so passionately concerned in it for the Spanish
Interest, that he made no conscience of contradicting himself grossly in it,
nor had any regard to Truth and Reason. I think this ought to be a key to us to
open the Jesuit's meaning, when he talks of the true Reconciliation of the
Realm to God; I question not but the whole Reconciliation he drives at is, that
we might all turn true Papists, and all Papists would fairly give up their
Abby-Lands to their Council of Reformation, which he sets up in his VII th.
Chapter.

(4) Weaker Catholics, which are commonly known in England by the name of
Schismatics.] How any Catholics should be Schismatics is worth our time to
understand; to do which we must go back to the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, when the Papists, notwithstanding the Alteration in Religion made by
that excellent Queen and her Parliament in the beginning of it, went to Church
to conform themselves (to put it in the words of one of their own Writers a
Romish Priest Vertumnus Romanus published by Dr. Featly, Pref. p. 7.
) to the State, as they did in King Edward the Sixth's time: keeping privately
to themselves the exercise of their own Religion. This Practice of the Roman
Catholics continued for several Years here; my Lord Chief Justice Coke says
upon his own knowledge for ten or a dozen Years: and had I suppose continued
on, had not the upstart Faction of the Jesuits set themselves with all their
might and their Interest to break it off.

They were aware that such Conformity of their Roman Catholic Friends would in
a few Years have left not one Papist in England, and indeed it was morally
impossible that it should have happened otherways, since we need not doubt but*
that the great Truth and the Light, the Doctrine and the Liturgy of the Church
of England so exactly conformable to the Word of God, and to the purest times
of the Primitive Church, would, by God's Blessing, have shined into their
Hearts, have enlightened them, and made them become true Church of England
Christians by renouncing all those Relics of Popery which they fostered
privately in their breasts. And therefore the Jesuits and their Friends by the
Interest they had in the Council of Trent got a little Cabal of that Council a
dozen of Bishops and others (out of which number Pate the Bishop of Worcester
the only English Popish Bishop in that Council was left out, though of all Men
the fittest to have been consulted in this matter) favorers of their Society,
to (...) up Reasons why the Catholics of England ought not, and must not,
under pain of Schism and Damnation, go to the Protestant Churches there, in
which they load our Church with many calumnies, our Rites are made to be most
wicked and accursed; all which though these Twelve Caballers knew in their own
Consciences to be as false as Hell; yet to affright their People from our
Churches they were forced to paint our Church as deformed as their own Church
by her Idolatrous Rites and Superstitious Practices is; However all this, and
the Pope's Rescripts to the same purpose would not hinder many Catholics from
going to Church, and their defense was, that this Decree, as well as the Pope's
Rescripts, were surreptitiously gotten, that both Pope and Council were imposed
upon, and therefore they would not run themselves into needless danger; these
are the Men, whom our Jesuit here does call Schismatics.

CHAP. IV. How all sorts of People, to wit, Catholics, Schismatics and
Heretics may be dealt withal, at the next change of Religion.
AFter Union and good Disposition of Mind in all, and a hearty Reconciliation
of Almighty God, will be necessary, a sweet, pious, and prudent manner of
dealing, and proceeding as well with Catholics as Schismatics, Protestants
and Persecutors; And as for known Catholics, which have been constant, and
born the brunt in time of Persecution, though for their own parts they ought to
follow the most holy and secure Council of our Savior, Cum omnia feceritis
dicite quia servi inutiles sumus, quod debuimus, fecimus, nothing presuming of
themselves, or vaunting over others, but expecting their reward with humility
at God's Hands; yet it is evident that in all Reason, and Justice, and Law of
gratitude, they are to be used and employed by the Commonwealth in all
Principal Charges, Rooms, and Offices, with special confidence, every Man
according to his known Zeal, Ability, and Talent for the same, and according to
the measure of his suffering for God's Cause, by which means both they and
others, shall be animated and comforted, and the state of Religion much more
assured, than if for particular Favors, Kindred, Bribes, Interest, any be
preferred, or such as are not known to have any Zeal in God's Affairs, as in
the late Queen Mary's time, in many places was seen, to the grief and
discouragement of many, and to the infinite danger of the Realm, as after well
appeared.

As for Schismatics, or close or weak Catholics, that have fallen, denied, or
dissembled their Religion, if they have done it of frailty, and have not been
Persecutors, the more Compassion is to be had of their Estate, and the more
sweetness to be used in restoring them to the Unity of God's Church again; But
yet how far they are to be used in matters of the Commonwealth, especially at
the beginning, and in rooms, where their weakness and inconstance may be in
danger, the Law of Godly Wisdom, must determine; and the manner of their
Reconciliation will give also great light to this Deliberation, which
Reconciliation as well in these Men, as in all others that shall return to
Catholic Union again, whether they have been Heretics or no, ought to be made
with great attention and deliberation, as in a matter of most high moment for
all their future Life and Condition; For that most commonly, according to this
first step of reentrance with Almighty God again, is the Sequel of all that
ensues, good or bad; so as he that makes a good, and perfect, and sound
Reconciliation proves, for the most part, a sure and constant Christian
afterward, and he that huddleth the matter up in haste, without due measure of
Consideration is where he was before within a few days after, and perhaps far
worse for contempt of so great Accommodation. Wherefore, to the end that this
so mighty a Foundation may be laid as it ought to be, the Commonwealth should
take care, and especially the Bishops, that Men of Ability and Capacity only
should be employed, in receiving of these Reconciliations at the beginning; and
some particular form were to be prescribed how it should be done, especially in
great Persons, and Subjects of great importance, and these perhaps not to be
reconciled without special faculty or knowledge of the Bishop, or Prelate of
the place; and by some able Person by him assigned; and this with giving to
them space and due time of Deliberation, Recollection, Meditation, Instruction,
and of any other means to help them in so great an affair. And this for them
that will return; But as for Enemies, or obstinate Heretics, whether they be
of Malice or of Ignorance, another course seems to be taken for their
Reduction and Satisfaction, which is to endeavor by all ways to convince them
(if it be possible) of their Errors, and this by reason and sweet means, as far
as may be, whereof I shall touch some Particulars in this place. And first of
all, ( f) Perchance it would be good, considering the present State of the
Realm, and how generally and deeply it is, and has been plunged in all kind of
Heresies, not to press any Man's Conscience at the beginning for matters of
Religion, for some few Years; to the end, that every Man may more boldly and
confidently utter his Wounds, and so be cured thereof, which otherwise he would
cover, deny, or dissemble to his greater hurt, and more dangerous Corruption of
the whole Body; but yet it may be provided jointly, that this Toleration be
only with such as live quietly, and are desirous to be informed of the Truth,
and do not teach, and preach, or seek to infect others; and by experience it
has been seen, that this kind of suffering and bearing for a time has done
great good, and eased many difficulties in diverse Towns rendered up in the Low
Countries, which being mitigated at the beginning with this entrance of
Clemency, never greatly cared for Heresies afterward: yet do I give notice
that my meaning is not any way to persuade hereby, that Liberty of Religion to
live how a Man will should be permitted to any Person in any Christian
Commonwealth, for any cause or respect whatsoever; from which I am so far off
in my Judgment and Affection, as I think no one thing to be so dangerous,
dishonorable, or more offensive to Almighty God in the World, than that any
Prince should permit the Ark of Israel and Dagon, God and the Devil, to stand
and be honored together, within his Realm, or Country. But that which I talk
of, is a certain Connivence or Toleration of Magistrates only for a certain
time to be limited, and with particular Conditions and Exceptions, that no
meetings, assemblies, preaching or perverting of others be used, but that such
as be quiet and modest People, and have never heard perhaps the grounds of
Catholic Religion, may use the freedom of their Consciences, to ask, learn and
to be instructed for the space prescribed, without danger of the Law or of any
inquiry to be made upon them to inform themselves of the truth. And I would
hope verily, that by the grace of Almighty God, and by charitable diligence and
industry of good Men, and especially of diligent Pastors, and Preachers, that
many good effects would follow of this Toleration: For first there would be
taken away that slander wherewith the Enemies are wont ordinarily to charge the
Catholic Church, though perversely and falsely, that she persecuteth before she
instructs. And secondly, the Wounds would be opened and cured as before has
been said, that otherwise would be dissembled and more infested. And thirdly,
there would be more liberty for Men to deal for the true Conversion of
Heretics; and they with more confidence, comfort, and alacrity would alter
their Minds, and be more capable of the Truth; and I think it would be the
gaining of thousands of Souls that otherwise would be lost: and finally by this
means the Prince would come to know, at the end of the time prescribed, what
Disposition of People he had within his Realm, which otherwise would be hard to
do. And these are my reasons for my desires in this behalf, which I do remit,
as all the rest that here or elsewhere I shall say, to the more mature judgment
of them, which at the wished day shall be able to judge better, ex re
praesenti, and determine the Cause.

There remains to say a word or two of the best ways how to Convert Heretics
to the Catholic Faith, whose Souls we ought to thirst and seek for above all
other things of the World. And first of all, there is no doubt but that the
chiefest and most principal means will be to give the battery to the Judgments
and Understandings, though to gain first their good wills and affections, by
the Clemency before mentioned, and other Points that after shall be touched,
will be a great Disposition and entrance to the same. But for convincing of
their understandings in matters of Controversy, I would wish that a plain
contrary course were taken of us toward them, for that which they have used
toward us, seeing that our cause does bear it, which is of contrary State and
Condition to theirs. For, whereas their cause being false, ( g) they would
never consent to come to any indifferent Trial or Disputation with the
Catholics; I would wish that seeing our Cause is true and substantial, and the
more it is tried, the more it will appear, that once at least at the beginning
full satisfaction were given by English Catholics, to those, and all other
Heretics, of the World, by as full, free, equal, and liberal Disputation, as
possibly could be devised, within our Realm, and this in London, Oxford,
Cambridge, or some other fit place, where all the Heads of Heresies might most
conveniently have recourse; and the particular Circumstances, which for the
present do offer themselves to me for the profitable performance of this
enterprise, are these that follow, other Men at that time will easily invent
better; That sufficient warrant and warning be given to all sides to prepare
themselves; That the Heretics do choose three or four of their most learned Men
to dispute, and answer, and one other to be President, and another to be
Notary; and that the like must be assigned of the Catholic Party for this
Trial; and that all be prepared for a certain day upon the particular
Controversies that may be appointed, and all kind of Books allowed them to
their contentment. There may be two high Seats, Stages, or Scaffolds appointed
so as all may hear, and see, and on the one may sit the forenamed three or four
Disputers of the one side together with their Furniture of Books about them,
and so on the other side may be placed the Catholic Party, and in equal
distance between them both may sit the two Presidents of the Disputation, with
the two Notaries, and commodious Room left for all the lookers on, to behold
and hear. The first day may Argue or Dispute the one side upon the Controversy
that shall be set up publicly, and be known the day before, and the other part
may defend, and answer; and so interchangeably the next day may answer and
defend the other side that argued the day before, and upon the very same Doubt
or Controversy; so as the ability of both sides, in opposing and answering in
the same thing, shall be seen; which the Protestants never durst permit to
Father Campion and his Company, in their feigned Disputations, nor yet to give
them Books or time to prepare themselves, whereas all the contrary must be
performed by ours.

The manner of arguing and answering may be that one of the three or four
Disputers for each side, be appointed to be Proloquutor of the rest for that
day, and that he only do speak, and be bound to answer and argue in form of
School, and that others that be his assistants do not interrupt him but let him
speak alone until he have proposed his Argument or Answer wholly, and repeated
the same; and whether his assistants do allow the same without adding, or
altering, and saying; yea, the two Notaries shall agree upon the writing, and
then shall the other part answer, or reply, and having ended, to speak in form
of School, the like shall be used in asking his assistants, whether they be
content and satisfied with that he sets down. And thus though the Arguments
will go something slowly forward, yet in the end will great substance be drawn
out of this bolting; for that the one Party or the other will come quickly to a
plain exigent, and to have no more to say but only words, which will be easily
discerned by all that are present; for that although the formal Speech of
Disputations must be in Latin, yet may all be so easily declared, as few men of
understanding will be present, that will not understand the substance of all.
And for the two Presidents, or Moderators, though they be of different
Religion, yet their Offices being only to speak, when need is, and to hold
peace, and to make the Arguments, and Answers to be well understood only on
both sides; it may be thought they will pass well enough for the purpose that
is pretended, especially if there be another person of higher authority placed
there by the Prince, as there ought to be, who may cause each Party to do their
Office and Function, with Modesty, Peace and Edification, and remove away,
without remission, whosoever should fall into disorder of words, and command
now and then the two Notaries, or one of them at one time, and the other at
another, to read out aloud the Arguments, Answer, Reply, or Distinction, that
has been given; and at the end of every day to recite all that has been
spoken that day, and this with the consent of both Presidents, and of all six
Disputers. And if there be but one Week bestowed in this Work, with these and
the like circumstances, and at last all these Disputations publicly showed in
Print, for the satisfaction of such as could not be present, and that all
circumstances be declared, how and when, by whom and in what order they were
done. I am of Opinion it would break wholly the credit of all Heresies in
England, and that afterward few Books would be needful on our part, as in
truth it were to be wished, that few or none were written in the Vulgar Tongue,
against Heretics; but rather that Books of Devotion, and virtuous Life should
enter in their place, and the memory dye of the other Wranglings. And the like
course also may be taken by Preachers in their Sermons, which by little and
little were to be freed from all mention of Heresies, to the end the People of
God might come again to their old peace of Mind, and attention only of good
Works, and Christian Virtues.

And this is so much as I have thought good to advertise, about this manner of
( g) public Disputation, which has been often asked by the Catholics at the
Protestants hands, and could never be obtained; and no marvel, for, as Christ
says, Omnis qui male agit, odit lucem, and non venit ad Lucem, ne arguantur
opera ejus; but on the contrary side, Qui facit veritatem (says he) venit ad
Lucem, ut manifestentur opera ejus. And though I confess that in a quiet and
established Catholic State, Disputation with Heretics were not to be presumed
profitable; yet our Condition is different now at the beginning, and will be
for some Years in England; and all satisfaction must be given, that may be
conveniently; and seeing our building is true at the Foundation, and our Money
with which we desire to enrich Men, is pure Gold, and tried, the more we rub it
on the Touchstone, the better it will appear, and the more acceptable it will
be to all Men. One other public satisfaction also I could wish were given, for
some days at the beginning, to certain principal Persons in London, or
elsewhere; or rather that every Bishop should do it in his City or Diocese, for
that in my Opinion it would be of very great importance; And this is, That some
chief Man of Learning and Authority of our side, or the Prelate himself should
take a certain hour in the day to confer openly the writings of some two of
both sides, as namely of Juell and Dr. Harding in London, for that they write
both in the Vulgar Tongue, the one against the other; and of Whitaker and Dr.
Stapleton in Oxford or Cambridge, for that they writ in Latin, and the manner
of this Conference might be, that one in Pulpit, or public Audience, should
read some Paragraph out of one of them, and confer presently the Authors which
he cites, and whether he cites them truly or no; and to let the places be
read publicly out of their own Authors; which may be prepared to be there
present, and then the answer of the other might be read, and Authors also that
he alleges; and for more indifferency of this Examination or Collation, there
might be two Learned Men appointed, one of each side, a Protestant and a
Catholic, to see that no fraud or injury be done to any Party, but only the
Books examined sincerely: and seeing that the truth is but one, and cannot but
appear by this Collation, ( h) I persuade my self this Examination would do
exceeding much good to all such of understanding as should be present, as
indeed I suppose that all principal Protestants likely would be, for that the
Exercise would be both pleasant and profitable; and I dare avouch that Juell
will be discovered to make so many shifts, and to slide out at so many narrow
holes and creeks to save himself, and to deny, falsify, and pervert so many
Authors, Doctors, and Fathers, as his own side, within few days, would be
ashamed of him, and give him over; which would be no small blow, to overthrow
Heresy even by the root in England, he having been their chiefest Pillar, to
maintain the same in that Kingdom.

Besides these two public satisfactions, I do persuade my self there will be
need of little more; for that the private Industry of diverse good and learned
Men, and one Layman with another, and the virtuous lives and conversations of
our Priests and Clergymen, and the Example of all sorts of Religious People,
both Men and Women, and the very outward face, show, and practice of Catholic
Devotion, the wearisomness of Heresies, and of their Authors and Maintainers,
will quickly work out all affection of People toward them, and plant it the
contrary toward true Religion, Piety, and Catholic Christianity.

And thus much for gaining of those that have been deceived by error, and are
of a good nature, and think they do well, and do hold a desire to know the
truth, and follow the same, and finally do hope to be saved as good Christians,
and do make account of an honest Conscience, though they be in Heresy; But for
others that be either wilful Apostates, or malicious Persecutors, or obstinate
Perverters of others, how they may be dealt withal, it belongs not to a Man
of my Vocation to suggest, but rather to commend their State to Almighty God,
and their Treaty to the wisdom of such as shall be in authority in the
Commonwealth at that day; admonishing them only that as God does not govern the
whole Monarchy but by Rewards and Chastisements; and that as he has had a
sweet hand to cherish the well-affected, so has he a strong arm, to bind the
Boisterous, Stubborn, and Rebellious; even so the very like and same must be
the proceeding of a perfect Catholic Prince and Commonwealth; and the nearer
it goes to the Imitation of God's Government, in this and all other points, the
better and more exact and more durable it is, and will be ever.

And this answer may be given in general; for, in particular, what order is to
be holden with such as before I named, Persecutors, Arch-Hereticks, false
Bishops, Preachers, Ministers, Apostates, Traitors to the Cause, Strangers and
Foreign Heretics, that do oppress the Realm, and others of the like Crew and
Condition, I leave to be determined according to the circumstance of time,
occasion, and place, when opportunity shall be offered.

Animadversions on Chap. IV.
( f) PErchance it would be good -- not to press any Man's Conscience at the
beginning for matters of Religion, for some few Years] The perusal of this part
of this Chapter I cannot but recommend to all those Dissenters in England, that
did in the late Reign not only accept of the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, but give the King such extravagant thanks for it. They must not
deny that they were warned of the snare, and that all the Kindness showed them
was but forced, and would in a little time have proved their own, as well as
Ruin of the Church of England, which was too wise to be trickt by the
Jesuitical Arts of that Court. They may see here what was the sole design of
that grinning Toleration, and, which is more, how lasting it was to have been.
Who can read the Jesuit's Instructions and Limitations here about it, as the
late King questioness did? and remember the Cant that was set about then, that
the Liberty of Conscience should be made as firm as Magna Charta, and
established to all Posterity. It was indeed the Admiration of all wise Men,
that the Dissenters who had believed that the Declaration of 1672. was designed
to make way for Popery, and had seen it proved out of other Books as well as
Coleman's Letters, that this was their most probable way to bring in Popery,
should in the Reign of a Popish King himself, governed by Jesuits, and when
Popery was barefaced, be imposed upon to comply with, and (which was ten times
more foolish) to address and thank the Popish King for that Declaration, which
I do from my Soul believe would not have been continued to this Year 1690. so
many are the Limitations, and Restraints, and Conditions in it, that it would
have been the easiest thing in the World for them, when they pleased, to have
taken the forfeiture of this Charter also for Liberty of Conscience. It was a
Comical sight indeed to see Mr. Lobb the Presbyterian and Father Petre the
Jesuit caballing and contriving together, and as great Intimado's as if they
had been of the very same Society; to see Pen the Quaker and Brent, Mr. Alsop
and Nevil Pain settling and securing Liberty of Conscience, and Father Warner
as obliging to them as can be; but whatever Professions of Love and Sincerity
were made to the Nonconformists by the Jesuits then, I can assure them that at
the same time F. Warner the Jesuit, the late King's Confessor, looked upon all
the Dissenters together as the worst and vilest of Men, and insufferable in any
Government, especially in a Monarchy: and this I have out of his History of the
Popish Plot written with his own hand, which I have now by me, wherein his
Characters of the Presbyterians (which is the name he gives to all Dissenters)
are somewhat extraordinary, and I should desire Mr. Alsop and Mr. Lobb to
recollect how far this following Character of themselves and their Friends does
agree with the Discourse they were at the same time treated with by the late
King, the Jesuits, and their Tools: Pervicacissima (says he Apparatus, p. 7.
) ista factio, omni imperio adversa, populorum exitio nata, and Romae and
Patriae communis Erynnis. Such Characters as this run through his Seven Books
of the History of that Plot; which I could not peruse without astonishment,
that any People that wear the name of Christians could be such abominable
Hypocrites, as to court and caress with their Tongues those Men, whom in their
writings they were at the very same instant representing to Foreign Nations and
to Posterity as the wickedest and worst of Men, Furies and Firebrands of Hell:
the least that such a practice can prove, is, that a Jesuit is a Scandal to the
Christian Name.

And now I have mentioned Father Warner's MS. History of the Popish Plot, I
cannot but do the Earl of Castlemain the kindness to help him out of this
History with a breviate of his Instructions for his Embassy to Rome. In his
late printed account of what had been said by him before the late House of
Commons, he makes his Embassy to have been just such as is between two Temporal
Princes about Compliment and Commerce, and says he could prove it, but that he
had indeed burnt his Papers. I am glad I can help his Lordship herein out of
Father Warner's History, whom no body will question to have known my Lord
Castlemain's true business to Rome, being at that time a chief managing Jesuit,
and, which is more, the King's Confessor. This is his account of it, when he
comes to speak of that Kings Accession to the Crown, and his suppressing the
two Rebellions against him. Things being (says he Lib. 8. p. 153. 1685. Rebus
intra Regnum utcunque stabilitis, concordia florentibus, proxima serenissimo
Regi cura fuit suas ditiones cum Ecclesiae Catholicae Capite Romano Pontifice,
sanctaque Sede Apostolica connectere, a qua haeresis eas ante sesquise ulum
divulserat. Ad tentandum ergo Vadum anno 1685. Romam destinat Jodunem Carillum
and stirpis claritudine and opulentia illustrem. Cui revocato, cunctis ex unto
gestis, Legatus extraordinarius eo destinatus est anno sequenti, nempe 1686.
illustrissimus Comes de Castlemaine, Obedientiam Canonicam Jacobi and
Catholicorum Regni nomine testaturus.
) however settled within the Realm, and in a peaceable flourishing Condition,
the next care his Majesty had, was to unite his Countries to the Obedience of
the Bishop of Rome and the Apostolical See, which had been cut off by Heresy
about an age and a half ago. To try the Pope's Inclination, in the Year 1685 he
sent Mr. J. Caril, who succeding to the utmost of their desires, and being
recalled, the Earl of Castlemain was sent the next Year, to wit, 1686.
Extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope, in the name of the King and the
Catholics of the Realm, to testify their Canonical Obedience, or to make
their Submission to the Holy See.

( g) They would never consent to come to any indifferent Trial or Disputation
with the Catholics. and below -- This manner of public Disputation, which
has been often asked at the Protestants hands, and could never be obtained.]
How very unprobable this is, which the Jesuit does so confidently affirm here,
I appeal to the Papists who have read how warmly their Party did declare
against any such Disputations in the beginning of Q. Eliz. and to what this
Jesuit himself relates of the Conference in France betwixt du Plessis and
Cardinal Perron, That the Pope's Nuncio declared against it, as a thing that
did not belong to the King to appoint. And though this hot Jesuit is for such
Conferences, yet those of his own Party, that have more learning and more
moderation, have not been fond of such Trials. In the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, when she appointed a Conference to be managed with all the
fairness that the Jesuit himself proposes in his Conference here, the
Archbishop of York did, after he had communicated the Queens Intentions about
it to his Brethren, not without difficulty, consent to it. And what was the
fruit of it? the very first day they met at the Conference they broke the Rules
for it, and pretended their Paper (which they were to read first) was not quite
ready, and that they had mistaken the order: The next day they met, the
Conference ended, the Papists refusing to read their Paper first upon the
second point, as had been agreed for them at the appointing the Conference: See
Bishop Burnet's History of the Reformation, Second Part, p. 390. etc.
and the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln, who were two of the Disputants,
were so far from approving such Projects as our Jesuit lays down here, that
they declared, That the Doctrine of the Catholic Church being established,
ought not to be disputed; and talked of Excommunicating the Queen and her
Council for appointing such a Conference; which yet our Jesuit has the face to
say the Protestants durst never grant.

( h) I persuade my self this Examination would do exceeding much good.] And I
am as fully persuaded, that the Jesuit's Persuasion here had no other
Foundation than Confidence, which he would have been cured of as to this thing,
had he read either Bishop Juell or Dr. Whitaker's Works: and for all the
Jesuit's assurance then, we see his own Gang, as well as the rest of the
Missionaries that were to have converted us in the late Reign, durst never so
much as think of this Project: they were for varnishing and painting, instead
of disputing; and he was the cunningest Man that could make their Popery look
likest the Protestants Doctrines: witness the Bishop of Meaux, and the
Representers Writings. There was indeed a little venturing into antiquity by
the Author of the Nubes Testium and Mr. Clench, but how they two came off, the
World does already know.

CHAP. V. The forwardness that ought to be in all for the Restitution of
Ecclesiastical Lands and Livings, and with what facility and ease it may be
done.
AMong other good Dispositions of Minds, and effects of a true and sincere
Reconciliation with Almighty God, one principal ought to be at the time that
his Divine Majesty shall show mercy unto England, ( k) that every one should
have a special care, and fervent desire, to clear his Conscience well, and
sufficiently about Abby-Lands, and Ecclesiastical Livings, which himself or his
Ancestors by any pretense of Title whatsoever, shall have invaded or detained;
to which thing we may apply that wholesome Admonition of God by the Prophet, as
very peculiarly spoken to us at that day, expurgate vetus fermentum, cleanse
your self thoroughly of the old Leaven: For that I take this to be the most
principal old Leaven, that distained and distempered the other actions of our
Catholic Realm at the last change, and offended the eyes of our Just God most
highly, that they took no sound order at all for any reasonable satisfaction,
in this great affair of Restitution to be made to God and his Church.

For which is to be noted, That albeit (the Times and State of England, and
Condition of Men and Things there considered) it seems not possible, or at
leastwise not expedient, that any rigorous or exact satisfaction should be
required in these affairs; yet that some kind of moderate temperature and
composition, according to some form of Justice or correspondence of Equity,
should be taken in the matter, I would think it so absolutely necessary, as no
good Christian Conscience can be secure without the same; And the reason hereof
is, for that these Goods belong first to a third Party, which were the Owners
and Givers, and by them taken from their Children, and Kindred, and Inheritors
for a special Ecclesiastical use to be applied to God's Service, and the help
of their own Souls by perpetual Prayer ordained to be made for them, cannot in
any Reason, or Law of Justice, be taken wholly from those uses, and applied or
permitted to be profane, but only by force; seeing it is directly against the
intentions of the first Founders and Givers, and whereof it is to be presumed
they would never allow, if they were alive again, but rather would say of the
two, That their Heirs and next Kin should reenter and possess the same, rather
than by violence they should be detained by other temporal Men that are mere
Strangers unto them. Neither is it sufficient for the security of any careful
Dan's Conscience to say,
That the Sea Apostolic has tolerated with these things in Queem Mary's time;
for that it is well known how times and matters went then, and how the Sea
Apostolic, like a Prudent and Pious Mother, was content to take of her
Children what she could get, rather than lose all; So that the Toleration then
used (as in truth it may be said) was upon constraint, and fear of farther
inconveniences to follow, if the matter should have been greatly urged at that
time; the covetous humors of diverse principal Persons in Authority being well
known, together with the cold Dispositions of the rest of the Realm, to do that
which in equity and conscience they were bound in this behalf; and this
appears by the very words themselves, of the general Bull of Absolution and
Toleration, which Cardinal Poole, of Pious Memory, delivered to the Realm for
this effect, wherein every Man in particular (notwithstanding this general
plaistering up of things) is most earnestly exhorted to look unto his
Conscience in these affairs, and to seek the security thereof by Direction of
Virtuous and Learned Men.

And seeing Almighty God has declared his heavy displeasure, since the patching
of matters at that time by the lamentable and most miserable fall both of
Religion it self, and of these Persons also that were most backward in this
Restitution; and that these corrupt affections of some worldly People may be
presumed to be well purged before this day by the fire of Persecutions in these
latter Years, I hope verily that it may easily be brought to pass at the next
Reformation; That some such good and substantial order may be taken, in this
weighty affair, as God's Justice in part may be satisfied, Men's Consciences
quieted, their Estates at home for the time to come, assured, the World abroad
edified and the Church of God, in some proportion of equity, satisfied; and
thereby this great Petra Scandali, that hitherto has endured, and the strong
brazen Wall, that has divided between God and us, may be removed; whereof I do
conceive so much the more hope and confidence, for that the means to perform
the same seem not to me very hard, but rather easy; supposing the good and
pious Dispositions of Minds, which I suppose we shall find at that day, in
those to whom the matter shall appertain. And therefore I shall lay down in
this place the means that I have conceived for the easy performance of this
point.

All Englishmen do know the peculiar ancient custom of letting Lands in
England, after the rate of old rent of Assize, which by experience of many
Countries, I can affirm to be the most commodious, honorable, and profitable
Custom, both for Lord and Tenant, that is in the World, all circumstances
considered, as afterward shall be showed; And no sort of People were wont to
be more observant of this Custom, than were Religious and Ecclesiastical
Landlords, who besides that they were never wont lightly to raise their Rents,
did use also commonly to take very small Fines; so that in very Deed if these
old Rents of Assize were restored again to the Church, it might be said in
effect, That the whole were restored, and thereby a certain proportion of
equity in Restitution observed; and on the other side, if the possessions and
the fee Farm of these Lands (which commonly do amount to double or triple the
value of the old Rent, or may be made so good) be left, and made secure for
ever unto the present Possessors of the same, as by the Prince, Parliament, and
Pope's Authority they may be, I do not see, but that the Composition, and
Temperature would fall out well for all Parties, and for all effects that can
be desired.

For first God's Justice and the Church's Right in a certain sort should be
substantially satisfied, and the Possessor's Conscience assured, which is the
principal, and then his Ecclesiastical State also would not be over weakened or
abated thereby, as is evident. And if it should happen out otherwise in some
particular Men of special merit, to wit, that by this general Restitution he
should be over much impoverished, it would be an easy thing to help and
recompense the matter otherwise, as by giving him some Office or some Lease of
fee Farm of other Lands, that shall return wholly to the Church, or the like;
For it is to be understood, that albeit the Church do and may use this benign
Compassion, with such as be her Children, and of particular deserts toward her
for their Piety and Religion; yet no reason is there,
but that such as be Enemies, Persecutors, or of notorious Impiety against her,
should leave the Livings, which they possess of her wholly, and wish more
rigor of Justice, than the other before named; so that the Church may dispose
not only of the old Rents, but of Revenues also, Houses, Buildings, and other
Emoluments.

For better understanding whereof, it is also to be noted, that ( l) as well
these Lands entirely restored, as the other old Rents before mentioned, to the
end they may be employed to the best and greatest glory of God, and public
profit of the Realm, were not to be turned presently at the first to any
particular Owner that would challenge or lay claim to the same; but rather by
Petition of the Prince and whole Realm, and approbation of the Sea Apostolic,
were to be assigned to some common Purses and Treasury, and this to be
committed to some certain Council of principal Bishops and Prelates, and others
most fit for the purpose for certain Years to be limited, to gather up and
dispose of all these Rents, Revenues, and Ecclesiastical Livings, during the
time to them assigned for the greatest benefit of the English Church and Realm,
and that at the end of the term allotted, which might be some four, five, or
six Years, more or less as shall be thought best, they might be bound to give
an account to the Persons that should be assigned by the Prince, Parliament,
and Pope's Holiness for this effect, how they have disposed of this Treasury
committed to their charge, and this Council might be called the Council of
Reformation, as after shall be more particularly declared. And the reason why
it were not convenient to return these Lands and Livings again to the same
Orders of Religion, that had them before, is evident to all Men; to wit, for
that the Times and State of England are far other, and different from that they
were, when these Lands were given; and consequently do require different
provision and disposition of things, conformed to the present necessity and
utility of the Realm; as for example, the World knows that the most part of
all Abby-Lands, appertained in the old time to the Religion of St. Bennet, of
which Order at this time there are very few of the English Nation to occupy or
possess the same, and to bestow them upon Strangers of that Religion, England
having so many other necessities, were very inconvenient; and besides this it
may be so that many Houses and Families of that Order of St. Bennet, or of St.
Bernard, or of the Monastical Profession (though in it self most Holy) will
neither be possible nor necessary in England presently upon the first
Reformation; but rather in place of many of them, good Colleges, Universities,
Seminaries, Schools, for increasing of our Clergy, as also of diverse Houses of
other Orders, that do deal more in preaching and helping of Souls, and for that
respect will be more necessary to the Clergy of England, in this great work at
the beginning, and for many Years after; though of the other also are not to be
omitted to be planted and well provided for, according as it shall seem most
expedient for God's glory, the Universal good of the Realm to this Council of
Reformation, by whose hands their Lands, Rents, and Revenues may far more
profitably be divided and employed, and with much more peace and quietness,
than if they should be returned to every particular Religion again.

Animadversions on Chap. V.
( k) THat every one should have a special care and fervent desire to clear his
Conscience well and sufficiently about Abby-Lands.] In this Chapter our Jesuit
does very warmly press the Restitution of Abby-Lands, and I could heartily have
wished that those that furnished Dr. Johnston with his Materials for writing
his little Book about the Assurance of Abby-Lands to the Possessors here in
England, had accommodated him also, as they might, with this Jesuits Memorial;
I am confident it would have saved the Doctor something else besides his Pains.

How ridiculous his Attempts were then, was showed by an Ingenious hand in a
single Sheet of Paper entitled Abbey and other Church Lands not yet assured to
such Possessors as are Roman Catholics: And indeed our Jesuit has knocked their
great Argument, from the Pope's Confirmation, in Q. Mary's days, on the head,
when he declares, That it is not sufficient, for the security of any careful
Man's Conscience, to say, That the Sea Apostolic has tolerated [the Jesuit
will not use the word Confirmed] with these things in Queen Mary' s time; for
that (says he) it is well known how times and matters went then. And how the Sea Apostolic was content to take of her Children what she could get, rather
than to lose all;
so that the Toleration then used was upon constraint, and fear of farther
Inconveniences to follow.

As that Attempt to assure Abby-Lands was ridiculous, so I am afraid it was not
the sincerest; whosoever has read this Jesuit's Memorial, and has any value for
him, cannot but suspect the same with me.

One thing is a little peculiar in this Chapter, the Jesuit is for compromizing
the business with the Possessors of Abby-Lands, and yet his Arguments for a
Restitution of those Lands, if they prove any thing at all, prove that the
Restitutions ought to be absolute: but let his Arguments be what they will, the
Jesuit is for having half a Loaf rather than none at all.

( l) That as well these Lands entirely restored, as the other old Rents --
were not to be turned presently at the first to any particular Owner.] After
the Jesuit has contended so earnestly, in the first part of this Chapter, for
Restitution of Abby-Lands, upon reasons of Conscience, one cannot but wonder
that he should not be for restoring them to their Primitive Owners; which I am
sure Conscience and Justice do as much exact as the Restitution of them at all.
The plain and true Reason of it is this, The Jesuits being an upstart Order
since the Suppression of Monasteries by King Henry the Eighth, none of those
Abby-Lands did belong to them, nor could be restored to them: and to have 'em
all given up to the Benedictines and the other old Orders, is what a Jesuit
could never bear; and therefore he is for having them all sequestered into a
common stock for six and seven years, in which time no question need be made
but that the Jesuits would have run down all the old Orders as useless to
England, and would have swallowed the whole Morsel of Abby-Lands themselves.

CHAP. VI. Of the many great and singular Benefits that would ensue to the
Church and Realm of England, by this Restitution and Disposition of Abby-Lands.
FIrst of all would ensue the thing that we have most need of, and it imports
us of all other Points, which is that Almighty God's wrath would be pacified
toward us, and toward the Realm, which may be presumed his Justice has
scourged and afflicted so grievously, as all the World sees and wondereth at;
for that infamous Sacrilege and Monstrous Rapine of King Henry the Eighth,
whereby at once he destroyed and plucked from God and his Church, and from all
Saints and Souls deceased, all the pious Acts and Memories of Religion, that in
more than a Thousand Years before him, his Ancestors had bestowed that way, and
for that all, or the most part of the Realm, had their part and interest,
either of that Sacrilege at that time, or of the Temporal gain afterward, and
no convenient satisfaction hitherto has been made, no marvel if the hand of
Almighty God has been heavy over us: For we read that God never ceased to beat
and whip King Pharaoh until he had restored unto Abraham his Wife again; and
that is a common Maxim among Divines, Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur
ablatum.

Secondly, It would follow by this Restitution, and temperate Composition, That
such as remain with the Possession of Abby-Lands and Ecclesiastical Livings in
the manner aforesaid, might hold them securely, they and their Heirs, without
scruple or danger to God or the World, which by no other means, it seems, can
be assured them, either in respect of the one or the other. For in respect of
God and their Conscience, I have already said that it is very hard to see how
they may be assured any other ways. For as for the Sea Apostolic, though it
may in certain cases dispose of Livings left to the Church from one use to
another; yet to the end their disposition may be available, and the Possessor's
Conscience free, there are required many Conditions and Circumstances which
will hardly be found or verified in our case of England. For first the
Disposition of Christ's Vicar must be free without all constraint, fear or
respect of avoiding greater inconveniences, and then the commutation ought to
be with consent of Parties interessed, or that have claim, if there be any, as
here are many, to wit, all Religious Orders and other Ecclesiastical People,
besides the Successors and Kindred of them, that gave the Lands, which would
hardly agree to let the said Livings to be utterly alienated as they are;
Moreover the Commutation to be good in Conscience, ought to be to so good an
use, or better for the time present, and glory of God, than was the first
Institution of the Givers and Founders; and which of themselves might be
presumed, if they were alive again, and saw the circumstances of our Times,
that they would allow, or not mislike of the same. All which is so far off from
our English case, as all Men of judgment do easily see.

In respect of the World also, and of temporal Justice, there is no great
security to the Possessors of these Lands, without some such sound Order and
Agreement as this is; for that ever there will be murmuring and pushing at them
and their Children; and as Religious Orders shall come to grow and wax strong
in England again, they will have a saying to their old Tenants, Invaders, or
Detainers of their Lands one way or other; and it would be a ground of infinite
suits and troubles, and as the Prince should be affected for the present, or
interessed in the matter one way or other, so would he favor or disfavour; all
which would be matter of great inconveniences, and wholly cut off by this other
way.

Thirdly, It would follow by this manner of Restitution, that the Church of
England would be furnished again quickly, to wit, within the space of five or
six Years (which might be the time allowed for the aforesaid Council of
Reformation, to dispose of things) of more variety of Religious Orders, Houses,
Abbys, Nunneries, Hospitals, Seminaries, and other like Monuments of Piety; and
to the purpose for the present good of our whole Realm, than ever it was before
the Desolation thereof, so as the words of St. Paul, in a certain sense, would
be verified, Vbi abundavit delictum, ibi superabundavit and gratia. I say of
more variety of Religious Monuments, and more to the purpose for the present
good of England; for that they would not be so great perhaps, nor so
Majestical, nor yet so rich, nor would be needful for the beginning, but rather
in place of so great Houses, and those for the most part of one, or two, or
three Orders, and those also contemplative, that attended principally to their
own Spiritual good, and for that purpose were builded ordinarily in places
remote from Conversation of People, there might be planted now, both of these
and other Orders, according to the Condition of those Times, lesser Houses,
with smaller Rents and numbers of People, but with more perfection of
Reformation, Edification, and help to the gaining of Souls than before; and
these Houses might be most multiplied, that should be seen to be most
profitable to this effect. And in this manner might England, in small space,
become again the most excellent and best furnished Country in the World, for
variety and perfection of Religious Houses, and other like Works and Monuments
of Piety.

Fourthly, would follow of this Restitution, the Stay, Pillar, and Foundation
of all other good Works to be done, and of the whole external reparation of our
English Church, which may be made or much helped by this common Purse, and
without this will hardly, or never be done. For that the necessity will be
infinite, and Reparations wonderfully great, that will be needful after so long
a Tempest, Storm, and Shipwreck. Catholics will be poor for diverse Years, and
the Works will be many, great, and costly that must be done; as namely, The
variety of Monasteries, and Religious beforementioned, both for Men and Women;
repairing, enlarging and multiplying of Churches, increasing of poor Benefices,
restoring of Hospitals, provision of free Schools, erection of Seminaries both
for the Youth of our Nation, as also for others round about us infected, of
whose reduction we must also have care. The founding of public Lectors in our
Universities, and assisting many particular Colleges that lack Maintenance, and
Rent, and a thousand particular wants, needs, and necessities more than are,
and will appear in the beginning, for the new setting up of our Catholic
Church again; for which if we have not some such common Purse, as this is, the
matter will go very slowly forwards, and the Reformation never such as it ought
to be. Wherefore this point of restoring Abby-Lands, with the moderation which
I have said, is to be helped, set forward, and urged, most earnestly, by all
such as have God's Zeal in them, and desire a good Reformation in England. And
whosoever should be contrary or backward in this matter, either for his own
interest, or for his Friends, or of vain fear, policy, coldness, or lack of
fervor, he were not to be heard, seeing the reason alleged for it; together
with the facility to compass and perform the same, are so notorious and
evident, and therefore not only the principal Persons of the Realm (who may
farther or hinder the same) were to be disposed and dealt withal before hand,
but even the Prince and Catholic King that God shall give us, and his Holiness
also were to be prevented in this point, as the most principal and important
for all our work. And of the Prince it were to be wished that he would promise
or vow to Almighty God, by way of Oblation, That if he give him good success in
the establishing of his Crown and the Catholic Religion, he will for his part
restore in the manner before mentioned, all that he shall find invaded, or
retained by the Crown, thereby to give example and encouragement for others to
do the like. And in like manner of Heretics, and Rebels Goods, which any way
shall come to be confiscate, he will abstain his hands from the part of God and
of his Church, which therein shall be found to appertain unto them, and by this
pious and religious proceeding there is no doubt but God will prosper and aid
him much the more. Of his Holiness also the like were to be required, that
considering the many necessities that England shall have at the first beginning
to set up, and restore the outward would vouchsafe not only to further and
favor this designment of Restitution to be made, in manner aforesaid; but also
as a bountiful Father,
remit some part of the temporal duties, which will be due to the Sea
Apostolic from England as the first fruits of Bishoprics and the like, for
the certain space only of some Years after the next change for the setting of
foot of our Church again; which will be of great Edification to all the World,
and an infinite encouragement to our English Catholics. And last of all, about
this matter, may be remembered, that among Ecclesiastical Livings, that have
been invaded by temporal Men, some have been taken from the Secular Clergy
also, as from Bishops, Cathedral and Collegial Churches, Colleges, Deanries,
Parsonages, Parish-Churches, and the like; though nothing so much as from
Religious Orders. And these for that their true Owners are or will be quickly
extant, and that present need will be of the same, for the uses to which they
were first appointed; it is reason they should be returned to the same Uses and
Churches again, and not to the common Purse, as the other; yet with the
Limitation, Order, and Reformation, that the Council designed for this purpose,
shall think best and most expedient.

About Impropriate Parsonages, Patronages, and Advowsons of Benefices, albeit
for the part they come into Temporal Men's hands, at the beginning, as things
either incorporated or annexed to Abby-Lands; for that these Revenues and
Privileges were given to Religious Orders in the old times, for the better
maintenance, and with Obligation only to provide Preachers and Teachers to the
Parishes; and that when Religious Houses were suppressed by King Henry, the
said Parsonages, Tithes, Advowsons, and Patronages passed also to Laymens
hands, as Members and Parcels of Abby-Lands; yet notwithstanding, for that in
truth they were taken from the Livings and Revenues of Pastors and Curates at
the beginning, and are part of the Revenues, it seems more reason that they
should be accepted rather Ecclesiastical, than Monastical Livings; and
consequently be returned back to the Church again, though with the Moderation
and Qualification that shall seem most expedient to the Council, and not to be
disposed of to any other uses, as Abby-Lands may be for the greater glory of
God, and better setting up of our Church again. And for that I have diverse
times made mention of the Council of Reformation, I shall now set down some
Notes about the same.

CHAP. VII. Of a Council of Reformation to be ordained, and wherein they are
principally to be occupied.
FOR the Execution of all these Notes and Advertisements that here are set down
about the Reformation of England, nothing will be of so much moment, as to have
certain, prudent, and zealous Men put in authority by the Prince, and
Parliament, and Pope's Holiness, to attend principally, and as it were only to
this affair, and to be bound to give a continual account what they do in the
same. And for that and name of Inquisition may be somewhat odious and offensive
at the beginning, perhaps it would not be amiss to name these Men a Council of
Reformation, and that their authority might be limited for some certain number
of Years, as four, five or six, as it should be thought most convenient and
sufficient, for the setting up and establishing of the English Church; and that
before the end of this term assigned, they shall give account to the Persons
appointed for this purpose by the Pope, Prince, and Parliament, of all matters
committed to their charge, and especially of the Ecclesiastical Rents received
and employed by them as after shall be declared. And for that the matters and
affairs, which are to be laid upon these Men, are many and weighty, and of
singular great importance, it is necessary, first, that the place of their
ordinary residence should be in London near the Court, whereby they may have
easy recourse and conference with the Prince and Council. And secondly, That
their Persons be of great sufficiency and respect, and fit for the purpose; as
for example, perhaps may the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Winchester, London, and Rochester, whose Diocesses lie near about the City, and
will be no great let to their ordinary charge to reside much in London, and be
employed in this affair also. And with these Men might be joined, other
principal and skilful, either Bishops or others, as should be thought best;
together with all kinds of Officers, Secretaries, Notaries, Gatherers,
Treasurers, and other helps, for better Execution of so great a charge.

The first and most principal thing that in Temporal matters should be
committed to this Council, is the gathering of the said old Rents of Assize of
Abby-Lands and other Ecclesiastical Revenues, which, by virtue of the
Restitution above mentioned, are to return to the Church, and by these Men, as
has been specified, are now to be put in one common Treasury and thence to be
spent and employed within this time limited of their Commission, as they shall
judge most needful, and to the most advantage of God's Holy Service and common
benefit of the Realm.

The like charge also will be necessary to lie upon them for the Collection and
Custody of all other Ecclesiastical Rents and Revenues throughout England; as
of Benefices, Parsonages, Curates, and other such Livings, as cannot
conveniently be provided of particular Owners, seeing that the English Clergy,
which for the present we have, and are like to have for a great time after the
next Reduction of England, will scarce be able to furnish the principal
Dignities, and places alone of Jurisdiction and Government, as Bishoprics,
Deanries, Archdeanries, Colleges and the like; and if besides these there be
two or three Men left for Preachers to be given to every new Bishop to carry
with him into his Diocese (a small store, God knows, for so great a Charge) it
will be all, and how then think you will it be possible to furnish the least
part of the residue of Benefices throughout England, for some number of Years?
Wherefore, to remedy this inconvenience, it seems that the only way would be
for this Council of Reformation to appoint Collectors of these Rents, and to be
accountable for them, as for the rest; and allowing so much to be spent in
every Parish as shall be thought needful, they may reduce the remnant to the
aforesaid common Purse, for common necessities, until there be store of Priests
to furnish all places, with particular Curates and Pastors, which may be by
God's grace, and good diligence of this Council, in erecting and furnishing
Seminaries, within the space of some five or six years, that is before this
Council shall resign over their authority. And in the mean space, the best
means of supplying the common Spiritual needs of England would be perhaps, that
no Priests, besides Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the like, (that are
needful for the Government of the rest) should have any particular assignation
or interest in any Benefice; but only a sufficient Pension allowed him by the
Council of Reformation, or Bishop of the Diocese, for his convenient
maintenance and his Commission to Preach, Teach, hear Confessions and all other
Exercises of Priestly Function. And when the Council of Reformation were to
leave their charge, then might they take a view of all the Priests in their
times or before; and according to each Man's talent, and good account given of
himself in this time of trial, to place them in Benefices; But yet with this
express Proviso and Condition, That they may be removed again from the same
Benefices to a worse or to none at all, if they give not Satisfaction in their
Function; which only Bridle may chance to do more good, than all the Laws and
Exhortations in the World; and it would be good sometimes to put it in
Execution, to promote some in higher Benefices, and thrust down others to
lower, by way of Visitation, when cause is offered.

And one thing, before all others, will be of very great moment for this
Council to put in practice, which is, That presently at the beginning they do
publish an Edict or Proclamation, with all severity, commanding, under pain of
great Punishment, That no Religious or Ecclesiastical Person whatsoever do
enter into the Realm without presenting himself before the Council within so
many days after his entrance, and there to show the cause why he comes, and
the License and Authority by which he comes, and to stand to the Determination
of the Council for his abode or departure again; for if this be not done, and
observed with all rigor, many scandalous, light, and inconstant People, partly
upon novelty, and partly upon hope to gain, will repair presently to England,
and do great hurt by their Example.

And when this Door is once stopped, it will be easy for this Council to write
to all the Heads of Religious Orders, that are in other Countries, to send them
such a number of exemplar and reformed Men or Women to begin to plant the said
Religious in England as shall be thought expedient, and be demanded. And for
that Religious Orders have been more defaced, dishonored, and persecuted in
our Realm than in any Christian Country in the World, perhaps it would be
convenient to make such an amends and recompense, as is not besides in any
other Kingdom; to wit, that all the approved Religious Orders that are in the
Church of God should be called into England, and placed jointly in the City of
London; for that at least it is to be presumed that this City would be capable
of all, and from thence they might be derived afterward by little and little
into other places of the Realm, as Commodities were offered, and as Men's
Devotions should require, and as they should be proved to be most agreeable and
profitable to the State of our Country, but altogether to be in London, and
that in the perfection of their first Institution, would be a most excellent
thing, and a privilege above all other Kingdoms in the World, where all
Religious Orders are not seen together, and much less in the perfection of
their first institute and observance; which ought to be the Condition of
admitting any Order into England, now at our next Reformation, be they Men or
Women, to the end that the greater Glory of God be procured in all things.

And for more easy effectuating of this, there may be taken order, that
Religious Men and Women be called, and admitted only from the Parts and
Countries for beginning this great work of England where it is known that their
Order is reformed, and has some that observe the first perfection of their
Rule, and in our days diverse Countries have. And with this one Observation only
about Religious Orders and People, England would be the most eminent Country of
Christendom, as has been said.

In the beginning of Religious Houses in England, care may be had that such be
builded, and most multiplied as be most needful and profitable for the time
present, and do apply their labors to action, and to the help also of others;
and that before all the rest, Seminaries and Colleges be built and put in
order, for the more ease of our Clergy.

And as for old and ancient Religious, that appertain most to Contemplation,
though also they be not to be omitted, yet when in every Shire there were one
of a sort planted for a beginning, and endowed with sufficient Rent for a
competent number, that would observe their first institution, it were no evil
entrance; for that quickly the Devotion of Good People would increase the same,
and so would England come in small time to be furnished with more variety of
Monasteries and Religious Monuments, and of much more edification, than when it
flourished most. Nunneries also for refuge of Virgins, and of the devoutest
sort of Womenkind, were to be set up, and the most of Observant Orders and of
most edification were first to be planted, for example and encouragement of
others.

It were also to be considered, whether some new Military Order of Knights were
to be erected in our Realm, for exercise and help of our young Gentlemen and
Nobility, as in other Countries we see it. And as for England, in times past,
it had only the Order of St. John of Malta, wherein now perhaps there may be
some difficulties at first, for that we have no Knights left of our Nation in
that Order to train the rest; and to begin it only with strangers may seem hard.

And secondly, For that albeit their institute be good and holy to fight
against the Turk and other Infidels, yet is Malta far off, and these Ages have
brought forth many more Infidels and Enemies near home, to wit, Heretics; and
thereby the binding of young Gentlemen, which live abroad in the World, in
Wealth, Liberty, Ease, and Conversation also with Women to perpetual Chastity
by Vow, as Knights of Malta be, without giving them the means and helps that
other Religious Men have to keep the same (which are Disciplines, and restraint
from Company, and the like) has also his difficulties, as both reason and
experience does teach us, and the examples of some other Countries do prove, as
namely of Spain, where, for avoiding of difficulties, they have procured
Dispensation from the Pope that the Knights of the Military Order of St. James,
Alcantara, Calatrava, and the like, may Marry.

Wherefore some are of Opinion, That it were good that other in place of this
of Malta, or besides this some other new Order, were erected also in our
Country of Religious Knights, and ( m) that their Rule might be to fight
against Heretics, in whatsoever Country they should be employed.

And when Heresies should fail, that they then keep our Seas of England from
Pirates, and our Land from public Theft, binding themselves for their probation
to serve in their Exercises the time that should be limited; and for keeping
the Land at home they might have other Companies and Confraternities under
them, much like to that called the Holy Hermandad in Spain, which alone keeps
all these great and vast Kingdoms from Robberies. And this Order of new English
Knights might quickly be made a very flourishing Order, being permitted also to
Marry, and they might take the Name and Protection of some Holy King of
England, or of all the Holy Kings jointly, or of St. George; all which I leave
to the Consideration of this Council to deal therein, with the Prince and
Parliament.

Animadversions on Chap. VII.
( m) THat their Rule might be to fight against Heretics.] In this Chapter our
Jesuit treats of his Council of Reformation; he had great reason to avoid
giving it the name of the Holy Council of Inquisition, since how fond soever
Portugal or Spain may be of an Inquisition, it is odious to England, and
abominable, and ought to be so to all Christians, there being nothing more
barbarous, nor more diametrically contrary to the Religion of the Blessed
Jesus, than the Popish Inquisitions. But this would have been very slender
comfort to us in England, since it seems we were to have had the Thing without
the Name, for the use the Jesuit would have had the young Popish Gentry of
England put to in this Chapter, is to have them listed into a Fraternity, the
business of which was to have been very honorable to them, to wit, to go a
Dragooning about the Nation, and to have hunted down the Protestants (whom he
here calls Heretics) like wild beasts, and when they had thus Christianly
rooted out all Protestants by this mild persuasive way, out of this Nation,
then forsooth these wonderful valiant Knights were to have been sent abroad to
purge the World of Heretie; and after all, our Seas of Pirates, and the Land of
Thieve, which if they had done, I am sure England would have been rid of the
Jesuits as well as of Protestants

Nor is the Jesuit content with this, for after a few years England was to have
Name and Thing; for when his Council of Reformation resign up their Authority,
he makes it necessary See his 9 th. Chapter.
that they should leave some good and sound manner of Inquisition established
for the Conservation of that which they have planted. And indeed the Jesuit is
in the right of it, that a sound manner (by which I know the Jesuit means a
most severe and bloody manner) of Inquisition is absolutely necessary, either
for the planting or the preserving such an absurd and ridiculous Religion as
Popery is in England.

CHAP. VIII. Of diverse other Points that will belong to the Council of
Reformation to deal in.
HItherto only has been treated of Abby-Lands and Ecclesiastical Livings to be
collected, employed, and disposed by this Council, and Religious Orders to be
replanted; but many other Points do yet remain, for that the whole weight of
Restitution, both of the External and Internal face of our English Church, and
the perfect reparation both material and formal of the same, will depend
principally of the Authority, Wisdom, Zeal, Magnanimity, and Piety of this
Council; and for this purpose such principal branches as come now to my Mind, I
will here set down.

First of all it will appertain to these Men to send Commissioners abroad into
the Realm, and to have ordinary Correspondence in all the Shires of England,
thereby to advise from time to time, what are the greatest wants, and what
first is to be remedied or provided for: As for Example, here Preachers, here
Confessors, here Priests to say Mass, here Seminaries, here Schools, here
Monasteries, here Colleges, here Nunneries, here Hospitals, here building, or
enlarging, or repairing of old Parish-Churches, with their Sacristies, or
Revestries, Tabernacles, Church-Houses, public Crosses, and the like; whereof
I shall treat more in some particular Chapters afterward in the Second Part of
this Memorial. And for that the Reverence of Religion, and motive of Devotion
to the People, does greatly depend of these external things, it must be one
principal care of this Council to have them well reformed, and practical Men
sent about the same.

The like necessity will be also to augment the Livings of certain Curates and
Pastors, in many places, and to increase in some others, where one is not
sufficient, as commonly it will not be convenient for one only Priest to live
any where alone, if it may be remedied in respect of wanting a Confessor for
himself or others, when he should be sick, except the Parish lay so near to
some other, as in all necessities they might give mutual help one to the other,
as if they lived together.

For singing and hearing of Mass also at the beginning, order must be taken
that diverse Parishes repair to one upon Sundays, and great Holy Days, and that
Priests be so distributed, as they may supply the best that may be, until
better provision can be made, and perhaps it would not be amiss to call in some
stranger Priests, for a time, Men of Edification and Virtue, such as might be
procured by means of some Pious and Zealous Bishops of Foreign Countries, and
by Commendation and Election of some Religious Orders, that keep Schools, and
do know the Virtue of every one, and being requested by our Council of
Reformation, would have care to direct only such Men unto us as should be for
the purpose; who being divided about the Realm, and convenient Stipends
appointed them, without appropriation of any Benefice (for that would have
inconvenience) they would greatly ease and help our English Clergy, until it be
increased and grown stronger; and these Strangers would serve to say Mass, and
administer some Sacraments in Parish-Churches, and might supply also the Labor
and Function of some Canons, for singing in the Quire and diverse Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, where other Provision of our own Nation could not be so
soon made. And it perchance would be less hurt to pass on with these Strangers
for a time, who afterward may be removed, if they should not prove well, than
for haste and want to make up a number of unable or evil Priests of our own,
who would be ever after a Seed of Corruption and Disorder to the whole Realm:
of which point I shall say also more in the Second Part, when I come to speak
of Seminaries; where no Priests at all could be planted at the beginning, there
some honest and discreet Person or Persons of the Parish or of the next to it,
though they be Laymen, were to be assigned to have care of the Church
Revestry, and Priest's House, and to see all dressed up, and kept in good
order; and that presently such things as were to be redressed or builded up for
the necessity or decent use of all, when Priests could be had, should be out of
hand beginning to be put in order, and Money to be allotted thereunto by the
Council according to the Information given of the necessities; for which effect
diverse Visitors, Commissaries and Under-officials, should continually be
employed to advertise and see how matters go forward.

And as for the Church Service, if it may not be had as were to be wished every
where at the beginning, nor that it can else be done in all places by a Priest
or Deacon, or by one in Holy Orders, yet at leastwise some such discreet
Layman, as before is mentioned, might be appointed to see some good order
kept; and that the Bell be rung thrice a day to the Angels Salutation, and that
upon Holy Days at least (if not more often) the People be called together to
the Church by the common Bell, there to pray alone in private Prayer, if no
public can be said (as perhaps there may) at least wise the Service of our
Lady may be said by some one or other, or many together, and some Homily or
Spiritual Book read, and some Instruction given how to say every one the Beads,
and other like helps; to the end that Prophanity, Atheism, or forgetfulness of
God and Godliness enter not at the beginning before Priests may be had.

A Calendar is to be drawn out and agreed upon for the Holy Days that are to be
observed in England; few and well kept were much better than many with hurt of
the Commonwealth and Dissolution of manners. It is no small temporal loss for
poor laboring Men, that live and maintain their Families upon the labors of
their hands, to have so great a number of vacant days as in some Countries
there be, whereby the poor are brought to great necessity, and the Realm much
hindered in things that otherwise might be done, and Corruption of Manners by
idleness much increased. For remedy of the first, which is the multitude of
Holy Days, (I mean besides Sundays) let it be considered, whether this
Moderation amongst others might not be admitted, that some days had only
Obligation to hear Mass, and that afterward Men should work, and that nothing
should be taken from laboring Men's wages for this time spent in hearing of
Mass; so that this loss would fall only upon the richer sort that are better
able to bear it. Holy Days might be for half a day only, to wit, for the
Forenoon, and that after Dinner, every Man should work, and that this should
not be left to every Man's proper will to work or to make Holy Days at his
pleasure; for that many out of idleness would play, and induce others to the
same; but only the order set down should be inviolably kept.

For the Second Point, which is to keep well these Holy Days that are
commanded, it will import much that certain good Exercises be appointed to
occupy and entertain the People upon these set days; and these may be partly
Spiritual, as Service said, or singing the Church-mattins, Mass, Even-Song,
Preaching, reading of Homilies, Catechisings, or teaching the Christian
Doctrine to the People, wherein great care and special labor should be
employed at the beginning, and some other Exercises may be of honest
entertainment, and Relaxation of Mind, which may keep the common sort from more
disorderly Games; and amongst other things, the going of one Parish to another
in Procession, upon their Festival days, is not the worst, if some little
abuses be taken away, which were crept in, and might be remedied by teaching
them to go with Devotion, saying their Beads, the Litanies, and the like, and
some Men appointed to repeat the principal points of the Saints Lives, which
they celebrate; and by this means also one poor Parish helps another for the
maintenance of their Church, albeit the Council of Reformation may take order,
amongst other points, that every Parish Church have some particular Rent in a
common Purse for their maintenance without asking Alms of the People. Order may
be taken also to bring in certain Brotherhoods and Societies in every Parish
that shall be capable thereof, whose peculiar profession may be to treat upon
Holy Days of all good works, and reforming of such abuses or wants as shall be
discovered. And these Societies must have certain Privileges, Preeminences,
and Exemptions for them that do their Office well, and Chastisement for the
contrary; but all must be subject and subordinate to the Ordinary: For of
Exemptions of Confraternities from Visitation of their Bishops, many disorders
and inconveniences have been seen in other Countries.

And above all other Confraternities or Societies, one of the Christian
Doctrine would be the most necessary in every Parish at the beginning, whereof
the Curate may be the head, and some other of the graver sort and principal Men
of the Parish may be adjoined, and their Office may be to be present on
Holy Days, when Disputation is held amongst the Children publicly in the
Church, and procure that none be away. And it should be good, that some
particular emolument should result to these Men for their diligence, and that
there were some particular Rent also to buy rewards for their Children that
shall prevail in this Disputation, which would animate greatly both them and
their Parents, and others to be present, and perfect in the Doctrine. And to
this Confraternity of Christian Doctrine might be joined, in the beginning, the
Society also of the Blessed Sacrament in the little Parishes where more
Societies could not be put in ure, whose principal charge it is (I mean the
Confraternity of the Sacrament of the Altar) to accompany the Body of our
Savior with Lights and other Actions of honor, when it is carried abroad to
the Sick, and in other occasions.

And for that in no other thing God has been more dishonored in England than
in matters touching this heavenly Sacrament, it will be reason that particular
recompense be made therein at the very first entrance of Religion again.

Some such Officer as the Romans called their Censor to look that no Man lived
idly, nor brought up his Children without some Exercise and means to live,
would be of importance for this Reformation. And this man might call to account
also such Men as lived suspitiously or scandalously, as by Carding and Dicing,
or spent riotously any way his own Goods or his Wives. And the like
Commissioners were to be sent to the Universities to reform them to the best
utility of the Commonwealth, and of those that study in them, and for drawing
of strangers to frequent them, as in other Countries.

And the like Visitation and Reformation may be made of the Universities of our
common Laws; to wit, of the Inns of Courts and Chancery in London. And this
concerning both Manners and Learning; and certain skilful, prudent and pious
Men, may have Commission to consult what were to be redressed about the common
Laws, either for learning, teaching, or practice of the same, to the end the
Prince and Parliament might afterward determine thereof.

And the like about our Colleges, Halls, and manner of reading both of
Philosophy and Divinity, Physic, Civil and Common Laws, and other Sciences in
the Universities.

And amongst other Points, to consider whether a Third University were not
necessary in the North parts of England, as at Durham, Richmond, New Castle or
the like place in these quarters, for the better polishing of those parts
toward Scotland, and planting learned Men in the same, seeing they have need;
and that the other two Universities which we have already, are both of them far
toward the South, and many of the North parts cannot so conveniently send
their Children unto them.

And diverse other Countries have three Universities, within much less circuit
than these three would be. A like Consideration also might be, whether it were
not expedient to have a third Archbishopric in England; for example, at
Bristol or thereabouts, which might have for his Suffragant Bishoprics, those
of the West Country, and more parts of Wales, that lie near about. And hereby
might the Archbishopric of Canterbury's charge and labor be eased much, and
the Metropolitan Visitations from three Years to three Years, more commodiously
performed, and yet sufficient privileges and preeminence left to the said
Archbishop and Primate of Canterbury, according to the ancient dignity of the
said Church.

In like manner it may be put in Deliberation, whether the number of Bishops,
in some part of the Realm, were not to be increased, for the better governing
of the Clergy, or at leastwise that their circuits were better divided, some of
them being, at the present, very ample and laboursome, as Lincoln, York, and
some other; and in some other places, perhaps the Livings of some other
Bishoprics were to be augmented for better maintaining of the Dignity, though
ordinarily this is the least want of our Bishops in our Realm; and the
authority of the Place is better maintained by opinion of Gravity, Learning,
Wisdom, and Holiness, than by much abundance of Riches.

CHAP. IX. There ensue more matters that appertain to the Council of
Reformation.
THough I have touched diverse points, yet follow there more belonging to this
Council, among which one very special is as has been signified before, the
particular care that ought to be had of erecting of Seminaries at the very
beginning for the increase of the Clergy, and this in every Bishopric,
according to the Order of the Council of Trent. And before that Men be
interessed in the Livings either of Bishoprics or Benefices, all the
Ecclesiastical Livings of the Realm might be searched what each one might
contribute to the erections and maintenance of these Seminaries, which may be
at such an easy rate, as none had need to feel it; and yet may the Furniture
for Education of English youth be such, by these means, as no Realm in the
World will have the like; and all these Seminaries may be divided into two or
three parts, according to the number of the Universities or Archbishopricks;
and every University have one great Seminary, wherein only the course of
Divinity and Philosophy may be read, and in the other abroad that are
subordinate to these may be read Grammar, Humanity and Rhetoric alone, and as
the Scholars shall grow fit they may be transferred to the great Seminaries of
the Universities.

The like care must be had for well ordering of Grammar-Schools, what Books are
to be read, and what manner of Masters are to be allowed, as also for other
Schools for Children, Writing, Reading, and casting of Accounts by Arithmetic,
which greatly does awaken and sharpen the wits of young Children, and make them
the more able Men for their Commonwealth, if it be taught with care and good
order as in other Countries it is, where Children are wont to be examined in
public, and made to Compose, Divide and Multiply numbers upon the sudden, and
without Book, and rewards proposed to them that do best. And in all Schools
must there be particular order also for teaching of the Christian Doctrine, and
diverse proofs appointed for the same. Public and private Libraries must be
searched and Examined for Books, as also all Book-binders, Stationers, and
Booksellers Shops, and not only heretical Books and Pamphlets, but also
profane, vain, lascivious, and other such hurtful and dangerous Poisons, are
utterly to be removed, burnt, suppressed, and severe order and punishment
appointed for such as shall conceal these kind of Writings; and like order set
down for printing of good things for the time to come. It would be of great
importance, that in every City or great Shire Town, there should be set up a
certain poor Man's Bank or Treasury that might be answerable to that which is
called Monte della Pieta, in great Cities of Italy; to wit, where poor Men
might either freely or with very little interest have Money upon Sureties, and
not to be forced to take it up at intolerable Usury, as oftentimes it
happens, to the utter undoing and general hurt of the Commonwealth; and for
maintenance of these Banks, some Rents or Stocks of Money were to be assigned by
the Council of Reformation, out of the common Purse at the beginning, and
afterward diverse good People, at their deaths, would leave more, and Preachers
were to be put in mind to remember the matter in Pulpits, and Curates and
Confessors in all good occasions, either of Testaments when they are made, or
of cases of Restitution when they should fall out, and other such occasions.
The like good use were to be brought in, that Ghostly Fathers in hearing
Confessions and otherwise should admonish their Spiritual Children, among other
works of Piety, to visit Hospitals and sick People, as also public Prisons,
and enjoin it some times for Penance and part of Satisfaction, especially to
principal People whose Example would do much good to others, and by the Fact to
themselves. And to the end there should not be so much repugnance therein, as
commonly is wont to be in delicate Persons, the Hospitals were to be kept fine,
cleanly, and handsome; and public Prisons were to be enlarged with Courts and
open Halls for People to visit them by day, and relieve them with their Alms;
though by night they were kept more strait. And above all other things,
convenient place is to be made in all Prisons to say and hear Mass, and for
Spiritual Men to make Exhortations to the Prisoners, seeing that besides the
chastisements of their Bodies, the salvation of their Souls is also to be
sought; and oftentimes they are in better disposition to hear good Council, and
profit themselves thereby, standing in the Prison, than when they were abroad.

And for this effect only (that is to say) for looking to Prisoners, and
procuring the comfort, relief and instruction of such as be in necessity
therein, diverse Societies and Confraternities are seen to be instituted in
other Countries, where Charity does flourish, and ought to be also in ours, and
the public Prisons for this respect (of the Shires) were to be put in
principal Towns and Cities where these Societies might be erected, and an
extract or summary of all the charitable works, accustomed to be done in other
great Cities, by the Confraternities and other ways, as namely in Rome, Naples,
Milan, Madrid, and Seville, were to be had and considered by our Council of
Reformation, and put in ure, as much as might be conveniently in England.

A general Story of all the most notable things that have happened in this time
of Persecution, were to be gathered, and the matter to be commended to Men of
Ability, Zeal, and Judgment for doing the same. And when time shall serve to
procure of the Sea Apostolic, That due honor may be done to our Martyrs, and
Churches, Chapels, and other memories built in the place where they suffered,
and namely at Tyburn, where perhaps some Religious House of the third Order of
St. Francis, called Capuchins, or some other such of Edification and Example
for the People, would be erected, as a near Pilgrimage or place of Devotion,
for the City of London, and others to repair unto.

Before this Council make an end of their Office, or resign the same, which (as
before has been signified) may be after some competent number of Years, when
they shall have settled, and also secured the state of Catholic Religion,
and employed the Lands and Rents committed to their charge (and this were to
be done with the greatest expedition that might be) it would be very much
necessary that they should leave some good and sound manner of Inquisition
established for the conservation of that which they have planted: For that,
during the time of their authority, perhaps it would be best to spare the name
of Inquisition at the first beginning, in so new and green a State of Religion,
as ours must needs be, after so many Years of Heresy, Atheism, and other
Dissolutions, may chance offend and exasperate more than do good; but
afterward it will be necessary to bring it in either by that or some other
name, as shall be thought most convenient for the time; for that without this
care,
all will slide down and fall again.

What form and manner of Inquisition to bring in, whether that of Spain (whose
rigor is misliked by some) or that which is used in diverse parts of Italy,
(whose coldness is reprehended by more) or that of Rome it self, which seems
to take a kind of middle way between both, is not so easy to determine, but
the time it self will speak, when the day shall come, and perhaps some mixture
of all will not be amiss for England; and as for diverse points of the diligent
and exact manner of proceeding in Spain, they are so necessary,
as without them, no matter of moment can be expected, and some high Council of
Delegates from his Holiness in this affair, must reside in the Court, to direct
and to give heart and authority to the other Commissioners abroad, as in Spain
is used, or else all will languish. Their Separations of their Prisons also
from concourse of People that may do hurt to the Prisoners, is absolutely
necessary, as in like manner is some sharp execution of Justice upon the
obstinate and remediless. Albeit all manner of sweet and effectual means are to
be tried first to inform and instruct the Parties by Conference of the Learned,
and by the Labor and Industry of Pious and Diligent Men, for which effect some
particular method and order is to be set down and observed; and more attention
is to be had to this, for that it is the gain of their Souls, than to the
execution only of punishment assigned by Ecclesiastical Canons, though this
also is to be done, and that with resolution, as before has been said, when
the former sweet means by no way will take place. And finally this Council of
Reformation is to leave the Church of England, and temporal state, (so far
forth as appertains to Religion) as a Garden newly planted, with all kind and
variety of sweet Herbs, Flowers, Trees, and Seeds, and fortified as a strong
Castle, with all necessary defense for continuance and preservation of the
same, so as England may be a spectacle for the rest of the Christian World
round about it; And Almighty God glorified according to the infinite multitude
of dishonours done unto him in these late Years. And for better confirmation of
all points needful to Religion, it would be necessary that either presently at
the beginning, or soon after, some National Council of the English Clergy
should be gathered and holden, and to consider in particular what points of
Reformation the Council of Trent has set down, and to give order how they may
be put in execution with all perfection. And finally besides these points
touched by me for the Council of Reformation, and this National Synod to look
upon, many more will offer themselves when the time shall come, no less
necessary and important perhaps than these, which their charity, and wisdom,
and quality of their Office will bind them to deal in for God's Service and the
public weal; And I have only noted these, thereby to stir up their memory to
think of the rest.

CHAP. X. Of the Parliament of England, and what were to be considered, or
reformed about the same, or by the same.
FOR that the English Parliament, by old received custom of the Realm, is the
Fountain, as it were, of all public Laws, and settled Orders within the Land,
one principal care is to be had that this high Court and Tribunal be well
reformed and established at the beginning, for a performance whereof, certain
Men may be authorized by the Prince and Body of the Kingdom to consider of the
points that appertain to this effect, and among other, of these following.
First, of the number and quality of these that must enter and have Voice in the
two Houses: And for the higher House, seeing that Voices in old time put also
diverse Abbots, as the World knows, it may be considered, whether now when we
are not like to have Abbots quickly, of such greatness and authority in the
Commonwealth, as the old were, it were not reason to make some recompense by
admitting some other principal Men of these Orders that had interest in times
past; as for example, some Provincials, or Visitors of St. Benet's Order,
seeing that the said Order, and others that had only Abbots in England, are now
reformed in other Countries, and have therein Generals, Provincials, and
Visitors, above their Abbots; and with the same Reformation it will be
convenient perhaps, to admit them now into our Country, when they shall be
restored, and not in all points, as they were before. Secondly, about the Lower
House it may be thought on, whether the number of Burgesses were not to be
restrained to greater Towns and Cities only. And for that in this House, as
well as in the Upper, matters are handled that belong to the Realm in general,
whether some mixture of Ecclesiastical and Religious were not to be admitted,
as well as in the higher House, as namely of some Deans, or Archdeacons, or of
some heads of Colleges or Universities, and some Provincials, or Visitors, or
special Men to be chosen of some Religious Orders to be intermixed amongst the
Burgesses and Knights of the Shires, as Bishops and Abbots were amongst the
Temporal Nobility of the higher House, seeing that these Men both for Piety,
Prudence and Learning, and for their experience in the Commonweal, and practice
abroad, especially some of them that might be picked out for the purpose, may be
presumed to be able to give as good advice in all points, belonging to the good
Laws and Ordinations for Manners and Government, as Burgesses and Knights of
the Shire, that ordinarily are gathered for furnishing of this House, and in
particular they would have a special eye to the assurance and preservation of
Catholic Religion, which is a principal consideration.

For choosing of Knights of the Shires, as also Burgesses, a more perfect and
exact Order were to be set down, and less subject to partiality and corruption;
and Information were to be taken of their names and Religion. And for Knights
of the Shire perhaps it would not be amiss to give some hand in the matter, at
leastwise for a time to the Bishop of the Diocese to judge of their virtue and
forwardness in Religion, and to confirm their Election, or to have a negative
Unice, when cause should be offered, and that they made public Profession of
their Faith before their Election could be admitted, or they take their way
toward the Parliament.

At the first meeting the first consideration ought to be whether it be a full
and lawful Parliament or no, and that in both Houses; and whether all Parties
be there; and whether any present have any impediment to be laid against him
why he should be removed, or not have Voice; or whether such or such as be
absent, and may come, shall have Voice when they come; and such other like
circumstances, and all to be set down in writing by the Notaries or Secretaries
of Parliament. Men may be appointed to examine with what Authority old
Privileges or Pre-eminences have been taken from the Parliament in these
latter Years, especially since the entrance of Heresy; to the end the
Catholic Prince that God shall give us may be dealt withal to restore the
same, seeing it is for the good and service of the Realm.

After the first Decree, whether it be a lawful Parliament or no;
the second should be, ( n) That every Man be sworn to defend the Catholic
Roman Faith; and moreover, That it be made Treason for ever for any Man to
propose any thing for change thereof, or for the Introduction of Heresy. And
for more Peace, Concord, and Liberty of Voices, it were good perhaps to use the
custom of Venice and other Countries, where Suffrages are given in secret by
little Balls of different colors, signifying Yea, or No, to the matters that
are proposed.

A good manner of proposing in Parliament.
It has seemed to some Men, that a good manner of proposing matters in the
Parliament might be first to appoint four or five Commissioners, together with
the Speaker, to view and examine the Bills that are to be exhibited, and to
reject such as be impertinent; and for the other to propose so many in one day
as time permits, to open and lay down the reasons on the one side, and on
the other; and if the matter be of doubt, or of great importance, then may the
House award, That the next day two Persons may speak upon the Proposition
exhibited, the one in favor, the other against it; to the end that upon the
Third Day Men may give their Voices, with more light and deliberation: and if
the thing be of small importance, and easy, it may be concluded the second Day
upon the first Days Discussion only, but not sooner. And the days and matters
appointed to be discussed, should be registered and read publicly in the
Parliament House by the Secretary, to the end that every Man might know what he
were to deliberate or determine of the day following. And thus much for the
Order of proceeding: But now for making of new Laws and Decrees in our
Catholic Parliament, these Notes following may be remembered among other.

New Laws to be made or thought on.
To abrogate and revoke all Laws whatsoever have been made at any time, or by
any Prince or Parliament, directly or indirectly in prejudice of the Catholic
Roman Religion, and to restore,
and put in full authority again, all old Laws at ever were in use in England,
in favor of the same, and against Heresies and Heretics.

The Law of Mortmain, Mortmains
whereby Men are forbidden to employ their Goods upon pious works that be
perpetual, without particular License of the Prince, is not in any other
Kingdom, where yet no such inconvenience is seen to ensue of overmuch to be
given as is pretended by the motive of that Law. And therefore seeing all pious
works must begin again in England, it were necessary perhaps that this
restraint should be removed for a time at leastwise, and Men rather animated
than prohibited to give that way.

It may be examined by the Parliament, whether Lady Elizabeth entered by good
right or no to the Crown, or at leastwise, whether she were true and lawful
Queen,
since the Declarations and Depositions published by Pius Quintus: and if not,
then (albeit for quietness sake and security of the Commonwealth, it may be
Decreed, That all matters past, by order of common Justice, shall be ratified,
except only such open acts of manifest injustice as are notorious to all the
World to have been done against Religion, by manifest wrong, as the injurious
Condemnations of diverse Catholics, and evident oppressions of some other
Persons) yet that all other Acts of Grace, and matters of Gifts, and Donations
of Livings, Titles, Honors, Offices, and the like (which she did as true
Queen) be ipso facto void and of no effect, where notwithstanding may be a
Proviso, That whatsoever such benefit or grace she bestowed upon any known
Catholic, or Man of public merit, shall be holden for good, in favor of the
Catholic Religion, so much persecuted under her Government; And for all other
her said gifts or graces to be either void, or at leastwise suspended, until
they be confirmed again by the next Prince to ensue, and some such Distinction
and Declaration to be made, seems necessary for many reasons.

Again, Whether the first Parliament of Q. Elizabeth were good.
it may be considered whether the first Parliament holden in this Queens days
were a good and lawful Parliament or no, by reason of the want of Bishops, and
of the open violence used unto them by the Laity. And if it were not lawful,
that then all other Parliaments since that time depending thereon, and wanting
true Bishops, may be declared in themselves to have been of no force, nor yet
the Laws therein made; and consequently to be frustrate, and to be put out of
the Book of Statutes, except such as this Parliament shall think necessary to
confirm and ratify or make anew.

The Decree and Law for the faithful restitution of Abby-Lands and
Ecclesiastical Revenues, with the Moderation before specified, is to be
determined of among the very first points of importance; and it were to be
performed with a great alacrity and promptness of minds in all Men, thereby to
bind Almighty God to deal the more liberally also with us, in all the rest that
were to be done, as no doubt but he would, and after this many other particular
Commissions and Subdelegations are to be given forth by the Prince and
Parliament to particular Troops and Companies of Men for setting good order in
diverse matters, as namely one very ample to the Council of Reformation
beforementioned, for the reestablishing of Religion, and for gathering up and
disposing of the Ecclesiastical Rents and Revenues aforesaid.

And other were to be given out to certain principal Lawyers and others, to
reform the points that shall seem needful about our Common Laws,
Inns of Courts, and the like, as has been mentioned; another for the
Universities, another for the planting of Seminaries as well of our Nation, as
of our Neighbors, Strangers for their Conversion, and diverse other such like
weighty affairs are to be committed by different Commissions to able and fit
Persons, for putting our Commonwealth in joint again, except it shall seem best
to commit the most of these matters by a general Commission to the Council of
Reformation in form as has been declared, all which being confirmed by our
Catholic Prince, and See Apostolic, may be executed sweetly and securely by
the grace of God to his most high glory, and everlasting good of our Realm. And
this is so much as I have to note for the present about this First Part,
concerning the whole Body of the Realm in general. Now shall I speak somewhat
of the two principal Members, which are the Clergy and Temporalty in particular.

Animadversions on Chap. X.
( n) THat every Man be sworn to defend the Catholic Roman Faith, and moreover
that it be made Treason for ever for any Man to propose any thing for change
thereof.] In the late Popish Reign every one does remember what abundance of
pains was taken to ridicule the Penal Laws and Test, but especially the Test;
for the decrying of which all Mouths were opened, all Pens employed, even one
of our own, if we can with truth call our own that Scandal of Protestant
Episcopacy Dr. Parker of Oxford; and yet we see that how abominable soever a
Test was in favor of the Church of England, the Jesuit is for having one, and
that no body be admitted to suffrage in Parliament till he has taken a
swearing Test for Popery. And just so it is with Penal Laws, though those made
against Papists (which by the bye were made not against their persuasion in
Religion, but against the Treasons and Plots (which as Papists) they were ever
and anon running into) be abominable, yet against Heretics they are absolutely
necessary. When I first read this Chapter I could not but wonder at the
Impudence of the Romish Priests in the late Reign that made such tragical
Exclamations against Penal Laws, but especially of the Jesuits, who having this
Memorial in their hands, and admired by them, should exclaim against sanguinary
Laws, when yet they were resolved as soon as they could get a Popish
Parliament, to have all the Laws that were ever made against Heretics, those
for burning them at Stakes restored, and put in full Authority. God has
delivered us out of the hands of such abominable and bloody Hypocrites, and may
He ever preserve us from them, who gave good words to the Protestant Dissenters
that would be cajoled by them, with their Mouths, while they had destruction
and ruin in their hearts against all Protestants whatsoever.

And at the same rate were too many Dissenters gulled about the promised
Liberty of Conscience, that was to be established in Parliament, to be made as
firm as Magna Charta, and it should have been made Felony or Treason, and I
know not what, for any one in Parliament ever to have motioned a Repeal of it;
but now we see in the Memorial found in the late King's Closet, what it was
that was to be so firmly established, we find that immediately it was to have
been made Treason for ever for any Man to propose any change of Popery in
England.

The SECOND PART of this MEMORIAL Touching the CLERGY.
I noted in the beginning, the Clergy might be divided into Three principal
Branches, which are, Bishops, Priests, and Religious Orders, both of Men and
Women; and so according to this Division shall I prosecute this Memorial.

CHAP. I. Of the Clergy in general, what they are and ought to do at the next
change.
HAving to speak of the Clergy in general, which God from the beginning of his
Church vouchsafed to name his own Portion, The name of the Clergy.
for that they were dedicated more particularly than other Men to his Divine
Service; and our Savior to call them by the most honorable name of the light
of the World, and Salt of the Earth. The first point of all to be remembered
unto them seems to be, that if ever there were a time, wherein the effect of
these names were needful to be showed, and put in execution, it will be now at
the beginning of our Countries next Conversion, whose Fall and Affliction, may
perhaps in great part be ascribed to the wants of these effects in former times
past. And furthermore, it may be considered, that the State of the Clergy in
England, after a long desired Reduction, and happy entrance of some Catholic
Prince over us, and after so long and bitter a Storm of cruel Persecution, will
be much like unto that which was of the general Church of Christendom in time
of the first good Christian Emperor Constantine the Great, after the bloody
Persecutions of so many Infidel Tyrants that went before him for three hundred
years together, at what time as God on the one side provided so many notable,
zealous, and learned Men for the establishing of his Church, as appears by
the three hundred and eighteen most worthy Bishops, gathered together in the
general Council of Nice; so on the other side the Devil ceased not to stir up
amongst the Clergy of that time, diverse and sundry Divisions, Emulations, and
Contentions, some of indiscreet zeal against such as had fallen and offended in
time of Persecution; and some other grounded upon worse causes of Malice,
Emulation and Ambition tending to particular interest, whereby both that good
Emperor in particular, and all the Church of God in general, were much
troubled and afflicted, and many good Men scandalized, and God Almighty's
Service greatly hindered, and the common Enemy comforted.

And considering that the Times, Men, Matters, and Occasions may chance to fall
out very like or the same in England, whenever it shall be reduced to the
Catholic Faith again, great and special care is to be had lest semblable
effect should also follow, to the universal prejudice of the common cause:
wherefore this ought to serve as a preparative, A Consideration both for Prince
and People.
both for our Prince and People to put on the same pious and generous mind that
Constantine the Great did, to bear patiently with the infirmities of Men, and
remedy all matters the best he may, and the People, but especially Priests to
beware of like deceit of the Devil; and amongst other things, if perchance, in
time of Persecution, cause has been given or taken of offense or disgust
between any person whatsoever, that have labored in God's Service, and do tend
all to one end, to procure effectually now that it be altogether cut off and
put in oblivion, and this especially amongst the Clergy, and by their means
amongst others; and if there should be any unquiet or troublesome Spirit found,
that under any pretense would sow, or reap, or maintain divisions, that the
Holy Apostles Counsel be followed with him, which is to note and eschew him, to
the end that all may join cheerfully and zealously to the setting up of this
great and important work of Reformation. And so much for Concord.

But as concerning example of good Life, and to be Lanterns of the World, I
hope in Jesus there will be no great need at that day, nor for that day now to
call much upon our Clergy, or at leastwise for some years after our Reduction,
they having received so abundant grace of Almighty God in this time of
Persecution, and so excellent a kind of Holy Education in our Seminaries, The
Education in our Seminaries.
as never perhaps any Clergy had in the World, which Benefit of God ever ought
to be a Spur unto them to be answerable to the same in their lives and works,
and to fear the most terrible sentence of St. Paul to the Hebrews, about the
hard and miserable case of such as after much and special grace received, slide
back again to their everlasting and most intolerable Damnation.

A blessed Servant of God, The cry of Mr. John Avila.
in these our days, cried out in a certain Memorial of his to the Council of
Trent, about matters of Reformation, saying, Take from us once, if it be
possible, the shame and reproach of Israel, which is the Evil and Idle Life of
Clergymen, which cry ought ever to found in the Ears of our Clergy, also for a
watchword, and jointly to remember the Admonition of St. Paul no less
necessary than this, for them that are to labor in God's Vineyard, which was,
That having meat, and competent maintenance, they should seek no farther, but
be content to labor willingly and liberally for so worthy a Master as is to
pay them above all expectation, or desire, in the next Life. Which Admonition
is most important for moderating our appetites, and avoiding of ambition,
greediness, and contention, when the day shall come, though in England there
will not want to give contentment also with abundance in temporal matters to
all godly Men that shall labor there, if his Divine Majesty vouchsafe to
restore the same from his Enemies hands; so as my hope is that our Clergy in
every degree from the highest to the lowest will endeavor, at that day, to
conform themselves to all rules of Reason, Piety and Religion, and to hearken
gladly to any good Counsel, or remembrance of Order and Discipline that shall
be offered, for theirs and the common good, and with that I may presume to set
down the Notes that hereafter do ensue.

CHAP. II. Of Bishops and Bishoprics in England.
BIshops and Prelates be Heads of the Clergy, and if all ought to be Light and
Salt, how much more they that must lighten and season not only the Temporalty
and Laity, but all the rest of their own Order also, who according to the
example given them by their Prelate, are wont to proceed. And on the other
side, the best means for a Bishop to do much good in his Diocese, is to have
good Priests about him: for that a Prelate without good Priests to help him, is
a Bird without Feathers to fly; and to have good Priests, he must make good
Priests, both by his Life, Doctrine and other good means, and especially by
Seminaries; for that Figs grow not on Thorns, as our Savior says; and to have
so great a Treasure, it must cost both Labor, Industry and Money.

The Authority and Jurisdiction of Bishops in England is commonly more than in
diverse other Countries, and more respected; and their ordinary inquiry upon
dishonesty of Life or suspicion thereof is peculiar to England alone, and of
very great importance for holding Men in fear of carnal sins, and for this
cause to be continued and increased. And albeit, in some other Counties, simple
Fornication be not so much punished, or pursued and inquired upon, and that the
Stews also be permitted for avoiding of greater inconveniences, in respect of
the different natures and complexions of the People; yet by experience we do
find, that the same necessity of liberty is not in England, and consequently in
no wife to be brought in again; for that it is an occasion of fall, and of
grievous temptations to many that otherwise would not have them.

That English Custom also of often Visitations by the Bishop, and by his
Counselors, Officials, and other Ministers, and Probats of Testament to be
made before them, and the use of often administering the Sacrament of
Confirmation to Children, is very laudable and to be honored; and any other
thing that may belong to the authority, credit, or good estimation of the
Bishop, or of his Function and Office; and if for a time after the next change,
some hand were given to Bishops also in Temporal affairs, as to be principal in
all public Commissions within the Shire, it would greatly authorize Religion,
and assure the Country much more to the Prince.

It will appertain to the Council of Reformation to consider of the Revenues of
each Bishopric, Bishops Livings.
and where there wants sufficient to bear out decently that State, then to
add so much as shall be necessary; yet are Bishops to be admonished, says Mr.
John Avila, that Christ wills them to be Lights of the World, and Salt of the
Earth by their fervor of Religion, Prudence, and Virtues, and not by abundance
of great Riches and Pomp; and he alleges a Canon of the first Council of
Carthage, which says thus: Episcopus habeat vilem supellectilem, mensam, and
victum pauperem, and dignitatis suae authoritatem, fidei and vitae meritis
quaerat. And upon this he adds, That much more hurt has come to the Church
of God by overmuch Wealth of Bishops, than by their Poverty, albeit he wishes
notwithstanding that they have sufficient with Moderation.

And he beseeches the Council of Trent, that as well of Bishops Livings, as of
Deanries, Archdeaconries, Rich Benefices, and all other Ecclesiastical Livings
which can bear it, that there be a certain Portion allotted for the Poor,
whereof he would not have the Incumbents to have Possession or Interest, but
only that they with some other assigned for that purpose to be joined with
them, to have the Distribution, and be accountable yearly for it, as if it were
not theirs.

And his reason for this is, for that each Ecclesiastical Person being bound in
Conscience to give part to the Poor, it were good their Consciences were eased
herein by help of some others also, and that the Poor were assured of their
Portion: which Holy suggestion might easily be put in Execution at the
beginning in England; and it would be a goodly Treasure for the Poor in every
Diocese, and a singular Example to all other Nations in Christendom; and those
that are good Prelates and Priests, would be contented therewith, and give
besides also of their own, and such as are otherwise, at least would be forced
to give this to their own benefit and others.

For the Bishop's own Person, as also his Household, it shall not be needful to
say how far off it ought to be not only from vanity, pomp, and lightness, which
is crept into many to the ruin and scandal of the World; to wit, of gorgeous
Apparel, great troops of Servants, rich Furniture of Household Stuff, and other
Ostentation of this quality; but also and much more from the prophanity and
secularity of others, as Hawking, Hunting, Dicing, Carding, Banqueting,
enriching of Kindred, and the like; which Corruptions do easily insinuate
themselves, partly by corrupt Nature, and partly by inticements of others, as
by experience we have seen in former times, if our Bishops and Priests do not
stand watchfully upon their own Actions, and resolutely cut off the Serpents
Head, and all Serpentish allurements to these things at the beginning.

The Bishop's Person ought to be as an Angel of Peace, Joy, Comfort, Aid,
Compassion, and Encouragement amongst the People; and his House to be a School
of all Virtues, and a Shop or Storehouse of all virtuous Men, to take out as
need shall be, for the furnishing of other Places. Silks, Velvets, Chains of
Gold, Feathers, Hawks, Hounds, and the like in his House or Household is great
vanity. Idleness, Swearing, Gluttony, loose Life, Unlawful gains in his
Servants, is Impiety. Well it were that Prelates Servants should be the better
provided for, than any other, to the end that many might desire their Service,
and bear the Discipline of their Houses more willingly, to wit, that they
should be both better paid, and have more ways for their present Services, and
more hope of certain recompense for the time to come; but with this also it
were reason, that they should be known from all other Men's Servants by their
Virtuous Behavior, Modesty in Apparel, Temperance in Diet* Sweetness and
Humility of Speech, Courteous Conversations. No less care ought to have the
Bishop of the Souls of his Servants, but rather more than any other of his
Flock; which the Holy Apostle St. Paul did so far exaggerate to his Scholar
Timothy that was also a Bishop, as he said; If any man have not care of his
own, and especially of those that be his Domesticals, he is without Faith, and
worse than an infidel.

The principal Point that good Prelates do use, and may use, about Reformation
of their Families, are, first, to keep no more than they have need, and are
well able to maintain of themselves, without permitting them Shifts, Bribes, or
other unlawful or suspicious means to help themselves, under color and
countenance of their Master's Coats, which all redoundeth to their Masters hurt
and discredit. And, Secondly, if more do offer themselves to service, than the
Bishop can thus maintain, or has need of, more merit and edification will it
be to help to place them otherwhere, and to assist them also with Alms abroad,
if his ability be for it, than to hold great Troops of Servants under pretense
of Piety and Alms, which oftentimes is Oftentation and Vanity, or at leastwise
great occasion thereof.

Thirdly, such as be admitted to the Bishop's Family, and dwell in his House,
ought to be governed with all kind of care and good Discipline fit for such a
place, and not disagreeing to the State and Concition of the Men; and namely,
That they confess themselves every Month at the least with known and approved
Confessors; and that the Bishop himself upon high Feasts, or some other, may,
by his appointment, administer unto them the blessed Sacrament; that whilst
they dine or sup in the Hall, they have some Spiritual good Lecture read unto
them, that a certain competent space be appointed them to rise and go to Bed,
and some Exercise of Prayers in the Mornings, and that in the day time, such as
have no particular charge or offices to occupy themselves in, but to attend and
wait, have some thing devised for their Exercise, if it may be to keep them
from idleness: and among these may enter some honest kind of Disports also at
certain times, and store of good Books to be laid in public places for them to
read, and entertain themselves at other seasons.

No access of Women to be permitted.
All kind of access and ordinary residence, or traffic of Women within a
Prelate's House for any occasion whatsoever, whether they be kindred or not, is
indecent, suspicious, and full of disedification, except it were only upon some
known cause, suit, or particular business without stay, which yet ought to be
avoided the most that may be.

Occupations of a good Bishop.
The occupations of a good Bishop, which lie upon him, by obligation of his
office, are so many and weighty, as it cannot be imagined how he can have spare
time and leisure for idleness, or vain and secular entertainments, if he have a
good Conscience: but rather it is needful that he devise the time very well,
and exactly, for to be able to fulfill his duty, in preparing, saying Mass,
preaching, teaching, visiting his Diocese, hearing and determining of causes,
attend to his particular Household, conferring with his Officers, and a thousand
other Occupations, Cares, and Obligations that will fall upon him, and take
from him both his time by Day, and sleep by Night; if he be such a Father as he
ought to be, and have a tender heart toward God's Service, and his own
Salvation, and toward the good of his People and Country; which being so,
there needs no other Advertisement in this behalf, but that he be a good Man,
and look well to his Conscience, and divide well the hours of the day that
every thing may be done in its time, and Men find space and facility to
negotiate with him. Let him visit his Diocese often by himself, if he can, to
know his own Sheep nominatim, as Christ commands; and if he cannot, let him
do it by his Officers, and see that it be done with diligence, and gratis,
without Bribes; and let the Visitations be examined well afterward, and some
Declaration ever made of them, by punishing or promoting of such as deserve, to
the end it may appear that they are not made only for fashion sake. The custom
of England is to call the Curate, with the two Churchwardens to every
Visitation, and two principal Men more of the Parish; and to exhibit
Interrogations to the one Party concerning the other's demeanor, is a very
effectual order, if it be well observed, as is also that every Archdeacon
should make his Visitation apart at his due times, and communicate them after
with the Bishop.

In all good works that are to be done within the City where the Bishop
resideth, or within his whole Diocese, whether they be for setting up of
Religious Houses, Schools, Seminaries, Hospitals, Colleges, Prisons, bringing
up of Orphans, Marrying of poor Maids, helping of Widows, repairing, enlarging,
and furnishing of Churches, redeeming of Captives, setting forward of
Confraternities, and the like; the Bishop as the Common Father and Treasurer of
the poor ought to have his part more or less according to his ability. And when
he were able to give no Money, yet should he animate others, show the way, give
the designment, remove difficulties, and make much of them that were doers
therein, whereby only (I mean by his authority, consent and encouragement) he
should be able to bring many good things to pass, even without Money, if he had
it not to give; but if he have wealth and will not spend, words will do little.

It is reported of certain godly Prelates, That besides the bestowing of their
own Goods in pious works, God gave them force to draw out great store of other
Men's also, and so to have the merit of both; For which cause, first they used
to be very familiar with all such Men as had this Spirit, to go up and down,
and attend to these works, willing them never to be dismayed, but to come to
them in all their difficulties, for that Money and Council should never want.
And, Secondly, they used to have a lift of all the rich Men within their
Diocese, whom they sought also to gain before hand, by courteous entreaty, and
often inviting of them; and when any work of Piety was offered, then would the
Bishop first set down all his own Contribution, and then persuade the rest by
his Exhortation and Example to do the like. And by this means they brought to
pass infinite great works, that otherwise seemed altogether above their powers.

What Men ought to be chosen Bishops.
Many good Men of our time are of Opinion, That the first quality and condition,
which the Prince ought to consider, in choosing, or presenting a good Bishop,
should be whether he be liberal, and a good Alms-man, or no; for if he have
this grace, it is impossible almost but that together with this, he is a good
Man of Life also. And albeit he should want a great degree in learning, or some
other such part, yet this one of Almsgiving would supply for all, and by his
liberality he would make learned Men, though he were none himself; and so
supply the want by others. But if he want this part of Piety, all the rest will
do little good with the People. And Mr. John Avila notes to the Council of
Trent, that not only Christ himself, but his Apostles also after him, laid
hands rather of virtuous Men to make Bishops, though they were Married, than of
great learned Clerks. And so do the two Descriptions made by St. Paul to
Timothy, and to Titus, of good Bishops, declare, though learning also be
necessary, but more the other.

The Bishop ought to have a Roll of all the Preachers, Pastors and Priests
within his Diocese, with the Names, Surnames, Parentage, Ages, Talents,
Manners, Merits, and Occupations, and to study and go them over often, and to
add every Year, that which his Officers do bring in their Visitations, of their
Merits or Demerits; and besides this, to have some special Men of confidence
and zeal in every place to advertise him of that which passes for his better
Instruction, to the end that when Benefices, or other Charges shall fall void,
he may provide them with more facility, and commend also to the Prince, such
Persons as deserve to be preferred to higher Rooms; and put back, deprive, or
chasten them that behave themselves evil.

The like Lifts ought the Archbishops to have over all the Bishoprics, under
their Charges: And the same ought to have the Prince and his chief Counselors
over all the Realm; so all good Men should not need to sue and labor to be
employed, nor the ambitious greatly profit themselves by their solicitude and
negotiation; but the one should be fetched out of their corners, when they
thought not of it, to Promotion, and the other sent home empty from the Court
and other places, which they troubled by their importunity, until they were of
better Merits. No one thing would so much profit the Commonwealth, as if these
punishments and rewards were sure and certain.

Benefices to be provided by opposition.
It is thought also, that it would be a matter of great importance, for the
preservation of a good English Clergy, that the providing of Priests for
Benefices within every Diocese should be reduced to the Bishops and to certain
of the Chapter or chief Men about him, to be assigned for that effect, and that
the preferment should go by Opposition and Trial, both for learning and
manners; and certain Examiners to be appointed for the Determination, who
should give their Determination upon their Oaths; and that the Patrons of
Benefices, that now are in England, should be recompensed with some other
Privilege or Honor to be done to them in their Parishes, where they are
Patrons; but not to present the Persons, nor give Advowsons; or at leastwise,
if all were not to be taken away, the most should be, that they presented some
three or four able Men together, both for learning and manners, and that the
Bishop with his Examiners may take whom of those they judged most worthy.

After Examination made of Men's learning, by Opposition and Disputation, the
like Examination, or rather much more stricter, ought to be made of Life and
Manners, either by the self same Examiners, or rather by others to determine
also upon their Oaths, as the former: And this second Examination ought to be
made by Testimony of Letters, and Witnesses concerning the behavior of the
Pretenders; and ever the Merit and Virtue ought to be preferred before
Learning; and to the end Men be not disgraced by this second Examination, after
they have passed the first of learning, perhaps it will be best, that this go
first; and if any Man be found defective in this, he may, with less discredit,
desist from the other; and let the Trial and Opposition be published some Weeks
or Months before, as shall be thought necessary. And greatly it will import
that all Benefices be given and taken in England with this express Condition,
That upon Merit or Demerit, they may be changed, or taken away, and the Parties
removed either to higher or lower Benefices, or to none at all, if he deserves
it. And that the Condition also be put by the Prince and Pope, in providing of
Bishoprics, to wit, that when ever the Prince or Archbishops shall require
Visitors of His Holiness to visit any Bishop, or Archbishop, and shall find
just cause to deprive him, or put him down to a lower Bishopric, that it shall
be lawful, and that each Prelate may enter with this express Condition, as also
Deans, Archdeacons, Canons and the rest. And that sometimes it be put in
Execution, for that this will be a continual Bridle and Spur to them, when they
know they have no certainty, or perpetuity; and as to the good, it will be an
occasion of perpetual promotion, so to the other it will be a motive to look
about them.

Order must be given by the Bishops for often meeting of the Clergy in
Provincial Synods; or otherwise to confer their doubts, and to take light and
encouragement the one of the other. And for the better keeping of Unity both in
Mind, and Spirit, and Actions; and the old Canons, Customs, and old
Ecclesiastical Ordinances of our English Church are to be brought in ure again,
as much as may be, and as they serve profitably to our Times.

Whether it be convenient to have a Third Archbishop in England, and some
Bishoprics increased, enlarged, diminished or divided, I have put it in
Consideration before the Council of Reformation, and so have no more to note in
particular about this Chapter of Bishops, but only to refer my self to that
which in general the Holy Council of Trent has ordained, about Reformation of
Bishops, which I do suppose ever as a Foundation to all, that here or elsewhere
is added for England alone at its next change to Catholic Religion.

CHAP. III. Of Deans, Canons, Pastors, Curates, and the rest of the Clergy.
AFter Bishops do follow the other inferior Order of the Clergy, to which may
be applied so much of that which I have spoken before in the Chapter of
Bishops, as does concern them. And furthermore you may add the Advertisement
and Ordinations of the Holy late Council of Trent, about Reformation of
Priests, which were convenient should be put in Execution in England above all
other Catholic Countries, with Zeal and Devotion: and what else I can remember
that is particular to our Country, or not touched by the said Council, I shall
endeavor to suggest in this place.

All Men will confess that Deans, and Canons, and other Ministers of Cathedral
Churches at their first Institution, and many years after, did live in common,
and did eat together in one Hall, or Refectory, and that their Life and manner
of Discipline, was a community of one good and well ordered College, as we read
of those that lived under St. Augustine, as their Bishop, in the City of Hippo
in Africa; and of those that long after lived under St. Dominick, as their
Prior in the City of Osma in Spain; and for this effect were the Closes, or
Cloisters built in every Cathedral Church for Canons to live together under one
Lock and Discipline, as has been said, and for this cause were they called
Regular; and the very name of Canon signifies a Rule; and in diverse places yet
of other Countries, the same is observed, though not with so great Exaction, as
from the beginning it was. But now in England it might be restored to the first
perfection again, so as our Canons might live in common, and be Exemplar Men of
Life. And if there should be any difficulty to obtain this of all, yet at
leastwise that no Man live abroad, or alone, but by particular leave and
Dispensation. And that such as will live in Community, may have some
privileges above the rest; and that ordinarily of these Men, may be chosen
Deans, Archdeacons, Heads of Colleges, Bishops, and other Dignities, so as to
live Exemplarly may have some privilege and enlargement above the rest; for
which cause also it would be good, that some ordinary degrees and steps were
known in the Commonwealth for Ecclesiastical Men to ascend, and to go up by.
And first Seminaries and ordinary Colleges in the Universities, and from thence
to be Heads of Houses, and Fellows of the exempted and privileged Colleges, of
which I shall speak more in the Chapter following concerning Universities; and
from those to be Canons in the Cathedral Churches, and after to pass to other
Dignities, Prelacies, and Bishoprics. Among which Degrees of Promotion, no one
is more fit to try Men, and to make them sufficient for higher places, than
Canonneries, if they were used to this effect, and Men ordinarily taken from
thence to other preferments; and this according to their Merits only, and
behavior in the same, and not for favor, kindred, and other respects. And
still the most virtuous, wise and orderly, is to be preferred, and especially
those that are pious, and Men of Alms, though they were somewhat inferior to
the rest; and that no troublesome, unquiet, idle, vain, heady, proud, or
dissolute Men should be preferred, though he were never so qualified otherwise,
but rather know certainly he should be put back from that place, and with that
express Condition to take his Canonry or other Dignity, when he enters, as
before has been noted.

Of helping our selves by Strangers.
I have suggested before in the Chapter belonging to the Council of Reformation,
how that the scarcity of good and able English Priests being so great, as it is
like to be at the next change, when so many places will be to fill, as the
greatness of such a Kingdom requires; the first care must be in all reason,
and good Law of prudence, to furnish Bishoprics, Deanries, Archdeaconries, and
some such other principal charges of Jurisdiction and Government, where only
the English Men will be able to discharge the Office, by reason of the
Language, and not Strangers; But yet where no convenient provision can be made
of the English Nation, there to help our selves rather with some discreet and
virtuous Men of other Countries for a time, and those to be chosen and sent us
only upon our Petition, by zealous and good Bishops abroad, than to leave the
People wholly unfurnished, namely for saying of Mass, singing in the Quire of
Cathedral Churches, and Collegial, and other such like Priestly Functions, as
by Men of other Languages may be performed, with Condition that this shall be
used only for a space, until our Clergy shall be increased; and no propriety of
Benefices to be given to them, No Appropriation of Benefices at the beginning.
but only competent Pensions and Allowance, during their abode in England,
which may be so long as they behave themselves well, and give Edification to
the People. I have spoken also of English Preachers to be sent over the Realm,
alloting to every Bishop so many as may be had for that purpose, and that he
divide them, as he shall think most needful, and that for some few years at
least, it would be more commodious for the Public, and more liberty for the
Preachers, and Priests themselves to have no Appropriation, or Obligation to
any particular Benefices, but ample Commission rather for all with a sufficient
stipend to live upon until things be better settled.

Churches, Chancels, and Sacristies.
I have also signified how needful it will be that Commissioners be sent abroad
to visit Churches throughout the Realm, and all things belonging thereunto, and
to enlarge the material part in many places, for that the People are much
increased; and that the Chancel in particular be more capable, decent, and
commodious for the Priests; and the Sacristies and Revestries for the Furniture
of the Altar, and the rest of God's Service; and that they be made much bigger
and more handsome, as well for service of the Priests, as for principal Men
sometimes to retire themselves thither for Confession, and other such
occasions; and that the provision and furniture of Vestments, and other
necessaries for the Churches, be such as may edify and increase Devotion, and
not the contrary, as at other times it has been; and discreet and able persons
be chosen to have care of these things, and competent maintenance allowed them
for the same, and not to be committed to most impotent, ignorant, and
contemptible of the Parish, as it has been accustomed; For that they will do
the Office for little or nothing, but yet so as it were better undone. It is to
be considered whether Catholic service may be said again in our old Churches
before they be consecrated of
new, or hallowed publicly from the Profanation of Heretics, and this for
more Detestation of Heresy. And in like manner it may be considered, whether
such known Heretics, or notorious Schismatics, or Persecutors, as shall
return to the Union of the Catholic Religion, should presently be admitted to
come to our Churches, or rather that some part of the old Ecclesiastical Canons
should be put in ure for their restraint for a time, so as though they be
reconciled, absolved, and admitted also to the Sacraments in private, yet for
public satisfaction, they should not be admitted to enter our Churches, but by
little and little, and with the Moderation, Humiliation, and other reverent
Ceremonies appointed for that purpose; which the sooner also is to be thought
on, thereby to show the different proceeding between them and us, they pressing
us to go to their Church against our Wills and Consciences, though it were with
open and known Dissimulation, and we do not admit them to enter our Churches
out of hand, though it be desired by them, and that they made Profession both
inwardly and outwardly of our Religion.

And if such care and circumspection be to be used in admitting Heretics to
our material Churches, as in truth there ought to be; then much more must be
had in admitting them to be Priests and Ministers of the same, except it be
upon great and long probation and satisfaction given,
and in some rare case, as all the World may see and confess. And whether it
shall be fit at that day to disable some great and able Heretics, and their
Posterity, especially if they have been principal Authors in the overthrowing
of the Catholic Religion, or known Persecutors of the same, not only from
Priesthood and Ecclesiastical Dignities, but also from other honors and
Preferments temporal of the Commonwealth, for warning and deterring of others,
and for more security of the said Weal Public, the wiser sort of that time may
put in Consideration.

As for the good Life of Priests and Clergymen, whereof all depends, that
great Servant of God Mr. John Avila lays a very prudent Consideration before
the Council of Trent, saying, That it is not enough for making of good Priests
to multiply good Laws, and appoint punishments to the Transgressors, as many
Prelates do, for that it costeth them little: and the reason is, for that it
being a painful thing to punish often, as well for him that punishes, as for
him that is punished, it wearied out the one and the other, and oftentimes
sooner the Punisher than him that is punished, if he be perverse; and so no
good ensues thereof at all. Wherefore he says the true remedy is to procure
that Men be induced to love good Laws, and observe them without punishment, and
then good Laws will profit them. And such are they who are virtuously brought
up, and trained in godly Discipline from their youths; and for that this does
ask both care, and labor, and cost, few Prelates will take it upon them. But
ours of England ought to do otherwise, and to take the Water from her Fountain,
which is to train up the youth of their Diocese from their tender years in
Schools, Seminaries and Colleges of Piety and Learning. And this godly Man
would have no Priests made at all, but only out of these Seminaries and
Colleges; and if any did offer themselves that had not been brought up in them,
he would have them put into some other Colleges, or Seminaries to be errected
for this purpose, there to live, and be tried for a time upon their own
charges, to make proof, not only of their ability in learning, but also and
much more of their humility, patience, obedience, conformity of manners, and
other like virtues fit for Clergymen.

Preferment for those of Seminaries.
Moreover his Opinion is, that the best Ecclesiastical Livings, and
Church-Dignities should be laid upon these Men that are taken out of Colleges
and Seminaries; and that in all things, caeteris paribus, they should be
preferred, and this according to the Testimony of their Superiors, concerning
their virtue, which ever he would have more to be respected than their
learning: and if any should behave themselves evil in the Seminaries, or be
expulsed for their Demerits, he would have them incapable of Holy Orders
thereby, if already they be not in Holy Orders; and if they be, then to be
incapable of any Ecclesiastical Promotion, until they have given large and
substantial satisfaction of their change and amendment. And finally he says,
That he would have the life of Clergymen to be so full of labor, as idle
People should not desire it; and so full of virtue, Directions and often
Meetings for the Clergy.
as Crewes would not come to live among them. For which cause perhaps it would
not be amiss, that some particular Instructions should be given by the Bishop
of the Diocese, or by the Archdeacon of that Circuit, or by some other
Superior to all the Priests within his charge, what they should do, how to
proceed and behave themselves, in all occasions, how to distribute and divide
the time, and wherein most to labor, and most to avoid, and other like
particularities, for their help and direction. And to be bound to yield an
account of all these points, at the Bishop's, Archdeacon's, or Official's
Visitation, or at the ordinary times of their meeting together, I mean the
Priests of each Circuit among themselves, which days of meeting ought to be
somewhat often, and frequent at least, at the beginning, as namely every second
and third Month, or as often as shall be appointed, and thought convenient for
those times. And at these meetings, Priests may be examined of these and like
points, and take direction of their Superiors, and propose their doubts or
difficulties, which they have found in the course begun of setting up Religion,
and gaining of Souls. And there might be ordained Sermons, Conferences, and
Exhortations to be made at these meetings, and certain learned Men appointed to
examine and resolve their doubts, which would be a great light and
encouragement for them all to go forward in this Holy Work. Of Priest's and
Clergy-men's Apparel.
And this is so much as at this time comes to my Mind about these matters
needful to be remembered, except I should add, That the form of Apparel of our
new English Clergy is to be reduced also to the measure and proportion of that
Perfection and Edification which we desire to see in our Priests at the next
change, and that both vanity and novelty be avoided then, and above all,
lightness and dissolution; for which effect perhaps the best means will be to
bring in use again, as near as may be, the old grave custom and fashion of
Apparel that our Clergymen used in ancient times, whereof such as at that day
shall be appointed to consult and treat of this matter, will better be able to
set down the particulars.

CHAP. IV. Of Seminaries, Colleges, Universities, and Schools.
AS concerning Seminaries and Colleges for Institution and Increase of our
Clergymen, at the beginning of the next change, and how they ought to be
erected in every Diocese or Bishopric, founded and provided for by
Contribution of Ecclesiastical Benefices, established with good Laws, and
necessary Privileges, provided of good Governors, divided into diverse Members
or Parts, according to the number of our Universities in England; and that the
lesser Seminaries abroad be subordinate to the greater of the said
Universities, Proof of such as desire to be Priests out of Seminaries.
and how that none commonly should be admitted to Priesthood, but such as have
been brought up, and given good proof of themselves in these Seminaries, or
other Colleges of like Discipline. Of all these points, I say, there has been
sufficiently spoken before in diverse Chapters of this Memorial, which need not
be repeated in this place, only I add, that these great Seminaries, which in
the First Chapter of the Second Part of this Memorial I said were to be erected
in the University for Heads of the other, that were to be subject unto them
abroad in every Diocese, may serve also for that effect, which Mr. John Avila
required in the former Chapter, which is for these to enter, and be proved for
a time, who pretend to be Priests, and that before they take Holy Orders they
do dispose themselves duly by making the Spiritual Exercises, and using of
other means, whereby to know and consider well what they take in hand; and that
such as be of best wits, be applied to preaching, and those of meaner to hear
Confessions, and those of Prudence, Activity, and sound approved Virtue, to be
employed in Government; and thus much of Seminaries of our own Country.

But now for help of other Countries also we ought to have some special care,
considering the Benefit that we have received by Seminaries to procure their
Conversion, so much as lies in us, by the same means; and for this purpose it
would be a work of great Piety and Edification, and partly also due, that we
should erect in our Country, and namely in London, where most concourse of
Merchant Stangers are, some number of Seminaries for the help of our Neighbors
oppressed or infected with Heresy, as namely, Denmark, diverse parts near to
us, of Germany, Poland, Gothland, Sweedland, Scotland, Muscovy, and the Isles
of Zeland; from all which places store of youth might be had, by reason of the
concourse and Contraction of Merchants that daily come to London from those
parts. And by the Industry of some good Catholic Men that may be found or made
in the said Countries, by such zealous English Priests of our own as would be
willing to employ themselves in this work, and go thither also if need be;
among which most gladly the Writer of this Memorial would offer himself for
one. And so procuring and setting a certain sure manner of correspondence from
these Kingdoms for their youth to come to us, and putting in Spirit to them,
when they be with us, together with learning, for aiding of their Countries,
the like effect would follow in the end, which we have seen, and proved in
England. And Almighty God would be greatly glorified thereby, and we should
revive again the old glorious Piety and Zeal of our Ancestors the Saxons, who
after their own Conversion were Converters almost of all Nations round about
them: and this for this matter.

As for the Universities, Of Universities and Colleges.
it is well known that they are the Fountains of all good Learning, Policy and
Government in the Commonwealth, and therefore to be favored, nourished,
increased, and those also which England has, are the most fair, and best
furnished for the material part, which is for the number of Colleges, and
manner of Building, Foundations, and Commodities of Rents that be to be seen in
all Christendom, as they can testify, who have seen the one and the other,
though in other Countries also, there be many goodly Universities in like
manner, which in the formal and more essential part do greatly exceed ours, to
wit, in their good order of Discipline, Number, Quality, Variety, and Diligence
of Readers, abundance of Students, and the like; all which points also might be
brought easily into ours, and so make them absolutely the best of Europe, and
to be frequented also by multitudes of foreign Scholars, seeing that
maintenance is better cheap with us, than any where else. And this would be a
point of much honor to our Nation.

And to bring all this to pass, the first thing must be, that large and ample
Commission be given by the Prince and Parliament, and confirmed also by the
Pope, to certain Men of Experience, Learning, and Wisdom, for that purpose, to
see what is convenient to be ordained for those effects and times, and for
reducing of our Universities to the best utility of our Commonwealth, having
yet respect so far forth as no great inconvenience do ensue thereof, to the old
ancient Statutes, Customs, and Orders of the said Universities and Colleges,
and especially that the Founders be not deprived of any substantial part of
their Holy Intentions. And for that he that writes this Memorial, has seen
and informed himself of the chiefest Universities that be in Christendom, and
has had experience also of our own, the principal parts he has noted, and seen
to be worthy to be considered, for the reforming, or bettering of our English
Universities, are these which ensue.

Multitude of Oaths to be restrained.
First, That the exceeding great multitude of Oaths, which are wont to be given
to them that take degree of School in our Universities, be moderated, or taken
away, for the easing of Men's Consciences, and that some few principal and
substantial Points only be given by Oath, and the rest commanded under pain of
Temporal Punishments. The reading of Sciences in particular Colleges does
greatly hurt and hinder the public profit of Students in their Learning; for
neither so learned and substantial Readers can be had in private Colleges, as
were necessary to be public Masters; nor can the number of Schools be so
great, and chosen in every particular College or Hall, as were convenient, to
furnish a course of any Science, with reputation and profit; whereof also
ensues, that neither the Master nor his Scholars are able, or much animated,
to go forward in the same.

For remedy of this, the use of most Universities in foreign Countries is very
good, which is to have public Lectures only in public Schools that are fair
and largely builded for the purpose, and in them to have chosen public Readers
of great sufficiency for all Universities, and that their wages be such, and so
honorable, as they might well be able to live upon them, without seeking of
other shifts; and that in no particular College there should be public
Lectures permitted, except it were in time of Vacations, or of some particular
things that are not read in the public Schools, as of some points of
Mathematics, the Languages, or the like; but rather that all Students of every
College, should be bound to hear their ordinary courses of Arts, Sciences, and
Faculties, in the common Schools, or else not to have License to proceed, or
take Degree within the University; and that in place of private Readers, in
particular Houses, there should be appointed repetitors in every College, whose
Office should be to hear the daily Repetitions of such Lectures, as are read in
the public Schools, and to moderate and proceed in all Conferences and
Disputations about the same; and by experience it is found that this manner of
study does profit more in few Years, than any other in many.

Competent Stipends.
The ordinary wages of a public Reader ought to be such, as will move the
principal part of learned Men to sue and stand for the same, and to persevere
in it when they have it. At least some few Lectures ought to have this
commodity annexed unto it, though others may be of far less value, to the end
that upon hope to come at length to these greater Lectures by degrees, learned
Men be content to pass with the other of less moment for a time.

It might be considered whether it should not be good to have concurrence in
every principal Lecture that is read in the common Schools, as diverse foreign
Universities have, to wit, that two learned Men should read jointly Divinity;
and the like in Law and Physic in different Schools at the self same hour, and
upon the self same matter and subject, so that Scholars be left free to go to
which of the two they shall like best; for by this means the two Concurrents
will try who shall read best, and have the most hearers. And as for the number
of Lectures that are to be read every Year, or Quarter, by the public Master,
they may be set down, and the portion of wages that answer them to every
Lecture, and how many Lectures soever the said Master shall fail to read by
himself, or by a sufficient substitute to be allowed by the University, so much
of his wages is to be deducted presently, every Month, or Quarter, without all
Remission, and to be bestowed upon poor Scholars, or other good uses, as shall
be most expedient. And this is the only way to make public Readers diligent
and careful.

Touching the number of Lectures to be read publicly, in best Universities
they are these, First, For Divinity there can be no less than four at the
least, which are, two in School-Doctrine, one of the Scriptures, and one of the
Moral part alone, commonly called Cases of Conscience. In the Civil Law three
are the least, to wit, one of the Institutes, another of the Digests, and a
third of the Codex. And in like manner in Physic, one at least must be of the
Speculative part, and another of the Practical, besides two other at certain
seasons, to wit, of the Herbal and Anatomy. All which Lectures are either
wanting, or very weak in our English Universities at this day.

And besides this, since Heresy came in, we have had no Lectures at all of
Canon Law, which are to be reduced again, though it may be put in Consultation,
whether it shall be needful to make it a distinct Science and Faculty from the
Civil Law in England, as it is in other Countries (for Men may study it alone,
and take degree therein apart) or rather that both the Civil and Canon Law be
made but one Faculty; for that the Realm of England being not governed by the
Civil Law, as other Realms about us be, there is very little use thereof but
only in the Admiral's Court, and in some other few cases. And whatsoever
besides is decided by none of these two Laws in England, but is commonly done
by Rules of the Canon Law, as in the Court of Arches, and in all other
particular Courts and Tribunals of Bishops, Commissaries, Officials and the
like; so as these two Faculties may easily be joined in one in our
Universities, and be learned by the self same Men for the use of England. And
to the end that such as do study these two Faculties, be better founded and
furnished with variety of learning, for Argument and Reason, than commonly they
are wont in some other places, where Men study the Common Law alone without the
help and furniture of all other Sciences. It shall be good perhaps that such as
mean to take degree in this Science of the Canons, be not only bound first to
have studied Humanity and Rhetoric, but also their course of Logic and
Philosophy, as well as those that are to study the Faculties of Divinity and
Physic; and that no Man be permitted to take degree in these two Laws, without
having passed first his foresaid course of Philosophy; and by this means the
time and labor of study, in these three principal Faculties, of Divinity,
Laws, and Physic, will be equal.

Lectures also of lower Sciences must be provided for in the public Schools,
with public and sufficient Stipends, as namely three Masters for the course of
Philosophy, one of Logic, another of the Natural part, and the third of
Metaphysick, and these three to go on successively, every one reading out the
whole course of the forenamed three Sciences, so as every year they may begin
one course of Logic, for the whole University, and another end with the
Metaphysics.

Mathematics and Tongues.
The Mathematics also must have one Lecture, if not more than one, as also the
Hebrew and Greek Tongues. And to the end Scholars may not want to be hearers of
these Lectures, wherein sometimes there is difficulty, the matter may be so
tempered as those of the second and third Year of Philosophy, may be bound to
hear the parts necessary for them of Mathematick Sciences, and those of the
first and second Years of Divinity may have the like bonds to hear the public
Lecture of the Hebrew Tongue, if they mean to take degrees, as those also that
study Rhetoric and Humanity may have Obligation to understand the Greek. And
that is to be noted, that the common Grammar-Schools in England, though there
were many and great in diverse places, yet are they defective in many points for
the sound attaining of the Latin Tongue, which now may be amended partly by the
Seminaries, which are to be in every Shire, and are to profess only Grammar,
Humanity and Rhetoric, and partly by our Universities also, where the study of
the Latin Tongue may be settled in more perfection than it was wont to be.

Defects of Grammar Schools.
The defects also of our Grammar-Schools are commonly these; First, That they
have but one Master, or at the most a Master and an Usher, who cannot possibly
read so different Lectures, as the different Capacities of so great a multitude
of Scholars will require, wherefore in other Countries, wheresoever good order
is kept, they do divide the whole compass of Grammar into four or five distinct
classes or forms, and do assign a particular Master to every one of them, and
above these do appoint another form for Humanity, and another for Rhetoric, so
as they be six or seven distinct forms in all, ordaining moreover that from the
second or third form of Grammar, the Scholars begin also to learn the Greek
Tongue, so as when they come to Rhetoric, they have it very perfectly.
Moreover they appoint that none may pass from one of these forms to another,
upon will and favor, but only upon strait Examination, and Proof made by
indifferent Men; and that none be admitted to begin the course of Logic and
Philosophy with intent to proceed and take degree therein, and in other higher
Faculties afterward, except he first have passed these inferior forms, and in
particular have bestowed one Years study in Rhetoric for the more perfection
of the Latin Tongue, which is the ground of all the rest. Which order, if it
were well observed in our Universities and Schools of England, and fit Masters
appointed for the purpose, and the inconvenience of over much beating of
Children taken away, which is another disorder of our Grammar-Schools,
wherewith diverse of the best wits, and especially such are best brought up, and
are of best Parentage, are dismayed and terrified from study, I would think
that in few other places of the World, studies would go better forward than
among us. The ordinary times and spaces appointed for reading and hearing
courses of Sciences and Faculties in foreign Universities, Time and spaces of
courses in Faculties.
are of great utility, and to be brought into ours; as namely three years to
end the course of Logic, Natural Philosophy, and Metaphysics; four years for
the course of Divinity, Law or Physic, and after the fashion of English,
French and Flemish Universities, which therein are somewhat different from
others, our Scholars might take degree of Batchelors of Art, at the end of
Logic, or Natural Philosophy, such I mean, as should be able to defend the
same in public Disputations, and no other; and in the end of hearing the
Metaphysics, or a year after to be allowed them for Repetition, or going over
again the whole course, to such as were to take degree, they might be made
Masters of Art, upon the like public Trial of Disputation, and Examination, as
before.

The degrees of our Batchelors also, or Licentiate in Divinity, Law, or
Physic, were not to be given to any but after the full study of their courses;
to wit, of four years hearing each course, and one or two years more to be
allowed, to repeat, or look over the said courses again, and after often
public Exercises and Trials to be made upon him in the mean space; and that
after this degree of Licentiate, or Bachelor, other three years to be assigned
of like Trial for them that will pretend to proceed Doctors; and that all these
points of trial for taking degrees be observed with rigor, and not dispensed
with and changed into many Contributions, as is now accustomed, but very rarely
and upon some great and extraordinary occasion; for that by this the same and
estimation of our Universities would be exceeding great in the World abroad,
and our degrees of learning would be holden in great account, and our Country
would be full of learned Men, with fewer titles void of substance. And among
other things, provision must be made that such degrees as are taken abroad, in
some foreign Universities of less moment, for Money only or Favor, without
Merit, may be called to Examination again, and not allowed of in England
without new approbation.

The order of dictating used in all foreign Universities, to wit, where the
Master, besides a brief Declaration of his Lesson by Discourse, either before
or after, uses to dictate soft and fair, so as all his Scholars do write his
words, is no doubt a most profitable order, and holds both the Master and
Scholar in attention, the one not to speak any thing, but well studied and
thought upon, for that it is to come to the view of others by the witness of so
many as do write and take his Lectures, and the other which are his Scholars
are held also in attention, by writing, and for that they must give an account
afterward of the whole in time of repetition, who otherwise would have their
Cogitations in other matters whilst the Master reads; and therefore this
order is also to be settled in our Universities, and the precise number of
days, wherein Lectures or Vacations were to be had, is to be established so far
forth as may be, and the matters, that each Master is bound to read in every
year, are to be assigned under pain of forfeiture; and the less that is left to
Men's proper Wills or Arbitrament, is the best both to profit and keep peace
amongst Scholars. And this so much as about matter of study and learning,
offers it self to me for the present. Other Men that shall be appointed to
visit and reform our Universities at that day, will see more. These points are
only for a remembrance. And now will I speak also somewhat in the Chapter
following about the manner of Government, and proceeding of the said
Universities.

CHAP. V. Of Government, Discipline and manner of proceeding of English
Universities.
IF our English Universities have need of Reformation touching matters of
Learning, Masters, Readers, and Lectures, as has been declared; much more is
the same necessary in points of Government, Manners, and form of Life, and
proceeding. Wherein, albeit our old Founders and Governors of English
Universities, left many good Laws and Orders, conform to the times, wherein
they lived, and to that which then was used; yet the said times being now
changed, and matters standing far otherwise in the World, and many things
learned by experience, which then were unknown, and the rigor of old
Discipline being wholly dissolved, broken, and loosed by the Heresies of our
time: it will be needful in this behalf, to make a great Reformation. And
albeit that all respect and reverent regard be to be had, and born unto the old
Laws and Ordinances of Universities and Colleges, where no inconvenience is
seen to the contrary; yet must the Commission and Faculty of such as come to
reform, be very ample and large, both from the Realm and See Apostolic.

Beginning of establishing Discipline.
And first of all for settling of common Discipline, most evident it is, that
all habitation, concourse, and negotiation of Women, which heretical
Dissolution has brought in, is utterly to be removed from all Colleges and
communities of Students, and herewith all junkets, all lascivious banqueting,
excess of Apparel, Dancing, Fencing-Schools, and the like; that no Man have
leave to go forth, but by knowledge and license of his Superior, and this to
known honest parts and Persons, at Houses lawful, accompanied with his fellow,
or more if need be, in decent Apparel; Order of Apparel.
Which Apparel, for use of the whole University, may be divided generally into
two or three sorts, as in other best Universities of foreign Countries is to be
seen; to wit, that Graduates, Fellows, and Scholars of particular Colleges, may
have one sort of Apparel distinct from the rest of the whole Body of the
University, and those of one College to be known from those of another, by some
distinction of Collars, or other like difference in their habits; and that
after these Collegials, all the rest which are Students of the University, may
have a certain general and modest kind of Attire, without permitting any man to
differ from the same which is a Student, except in some rare and extraordinary
case, as of some Prince, great noble Man, or the like. And that this common
habit be divided only into two sorts, the one for Divines only more grave,
which yet ought to be as near to old English custom, and form of ancient
Catholic times, as may be; and square Caps with Cassocks down to the Knee, as
in Lovain, Doway, Paris, and other Universities of France and Flanders, now
also is used. And the other sort of Apparel may be for Lawyers and Physicians,
and such as study Philosophy, and inferior Sciences, or are Commoners in the
Halls or Colleges; which sort of Apparel may be long Cloaks, with Hats, as it
is used in Spain and Italy, if it shall be so thought convenient. Which points
I do touch the sooner in particular, for that great exactness will be necessary
in this behalf at the beginning, both to cut off the liberty and superfluity
brought in by Heretics, as also to prevent the Novelties, which some of ours
may chance bring home from other Countries, if care be not had. And this point
of Apparel, is a principle of much good or evil in the Commonwealth.

Porters that be discreet, honest, and faithful men must be appointed to the
Gates of every College; Heads of Houses also must be chosen at the beginning
rather according to their virtue and love toward Discipline and good order,
than of any other quality. For that without such men it will be hard in the
beginning, to raise up, and establish again, virtuous Life and Conversation,
after so universal a Flood of Enormities, as has overflowed all; And for this
respect perhaps, it will be needful that not only all interest to Headships of
Houses, but Fellowships also,
and Scholarships, and all other Officers, of particular Colleges, and of the
Universities in general, be made void at the beginning, and new men planted and
placed again upon choice as they shall be thought fit for this new beginning,
and perfect Reformation; and that the overplus of Rents and Revenues of
Colleges for the mean space be gathered and put in a common Purse by order of
the said Council of Reformation, not to be disposed of to any other uses, as
other Eclesiastical Rents before mentioned, but to be reserved for better
furnishing of the same Colleges and Universities, as need shall offer it self,
when a number of Students shall be increased: Wants of diverse Colleges.
for more reason whereof, it may be considered that not only our Universities
in common, will have need of great and public reparations and expenses at the
beginning, in building public Schools, founding of common Lectures, and the
like; but every particular Hall also, and College the like: For that the most
of them are very defective in their building, and other things necessary to
their furniture, as of their Chapels, Churches. and public Halls and places
for Disputations, Repetitions, and other such exercises of learning, as are in
other Countries, and are to be provided in ours. And besides this, diverse of
them do lack infirmaries for sick-men, Rooms of Hospitals, for Strangers,
Comers and Goers, and Novices that enter of new, or are in their first
probation, and diverse such other buildings, reparations and accommodating of
their Houses, both for common and private uses. Many of them also do want Rents
sufficient for maintenance of a sufficient number of Fellows and Scholars to
uphold the credit of the House, diverse of them are in debt, and other
difficulties, and wants, without provision of sufficient Libraries, and Books,
and other furniture necessary for learning, all which particular needs of
private Colleges, as also the wants before mentioned of public Schools,
Lectures, Masters, Readers, must be now helped, with the common Purse of the
Universities Lands laid together for some years at the beginning, I mean the
overplus that shall remain above the maintenance of some few fit and chosen
men, to be Heads and Fellows of Houses for bringing in of this perfect
Reformation.

Heads of Houses.
And as for Heads and Governors of Colleges it may be thought upon, whether it
were not best, that some moderation should be established for their expenses,
state and manner of Life in the Colleges, otherwise than now it is. For, seeing
that England has so many other places of Prelacy for men of merit to be
preferred unto, as diverse Archdeacons, Chancellorships, and the like; many men
are of Opinion, That it were much better that the Heads of Houses in
Universities, should never be given for time of Life, nor have so great
allowance of men, houses, and wages, as some of them have, that use it only to
pomp, and to no profit of Students, but rather that it should be, as it is in
other foreign Universities, a matter of dignity and honor, than of wealth and
gains; and that it should endure but for a certain time, to wit, two or three
years, whereby more Men by succession of time might obtain the same, and
thereby made fit to govern afterward in other places; whereas now those that
once get the Rooms, accounting themselves sure thereof, during their lives, are
made more careless, and are much absent from their charges, lying commonly in
the Court, and making this Headship of the College but a step of Ambition to a
higher promotion. And the allowance of their expenses are so great, that it
outeth almost a third part of the Fellows and Scholars, which otherwise might
be maintained more, if the Head's Portion were moderate, as in other places it
is. And the going forward in studies would be much better attended unto.
Wherefore this point in all reason is to be remedied, and no more to be allowed
to the Head during his Government, than a reasonable portion for himself, and
for a Man or two whilst he governs, and that the same Government endure not
ordinarily more than three years; and that he may be elected out of any
College, or House of the University, without prejudice of losing his place, or
commodity that he had before, if after his Headship ended he will return to the
same again. And to the end he be more vigilant in his Office, the order of
other Countries seems very good that a Month before his said Office is to
end, there should ordinarily a Visitor be sent to examine how he and his
Officers have behaved themselves, and in what state they leave the Colleges,
and that the said Visitor should assist afterward in the Election of a new
Head; and Officers to be chosen at the same time, and that done, might the
Visitation be confirmed, with such assistance, as shall be appointed thereunto,
and so sentence be given for the praise or punishment of the said Head, and the
rest of the Officers for their years past.

With this vigilance it may be presumed that the Government of Houses would go
much better, especially if there were some one Man in or near each University
that had eminent authority over all to determine causes, and to send ordinary
Visitors to every College and Hall, every third year at the change of their
Head-Officers, as is aforesaid, himself remaining, high, sole, and perpetual
Visitor of the said University during his Life.

It were to be wished also, if it could be brought to pass, that young men in
the Colleges, during time of their studies, though they be Fellows, had no
Voices in setting, or letting of their Lands, buying or selling, choosing of
Officers among themselves, and the like; for that most certain it is, both by
reason and experience, that these things do greatly distract the wits of
young men, and especially of students, and do hinder their learning, and put
them in continual broyls, disquietness, contention, and dissension, both
amongst themselves, and with their Superiors. For remedy whereof, it seems
that some two or three, at the most, within every College, of the most ancient,
and fittest for the purpose, that have ended their studies, or are very near to
the same, might be appointed to have a hand in the Temporalties. Therefore,
together with the Head, without troubling the rest, whereunto may be joined
some wise or discreet Procurator abroad; and all these might be bound not to
let or set, buy or sell any great thing of importance, without the consent of
other two or three Heads of Religious Houses, or other Colleges within the said
University, who might be immediate Patrons, and Overseers of this College, or
Hall, and might be bound to come or send every quarter of the year once to view
and see the accounts, how they pass; and at the end of each year to subscribe
them with their hands, and at the end of three years, when the Head, and other
ordinary Officers of the College were to be changed, for to avoid Elections, it
would be best no doubt for every College to choose their Head, and all other
principal Officers at one time together for to endure for three years, as
before has been said. These Patrons and Overseers, after the Visitation ended
by him that shall be sent by the chief Visitor, be he Chancellor, or Bishop,
that shall have this supreme authority, they may, I say, join with the said
Visitor, to overlook his Visitation, as also assist him in the Election of the
Head, and Officers that are to follow, and have their Voices also in the same,
and this may be observed in every College, over which both particular Patrons
and Overseers may be appointed, as has been declared, for their better
Direction and Government. And besides these, a general Visitor may be over the
whole University, and be respected and obeyed by all; which no doubt would be
far better, and more commodious, than one College to depend, as now they do, of
one Bishop, as their Visitor, and another of another, which Bishop lying
oftentimes far off, cannot have so great care or knowledge of University
matters, as was needful, and consequently of less authority with the whole. For
that the Bishop which is respected by one College, for that he is their
Visitor, is nothing cared for by others, over whom he has no jurisdiction at
all. But by the means which I have proposed, of being general Visitor, and
lying in or near the University, he shall be respected by all, and his
Ordinances will be observed, for that he is present to overlook the same. And
again, if two or three Heads of Houses be appointed immediate Patrons, and
over-lookers of every particular College, there will be much matter of
Government, and Authority to exercise all Heads, and one College will respect
another, and help to hold up Discipline, and good order, one in the other,
which now is not done.

CHAP. VI. How Fellowships, Scholarships, and other such places were to be
proved.
AS for choosing of Fellows and Scholars into every House, where places are
vacant, and that with indifferency and good order, without partiality and
bribes, as now is used, this method following may be observed, which is used
also in foreign Universities: When any place is void in any College, it should
not be provided and filled again before the end of the year, in which it
falls void, to wit, until the next festival day of the same College; and this
to the end both that the College may help, and better it self by the saving of
the Fellowship, or Scholarship for the remnant of that year, as also to the end
there be time to give notice abroad in the University, or farther off also if
need be, that such and such places are void, to the end that fit men may
prepare themselves, to oppose for the same. And so when the time comes, or
some three or four days before the Feast, that the Head, with his principal
Officers, as also that the Patrons before mentioned may join together, and make
public examination of the Opponents, as well for their manners, as learning;
and this in such sort, as there may be no place for corruption; or partiality.
And then taking first a public Oath to do uprightly according to their
Consciences, they may give their voices, and he that has the more part clearly
of all the Electors, to be accounted for lawfully chosen, and none else; which
point only if it might be observed in our English Universities, and the foul
corruption and bribery removed, that Heresy has brought in, in our days, that
would be sufficient to animate all the youth in England to follow their studies
with carefulness.

Ordinary Jurisdiction.
As for the ordinary Government and jurisdiction over each University, it may be
considered, at that time, what way will be best to take, and the manner of
other Universities in foreign Countries, may be weighed by the Council of
Reformation, and their Commissioners, as namely whether this ordinary
Jurisdiction shall be only in the Chancellor, as now is used in England, and
whether any Bishop may overlook them, or the like; as also whether the Offices
of the Proctors and Clerks of the Market be to be committed to young Men that
study, as now is accustomed, seeing that oftentimes it is occasion not only of
distraction and loss of time unto them, but also of dissolution of life, and
corruption of their manners, by reason of the liberty that is given them
thereby of conversation with loose and dissolute people.

Election of public Readers, and other Officers.
The Officers that are to be given by the University, as also the public
Lectors, and other such Preferments, as are not so well given in other foreign
Universities in my opinion, as they might be, where they are bestowed by the
popular voices of the common Students in every Faculty, who being less able to
judge of the fitness of the Persons that stand for the same, and more easy to
be corrupted, and drawn into factions, mutinies, and other disorders, to
trouble both themselves and others about such Elections, and oftentimes also
endanger their own Consciences in following passion in the choice made by
others: and therefore no doubt, but the more quiet, grave, and sure way would
be that these Elections should be made by the major part of the Heads of Houses
only upon public examination of the Persons that do stand for the Preferment,
and oath given by themselves, to do uprightly; and when it is for any public
Lecture the Doctors and Batchelors only of that Faculty, might have their
voices with them.

And for more gravity, honor, and renown of our Universities, let it be
considered, whether it were not good to have more eminent and privileged
Colleges in the same for learned and grave Men only to enter, as in diverse
Universities of Spain is used, besides the ordinary Colleges we have for
Students only, in which no Man may study longer conveniently than the ending of
his course, in the Faculty he studieth: and if he should, he would rather be a
burden to the House, and trouble to the rest, which are Students, than any
thing else, seeing he can have no exercise of learning convenient to his degree
among them. And for that cause the order hitherto observed is good, no doubt,
and ought to be observed, that Men that have ended their courses after some
reasonable time given them also to repeat, and look over the same again, should
depart, and give place to others. But yet to the end that such as would remain,
and go forward in studies, might have commodity to do the same, it would not be
amiss perhaps, that some such greater and more principal Colleges as are in
other Universities should be erected also in ours, for learned Men to enter,
and live therein, to wit, that none should be admited but such as have taken
Degree of Doctor, Licentiate, or Bachelor of Divinity, Law, or Physic, and
that in the same Colleges there should be continual exercises of learning,
discipline, and order, together with settled maintenance fit for such Men;
conform to the orders of suchlike Colleges, as are in other Countries, whose
Rules and Laws might be viewed and brought into ours; and out of these Colleges
might be chosen both public Readers, Heads of Houses, Canons, Deans,
Chancellors, Archdeacons and Bishops, as also Doctors of Law for the Arches,
and other such Tribunals, Physicians for the Court, and other principal Cities
of England. And finally these Colleges would be as it were principal
Storehouses of learned, approved, and eminent Men, for the Prince and
Commonwealth to lay hands on for all chief Functions within the Realm. And
albeit that by means of these principal and bigger Colleges, great perfections
of learning would grow quickly within the Realm, both in the Faculties of
Divinity, Law, and Physic; for every one whereof there might be appointed one,
or more of these Colleges, or at the leastwise for Law and Divinity; yet
moreover, and besides this, for better preparation to the same in other lesser
Colleges, diverse Men are of Opinion, That it would be a matter of much
importance, if all the Colleges of the Universities were sorted out unto the
peculiar studies of these Faculties distinctly, so as one Faculty only should
be studied in one College, and not all mixed as now in diverse places: as for
example, That some one or two Colleges among the rest were appointed out for
only Lawyers, and other two for Physicians, and all the rest for Divines; and
that particular Halls and Convictories might be appointed and made subordinate
unto these Colleges for Students of the same Faculties only, to the end that
the exercise of learning in every Faculty might be more frequented, better
maintained by living of many together, that do profess one and the self same
thing, than by living straggling abroad, in different Colleges, as hitherto
they have done, where they have neither company, help, or comfort in their
studies, nor sufficient practice and exercise in the same, especially Lawyers
and Physicians that have solitary places, in separate Colleges, and by this
other means should live together, and profit more, and be better known: whereof
also would ensue that all such causes of consultation, as should come from
abroad to be consulted, either in the one, or in the other of these two
Faculties, might be better done, and with more credit and reputation in a
Community of learned Men, that live together, than by particular Men that live
asunder.

As for the College or Colleges of the Physicians, that by this order should be
established, they might have their Gardens also apart for all sort of chosen
Simples from all parts of the World, and some learned Men to attend only
thereunto, and to show them unto Students of that Faculty, and to read
particular Lectures thereof at certain seasons, as another might also of
Anatomies apart, according as before has been touched, and is used in the
University of Padua, and some other such principal Schools beyond the Seas,
where this Faculty of Physic does flourish most.

And if any Man would make a doubt, How Founders Intentions for Masses may be
satisfied.
and ask here, how the Founders Wills and Intentions may be satisfied by these
means, in such Colleges as these Faculties of Law and Physic are to be settled
in with Divines, for that their meaning was to have Priests in their Colleges,
and Masses to be said for their Souls, it may be answered, That in other
Colleges, where all are to be Priests and Divines, so many Masses may be
appointed to be said every day for these Founders, as they had appointed to be
said in their own Colleges; and as the places of Lawyers and Physicians were
also before in other Colleges, whence they are removed. And more than this also
there may be some certain number of Priests and Chaplains established in these
Colleges, now occupied by Lawyers and Physicians, to say Mass daily for the
Founders; which with Dispensation of the Sea Apostolic, seems would be a
reasonable and sufficient Compensation. And this is so much as for the present
occurreth to my mind, to be suggested, about the reforming and perfecting of
our English Universities, whereof would follow no doubt great honor and profit
to our Commonwealth, if it might be done, as it should be; and if besides all
this a third University might be added to the two which we have already, and be
placed in the North Parts of England about Durham, New Castle, or Richmond, as
before has been mentioned in the Chapter appertaining to the Council of
Reformation, where reasons also were alleged for the same. The utility, no
doubt, and honor thereof would greatly import the benefit of our Weal public,
and principally the parts near about, where it should be placed, which I leave
to the wisdom of them, who shall have authority to dispose thereof at the
wished day that we expect and pray for.

CHAP. VII. Of Religious Men and Women, and matters appertaining unto them.
IN diverse former Chapters there has been mention made of Religious Orders,
both Men and Women, which being the third principal part or member of the
Clergy, as before has been signified, should have in this place some peculiar
Treatise also, but that there has been so much spoken thereof already upon
different occasions, as little remains to be added here.

The principal point that seems needful to be remembered, is, That this part
of the Clergy, I mean Religious People, is or ought to be the ornament of all
the rest, and that by the height of their Vocation, they should participate in
a more ample and eminent sort, of those excellent names of Lights of the World,
and Salt of the Earth, which our Savior vouchsafed to attribute to all his
Portion and Clergy; but yet are they more due unto the State of Religious
Persons, which bind themselves by Vow to a life of greater perfection than the
rest, and consequently ought to be clearer Lights, and more excellent Salt than
any other. And he that would consider of Religious Orders, as he should, seeing
them intermixed among other People in a Catholic Commonwealth, he should
imagine them as Veins and Arteries spread throughout Man's Body to give Blood
and Spirit to the fleshy parts that lie about them. And again, as Wells,
Springs, Brooks, and Rivers divided all over the Earth, to minister moisture
and life to the Fields, and pasturages adjoining unto them: and so consequently
as when the Rivers of any Country, or Veins or Arteries do wax dry, or are
corrupted, or give evil moisture, nourishment, or infection, all the rest must
needs perish and putrify; so when Religious People themselves be corrupted,
and do infect, or scandalize others, by their evil example, or do dry up, and
fade away, all the rest must needs come to desolation. This has been tried in
no Country more for times past than in ours; and for that cause is the greater
care and desire of good Men to have it well remedied at the next change; and
that as on the one side it is desired, as before has been noted, that all the
approved Religious of God's Church should be admitted again into England for
more honorable satisfaction of impieties committed against them in times past;
so on the other side is there no less desire of good Men, that none should be
admitted, but called for and chosen, and such as will promise the perfect
observation of their first Institution and Rule, so as they may be true Lights,
and Salt indeed.

The Edict, or Proclamation, whereof I spoke before, to be made at the very
first beginning against the entrance of any Religious People, but only upon
License and Approbation of the Council of Reformation will help greatly to this
effect, if it be observed, as it ought to be, with exactness. For otherwise,
all idle and wandering People, and such as best may be spared in other places
will flock to us.

All Emulation and Contention, Emulation to be avoided.
among Religious Orders, must be carefully avoided at that day, whereunto it
seems that two things will greatly help, first, That no Religious be admitted
but reformed, as has been said; for that between good and perfect Men there is
never Emulation, or Contention, both Parties being united in Christ, Qui fecit
utraque unum, as the Apostle says, and non est exceptor personarum, and so the
nearer that each part is united to Christ in Holiness and Perfection, the
nearer are they united with others also: then can there be no difference
between them, according to the Rule most certain of Euclides, that such things
as are united in a third, are united also between themselves, so as wheresoever
there is Contention or Emulation between Religions, that profess both of them
to serve Christ, the offspring is Imperfection in one or both parts, and the
more Contentious is ever the more imperfect, and this is the first point.

The second help or remedy may be, That the Council of Reformation, with
Faculty of his Holiness, do take upon them the Distribution of all
Ecclesiastical
Livings and Lands which shall be restored, according to the present necessity,
convenience, and utility of the time present, without respect of former
Possessors. Great and special care must be had of erecting Monasteries for
Women, which are like to be far more in number than Men that will enter into
Religion at the beginning, having been violently debarred thereof all the Reign
of this Queen. And no one Impiety of our Heretics perhaps has been greater,
or more barbarous, than the forcing of Virgins to break their holy purposes, or
not permitting to execute the same, by entering into Religion. And for that the
scarcity of able Men will be such at that time, and so many other things
wherein to employ them, as they shall be hardly able to attend to the
Government of the Nunneries for a time, which yet cannot well go forward
without the Direction and oversight of some such grave, virtuous, and discreet
Men. For this cause it behooves to consider well what Orders of Religious Women
are to be admitted at the first, and how they may best be governed, to the end,
that such strifes may be avoided as oftentimes in Catholic Countries about
these and the like affairs do fall out.

In diverse Parts and Provinces of Christendom, there are some Religious Orders
in these our days more reformed than others, and of these ought our Council of
Reformation to call before the rest. For as the first Foundation shall be laid
in England, so will the rest follow, and go suitable to that; and as the Clock
is first set with us, so will the wheels walk afterward, and the hours follow
accordingly. And for that all other points of importance have been touched by
me elsewhere concerning these matters, as also about the new Militant Order,
that may be erected and brought in, I shall here make an end, both of this
subject, and of the Second Part of this Memorial appertaining to the Clergy.

The THIRD PART of this MEMORIAL Appertaining to the LAITY.
The Third and last that treats of Laity, or Temporalty, has three principal
Heads or Members no less than the former, to wit, the Prince with his Council,
the Nobility, and Commonalty; of every one of which we shall speak in order, as
in the former Parts has been done.

CHAP. I. Of the Laity or Temporalty in general.
BY that which I have spoken in the First Chapter and Second Part of this
Memorial about Clergymen, the difference and distinction may appear, that is
betwixt these two principal branches of a Christian and Catholic Commonwealth,
to wit, the Clergy and Laity, which is a distinction observed from the very
beginning of Christian Religion and the Primitive Church, as may appear by the
first, second, third, eight, seventy, and diverse other Canons of the first
general Council of Nice, where often mention is made of this distinction. And
before that again Tertullian, a most learned and ancient writer, not only
sets down the same distinctly of Clergy and Laymen as received generally in
his time, but shows also, and reprehendeth earnestly, the Emulation and Envy,
that even then began by art of the Devil to be in diverse of the Laity against
the Clergy, using the same objections that Luther and Calvin, and other
Heretics of our time set on foot again now against the same sort of Men. When
we Laymen, says Tertullian, 'in his Book de Monogamia, become proud, and are
inflamed against the Clergy, then we say we are all one, and that all Men be
Priests, for that Christ made all Priests, and unto God his Father; but when we
come to be exhorted and provoked to observe Priestly Discipline equally with
them, then we lay down our Vomits, and confess that we are different and
inferior to them. By which words of Tertullian we learn not only the great
antiquity of this Distinction, between Laymen and Clergymen, but also the
antiquity of that hatred and emulation which our times have received between
these two States, to the infinite hurt and prejudice of God's Catholic Church;
and in like manner the antiquity of that heretical Objection, which Calvinists
and Lutherans make against Clergymen, saying, That all Men are Priests as well
as they: by which is seen that as God's Church has been ever one from the
beginning, holding always this distinction of these two Members; so has also
the Devil's malice been one from that time hither, in setting divisions between
the same. The Derivation and Original of these two names is known to all the
World, being deducted of the Greek, wherein Clergy signifies Inheritance, Lot,
or Portion, which the holy ancient Father St. Hierome, in a certain Epistle to
one Nepotian, says, may be understood in two ways, and both of them true; to
wit, for that either Clergymen be the peculiar Inheritance, Lot, or Portion of
God; or for that Almighty God is the peculiar Inheritance, Lot, or Portion of
Clergymen, above the rest of other People, which People in the Greek Language
is called Laity. And we in England, from the first time that we were
Christians, to explicate more the matter, and to make the distinction betwixt
these two sorts of Men more full and plain, have used to call them the
Temporalty, and Clergymen the Spiritualty, and so we say in all the Acts of
our Parliaments, to wit, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this present
Parliament gathered together. And the very Heretics themselves that first
envied so much against this distinction of Laity and Clergy, are now come to
use the very same speech and phrase in their Parliaments, that is to say, the
Spiritualty and Temporalty: for better understanding of which distinction of
Spiritualty and Temporalty, for that it is, as I have said, most ancient in our
Realm, it is to be considered, that as in Man there are two parts, first, and
principally, the Soul, which is a Spirit, and endures for ever, and
consequently the matters belonging thereunto are Spiritual and Eternal. And,
Secondly, the Body which endures but for a time, and therefore the things
appertaining thereunto are called Temporal; Even so for that the Office of the
Clergymen is principally about the Soul and Life to come; and of Laymen,
about matters appertaining to the Body, and to the life present, therefore the
former are called Spiritual, and the other Temporal; whereof ensues, that as
much as the Soul exceeds the Body, and Spirit excels Flesh; and as much as
the Life to come passes the Life present, and Eternity excels Time, so much
excels the State and Vocation of Clergymen, the State of Temporal men, as
St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose, three worthy Doctors
of Christ's ancient Church, in their several Treatises about Priesthood, do
declare, notwithstanding that in their particular Lives a Layman may be better
than a Clergyman, and be preferred before him in matters of his Salvation.

The Ordaining of a new Clergy by Christ.
For more Explication whereof it is to be understood, that Christ at his being
upon Earth, showing his coming to be only for gaining of Souls, would not
meddle in Temporal Government, but framed unto himself a new Order of the
Clergy for this purpose, choosing first Apostles, and giving them authority, to
ordain others for their Successors by Imposition of Hands, by the name of
Bishops, and besides these, other inferior Orders also by the name of Priests,
Deacons, and the like; and to this sort of People which he called the Light and
Salt of the Earth, he committed the managing of Souls, and all authority and
jurisdiction necessary for the same, as to Teach, Preach, Baptize, Administer
Sacraments, to bind and loose from Sin, to correct and reprehend, to make
intercession by Prayer, and finally the opening and shutting of the Gates of
Heaven. Which heavenly jurisdiction over Souls, to the end he might show how
high and worthy a thing it was, and not depending any way of the Temporal
Jurisdiction and Government of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, which respected
Temporal ends, but much higher, and far more eminent, he did ordain it and
caused to be in practice for many Years together; when all Temporal Princes of
the World were Infidels and Enemies, and knew not of this. But yet on the other
side, was not this Government of Secular Princes impeached, taken away or
hindered by this other and different Spiritual Government of the Clergy, but
rather confirmed and established by the same; so far forth as they tended to
common Justice, Peace, Equity, and Virtue, which this Spiritual Government of
Christ did principally procure, as means, as well to their ends, that is to the
Salvation of Souls, as to the Temporal end of the Weal public. And therefore
when afterward Princes began to be Christians, and to subject themselves also
to this Spiritual Government, and Jurisdiction of Souls, and to be Sheep of
these Spiritual Pastors, among the rest, they were admitted without detriment
or diminution of their Temporal State and Government, so far forth as it
concerned the Temporal good of the Commonwealth, which is Peace, Wealth,
Justice, and the like; but yet so as they should not meddle, or challenge power
in the Spiritual Jurisdiction of Souls, but be subject therein, and leave that
Government to Clergymen, and Spiritual Governors appointed by Christ, and put
in authority for that purpose, long before Temporal Princes came to be
converted, as has been declared. And therefore came the distinction of
Spiritual Governors, and Temporal Governors, of Clergymen and Laymen, of
Christian Pastors, and Christian Sheep, in which number of Christian Sheep and
Subjects, all Princes of the World are to be accounted in respect of their
Souls, and in all points appertaining thereunto, and in respect of their
Spiritual Pastors. And albeit here in this life, among Flesh and Blood, where
matters of this World and Life present are more respected commonly, being
present, and the object to our Senses, than Spiritual matters are of the life
to come which are not seen, but believed only: though, I say, the external
show, power, and terror of Temporal Princes be much more respected, reverenced,
and feared, than is the authority of Priesthood, or Jurisdiction of Spiritual
Governors; yet in themselves there is no comparison, as by the reasons before
alleged does evidently appear, but that the authority of Priesthood, is much
more great, high, and worthy, and more principal and ancient in the Church of
Christ, for that it was before the other many Years, and is over and above the
other, and that so far forth, as St. Paul in his first Epistle, and fourth
Chapter to the Corinthians has these words* If you have secular Judgments
among you, appoint for Judges the contemptible that be in the Church of Christ,
for that function, which yet I speak, says he, to your shame; for that none of
the wiser sort among you do end or take up these temporal strifes, but one
Christian accuses another, and that before secular Tribunals even of Infidel
Princes.

Christ himself, Temporal authori^y far inferior to Spiritual.
when he was requested to judge between two Brothers, in a Temporal matter, he
refused the same, as also fled when the People would have made him a Temporal
King; and finally he said his Kingdom was not of this World, which was not to
disallow, or contemn Judgment or Temporal authority of this World, or that he
was not in truth most lawful King also of this World, being the Judge, Author,
and Creator thereof; but all this was to show the small account he made of all
this Temporal power in respect of the power Spiritual over Souls, which
properly he came to exercise, and to plant and settle in the Church after him;
unto which all Kings and Emperors that would be saved, should subject
themselves and their Sceptres, as we read that our Great Constantine before
named, and first Christian Emperor of the World did, and after him the most
renouned of the rest, as Valentinian, the two Theodosius's, Justinian, Charles
the great, and others, in the occasions that were offered, did humble
themselves unto their Pastors and Governors of Christ's Church, showing
themselves thereby to be the true Nurses and Foster-Fathers of Christ's Church;
which Isaiah the Prophet had foretold should come, and succeed in Temporal
Christian Kingdoms and Monarchies. And yet by this did they not lose, or
diminish one jot of Temporal authority, height, or Majesty, but rather did
greatly confirm and increase the same; for that Spiritual Pastors and Governors
of Souls do teach, and command all due reverence, and obedience to be done in
Temporal matters to Temporal Princes, and do exhibit the same also themselves,
and do punish the contrary by Spiritual and everlasting punishments, as well as
by the Temporal, upon such as are wicked, or rebellious therein; so as both
these Governments joined together in a Christian Commonwealth, and one not
disdaining or emulating the other, but honoring rather, respecting, and
assisting the same, all goes well both for the Temporal, and everlasting
felicity of all. And such as do set division betwixt these two States, are very
Instruments of Satan; The old Temporal honor of English Clergy.
such as are the Heretics, Politics, Atheists, and other seditious People of
our days. And for that in no other Country of the World, whilst ours
flourished, has there been more union, love, honor and respect born betwixt
these two Orders of Spiritual and Temporal Men, than in England, as may appear
even to this day, by the many Temporal Honors, Prerogatives, and Dignities
given to our Clergy in the Parliament, and other Temporal affairs; and that the
Emulation and breach between the same enkindled, and set on by the Devil and
wicked Men, has been a principal cause of the ruin both to Country and both
Parts, that were Catholic in times past, as has been said, and seen: for this
cause I thought it not amiss to speak somewhat more largely of the matter in
this place; and by this occasion having mentioned the same, in diverse other
places of this Memorial before, as a matter of no small importance, to be
thoroughly remedied, and reformed at the next change, if God say Amen; which
remedy will be, if the Clergy considering their high Vocation, and Estate, be
not proud thereof, nor ambitious, but endeavor to conform their lives to so
great worthiness of their Profession. And if Laymen, on the other side,
considering the very same, to wit, the dignity and reverence due to such as
have Jurisdiction and Government over their Souls, and must open and shut the
Gates of Heaven unto them, do not malign and envy their Estate, as miserable
Chore, Dathan, and Abiron did, but do seek rather to profit themselves thereby,
and willingly join with them to the procuring their own, and other Men's
Salvations.

And this is so much as is needful to be spoken in this place of the Laity, or
Temporalty in general; for that afterward there will be place to speak of all
particularities that shall occur in the several Chapters that shall ensue.

CHAP. II. Of the Prince and his Council, and matters belonging to them.
AS the Prince in every Commonwealth is the Head and Heart from whence all life
and vigor principally comes unto the same; so above all other things is it of
importance, that he be well affected and disposed, and so much the more in
England above other Countries, by how much greater and eminent his authority
is, and power with the People more than in diverse other places; by which means
it has come to pass that England having had more store of holy Kings in
ancient times than many other Countries together, came to have Religion and
Piety more abundantly settled by their means, than diverse Realms about them;
and on the contrary side her Kings and Princes of later years having been
perverted by dissolution of Life and Heresy, they have brought her into more
misery, infamy, and confusion, within the compass of few years, than all other
Christian Kingdoms round about us together.

The importance of a good Prince, and the account that he must make.
Wherefore the principal help and hope next under God, which our poor afflicted
Country has, or may have of her redress, is by means of her good Catholic
Prince that God of his Mercy shall vouchsafe to give us, who also considering
the great work whereunto he is called, shall in no wise be able better to
satisfy his Obligation and Duty to God, and the Expectation
of all good Men, and to assure his own Possession and Estate, than to make
account that the security of himself, his Crown, and Successor, depends
principally, of the assurance, and good establishment, of the Catholic Roman
Religion within his Kingdom; and whatsoever is done or permitted against this
Religion, is not only against Jesus Christ our Savior, and his Spouse his
Catholic Church, but also against every Catholic Prince as his supreme
Minister; and much more against the King of England (as things do now stand)
both for Religion and Estate.

First of all then is to be recommended, with all humility, and earnest suit
unto his Majesty that shall be established, the singular care, and holy zeal of
restoring perfectly the Catholic Religion in our Realm, and to employ his
whole endeavor and authority therein, and to concur, and assist with his
Princely favor, and special Protection, all such Men as principally shall
labor therein, and above other the Council of Reformation, the Prelates,
Preachers, and Clergy of his Realm, and by example of his own Royal Person, in
frequenting the Holy Sacraments, and other pious Actions of Religion, and
Devotion, to animate all other his Subjects and foreign Princes also, and
Countries about him to whom he will in these our times be a remarkable mirror,
to imitate the same, and this for his own Person.

But concerning his Majesty's Council, both in Spiritual and Temporal affairs,
it will import also exceeding much, that he make choice of fit and worthy
persons. And for the first which is in matters concerning conscience, the pious
custom of some Catholic Kings, A Council of Conscience.
and namely those of Portugal, in times past, is greatly to be commended, who
besides their Temporal Council, had also another of learned Spiritual Men,
named the Table of Conscience, in taking any thing in hand, and execution of
the same. And for this Council they were wont to make choice, as I have said,
of some number of eminent and learned Men, and also notorious for their Piety
and good Consciences, whether they were of Religious Orders or no, and the head
or chief of these, commonly the King's own Confessor, who might with more
security, by council and assistance of these able Men, direct the King's mind
with safety of Conscience. And whatsoever Prince shall take this course, no
doubt but he shall find great help, light comfort, security, and quietness of
Mind thereby. And as for the World abroad, it must needs be The quite contrary
has happened very lately in England.
a singular great justification of all his acts, intention, and attempts, in
the eyes and tongues of all Men, seeing he does them by the direction of so
irreprehensible a Consultation. His Temporal Council shall be needful to be
made with great choice and deliberation, especially at the beginning in
England; for that if any one person thereof should be either infected with
Heresy, or justly suspected, or not fervent, nor forward in the Catholic
Religion, and in the Reformation necessary to be made for good establishment of
the same, it would be to the great prejudice of the cause, and of his Majesty
and Realm.

And seeing Heresy and Heretics could be so vigilant for overthrowing of true
Religion, at the beginning of this Queen's Reign, as they admitted no one Man
to govern, whom they might suspect to favor true-Religion, how much more
zealous and jealous ought our new Catholic Prince to be in excluding from his
Privy Council, and other places of chief charge and government, not only Men
known or justly feared to be favorers of Heresy and Heretics, that will
never be secure to God or his Majesty, but also ^old and doubtful professors of
Catholic Religion, until they be proved by long tract of time. And seeing that
his Majesty shall have so great choice at that day of approved, constant
Catholics within the Realm, as never was seen the like since our first
Conversion, who have suffered so constantly at the hands of Heretics, in these
Persecutions, it is to be hoped and expected that his Majesty will serve
himself first, and chiefly of these men above all others, according to their
merits; and after these, of such other known Catholics, as albeit God gave
them not fortitude and constancy to suffer so much as the others did for
Religion; yet were they ever secret favorers, and never Persecutors or open
Enemies to the truth.

Restoring of Liberties and Privileges.
It is to be commended with like submission and instance to his Majesty, that
after he shall have taken the Crown upon him, and embraced this Realm, as his
loving Spouse, he will confirm first of all, the Laws, Customs, Privileges,
Dignities, and Liberties of the same, and to take away all such burdens,
servitudes, and unjust oppressions, as have been any way laid upon us in former
times, but since the entrance of Heresy. And as this is to be done to all the
Realm, as to the Nobility, and to the Commonalty, so principally and above
others it is reason that it should be performed to the Church and Clergymen,
who beyond all others have been injured in these latter times, so that, at the
least, it will be just that the Church of England be restored to the same state
of Privileges, Possessions, Dignities, and Exemptions, wherein it was when
King Henry the Eighth began to Reign. And for that the external face and
material part of our Churches has been so much defaced, spoiled, and broken
down by King Henry the Eighth, and his Children, as all the World sees, it
will be one principal part of our new King's Piety and Religion to concur
effectually to the rebuilding and restoring of the same again, by the means
touched by me before, of that moderate and temperate manner of restitution,
whereof I have spoken largely in the First Part of this Memorial. And it is to
be hoped that his Majesty will be the first, and most fervent fartherer of the
same, according to the Holy Obligation,
Vow, and Offer, that he will make to Almighty God, for that Heroical
enterprise, to his eternal honor, and infinite benefit, and beautifying of our
Commonwealth. Which sound Foundation of Religion and Piety being once laid, it
may be suggested to his Majesty, with like solicitude, touching the execution
of Justice to all Men with indifferency, which is the principal point of a true
Catholic Prince's Office next after God, and Religion, Restitution of Justice.
and is so much the more necessarily to be looked to now in England after so
long a storm of injustice and iniquity, by how much the more all parts and
joints of equity, both toward God and Man, have been wrested, and wronged
therein, by Heretics and Atheists.

And first of all are to be redressed the open wrongs which have been done to
our Catholics for their Faith and Religion, whether it were by show or color
of Laws, or by manifest Tyranny. And secondly are to be remedied the known
public oppression of the common People by some that have been in authority, as
namely encroachments upon their Lands, Tenements, or the like; as also the
corrupt manner of proceeding of certain Quests, and Juries, both in matters of
Life and Lands, that in later days, by the infection of Heresy, have been
accustomed to apply themselves to the favor of Magistrates in authority,
without regard of Right or Conscience.

Multitude of Thieves in England.
One thing also in particular, for very honor of our Realm, and saving the
Lives and Souls of infinite Men, is greatly wished might be recommended to his
Majesty, and effectually redressed, which is the multitude of Thieves that rob
and steal upon the Highways in England, more than likely in any other Country
of the World; they being also oftentimes of no base Condition, or Quality, that
do it; but rather Gentlemen, or wealthy Men's Sons, moved thereunto not so much
of poverty and necessity, as of light estimation of the fault, and hope of
Pardon from the Prince; whereby it comes to pass, that albeit the English
Nation, as by experience is found, he not so much inclined to steal in secret
as some other Nations are, and that more are put to Death in England, for
punishment of that Fact, than in many other Nations together; yet is this
enormity of robbing upon the Highways much more frequent and notorious in
England, than any where else in Christendom; which is a great infamy to our
Government, and hurt to the Commonwealth.

For remedy, though diverse means may be suggested, whereof I shall have
occasion to speak in the two Chapters following; yet one principle is thought
to be, if it were once known, that the Prince would hardly or never dispense or
give pardon in that offense, but upon great, rare and extraordinary occasion;
For albeit many obtain not this pardon, yet the very hope thereof encourages
others to attempt the Fact. And we see that in some Countries, and especially
in Spain, above all other that I have seen, though the Realm be much bigger,
and have many more fit places to commit such offenses than ours; yet very
rarely it is heard that public robberies are committed upon the Highways,
though in private and secretly is no Country perhaps more: which principally is
attributed unto the certain and constant public Justice that is done upon them
without remission that commit the Fact, if they be found, and to the great
diligence used for finding them out by the particular pursuit of a certain
Company and Confraternity of Men appointed for the purpose, and peculiarly
dedicated to this work, named the Holy Brotherhood, which is endued with many
privileges, and sufficient authority for the same. The which thing is wished
also might be brought into England, and made subordinate to the new Religious
Order of Knights to be instituted both for the defense of Sea and Land, which I
have spoken of in the First Part of this Memorial. And albeit the strictness of
the Prince be necessary in giving Pardons, for cutting off all hopes to the
Malefactors, yet were it to be wished that the rigor of our Temporal Laws, for
putting Men to death, for theft of so small quantity, or value, as is
accustomed in England, were much moderated, and some lesser bodily punishments
invented for that purpose, as also that some means of moderation wherein the
manner of quick dispatch of Men's lives, by Juries impanelled in haste, and
forced to give Verdict of Life and Death upon the sudden, without allowing
space, either for them to inform themselves, or for the accused to think duly
upon his defense, or to help himself by any Proctor, Attorney, contrary
witness, or other such aides, as both reason, and other Country Laws, and
equity it self seems to allow; whereof I shall speak more when I shall come
to speak of our Common-Laws of England, in the Fourth Chapter of this Part.

And for that it will not be enough to plant only Religion, Justice, and other
such parts of a true Christian Commonwealth, but also it will be needful to
uphold, maintain, and defend the same: It must appertain also unto a Catholic
Prince, whom God shall bless with the Crown of England, to show himself a
continual Watchman over the same, and with his vigilance provide for the
perpetuation thereof, and first of all to assure the Succession of the Crown by
good provision of Laws, which Heretics, of later years, have so much
confounded, and made so uncertain; This Principle does not only justify an
Exclusion-Bill, but a worse Practice, that I will not name.
and in such manner must be link the state of Catholic Religion and Succession
together, as the one may depend, and be the assurance of the other.

Moreover his Majesty must see due execution from time to time done of such
good Laws and Ordinances, as to these and like purposes by himself and the
Realm shall be at the beginning determined and set down; for which effect it
seems, that the custom of some other wise Catholic Princes of foreign
Countries is much to be commended, who do use both ordinarily, and at other
times unexpected, to send Visitors, to diverse parts of their Realms, as namely
to Universities, and to all Courts of Law, and Justice, and other places, where
any great abuse, and excess may be committed touching the Prince's Service, or
other State of the Commonwealth; which Visitors, being Men of great integrity,
skill, and wisdom, and furnished with sufficient Authority and Commission to
fear no Man, do return back true Information of that which is well, or amiss to
the Prince and his Council, who, after diligent view and deliberation, do cause
the same to be published, and all Parties to be punished, or rewarded,
according to their merits, which is a great Bridle to hold things in order.
Furthermore, for that it is of great moment for the Prince to know and be truly
informed of the quality and merit of such of his Subjects, Lists of Men's names
and merits.
as he is to prefer to Offices and charge in the Commonwealth, either Spiritual
or Temporal; it were necessary his Majesty from time to time (as for Example,
from three years to three years, or the like, according as some other godly
Princes also use) should cause certain Lists and Catalogues to be given him of
Men's names by diverse secret ways, and by Persons of credit, discretion, and
good Consciences, touching all such Subjects in every Country, Province,
Universities, Cathedral Churches, Houses of Law, and particular Colleges, as
for their learning, wisdom, and other good qualities were fittest to be
employed, and preferred by his Majesty; and that these Lists and Memoires
should be often viewed by the Prince himself, and by his Council, and be
registered in some Book by some Men of Confidence, about his Majesty, free from
all suspicion of Interest or Corruption, and appointed only to attend unto this
affair, and to take the Memoires that shall be sent from all places; which
Memoires, Lists, and Catalogues might be renewed from time to time, as before
has been mentioned, and hereby would come to pass, that the Prince by tract of
time should come to be perfectly informed of the merits and abilities of all
his principal Subjects: and therefore again would ensue, that worthy Men,
without seeking and laboring for it, as commonly they are more modest than
others, should be sought out, and preferred; and that ambitious and unworthy,
which ordinarily are the most importunate suitors, should be restrained, and
put back to the comfort of all good Men, and to the inestimable benefit of the
Commonwealth, and singular help of God and the Prince's Service.

And as this would be one great means to advance worthy Men, so is there
another, of no less importance or piety, for the amending of such as run awry,
which easily might be performed by a careful Catholic Prince to the great
benefit of many, and to his own singular commodity both with God and Man. And
this is that some special good Man about his Majesty, which is discreet, pious,
and learned, as for example, his Confessor or the like, should be appointed to
take the Relations and Informations, which do come, and would come in such a
case, of principal Men's behavior through his Realm, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, especially of such as are in Government and Authority; and that when
any evil fame or report should come of any Man's bad proceeding, or notorious
negligence in his duty, or manner of life, and were confirmed by many ways (for
light of credit he ought not to be, considering the natural inclination of Men
to speak rather evil than good of such especially as are in authority) then
should this person confer the same with his Majesty, and by his License, though
as of himself by the way of Friendship admonish the said Party of the opinion
and report that is of him, to the end he might look about him, and amend that
which were amiss before the Prince should be forced to take knowledge thereof,
or put his hand in the matter. And I am of opinion, That this only Art of
Brotherly Correction, which is commanded straightly by God to all Men, but
especially to Governors, and such as have care over others, though little used
now in the World, if this one means, I say, were brought into England, among
other good Orders now at the beginning, and put some times in Execution by our
Catholic Prince's commandment, it would remedy more evils, and procure him
more hearty good will with the People, and merit with Almighty God, than any
thing else that could be devised for this purpose. Many other suchlike things
might be here suggested for the happy day that we expect, when God shall please
to send us this Catholic Prince: but that both these, and all other points
besides that are treated in this Memorial, if any shall be judged worthy of
Observation, will appertain principally unto him, as the head of all, to see
them set forward, established, and preserved. I shall descend to no more
particulars in this place, but remit me to that, which in other Chapters also
is recorded, recommending the whole to his Majesty's Protection, and zealous
furtherance, so far forth as they shall be found to tend to the greater glory
of God, and advancement of the Weal public.

And for that diverse good Books, and notable Discourses are abroad also in
Print about this Subject, and do lay before good Princes Eyes many excellent
points for their better help, light, and direction in Government. I do remit my
self also in many points, and among other, to a notable Treatise come forth
this very year in the Spanish Tongue, written by a grave and learned Man, of
the Society of Jesus, named Father Ribadeneira, the Title whereof is, Of the
Religion and Virtues that a Christian Prince ought to have, for the well
governing and preservation of his Estates: which in my Opinion is a right
excellent piece of work, and worthy to be read by all good Princes, for that it
will put them in mind of many rare and necessary points, fit to be remembered,
embraced, and put in execution; and whatsoever Prince would read it diligently,
or appoint every day, at his best leisure, but some little part thereof to be
read unto him, with attention, and he would continue this Exercise with desire
to please God, to discharge his Conscience, and to govern well his
Commonwealth, he would hardly do amiss, in my Opinion, and should have need of
little other Counsel for taking the right way in all his occasions, purposes,
and affairs.

CHAP. III. Of the Nobility and Gentry of England, and matters appertaining to
their Estate.
BY the Nobility of England we do understand, according to the fashion of other
Countries, not only Noblemen of Title, but Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights, and
other degrees that be above Yeomen, Husbandmen, and the Commonalty. In which
inferior sort of Nobility beneath Barons, I mean of Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen, there is not that distinction observed betwixt their degrees in
foreign Countries, as is in ours; and I take ours to be far better, and the
more laudable Order.

This Nobility then and Gentry being the chief Members of our Realm, are
carefully to be preserved by our Catholic Prince, in their ancient honors,
dignities, and privileges; and whatsoever injury, or disestimation has been
laid upon them, these later years, by some base Heretical Persons in authority;
it is to be removed, and particular inquiry made by Commissioners appointed by
the Parliament for this purpose, wherein, and in what points the Nobility of
England have been injured, dishonored, or oppressed, in these later years of
Heresy, to the end that supplication may be made to the Catholic Prince for
remedy thereof. And as the ancient Nobility of England, in times past, came to
that dignity in the Commonwealth, and to their credit and estimation both with
Prince and People, first for their Piety and Zeal in Christian Religion, and
secondly for their Fidelity and Valor in Service of their Prince and Country;
so their Heirs and Posterity must conserve the same by the self-same means. And
first of all it will behove them greatly to take it for a point of chief
honor, greatness, and Nobility, at this next Conversion of our Realm, to show
their eminent zeal in furthering Religion, and the Reformation
beforementioned, in all they can, both by their authority, credit, power and
zeal; and edifying also other Men by their Example of Life, as by frequenting
the Holy Sacraments, in their own Persons publicly and often, and by joining
cheerfully and piously, as their Forefathers were wont to do, with the Clergy
and other good Men, to further the advancement of God's cause, in all points,
and in particular by yielding, and agreeing willingly to the order that shall
be taken, for the moderate restitution of Ecclesiastical Lands before
mentioned. And this for Religion.

But for the other points of Chivalry, and acts of Arms, our Nobility is by all
means to be encouraged to exercise themselves, and their Children therein,
according to the laudable example of their Ancestors, who for the same were
renowned both at home and abroad. And in particular it were to be wished, That
they should show their valor against heretics, and Enemies of God, and his
Church, of these our days, seeing they are so many, and so pernicious, as well
at home among us, as also in diverse Kingdoms round about us; whereas their
Ancestors, to fight against Infidels, less dangerous and odious to God than
these Heretics, undertook long, costly and perilous journeys into Asia and
other Countries.

And for better performance hereof, I mean of fighting against Heretics, it
may be considered, as before I have noted, whether it shall not be more
convenient for the exercise of our Nobility, and for the better provision for
their younger Sons, that some new kind of Religious order of Knights were
appointed in England, instead of the other of St. John of Malta, whose Seat and
Residence is very far from England, and the observance of the Rule, much fallen
from the first perfection, and hard to be reduced or kept by younger Gentlemen
that live at liberty abroad, especially touching the Vow of Chastity, as has
been before declared.

As for other private Exercises, and Customs ordinarily used by the Nobility
and Gentry of England, wherein they do exceed much the custom of other
Countries, as namely in the much use of Hawking, Hunting, keeping of great
Houses, many Servants, much Hospitality, and the like; it is to be noted, that
as in it self they are things honorable and fit for Nobility, being used with
moderation that is convenient; so, for many reasons they being old customs of
their Ancestors, are not to be dissuaded nor left off, but rather continued for
avoiding of greater inconveniences, though with such Reformation as is needful
for taking away, or lessening of such excesses, as sometime creep in. As for
example, that those exercises beforementioned of Noblemen's pass-times be not
hurtful, either to poor Men, their Neighbors, or to their own Devotion, and
acts of Religion, whereunto they are bound, as of hearing of Mass, Sermons, and
the like; and that their Housekeeping be moderated from gluttony, dissolution,
and excess of drinking; and that their keeping of many Servants be limited with
these Conditions; first, Nobility's Servants.
That no Man keep any more than he can well maintain of himself, and that
wholly, giving them sufficient whereon to live, without necessity to attempt
any other unlawful shifts or means for their maintenance, as often does happen
in such Servants, as being otherwise poor, do take only Livery-Coats of their
Lords and Masters, for to shift thereby, under their countenances and authority.

The second Condition is, That these Servants be kept from idleness with some
honest exercise, either of labor or recreation, and that they be taught the
necessary points of Catholic Religion, and Christian Doctrine, and that some
good Books be provided for them in places where they wait, wherewith to
entertain themselves, and be moved to virtue, and diverted from sin, and that
some peculiar account be taken of their Christian demeanor, and of their going
to Confession, and the like; for unto all this, and more too, is a good
Catholic Lord and Master bound concerning; his Servants.

A third Condition of keeping Servants, or rather an advice to good Lords and
Masters may be, that they have care to provide for their Servants according to
their merit, not only for the time of their present service, but some stay of
certain living afterward, to the end that having spent their youth in their
Lord's and Master's service they fall not afterward into misery, and being
forced to seek their living by unlawful and dishonest means, to dishonor both
their Masters and themselves: wherein also may be considered, that if their
Lords and Masters should die without providing for them at all, or recompensing
their service; whether it were not convenient they should have Actions by our
Law against his Heirs for some honorable satisfaction, as the Civil Law and
Statutes of other Countries do allow. And thus much for Servants.

Nobility's Children.
For Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Children it were greatly to be wished that such
care were taken for their Education first in Piety, and then in learning, and
other qualities fit for their Estate, that their Prince and Commonwealth might
afterward employ them worthily in occasions and affairs that shall be offered,
and not be forced to prefer other of far meaner birth for the defects and
insufficiency of the Nobility.

And first of all, to speak in order, though it be not necessary for Heirs, and
Elder Brothers, to study so much as the Younger, for that they are to live on
their Lands; yet for sustaining the place wherein they are to live, some
learning is necessary, but much more that they be brought up in Order and
Discipline, and that they be taught to know God and themselves, seems may
best be done either in the Seminaries and Convictories whereof I have spoken
before, or in some Colleges of the Universities, when they shall be reformed
and brought in order again; and some part of this also may be taught at home by
private Masters, if their Parents be discreet and careful; though this be
somewhat hard, and seldom takes great effect by the overmuch indulgence of the
said Parents, as also by the flattery of Servants that ordinarily are wont to
instill nothing but pride and vanity into their young Masters that are brought
up among them; so as the Education of Nobility and Gentry is much more
effectual abroad than at home.

Wards.
As for the manner of their Wardships begun in England with very good intention,
though different from all other Nations, and of late years perverted by
Heretical Governors, against all equity, to the Wards and Pupils, both in their
Livings and Educations, and Match of Marriage, that some good remedy and
moderation may be had in this matter, by dealing with the Catholic Prince
which shall be as the Deputies of the Parliament shall best devise and suggest.

Younger Brothers.
About the younger Sons of Noblemen and Gentlemen, it is to be considered, That
the Common-Laws of England, are much less favorable and beneficial unto them.
The Civil and Imperial observed in other Countries are such as do allow them
equal Portions with their eldest Brethren of all the Goods, Chattels, and Lands
of their Fathers, which be not intailed, as of all that also which has accrued
or been augmented by means of the said intailed Lands, or otherwise; whereas
the Laws commonly of England leave all to the elder Brother's disposition and
pleasure, if the Father chance to dye without taking particular order in the
same himself, whereby many younger Brethren of good birth are driven oftentimes
to great extremities, and to undecent shifts for their maintenance, to no small
inconvenience to the whole Commonwealth. Wherefore it may be thought upon,
whether some moderation in this point were not convenient to be put, whereby
younger Children might have some occasion to a reasonable Portion at least of
their Parents Substance, whereby to maintain themselves somewhat conformable to
their Birth, State, and Condition.

In foreign Catholic Countries the younger Children of Nobility and Gentry are
greatly helped and advanced by the Church, wherein they are preferred before
others in authority and dignity, if their merits of learning and virtue be
equal; whereby it comes to pass, that these younger Brethren, giving
themselves to study, upon hope of these preferments, do come in time to be
excellent Men, and of more authority and living than their Elder Brothers;
which is a great stay for the Nobility, and no less for the defense of
Catholic Religion by the union of these Noblemen of the Clergy, with others of
their Lineage, Kindred, Acquaintance, and Friendship of the Temporalty, and
consequently the custom is to be brought into England, if Noblemen's Sons would
make themselves fit. Wherein there will be much less difficulty than in times
past, when that sweet, and clear manner of teaching the Latin Tongue, and other
Sciences shall be brought into England, which is used in other places, and that
other hard, dark, and base custom of so much beating of youth be removed and
taken away.

Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Daughters and Dowries.
About Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Daughters, it is also to be considered, that
as many of them, by all likelihood, when Catholic Religion shall be restored,
will betake themselves to Religious and Monastical Life, as in other Countries
we see; so shall their Parents be much eased thereby, and the better able to
provide for the Marriage of their other Daughters, remaining in the World, in
which point notwithstanding, seeing that the excesses of our times, in giving
great Dowries, is grown to be at such a height, that it impoverisheth
oftentimes the Parents; it seems a point worthy the consideration, whether it
were not expedient that the Parliament should limit the quantity of Dowries
according to the State and Condition of every Man; which no doubt would greatly
ease the Nobility and Gentry of England, and be profitable for many respects.
And touching the assurance of these Dowries, as also for the Jointures of
Lands, the Laws of other Countries, and ours are far different, and good it
were for us to take the best of them both. And first for Dowries in other
Countries they are more assured unto the Wife than in ours; for that there the
said Dowry never enters into the Husband's Possession in propriety, but only
is put out to Rent, and assurance given for it, of which Rent only the Husband
may dispose, during his Wive's Life, but no ways spend, or diminish, or impawn
the Principle; which seems a better order, and more sure for the Wife, than
to leave all free to the Husband's Disposition, as in our Country, where
oftentimes an unthrift matches with a rich Woman, spends all she has without
remedy or redress. The Wife also in other Countries, if she has no Children,
may dispose of all her Dowry to good works, or to any other uses that she will,
by her Testament in secret, and sealed, and not to be opened before she be
dead. And this may she do without obligation to leave any part to her Husband,
except she list: which is some motive also for her Husband to use her well
while she lives, upon hopes to be her Heir, or Executor; and if she has
Children, then may she dispose only of the fifth part to good works, whereof
nothing is allowed by our Laws of England; and it seems a great defect, and
may be considered, whether it be not to be amended.

But on the other side, touching Jointures, the Condition of Women is better in
England than in other places: for that whether they bring Dowries or not, by
our Laws of England, they may claim a Third of their Husband's Lands; which in
other Countries is not so, where if they bring no Dowry, they can claim no
Jointure at all, neither any part of their Husband's Goods, except he please of
his free will to leave them any thing: and if they bring Dowry, then shall they
have their whole Dowry again at their Husband's Death, and more than this, the
half of all such Goods, and Movables, as were gained since their Marriage by
reason of the said Dowry, or otherwise; which is less prejudicial to the Son
and Heir, than the other of England; but yet which of them be absolutely
better, may be a matter perhaps disputable. And thus much for Noblemen's and
Gentlemen's Children. It shall not be amiss to pass to their Servants, whom
also they ought to have in place of Children, and to comfort, defend, and
cherish the, desiring to see them wealthy, and well able to live according to
the ancient Love and Charity of English Landlords toward Vassals, Subjects,
and Tenants; which Love and tender care having been greatly broken and
diminished, in these later years, by the impiety, avarice, riotousness, and
other disorders brought in by Heresy, is to be restored again by Catholic
Religion, and Landlords are to be taught to make such account of their
Tenants, as of them by whom they live, and also by the Sweat of their Brows do
suck, and draw out of the Earth Commodities, whereby Noblemen and Gentlemen are
maintained at ease.

Setting the Lands at the old Rent of Assize.
And for that many Landlords of these times have begun to raise their Rents, and
to impeach that old and most laudable tenure of England, of old Rent of Assize,
it is to be understood that no one thing among the Customs of England seems
to diverse Men that have seen also other Countries, of more importance to be
kept, observed, and to be brought back again to the old use, than this manner
of letting, and setting Lands for term of Life, after the rates of the old
Rents; and that no one thing in times past has been a greater ground of
abundance, and felicity in our Commonwealth, both to Nobility and Commonalty,
than this honorable custom of Leasing their Lands; for that it is generally
profitable, both to the Landlord, and Tenant, and Commonwealth in particular;
to the Landlord, for that he setting down his Household, and framing his
Expenses according to the rate of his old Rent, which is certain, may easily
still be before hand, and hold himself in abundance with the extraordinary
incomes that shall enter by Leases, Fines and other such casualties, and in
like manner the charges of Subsidies, Tenths, Loanes, and other public
Impositions laid upon him by Parliament or other means, they are ever according
to his Rents in the Queen's Book which are far less, and more easy, than if he
were charged according to the Portion of rack Rents. To the Tenant also this
way of taking Leases after the rate of old Rent is very commodious, for that
albeit he pay sometimes a good fine at his first entrance, yet lives he at an
easy Rent afterward, and leaves a certain and sure provision for his
Children: and commonly the Father pays the Fine of his Son, so as the Son
enters without any burden at the beginning. And if one Landlord take great
Fines, which also were to be moderated, yet another will come of a better
Conscience, who will take less, and so the Tenant lives always in hope: and if
the worst happen, he is sure to be preferred ever before others, paying as
another Man does, which is a great preferment, and very honorable also to the
Landlord to have Families continue in his Lands for diverse Ages; whereby they
are more knit unto him in hearty good will, and true Allegiance: and being
wealthy, their Riches are his at commandment, both for his own service and his
Prince: which is not so, where Tenants are rackt, and changed often, and made
so poor, both in love and substance, as they are neither willing nor able to do
any thing at all for their Landlords when need requires.

Old Rents commodious to the Commonwealth.
To the Commonwealth this manner of tenure is wonderful beneficial, for that by
this means the Lands come to be well manured, tilled, plowed, planted, fertile,
and abundant. For that every Tenant holds the same as good as for his own
Lands, and knows that neither he nor his Posterity shall be deprived thereof:
where on the contrary side in diverse Countries, for that Lands are let only
from year to year, or for very few years together, and that all Rents are
raised, and rackt to the uttermost; it is pitiful to see how bare and needy
common Husbandmen be, and how miserably the whole Land lies open and naked
without Hedge, Ditch, or Tree, every Man only endeavoring to draw out the
heart and substance thereof for the small time he has to use it, being well
assured that if he should manure, or cherish the same, another would give more,
and take it from him the year following, where they neither love the Lands nor
the Landlords, but only follow their present Commodity, and both the
Commonwealth, the Prince, the Landlords, and themselves, receive great damage
thereby, as has been declared.

Wherefore it may be considered, both by the Prince and Parliament, whether it
were not good, that so honorable, ancient, and so profitable a custom of
letting Lands after the old Rents be restored to our Country again, and that
all rackt Rents be brought back to the old proportion, or somewhat near the
same, with some reasonable recompense to the Landlord by way of Fine, and that
from henceforward no Man may raise his yearly Rents but with a certain
moderation to be limited; which thing, no doubt, would wonderfully concern the
Wealth, ease, and contentment of all the Realm, for that every Realm is so much
the better, and more prosperous, by how much the more indifferently, the
substance thereof is divided into the hands of many according to each Man's
Estate and Condition: and not as in some Countries, where one sort of Men are
very rich, and the other sort extreme poor, the one sort of Lords having all in
their own hands, the other sort seeming to be Bondmen, and mere Servants,
having only to eat that which the other sort gives them from day to day:
whereby it comes also to pass, that little good can be done with them in
matters of their Souls, by reason of their continual labor, ignorance,
rudeness, and extreme poverty. From which misery God has hitherto delivered
the Commonalty of England, by reason of this kind of Tenures, Leases, Bargains,
and Copyholds, by which most of the common People are able to maintain
themselves decently, and bring up their Children in Civility; and will be able
to do the same still, and much better, if the former custom be brought back
again, continued, and established. And for that I take this point to be a great
and substantial foundation of the public, and particular weal of our Country,
I have been the longer in treating thereof.

And now therefore to make an end, having spoken of the Nobility and Gentry,
both in their own Persons as also of their Households, Servants, Children,
Wives, and Tenants, there seems little remaining to be added, except I should
say, That whereas the English Nobility seems in other things to be the most
prosperous in the World, in one thing only which concerns them most of all,
which is, the safety of their lives, they are thought to be most unfortunate,
miserable, and subject to injuries of any other Estate of Men that live; for
that upon any least suspicion or displeasure of the Prince, or every of their
Enemies, they may be brought in danger, and made away, as we have seen that the
greatest Men commonly of our Realm have been, and few eminent Men above the
rest, as Dukes, have dyed in their Beds; and no marvel, for that the Kingdom
being but little, and the sway of a Duke great among the People, especially
when there is but one, or few of that Title, and the way to cut them off so
easy as to put him upon a Quest of his Peers, whether they be Friends or
Enemies, and that in one day only, he shall be tried, and the most of that time
spent, by the Princes learned Council, in amplifying and exaggerating Enemies
or suspicions of Enemies against him, and no Lawyer or Attorney given or
allowed to defend, or speak for him, which should be granted, if the matter
concerned but ten Shillings, of Lands or Goods only. These things, I say, being
so, which to Strangers seem wonderful, and almost incredible; no marvel, though
our Nobility be cut off many times upon small occasions, and that their Estates
by others be judged very slippery, and miserable; for remedy whereof, some are
of Opinion, That for avoiding of jealousy in the Prince and Commonwealth
against great and powerful Men, it were a good means to have many equal in the
self same degree, as for example, many Dukes, Marquises, as there are of Earls;
For that hereby every one would come to be less respected, and to be of less
power with the People: for the Dignity would be divided amongst many, and
consequently less eminent in one. And if any one should go about to be
insolent, the other would be able to repress him; and we see that in old time
it was so in England. Another means will be, that all such Dignities,
Prerogatives, public Emoluments, Offices and Preferments, as are to be in the
Countries, where these great Men dwell, should depend on the Prince
immediately, and not of them; and that some other Men also of Dignity, that are
made and set up by the Prince, and depend only of him, as namely Bishops,
should have sway with them, and Commission in all matters belonging to the
public; and when any poor Man were injured by a great, he might be heard
easily, and remedied, and so taken into the Prince's peculiar Protection, as he
durst complain, and not fear afterward the others power and violence, by all
which means it would come to pass, that the People would only depend on the
Prince, and great Men come into less suspicion and danger, and the Commonwealth
and Prince stand more assured from troubles, and commotions, and each part live
more safely and contentedly.

And for that I am to speak afterward more in particular of the Common-Laws of
our Realm, and among others, of this, concerning the proceeding in matters of
Death and Life, by way of Quests and Juries, as well for the Nobility, as also
the Commonalty: I shall speak no more, in this place, but remit my self to that
which I shall set down there.

CHAP. IV. Of the Inns of Court, and study of the Common Laws of England, and
of the Laws themselves.
FOR so much as it is a custom now in England, and has been much increased
these later years, that either all, or the most part of Noblemen's Children do
repair to the Inns of Court, and Chancery, under pretense of studying the
Common Laws of England (though some do nothing less in effect) it shall not be
amiss perhaps, after the Treaty of the Nobility, to say somewhat of the Inns of
Court, and manner of studies.

And first of all it seems necessary, that, as before I said of the
Universities, some ample Commission should be given to certain wise, godly, and
learned Catholic Men in the Laws, to consult what manner of Reformation were
best for the said Inns of Court, and Chancery, both touching learning and
Piety: which Houses, by the liberty and dissolution of Heretical times, have
been brought to great disorder, and so become Schools of mere vanity, pride,
and looseness.

The principal points that seem may be reformed are, first, about their order
of Life, Discipline, form of Apparel, Conversation, and the like; as in other
Universities and Colleges of Laws is accustomed abroad in the World, where the
Nobility also do study the Laws of those Realms, without any such notable
disorders, as in England are seen. And, secondly, about the manner of study in
these our Common Laws, as for example, That they may have ordinary Readers,
Lecturers, and set Causes for their profiting in learning, as in other Sciences
is accustomed; and as has been noted before in the Chapters belonging to our
Universities, out of which may be taken and applied to this also, so much as
shall seem for the purpose, seeing these Houses and Schools do make in like
manner a certain University for study of this one Faculty of the Common Law;
and consequently may very well participate of orders insinuated before for
Universities, and the Readers be bound to dictate, and the Students to write,
and to make repetition of their Lessons, and to have Exercises, Conferences,
and Disputations, times limited, wherein to end their courses of Law, and to
proceed, and take Degrees, in manner and form, and with the circumstances that
shall be appointed and thought most convenient. All which points may be set
down distinctly, as well as in other Universities, and some order may be
thought on also for the reducing of the huge Mass, and Book of our Common Law,
to some more clear order and method, so as it may be learned with clearness and
distinction, as other Faculties are: and perhaps it will not be amiss to bind
such as will make profession thereof, and take degrees therein, to study first
the Latin Tongue with some perfection, Reformation of the Common Law.
as also to pass the course of Philosophy, thereby to be the more able Men
afterward to judge and treat matters in their own profession.

Moreover it may be thought upon, whether it were not convenient, that some
Commissioners appointed for the same purpose, should suggest and give up such
points as shall seem wanting and defective in our Common Laws, to be remedied
by Act of Parliament, or Decrees of grave and learned Lawyers, or be supplied
by the Civil, Canon, or Imperial Laws, and among other points they may
determine of Lawyer's Fees, as also of their manner of proceeding, and remedy
such abuses as have crept in during the time of Heresy or otherwise; among
which one principal seems to be the multitude of infinite Suits increased in
these our days, partly by the wrangling natures, covetousness, and little
Conscience of some People; and partly also by the encouragement of the Lawyers
themselves, that either buy or set forward bad titles for private gain. Remedy
for bringing Suits to London.
For remedy whereof, and for a thousand inconveniences, which hereof do ensue,
it may be considered by the Commissioners, whether it were not good to limit
the number and quality of Suits that may be brought to London, to which place
every poor Man cannot follow; to wit, that the matters to be tried in London,
must be of such, or such value, and importance; and that other affairs of
lesser be heard first by some certain Men of the Shire, where the Controversy
rises, and be composed or decided by them, either by way of peace, or
friendship, or by sentence of Law, and Justice; and that if it cannot be so
ended, but that the Party, or Parties will need appeal to London, that then it
be remitted with these Men's Judgment upon it, or with their sentence given
first in the matter. And perhaps it would not be amiss in diverse cases to bring
in the custom of Spain, for depositing mily quinentos doblones, which is about
three thousand Crowns value to be deposited presently by him that will appeal
to the King and his Council, from the ordinary sentence of Law given against
him in other Lower Courts; which Money is to be divided, the one part to the
Prince, the other part to the Judges that gave the first sentence, and the
third part to his Adversary in the suit for his Charges, if the said first
sentence be confirmed again by the five new Judges, which the Prince upon his
appeal is to give them for the final determination of the cause. Some such
Bridle, I say, were to be devised against troublesome and contentious People,
that will not stand to any order or composition, which composition ought first
to be sought for; and that the Parties that are to go to Law, should first be
bound to have their matter heard, as I have said, by good and skilful Men of
their Country, before they pass any farther. Some lower Tribunal were also to
be appointed throughout the Realm in more places than in York, and in the
Marches of Wales (as now it is) where Men might have Justice, without repairing
immediately to London. Visitors upon Lawyers and Judges.
The custom of other Countries is very laudable, where from time to time,
certain Visitors, Men of great Integrity and Justice are appointed by the
Prince and his Council to visit all Judges, Lawyers, Sollicitors, Counselors,
Proctors, Attorneys, and other Officers belonging to Justice in all Courts
throughout the Realm, and to examine how they have behaved themselves in those
Charges, what riches they have gotten, and in how little time, what Bribes and
Corruptions may be proved against them, and other suchlike points; all which
being returned by the said Visitors, and reviewed by such as the Prince and his
Council shall appoint to be Overseers of the said Visitation, sentence may be
given, and published for the honor of the good, and punishment of the wicked.
And the punishment which is used in Spain, among other things, seems very
good, to wit, that he that shall be found to have done evil in a higher Court
or Tribunal, be for penance put back to a Lower Court again: as for example,
from London to York, or the like. And contrariwise, he that has done well in a
Lower Court, be preferred to be a Judge, Councellor, or of a Degree in a higher
Tribunal, and that ordinarily may be not promoted to a higher Court, without
having first passed by a lower.

And as for the Common Laws of England themselves, though most Men, I believe,
will be of Opinion, That being settled now, and having endured more than five
hundred years in our Realm, it were troublesome and dangerous, and no way
convenient to have the whole course thereof changed; (and no doubt but in
diverse points, especially for brevity, they may be preferred before the Civil
and Imperial Laws, which give more space to Suits) yet can it not be denied,
but that it was a form of Law brought in in haste, and by a Conqueror of a
foreign Nation, with especial eye to keep down, afflict, and extirpate the
English People. And the Normans themselves, that laid these Laws upon us, have
long ago, in their own Country, forsaken them, and betaken themselves to the
Government of the Civil Law, tempered with National Statutes, whereby the
residue of the Countries of France are governed.

The Common Laws of England unjust in matter of Life and Death.
And for England it is evident, that diverse points of our Common Law, brought
in by the Normans, touching Life and Death, (which is the dearest treasure that
Man has in this World) do favor much of Tyranny, and seem to be against not
only all Laws of other Countries, but also against very Reason and Justice it
self, and against all Law of Nature also; which Law of Nature does permit to
every Man a just and reasonable defense of Life and Innocence: Neither can any
Prince, Country, or humane power take away that defense, albeit they may
determine the particular manner how to make the trial. But in England it
seems that the defense it self is taken away, or at least the true liberty,
means, and possibility thereof. For how is it possible, for example sake, that
a Man standing at the Bar for his Trial upon Life and Death, feared on the one
side with terror of that may happen unto him; and on the other side,
astonished with the sight of such a Court and Company set against him, and with
the many Accusations, Exaggerations, and Amplifications of the Prince's
Attorneys, and other Officers that plead against him: how is it possible, I
say, that such a Man, especially if he be bashful, and unlearned, in so short a
time, as there is allotted him for answering for his Life, without help of a
Lawyer, Proctor, or other Man, that may direct, counsel, or assist him in such
an agony; how can he see all the parts or points that may be alleged for his
defense, being never so Innocent?

The Equity and Piety of Imperial Laws in matter of Life and Death.
The Imperial Laws confirmed by Justinian, and other Emperors, after many
hundred years of proof, and received since by all Christian Nations saving
ours, do allow to every Man that is accused for his Life, all lawful and
reasonable means of defense, with sufficient time and deliberation for the
same: and no marvel, for if it be reason to give freedom of defense for any
parcel of a Man's Goods and Lands impugned by another, how much more reason is
it the same should be given for the defense of a Man's Blood, wherein goes
Goods, Lands, Life, Honor, Children, Kindred, and all the rest? all which in
England is shuffled up in haste, put upon the verdict, malice, ignorance, or
little Conscience, or care of twelve silly Men, who presently also are forced
to give verdict without time, or means, to inform themselves further, than that
which they have heard there at Bar; which, oftentimes, is nothing but
Confusion, Partiality, and Rhetorical amplification on the King's behalf by his
Lawyers that talk for their Fees, that accuse, and no Man is suffered to
defend, instruct, or speak for the accused: which is the greatest injustice
that can be devised; and no doubt but infinite innocent Blood is shed by this
means, and lies upon the heads of our Judges, Juries, and Quests, and upon all
the Commonwealth besides.

Whereby for remedy of so great inconveniences, both before God and Man, for
that all foreign Nations do cry out of this our manner of Judgment, it should
be good at least that before the Assizes, or Arraignment be made upon Life and
Death, the Prisoner's Process should be made by some Men of Conscience and
learning, appointed for that purpose in every place, where the common Gaols be;
and that sufficient time be allotted them to examine the matter thoroughly,
first, what the Accusers, and Witnesses do say, and to give a Copy thereof to
the Prisoner, with a Lawyer or Proctor to help him, and to see what he can
truly answer to the same, and what Exceptions he has against the Parties his
Adversaries. And if his poverty be such, that he cannot pay the Fees of a
Lawyer, or Attorney, to answer for him, there should be a public Attorney
appointed unto him upon the Prince his Charges, as in all other Catholic
Countries is used, not only in matters of Life and Death, but also in all other
suits concerning Justice, wherein all such as do give Petitions that they are
poor, and cannot pay Lawyer's Fees, and do prove the same, they have presently
both Lawyers and Attorneys appointed unto them, at the King's cost, and all
writing, and other helps given them, free from all charges for prosecuting
their Justice; which is, no doubt, a notable pious Order, and ought to be
brought into our Country, with restoring true Religion. And as on the one side,
Christian Charity moves to wish that to Men accused for their lives, all
lawful and reasonable liberty of defense, and Trial should be given; so on the
other side the same charity requires that those that shall be found culpable,
should without remission, or hope of pardon, be punished, for the example of
others, and for avoiding the great Infamy of our Nation, whereof I spoke before
in the Second Chapter of this Part, touching robbing upon Highways. Perhaps it
would not be amiss for this purpose, that some distinction of punishments
should be made for that crime, from some other common theft, and of less
offense and hurt to the Commonwealth: and albeit the kind of Death upon the
Wheel in France and Flanders, for Murders and Thefts upon the Way, do seem over
rigorous, and horrible, and no ways to be brought into our Country; yet some
other less aggravation might be used with us, as it is in other Countries: as
namely, that their Bodies might be left unburied in the place of Execution, for
a memory and terror unto others, as in all other Christian Nations commonly is
accustomed. The use also of the Romans to whip certain Malefactors somewhat
rigorously before their death, did terrify many at that time, which otherwise
would not much have esteemed hanging only: and the like effect it would work
also by likelihood with us, if it were put in use. Some other punishments also
should be devised for many thefts of little quantity, for saving of Man's
Blood; for that the custom of hanging in England for so small a sum, and
quantity, as our Laws appoint, is much reprehended in all other Nations. But
above all other things, good and effectual means are to be sought to divert Men
from these offenses, and to make them hate and shun them; and this ought to be
the greater care of a Commonwealth, than to punish only such as do offend,
though this also ought not to be omitted: and what means may be used to prevent
the youth of England, and avert them from this vice of stealing, I have showed
by diverse occasions in some Chapters before; and surely it is great pity to see
so many consumed by Gallowses in England, more perhaps than in half Christendom
besides. And yet the sin not remedyed thereby for want of cutting off the root
by good Education, and by fear of Justice, equally and constantly administered.

Diverse other points of our Common Law might be touched, wherein perhaps some
Reformation, or little Alteration might be used with the great good of our
Commonwealth, though for the whole course thereof, as before I have signified,
being so established as it is, I would not give Counsel to make great Mutation;
but rather endeavor to perfect that which is settled, and supply the defects
that may be of great inconvenience. And this is all I remember to be suggested
at this time about these affairs.

CHAP. V. Of the Commons of England, and matters appertaining unto them.
THE Commonalty being the Body and Bulk of the Realm, and those that sustain
the labor of the same, they are greatly to be cherished, esteemed, and
conserved, and next after the planting of true Religion, and Knowledge of God,
great care is to be had of their enriching. For that as Constantius the
Emperor was wont to say, The Prince's true Treasure, are the Coffers of his
Subjects, and especially of the Commonalty, who, if they be poor and needy, can
neither pay their Landlords, nor till or manure the ground, nor help the Prince
in his necessities.

And by the Commonalty I understand, in this place, Labouring-men, Serving-men,
Husbandmen, Yeomen, Artificers, Citizens, and Merchants, all which labor, and
toil, to the end that others may live in rest. And in England, as before I have
touched, their Condition was wont to be more prosperous and happy, than in any
Country else of the World besides, and may be again, by the grace of God, with
the restoring of true Religion; the loss whereof brought not only Spiritual,
but also Temporal misery upon our Realm.

First then is to be enquired upon, Inquiry upon Injuries done to the
Commonalty.
by such Commissioners as for this purpose may be appointed, what Oppressions,
Injuries, Vexations, Losses, or other injuries have been laid upon the
Commonalty, or any part thereof, by the Heretical Estate of these later Years,
or by bad Landlords, Noble, or Gentlemen of Puissance, to the end it may be
remedied; also what Landlords principally have most raised, or racked their
Rents, to the end they may be dealt withal^ for some Moderation. The
Privileges also both of the Commonalty in general, or of any community within
any Country, Province or Circuit, whether it be about Commons, Woods, Freedoms,
or the like, that may have been broken, taken away, or injuriously violated,
may be considered, restored, and confirmed again. And among other things
necessarily to be looked to among our Commonalty will be to reduce them again to
their old simplicity, both in Apparel, Diet, Innocence of Life, and plainness
of Dealing, and Conversation, from which Heresy has distracted many. The
Distinction also peculiar unto our Country of diverse States of the Commonalty,
as Laborers, Husbandmen, Yeomen, Farmers, and the like, is to be conserved,
and Men are not lightly to be permitted to pass from these States, to the State
and Condition of a Gentleman, without particular Merits to be allowed of by the
Prince, or by some privilege of learning, Chivalry, or the like; and not only
by way of wealth, as of late years has been accustomed.

Order must be taken that the Commonalty may not be vexed with suits in Law, by
troublesome Men, but that certain Men in every Shire, as namely Justices of
Peace, and suchlike, may hear matters first, and compose and take them up,
with the consent of both Parties, or otherwise favor him that has the most
right, and shows most modesty, and desire of Peace.

The Law used in some foreign Countries, that no Tenant may be surety for his
Landlord, or if he be, that it be of no force in Law, is very good, and
profitable oftentimes for both Parties.

Honest Recreation of the Commonalty.
The old exercise of England for Parishes to meet together upon Holy Days at
the Church-houses, Churchyards, and other such places, and there to disport
themselves honestly, for avoiding idleness or worse Occupations at home, is not
evil, but to be continued, avoiding only the excesses, or abuses, that may be
therein, which were not commonly accustomed to be great; but the thing it self,
I mean that meeting and entertainment of mirth works diverse good effects, as
by the want thereof in some other Countries has been noted; for it holds the
People in Contentment, and makes friendship of one Man with another, and of
one Parish with another; and when they are joined together, any good
Instruction, or exhortation may be made unto them, if the Curate or any
Spiritual Man will take the same in hand.

Corpus Christi Feast.
The custom also of going one Parish to another, upon their Weekdays, with the
Banner of their Saint, is commendable, and much more the Festival mirth wont to
be used in Celebration of Corpus Christi Feast, which were to be restored with
all solemnity of honoring that Divine Sacrament, which our Heretics have
sought so much to dishonor.

The means also of frequent Conversation, and Contraction between the People of
England, by often Markets and Fairs, wherein the Commodities of one Town are
imparted with another, is a thing more used in our Country than in any other in
the World, and much to be commended, as also conserved, and increased, with
immunities, and privileges for the many good effects that do result thereof.
The calling in of base Money in this Queen's days, and bringing all to Silver,
was an Act to gain to them that were Authors thereof, and great incommodity it
is to the Commonalty, both in respect of traffic, buying and selling, and
exchange, as also of helping the poor with Alms, that no Brass Money at all has
been permitted, as in all other Countries is used, where yet there is much more
store of Silver, than in ours. For without this, neither can the poor live, nor
small traffic be maintained; wherefore of necessity it must be thought on,
that some Brass Money be brought in correspondent to our Farthing, Halfpenny,
and the like.

I have spoken also before of a certain Common Treasure, or bank to be erected
in every great Town for poor Men to borrow Money upon sureties, with very little
or no interest, which would be a great help and stay for many poor People.

Diverse Companies and Societies also, and Confraternities are to be erected
among the common People for their exercise in Piety, and works of Charity: as
for example the Confraternity, or Brotherhood of the blessed Sacrament, of the
Christian Doctrine, of visiting Prisons, or the Sick. All which Brotherhoods and
Societies, must have their particular Statutes, Rules, and Ordinances for their
good directions in their holy purposes.

Diverse Schools.
Though the number of Grammar-Schools in English Towns, Cities, and Villages,
be more frequent commonly, than in any other Countries; yet are they now to be
increased: and no Village lightly should pass without a Master in it, to teach
the Children to write and read at the least, and to cast accounts, and to know
the Christian Doctrine; and when good wits are discovered, they should be sent
to higher Schools, and thence to the Seminaries to go forward in learning. And
particular care ought to be had, as before has been noted, that Men be not
suffered to bring up their Children idly, without some Talent of Study, Art,
Science, or Occupation. And of this the Bishops ought to make inquiry of the
Curate and Churchwardens, in their Visitations, and the Secular Justices in
their ordinary Quarter Sessions, to the end that this fountain of evil in the
Commonwealth may be avoided.

The Conclusion.
And albeit many things more may be noted, especially out of the godly Customs
of other Catholic Countries; yet not to enlarge any further this Memorial,
which is grown much greater, than at the beginning I had purposed, I mean to
stay here, leaving the Consideration, and suggesting of the rest, to them that
shall know more, and live at that happy day, which we pray for, of the
Conversion of our Country. And if only these few Notes, or the principal of
them, which we have laid together, in this Memorial shall be put in Execution,
I do not doubt, by the help of Almighty God, to whose Glory all tends, but
that our Country, in small time, would flourish more than ever again: So as we
may justly take that comfortable saying of Esaiah the Prophet to be spoke to
us, which he spoke to Jerusalem after a mighty storm of Purgation past,
Consolamini, consolamini, Popule men's; Dimissa est iniquitas Jerusalem,
suscepit de manu Domini duplicia pro omnibus peccatis suis.

FINIS.
Subscribed by the Author's own hand this that follows: This I had to suggest
to the Honor of Almighty God, and good of our Country. ROB. PERSONS.

Books lately Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
THE Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin examined
and confuted, by several London Divines. 4o. With a Table to the whole, and the
Authors Names.

An Exposition of the Ten Commandments, By Dr. Simon Patrick, now Lord Bishop
of Chichester.

The Lay Christians's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures, by Dr. Stratford
now Lord Bishop of Chester.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for proof of the points of
their Religion, Examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In twenty
five distinct Discourses, by several London Divines, with a Table to the whole,
and the Authors Names.

The Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 40.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths Stated. 40.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the present
Revolution. 40.

The Advantages of the present Settlement, and the great danger of a Relapse.

A short View of the Unfortunate Reigns of these Kings, William the 2d. Henry
the 2d. Edward the 2d. Richard the 2d. Charles the 2d. and James the 2d.

Dr. Sherlock's Summary of the Controversies between the Church of England and
Church of Rome.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

Dr. Wake's Tracts and Discourses against Popery, in 2 Vol. ^^^rto.

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
Piedmont. By P. Allix. DD. 40.

Geologia: Or, A Discourse concerning the Earth before the Deluge, wherein the
Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book entitled [ The Theory of the
Earth] are excepted against: And it is made appear, That the dissolution of
that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a new Explication of
that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of Wor^ington in Suffolk.

The Present State of Germany; or, a^ Account of the Extent, Rise, Form,
Wealth, Strength, Weaknesses, and Interests of that Empire: The Prerogatives of
the Emperor, and the Privileges of the Electors, Princes, and Free Cities,
adapted to the present Circumstances of that Nation. By a Person of Quality. 40.


