Particular Relation OF THE BATTLE, Fought on the 29th of July, 1693, Between
the Confederate ARMY, Commanded by His Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN, AND THE
Elector of BAVARIA, etc. And that of France, Commanded by the M. d' Luxemburgh

WITH An Exact List of the Principal Officers killed, wounded and taken
Prisoners on both sides.

As it was Printed at Brussels by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Roper, at the Mitre near Temple Bar. 1693.

A Particular Relation OF THE BATTLE Fought betwixt the Confederate and French
ARMIES, On the 29th of July, 1693.
THE Convenience of Forage furnishing the French Army with an opportunity to
subsist longer at their Camp at Hellesheim, and the scarcity they foresaw would
happen in the Army of the Confederates, in case they made a longer stay in the
place where they were encamped, viz. Park, near Louvain, being in all
probability likely to incommode so great a Multitude, the King of Great Britain
and the Elector of Bavaria resolved to make a considerable Detachment of Horse
and Foot under the Duke of Wirtemburgh toward French Flanders, to break the
Lines by which the Enemy ever since the beginning of this War have covered
their Country, and taking away the means of forcing them to a Contribution,
hoping by this Diversion either to put their Design in execution, or else to
open a Passage which the Enemy had hitherto blocked up, and they obtained some
days after. We were now informed, that the Marshall d' Luxemburgh marched with
all imaginable speed to show themselves before Huy, a City in the Bishopric of
Liege, seated on the Meuse, betwixt Liege on the one side and Namur on the
other. The next day the Confederate Army marched in pursuit of the Enemy,
rather designing to through 10 Battalions which have been drawn from thence to
fill up the Detachment of the Duke of Wirtemburgh, than to succor the City of
Huy, because they were satisfied they had not time to do it, and that the
Ground the Enemy had posted themselves in would not permit it; whereupon the
Army marched and encamped with its right at Alo, and its left at Oppintenguen:
Here Advice came, that we had capitulated after a few Cannon-Balls and Bombs
had played against the Town, and that the Marshall d' Luxemburgh had marched
toward Liege, as in truth he did, advancing with his right within a League and
half of that City, which obliged the Confederates to send back the 10
Battalions to Liege, which they had drawn out of that Garrison, and three more
to Mastricht, and to march with all their Army to their Camp at Nechespin and
Wangheim, the little River of Gheete being under back, within seven Leagues of
the Enemy's Camp, to prevent them from gaining their march before us, and
posting themselves betwixt Brussels and us, which was their chief Design all
this Campaign. Although some were of advice to pass the River and post our
selves behind Tillemont, yet the Troops being fatigued, and the Enemy having
not stirred all that day, it was resolved to make a halt in the same place.

On the 28th of this Month, being nevertheless in readiness to continue our
march, when the French Army should advance, which the Marshall d' Luxemburgh
did with so much Secrecy and Diligence, that having marched from Ten of the
Clock the Night before, the first Advice we had of them in the Camp of the
Confederates, was to see and appear the next Day about Three of the Clock in
the Morning, on the 29th, upon the Hills of Raidshoven, on the side of
Lanfirmy, now called Landen.

His Majesty of Great Britain, and his Electoral Highness, immediately mounted
on Horseback, being followed by all the Generals, and gave Orders for the
Soldiers to get their Arms ready. Being now satisfied, that the Enemy came with
a resolution to attack us, and that for this purpose they possessed themselves
of the Village of Overwind, it was resolved to move before them with the Body
of the Army and part of the Right-wing, to possess the rising Ground between
Neerwinden and near Landen, and with their Foot to seize the Villages of
Neerwinden and Laer, which was before our Right-wing. This was put in execution
by his Electoral Highness in person, with six Battalions of Brandenburghers,
that were in the Spanish Pay; five English, and six of Hannouer. This took up
all the Evening, and at break of the day we found the Enemy put themselves in
readiness to fall upon us; Orders were therefore given, to make a Retrenchment
and to raise a Breastwork in a right Line before the Body of the Army, putting
all the Infantry behind upon two Lines, that so they might support one another
upon occasion; five Batteries of greater Artillery were raised, that commanded
and flanked all the Ground, by which the Enemy were to make their Approaches;
the left Wing was covered with a hollow Way, almost inaccessable, and likewise
with other advantages that still were assured them against any Attack. All this
did not hinder us from reinforcing them with some new Recruits of Foot; and
besides this, all Precautions were taken which they thought convenient; Orders
were given to pass the River with all the Baggage, and to march for Dyest,
which was accordingly performed. Powder and Ball were now distributed, and
every one was commanded to prepare themselves for the fight; the King of Great
Britain, as Generalissimo over them all, and his Electoral Highness afterward
commanded the whole right Wing, where the Marquess d' Bedmar, Marshall d' Camp
General of Spain, gave Orders to all the Troops of that Wing, except a Party of
those of Hannover, which the Prince Elector of Brumswick commanded; as this
Prince himself was commanded by his Electoral Highness. In the right Wing, on
the first Line, where the Spanish Troops were placed, was the Lieutenant
General of the Cavalry of Puy; after him followed the Count d' Arco,
Lieutenant General, who commanded the Bavarian Curiaciers; then the Baron d'
Heyden, Commandant of the Troops of Brandenburgh; next, at the Head of the
Troops of Hannouer, was the Electoral Prince of Brunswick, with General
Offencer; and the Infantry was now advanced as far as the Villages above
mentioned.

Prince Charles of Brandenburgh, Brother to his Electoral Highness of that
name, commanded, as General, six Brandenburgh Battalians; Brigadier Ramsey,
five English; and Leiutenant General Dumont, six of Hannouer; the Count d'
Brovay, commanded the Spanish Squadrons in the second Line, and the Count Soye
those of Brandenburgh in the same Line. The Right-wing of the Infantry in the
Body of the Army was commanded by Count Solmes; the Left of the same Infantry
by Prince Nassau of Frizeland; but the Cavalry of the main Body was commanded
by Prince Nassau-Sarbrooke in Subordination; his Electoral Highness had with
him Don Francisco d' Castillo, General of the Artillery, the Duke of Holsteine,
the Marquess of Vscia, the Prince d' Barbenson, and all the Lords of the Court;
and the Marquess d' Bedmare had with him the Count d' Thian and Don Francisco
Manriquez.

Thus the night passed in making these Preparations, without any other Action,
but all were at their Arms; and his Electoral Highness mounting on Horseback
at break of the day to visit the advanced Villages, found that the Infantry
that were posted there were not sufficient to maintain them, nor to hinder the
Enemy from finding means to pierce into our Camp; and as soon as it was day it
plainly appeared by the Enemy's Motion, that their design was to attack our
Front all together. While these things were doing, the King of England arrived
at the Right-wing, asking for his Electual Highness, to conferr and deliberate
about their last Resolutions. The Cannon now began to play from the Batteries
that were planted in the main Body upon the Enemy's Horse, which now poured
down from the neighboring Hills into the Plain: and his Majesty being told,
that it was necessary to post a greater Body of Foot into this place; he gave
Orders for two more Battalions and four Squadrons of Dragoons of Hannouer,
which served pretty well to stop some empty places, although the conclusion
showed they were not sufficient with such Unequal Numbers to oppose the Mighty
Multitudes of the Enemy. In this posture we expected the French, showing a
great deal of Satisfaction and more Joy then had been ever seen in the Army,
which was then so much the more surprising in ours, since it was Inferior to
that of the Enemies in more then 30 or 36000 Men; however, this Enequality was
in some manner repaired by that Presence of Mind, that Activity and Diligence
which our two Generals showed everywhere. About five of the Clock in the
Morning several other Batteries were ordered to play; and we saw the Enemy
approach, taking their principal Forces as far as the Right-wing to encompass,
as a Serpent would do with his Tail, our Left-wing up to their Retrenchments
made before our main Body: but a little after we were made sensible to attack
us everywhere all at a time, advancing with their Left to possess themselves
of two small Villages where our Troops were posted; which his Electoral
Highness observing, he pushed forward, with the Generals that followed him, to
encourage with his Presence the foot that defended them; and this affected for
some time successfully, exposing him in all places not as a General, but as the
most incosinderable Officer. The King of Great Britain showed himself
Indefatigable on all occasions, leading up several Battalions himself to
charge, after having shared the Command with the other Generals. In the mean
time the Enemy's Forces were so superior to ours in Number, that two of our
Battalions were obliged to give way, and as it were at the same time the others
that where placed at the Left: during these Actions on both sides, the Enemy's
foot gained a Post on the Right, where his Electoral Highness was, by favor of
which some Squadrons found an opportunity to advance into the Plain; and thus
broke the first and second Line of the Horse, piercing as far as a River that
was on the back of our Army, which the Marquess d' Bedmar observing, be beat
them back to the Post they had gained upon the foot, where very few of them
escaped, being cut in pieces upon the spot: and at the same time his Electoral
Highness on one side, with his sword in his hand, and the Marquess d' Bedmar on
the other, rallyed these Battalions that had given way, and led them to the
Post which they had lost, and now retook with a mighty slaughter of the Enemy,
and likewise established two Lines of Cavalry in such manner as if thy had not
fought at all.

While they passed, those who on the right had the management of a Battery of
six Pieces, abandoned it without orders, so that the Generals at their return
found themselves without Artillery, which caused a great Confusion.

The Main Body was perpetually attackt, and there was great firing on both
sides, on the left wing with a Vigor and Resolution that can hardly be
equalled; this hindered not the Enemy from reinforcing their left with Horse and
Foot, and attacking the post of the right wing of the Confederates afresh,
whose forces were much diminished; and having no other Foot to relieve and
support them this gave the Enemy an occasion to pierce unto our Camp; and
putting themselves in a posture to attack our Horse the second time, the Count
d' Arco General of the Bavarians charged them with bravery and success, that he
drove them back to their Camp with the same fury that the Enemy had made appear
when they fell upon him.

At the same time his Electoral Highness returned with the Generals that
followed him with a design to reinforce the Foot, and to retake this post the
third time. The enemy rested some time without doing any thing, either rendered
wise by what had already happened to them, or else expecting new recruits which
soon after appeared; then turning a little upon the right they threw themselves
upon two Battalions of Hannouer, who not being able to make a longer
opposition, retired after they had made a great slaughter, and discovering the
Flank of the Main Body, the Enemy began furiously to fall upon the English
Battalions; the French having posted these new forces on their left, (...)
stretched themselves as far as the place where his Electoral Highness was with
a Battalion of the Blew Guards, of his Brittannick Majesty's, who observing the
posture and numbers of the Enemy, and foreseeing the mischief that might
happen, he sent the Marquess d' Bedmar to charge them in the Flank, whilst the
Elector attacked them on the Front; then the Officers of the Blew Battalions
and two others sent word to his Electoral Highness, that they had no more
Ammunition left, after they (...) fought for the space of six hours entire, and
while they went to bring up the right wing of the Infantry, belonging to the
Main Body, began to retire, not being able any longer to endure the great
Firing that was made upon them, both in the Front and in the Flank^ the Enemy
finding a free passage open by the favor of the Foot, came with the gross body
of their Horse and attacked the Hannouer Cavalry, which they broke, and
extending themselves from the Village as far as the River, that was behind us,
immediately formed a Line, and separated our right Wing of the Main Body; which
his Electoral Highness seeing, as also that the left Wing had begun to
withdraw, and that the Main Body was doing the same, as he followed it, he
ordered his ^uriaseers to make a Countermarch, because they stood the nearest
to make head against the Enemy, and calling all the Generals together that were
not far from him, he told them, they saw in what a condition things were, that
if it was necessary to Sacrifice themselves, and throw away their own lives, he
would be the first; to which they answered, that there was no other way to
take, but to retire in the best order they could; he told them, he sufficiently
saw the necessity of it, but could not without great difficulty submit to such
a cruel resolution, all of them represented to him how small a time he had to
put this in execution and put the^ (...) in readiness to pass the Bridge, which
could not be done easily, the Enemy being already mingled with our Men who had
gained the other side of this small River; and here it was that we lost some
Offices and Soldiers; his Royal Highness placing himself on the otherside, and
rallied all the Cavalry and Infantry that had passed the River and the Bridge,
still supporting those that were ready to pass it, and here he tarried till such
time as the Rear Guard was on the same side the River with him, then slowly
retiring to Tillemont, he there found his Britannick Majesty who was newly
arrived; and who had retired from the Field of Battle at the same time by
another Bridge. In this place they stayed till night drew on, gathering all the
dispersed remainders of the Battle, and after that marched to the neighborhood
of L^vain; the Cavalry of the left wing, and the Infantry of the Main Body,
retired toward Leewe, and from thence to Dyest, from which last place they are
expected, and thence we shall see that the loss we sustain, was ^finitely less
then we imagined was at first. His Brittannick Majesty is retired between
Mahines and Vilvord with his own Troops and those of Hannouer and his Electoral
Highness with those of Spain, his own and Brandenburgh, within a League of
Brussels, where daily arrive abundance of of People who were missing on our
side, and where we are upon the point of joining the Main Body, as soon as the
Detachment of the D. of Wirtenburgh is returned from the expedition on the
Enemies Line.

Never was any action managed with greater obstinacy and warmth; the Valor and
Experience both of his Majesty and his Electoral Highness appeared in so
extraordinary a Manner, that we may safely say, that if they don't surpass the
Most Celebrated Generals of Antiquity they equal them at least, but as for the
present age they have known to dispute the bravery with them. We don't Justly
know as yet Number of the slain, the prisoners or the wounded, Either in the
Confederate Army or that of the Enemies, but the Common Report is, and it seems
to be well grounded that the Enemy have lost above 20000 Men amongst which 60
Generals or persons of Note, and about 3000 other Subalterine officers; we are
assured that the loss of the Allies does not amount to 7 or 8000 men taking the
dead and wounded and the Number of Officers is not Considerable, we have 400
Prisoners of the Enemy and 32 Officers and are Credibly Informed that the Enemy
have not above 300 of ours and very few Officers; as for what Remains all the
Generals of the King of England, and the Allies wrought miracles, as likewise
did those of his Catholic Majesty; and persons of the greatest experience in
Military Offices, Confessed they never beheld so bloody and obstinate a Fight; it
is agreed upon all hands that near 30000 persons were Killed in the field of
Battle; which will not appear strange if we Consider that they fought for 9
hours together, and that almost with the same vigor and Gallantry that diverse
Posts fortified Either by Art or Nature were gained or lost, that the Cavalry
sustained several furious attacks, that the Artillery of the Allies played 4
Entire hours and made a horrible Massacre of the Enemy, who could bring up only
a few small pieces to the place of battle by reason of the defiles; and lastly
that a bridge was to be passed in the sight of a victorious Arm.

A List of the Generals and Principal Officers of the Confederate Army that
were Ki^led, Wounded and made Prisoners in this Action.
THE Prince de Barbancon, Dead. The Barron d' Offener, Lieutenant General of
the Troops of Hannover, Dead. The Count de Solms, Lieutenant General of
Holland, his Legs shot off. The Duke of Holsteyn, Admiral of Flanders, Wounded.
The Sieur Fagell, Brigadier, Dead. The Major General Bouche of Hannover, Dead.
The Major General Oorth of Hannover, Wounded. The Duke of Ormond, Lieutenant
General, Wounded, and taken Prisoner. The Sieur de Scravenmore, General,
slightly Wounded, and taken Prisoner. The Sieur de Zuylensteyn, Lieutenant
General, taken Prisoner. The Count de Brouay, General, taken Prisoner. Coll.
Wiesel, Dead. Baron de Heyden, Major General, Wounded The Count d' Arco,
General of the Cairassiers, Wounded. Don Domenico Pignatelli, Master of the
Camp of one third of the Horse, Wounded. Don Louis d Borja, Brother to the Duke
of Gandia, Master of the Camp of one third of the Horse, Wounded. Don Alexandro
d' Guzman, Master of the Camp of one third of the Cavalry, wounded Coll. d'
Bay, wounded. Coll. Aylva, his leg shot off. Coll. ^ordon Wounded and taken
Prisoner, with several others as well dead as Wounded and taken Prisoners.
A List of the Principal officers of the Army of France that were Killed,
Wounded and taken Prisoners.
The Count d' Montchevrevil Lieut. General and Governor of Artas, dead. The
Duke of Vser Coll. of the Reg. of Cruzoll, dead. The Prince Paul, second Son of
the Prince of Lillebonne, Colonel of the Horse dead. Mr. de Quo^dt, Brigadier,
dead. The Count d' M^ntfort, Son of the Duke of Cheureuse, Brigadier, dead. The
Count d' Gournay, Col. dead. The Count d' Imecour, Brigadier, dead. The Count
d' Gassion, Officer of the Guards du Corpse, dead The Marquis de Lignery,
Officer of the Guards of Corpse, dead. The M^quis d' Montrevell, Brigadier,
dead. The S^ Bohle, Brigadier, dead. The Count d' Chanvallon, Ensign of the
Light Horse, dead. The Sieur Roses Son, Lieut. Genesis dead. The Marquis d' Tracy;
Officer of the Guards du Corpse, dead. The Lord Lucan, alias Sarsfield, Marshal
d' Camp, dead. Chassenet, Captain of a Regiment of Guards, dead. Gav^t, Capt.
of the same Regiment, dead. The Prince d' Conte, Lieut. Genesis wounded by a Sabre
on the head The Duke d' la Rocheguyon, his Foot shot off by a Musket. The Duke
d' Monm^rancy, Marshal d' Camp, and Son of the Marshal d' Luxemburgh, wounded.
The Duke d' St. Simon, Brigadier, wounded. Mr. de Ximenes, Lieut. Genesis and
Governor of Maubeuge, wounded. (...)

