A METHOD To Gain Satisfaction IN RELIGION.

Proposed Occasionally in a Letter to a FRIEND.

(...), Hierocles. By J. P. Philologos.

London, Printed by T. M. for Barber Tooth at the White-Horse by York-House in
the Strand, 1673.

March 12. 1672/3.
SIR,
NO sooner did sleep this morning peep out of the door of my Senses, but you
opened the door of my Chamber, about the time when the ushering beams of the
Sun began to guild our Heavens: my vigilant Soul then taking her place to
actuate all my faculties, she no sooner darted out a short Ejaculation to her
Maker, but what was casually discoursed of last night, was presented to my
thoughts: I considered how uncouth and strange that very method of searching
after the truths of Religion seemed to you, which to me has been the Pool Star
to direct my trembling mind, and from which no other Arguments (I could yet
meet with) could ever entice my Reason to make any variation: which made me
again reflect, that God is as much to be admired for the various genius of men,
as for their different Physiognomy: that there may be Garments of diverse
fashions cut out of one piece of Stuff: the same faith may be held upon
different Ratiotinations: But since, Sir, by this method I reaped so great
satisfaction my self, I could not choose (out of a sense of your zealous
enquiery after the same truths, and your seeming Concessions to them) but to
offer these, whereby my meaning may be more intelligible, Discoursings being
often liable to misapprehensions: My Relative Respect due to you has been a
further enforcement to acquaint you, with what has proved so satisfactory to
me, though not so methodically, as (perhaps) I might have done, if I had took
more time; or so strongly, as if I had had the convenience of those helps, I
have sometimes had: However, upon the aforesaid Considerations, I present you
with the following Severalls.

(1) I at first considered with my self, that all Superstructures must needs be
sandy and weak, whose foundation is not surely laid: And he that desires to be
satisfied in Religion, ought to begin with searching out, and establishing the
grounds on which Religion is built.

(2) There are two things from whence the Existence of Religion is to be
concluded, viz. Revelation and Reason; by Reason I understand a natural inbread
Principle of Truth wrought upon the Soul by Revelation, the Mind or Will of God
coming immediately from himself, or from those who were divinely inspired by
him.

(3.) The Being of a God is to be presupposed to Faith in Revelation:
Revelation supposes the being of a God, but cannot prove it: For we can have no
security, that the Revelation is true, till we are assured it is from God.

(4.) The Fundamental Proof of the Being of a God, is Right Reason: the Apostle
acknowledges the Existence of God to be proved by those inbred Notices which
God has naturally planted in the Souls of all mankind, the Heathen not
excepted, Romans 1.19. what matter the Beauty, Order and usefulness of the
Creatures do afford us, for Religious acknowledgment, is naturally rational:
And whatsoever Revelation yields us for the same, is as truly rational as that:
for when we are once convinced of the Divine Authority of the Revelation, mere
Reason will force us to its assent. Why God is to be believed, when he has
Revealed any thing, is not a Task for a Rational Creature, however for any that
own Christianity.

(5.) So that the first and main thing, that my inquisitive Mind sought to be
satisfied in, was to assure my self of the Divine Authority of S. Scripture,
which was Divine Revelation; what it was, Christ has taught:

(6.) Though Scripture be Sufficient for its end, yet Reason must be
presupposed to it: As I take Reason (which is nothing else but another part of
Gods word) to be the foundation of Religion, so I take Tradition (which is the
Universal Consent of those Ages immediately succeeding the Apostles, before the
Emperors turned Christian) to be hugely serviceable, if not absolutely
necessary to inform and rectify my Reason, as being the only means to convince
my Reason of the Divine Authority of that Book we call the Bible: and I did not
think my self bound to believe what is there declared, till I had Reason to
think that God was the Revealer, otherwise it had not been Faith, but vain
Credulity.

(7.) Therefore applying my self to the Test of Tradition, I became thereby
convinced and persuaded, that the Books which we call the Bible, were the
only-truly-divine Revelation, as they are numbered in the 6th. Article of
Religion, set forth by the Church of England, 1562. So that by the care of
those that lived at the Fountainhead of Christianity (God by his Providence so
disposing and preserving it through all succeeding Ages) I came to know the
Word of God: not knowing of any other way left to yield me the like
satisfaction.

(8.) Now being to be fully persuaded of the Divine Authority of the Bible, my
next undertaking was to satisfy my self how I should come to understand the
Right Sense, or be assured of the true meaning of the Text. That they are the
Words of God, my Reason assents; and that which I was next to enquire after,
was, how to be assured of their true meaning.

(9.) And first I concluded with my self Negatively, That the Letter alone was
not a sufficient means to assure me of the true Sense of the Scripture. Since
(not to insist, that if it should be denied in whole or in part (as most of the
Books of the new Testament have been by some or other) the Letter could not
evidence it self) the experience of so many erring thousands is a lamentable,
but a convincing Proof of it. As to instance, let any unprejudiced Person set
himself impartially to examine severally and by themselves, the Interpretations
and Glosses, the Independents, Presbyterians, Papists, Socinians, etc. do
severally give upon the Letter of the Text. And they shall every one fairly
seem to give a likely Sense answerable to their several Hyphothses of their
Religion; and perhaps, for ought as some (though uninteressed) can collect from
the Letter, only one possibly appears as probable as the other: And the Reason
why each particular Persuasion so dearly espouses its own Interpretations,
seems to be the primary Tincture, which (at first being imbibed for want of a
more Rational Foundation) is uncontroulably retained for ever after, containing
a prejudice against all other Senses whatsoever: And it cannot be denied, but
every one of these are really persuaded of the truth of their own meaning,
since they profess to reverence Gods-Word as much as any: read it frequently,
study it diligently, quote it constantly, and zealously defend the sense which
they conceive of it, so far; that many are even ready to die for it,
notwithstanding they all contradict one another, and that in Fundamental Points.

(10.) Considering with my self the endless Enthusiasms, and Popish
Phanattismes which are so furiously imitated by some amongst us, I was on the
other side fully convinced, that the light of the Private Spirit alone was no
infallible Director in this case neither, since we see by too too sad
experience multitudes of those to differ one from another (as before) in
essential points of Religion, as in the Trinity and Godhead of Christ, etc. and
yet every one affirming, that they are inspired by that unerring Light, which
leads them into all truth: and their Interpretations are all of them from the
evidence, and Demonstration of the Spirit. Now the cause of all this seemed to
me to be nothing else but their furious Rejecting of Reason, with the only
means (in this case) to Rectify it, viz. Tradition, and their accepting instead
thereof an inward self-conviction (which is nothing else but a sense or
persuasion wrought gradually upon them by the strength of their several
Educations) to be a sufficient persuasion to assure them of the Divine
Authority of S. Scripture, and of its sense too: which is extremely groundless
and irrational, and the Mahumetans have as much to say for their Alcoran and
Religion, as this comes to.

(11.) Neither the Letter of Jeremias his Prophesy, nor that Portion of the
Spirit which Daniel had bestowed upon him was sufficient to make him understand
the Number of the years there mentioned, but we find there was something else
necessary, Dan. 9.2. So that neither the Letter, nor the Light of the private
Spirit alone being able to assure me of the true sense of S. Scriptures, there
needs but common Reason to discern that the same Rule (which I had for the
Authority or Canon of the Word of God it self, if it be sincerely followed
according to Right-Reason) was the only sufficient means to assure me of its
true meaning and sense. It appeared to me greatly rational to receive the sense
(as well as the Words) of S. Scriptures from those, that were either
contemporary with, or immediately succeeded, the Apostles: And in all
controversial points, this Rule has proved to me the only satisfactory refuge
I could ever yet meet with: It is the only means to convince my Judgment what
Christ and his Apostles taught and practiced, what was the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Apostolic and Primitive Church.

(12.) This Rule of Faith (if I may so call the means to know the true sense of
S. Scripture) will certainly convey down the true Faith unchanged to all after
Ages: By which Touchstone is to be tried, which is the true Church: For a
Church is a Congregation of the Faithful, and the Faithful are those which have
the true Faith; If the true Faith cannot be had without this Rule, then they
only that have this Rule are the true Church.

(13.) Having found the Rule of Faith, there remained to find out which body of
men in the World do follow this Rule: For those and only those (I conceived)
could be assured of the true meaning and sense of S. Scripture, could only have
the true Faith, could only be the true Church: My Zeal was on fire till I was
satisfied that I was a member of that Catholic Church: whereas all the rest of
men in the World (since they have but fallible grounds of their Faith) cannot
have true Faith, but Opinion only.

(14.) I had a strong presumption, and indeed a firm assurance, that the Church
of England does hold her Doctrine and Discipline by this infallible Tenure,
since She alone owns this Rule, and demonstratively proves, that she does now
stick by it; For I satisfied my self, that her Doctrine and Discipline (which
she has not been ashamed to confess, but to evidence to the open veiw of the
World in her Articles and Canons) is squared according to the Testimony of the
Primitive Age, and unmuddied Fountain of Christianity, and therefore I
concluded her to be the true Church, and so to be possessed both of the true
Letter and sense of S. Scripture. And if any particular Text be ambiguous, and
perhaps not cleared by any Primitive Writter, She is in a capacity by the word
written in her heart, viz. Right Reason, to assign a sense agreeable to the
Rule of Faith, being assisted by that infallible Guide which leads into all
Truth.

(15.) Oh! how highly rational did it appear to me to bring the sense of S.
Scripture (where it seems dubious) to the Apostolic Primitive sense and
Practice rather then to make it fadg to any preconceived Notion whatsoever. By
which very consideration, how easily might the fearful stirs about
Controversiall Points be avoided, and how strangely short might the large
Debates about the meaning of particular Texts become, and in what peace, quiet
and Satisfaction might they end? What if the Letter of S. Scripture in the
opinion of some does seem as much to favor some other Doctrine or Discipline,
as that of the Church of England: yet since it does as fairly speak (if not
more manifestly, as is unanswerably proved by Judicious Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Policy) for that, as for any other among the many that are
contended for: Methinks upon this very consideration, she might be allowed to
stand (if not upon higher) yet upon as even terms, as any of the other: But
when I see the Church of England to write so nearly after the Original Copy,
to teach and practice the same things, which those first and unmuddied times
did; this, this very consideration clearly turns the Scale, and so alters the
case, that she (if but permitted to be weighed in the balance of common
Reason) would prove too pondrous for any Rival: there was never yet any
pretended Church, that ever came in competition with her, but was found too
light.

(16.) By the help of these Considerations, I became clearly sensible, that the
eye of the understanding of those, that urge, that nothing ought to be
established in the Church of God more then what is positively or interminis
commanded in the S. Scriptures, did look through a fallacious Prospective.
Besides, the Jewish Church (the Particulars of whose Worship were so exactly
particularized in their Revelation, that with far greater reason, they might
have pretended such an assertion) did not think it self bound up in such strict
limits, as not to have power to recede from the Letter of their Law, and
therefore (as occasion offered) did ordain and practice many things which their
Law did not enjoin, yet had the open approbation of God himself: As for
instance (1) their Building of Tabernacles, (2) their hours of Prayer, (3)
their sections of the Law and the Prophets, (4) their keeping the Passover, 14
days by Hezechias, when as the Law enjoined but 7 days, (5) their feast of
Purim by Esther, (6) their Feast of Dedication by the Maccabees, (7) their Fast
of 4, 5, and 10 months under the Captivity. (8) their use of baptising
Proselites, (9) their Washing of feet before the Passover, imitated by our
Savior, etc. These things considered; I knew not why the Christian Church
should be deprived of the like Privilege: Besides, there being many things,
for which though there are no indisputably express texts, yet finding them
allowed, enjoined, and practiced by the Apostles, or their Immediate
Successors, I thought my self obliged to receive them, not knowing but they
might have, nay rationally concluding that they must have, Divine Authority:
Such as, the Change of the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday: the Baptising of
Infants: the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, as Stipulatores: Confirmation
Public Lythurges (as the Greek Lythurgie composed by St. Paul; the Indian by
St. Thomas: the Ethiopian by S. Mark: the Muscovian by St. Andrew, etc.) the
Observation Anniversary of Christ's Nativity, and of other Feasts and Fasts, the
Hierarchichall Policy of Church Government, and the like.

(17.) As these Considerations have been helpful to build me up to a firm
Settlement in Religion, so I have hopes, that they will have the like influence
on all, unless it be either on those of Rome, or on others among our selves,
who being brought up to a certain Sect, and addicted to a particular Party,
have so irresistably espoused certain Opinions, that right or wrong they are
resolved not to bring them to this Test: And such persons are in a dangerous
condition: Strangers to Christianity, Turks and Infidells may sooner be
persuaded to give a Bill of Divorse to their whoring after strange Inventions,
and be sooner gayn'd to make use of their Reasons (the only Distrimination
between men and Bruites) then such as these.

Lastly, To conclude with the Resolution of a Quere, which (it may be, is here
as necessary, as it) is likely to be made to the aforesaid Method, viz: If
Reason be the Foundation of Religion, and Tradition be absolutely necessary to
rectify it; how shall illiterate persons be satisfied, whose educations, and
stations in the World, do incapacitate them to be informed by such means? The
Answer is this, there is no man, though never so illiterate, if he will be true
to himself, and lay aside all manner of prejudice of imbibed Principles, and
Parties, etc. But will easily confess the aforesaid Hypothesis in general to be
consentaneous to his Reason; and though he is not in a capacity himself to
search Tradition for the truth of things, yet he must acknowledge that the only
way left for his satisfaction, is to have recourse to that sort of People in
the world (and to only them) that hold that Method* And (as I have before
hinted) the Church of England are they, and only they, that build upon this
Rational foundation. So that, that Faith is to be received from thence, which,
being hatched by Gods H. Spirit in men's hearts, brought forth by Reading,
cherished by hearing of the Word, sealed by Baptism, and strongly confirmed by
their partaking of the Sacraments, will prove the only Saving Faith.

FINIS.

