A PARTICULAR RELATION OF THE LATE SUCCESS OF His MAJESTY'S Forces at TANGIER
against the MOORS.
Published by Authority.

Tangier, September. 23. 1680.
THe 12th Instant arrived here the Sweepstakes and other Vessels with three
Troops of Horse, consisting of 150 Men, and with Stores and Provisions of War.
The 15th, being the Morning after the New Moon appeared, the Alcayde sent Hamet
with a White Flag, to acquaint Sir Palms Fairborne our Lieutenant Governor,
That the Cessation was expired; and the same day the Moors made several Shot at
our Sentinels, and were Answered in the like kind. From the 15th to the 20th
there passed nothing of Action: But a Council of War having been held, It was
Resolved to March out, in order to the Recovering some of those Posts which the
Enemy was in Possession of. Accordingly on the 20th, by break of day, the Horse
Marched out at Catherina-Port, a small Party whereof being appointed to
discover the Ground, our Governor the Lord Mordant, and Mr. Sheres our
Surveyor-General being at the head of them, galloped up to the Ruins of
Pole-Fort; where the Enemy used to have a strong Guard; but finding not so much
as a Sentinel there, they advanced along the Ridge of the Hill to the ground
whereon Monmouth-Fort stood, where likewise the Moors were wont to keep a
constant Guard, which Post they also found deserted. In the mean time the Horse
being posted in convenient stations, the Foot Marched out with all the silence
possible, consisting of Four Battalions, and an Advanced Party of 200 Men
Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Talmash, the Earl of Plymouth, and several
Gentlemen with him, being Volunteers, who Marching up to the Ground of
Pole-Fort took their Post there; Lieutenant-Collonel Sackville, with the
Battalion of Guards, was Posted on the Right, upon the skirt of the said Hill,
on the Left of whom was a Battalion of the Old Regiment of the Garrison,
Commanded by Captain Giles; the other two Battalions, drawn out of the Scotch
Regiment, were on the Left of them, Commanded by Major Hackett, and Captain
Spott, with a Company of Grenadiers Commanded by Captain Hodges. In the Spurr
within the Stockades, before Catherine-Port, was Posted another Battalion of
the Old Garrison, Commanded by Major Boynton. Vice Admiral Herbert, with 500
Seamen, Marched out at the Sally-Port, on the South-East side of the Town, and
possessed the Ground between that and Cambridge-Fort, where they Entrencht
themselves. The Parties being thus disposed, a competent number of Men,
appointed for the Works, advanced, in order to their Intrenching on the Ground
of Pole-Fort, where Major Beckman the Ingenier assigned them their Work. The
Enemy by this time having taken the Alarm, came and lodged themselves upon
our Old Line, betwixt James and Monmouth-Forts, from whence they plied us very
warmly with their Small-shot, the place lying wholly open to it; but our Men,
encouraged by our Governor, who Commanded upon the Spott, notwithstanding the
sharpness of the Service, went through with it; In the mean time small Parties
were drawn out of the several Battalions, who advancing to the very Line where
the Enemy was lodged, forced them thence; in which Service, a Party of
Grenadiers, Commanded by Captain Hodges, behaved themselves very bravely. These
Detachments were relieved by others, by which means the Enemy was constantly
entertained, and our Works went on cheerfully. By Night we had Entrenched and
Stockaded in as much Ground, as received 500 men, who were lodged there,
Commanded by Lt. Colonel Sackville (my Lord Plymouth, my Lord Mordant, and most
of the Gentlemen Volunteers bearing him company) Lieutenant Colonel Talmash,
Captain Kirk, Captain Lockart, Captain St. John's, etc. commanding under him.
In this days Action we had 5 men killed, 12 wounded; of the Horse several were
shot in their Arms; and the Moors permitted us to retire without giving us any
disturbance.

The 21, we marched out as early as the day before, with this difference only,
that Major Boynton commanded a Battalion in the Field, and Captain Giles in the
Place of Arms before Catherine-Port; having posted the several Battalions, we
prosecuted our Works within our new Intrenchment by Blinds, Parrapets, and
performing other Services for the strengthening the place, and securing our
men; We possessed our selves of those Advanced-Posts from whence the Enemy
annoyed us at our Work. We also took possession of a Line on the right of
Pole-Fort, where the Enemy had pitched their Colors with very little loss; and
the ground we gained we kept; and in order to the securing our new Works, we
began a Line from Pole-Fort, to the Left, toward Bridges-Fort; this day and the
day before several of the Enemies Horse and Foot were killed; of ours 7 were
slain, and 18 wounded; of the Horse several were shot in their Arms, and two
Horses killed, and two more disabled; This night Major Hacket had the Guard in
our New-Work at Pole-Fort, Captain Hodges, Captain Loudy, Captain Hume, etc.
commanding under him.

The 22, we marched out early as before, taking Possession of the Ground, as
formerly, by Detachements from our Battalions, a Party of Grenadiers of
Vice Admiral Herbert's Men being posted upon the Ground of Monmouth Fort. Some
of the Moors Horse advanced very resolutely to the very Line where our Men were
Lodged, but were repulsed, and several of them killed. Several of the Scotch
Grenadiers, who were very active and daring, advancing to the Sand-Hills a
little too far, and mixing with the Moors, were some of them killed, and others
advancing to their relief, were likewise hard put to it. All this day the Enemy
kept us in much Action, they pressing our Advanced-Parties very much who were
assisted and sustained by the Horse, and maintained their Ground till night,
when it was thought fit they should retire; and that they might the better do
it, our Governor, who perceiving the Enemies strength to be increased, as well
by the number of Colors that appeared, as by their pressing us more this day
than they had done hitherto, conjectured they would make some brisk. Attempt
upon our Retreat, provided for it by commanding Major Hacket with a Party to
sustain the Rear, which proved of admirable use to us; for the Moors upon our
retiring, immediately advanced, and came over our Lines, but were so well
received by Major Hacket, that they soon retreated. In the Evening Vice Admiral
Herbert planted two Demy-Culverins at his Post, which did good Service; this
day we had 8 Men killed, and 20 wounded.

Thus you have an Account of these three days proceedings, in which our
Governor has shown as much Military Skill as Personal Bravery,

Vice Admiral Herbert on this, as on all other occasions, has given Proofs of
his Courage and Conduct. Major Beckman has shown himself a stout and able Man
in his Profession; Lieutenant Colonel Sackville, Lieutenant Colonel Talmash,
Major Hacket, Captain Faltry, Captain Kirk, Lieutenant Bridgeman, and
Lieutenant Fitz-Patricke, and all the other Officers as well English as Scotch,
have behaved themselves like brave and gallant Men; and all the Soldiers in
general that were in the Actions deserve a like Commendation: The Gentlemen
Volunteers have likewise approved themselves Men of Courage; And the Earl of
Plymouth and the Lord Mordant, did not let any Action pass either on Foot or
Horseback, in which they had not a share.

FINIS.
In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1680.


