AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. Sherlock's Book, ENTITLED, The CASE of the ALLEGIANCE
DUE TO SOVEREIGN POWERS, STATED and RESOLVED, etc.

BY JAMES PARKINSON, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for David Hay, M.DC.XCI.

AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. Sherlock's Book, ENTITLED, The Case of the ALLEGIANCE,
etc.
I Have Examined Dr. Sherlock's Book, Entitled, The Case of the Allegiance due
to Sovereign Powers, etc. And I must own, that he has done what I expected he
would; For I expected he would start some new Doctrines to maintain his old
Principles: And he has fully answered my Expectation.

He tells us, he has renounced no Principle that ever he taught, Case of
Allegiance. Pref.
excepting one in the Case of Resistance: so that though he be a fallible
Creature, yet, it seems, he is but one degree beneath Infallibility.

But tho he may be mistaken, yet this be is sune of, Case of Allegiance. Pref.
That he never acted with more sincerity in any Affair of his whole life, than
he has done in this matter, from the beginning to the end; for which I will
take his word, for I had rather believe, than censure and judge him.

Though he refused to take the Oaths, yet he never engaged in any Faction
against it, nor made it his business to dissuade men from it. But did he not,
when his Opinion was asked, declare his own Thoughts? And were not his Thoughts
against it? And was not this enough for the Oracle of the Party, whenever he
was consulted, freely to declare his Thoughts? Oracles are sometimes dumb, and
will give no Answer; but this Doctor was always a Speaking Oracle to the Party.
And who can think that he ever spoke in vain? Who can believe, that those words
which dropped from his mouth, and dropped into the Ears of those that admired
him, and blindly believed in him, could ever fail of making or confirming
Non-Swearers.

He had no aversion, to the Government of King William and Queen Mary; and why
should he? The Government surely is almost as good, as it was when the Seven
Right Reverend Bishops were sent to the Tower; it is almost as good, as it was
when Father Peire was at the Helm; nay, I will be bold to say, it is very nigh
as good, as it was when he assisted at the degrading of the Excellent Mr.
Johnson. But was he not thankful to God for it? no; only he had no averston to
it.

He prayed for King William and Queen Mary. One would think, that had he prayed
heartily for them in the Church, he would have owned them in a Court of
Justice, by taking the Oath of Allegiance to them: No, this he could not do; he
still refused the Oaths out of pure Principles of Conscience: but however he
prayed for them. And this was a disposition of mind prepared to receive
satisfaction whenever it was offered. This I believe, and I doubt his desire of
satisfaction has secretly and insensibly distorted his Judgment: I am sure
distorted it is. But is his Judgment always distorted? Was it distorted while
he refused the Oaths? And is it distorted now he has taken them? Yes, so it is;
his Judgment stood awry before, because he was not for King William and Queen
Mary: and his Judgment still stands awry, because though he swears Allegiance
to them, yet he does it in a wrong sense; he swears to them no otherwise, than
he would be ready to swear to any Usurper, when settled in the Throne. And I
know not what else should have thus distorted his Judgment, unless it were a
great desire of satisfaction; For the Principles, on which he grounds his new
Allegiance, are false and precarious, and will satisfy no man, who has not as
great a desire of satisfaction, as he himself had.

But though he desired satisfaction, yet, it seems, it did not come presently
to him: he did in his thoughts ever and anon make a step toward King William,
but still his old Principles drew him back; and in this state of wavering and
doubting he continued almost two years; moving forwards, and backwards; looking
sometimes on King William, who had God's Authority to bestow the Preferments;
and sometimes on King James, who had (as he would make us believe) the Legal
Right. He likewise drew up his thoughts in writing, and showed them to some of
his Friends, and told them where he stuck; but stick he did, and could find no
help for it. What? was the desire of satisfaction grown languid and weak? no;
but though that was as strong as ever, yet that alone could not do the job.
Still he stuck, and had stuck to this day, had he not been relieved by Bishop
Overall 's Convocation Book.

Doubtless the Members of that Convocation spent their time to good purpose;
and Dr Ouerall did great service to the Church by registring what passed in
that venerable Assembly: Dr Overall was no Bishop during the time of that
Convocation, nor for some years after that.
for had it not been for his Convocation-Book, this Reverend Doctor had
forfeited the exercise of his Ministry for a mere mistake. But what were the
wonders, that this Convocation-Book has wrought on him? why, it confirmed his
former Notions, and suggested some new thoughts to him, which removed those
difficulties that he could not conquer before. So that, it seems, he would not
have us think, he had all his good Notions from the Convocation-Book; no, he
had many of them before he read it, and that Book did only confirm them. And
besides all this, he tells us, That The venerable Authority of a Convocation
gave him greater freedom and liberty of thinking, Preface.
which the apprehension of novelty and singularity had cramped before. And now
the Doctor swells, and is puffed up with the Sacred. Authority of a
Convocation. His Soul was not at liberty before; it was chained and fettered,
and he was afraid to let his thoughts rove and wander; but, now he has the
Convocation on his side, his thoughts are at liberty, and he resolves to
wander; and I likewise resolve to follow him, as far as I shall see it
necessary.

Page 1. Case of Allegianc.
At his first setting out, he complains that the Controversy is perplexed; but I
doubt, that before I shall get to the end of his Book, I shall have greater
reason to complain, that he has perplexed it more. But what is it that has
perplexed the Controversy? Why, it is the intermixing the dispute of Right,
with the duty of Obedience: as if we could be bound to obey one who has no
right to our Obedience: Page 1.
it is a making the legal Right of Princes to their Thrones, P. 1.
the only reason and foundation of the Allegiance of Subjects: and I would fain
know what other foundation of Allegiance there can be? Bishop of Sarum's
Pastoral Letter, p. 6.
For Allegiance is Obedience according to Law; that is to say, not a blind and
absolute Obedience, but such an Obedience as is defined and limited by the Law.

He blames those that have not taken the Oaths, Page 2.
because they go wholly upon this Principle, That Allegiance is due only to
Legal Right: and take away, says he, that, and you remove all the difficulties
they labor under; and I suppose it is for their sakes, that he has, as far as
in him lay, taken away the Legal Right from their Majesty's, that so he might
remove all the difficulties which the Non-swearers labor under. But he seems
not to care what becomes of their Majesty's, nor what difficulties he throws
them into. And he blames likewise many of those that have writ in defense of
the new Oaths, because they suppose that a Legal Right is necessary to make
Allegiance due, Page 1.
and have therefore endeavored to justify the Legal Right of their present
Majesty's. This it seems is become a Crime, to justify the Legal Right of Their
present Majesty's, which yet if we do not justify, we condemn our selves. But
why should we not justify the Legal Right of Their present Majesty's? Why
should we, for the sake of a few Non-swearees, betray our Cause, and tacitly
own, that we believe King William and Queen Mary to be Usurpers? He gives two
reasons for this; and I think he is a very bold Man that will venture to give
reasons for so unreasonable a thing. Now his Reasons are, 1st, Because it is
unfit to dispute the Rights of Princes. 2d, Because it is unnecessary.

1. Because it is unfit to dispute the Rights of Princes: But though it may not
be fit to dispute the Right of a Prince, Page 1.
when settled on the Throne, yet it might have been fit to assert it; though no
Government can permit it to be a Question, yet it might have been his declared
Opinion; one would think that he, out of gratitude to his Royal Patron, should
have owned him to be Rightful King; nay, methinks his interest should have
prompted him to it: For I must tell him, there is this in the case, which he
little thought of, That if K. William have not a legal Right to the Crown, Dr.
W. Sherlock can have no legal Right to the Mastership of the Temple: For it is
the Law alone, that invests King William with a Power to bestow these
Preferments; and therefore if the King be only King de facto, that is, in his
sense, an Usurper, I know not how the Doctor will be able to make out, that he
is any more than de facto Master of the Temple, without a Legal Right to his
Place. A froward Prince would hardly bear such ill treatment as this, I Am sure
his Legal King would not; and a mild King does not deserve it from him. I doubt
not but he has done a great deal of mischief (though I do not say he designed
it) by refusing to take the Oaths; And did it become him to publish such a Book
to the World, and, by implication, declare to all his fellow Subjects, That he
for his part does not look upon King William and Queen Mary, to whom he has
sworn Allegiance, to be any more than a King and Queen de facto, that is
(according to him) Usurpers?

2. He says, It Is unnecessary to defend the Legal Right of King William and
Queen Mary: For whom is it unnecessary? For him, it may be, because he does not
believe it; but it is not unnecessary for those that own their Legal Right: Nay,
there is nothing more necessary than this; and therefore two Parliaments, this
and the last, have recognized their Title. But it seems those Parliaments did a
very needless thing, and wanted this Doctor to give them better Advice; for he
that can sit in his Study, and there make and unmake Kings at his pleasure, may
surely be fit to give Counsel to Parliaments.

The Doctor and I are in one thing agreed, That Allegiance is due to King
William and Queen Mary; but we differ about the foundation and reason of our
Allegiance: He thinks that we ought not to take the consideration of Right into
the Settlement of Government; Page 18.
for he says, A Prince may be settled in his Throne without Legal Right, and
when he is so, God has made him our King, and requires our Obedience: and I
cannot be of his Opinion. He says, That his Allegiance may be due to one who
has no Legal Right to Govern him; I say, that I owe Allegiance to none but him
who has the Legal Right.

I shall therefore do these two things: 1. I shall give my own Opinion, with
the Grounds and Reasons of it. 2. I shall examine his.


I. I shall give my Opinion, with the Grounds and Reasons of it; which I shall
do in these following Propositions:
1. Allegiance, is Obedience according to Law.

2. No Man can have any Right to my Allegiance, who is not my Lawful King.
These Propositions are, I think, in themselves evident, and need no proof: And
therefore.

3. King William and Queen Mary are Lawful and Rightful King and Queen of
England, and the Dominions thereunto belonging: This appears plainly from that
Declaration which the Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster, presented to
their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, Feb. 13. 1688. wherein they
set forth, Declaration of Lords and Commons presented to the Prince and
Princess of Orange.
That King James, by the assistance of diverse evil Counselors, Judges, and
Ministers, employed by him, had endeavored to extirpate the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and many instances they
give of his misgovernment; and that he had Abdicated the Government, and the
Throne was become Vacant. And then they assert the several Rights of the
Subject, which the late King had notoriously violated; and last of all, Having
an entire confidence that his Highness the Prince of Orange would preserve them
from the violation of their Rights, and from all attempts upon their Religion,
Laws and Liberties; they resolve, That William and Mary, Prince and Princess of
Orange, be, and be declared King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging. And the Prince and Princess of Orange, at
the Request, and by the Advice of the Lords and Commons, 1o. Willielam and
Mariae. c. 1.
did accept the Crown and Royal Dignity of King and Queen of England, France
and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereto belonging. They did
accept the Crown, they did not snatch it by force and violence; They were no
Conquerors, no Usurpers.

And afterward, in an Act past December 16. 1689. the same Parliament
recognized their Title in these words; The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, seriously considering how it has pleased Almighty God in his
mavelous Providence, and merciful Goodness to this Nation, to provide and
preserve Their said Majesty's Royal Persons most happily to reign over us upon
the Throne of Their Ancestors (for which they render unto him from the bottom
of their hearts their humblest thanks and praises) do truly, firmly, assuredly,
and in the sincerity of their hearts, think, and do hereby recognize,
acknowledge and declare, That King James the Second having abdicated the
Government, and Their Majesty's having accepted the Crown and Royal Dignity,
Their said Majesty's did become, were, and are, and of right ought to be by the
Laws of this Realm, our Sovereign. Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of
England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; in, and to
whose Princely Persons the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms,
with all Honors, Titles, etc. to the same belonging and appertaining, are most
fully, rightfully and entirely invested and incorporated, united and annexed.

And when that Parliament was dissolved, and a new one summoned to meet at
Westminster, there was a new Recognition of Their Title in these words, We Your
Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, in this present Parliament Assembled, do beseech Your Most Excellent
Majesty's, that it may be published and declared in this High Court of
Parliament, and Enacted by Authority of the same, That we do recognize, and
acknowledge Your Majesty's were, are, and of Right ought to be by the Laws of
this Realm, our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, etc.

And if this be not a Legal Title, I know not what a Legal Title means. It is
as good a Title as Edward the Confessor had; as good a one, as W. 1. W. 2. Hen
1. K. Stephen, Hen. 2. K. John, Hen. 3. Edw. 3. Hen. 4, 5, 6, 7. Q. Mary, or Q.
Elizabeth, (one or other of those two Queens) either had, or could pretend to;
and these, whom I have mentioned, had as truly a Legal Right to the Crown, as
any of the rest whom I make no mention of: And the true Reason why I instance
in these, is this, Because it is certain that none of these were Kings by any
Divine Right of Succession.

If Proximity of Blood be absolutely necessary to a Legal Title, then Edw. the
Confessor had none; for when he ascended the Throne, Edgar Atheling, his Elder
Brother's Son, was alive. Then W. 1. had none, both because he was
illegitimate, and also because Edgar Atheling was still living. Then W. 2. and
Hen. 1. could have none, while their Elder Brother Robert was living. Then K.
Stephen could have none; for the Right of Blood was in Maud the Empress, Hen.
the first's Daughter. Then Hen. 2. could have none, so long as his Mother Maud
was alive. Then K. John could have none; for Arthur, his Elder Brother's Son,
had all the Right that Proximity of Blood could give. Then Hen. 3. could have
none, at least, not before the 24th year of his Reign or thereabouts; at what
time Eleanor, Sister to Prince Arthur, died. Then Edw. 3. could have none,
during the Life of his unfortunate Father Edw. 2. who was Deposed. Then Hen. 4,
5, 6, 7. could have none, there being another Family which had the proximity of
Blood on their side. Then Q. Mary, or Q. Elizabeth, (one or other of them)
could have none; for it is certain that one of the two must be illegitimate,
because Katherine, Q. Mary's Mother, was living at the time when Q. Elizabeth
was born: And yet we do not find that any Learned and Pious Bishops, or any
other dignified Clergymen, ever refused to accept of Ecclesiastical
Preferments from any of the forementioned Princes, and to swear Allegiance to
them. Nor can it be said, that they swore Allegiance to them as to Kings de
facto, but not de jure; at least wise, this cannot be affirmed of those who
lived before the Reign of Edw. 4. for then arose this distinction, and not
before.

The Scotch Parliament calls this a Villainous distinction: I think I may say,
it is a distinction that is not well grounded; for it seems to me to be founded
on a false Principle, That Proximity of Blood gives such an indefeasible Right
or Title to the Crown, that he, who is next on the Royal Line, whatever his
natural or moral incapacities are, cannot be barred from succeding to the
Throne: Which is directly contrary to a Statute made in the 13th of Q. Eliz.
chapter 1. wherein it is affirmed, That the King, Lords, and Commons, have right to
limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent, Inheritance, and
Government thereof: And 'twas by the said Statute made Treason, during the Life
of that Queen, to hold, affirm, or maintain the contrary; and, after her
decease, forfeiture of Goods and Chattels; and I know not of any Law of God
that the Queen and Parliament broke when they made that Statute. A King de
facto is not, as the Doctor imagines, an Usurper, but he is a Lawful King; He
is one to whom our Allegiance is due, (as appears from a Statute made in the
11th of Hen. 7. chapter 1.) and Allegiance is due to none, but him who has a Legal
Right; for Allegiance is Obedience according to Law, and consequently must be
paid to him to whom the Law directs us to pay it; and to say that the Law
directs us to pay our Obedience to one, who has no Legal Right to it, does not
sound well.

4. It follows from hence, that our Allegiance is due to K. William and Q.
Mary; for it is due to a Lawful King, and it has been showed, That Their
Majesty's are Lawful and Rightful King and Queen. And this is the foundation of
my Allegiance.

II. I must now examine. Dr. Sherlook's Opinion concerning this matter.
His notion is this, Page 10.
That all Sovereign Princes, who are settled in their Thrones, are placed there
by God, and invested with his Authority, and therefore must be obeyed by all
Subjects as the Ministers of God, without enquiring into their Legal Right and
Title to the Throne. And he tells us, That the Convocation has determined two
great points, whereon this whole Controversy turns: 1. That those Princes, who
have no Legal Right to their Thrones, may yet have God's Authority. 2. That
when they are thoroughly settled in their Thrones, they are invested with God's
Authority, and must be reverenced and obeyed by all, who live within their
Territories and Dominions, as well Priests as People.

This is his Doctrine, And this, says he, I will endeavor to prove from the
Authority of Scripture and Reason.

Scripture and Reason I am always ready to hear; he that brings me a plain
Scripture proof, commands my assent; and he that gives me a good Reason, will
easily persuade me: And therefore though the Venerable Authority of a
Convocation stands in the front of his Book, yet I intend it shall Lackey after
his Reasons, and his Scripture Proofs.

SECT I. Dr. Sherlock's Proofs from Scripture and Reason Examined.
HIS Proofs from Reason and Scripture must, he says, necessarily be intermixed,
and interwoven with each other; and to set the matter in as clear a light as he
can, he reduces the whole into the Propositions following:

Prop. 1. That all Civil Power and Authority is from God, etc. This is loosly
expressed, and in general terms, and may be allowed to be in some sense true,
and therefore I will let it pass, and will desire him to consider, that so is
every thing from God, except Sin; so are Riches and Honors from God, tho Men
bestow them; so is the Doctor himself from God, tho his Father begat him; and
so is his Book from God; for God gave him Power to write it, though I do not
think, God gave him any Authority.

Prop. 2. Civil Power and Authority is no otherwise from God, than as God gives
this Power and Authority to particular persons, etc. A great discovery this!
That God does in some sense give whatever may be said in any sense to come from
him; as if a creature could snatch any thing from his Creator against his will.
But how is Civil Power and Authority from God? And how does he give Civil Power
and Authority to particular persons? He tells us,

Prop. 3. There are but three ways whereby God gives this Power and Authority
to any persons; either

1. By Nature; Thus Parents have a natural superiority over their Children; but
by what bounds this Paternal and Patriarchal Authority was limited, we cannot
tell; it is in vain to enquire after it now: And so he has taken his leave of
Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha.

2. By a particular nomination; Thus God made Kings only in Jewry; but this
does not at all concern us.

3. By the disposals of his Providence: That God Governs the World, I am very
sure, for his Word assures me of it; and it is the greatest comfort of my Life,
to consider that there is a Wise, Just and Good God who Rules the World. But
how does he Rule the World? How does he set up and pull down Kings, and bring
about the great Revolutions and Changes of Governments? Does God prescribe to
any people a form of Government? Does he appoint or dictate the particular Laws
of each Country? Does he nominate the Supreme Magistrate? Does he set bounds to
the Supreme Governor's Power? No, he does none of these things; but leaves them
to the Reason and Prudence of Men. But yet God is not altogether unconcerned;
he does not sit on his Throne in Heaven a mere Spectator of human Affairs,
without ever intermedling in them: But he interposes, as becomes a Wise
Governor of the World, by directing and guiding the minds; by moving and
inclining, by checking and restraining the wills of his creatures in an unknown
manner. How, or in what manner he directs the greater and the lesser Wheels of
Providence, we cannot tell; but that he does direct them, is not to be doubted.

In the general, I think we ought to lay down this Rule, Never to ascribe to
God any thing that is unworthy of him, that is disagreeable to his Wisdom, or
Jushice, or Equity, or Goodness; and therefore since his Divine Laws are full
of Wisdom, Equity, Justice, and Goodness, we ought never to think that he who
has obliged Mankind by such excellent Laws, does by any secret influence move
them to a violation of them. He indeed sees the unruly Wills and Affections of
Men, and knows that they will abuse the Power they have, and unjustly catch at
more to oppress their Brethren; and he in his Wisdom permits sometimes that
they should attain their wicked ends; but when ever he does so, we must not
take it for a mark of his approbation; nor argue thus, That because they
prosper, therefore God is pleased with their doings; for he will certainly,
sooner or later, punish them for what they do. But you will say, when an Usurper
prospers, and ascends the Throne, and is settled in it, Does not God then make
him a King, and invest him with his Authority? No such matter; he is still a
private Man, without Right to Kingly Government, unless an Unjust action can
create a Right. But though an unjust action cannot create a Right, yet God can
give him a Right. True; But how shall I know that he does so? That, says the
Doctor, you may know by the event; if you see him able to crush whom he
pleases, and seated upon the Royal Throne, assure your self, that God has set
him up, and made him a King; for the most high rules in the Kingdom of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of Men.
Now in answer to this, Dan. 4.17
I allow the Doctor, that God does in some sense set up a Tyrant; but then I
desire him to consider, that Satan likewise sets him up, and wicked Men set him
up, and he sets up himself. He sets up himself by abusing the Power he has, by
increasing it more and more through his restless Ambition, and by raising of
Forces to gain the Sovereign Power. And wicked Men set him up, by giving him
assistance for the accomplishing of his wicked designs; not that they love to
be Slaves, but they are willing to enslave others, and tyrannize over them. And
Satan sets him up, by tempting him to get the Sovereign Power, and make himself
a God upon Earth. And lastly, God sets him up; But how does God set him up?
Why, God gives him those natural powers and faculties both of Mind and Body,
which fit him for great Undertakings; and moreover he in his Providence gives
him many favorable opportunities for increasing his Wealth, and enlarging his
Power, and strengthening his Interest amongst his Fellow Subjects: And these are
a Ladder, by which he may possibly climb to the Sovereignty. And though God has
in his Word forbidden him to invade the Rights of others, and advance himself
to the Throne by unjust means, yet he permits him to do so; though he, who sets
bounds to the raging Sea, And says, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further;
Job 38 11.
and here shall thy proud waves be stayed; could easily restrain an Ambitious
Usurper, and stop him from ascending the Royal Throne; yet he, for wise ends,
suffers him to go on and prosper in his unjust Enterprises. Thus God sets up a
Tyrant, (but gives him no Authority) and the Devil sets him up, and wicked Men
set him up, and he sets up himself. And this is agreeable to the Style and
Language of Scripture, which tells us in one place, That Satan stood up against
Israel, and provoked David to number Israel; 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 2 Samuel 24.1.
And in another place, That the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel,
and he moved David against them, to say, Go number Israel and Judah: So that
here the same sinful Action is in words ascribed to God and Satan, for both are
here said to have moved David to number Israel, and the word in the Original is
in both places the same; it is (...), which signifies to Seduce, Entice, or
Persuade; and who will think that God does persuade or entice men to sin,
otherwise than by giving Satan permission and leave to tempt and entice them?

Well then, God never sets up Usurpers so as to give them any Authority; P. 13.
and therefore that is very false which Dr. Sherlock delivers for a certain
truth, viz. That God never suffers an Aspiring Prince to ascend the Throne, but
when he thinks fit to make him King; for he is not made a King upon his
ascending the Throne, nor has he any Regal Authority, unless the Dr. can prove,
that barely to ascend the Throne, is to be a King: And when he can prove that,
I Will undertake to make out, That to ascend the Temple-Pulpit, is to be Master
of the Temple; and then he must have a care of getting another to preach for
him. P. 13.
But, says he, unless all Kings are set up by God, and invested with his
Authority, we can never know what Kings have God's Authority, who those are
whom we mu^t obey out of Conscience, and whom we must not obey Which is just as
if one should say, Unless every one that comes up into the Temple-Pulpit be
Master of the Temple, one cannot be able to know, who is, and who is not Master
of the Temple. One would admire that one, who has so good a faculty of
explaining Mysteries, should not be able to distinguish between a King and a
Tyrant, nor know the difference between Accepting, and Snatching of a Crown.

Prop. 4. All Kings are equally rightful with respect to God. This I utterly
deny. For God surely sees and knows, that one ascends the Throne by Fraud, and
Perjury, and Violence, and Oppression, and Murder; and that another is freely
chosen by the Voice of the People, for the great esteem they have of his
Justice, and Valor, and other noble Qualities that fit him for the exercise of
Sovereign Power. Now will any man say, that a Holy and Just God makes no
distinction between these two? Will any man affirm, that God puts no difference
between one that enters by the Door into the Sheepfold, and another that climbs
up some other way? Between the Shepherd who feeds the Sheep, and a Thief or
Robber that comes to steal them? Men do not judge them to be equally Rightful
Kings, and yet Men judge by a Rule that God has given them, viz. the Rule of
right Reason; and why should we think that God judges otherwise in this Case,
than Men do? Men, who judge thus, are not mistaken in their Judgments; and I do
not see any reason, why God, who cannot be mistaken, should not judge in this
Case as Men, who are not mistaken, do. In short, If Men, who think an Usurper
is not a Rightful King, be not mistaken, it is reasonable to conclude, God
thinks so too; and on the other hand, If God thinks an Usurper to be as much a
Rightful King as any other, methinks this should be a very good Reason for us
to think so too: For if we think as God thinks, we shall not err in our
thoughts. But how does he prove that all Kings are equally rightful with
respect to God? Because, says he, they are placed in the Throne by God. And are
they not placed in the Throne by Men? is not the hand of Man visible in this
matter? Nay, is not the hand of Man the only visible hand? and do not the hands
of violent Men set the Crown on the Head of an Usurper? and does he think, that
such a one is with respect to God as Rightful a King, as God's Anointed King
David was? I grant, that if God were the only Person that placed Princes in the
Throne; if he did always himself put the Scepter into their hands, and by a
Voice from Heaven, or an express nomination, made Kings; there would then be no
question, but all would be equally Rightful Kings, though not equally good
ones: As Readiness Title was as good as that of David, though he was not so good a
King. But since Men are concerned in advancing Princes to the Throne, and they
may, and do often, by unjust means place them thereon; to say that all Kings
are equally Rightful with respect to God, is to say that God has no regard to
the sinful Means that are used to set up such Kings; it is to confound the
Notions of Good and Evil, of Right and Wrong, and to turn the World into a mere
Bedlam. Add to this, That if all Kings were equally Rightful with respect to
God, then why should he complain as he did, They have set up Kings, but not by
me; Hos. 8.4.
they have made Princes, and I knew it not? Since, if what this Author affirms,
be true, God himself set up the Kings which they set up, and made the Princes
which they made; and did as truly make them, As if they had been expressly
nominated, and anointed by a Prophet at God's Command, as Saul and David were.
P. 13.


To conclude this Head, If all Princes when they are advanced to the Throne, by
what means soever they are lifted up above their Brethren, be equally Rightful
Kings, then surely they have equally a Commission from God, to act as Kings;
but Usurpers have no Commission at all from God to rule his people; they have
no Authority, and they can have none, unless God's word has lost its Authority;
for I Am sure, that forbids all unjust Usurpations, and thereby plainly tells
us, That Usurpers have no Authority, unless God should give them Authority to
do what he in his Word has forbidden; which I hope the Doctor will not affirm.

Prop. 5. The distinction then between a King de Jure, and a King de Facto,
relates only to Humane Laws, etc. If by a King de Facto; he means, as it is
plain he does, an Usurper; and by a King de Jure, a Rightul King; I grant, that
if the foregoing Proposition were true, this would be true too; for if all
Kings be equally Rightfu with respect to God, then all Kings are Kings de Jure
with respect to God; and consequently, as he says, the distinction of a King de
Jure and de Facto would relate only to Humane Laws: So that here is nothing
else asserted in this Proposition, but what was in the former. Only I must tell
him what I have observed already; That this distinction is not to be allowed
with respect to Humane Laws; for in England, whoever is a King de Facto, is
also a King de Jure, for he has a right to our Allegiance.

Prop. 6. We can have but one King at a time; I Will give him this, and I hope
King William is the Doctor's King.

Prop. 7. He is our King, who is settled in the Throne in the actual
Administration of Sovereign Power, etc. If he means by settled, legally settled,
I agree with him; otherwise I deny it. For I know of no other Settlement, but a
Legal one, that can make a King: A Settlement without Law, which the Doctor
speaks of, is the Settlement not of a King, but of a powerful Usurper: it is
just such a Settlement as a Thief may have for a time, who breaks open another
Man's House, and turns him out, and takes possession of it.

Prop. 8. Allegiance is due only to the King. This I freely give him. And from
hence he concludes, That we must pay our Allegiance to him who is our King,
though without a Legal Right. His Supposition is false; for he supposes, that
one may be his King without a Legal Right, which I deny: He may be, and is an
Usurper, who has no Legal Right, but he is not our King: he is a private Man,
intruding himself into a public Office, which he is not called to: and no
Allegiance is due to him.

But, says he, our Allegiance is due to him who is our King, though without a
Legal Right, because Allegiance is due only to God's Authority, not to a bare
Legal Title without God's Authority. Here he separates two things, which do
always go together; a Legal Right, and God's Authority; for God does not give
Authority to any, but those who have a Legal Right. I grant, that God may
nominate Kings if he pleases, and then doubtless they would have his Authority
without a Legal Right; nor would they need any Legal Right, since they would
have a Divine Right, which would be better. But since he does not nominate any
Kings, as he formerly did in Jewry, we have no way to know who has God's
Authority, but by knowing who has the Legal Right.

SECT. II. An Examination of some other Reasons and Arguments, urged by Dr.
Sherlock for the further Confirmation of his Doctrine, contained in his 4th
Section.
1. HE observes, That the Scripture has given us no Directions in this Case,
but to submit and pay all the Allegiance of Subjects to the present Powers. Nor
was it necessary that the Scripture should give us any other directions in this
case; for why may not Reason without Scripture direct us in this case, as it
did direct Men before the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans was written? But
Scripture, he says, makes no distinction, that ever he could find, between
rightful Kings and Usurpers. And what then? Scripture makes no distinction that
I can find, between my right Hand and my Left; but a little Sense and Reason
will teach me to distinguish. Was it necessary for the Apostle, when he taught,
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, to have added, if they be truly
the higher Powers; but if they be not the higher Powers, you need not be
subject to them? Was it needful, when he said, Servants obey your Masters, to
have immediately subjoined this, if they be really your Masters; but if they be
not your Masters, you need not obey them? Was it necessary, when he gave this
general Command, Wives submit your selves to your own Husbands, to have
immediately added, if they be indeed your own Husbands; but if they be not your
Husbands, you need not submit your selves to them? No more was it necessary for
the Apostle to distinguish between a rightful King and an Usurper; because
every one that has but common Sense and Reason, can do this with ease, without
Apostolical help. An Usurper of Royal Power, is not to be reckoned amongst St.
Paul's higher Powers; nor is he any more my King, as being not called to that
Office, than he can be called my Master, with whom I have made no Contract: And
therefore to say, the Apostle here speaks only of lawful Powers is not (as he
says) gratis dictum; it being the only reasonable interpretation that the words
can bear.

Had there (says he) been any such Rule before given, to submit to lawful
Powers, but not to submit to Usurpers, there had been some pretense for
understanding St. Paul 's all Power of all legal Power; but there being nothing
like this any where in Scripture, if he had intended any such distinction, he
ought to have said it in express words, or else no Body could reasonably have
understood him, to intend this Precept of Subjection to the higher Powers, only
of Powers that had a legal Right.

Nay, on the contrary, say I, if St. Paul had not intended any such
distinction, he should in express words have forbidden such a distinction; he
should have told us that we ought not to distinguish between rightful Kings and
Usurpers; for that we should thus distinguish, Reason will teach us; but that
we should not distinguish, can be only Matter of Faith. I would think my
Obedience due to an Usurper, if I had plain Scripture for it; but Reason, I am
sure, does not teach it. The Doctor himself formerly taught, that when St. Paul
says, All Power is of God, he means only legal Power: and that I believe was a
true Exposition of the Text: But it seems he has now renounced it, as he tells
us in his Preface to the Case of Allegiance, etc. and I know no other reason he
has for so doing, but only this, because it cannot stand with his new Doctrine.

The Criticism, he says, between (...) and (...), will not do: No matter for
that, I lay no weight upon it; and yet by the by, I must tell him, (...) and
(...) do differ in proper speaking; for the former is Power, whether legal or
no; the latter is only legal Power, or Authority.

What he says, That if St. Paul had meant only legal Powers, then in order to
the fulfilling of this Precept, it would be necessary for Subjects to examine
the Titles of Princes, and to that end to be well skilled in the History and
Laws of a Nation, etc. is so weak an Objection, that it neither needs, nor
deserves an Answer: For though he will not take the Judgment of two
Parliaments, that have declared King William and Queen Mary to be lawful King
and Queen of England; yet others think it reasonable to rest satisfied with
their Declaration.

What he adds concerning the Titles of the Roman Emperors in St. Paul's Time,
Enquiry into the Measures of Obedience.
That they were either stark naught, or doubtful, I cannot allow; for since
both the People and Senate had acknowledged the Power, that Augustus had indeed
violently usurped; it became Legal, when it was thus submitted to and confirmed
both by Senate and People; and it was established in his Family by a long
Prescription, when this Epistle was written.

But he goes on, and tells us, That the Reason the Apostle gives for submission
to higher Powers, is not a legal Right, but the Authority of God. To which I
answer, That the Authority of God does suppose a legal Right, God giving no
Authority to any one to rule over others, who are not legally deputed to the
Office.

God's Authority is, I conceive, a Divine Right: Now we may distinguish of a
Divine Right; for,

1. A Prince may have a Divine Right to ascend the Royal Throne: Such a Divine
Right as this Saul and David had, who were expressly marked out by God; and such
a Divine Right would any Prince have, if God should make any declaration in
favor of him. Dr. Burnets Enquiry into the measures of Obedience. etc.
But this pretense of a Divine Delegation can be carried no further, than to
those who are thus expressly marked out; and is unjustly claimed by those who
can prove no such Declaration to have been ever made in favor of them or their
Families; nor does it appear reasonable to conclude, from their being in
possession, that it is the Will of God that it should be so: This justifies all
Usurpers when they are succesful.

2. A Prince may have a Divine Right to secure him in the possession of the
Throne; such a Divine Right has every Prince that has a legal Right; and indeed
every private Man has such a Divine Right to secure him in the possession of
that which is his by Law. And though a Man has no Divine Right to his Property,
Ibid.
but has acquired it by humane Means, such as Succession or Industry; yet he
has a security for the enjoyment of it from a Divine Right: So though Princes
have no immediate Warrants from Heaven, either for their Original Titles, or
for the extent of them, yet they are secured in the possession of them by the
Principles and Rules of natural Religion.

Our Savior's Argument, says he, relies wholly on the possession of Power:
Whose Image and Superscription has it? In answer to this, I will only give him
Dr. Hammond's Comment upon the place: The coining of Money is part of the
Supreme Power, or Regal Prerogative, incommunicable to any other; and your
acknowledging this to be the Current Coin supposes Caesar, whose Signature it
has, to be your lawful Prince, to whom therefore the Tribute is due, as to the
legal Protector of your Civil Commerce: Look therefore upon your Coin for the
stating your Question, whose Image or Signature it has on it. And when they
confessed it to be the Roman Emperor's Image, our Savior thence concluded,
Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's; you that acknowledge
Cesar's Supremacy over the Jews, ought not to dispute, but pay him that Tribute
which is due to him as Supreme.

II. This, he says, gives the casiest and most intelligible account of the
Original of Humane Government, that all Power is from God. All Men do not think
the Account he gives of Government is so easy and intelligible; but it matters
not how easy and intelligible it is, if it be not true.

III. This Doctrine, he says, is founded on the same Principle with the
Doctrine of Non-resistance or Passive-Obedience. Is it so? then it has a very
weak Foundation, and there is good hope it will not stand long; for Passive
Obedience, as taught by him, is knocked down. And I wonder much that Dr.
Sherlock would reprint his Book entitled the Case of Resistance of the Supreme
Powers stated, etc. without taking any notice of Mr. Johnson's Remarks upon it.
But he thinks he may well despise that Authors Books, tho written with
Judgment; because the Author himself, after all his Merits, is so little
regarded.

SECT. III. Reasons and Objections against Dr. Sherlock's Doctrine.
1. THe First Objection that I shall make, is an Objection that he himself
raised against his own Doctrine; but I think he has not well answered it, and
therefore it still remains an Objection against him; I will deliver it in his
own Words.

This makes a Prince lose his Right by being notoriously injured; for if a
prosperous Usurper gets into the Throne, and settles himself there, God has
taken away his Crown, and given it to another, and therefore he ought not to
attempt the recovery of his Throne, (nor any other Prince to assist him in it)
which is to oppose God, and to challenge that, which he has no longer any Right
to.

This is the Doctor's own Objection, and I think it is a very strong one; let us
hear what he says to it; for I do not think he has given a satisfactory Answer.

He answers, That the Providence of God alters no Legal Rights, nor forbids
those who are dispossessed of them to recover them if they can. While such a
Prince is in the Throne, it is a Declaration of God's Will that he shall reign
for some time, longer or shorter, as God pleases; and that is an Obligation to
Subjects to submit: but that one Prince is at present placed in the Throne, and
the other removed out of it, does not prove that it is Gods Will it should be
always so, and therefore does not divest the dispossessed Prince of his Legal
Right, and Claim, nor forbid him to endeavor to recover his Throne, nor forbid
those, who are under no Obligation to the Prince in Possession, to assist the
dispossessed Prince to recover his Legal right.

To this I reply,

1. The Doctor owns that the dispossessed Prince, who had God's Authority, has
lost it; and methinks he should own too, that he has lost his Legal Right; for
either the Authority must stay with the Legal Right, or the Legal Right must go
away with the Authority; unless the Doctor will say that God Almighty has not
Authority to deprive a Prince of his Legal Right. And if so, I ask the Doctor,
From whom did the Prince, now dispossessed, receive his Legal Right? from God,
or the People? From the People he will not say, for fear I should bring him to
renounce another Principle. He must then say that the Prince derived his Legal
Title from God; And why may not God, who gave him a Legal Right, take it from
him? And how is he sure that he has not? How does he know that Gods Providence
alters no Legal Rights? God may alter Legal Rights if he pleases, and that he
does not, or will not, is more than he can tell. The Legal Right therefore
seems to me to be lost according to the Doctor's Principles. But,

2. Suppose the dispossessed Prince still to retain his Legal Right; I ask, Is
his Legal Right the same that it was before he was dispossessed? Yes, he will
say, for the Providence of God alters no Legal Rights. Has he then a Right to
every thing that he had a Right to when he was in Possession? Yes, says he, for
otherwise the Legal Right would not be the same as it was. I ask then, whether
he has a Right to the Allegiance of his Subjects? No, says he, that is due now
to another; that is to be paid to him who has God's Authority: Then, say I, the
Legal Right either is quite gone, or at least it is not the same; for before he
was dispossessed, his Legal Right did entitle him to the Allegiance of his
Subjects, now it does not. The Legal Right therefore signifies nothing, and
entitles him to nothing.

And what will it signify to have a Right to his Crown, if his Subjects are
under an Obligation not to assist him? Why, all the Comfort that he gives his
Legal King, is this, he tells him that God does not forbid him to recover his
Legal Right, nor forbids those who are under no Obligation to the Prince in
Possession, to assist him to recover his Legal Right....But he must expect no
Assistance from his Subjects, for indeed they are none of his Subjects now, tho
he has still a Legal Right to be their King.

I will desire the Doctor to view this Matter in a like Case, that he may see
the absurdity of it.

A lays claim to certain Lands which are in the Possession of B, and in order
to the Recovery of them sues B in Westminster Hall; brings his Writings and
Deeds into Court, and desires they may be read; brings his Witnesses, and prays
that they may be heard. The Judge tells him plainly, that it is needless to read
over his Deeds, and examine his Writings, and hear his Witnesses; that this
will but perplex the Controversy, and distract the Jury, and trouble the Court
to no purpose; and that he has a readier way to decide the Matter: and then,
immediately, without hearing the Cause, gives his Instructions to the Jury:
Look you, Gentlemen, here is a Question about certain Lands, which A claims,
but B possesses; where the Legal Right is, whether in A, or B, we know not; nor
does it concern us to enquire. It is plain, that wherever the Legal Right is,
the Possession is in B, and you need enquire no further: And therefore you
ought to find for the Defendent. It Is the Will of God it should be so, his
Providence has so appointed it, and we must obey. But, mark you, Gentlemen, in
case that A should have the Legal Right, (which I say belongs not at all to you
to enquire) your finding for B does not take away from A his Legal Right: It is
plain that the Providence of God has removed A from the Possession of his
Lands, and has given them to B; but that alters no Legal Rights, nor forbids A
who is dispossessed of his Lands, to recover them if he can. While B, is in
Possession of them, it is a plain Declaration of God's Will that he shall have
them for some time, longer or shorter, as God pleases; and that is sufficient
Warrant for you to find for B. But that B is at present in Possession of these
Lands, and A deprived of them, does not prove it to be God's Will it should be
always so; and therefore it does not divest A of his Legal Right and Claim, nor
forbid him to endeavor to recover his Lands, nor forbid the Mob (who are under
no Obligation to Usurpers and Invaders of other Men's Rights and Properties, and
are always kind to and ready to help injured Persons) to assist A to recover
his Legal Right. For, Gentlemen, let me tell you, Legal Right is the ordinary
way, whereby the Providence of God disposes of Lands, and this bars all other
humane Claims; but yet God may give the Lands of A to B if he pleases; but this
does not destroy the Legal Right of A, who is deprived of his Lands, nor hinder
him from raising the Mob to eject B^vi and A^m's.

This is the very Doctrine that this Author teaches; and if this be not
Enthusiasm, I know not what is. One would admire that any Man, who converses so
much with Lawyers, should advance such a Doctrine which destroys all our Laws,
and unsettles our Civil Rights and Properties, and tends to nothing but
Confusion: For if this Doctrine be true that he teaches, the Lawyers may fling
away their Law Books, and shut up Westminster Hall; for why should Clients come
to them for Advice, if this were the best Advice they could give, that they
should raise as great a Force as they can to recover their Legal Rights? for
this might have been done without consulting of them. Surely the Lawyers will
con him no Thanks for this Book: But what does he care? he is above the
Lawyers, and above the Law too; and by his own Authority, joined with that of
the Convocation, can repeal all our Laws, and null Acts of Parliament, and
declare, that whatever the Law or Custom has hitherto been, yet for the future
Possession alone shall give Right.

Nay, by this Doctor's Principles, a Murderer is the Minister of God, and ought
to be cleared in any of the King's Courts. For let us suppose B to be murdered,
and A to have been the Murderer. I will by the Doctor's Principles teach A how
he shall defend himself. A therefore shall own the Fact, that he did really
kill B; but he had an Impulse from God so to do; and this Impulse was
equivalent to a Divine Command, and a Divine Command is a sufficient Warrant
for any Man to send another out of the World. The Judge interrogates him
further, how he can prove that he had an Impulse from God? It Is plain, says A,
that this Impulse was from God, because without his Power I could not have done
it, and God never intrusts any Man with power to kill another, unless he give
him Authority to do it. So that Providence is the Murderer and not I. The Judge
then, well instructed in Dr. Sherlock's Principles, tells the Jury, that here
is one of our Sovereign Lord the King's Subjects murdered, and that A owns he
did it; but they must bring him in Not Guilty, because though he did kill the
Man, yet he did it with God's Authority.

I dread to mention the horrid and blasphemous consequences of this fanatical
and enthusiastical Doctrine: for hereby all Villainies, and Thefts, and Murders,
and Massacres, every thing that is abominable both to God and Man, will be
charged on God. And this is a sufficient Argument that it cannot be true.

II. I will borrow another Objection of Dr. Sherlock's, and that is this; Have
not Pirates and Robbers as good a Title to my Purse, as an Usurper has to the
Crown, which he seizes by as manifest Force and Violence? Does not the
Providence of God order and dispose all these Events? And are we not bound then
as much to submit to Pirates, as to Usurpers?

To which he gives this Answer, The dispute is not about Humane and Legal Right
in either Case. True, for neither has a Robber any legal Title to my Purse, nor
has an Usurper any legal Right to the Crown; but the dispute is about
Authority, which is the only reason of a conscientious Subjection. But what, I
beseech him, is this Authority, which he says the Dispute is about? is it
Humane and Legal Authority? No, for that is the same with Humane and Legal
Right. It is, he tells us, God's Authority. Now no Man, says he, pretends that
Thieves and Pirates have God's Authority, to which we must submit. And I wonder
that any Man should pretend that Usurpers have God's Authority, to which we
must submit. God's Authority is a Divine Right: Now I think an Usurper has no
more a Divine Right to seize the Public Treasure of a Nation, and to take a
thousand thousand Purses at once, than a Robber has to take one Purse; and I am
no more in Conscience bound to submit to an Usurper, and not to resist him,
than I am bound to submit to a Robber, and tamely to deliver my Purse to him. I
beseech him to tell me, why Tyrants and Usurpers have a Divine Right to their
stolen Goods, but Robbers and Pirates have it not? The Reason he assures us is
this, The Scripture expressly tells us, that Kingdoms are disposed by God. And I
ask him, Are not Men's Purses, and Money, and Goods at his disposal? Are not all
Things his? And who shall dispose of what is his, but himself? Does God dispose
only of Crowns and Scepters, and leave lesser Matters to be disposed of by
others? As therefore he thus argues, All Power is of God, and therefore
whenever any Prince, by what unjust means soever with respect to Men, is placed
in the Throne, and settled there, he is advanced by God, is God's Ordinance,
God's Minister, and must be obeyed for Conscience Sake. So in like manner I
will argue according to his Principles thus: All Riches are of God, 1 Chronicles.
29.12.
(for Riches and Honors come of him) And therefore when any Robber, by what
unjust means soever with respect to Men, gets Riches, he is enriched by God, is
God's Steward, and God has but taken away the Stewardship from another, and
given it to him; and he may as properly call the Goods he has unjustly gotten,
his own, as the former Steward could, when they were in his keeping. And
therefore the Outrages of Pirates and Thieves are not impertinently alleged in
this Cause. They have, says he, Force and Violence, which every Man must submit
to, when he cannot help it. And what else have Usurpers, but Force and
Violence, which every Man must submit to, when he cannot help it? O, he tells
us, Sovereign Power is God's Authority, though Princes may be advanced to it by
no honester Means, than Thieves take a Purse. I ask him, Does he think that a
Prince, who is advanced to Sovereign Power by no honester Means than Thieves
take a Purse, has any Divine Right to his Crown? Yes, he will say, because God
has given him a Crown. But how has God given him a Crown? He will answer, by
the disposals of his Providence. In like manner may I say, that a Robber has a
Divine Right to his ill-gotten Goods, for God has given them to him by the
disposals of his Providence.

And whereas he says, The beginnings of the four first Monarchies were no
better, and yet their Power was of God; I may with full as much reason say,
that the beginnings of some poor and mean Robbers, who afterward grow Rich by
spoiling others, are not one jot worse than the unjust beginnings of the four
Monarchies; and therefore their unjustly-gotten Wealth is of God. I will
undertake to make out, that Thieves have as much Divine Right to their stolen
Goods, as any Usurper has to his Crown. But to push the Matter further.

III. Suppose that A has unjustly gotten the Government into his Hands, and by
Force and Violence settled himself in it, and consequently, according to his
Doctrine, has got God Almighty's Authority. I ask the Doctor, who gave A
Authority to get God Almighty's Authority into his Hands? Will he say, God gave
him Authority to get God Almighty's Authority? If so, then A did not sin; for
no Man sins that acts by God's Authority; and yet he did sin, because he used
very unjust means to get God's Authority, Will he say, that Man gave him
Authority to get God's Authority into his Hands? Then Man gave him Authority to
sin against God, (for I suppose he gets God's Authority by unjust means.) but
no Man can do this; no Man can give another what he has not himself, for no Man
has Authority to sin against God.

We have thus brought our Usurper to the Steps of the Royal Throne, without any
Authority; but now we must change his Name, and call him Usurper no longer; tho
he ascended the Throne an Usurper, yet he is no sooner in it, but he is God's
Ordinance, God's Minister, God's Lieutenant, God's Vicegerent, God's Anointed.
He was, whilst he made his way to the Throne, an unjust Oppressor, and a
Murderer, for he waded through Blood to it: But behold a sudden Conversion, a
wonderful Change wrought on him; a wonderful Change indeed, like that of
Transubstantiation; for though he be made God's Vicegerent, and has received
from him a Commission to be his Minister for the Good of his People; yet still
he is, what he was before, a Devil. But behold him sitting upon the Royal
Throne, with a Crown on his Head, and a Scepter in his Hand, full of Majesty,
and having God's Authority to bestow Bishoprics and Deaneries on those of the
Clergy that flatter him, and to kill and murder the Laity as fast as he
pleases. Dr. Hicks immediately hastens to Court; and lest the new Prince should
commit a mistake in governing according to the Political Law, he instructs him
in the Nature and full Extent of his Imperial Law, and presents Jovian to him.
Dr. Sherlock comes next, and acquaints his Sacred Majesty, that he has God's
Authority, which is always irresistible; and forthwith presents his two
Cases, the one of Allegiance, etc. the other of Resistance, etc. But he wisely
takes care to blot out that Passage in his Case of Resistance, etc. P. 128.
That when St. Paul says, All Power is of God, he means only Legal Power; for
the Book with that Passage in it would be a very unfit Present for an Usurper.

Next comes the Guide of the Inferior Clergy, and assures his Majesty, that he
is ready to serve him with Tongue and Pen, and promises the same in the Name of
all his Scholars. Then come the Addressers from Cities and Corporations, and
these tender their Lives, and Fortunes, and Obedience, without reserve. The
Dispensing Judges bring up the Rear; and these bring the Body of the Laws in
their Hands, and lay them at his Majesty's Feet, assuring him, that
(notwithstanding whatever Bracton, and Fortescue, and other famous Lawyers have
said to the contrary) he is above the Law, and may if he list rule without it.
And now, if we will take Dr. Sherlock's word for it, the Usurper is settled in
his Throne, the whole* Administration of the Government, and the whole Power of
the Nation is in his Hands; every thing is done in his Name, and by his
Authority, (tho, as I have showed, Authority he has none) the great Body of the
Nation has submitted to him, and those who will not submit can be crushed by
him whenever he pleases: This, this is his Right and Title to the Crown, that
he can crush those who will not submit, whenever he pleases. And if this be not
a settled Government, he despairs of ever knowing what it is.

But still all this is nothing but Force and Violence, there is no Authority:
For the Usurper has no more God's Authority now he sits on the Throne, than he
had before he ascended it; Power and Authority are not the same; for though all
Authority be Power, yet all Power is not Authority; and though it should grow
or swell never so much, yet it cannot grow and swell into Authority; still it
will be Force and Power, and no more.

True says the Doctor, I grant that Power cannot give Right and Authority to
govern, (for that is Hobbism, and he is no Hobbist)* But, says he, it is a
certain sign, that wherever God has placed the Power, he has given the
Authority. Page 15.
For since Power will govern, God so orders it by his Providence, as never to
entrust Sovereign Power in any Man's hands, to whom he does not give Sovereign
Authority. Now here indeed is the pinch of the Matter, and therefore I shall
endeavor to ease my self and my Reader of it.

The Doctor allows, that Sovereign Power is not Sovereign Authority, and herein
we agree: But, says he, it is a certain sign, that where God has placed the
Sovereign Power, he has given the Authority. But this I deny, and thus I argue
against it.

Power is not a certain sign of Authority, and therefore Sovereign Power is not
a certain sign of Sovereign Authority; for it is every jot as reasonable, that
Power should be a sign of some Authority given by God to him who has the Power,
as it is that Sovereign Power should be a certain sign of Sovereign Authority.
For as the Doctor argues, Since Power will govern, God so orders it by his
Providence, as never to entrust Sovereign Power in any Man's hands, to whom he
gives not Sovereign Authority. So in like manner do I argue: Since all Power,
though it be less than Sovereign, will govern as far as it can; that is, will
give Law to, and domineer over those that have less Power, and will oppress and
crush them, (which is, in the Doctor's sense, to govern) God so orders it by
his Providence, as never to entrust any Power in any Man's hands, to whom he
does not give some Authority: And the Consequence of this is, that every one
who is stronger than Dr. Sherlock has Authority to govern him; for God, it
seems, would not have given him sufficient Power to govern the Doctor, unless
he had annexed Authority thereto. And this, if it be not Hobbism, yet is so
like to it, that it is not easy for any one who has not Dr. Sherlock's
subtilty, to distinguish it from Hobbism. I cannot think the Doctor will allow
that any one who has Power to govern him, has also Authority; and yet by his
Principles he ought to allow it. For whatever Reason he will assign, why, Since
Power will govern, God so orders it by his Providence, as never to entrust
Sovereign Power in the hands of any Man to whom he does not give Sovereign
Authority; Whatever Reason he will or can assign for this, will serve me for a
Reason to prove that God does not, or according to the Doctor's principle,
should not entrust any Power, though less than Sovereign, in the hands of any
Man, to whom he does not give some Authority in proportion to it. So that if
this Argument of his proves any thing, the fault of it is, that it proves too
much; for if it proves what he would have, that God gives Authority to Tyrants,
it proves also what he would not, that God gives Authority to all Oppressors.
Methinks such a startling Assertion as this, should have been proved by our
Author, he ought to have given some reason for it, for all Men will not take it
upon his Authority. But since he has given us no reason for it, I will examine
what color of reason there may be for it, for a good reason there can be none.
If God so orders matters, as never to entrust Sovereign Power in the hands of
any Man to whom he does not give Sovereign Authority, the most likely reason of
it is this, because Sovereign Power may do a great deal of mischief in the
World; and it is not agreeable to a wise and just and good God, to permit that
any one should have such a Power without his Authority annexed to it.

Now to this I answer;

1. They who have Sovereign Power without God's Authority, are as much under
the Restraint and Government of God, as they who have Sovereign Power with his
Authority: and therefore God can prevent and stop the proudest of Usurpers and
Tyrants from doing all the mischief they intend; and so he does, whenever so to
do will tend most to the honor of his own Name, and to the good of his People;
for a mighty Usurper, how great soever his Power is, is but the Rod of God's
Anger, (as it was said of Sennacherib) and God surely has the holding of the
Rod: And whether the Rod shall draw Blood or no, depends on the Pleasure of him
that holds it. He is God's Axe, and whether the Axe shall cut or no, depends on
the Will of him that has it in his Hands, and may or may not hew therewith.
Isa. 10.15.
And shall the Axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? Or shall
the Saw magnify it self against him that shakes it? As if the Rod* should
shake it self against them that lift it up? Or as if the Staff should lift up
it self, as if it were no Wood. Such mean, and weak, and contemptible things,
are the greatest and proudest Usurpers and Tyrants, when compared with God. The
pretense therefore, that Sovereign Power is capable of doing a great deal of
Mischief and Evil in the World (as indeed it is) can be no reason why God
should never suffer it to be lodged in the hands of any one, to whom he gives
not Sovereign Authority, because he can check and restrain the Power of
Usurpers and Tyrants as he pleases.

2. The annexing of Sovereign Authority to Sovereign Power, will not hinder
those who have the Authority from abusing their Power, and going beyond their
Authority. And therefore this Consideration, that Sovereign Power is capable of
doing a great deal of Evil and Mischief in the World, is no reason why we
should say that God gives Sovereign Authority with it; because Sovereign Power,
whether with or without Authority, is equally capable of doing mischief; for
it is the Man himself that does mischief, and not the Power, though indeed he
could not do so much mischief without so much Power; and it is the Grace of God
that must restrain him from doing mischief, and not his Authority.

3. If this were a good reason why God should never entrust Sovereign Power in
any Man's hands, to whom he gives not Sovereign Authority, it would likewise
serve for a reason why he should not entrust a less than Sovereign Power in any
Man's hands to whom he does not give some Authority; and yet we find that he,
in the course of his Providence, does entrust less than Sovereign Power in the
hands of those to whom he gives no Authority: As the Power that every Oppressor
has, is from God, but God surely gives him no Authority to oppress.

IV. But let us suppose now that whoever has Sovereign Power, has also
Sovereign Authority, and must not be resisted, and then I will prove, that the
Sovereign Authority is always in the People; for bare Sovereign Power is only
Sovereign Force, and Sovereign Force is the greatest natural Strength; and
surely the greatest strength is in the People, if the Doctor will allow me that
five or six Millions of Men have more strength than one single Man who is
seated on the Throne. Nay, according to this Principle, Sovereign Authority can
never be any where else but in the People; because the People cannot part with
their strength, nor confer it on the Supreme Magistrate; it is so their own,
that they cannot give it away. But you will say, they may promise, that they will
not use their natural strength otherwise than the Supreme Magistrate, or than
the Law shall direct. True; but though they promise that they will not use
their natural strength otherwise than the Law directs, yet still they retain
it; nor are they, upon their making of such a Promise, weaker than they were
before, there being not the least abatement of their natural strength: So that
if they had Sovereign Power before they made such a Promise, it follows that
they have it still. And therefore if (as he says) Power be a certain sign to
us, that where God has placed the Power, he has given the Authority; It is
infallibly true, that the Authority is in the People, and can be no where else,
because there God has placed the Power.

Hence I observe,

1. That the Doctor is really no Friend to crowned Heads, for he has unking'd
them all; he has taken away from them their Sovereign Authority, and given it
to the People. Now suppose that an oppressed People should be sensible that
they have the superior Strength, and should be so cunning as from thence to
conclude with the Doctor, that they have God's Authority to deliver themselves
from the Yoke of the Oppressor; I think, according to his Principles, he ought
to allow, they have Authority to free themselves from Oppression, because they
have Power, Supreme Power, or strength lodged in them; and God never intrusts
Sovereign Power in any Man's (or Men's) hands, to whom he does not give
Sovereign Authority. Besides it may be considered, that though, when they see
an Usurper on the Throne, they should with the Doctor conclude it to be God's
Will, that he should reign for some time longer or shorter as God pleases: Yet
they are taught by the Doctor, That this does not prove it to be God's Will it
should be always so. And therefore when they find they have strength to resist
the Tyrant, and can agree together to make use of it, they will presently
conclude, that it is not God's Will that they should be Slaves one Week or Day
longer. And thus the Doctor's Tyrant is on a sudden tumbled down from his Royal
Throne by that very Argument, that he made use of to set him up.

2. That the Doctor is fallen out with the University of Oxford who condemned
this Principle, That all Civil Authority is derived originally from the People;
and if the Fires be still continued there, his Book will be in some danger.
Nay, he is all on a sudden fallen out with himself; and from being a mighty
Assertor of the Prerogatives and Rights of Kings, is become a Republican: And
who can doubt but for the future, Lex Rex, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Milton's
Defensio populi Anglicani, and suchlike Books, will be in great esteem with
him.

But this is only a slip of the Doctor; he still means well to Kings,
especially if they be such as he sets up.

Now England, behold the King that Doctor Sherlock gives thee! he is an
absolute Lord, and some will call him Tyrant. For,

V. He that is a Sovereign Prince, and has God's Authority but no Legal Right,
is an absolute and unlimited Monarch; and consequently such a King as England
never yet owned; for it is Law that sets bounds to Regal Power; and therefore
he that is our King, but not by Law, is an absolute and unlimited Monarch. And
I am sure whatever Notions some Men, who understand little of our Laws, have
concerning the boundless Power and uncontrollable Authority of Kings, yet the
Laws do really bound the Regal Power; this the Lawyers teach us: This is the
Doctrine of Westminster Hall. And I think in a matter of this nature, it is
more reasonable to take the Judgment of Lawyers than of Divines.

VI. He that has God's Authority without any Legal Right, cannot be limited by
Laws: For God's Authority cannot be limited by Men; and therefore if it be
true, that he who has no legal Right to govern, has God's Authority when he is
settled in the Throne, then it follows that he has an Authority that cannot be
bounded by humane Laws. For a Power that God gives none can set bounds to,
besides God; and if he has made no limitations of the Regal Power, (as it is
plain he has not, just as plain as it is that he has said nothing about it)
then no limitations can be made: such a King cannot yield that any limits
should be set to God's Authority which he is invested with, unless he should
have a new Authority from Heaven impowring him to do so: And the People cannot
set bounds to it, neither with nor without his Consent; not without the King's
Consent, for that would be rebelling against God's Vicegerent, and trampling on
Divine Authority, that would be no less than a robbing of God, a stealing of
God's Authority, and the worst of Sacriledges: nor can they set bounds to his
Power with his Consent; for if he cannot part with any of his Power, they
cannot take it, for that would be like receiving of stolen Goods.

Besides, it may be considered, that surely God gives a Prince no more of his
Authority, than is fit and necessary to serve the Ends of Government; and
therefore he cannot part with any of it; or if he should, he would not have
enough left him to serve the Ends of Government; at least he could not be sure
that he should have enough, unless he were also sure of this, that God at first
gave him more than enough; which he cannot be certain of. He may indeed know
that he has more than he needs for his present Occasions; but he does not know
how soon the Scene of Affairs may change; and then all God's Authority, even
the whole Imperial Law may be little enough for him.

I have as much Zeal and dutiful Affection for their Sacred Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary, as any of my Fellow Subjects; and as I believe them to
have as good a Title to the Crown of England, as any of their Royal Ancestors
ever had; so I hope they are so firmly settled in the Throne, that all the
Powers on Earth will not be able to remove them. But I think Dr. Sherlock does
by his Principles undermine their Throne; for though he invests them with God's
Authority, because they have the Sovereign Power, are able to crush whom they
please, and are settled in the Throne; yet he will not own them to have a legal
Right to sit thereon; whereas it is most certain, that there is nothing can
secure to a Prince his Sovereign Power, but that which sets bounds to it, the
Law.

SECT. IV. Wherein is showed how little value we ought to have for the Acts and
Canons of the Convocation, begun in the first Year of King James I. 1603.
FOR, to the Authority of the Convocation begun in the first Year of King James
I, I may oppose the Authority of several Convocations in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, wherein the Bishops and Clergy were of a contrary Opinion. I shall
instance in two only, the one in the 35th, and the other in the 39th Year of
that Queen's Reign.

1. In the 35th of Q. Elizabeth, the Clergy were of Opinion, that an Usurper,
though settled in the Throne, had not God's Authority, and no Allegiance was
due to him, as appears plainly from their granting the Queen two Subsidies of
four Shillings in the Pound, to assist the Dutch in shaking off their Obedience
to their once Sovereign the King of Spain. 35 Eliz. c. 12. The Prelates and
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury have, for certain Considerations, lovingly
and liberally given and granted to the Queen's most excellent Majesty two
Subsidies of Four Shillings in the Pound. What were those Considerations?
Amongst others this was one, The consideration of her Majesty's great Charges
in the provident and needful prevention of such intended Attempts as manifestly
tended to the utter overthrow of the present happy state of her Highness's
Realm, to the miserable ruin of diverse other Princes and Countries associate
and near adjoining, and to the extirpation and rooting out of the sincere
profession of the Gospel both here and elsewhere. The Temporalities Subsidy-Act
explains this to us in these Reasons for their Tax, Cap. 13. "Besides the great
and perpetual Honor which it has pleased God to give your Majesty abroad, in
making You the principal Support of all just and religious Causes against
Usurpers: So that this Island has in your Majesty's Days been as a Stay and
Sanctuary to distressed States and Kingdoms, and as a Bulwark against the
Tyranny of mighty and usurping Potentates. -- Besides the great Succors in
France and Flanders, which we do conceive to be most Honorable, in regard of
the Ancient Leagues, the Justice and Equity of their Causes, etc. These were
the chief Reasons that moved the Clergy to give four Shillings in the Pound to
the Queen. This was read a third time, ( Mar. 30.1593.) in the Lords House,
these following Bishops being present, and no Dissentientes among them, as
appears from the Journals of the Lords House.

Cantuariensis. Londinensis. Godwin de Praesulibus.
Asaphensis. Roffensis. Exoniensis. Cicestrensis. Licolniensis. Petroburgensis.
Herefordensis. Bangorensis. Wigorniensis. Landavensis. Sarisburiensis.
Bathonens. and Wellensis. Johames Whitgift. Johan. Elmer. Gulielmus Hughes.
Johannes Young. Johannes Woolton. Thomas Bickley. Gulielmus Wickham. Richardus
Howland. Herbert Westfaling. Hugo Bellott. Richardus Fletcher. Gervasius
Babington. Richardus Coldwell. Johannes Still.
Now I think it is plain from hence, that the Bishops and Clergy, in the 35th
of Queen Elizabeth, did believe that an Usurper, though he be settled in the
Throne, has not God's Authority, and that those who are oppressed by him, may
lawfully resist him, and free themselves from his Yoke; for had they been of
Opinion that it was a Sin in the Dutch to resist Philip the 2d King of Spain,
as having God's Authority; would they not have directed her Majesty's
Conscience better in this Matter? would they not have humbly represented to her
Highness, that though Philip the 2d was an Usurper, yet he had God's Authority,
and therefore neither ought his Subjects to resist him, nor she to assist them
in making resistance? Would they not have given her Sacred Majesty good Advice
rather than Money? Would they not have admonished the Dutch to lay down their
Arms, and fly to their Prayers and Tears? Who can think they would have been so
uncharitable to their Protestant Neighbors, as to set forward their Damnation,
or so foolish as to buy their own at the rate of Four Shillings in the Pound?
Such Actions as these do plainly show what Opinion Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop
Elmer, and the rest of Queen Elizabeth's Bishops and Clergy had concerning this
Matter; and that as plainly as the Acts and Canons of a Convocation.

It may here be very proper to consider, that the King of Spain had once a
Legal Right to govern the Dutch, who were his Subjects, and owed him
Allegiance; but the Prelates and Clergy of the Church of England did verily
believe he had forfeited and lost it by usurping upon them; (for it seems, they
were of Opinion, that a Prince might usurp upon his Subjects, as well as
Subjects upon their Prince) and this I believe was our Case, King James the 2d
having been that to us, which Philip the 2d was to the Dutch.

That which I gather from hence, is this, That Queen Elizabeth's Bishops,
either did not think that an Usurper was invested with God's Authority; or if
they did, they believed it lawful in some Cases to resist a Prince though
invested with God's Authority. Now let Dr. Sherlock choose which of the two he
will grant me, for I think it cannot be avoided but one of the two must be
allowed.

2. In the 39th of Elizabeth, Chap. 26. The Clergy think themselves bound, etc,
to offer unto her Highness as a Testimony and Token of their good Wills and
dutiful Affections, some such Aid and Contribution toward the supportation of
her Majesty's Charges, as they are persuaded the greatness of the same most
justly may require. And the Temporalities Subsidy-Act, 39 Eliz. c. 27. has
these words; This Land is become, since your Majesti's happy Days, both a Port
and a Haven of Refuge for distressed States and Kingdoms, and a Rock and
Bulwark of Opposition against the Tyrannies and ambitious Attempts of mighty
and usurping Potentates. This passed the House of Lords Dec. 19. 1596; fourteen
Bishops being present and agreeing to it, one of which was Archbishop
Whitgift, etc.

The conclusion from hence is easy, that in the 39th of Queen Elizabeth's reign
the Prelates and Clergy owned not this Doctrine, that Usurpers, when settled in
the Throne, are invested with God's Authority, and must be obeyed by all those
who live within their Territories and Dominions, as well Priests as People.

Besides, it ought to be considered, that the Acts and Canons of this
Convocation wherein Dr. Overall was Prolocutor, were never ratified in
Parliament.

But you will say, They however give us the Judgment of the then Church of
England.

To this I answer;

1. That here is Church against Church, and Convocation against Convocation,
nay two Convocations (and I might have said, four) in Queen Elizabeth's Reign
against one in the Reign of her immediate Successor, K. James. Now methinks the
Authority of two or more Convocations in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, should
outweigh the Authority of one single Convocation in the reign of King James;
unless it can be made out, that the Church grows wiser and better every Age and
every Year than other, which I make some doubt of.

2. That in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Head of the Church agreed with
the Members; for both the Queen and her Convocations were of Opinion, that
'twas lawful for the Hollanders to shake off their Obedience to their once
Sovereign King Philip; but in the following reign of King James, the Head of
the Church and the Members differed about this Point, and the King was on the
Hollander's side; as appears from a Letter which that King wrote to Dr. Abbot;
Part of which I have thought fit to transcribe.

Good Dr. Abbot,
I Cannot abstain to give you my Judgment of your Proceedings in your
Convocation, New Obs. Vol. 3. Numb. 22.
as you call it; -- You know all of you, as I think, that my Reason of calling
you together, was to give your Judgments how far a Christian and a Protestant
King, may concur to assist his Neighbors to shake off their Obedience to their
once Sovereign, upon the Account of Oppression, Tyranny, or what else you like
to name it. In the late Queen 's time, this Kingdom was very free in assisting
the Hollanders both with Arms and Advice. And none of your Coat ever told me,
that any scrupled about it in her Reign. Upon my coming to England, you may
know that it came from some of your selves to raise Scruples about this Matter.
-- Yet I never took any notice of these Scruples, till the Affairs of Spain and
Holland forced me to it. All my Neighbors call on me to concur in the Treaty
between Holland and Spain; and the Honor of the Nation will not suffer the
Hollanders to be abandoned, especially after so much Money and Men spent in
their Quarrel: Therefore I was of the Mind to call my Clergy together, to
satisfy not so much me, as the World about us of the Justness of my owning the
Hollanders at this time: This I needed not have done; and you have forced me to
say, I wish I had not. You have dipped too deep in what all Kings reserve among
the Arcana Imperii. And whatever Aversion you may profess against God's being
the Author of Sin, you have stumbled upon the Threshold of that Opinion, in
saying upon the Matter, that even Tyranny is God's Authority, and should be
reverenced as such. If the King of Spain should return to claim his old
Pontifical Right to my Kingdom, you leave me to seek for others to fight for
it: For you tell us upon the Matter beforehand, his Authority is God's
Authority, if he prevail.

Mr. Doctor, I have no time to express my Mind farther in this thorny business.
I shall give you my Orders about it by Mr. Solicitor; and until then, meddle no
more in it, for they are Edge-Tools, or rather like that Weapon, that is said to
cut with the one edge, and cure with the other. I commit you to God's
Protection, good Doctor Abbot, and rest,

Your good Friend, James R.


And this I think lessens the Authority of Dr. Overall's Convocation very much,
that it is the Authority of a Church without a Head; for it is plain, that the
Head of the Church is on my side. And I lay some weight on this, that King
James who was a Sovereign Prince, and as fond of Power as any other, plainly
told Dr. Abbot, that he scrupled not about the Lawfulness of what the
Hollanders did in shaking off their Obedience to their once Sovereign the King
of Spain, upon the account of his Oppression and Tyranny.

Hence we may gather, that were K. James I. to judge between the late King his
Grandson, and the People of England; he would surely give Judgment on the
Peoples side; for he cannot condemn the People of England without condemning
the Dutch: And his Judgment in this Case I think we ought to value more, than
the Opinions of an hundred Doctors that differ from him.

But it is time now to draw to a conclusion. The Cause I am engaged in, is God's
Cause, and the King's and Queen's Cause, and the Peoples Cause: it is God's
Cause, whom Dr. Sherlock seems, by his Principles, to make the Author of Sin:
for whatever aversion he may profess against God's being the Author of Sin, he
has stumbled upon the threshold of that Opinion, in saying upon the Matter,
that even Tyranny is God's Authority, and should be reverenced as such. And it
is the King's and Queen's Cause, whom the Doctor supposes to be Usurpers,
though I do not say he has called them so. I know no necessity there was for
his writing on this Argument; and much less for his reasoning on the
supposition of unjust Usurpations; for here was no such thing as Usurpation,
unless to defend our Civil Rights and Liberties, and Religion established by
Law, must be called Usurpation; and unless he will call an excellent Prince,
who came to deliver us from Popery and Slavery, an Usurper. And though it may
be allowable to put the Case, Preface.
as he says, at the worst; yet methinks he ought not to have left it at the
worst; he should not have let his Reader run away with this Opinion, that King
William and Queen Mary have not a Legal Title to the Crown. And though he
forbids his Reader to charge him with reflecting on the present Government, yet
there is no intelligent Reader but must take his whole Book to be a Reflection
upon it; and will conclude from his not declaring King William and Queen Mary
to have a Legal Right to the Crown, that he does not believe it: For a wise
Man, I think, would have declared it, had he believed it; and Dr. Sherlock
never gave any just occasion to the World to mark him out for a Fool. And it is
the Peoples Cause, I mean it is the Cause of all those that are the King's and
Queen's Loyal Subjects; for since he says, That all Sovereign Princes, who are
settled in their Thrones, are placed there by God, and invested with his
Authority, and therefore must be obeyed, even though they turn Usurpers, and
oppress their Subjects, and destroy the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Government; it is plain that he charges all those who assisted his Highness the
Prince of Orange, and were the subordinate Instruments of our Deliverance, with
downright Rebellion against the late King. And these were the Reasons that
moved me to engage my self in this Controversy. Whether I have detected the
Doctor's Errors, and defended the Truth as I ought, I leave the Reader to judge.
God be thanked, we have a Prince, who wants not courage to defend his Legal
Right with his Sword; and I believe he will never want Writer's to justify it
with their Pens; and to prove that neither was he an Usurper, not were they
that assisted him, Rebels.

FINIS.

