A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF MR. Tho. Whitchurch, October the 15th.
1691.

AT CHALFONT St. PETER'S.

By HENRY PARSLEY, A. M. Rector of Hedgerley, in the County of Bucks.

LONDON, Printed by W* and J. Wild, for G. Conyers in Little-Britain, 1692.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aedibus Lambh. Augusti 11mo. 1692. Ra. Barker.

TO Mr. Richard Whitchurch.
SIR,
I Here present you with a Discourse which was preached at the Desire of your
Father, and is now published for the Satisfaction of some of your Relations,
and as a lasting Testimony of that Esteem and Respects I have for your self.
The Subject is of the greatest Concernment (how meanly soever it may be
handled) and if well thought upon and considered, would have a mighty Influence
upon us in the due Conduct and Government of our Lives: Which that it may have,
is the hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your Obliged Friend, and Humble Servant, HENRY PARSLEY.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. THOMAS WHITCHURCH.
REV. XIV. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the Dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.


IT is the common and universal Judgment of Mankind, a Truth generally
received, and which cannot be contradicted by any, that to be in such a State
or Condition, as is not obnoxious to Pain and Trouble; and where true and real
Happiness is to be found, is the true Interest and ought to be, nay, is the
constant Aim and Desire of all men, as they are reasonable Creatures; for the
Soul of Man can never be so far corrupted, as not to design in all its
deliberate and advised Actions, its own Happiness and Felicity as its End;
insomuch, that those who have made it their Business to understand Humane
Nature, have thought it enough barely to intimate and needless to prove this
Point, because it is already by every one confessed, no Notion more common, or
more generally owned, than this, viz. That every Man desires to be free from
Pain, Grief and Trouble, from any thing that is uneasy and vexatious to him,
and to live in an Estate of Delight and Happiness. There is another universal
Judgment of all Mankind, not denied by any man that will give himself leave to
consider and weigh the worth of things; and that is this, that the greater, and
more durable Delight, is to be chosen before the shorter and the less; for
Delight and Happiness being in the Opinion of all Men, esteemed a thing
innoffensively good, of which there can be no noxious or harmful Excess, it
follows, that the more of this excellent Condition any man enjoys, it is so
much the better for him, or he is so much the happier. Now if we look into all
those outward things that it is possible for us to enjoy here in this World, we
cannot find Happiness inscribed upon them, much less the greatest Happiness,
Riches, Honors and Pleasures here, as they are unsatisfactory to the Soul of
Man, when enjoyed; so they are uncertain, and easily interrupted, and
oftentimes intermixed with Troubles, or Evils, of one sort or other; either by
some Casualty (...) Accident they may be taken from us, or else we by Diseases
and Sicknesses made unfit to enjoy them; or at least, we are by Death utterly
deprived of them. Now therefore, if we will be wise, we must choose something
for our Happiness that is more pleasurable and satisfactory, more lasting and
durable, and that is a virtuous Life and Actions, a Life lead according to
God's Will and Command, to Right Reason and true Religion; and this will even
here, amidst the Troubles and Afflictions of this Life, delight our Souls with
solid Joys, and go along with us into the World to come, to our unspeakable
Comfort; for (says the Text) Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, they
rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. From these Words, I
shall endeavor to describe unto you, the Happiness of those that die in the
Lord, after they are delivered from the Burden of the Flesh, and to prove that
in Heaven God has provided for virtuous men, an Estate of Happiness, that is
in all respects the greatest that possibly can be imagined or enjoyed. And this
you cannot but grant, if you consider those Parts and Properties of it, which
in the Text are either explicitly or implicitly affirmed concerning it. As,
I. The First Property thereof, is the Absence of Grief, and Security from it:
The ^^est from (...) Labors. II. ^he Second ^^s the actual Possession of Joy
and Happiness; for Blessed, or happy are they, says the Text; which
Blessedness, without doubt, shall be in the highest (...), and greatest
Measure, suitable to the Goodness of God, who gives it, and to the Capacities
of those who are to receive it. III. Thirdly and Lastly, This Blessedness shall
be of the greatest Duration; and this is also implied in the Text, for
otherwise there cannot be a Freedom from all Sorrow, if it were possible for
their Happiness to be interrupted.


1. The first Property of this Happiness, is, that they have the Absence of
Grief, and Security from it; They rest from their Labors: This is necessarily
supposed to a State of Happiness, for that cannot be where Pains or Sorrows are
mixed, or fill any part of the Soul, there being (...). Foundation for true and
real Happiness, where the Place is already possessed with Grief: For, as the
Schoolmen use to argue, that the Privation ^r Absence of Cold, is necessarily
required for the introducing of Heat; so they affirm also, that the Absence of
Grief or Sorrow is as necessary for the Production of Delight and Pleasure.
Freedom from Evil is the Ground or Basis of Delight, and is in many places, of
Scripture expressly asserted to be part of the Happiness of the Blessed ^n
Heaven; especially by St. John, who we know, in the Gospel, was a Person so
very dear to our Savior, that he chose him out of all his Disciples, more
particularly to show unto him those things that were to come to pass at the end
of the World. He saw the Heavens and the Earth fly away from before the Face of
God, and there was no place found for them, Rev. 20.11. He saw also a new
Heaven, and a new Earth, and a new Jerusalem coming down from God, richly
adorned, as a Bride in expectation of her Bridegroom. Rev. 21. Ver. 1, 2, 3.
And I heard (says he) a great Voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his People, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God: And God shall
wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither
Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain. Behold, here you have
a particular Revelation of the first part of the Happiness of good men in
Heaven, which is a Security from Grief; and that so clearly and plainly
delivered, that there can be no doubt of it. For this came not, like the
Oracles of old, in a soft Murmur or Whisper; but he heard a great Voice, and
that declaring the Mind of God, not in dark Speech, or Words capable of various
Construction, but in plain downright. Terms, There shall be no more Death, nor
Sorrow, nor Crying, nor Pain. The Words you see are general and full, and can
be meant of nothing else than a perfect Freedom from all Evil. But to discourse
a little more particularly of this Point, The Evils to which we are here
subject, and which in Heaven we shall be delivered or freed from, are these
two, (1.) From the Evil of Sin, and from all Temptations to it. (2.) From the
Evil of Affliction, or Punishment for Sin.

(1.) From the Evil of Sin, and from all Temptation to it: We shall be there
out of a possibility of ever sinning any more; free even from all Temptation to
it. Now Sin is the great E^^^ good Men complain of, and are afraid of, and
notwithstanding all their Vigilance and Care, they may sometimes fall into Sin,
of an Offense against God; I say sometimes, though very ^^^ely, for if it be
often and generally so, they cease to be good Men; but whenever it is, it
creates Grief and Trouble to them. The Life of a Christian is a continual
Warfare, the Enemies he is to encounter are insinuating and powerful: He is to
fight against his own Lusts and Passiions, and evil Concupiscences, to mortify
Pride, to subdue Anger, to banish the least Thoughts and Motions of Malice and
Revenge out of his Mind: He is to arm himself against ill Examples, and to
overcome the Suggestions of Satan, who is most busy, and most subtle in making
all the other Temptations, we may meet withal, operative and effectual upon us,
by his Seductions and Delusions, and but too often successful. So that whereas
our Souls ought to be consecrated as a Holy Temple unto the Lord, free from all
Pollution of ^^n, from all sorts of Intemperance, Injustice and
Uncharitableness, and full of Purity, Love and Charity, we do here obtain these
but in an imperfect degree, and they are often interrupted; which makes the
good Man cry out with the Apostle, Who shall deliver me from this Body of
Death? and the though his Faith, and Courage, and Constancy, he daily gets
ground of his spiritual Enemies; yet it is but by little and little, and he is
in perpetual Danger, still being surpised into some little Compliances, at
least contrary to the Will of God, and by degrees perhaps, without his
extraordinary Watchfulness, and God's Grace, into greater. This is our Portion
here, and out Lot is this; but when we arrive unto those Regions of Bliss and
Glory that are above, have once weathered these short Storms, proved our selves
good and loyal Subjects to God Almighty, in fighting against his and our
Enemies (I mean our irregular Passions and Appetites) and overcoming them too,
in great measure; if the general Bent and Inclination of our Souls have been to
serve, and to please God, He will graciously forgive the little Follies and
Imperfections of Humane Nature, and receive us into his Favor, never to be
forfeited any more; where we shall neither sin, nor have any Temptation to sin;
but be under an happy Impossibility of offending God. Thus shall we be freed
from the Evil of Sin.

(2.) In Heaven we shall also be free from the Evil of Affliction, or
Punishment for Sin: For I reckon all the Miseries of this Life, all the
Imperfections of it, both of Mind and Body, viz. the imperfection of our
Knowledge, the Diseases and Infirmities of our Bodies to be the Effects of Sin,
and a Punishment of God for it. Whatsoever is ^^inful and burdensome to
Nature, is a Fruit of Sin, and Mark of our Rebellion against God.

Now, as in Heaven there is an absolute Freedom ^^^n all Sin, so there will be
also from all Imperfection, Pain, and Misery, which are the proper Attendants
and Consequents of Sin. There shall be no Blindness in the Mind, no
Perverseness in the Will, no Error in the Judgment, no Disorder (...) the
Affections, no Wearn^^ss in se^^ing God. There we may hope to be so happy, as
to know without Mistake, to judge without Partiality, and to be Wise without
Folly: Love is there without Hatred, Jealousy or Envy; Joy without any Sighing
or Sorrow, Praises without Complaints, Obedience without Reluctance; in one
lord, perfect Purity and Holiness without Spot or Blemish to sully the Glory of
it. As this low^^ Region of the Air, we see is the Place of Clouds and
Darkness, Thunder and Lightning, Storm and Tempest; but to the Dwelling of the
S^n and fived Stars, none of these pitchy Va^ours ascend to obscure their
brightness, or trouble their Peace; just so i^ th^s World the Scene of Misery
and Vexation, Confusion and Disorder; our Bodies are tossed with several
Storms, and our Souls many times hurried with more violent Tempests, the fierce
Gusts of their own Passions; but when we ascend to Heaven, that Region of
Light, we shall be out of the reach of these Troubles, and find our selves in a
State of perfect Rest and Joy, without the least Disgust to abate our
Contentment. Now this Freedom from the Sins and Follies, the Troubles and
Inconveniences, the Sicknesses and Diseases, imperfections, that we are here
liable to, must needs be very delightful.

Suave mari magno, turbantibus aequora nautis,
E Terra alterius magnum spectare laborem.
It is a pleasant thing (says Lucretius) for one that has been in a
troublesome and tempestuous Sea, and is himself arrived safe on the Land, to
look back and behold the Troubles and Dangers those are exposed to, who are yet
tossed upon the Waves; ^ot th^^ it can be pleasant for one Man to s^^ ^^^ther
in Distress, but a Joy to be in Security, and to view those dismal Danger which
he himself has so narrowly escaped. S^ likewise it is pleas^^t to the Blessed
in Heaven, after they are themselves in Safety and Security, to remember all
the Inconveniences, Hazards, and Afflictions which they were here exposed to
in this Life, and those eternal Torments they ^re obnoxious to, and which is
the miserable Lot and Portion of others, and they themselves, (...) the Mercy
and Goodness of God, have so ^rly escaped. This very Consideration must needs
afford them fit Matter of Praise, and Thanksgivings to God, who has placed
them in a blessed Estate, not obnoxious to any of their ^mer Griefs,
Sicknesses, or Pains; and has also redeemed them from the dreadful Region of
Darkness, and brought them to his own mar^^llous Light. This then is the first
Property of the Happiness of those that die in the Lord, (...) the Absence of
Grief, and Security from Evil. They rest from their Labors.

The Second Property of those that die in (...) Lord, is the actual Possession
of Joy and Happiness; for Blessed, or happy, are they (says the Text.) And
this Happiness, it may be rea^ly supposed, will principally consist,

In the Perfection of our Knowledge, our Understandings being enlarged and
widend, shall (...) a right Knowledge, and clear Sight and Vi^ of God. We here
know but in part, and see through a Glass darkly: But when that which is (...)
is come, then that which is in part shall be (...) away, 1 Cor. 13. v. 9, 10,
11. There the Joy of the Righteous shall be great from the Possession of God
himself, by the clearest Knowledge, and purest love of his Excellencies. They
see him as h^ is, 1 John 3. v. 2, 3. i.e. We shall not behold him, or know him
as we do now, by Similitudes, Resemblances, and Expressions borrowed from other
things (which is all our Natures are here capable to bear;) but by a clear
No^^n of him formd in our Minds, whereby they will be filled with a Knowledge
of him so clear, distinct and strong, that will even turn (...) ^n^^ his own
Nature Life and Happiness. The holy Soul shall there see the King in his
Beauty, all the Perfections of that infinitely glorious and blessed Being in
their Brightness and Purity. And this Sight will cause the most ardent Love, by
which there shall be an intimate, or vital Union between the Soul and its
Happiness, and from thence will spring perfect Delight, Psalm. 16.1^. For (...)
the Presence of God there is fullness of Joy, and at his Right Hand there are
Pleasures for evermore. And it cannot be otherwise, for how pleasant must it
needs be, to be delivered from the Imperfections, Errors and Mistakes
concerning Persons or Things here; nay, of God himself: As to Persons, we
sometimes judge falsely here, and most often; sometimes too severely, at other
times too favorably; too severely, either through mistake, not knowing from
what Principles the Actions of Men proceed, or from want of Charity to derive
them from the best; (...) favorably, out of Partiality or Ignorance: (...)
some Men may seem a great deal better than (...) are, and others a great deal
worse. Now (...) Mistakes on both sides will be there taken ^ay, and every one
shall appear as he is really a himself, and be judged accordingly. So that
^^ough a Man should have here the Applause of (...) whole World, yet if he be
inwardly bad and vicious, he shall be miserable, and though (...) be condemned
and hated of all, yet if he be ^^cerely good and virtuous, he shall be happy.
And then, as to our Judgment of God, in the Dispensations of his Providence, we
are sometimes at a Loss, how they can consist with a God of infinite Goodness
and Justice; but there the Intricacies of God's Providence shall be un^^d, the
Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness (...) God in hi^ darkest Dispensations, and
most un^^^chable Actions, shall be cleared up. There our Understandings shall
be extraordinarily and supernaturally illuminated, and our Knowledge be
^^^derfully increased and advanced, and our Minds ^^^^dingly pleased and
delighted, both by the Repetition and new Variety of Contemplation. ^here we
shall be freed from all those Mists and Vapors that here becloud our Reason,
and hinder us from the best Exercise thereof, the Love of God, and
Contemplation of his Perfections, which must needs be very delightful: for if
the Light of the Sun be so pleasant, that every Morning revives the World, and
renders it new to us, which was buried in the Darkness of the Night; how
infinitely pleasant will the Light of Glory be, that discovers the absolute and
universal Excellencies of the Deity; such as are his pure and unspotted
Holiness, his immense Wisdom and Understanding, his Almighty Power, and his
infinite Mercy? Oh! how inexpressibly great is the Happiness that proceeds from
the Illumination of a purified Soul, when such is the Amiableness of God, that
his infinite and eternal Felicity arises from the Fruition of himself, as ours
does from the Enjoyment of him; so that our Happiness will be of the same
Nature, though not in the same Degree with God's himself. For we shall (as our
Savior has promised in the forecited Place) see God as he is, i. e. we shall
have as real an Enjoyment of him, and as sensibly perceive it, as we do now any
Good in this World, though the manner of it is not certainly known. Let us
therefore conceive with ou^ selves, as well as we can, what his infinite
Perfections are, his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Power, his Unchangeableness, his
Immortality and Bliss, and then make account there will be a lively
Communication between us and all these, which will make us Partakers of his
Happiness: We shall not only enjoy such good things as flow from his greatest
Favor and Love; but in our Measures, and according to such Capacities as he
will give us, be what he himself is, bear some similitude to him in Wisdom,
Goodness, and Happiness; we shall be filled with Divine Joys and Pleasures, by
being filled with a great sense of him, and strong Love to him, and a lively
Resemblance of his blessed Nature, immutably and immortally, without any
Change, and without any End. There, if we live and die good Men, we shall enjoy
all the Effects of an holy Friendship (if I may so speak) with infinite
goodness, and receive such Communications from his boundless Love, as shall
make us really and substantially happy, like as he himself is. This ^hen is one
part of the Happiness of the Blessed (and a great one too) viz. it consists in
the Perfection of their Knowledge.

2. Another Part of the Happiness of Heaven consists in the Union of Affection
among the ^lessed Inhabitants thereof; a want of which, causes a great part of
the Troubles of this Life: Those who serve God faithfully here, shall then go
to the Company of the Prophets and Apostles, and all the holy Men of God, that
have been in all the Ages of the World, to those pure and immaculate Beings,
full of Love, to their Maker; and of Kindness and Charity one toward another,
no Animosities or Divisions shall be there, nothing that interrupts their
Peace: Peevishness and Passion, Mis-judgings, Mis-constructions, hard Censures
of each others Actions, too much Self-Love, Difference in Judgment, Pride and
Emulation imbitters men's Converse here; but there Corruption on all sides shall
be removed, their Judgments and Affections united, and their Dispositions
exactly suited; they shall be free from all manner of Injury, Envy, Suspicion,
or Uncharitableness. The Prince of Peace reigns in the Heavenly Jerusalem, and
preserves an everlasting Serenity and Calmness; the mutinous Spirits that
rebelled, were presently chased from thence into this lower Region, where they
brought Trouble and Disorder: there is not, there cannot be the least Jar or
Discord between those happy Inhabitants, an inviolable Love unites them all,
they enjoy without Envy; for infinite Blessedness is not diminished by the
Number of Possessors, the Inheritance in Light is common to all. Although the
Angels are distinguished by their several Orders and Ministrations, yet a Chain
of holy Love and Charity binds all their Affections together; and though the
Saints shine with different Degrees of Glory, yet, as in a Chorus of Music,
the different Voices make one entire Harmony; so there they are all united by
the most ^^^ent Love and Affection: There where there (...) no cross Interests
to contend with, no Ma^^^ or Envy, no Mistake or Prejudice, no Storms or
Tempests of unruly Passions, or inordinate ^^^res to ruffle or discompose their
Happiness to (...) Eternity. There the Righteous shall enter (...) those
blessed and peaceful Habitations, where ^^^e of those Jars and Contentions,
with which ^^^s World is exercised, disturb their Rest; no ^^sputes or
Controversies, no Ill Will or want of ^^^rity mar that everlasting Q^^^ which
they always enjoy, when they adore the God of Peace, and follow the Lamb, the
Prince of Peace. The ^^^tests and Divisions amongst us, must needs ^^ke all the
Sons of Peace grow weary, and with ^^^h the Psalmist, that they had W^^gs like
a ^^ve, that they might fly away, and be at ^est, (...) hasten their Escape
from the stormy Wind (...) Tempest, and make them long for those cool (...)
Shades of the Grave, and for that Peace (...) is in the Region beyond it, that
Peace which (...) never be interrupted; which b^ing m^ ^o ^he (...). Property
of the Happiness of the blessed, (...) That it shall be of the lo^gest
Duration, and that is Eternal and Everlasting; without which, it could not
indeed be the greatest Happiness: for such a Life cannot be the most happy,
which is not secure of its own Eternity. If therefore any thing be designed for
the full Satisfaction of Humane Nature, it must be a Delight that shall last
for ever, and that is such, that it must needs be satisfactory, seeing no man
can wish for more than eternal Happiness. The most full Enjoyment of all the
good Things this World affords, is nor to be called or accounted Happiness, not
only because they are vain and empty of true Satisfaction, but also because not
permanent and lasting; they are soon gone, soon decayed, and quickly parted
withal; Riches are not for ever, neither does a Crown endure to all
Generations, Prove. 27.24. but Heaven is an Inheritance as safe as great. Here
we are subject to Time, that carries us and all our Goods down its swift
Stream; but there Eternity, that is fixed and unchangeable, embraces us in its
Bosom. As God's liberal Hand bestows, so his Powerful preserves our Happiness;
the Blessed shall sing everlasting Hymns of Glory, and Songs of Thanksgiving to
the great Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, who has prepared and purchased
that Felicity for them, and has brought them to the secure Possession of it.
But when we have said all we can of the Happiness of Heaven, we must
acknowledge that we (...) infinitely short of what it is in it self. It is
^^^pared in Scripture to a Crown, a Kingdom, ^^^^ast; but is indeed much more
than all this: (...) a Kingdom without Cares, a Crown without a Cross, a Feast
without Satiety. It is called by these Names, because these are the great^^
things this lower World has. These Words amongst us sound high, and speak
Power, and ^^^our, and Plenty, and Pleasures, and what (...) World calls good,
and therefore Heaven is represented by such things which we understand and
regard. God Almighty saw our Infirmity, that we cannot well Judge of Delights
that are purely Intellectual and Spiritual, and has so far ^^^descended to us,
as to draw us some Sc^^^^ of Heavenly Joys in the Shapes and Figures of our
(...) earthly Pleasures; such are th^^^ of ^^astings, the Possession of Riches,
Honors and the ^^^e, but then these are but low and ^hort Repres^^^^tions of
the things themselves; such (...) of Heaven, as the Tabernacle and Temple a^^^g
the Jews were, o^ this and the other World. They were Images in little, but
came greatly (...) of what they represented (...) these things (...) Heaven;
for without any such (...) deceitful ^^^gs, there shall be abundance ^f Peace,
and ^^^ness of Joy, an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Finally, In the
present State, we are not capable to receive the full Knowledge of Heaven; what
we understand, is infinitely desi^able; but the most glorious part is still
undiscover^d. The Apostle tells us, in the First Epistle to the Corinthians,
Chap. 2. Ver. 9. Eye has not s^^^, our Ear heard, neither has i^ entered into
the Heart of Man, to conceive what God has prepared for those that love him.
We have reason to break forth in the Language of the Psalmist, and say, How
great is thy Goodness, O Lord! which the (...) l^^d up for them that fear thee.
We have nothing else to do but to supply the Defects of our Understanding with
an holy Admiration, and make good use of what is discovered to us. As,

1. From what has been said, we may learn this great Truth, that Heaven alone
is the Place of Happiness and that it is only the good and ^he (...) Christian,
that shall be^^^^ in (...), only such w^ s^ good Works do ^ow (...); not that
the best Works of the (...) Men (...) any such Condition; but that these Works
which also are pers^^ed by the Grace and Assistance of God, do qualify them
for that Happiness which is purchased for them by the Merits of Jesus Christ.
If ever therefore we expect to arrive at Heaven and Happiness as our End, we
must endeavor after Holiness and Righteousness, as the V^^^^^ through Jesus
Christ our Lord; and let (...) ^ing divert us from it, neither the Hopes of
(...), not the Smiles or Trowns of this World. If this Principle be but ^^nly
fixed in us through God's Grace, the greatest Difficulties, not the hardest
Labors ^ill scarcely discourage our Resolution, or hin^^ our Endeavors to
obtain it: If it be difficult for Mankind to reduce their natural Inclinations
to a Compliance with Christ's Precepts, to deny the inordinate Appetite of
sensual Pleasure, to deny unlawful Gains and Interests to the Desire of Wealth
and Riches, to mortify Pride, to subdue Malice, Anger, Revenge, and other
sinful passions; to retain Piety toward God in a profane and wicked Age; Truth
and Justice toward Men in a deceitful and injurious World: if it be difficult
thus to do, yet he that has ^^^nly fixed this Principle in his Mind, that this
is the Way to Heaven, and Heaven alone the Place of Happiness, will attempt to
make his way thither, through these or any other Difficulties, in the View of
the Glory set before him. For,

2. A Prospect of this Happiness should reconcile our Minds to any Condition,
to any Circumstances of Life, which the Divine Providence may think fit to
bring us to. We are to remember, that God sent us into the World for Religion,
we are but to pass through our pleasant Fields, or our hard Labors; but to
lodge a little while in our fine Fields, or our meaner Cottages; but to bait in
the way at our full Tables, or with our spare Diet. Let us not therefore have
any great Esteem for the things of this World; there is no other reason why
they should be loved or valued by us; but as they conduce to our chief End,
which is God and his Glory, and our Happiness and Felicity. We should here
imitate the Traveller, who, when fixed in his Determination of arriving at some
certain Place, if he meet with two or three several VVays, desires not this
more than that, but only as this may more readily bring him to his Rest: He
cares not much whether the Way be plain or hilly, whether it lead to the Right
Hand, or the Left, all is indifferent, so it brings him whither he would go.
After the like manner we are to behave our selves in the Use of the things of
this World; we are not much to love the good things thereof, nor fear the Evils
of it; but free from both, make only choice of that which leads to our
Salvation, and fits us for that Country we are seeking: If Poverty or Meanness
brings us to God, we are to embrace it with both Arms, and esteem it; (...)
Riches or Honors would withdraw us (...) him, we must trample them under foot,
and cast them from us; if Sufferings and Aff^^tions, Disgraces and Neglect, the
unjust Repro^ches and Calumnies of men, assist us to (...) Heaven, we are to
rejoice thereat, and to ^^^ive them with all Submission and Willing^^^^ We are
neither to desire or abhor the ^^^^d or evil in this Life, but as it unites or
se^^^^es us from God, as it brings us nearer to, (...) drives us farther from
our supreme Happiness, always remembering that complete Happines^ ^s only there
to be expected, where our ^^^^^ey ends. And who would not contented^^^ go
through a Prison to a Palace, a barren Wil^^^ness, to a Land of Promise? Who
would be uneasy under all that Load of Afflictions that may befall him here,
by the Malice and Contrivance of evil men? Nay, who would not end^^e the Cross,
and despise the Shame, for the (...) that is set before him? Did we always thus
act, how unmoved would the Rumors of Wars, and Devastations leave us, which
invade and agitate men's Breasts, and disturb their most pleasant and composed
Hours? We should let him alone to rule the World that made it; to take care of
us, who has engaged it, whose Providence watches over us, and whose Eternal
Happiness awaits us. Were we but once arrived at a true Indifferency of Mind,
Acquiescence in, and ready Compliance with the Infinite Wisdom, Power and
Goodness of God, and feared Doing instead of Suffering Evil; how serene! how
full of Tranquility-should we be amidst the Changes, Tumults, and Commotions of
this stormy Region, this uncertain State, and how absolut^ly resigned to the
Will of God in all things?

3. From what has been said concerning the Nature of the Ha ^iness of Heaven:
This should ^^^en us to endeavor after that Frame and Temper of Mind here,
those good Dispositions of Soul, as may fit us for the Enjoyment of it. For
instance, Does the Happiness of Heaven consist in the Perfection of your
Knowledge? ^eg of God, that he would open your Eyes here, enlighten your
Understandings, and translate you from Darkness to Light. Believe and consider,
that wilful and gross Ignoran^e here, is but a bad Preparation for Perfection
of Knowledge hereafter, and that those are not likely to come to Heaven, that
will not be at the P^^^s to understand (...) very first Principles of their
Religion. And this, as it will put you upon endeavoring after Knowledge, so it
will stir you up to practice and live up to the Knowledge of those things,
which God has been pleased most clearly and plainly to reveal in his Word;
for without Practice, all the Knowledge in the World signifies nothing, and
the ^^^y way to increase in Knowledge, is to practice what we already know; to
him that has shall be given, is as true of Knowledge as of G^^ce. Further,
Does the Happiness of Hea^^^ consist in a clear Knowledge and Sight of God, and
in an Imitation of his Perfections? Then endeavor to turn away your Eyes from
beholding Vanities: Make it your Business to follow after Holiness, without
which, no man ^^all see the Lord. Labor to see God here, that to you may be
the fitter to see and enjoy him h^^eafter; to see him in his Works, to search
aft^r, behold and admire that infinite Power, Wis^^m and Goodness, which are
visible and legible (...) the Works of Creation and Providence; but ^^re
especially, study to see and know God as ^e has revealed himself in his Word,
to see his Holiness in his Precepts, his Justice in his Threatenings, his Grace
and Goodness in his Promises; (...) so by a Sight of the Righteousness and
Equi^^ of his Commands, you may be brought to an ^^^rvation of, and an hearty
Compliance with (...) Divine Will here, and be in a good Capacity for ever to
adore, admire and imitate the Divine Perfections hereafter. Finally, Does the
Happiness of Heaven consist in a Union of Affections amongst the blessed
Inhabitants thereof? Let us then endeavor to remove far from us, all Anger,
Malice and Revenge, all those hateful Qualities that will render us sit only
for the Converse of wicked and apostate Spirits, and endeavor after such calm
and quiet, such charitable and peaceable Tempers, as may make us with infinite
Delight, when we go away from this wrangling and contentious World, conseit our
selves with the blessed Inhabitants of the other.

I should now conclude, had not Custom made it almost necessary to say
something upon these Occasions, which I shall do very briefly of (...) deceased
Friend and Neighbor. He (...) take his Sickness very patiently, in that (...)
a perfect Resignation of himself (...) God: He was very sensible of his
approaching End, and earnestly desired to receive (...) Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which he did with great Devotion. He expressed himself very charitably
of all, and said, He owed ^o Man the least ill will; but was in perfect Charity
with all the World, forgiving all those that any ways offended him, and if he
had given Offense to any, desiring the like from them; relying upon the Merits
of Christ for the Pardon of his Sins, and the Salvation of his Soul. I might
perhaps say a great deal more; but I love not to speak much on these Occasions,
and what I have here to add, is only this, That He was a kind Husband to his
Wife, an indulge^ Father to his Children, and a good Neighbor to his Friends
and Acquaintance. But to conclude, That which now only remains to be done, is
from this Instance of Mortality here before us (whose Soul we hope is at rest
with God) earnestly to exhort you to think on your own Mortality, and to
prepare for Immortality: In this short Life, to prepare for an endless one,
(...) it may be happy. This Life is in it self (...) worth any thing; but the
right use of it is o^ ^^^ite Importance. It is like the very first step (...)
^^ght or wrong Way, tending to a Palace (...) Prison, which indeed is a small
thing in it (...) but its Efficiency and Tendency is of as mu^^ Concern as the
whole Way and End it se^^. Which Preparation, is in short, by a Forsaking all
former Sin and Wickedness, which God will pardon for Christ's Sake, and an
Embracing of Virtue and Goodness.

This is that only which will be accepted of God and not bare Repentance,
without Amendment, unless it be where God sees good Fruits would follow. We are
to endeavor to forsake all Sin, and sincerely to practice our most excellent
Religion; live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, which will bring here with it
God^ Blessing, with the Peace and Satisfaction of a good Conscience, and
qualify us for that Happiness which Christ has purchased for us, and will
give to all such as are meet to be Partakers of it.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for George Conyers, in Little-Britain.
A Guide to young Communicants: Or plain Directions so the Receiving of the
Lord's Supper. In twelve Questions and Answers; with Meditations and Prayers,
etc. Price (...)

A Guide to the Al^ar: Or, A Preparation for a worthy Receive, of the Lord's
Supper; with Meditations and Prayers for every Day of the Week Price 1 s.

The (...) Man's Path way to Heaven: Wherein a Man may see plainly whether he
shall be saved or damned. By A^ther D^nt.

A Tr^atise of Prayer. By George Bright, Dean of St. A^^ph. Rector of
Loughborough, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.


