Seasonable Counsel TO An Afflicted People: IN A LETTER To the Distressed
INHABITANTS OF WEM In the County of SALOP, After the dreadful FIRE, which
consumed that Market Town, March 3. 1676/7.

Written by Andrew Parsons, M.A. and sometime Minister there.

LONDON. Printed for E. Brewster, and Tho. Parkhurst, at the Crane in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near
Mercers-Chappel, 1677.

To my dear Friends of Wem, who have suffered by the late dreadful Fire.
BEloved people, when I first heard of that devouring Fire, how could I be
otherwise affected than Nehemiah was, Chap. 1.4, when he heard Jerusalem lay
waste and burnt? He was astonished, wept and prayed to the God of Heaven. And
oh that my prayers may be as effectual and successful for you, as his were for
them; then Wem would be built again, as Jerusalem was; the glory of whose
second Temple exceeded that of the first, as did also their own Houses and
habitations, Hag. 1.4.

But is Wem burnt indeed? What, Wem! the place that God has blessed, and where
he has as signally manifested his power, goodness, forbearance, and mercy, as
in any place you or I ever knew? And is this lot and fate at last befallen Wem?
What! to come down so wonderfully! and in a little more than an hour, for her
beauty to be turned into Ashes! Sure this Fire (who ever kindled it here) like
that of Sodom came down from the Lord out of Heaven, it was so fierce and
unquenchable.

Therefore if other great and stupendous providence have passed as unregarded
by us, this must not, if we mean to prevent the flaming vengeance of God, next
upon our selves. O Wem, thou wast a Town saved by the Lord from Pestilence,
when (you do remember) God shot his Arrow in Shrewsbury on one hand, and
Whitchurch on the other; but the impression of this quickly wore off, and yet
the long-suffering of God still waited, (the holy and righteous God is slow to
wrath) and he was long a coming to Wem, expecting still his Gospel preached
there might find better acceptance, and prevail more to the amendment of their
lives. In the mean time he visited other places, and uttered his voice in
dreadful flames in Drayton, the sound whereof, had it not been for a general
and moral deafness, would have been shrill in your ears; crying, Wem, look upon
Drayton, and learn to be wise in time; in this thy day, know the things that
belong to thy peace and safety. God called, but Wem would not answer; yet still
Gods bowels wrought strongly toward Wem (as of old toward Ephraim) how shall I
give thee unto the flames? Make thee as Admah (Hos. 11.8.)? I Will practice in
like manner upon another place also; it may be then they will hear and fear,
and do no more wickedly; so a Fire, and that a dreadful one was in Newport: Now
God said as in Zeph. 3.7, Surely they will fear me in Wem, and break off their
sins which are greater, some circumstances considered; so iniquity should not
be their ruin: But behold, no returning yet, such as God looked for; and
though divine Justice cried, Wem is incorrigible, let it utterly perish; yet
mercy triumphs further over justice: No, says God, I will not destroy it
utterly yet, as I did Sodom: there are righteous in it, who though they be
sleepy, yet the firing of one little house, [this happened March 76.] almost
out of harms way, may awaken them, if others would not hear; being come home to
them to contend likewise by Fire, this might well be received as a strong Alarm
at the Gate. But at this time God repented, and therefore Wem repented not: yet
after all this, [Five Months after,] God would Fire one Beacon more in the
highest place, in the heart of the Town; and if he must be put to quench it
himself with the Clouds, because they did it not with their Tears, the next
shall be an unquenchable Fire: [which was March 3. -- 76.] I would not have
made mention of those neighbor Towns upon whom the hand of the Lord was heavy;
but that I feared, then I should lose my chief design, which is to advance the
infinite riches of Gods forbearance, to aggravate your sin, and to make way the
better for your deeper humiliation and repentance; but especially, though your
houses be in Ashes, that you might put your mouths in the dust, and justify
God in all his righteous proceedings against you: that you may have nothing to
say against God, but to turn your complaints against your selves, as the People
of God in like cases always have done. And if this was the effect, at present,
of this dreadful stroke, I hope you will experience another hereafter, which is
to do you good in the latter end.

Of two evils God would choose the least for you; he would burn yours, but not
you: he knew that Tophet would be a worse place for burning, than Tabora, Numb.
11. If a people were set upon sin, so that there was no saving them but by
Fire, if they were not burnt, they might be damned; if their houses were not
desolate, their salvation was endangered; if they would not so carefully look
for a House in Heaven, so long as they had where to lay their heads here on
earth, he must cure by burning. And my dear Friends, you are not the first that
God practiced this way upon; his own People the Jews were consumed by Fire and
other horrible judgments; at last sent packing away to Babylon (your suffering
not the one half of theirs) and yet all was for their good, Jer. 24.5. And
therefore my dear Friends, give me leave to tell you, that now under this
stupendous providence, is your day. Now is your critical time for making or
marring, for Body and Soul: hear, and your Souls shall live; repent, and your
Town shall be built, and you, and not others shall inhabit it.

No Conscience can be so stupid, but must conclude that as this dreadful
stroke, by all circumstances, was from an angry God in Heaven; so from thence
it brings this errand, Now or never repent; you did burn lately, you must turn
presently. I tell you, this Providence admits no delay; you must sin no more,
lest a worse fire come, or you come to a worse fire. God says to you, as well
as to his People burnt out of old, Consider your ways, Hag. 1.5. O would to God
you were (my dear friends) so come to your selves, as the Prodigal was, to run
and cry, Father, we have sinned against Heaven, else the Heavens would not so
furiously have blown the flames that did consume us. [The Town consumed in
little more than an hour!] O that the People of Wem were like the men of
Issachar, who understood the times, and knew what they ought to do. Then I
would comfort you who have lost your Houses, you should instantly have a House
without hands, made sure to you in Heaven for ever. Would not that be a
bonefire indeed that consumed your lusts (that ye might be meet to dwell in
that brave House) though it burnt your earthly tabernacles together? That wind
did blow you good indeed, if the Spirit of God was in it, consuming, the while,
your sins, and purifying your Souls; were your Houses built to day, and burned
again to morrow, you might afford to bear it, if Christ's Fathers House in
Heaven, by the Spirit of adoption, be sealed securely unto you; which then it
would be.

Now my Brethren, having this house I have been speaking of, in hope, if you do
repent, which this present Providence cries and calls aloud to you to do (if it
had been done sooner, your houses might have stood; if it be not done now, your
houses may never be rebuilt; if they be, you may not live to dwell in them:
and where shall ye dwell then? Oh the houses in Hell are woeful houses): will
you without delay obey this voice? Oh that while I am writing, I could be
assured you are repenting, that some good man or other would come to me with
good tidings: The people of Wem are much changed and refined by the Fire; there
are like to be more new creatures among the poorer sort, than new cottages: the
Church is burnt, yet the people passionately say, Come let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, weeping as they go. I
will not despair, I hope God will hear prayers, and give you repentance unto
life.

After Gods voice, I beseech you, by the mercies of God, let the voice of his,
and sometime your unworthy Minister be heard; repent and amend your lives. I
need not go to particulars to press this repentance; the sad Providence of God
has wrought so, I hope, as to save me this labor, and brought your sins fresh
to your remembrance. Though I cannot, yet sure God does hear your own
Consciences peaching you, viz. Ah, this is for my going prayerless to bed: if
our houses had been Churches, and we spiritual Priests to offer morning and
evening Sacrifices unto God, of broken and contrite hearts, this would, this
might never have been; but I did rise early, and made more haste than good
speed out of my own house, that I might be in the Alehouse; rise early to
follow strong drink, (follow it indeed, when I stand at it the whole day); I
came thither a man, but I went thence a brute. Shall I mention burning my
house? it is the infinite mercy of God I my self am not burning in Hell: Yonder,
yonder stood the house where I consumed so much precious time; where I spent
most of that which cost me so much sweat and labor, where I was drinking and
debauching my self while my family at home wept and sighed for want of bread,
or something else.

This fire was for our profanation of the Sabbath, a Judgment particularly
threatened for this sin, Jer. 17.27. God threatens, Zach. 5.4. to burn houses
for swearing and forswearing; and was it not a wonder of mercy my house stood
so long! O, the Scripture sure is the Word of God; I Will go no farther, than the
fulfilling of it, for a proof.

O my folly, my folly, says this, and twenty men more, whose hearts ran after
their covetousness. I have cared, and labored, plotted, and contrived with all
my might a whole age, for that which thieves might have stolen, which fire has
utterly consumed in one hour: How shall I answer God, who gave me so long time,
since I have nothing left now, to show what I did all this while: I have little
knowledge of the things of God to show: I have few good works to show: I was a
true lover of the Mammon of unrighteousness, it was in my heart; so that I was
an Idolater, and sacralegious person all that while. What, have I employed a
soul, a precious and immortal Being, about things, that it could never have
content in? And are these now gone in an hours time? Look yonder, all that I
labored for, and loved above my soul, is now some carts full of rubbish, and a
few handfuls of ashes. I have spent my time well, that am now levelled with the
poor man, that could arrive to no more than to see a little meat in his
cubbard! My Heaven has took Wings, and fled from me; and what a Heaven now
shall I have! Lord show me my folly, or I am undone. The House of God is burnt,
says another: And now if God should reckon with me for all the sins I have
been guilty of there; What a fire did I deserve to feel? Here stood my seat
where I slept so much: while I waked, my ears were stopped, because my mind was
devising evil devices, and was prejudiced against the Preacher and his Doctrine
both, especially the Application.

I do now wonder, and wonder again at my self, that while I heard there the
glad tidings of the Gospel sounding in my ears, I should be no more affected
than the pillar I leaned unto. There I was invited to the marriage-supper; yea,
I was promised in case I would consent, my Maker would be my husband, and if I
would be for him, he would be for me, Matthew. 18. But I made light of it, and
disdainfully said, I pray have me excused; though that while, I had no other
suitors than the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, whose motions I embraced,
though my early vow in baptism enjoined me by the Command of God upon greatest
penalties, to forsake them all.

There, we call to remembrance, the Minister cited and applied the words of
Moses to the two Tribes and half, Numb. 32.22, Behold you have sinned against
the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out.

We were told there, over and over, that we had God to serve, souls to save,
death to pay, an account to give, a sentence to receive, and eternity to live
in. But these things did not move us, so as to stop our running to all excess,
and committing iniquity with greediness; as if we could not soon enough provide
fuel, not only for this fire which has consumed us, but for a worse, which, if
God be not infinitely gracious to us through Jesus Christ, will be consuming of
us for ever.

And now methinks, I hear you sigh and cry: Men of God help us, what shall we
do? The wrath of the Lord is gone forth, the fire of his indignation has begun
upon our houses: what must be done to quench it, that it might not reach our
souls, that we may not suffer the vengance of eternal fire?

Christ's Counsel to the impotent man, John 5.14, Sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto thee, is proper and seasonable for me and you. My friends, come
let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn us, and he will bind us up; he
has burnt you, and he will then build you up: Knowing the terror of the Lord,
sure this Exhortation will obtain, Burnt children will dread the fire: O tell
thy lusts that have been as dear as thy right hand and eye unto thee, I Will be
revenged. This month you have made me lie down in sorrow, and if you live, I am
sure you will make me dye, and live in sorrow for ever. I have seen and felt,
and therefore dread the terrible God, who takes vengeance on those that will
go on in sin, though this voice by Word and Rod cry never so loud: Wherefore I
abhor my self in dust and ashes, I will forsake my sins. This, this is that, my
friends, you must do, or else you will be undone worse, a second time; at death
you will be utterly undone. It is not enough to go up and down in the Ruins,
looking wistly, sighing deeply, and saying, Alas! alas! so the friends of that
mystical Sodom and Babylon shall do, Revel. 18.10. But you must say, By the
grace of God, and in the strength of Jesus Christ, we will amend our lives for
time to come; it is time, it is high time: we have received the first, but we
will take heed of the worst fruits of sin. We will never love that more, which
has done more hurt in one hour, than it did us good all the days of our life.
Strong drink will burn: the color of it in the glass shall tempt me no more: A
Christian beast will be a Monster in my account for ever: And therefore I will
never put my bottle more to my Neighbor, to make him drunken, no never, after
God has put such a cup of his fury into my hands, and made me drink up the
dregs thereof (Oh that God would say as Isa. 51.22, thou shall no more drink it
again); I did swear and blaspheme, and my tongue was set on Fire of Hell: It Is
true, I was the more emboldned through the weakness of the Law, wanting
execution; but God has now required the penalty, and by his grace I Will forfeit
no more, his Law is holy, just, and true; He will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain. If God should say, the next Oath thou swearest, I Will
burn thy house; I hope notwithstanding my house should stand for my posterity
after me to dwell in. I am of another mind now; I shall never more think that
they who will wickedly and commonly swear, can serve God with reverence and
godly fear: If God will hear my prayers, and grant me his grace, I Will have
other employment for my tongue for time to come; I Will pray, and out of my mouth
shall proceed blessing; bu^ I will curse and swear no more. It i^ said one fire
will fetch out another poor man! who have broken the third Commandment, may be
more than a hundred times a day, How happy would thou be, if God should make
the firing of thy house a remedy to fetch the fire of Hell out of thy tongue*
O, I will boldly come into thy company for time to come, when I shall be sure
not to hear the language of Hell. When I shall comfortably converse with a man,
a Christian, and not with a Devil incarnate.

My friends, my friends, these are heavenly resolves, to drink and swear, and
sin no more. I pray God that these things thou bindest thy self to, may be
bound in Heaven, for your help herein stand^ in the name of the Lord; through
him alone, who must strengthen you, you can do these and all things.

Were I among you, since this awakening Providence, I am persuaded I should
have much such like work as John the Baptist had (if I was able to do it),
every one ran unto him, after he had preached cuttingly, Luke 3.9, saying,
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down and cast into
the fire: His Ax was so keen, that it divided between the marrow and the
joints, and made them cry out, what shall we do then? Publicans and Soldiers,
yea, all sorts came with their sores. John tells them what must be done, but to
be sure he refers them farther, to one that came after him, yet was before him,
who had the Balm that never failed; and shed wherewith to make a plaster, that
would never fall off without effecting the cure: So after this loud preaching
of God in flaming fire, many of your Consciences are scorched: Here say you,
was a fire indeed, which put us in mind to purpose of the fire of Hell; great
were our frights, and fears, by that; but to tell you the truth, we are afraid
of our souls, if they should burn also, that would be worse than the burning of
the whole world, because our souls are better than the world. It is true, we
are convinced, and our sins do trouble us, but the fire is not out, for our
pain and anguish still continues; What shall we do?

Truly I should be glad of such company, and such complaints too; sure this
work pleased John; and so Ministers of Christ work gladly all days of their
lives, and have joy in hope, that this greatest recreation will be at the end
of their work also: as it was at the end of John's preaching in the place
before mentioned.

But are you scorched indeed? does the sore of your sin, since the Fire, run
especially in the night? that you weep, when ye used to sleep? Are you truly
troubled with the greatness and number of your sins, which the light of this
Fire, through the grace of God, has made discovery of? O then come away, make
haste, linger not; the Gospel is an Hospital (the great Rabbi and Master of it
calls thee) where all sort of such maimed ones have lain: The door is open
day and night for all such, the worst have been cured without money, and
without price: Thy case thou say is sad: thy case I say is not desperate: I
would not venture my soul rashly for a world; but I would pawn it this once, if
thou be truly penitent, and can look unto Jesus, and have faith to say as
Mary and Thomas did, Rabboni, My Lord, and my God; Though thy sins were as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Christ bids thee look unto him, and be
saved: as sure as they that were stung with the fiery Serpents, when they
looked upon the brazen Serpent, were healed, Numb. 21.9. So thou that look
with a mournful, craving, steady, and believing eye, on Christ, the truth of
that which was his type, thou shall as certainly be saved. But then as they
that were stung, did beware of the venomous teeth of the fiery Serpents ever
after; So when thou art made whole, thou must sin no more, watch and pray
continually, that thou enter not into temptation. I say, watch and pray, this
counsel was never so seasonable as now. Satan knows Gods expectations from you,
now after this sweeping Judgment, are high; he knows if such opportunities of
breaking the league with sin, and making peace with God, be lost, nothing more
kindles the wrath of God, to leave you for ever, that you may dye in your sins:
this may make him swear in his wrath, I would have purified thee: I hearkened,
and heard, this Sabbath, and that Sermon, by former and latter calamities; when
shall it once be? never, if not after this fire. They shall be smitten no more;
they shall be awakened no more; sleep on now; but this know, your damnation
sleeps not. I called far and near; louder, and louder; all to no purpose.
I Will hold my peace till the day I say, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

I hope, my dearly beloved Friends, you will take the course before prescribed,
to prevent this sentence, and to escape that punishment; but if not, know
assurely the fire of Wem was purposely to make the fire of Hell hotter than
else it would have been. Can you bear with my using this sharpness? will ye
indeed bear with me? I use it, because of my hearts desire unto God, that you
may be saved. I love you, therefore you will bear with me; and therefore I warn
you, saying, Miss the wise improving of this hour of fire, this fiery trial, and
it may be as much as your immortal souls are worth.

Good sirs, good sirs, Do not return to folly again, lest Satan should beguile
you of this golden opportunity, to work out your salvation with fear and
trembling. O should I hear or see, that Wem, which has been a boyling-pot over
so fierce a fire, yet still does retain her scum to mix and settle again; I
should cry out, beware, there is death in the pot: Should I live again among
you, though I should see goodlier houses, yet I would lie in ashes, if those
that owned them did not more own Religion, and the good ways of God, than for
some years before the fire they have done; if they did not return from their
sins to the Lord, after they had so fallen by their iniquity. In the mean time,
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you, (till
God open a door, that I might teach you the good and the right way) 1 Samuel
12.23, that the greatest sense of this dismal Fire may continue upon you, lest
you come under the same condemnation with them, Psalm. 28.5, They regard not the
works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, therefore we will destroy
them. I need not tell you again, there is a worse Fire yet; the Fire that burns
souls, is a thousand times worse than yours; yea, than that which must burn the
World.

Let your fire put you in mind of that: Did you run to and fro in the streets,
while the flame did fly as fast on the top of your houses, sighing, sobbing,
and at last swooning? What Town so miserable as ours, for behold in one hour we
are poor, and miserable, and naked? Was there at once a common screeking-cry? O
my house is burnt, the cruel flames are eating quite up my habitation: All is
gone, says another; I am as poor as Job, says a third; all undone, all
undone. What a dreadful time and cry will that be then, when the whole world
shall be burnt up? O what weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth will
there be then, when the Lord shall come from Heaven in flaming fire, and render
vengeance to them that know him not, and obey not the Gospel of his Son;
burning the World first, and then the Throne for Judgment shall be set (God
knows where), that the wicked and unbelieving inhabitants of all the earth, may
be doomed and burnt with everlasting fire? Yours was a sad cry; at the general
conflagration it will be sadder; but the saddest, loudest and killing screek of
all, will be at the pronouncing upon Reprobates that dreadful sentence, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

I hope also by this Fire, you will be convinced as the people were, 1 Kings
18.38, 39. When the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the sacrifice, with the
wood, the stones, and the dust; took all, as yours did: They fell upon their
faces, and said. The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God. So say you,
verily there is a God that judges in the earth, that is long-suffering, but
not ever suffering; who, if he be not sanctified by a people, will sanctify
himself upon that people. God will come and right himself: although he may be
slow, yet he will be sure; you have often heard by the hearing of the ear, that
there is a great and terrible God; now your eye have seen, Oh fall down and
kneel before everlasting burnings, and a consuming fire; the Lord of hosts, who
has all creatures of his Army to fight against them, that fight against him,
will overcome when he judges. Fire and Water, Flies and Frogs, Men or Angels,
good or bad, what Regiments he pleases to Muster and Commission, must and
shall accomplish that whereto he send them. If God said to those Malcontents,
Numb. 12.8, Were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? one i^
Commission under him: Well then must you be afraid to sin proudly and
presumptuously any more for ever against the Mighty God, and Lord of Hosts
himself: Do not begin again to provok^ him. I hope God has put the sword up
into the scabbard; and there it will rest and be still, if you do not draw it
(...) (...) should be sorry, and tremble to hear after this fire, of any
Flagrans peccatum, ^. e. debauched practices to bear date after the 3d of
March, 1676, [then that ^ire was].

Upon your repentance you are purged from your old sins: God repents; and ^s he
repented, and said he would drown ^he World no more; so if Wem thus sin ^o
more, then he will burn it no more. And therefore I beseech you prepare no fuel
for a second burning; if you do, who knows the Power of Gods anger? he may
second it with the second death. You must sin wickedly no more against a God
that has you at Command, to do with you in two Worlds what he will.

By the light of this Fire also you may see to write vanity and folly upon all
things in this life, and upon the ^nordinate loving, caring, and seeking after
them: that which did full your heads, and your hearts, employ your hands, and
six days in a week were too little for Body and Soul, to be extended to the
utmost for them; but Gods day, and all must be taken in; the snatching flames
have caught hold on, and they are yours no more. May not some Neighbors take
one another by the hand, and bring them to their respective Ruins; and say,
Neighbor, if that was a man's God he loved most, then here in this heap of
rubbish and ashes lies my God, to whom I did sacrifice, rising early, and lying
down late: I see by this Fire my God was a dunghill God, and to the dunghill it
must go. O the folly, the fol^^ of a mortal man, thus to busy an immortal
soul, which is to stay in the body but a little while, and that a purpose to
get grace, to make it meet for glory, to spend time and strength about that
which is a heap of vanity; and which is worse, to purchase it with the hazard
of everlasting happiness! Such a one is to purpose an Object of pity, whose
riches are gone, but the sinful getting of them remains to be a witness against
him, before that Judge of quick and dead. For a man to get riches, and lose
them, and after lose his soul for getting them, is desperate folly and madness,
and the ^orriblest cheat that the Devil can put upon man; and therefore for
time to ^ome, I hope you will forsake him, and ^ake the Scripture for your
guide, for ^eeking the things of this world, Matthew. ^.33. John 6.27. To seek
them for Gods sake, not for their own; because ^e commands, and in the order he
appoints, giving them such estimations and ^ffections, as he allows; and if you
would do so my friends, and return in your duty and prime love to God, you
would (had you little or much) live far happier lives than if you should have
for the future, much more than ever ye did possess.

I beseech you in dear compassion to your souls, take heed of choosing that way
which makes the getting to Heaven so difficult, which is blockt up by the love
and cares of this World.

I beseech you my dear Friends, join your earnest prayers with mine to God, to
give you new hearts, that through his assisting grace, henceforward ye may seek
the things that are above the fiery Region, things that ye cannot lose. You
have lately experienced the sad di^appointment of laying up treasure (...)
earth; the Scripture, when you have do^^ all, will prove your best counselor,
(...) lay up your treasure in Heaven.

You have served a bad Master all the while, Mammon has put you all thi^ while
to drudg and labor in the Fire and now behold the fire has devoure^ your
labor. I pray you now stedfast^^ resolve one by one, to change your Master,
choose God for your Master. Dot^ not his word tell you, Him only mus^ thou
serve? This is your best Master return to him from whom thou have ru^ away ever
since the Covenant thou mades^ with him in baptism; pray him again to receive
thee into his service, and thou shall be sure of better work; yea, better and
surer wages also. Is not this hi^ Covenant with all his servants, not only as
Isa. 33.16. Thy meat shall be given thee, and thy drink shall be sure? But also
to give thee grace and glory, and to withhold no good thing from thee: Do you
not remember what has been told you, and where, that God will be your Father,
Christ your Savior, the Holy Ghost your Comforter, Angels your Guardians,
Saints your Companions, that Manna shall be your food, and like the Kings
daughters, Psalm. 45.13. Your clothing shall be of wrought gold, the world
shall be your servant, the Devil your slave, death shall be your friend, and
heaven shall be your home? serve the King of Kings, and this shall be your
^^ire. Good sirs, will you with full purpose of heart resolve to serve a good
God? It shall never repent you of his service, when you come to dye. O it ^^s
brave resolving upon that which a man needs never repent of. I know it ^^rks
you much, that you have risen early, ^ayen down late to get something together,
which with bleeding hearts ye saw burning together. O foolish, and foolish
again, have we all been, that our lusts should guide our lives, and order our
labors! Now we see what is come on it, we were deaf to the word all this while,
that cried, O ye fools, when will ye be wise? We hope through the blessing of
God, this Fire was good to make us wise; and the Lord being with us, w^ will
make proof of it for time to come Now most amiable, true, and lovely Religion,
the everlasting doors of our soul^ are open to give thee entertainment We will
set thee up, and thou will se^ up our houses, or settle us in a house which we
shall never go out of, after we are once in it. Now say one by one, let your
souls say, I Will be servant to no creature on earth; I tell you I will serve the
God of Heaven. My Maker shall be my Master, and then I am sure I am made for
ever.

Well, my dearly beloved Friends, whose eternal happiness my soul indeed yearns
after: you have resolved, now put your hands to the plow, and what your hearts
find to do, do it with all your might; you must put your All to it, All is too
little, yet the good God will graciously accept this little All. But let me
tell you beforehand, there be some in the world that will give you
discountenance and discouragement, that will think it strange that ye run not
with them, as of old, to the same excess of ^iot; that will persecute you by
mocking (as Ismael did the Son by promise): What, you mean to grow pure after
the Fire, do you? Thou that wast as honest a fellow as lived before, I know not
what to make of thee now; I am afraid you will turn Changeling, and grow mad. I
doubt you will not find me a false Prophet; you will, if you be real, be put to
this test: you are permoniti, but are you permuniti? Do you know your posture
and guard, if the sword of the tongue should make this pass upon you? Will you
say, or to the same purpose thus: I did use to do so my self, time was; and
that while, sure I was doing service under the Devil, whose great business in
the World is to hurry some to Hell, and hinder others all he can from going to
Heaven. But these things do not move me now, I thank God that ego non sum ego,
here am I, but not the same. I am resolved to serve God if I dye for it; I shall
dye the worst of deaths if I do not; I am sure there is none so wicked as to
except against him, who said, Away from me, for I will keep the Commandments of
my God; and why then against me, for saying with the same heart, the same
words? jeer me for this, and jeer the Scripture, and none but Devils in the
shape of men dare do so. Let men continue to be godly, till I reproach them for
their godliness, for time to come.

Well then, having this encouragement, I call you all together; and desire you
to make profession what you will do to glorify God and save your Souls. Shall
one speak for all, and the rest say, Amen? He that speaks for you, methinks
says in the sincerity of his heart, as Paul, I was a blasphemer, I was a
Persecutor, I was injurious, I was this and that, and what not? to demonstrate
the heart of man to be deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: but
God in mercy did bring this late Fire to enlighten me: what he did upon mine,
was but a means; his end was me: He would have me see one Fire, that I might
never feel another. I thank God for ever, it was a good Fire for me; I find,
(as Sampson's Riddle has it) Judge. 14.14, out of the eater comes meat. The
Fire, like Pharoah's lean kine, did eat all the fat of my substance; but it
made ready the Passover for me, and I have eaten the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the World. And now I will tell you what I will do for this
God, who while I thought he was undoing me, has done so much for me. I will
receive him into my heart, and walk worthy of him in my life; and if ever God
send me a new house (if ever I have one, it must be of Gods sending; as
Ahasuerus did command the Governors, Neh. 2.8, to supply Nehemiah, that he
might build; so God must command his Almoners concerning Wem, that it be built
also) I will dedicate it to the honor of God, in my calling and relation: What
was Joshuah's resolution, shall be mine; As for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord: My serving of God in his House, will be but a mock-service, if I do
not serve him in my own. There will I pray and not be ashamed; I will rejoice
with singing, and this shall be the burden of my Song, For his mercy endures
for ever. God might have said, Ashes to Ashes, House and Household burn
together. [The Fire began at eight at Night] If it had kindled in the dead of
the Night, we might have been presently in the chambers of Death. It is a night
therefore much to be observed to the Lord, a Night from which we may date our
new life; there was nothing but this caused joy in the Morning, after heaviness
enduring all Night, but that we had our lives for a prey, when we saw no houses
left; yet what cause of adoring with thankfulness, that we were all alive
before the Lord then our selves!

And does not this lay an eternal obligation to serve him, who was the
preserver of us, our wives and little ones? After such deliverance as this
given to us, shall we again provoke him? Can we expect to escape another time,
if we should slight so great salvation? Make vows and pay them, serve God at
home, and serve him in the Congregation, keep his Sabbath, be afraid because of
the power, when the Magistrate shall contend with you, as Nehem. 14.17, and
say, what evil is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath? I am afraid
Sabbath-sins have been a chief cause of consuming the Timber, with the Stones
of thousands of goodly Houses in England within these few years. How many in
Shropshire? where many Fires have been kindled and burning upon the Lords day;
so in the great City, and other great places in the Nation. Keep within (on the
Lords day) your own, and Gods house, to keep out the flying Roll, and the
burning Curse. O that all places round about might have a pattern of Universal
Reformation, in Wem, as well as an instance of doleful Desolation! And
therefore how much does it stand our Ministers upon, to walk circumspectly, to
preach powerfully, to preach, as if they would save themselves, and them that
hear them? As they know they are directed by their Superiors to pray; so they
must know it will be expected one day from the great shepherd, that by Life and
Doctrine they set forth Gods true and lively word. Thou that teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Are such like to prevail with others to bear heavy
burdens, when they that bind them, will not touch them themselves? The Prophet
Isaiah thought otherwise, and therefore would not give the people Precepts
without joining his own examples, Isa. 2.5, O house of Jacob, come ye, and let
us walk in the light of the Lord. Good Ministers say their people shall not go
to Heaven alone, they will go with them, and be their leaders: that Church had
but a name to live, whose Angel was dead. If the Minister be dead, how should
the people be lively?

My beloved Friends, God sent this Fire to awaken us all; Three Fires in Wem,
in three quarters of a year.
Ministers and People, watch therefore against all sin, to all duty; you will
say they are incorrigible offenders, who will commit iniquity to be punished by
the Judges, after they are once burnt in the hand; What mercy can you expect
from your Judge, who have been burnt thrice? God expects superlative sufferers,
should be ever after incomparable reformers, and to have no more to do with the
unfruitful works of darkness. We read in the Gospel, the last shall be first.
Who knows but by the power and grace of God, scoffers of godliness, having now
known the terror of the Lord, may be the first to encourage and promote it! He
that made so good a Paul, of so vile and wicked a Saul, can do this: when men
have been melted in such a Fire, they may be molded and fashioned by him who
made all things, vessels of Honor fit for their Masters use. Could I see this,
that one hours burning has done more for conviction and Reformation, than
twenty years preaching, I would say, God spoke to such out of the Fire indeed.
By this Fire God has laid a deep Foundation, and if you be not wanting to your
selves, you may build high, and make Wem a place of Renown. If you would take
my counsel, it should be this; presently get the start of all places about you,
and set up the Staple-trade of practical godliness; there is such a mystery in
this Trade, that it would make you all presently rich: you would have the
blessings of the upper and nether springs, and your latter end like Job's,
would be far better than your beginning. Wem has ever wanted a good Trade; I
am sure this course will bring one. Scripture rules and examples will direct
you in this Practice of Piety; be much therefore in reading the sacred Book;
other books may be of great use, but this is of infallible verity; let the word
of Christ therefore dwell richly in you, in all Wisdom, Teaching and
Admonishing one another: Love as brethren and companions in Tribulation; let
all bitterness, envy, and malice, be put away. Seek not your own things, but
every one another good: grudg not brethren one against another: live in peace,
and the God of peace be with you, Take heed in the last place of grudging and
murmuring against God: God will not be called in question for any of his works.
All souls are his, and so are all houses to; let him do his pleasure to one or
the other, who shall say unto him, what do thou? You must needs say he has
punished you less than ye do deserve, and then there is no wrong done; stand
still and see the Provision God will make for you: if you will vow to God, that
when he shall again build your houses, you will write Holiness to the Lord,
over your doors, God will delight over you to do you good. Wem shall flourish;
and men did not so much marvel at its desolation, but they shall as much admire
your restoration: But if you fulfill the Proverb, 2 Pet. 2.22, The dog is
returned to his vomit, and the sow to the wallowing in the mire, I tremble to
think what will befall you in the latter end; but I hope better things of you,
things that accompany salvation.

I shall forbear (because my Letter has gteaten'd beyond my first intention)
to write to them whose Houses and Goods were preserved from being consumed by
this dreadful Fire; because there is a book Printed in 67, called Counsel to
the Afflicted, will give them better advice than I can, which begins at page
293, which book some of their Neighbors can, and will willingly accommodate
them with the reading of, and any others may have it, I suppose, at Mr.
Parkhursts at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, London.

And now my Friends, I commend you all to the grace of God, whom I beseech to
comfort you under your present grievous Afflictions; which I doubt not of, if
you will but hear his voice, which cries aloud unto you, Micah 6.9, Hear the
rod, and who has appointed it. And put in practice this Counsel given in much
love to your souls, from the unworthiest of Christ's Servants, sometime yours,

And. Parsons.

ERRATA.
Page 4. Line 4. for March read May.

POssibly this Letter may come into more hands besides theirs, to whom (...)
have particularly written, who have also suffered in like manner with them.
Where ere it comes, I shall follow it with my Prayers, that it may contribute
something to revive the sense in all places (which are not a few in England
these ^ate years) people had, when the heavy hand of God by Fire was upon them.
Great judgments are to be kept in remembrance, and to be improved for promo^ing
repentance, and the fear of God all our days; yea, the memory of them should be
conveyed to posterity after us; as Joel 1.3, Tell your children, and let your
children tell their children. Men think unworthily of Gods Judgments, if they
suppose they are only to be regarded a few days.

Men and Brethren, who have suffered by so great and unusual Fires as have been
in our Land: What were your thoughts when your eyes were sadly beholding those
terrible flames? Were they not such as these? We have angered the great an^
terrible God, whose fury has broken out in these terrible flames. Woe unto u^
we must repent, or else our souls and bodies, as well as our houses and goods,
will be also as dry stubble to this Consuming Fire. Lord what will thou have us
to do? We will sin no more, but offe^ our bodies and souls a living and
acceptable sacrifice to God for ever.

It cannot be hurtful, it may be profitable, if I (the unfittest of those that
mak^ mention of the Lord), be your remembrancer of these promises made to God
i^ the day of your distress; the word is gon^ out of your mouth, and recorded
in Heaven, and ye cannot go back.

It is therefore your wisdom, and mus^ be your chiefest care, that these bonds
b^ taken up; and that payment be made o^ these vows, lest execution be taken
out o^ the Court of Heaven, and a worse thing come unto you, than the dreadful
Fir^ could procure; there can be no security against greatest fears and
dangers, till Gods anger be turned away so long as his hand is stretched ou^
still, past misery may be but the beginning of future sorrows.

As a Minister of the Catholic Church, I have Authority from Christ to speak,
if I could, to the whole Nation, or wherever he has a Church in the World,
being called thereto; but if I had opportunity, and power answerable to desire,
I would chiefly, if not only, confine my self to put those places and people
where the merciless Fire has been so raging for a few years past, in
remembrance, whether they have answered the call of God, when he cried then so
loud. O Drayton, New-port, Marlborough, London, Northhampton, Southwark, with
many other places of note in England, which have suffered the vengeance of
fearful Fire; you were once in ashes, have you repented in dust and ashes?

I make no question, but your respective Ministers cried aloud, calling you to
repentance (the main Errand which my Letter goes on) as seasonably, but much
more powerfully than I have done to the place and people I once belonged to.

But Men and Brethren, what answer and return? Methinks God has picked out
these and other burnt places (the light of whose flames was seen all the
Country over) to be the purest and visiblest patterns of Piety toward God,
and sobriety toward men, of all places in this Kingdom; and if they should not
prove such, should I speak too hardly, if I did adventure to say, it shall be
more tolerable in the day of Judgment for any other place in the Kingdom, than
for these?

What can be said for these places, when Christ speaks, saying, What could I
have done more?

You would not be reasoned, which my faithful Ministers did wisely and
earnestly attempt; no, nor be burnt out of your sins, which the power of my
anger, and my outstretched arm attempted also.

Beloved Christians, you have been pulled out of the Fire, but were you purified
in the Fire? Have you testified the truth of your repentance, for those sins
that were the chief fuel for the fire which the wrath of the Lord did kindle?
Have you testified indeed the sincerity of this repentance, as the believing
Corinthians did, 2 Cor. 7.11, as all the Saints recorded in Scripture, did by
reformation of life?

This Nation is sick, and ready to dye for want of repentance and reformation.
God hearkens, and hears; men look and enquire from one end of the Kingdom to
another; who shall begin, be the first, and best example of this real,
universal, and effectual reformation; that England, though it droops, may not
dye.

Sure these great places, who all had this loud call from Heaven, God calling
out of the Fire unto them, are to be first. I am sure God expects and designs
such so to be. Joel 2.3, 12. The Fire devoured before, and the voice of the
Lord comes after, saying, Turn unto me with fasting, weeping, and mourning.

So when the Citys of Judah were burnt with Fire, the design of God was, that
the filth of the daughter of Zion should be cast away, Isa. 1.7. God has the
same expectations from you, O people, whom the Fire of the Lord has destroyed,
and laid waste. Has God ever since waited for this? when shall it once be? O
give not God occasion to speak of you, as he did of Judah, Amos 4.10, Ye were
as a brand plucked out of the burning, yet have ye not returned unto me.

Though Judah thus offended by being incorrigible, O let not cause be given for
God to set this brand upon you! He had you in the Fire to melt you under his
hand, to work you up to his good pleasure; but you failed his expectation as
much as they did, Zeph. 3.6, 7.

But I hope better things from these places who have passed through the Fire. I
hope then they prayed effectually, like David, O God create in us new hearts,
that we might lead new lives, and walk in a perfect way in our new houses, that
we might sin no more, that so we might be burnt no more. Which shall be the
earnest prayer also of their souls well-wisher,

A. P.
April the 5th, 1677.
FINIS.

