A LETTER TO A friend in the Country: Being a Vindication of the Parliaments
whole Proceedings this last Session.
With the State of the PLOT, and manner of its Discovery.
SIR,
I Received yours of the 20th. instant, wherein I perceive some disaffected
Person has been laboring with you, to give you an evil Character of this
present Parliament; as also to occasion in you some Jealousy concerning the
Truth of this Plot, by reason of the dependence you say it has upon two single
persons Evidence, viz. Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow: Therefore since you are
pleased to condescend so far as to rely upon my poor Judgment, and desire my
Opinion in the matter, I shall to the best of my power present you with the
stare of the Case.

The many and great Advantages that of late years have accrued to the Popish
Party, from the success of the French Arms abroad, (whereby they hoped in time
of need to be assisted here at home) first emboldned them to undertake this
Design, which was then on foot of subverting our Religion and Government. This
made them despise and wish ill to the Emperor, and King of Spain, because
(though they were no less Catholic than the other) they were not so ready at
hand, nor so necessary for the carrying on of their Design, as would be Lewis
the 14th. if he proved successful: wherefore nothing could be ill, nothing
could be dishonorable that he acted. Now however at this time I can laugh as
heartily at any design of a Massacre from the Papists, as any one; yet on the
other side I must affirm, that had not this Plot been discovered, nothing was
more feasible: when the King had been destroyed, and a Popish Successor so
established, that all had been Traitors who opposed him; when all Offices of
Trust were put into the hands of Papists, as Hull was then in the hands of the
Lord Bellasis, etc. when all the Commonalty of England were (by that Statute
for the Preserving of the Game) disarmed and not left so much as a Musket or
Pocket-Pistol, for fear killing a Popish Bird; when we had a mercenary Army on
foot, ready raised and filled with Popish Officers, to have joyn*d that Party
at an hours warning; when the French was ready to have assisted them with Men,
Money, and Ammunition, being through their contrivance at Peace with all the
rest of the World; when at the same time the Spaniards (under the name of
Pilgrims) had designed to Land amongst us 12 or 14000 men, which is attested by
a Captain who was on board their Fleet, before they were dispersed by ill
weather; when all our own Ships had been bestowed upon Popish Commanders; when
all our strong Forts and Militia had been under the conduct of Popish Officers;
when at the same time our City had been Fired, and every man taking care of his
own particular concern, so that none were left to mind the public; when you
might have searched twenty Houses, before you met with one that had more Arms
in it, than some old rusty Gun or Pistol, and that perhaps without either
Flint, Power, or Bullet: when all these things concurred together, as they did
at the time of the Plots discovery, you must needs confess, That they had it in
their Power to act Massacres, or any other Villainies they pleased. But now,
Sir, blessed be God the Scene is changed, and however it is to be feared that
their wicked Engines are still at work, yet I cannot but hope the best, since
this prodigious Discovery. For having observed the miraculous Providence of
Almighty God, who in the midst of these our Troubles has raised us up such a
Parliament, whose Wisdom is sufficient to search into the most intricate
designs of our Enemies, whose Religion prevails above the Superstition of our
Adversaries, whose Courage slights their Godferizing Tenants, and whose Wealth
and Fortunes are sufficient to contemn all Indirect Bribes or Pensions, knowing
no other Service but that of the Public. Having likewise observed the
stupendous love and care which the great Creator has had for our protection,
in his wonderful Discovery of this so general and so damnable a Plot; how he
first raised up Mr. Oats, to be an Instrument of their detection; whose single
Evidence being censured for want of a second, how (according to that old
saying, Quos Jupiter vult perdere, hos prius dementat) God so blinded that
Popish Party, as to suffer them to commit that execrable Murder upon that
worthy Magistrate Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who as he had made the Plot known in
his Life, so did he make it be believed by his Death: After this, how the
Almighty raised up Mr. Bedlow, who by his Testimony did not only discover the
aforesaid horrid Murder, but also in the main confirmed the former Evidence of
Mr. Oats: And then, when their Evidence grew something cold, and to be
censured for their reflections upon some Great Persons, how he likewise raised
up first Mr. Prance, next Mr. Dugdale, and then Mr. Everard, together with
diverse Letters and Writings, which did not only confirm the former Evidence;
but were of themseves sufficient to prove the verity of this Plot, merely by
Circumstances, admitting Mr. Gates and Mr. Bedlow to be as great Liars as the
Papists report them to be. Having thus therefore observed such a Chain of
Providence linked in our defense, I cannot but rely upon it, and hope that the
Storm may light more heavy upon our Enemies, than our selves. However, if any
amongst us have betrayed us into ruin, when it come, I am sure for our parts
we shall have the same satisfaction which Aesop's little Fishes had, who being
pursued to shore by the great ones, when the little ones lay broiling in the
Sun, and just before they gave up the Ghost, they had the pleasure to behold
those great Fish (who had brought them into that ruin) to lie broiling as well
as themselves. And this, Sir, is what I have to inform you of concerning the
Plot.

But now concerning our True English Parliament, As every Englishman is
represented by them, so ought every Englishman to justify their Proceedings;
he that reflects upon them, reflects upon you, me, and every one; whereas he
that vindicates them, vindicates himself. Therefore in right of the People who
chose them, give me leave to justify their Proceedings unto you, against all
such Objections as their enemies have suggested.

First then, The Papists (whose only interest it is to speak against them, and
therefore all who do so are such) have under the pretense of Friends and
moderate Church of England-men, inveighed against the Proceedings of this
Parliament, as too hot and too rash both against Thomas Earl of Danby, and
James Duke of York; never considering that a man cannot be too zealous in a
good Cause, and now the Nation lies at stake, Non progredi est regredi, to be
lukewarm would be to countenance the Plot. What! would they have Danby
banished? bid him take up his Bed and walk? A pretty punishment for a man that
is guilty of so many Crimes, that he wanted words to express them by: You have
ruined the Nation, cozened the King of so much Money, go 20 miles off and
enjoy it; if this be all, England is the cheapest Treason-Ordinary in the
World. If he had robbed a man upon the Highway of a Crown, (although to rescue
himself from starving) he had surely died; but now having committed so much
greater Crimes, it will be clemency (forsooth) to pardon him: Parva scelera
puniuntur, magna in triumphis feruntur; As the Pirate said to Alexander,
Because I rob with but one Ship, I am a Rogue, a Pirate, and deserve hanging,
but you that rob with a hundred are for so doing called a great and gallant
Prince.

In the next place, I will acquaint you something concerning this Lord's
Pardon, whereof I presume you cannot but have heard. It is a Pardon that
comprehends all the Crimes that mankind could invent, although perhaps all
little enough too for so great a sinner; however this Pardon is the chief and
only Plea he depends on, saying, it was granted him by the King, and therefore
it is good in Law.

Here first, Although I deny not it came from the King, yet every good Subject
has great reason to believe that he never acquainted his Majesty, either of
what Crimes he was guilty, or what Crimes were comprehended in the Pardon, for
we are all too well assured of his Majesty's Justice, to believe he would have
granted such a Pardon wittingly: Therefore this Pardon may rather be said to
have been stolen from the King, than granted by him; also its not passing
through all the Offices, (which were appointed only to prevent such Pardons as
these) show in what an illegal and clandestine manner it was obtained.

But secondly, Admitting it did come from the King, yet is it at best but a
disputable thing whether it be therefore good; I am sure if it is good, the
consequences are evil; since if a Pardon stands good against such an
Impeachment in Parliament, what redress has the Subject (notwithstanding all
his Magna Charta) against any Courtier, who when he has ravished his Wife or
murdered his Children, produces such a Pardon from his Master? Is not the King
in this case as absolute as the great Turk, when he may send for our Heads in a
black Box, since it is but pardoning the Messenger that fetches them?

Lastly, As to the manner of his Trial, if any Person reflects upon the Commons
Proceedings in that Matter, it shows that he had not a true understanding of
their Reasons, since quitting the least part of their Right, might perhaps have
been a means of saving all the other five Lords in the Tower, as well as the
Earl of Danby; And if the Spiritual Lords had no Right to sit and Vote at his
Trial, which it is not yet proved they had, then the Commons had as much reason
to oppose it, as one of us have reason to except against the Sons being on the
Jury for the Father, from whom he has received his whole Estate. And this I
hope may prove satisfactory to you in behalf of the Commons, and may also
suffice in answer to all those, who condemn them for their Proceedings against
Thomas Earl of Danby.

The next thing wherewith they are charged, is their Bill for the excluding of
James Duke of York, as if it were not only hard measure to accuse him without
being heard, but also unjust to exclude the Heir to the Crown upon any account
whatsoever.

First, That it is not hard measure to exclude him without being heard is
evident, for that several Letters from Cardinal Howard, the Pope's Nuncioes,
and other grand Papists, in Answer to what he had either sent or caused to be
sent, show him to be the Original of this Plot, both against the King's Person
and Government, as it has already been voted in the House of Commons.

Secondly, For that his being a Roman Catholic, must of necessity produce some
ill effects against the Life of his most Sacred Majesty, (whether he be
consenting thereunto or no) since nothing would so highly advance the Popish
Interest as the Duke's being King; whereas if he were a Protestant, they could
have no advantage by plucking down one Protestant to set up another.

Thirdly, A prince does not run so much hazard from any Person living as from
his next Heir, whose Attainder (if he kills him) is immediately wiped off by
the Crown.

Here some may object and say, Why had it not been a better way to have
proceeded by a Summons and an Impeachment?

To which I answer, That the Parliament had too lately had experience what a
tedious and difficult way that of an Impeachment was, from the Proceedings
against the Earl of Danby; and if the Trial of a Treasurer was so impeded, how
much more unaccessible would the next Heir to the Crown have been, where every
one would sing a Placebo to the rising Sun.

Secondly, Others will have it to be unjust to exclude the next Heir from the
Crown upon any account whatsoever; but this I will prove to be contrary to the
Law of Nature and Custom of all Nations.

First, That it is contrary to the Law of Nature and Reason, to suppose that
the King and Parliament together cannot alter the Succession, is evident, since
the Heir apparent may sometimes happen to be a Fool, a Madman, a Turk, a
Heretic, or one deprived of his Senses, from whom nothing but public mine
could be expected, should the Government be put into his hands: Which does
sufficiently prove, that propinquity of Birth or Blood, without other
circumstances, is not alone sufficient to be preferred to a Crown, for that no
Reason or Law, Religion, or Wisdom in the World, can admit such Persons to the
guidance of a Commonwealth, from whom no good and nothing but destruction can
be expected; Government being in its primitive institution ordained for the
benefit of the Public, and not for its destruction.

Secondly, That it is lawful for King and Parliament to alter the Succession,
is evident from the Law of all Nations: And here let us begin with the People
of Israel, (1 Reg. 8.) to whom, after God had granted the same Government of
Kings that other neighboring Nations had, (and whose Kings did then rule by
Succession as ours now do) yet nevertheless God did at the very beginning and
first entrance of their Kings plainly show, that though this Law of Succession
by birth and propinquity should for the most part prevail, yet that it was not
so precisely necessary, but that upon just Causes it might be altered: As for
instance, Albeit he made Saul a true and lawful King over the Jews, yet after
his death, God suffered not any one of his generation to succeed him, not
withstanding he left behind him many Children, and among others Ishbosheth, a
Prince of 40 years of age, (2 Reg. 1 and 21.) whom Abner the General Captain of
that Nation followed for a time as his lawful Lord and Master by Succession,
until God reproved him for it, and induced him to cleave unto David newly
elected King, who was a stranger by birth, and no a kin at all to the King
deceased. Now if any shall reply here, That God put by Saul for his sins, that
is no Answer at all to us; for we pretend not that a Prince who is next in
blood, can be justly put by but for his own defect. Again, After David was thus
invested with the Crown, yet do we not find the Law of Succession to be
performed to any of his elder Sons, nor to any of their off spring or descents,
but only to Solemon who was his younger and tenth Son.

The next example of this kind among the Israelites was that of Prince
Reboboam, lawful Son and Heir to King Solemon, who after his Father's death,
refusing the Peoples request, to take off some heavy Impositions which were
laid upon them by his Father, they dem'd to admit him for their King, (3. Reg.
11.) but rather chose one Jeroboam, Rehoboam's Servant, that was a mere
stranger, and but of poor parentage, making him their King, and God approved
thereof, as the Scripture in express words does testify: And when Rehoboam
that took himself to be openly injured hereby, would by Arms have pursued his
Title, and had gathered together and Army of an hundred and fourscore thousand
chosen Soldiers, (as good as any French Janissaries) to pubnish these Rebels,
as he calls them, (5. Reg. 12.21.) God appeared unto one Semeith a holy man,
and bade him go to the Camp of Rehoboam, and tell them plainly, that he would
not have them fights, against their Brethren, who had chosen another lawful
King. Now if God permitted and allowed of this in his own Commonwealth, which
was to be the example and pattern of all others that should ensue, no doubt but
he approves also the same in other Realms, viz. that the ordinary of
Succession be altered, when just occasions are offered, either for his Service,
the good of the People and Realm, or else for the publishment of the Plots,
sins, and wickednesses of some particular Princes.

Having thus therefore showed you the most authentic Presidents and
Authorities out of Scripture, I shall for brevity sake (as unwilling to turn an
Epistle into a Volume) omit those innumerable other examples, which I could
here produce out of all other Histories and Kingdoms, as well ancient as
modern, both from Greece, Rome, Spain, France, and other Countries, and will
only touch upon England, and so conclude this Point.

To begin then first with King Edward, who dying in the year 900. left behind
him two Sons lawfully begotten of his Wife Edgina, Edmond and Ethelred, and a
third illegitimate Son, whose Name was Adelstan, born of a Concubine; but yet
forasmuch as this base Son Adelstan was esteemed to be of more valor than
either of the other two, he was preferred to the Crown before them, although
they were legitimate and he not, Polyd. hist. Ang. lib. 5. In fine, He that
will consider the passing of the Crown of England, from the death of Edmond
Ironside, (elder Son of King Etherled) until the possession thereof gotten by
William Duke of Normandy, may easily see, what Authority the Commonwealth has
in such Affairs, to alter Titles of Succession, according as public necessity
shall require. Again, After the Conquest, we see the Conquerour's eldest Son
Robert Duke of Normandy disinherited, and his two younger Brethren, William
Rusus, and Henry the First, preferred before him. But to conclude this Point, I
need trouble you with no other Arguments, to prove how justifiable such an
exclusion of the next Heir is by our Laws, since by the (13th. of Eliz.) he is
guilty of a praemunire, who affirms that the King and Parliament together
cannot alter the Succession.

This, Sir, is all that I can say in the Matter, which if it may prove
effectual to convince you of your former Error, of the Parliaments being, too
hot, you will then with the desire nothing more, than that they or their Ghosts
rise again with the same brave Spirits they left us, and fall upon the same
Subject, to wit, the Trial of the Traitors; so will our Enemies get no
advantage by this Prorogation, so will the French, the Pope and the Devil, have
just occasion of mourning, when the cause of that Triumvirate is in so great
danger. This, Sir, is all at present, from the Person in the World that loves
and honors you most.

Sir, Your most humble Servant, J. P.


