^ DIALOGUE between a Divine of the Church of England, and a Captain of Horse,
concerning Dr. Sherlock's late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Case of Allegiante due
to Sovereign Powers stated, etc.
^ivine. -- IT IS your opinion then, that it had been better that the Doctor had
never set Pen to Paper upon the Subject.


Capt. Much better, doubtless, with a ^^spect to his own Credit, and the
Reputation of the Cause (...) has at length espoused.


Div. Thus far I agree with you, that unless he could have ^^tified his own
doing upon Principles more honorable to (...) Methods and Instruments of the
late Revolution, he ^^ght to have kept his Thoughts within his own Breast,
(...) more Reasons than one. I think he should not, at this (...) of the day,
have published a Book, which, whatever (...) Design of it was, can have no
better Effect, than to ren^^r all those who (if I may so say) lent an early
Assistance to ^^ovidence in its first Motions toward the thorough Settlement
(...) talks of, to be no better than a Company of -- One ^^rd in your Ear.


Capt. True, however we have an Act of Grace, which, (...) I remember, pardons
us all to the Sixteenth of May last.


Div. Right; and if we had not then a thorough Settle^^nt, the Doctor may
chance to come in for a Snack yet, (...) the score of his Congratulatory Visit,
etc.


Capt. No, the Doctor tells ye, page 17. If the generality (...) the Nation
submit to such a Prince (i. e. a Prince, accord^^^ to his supposition, wanting
a Legal Right,) and place (...) on the Throne, and put the whole Power of the
Kingdom (...) his hands; tho it may be, we cannot yet think the Provi^^^ce of
God has settled him in the Throne, while the dispos^^^d Prince has also such a
formidable Power, as makes the (...) very doubtful; yet if we think fit to
continue in the ^^^gdom, under the Government and Power of the new Prince,
(...) are several Duties, which we ought to pay him. And (...) he proceeds to
enumerate all the Duties that can fall ^^thin the compass of any Charge that
can be made against himself upon the account of any thing he did antecedent to
what he calls a thorough Settlement.


Div. So that the Doctor, I find, is very careful to save one.


Capt. But not to hang up the rest I hope.


Div. No, no, he leaves 'em to the King's Mercy under a mild Government.


Capt. But who will he have then to be the true Objects of his Princes Bounty,
I would fain know; for it seems to me, that according to the Doctor's Notions,
there are but a very few.


Div. Why, the fewer the better cheer, Man. He Will meet with the less opposition
whenever he shall think fit to stand Candidate for any farther Preferment; for
all Mankind will agree, that those that do the most that can be expected from
them according to the strictest Principles of Loyalty and Obedience, Page 16.
are preferable in that Point to all others.


Capt. Ay, and doubtless they are.


Div. Well, and for a plain Direction to Subjects in all the Revolutions of
Government, he lays down this, The most (says he) that can be expected from
them, according to the strictest Principles of Loyalty and Obedience, is to
have no hand in such Revolutions, or to oppose them as far as they can, and not
to be hasty and forward in their Compliances; but when such a Revolution is
made, and they cannot help it, they must reverence and obey their new Prince,
as invested with God's Authority. Ibid.


Capt. I am not like to be a Colonel then, during this Reign; for when King
James had such a formidable Power as made the event doubtful, I taking the King
of Great Britain to be my lawful King, it is well known that I assisted him all
that I could at the Boyn.


Div. And as to Swearing and Praying, and all that, -- it is as well known that
I did what became me as early as the most forward of them all, and therefore,
Woe is me, I am utterly excluded, according to the Doctor, from all hopes of a
Bishopric.


Capt. Don't despond, my Friend, however; for I presume an honest Man may yet
be allowed to tell the Doctor to his face, That our King, and his Royal Consort
Q. Mary, have a Right, a true and indisputable Right, not only to what they
possess at present, but to what they claim, and is forcibly detein'd from them
by the Rebels.


Div. What need you be so earnest tho? Let me beg of you, Noble Captain, to
moderate your Zeal for the King's Honor and Service a little at present, that
you may the better attend to the Doctor, who says again, That many of those who
have writ in defense of the new Oath, have supposed this, that a Legal Right is
necessary to make Allegiance due, and therefore have endeavored to justify
the Legal Right of K. William and Q. Mary. Page 1.


Capt. Well, but what Effect had those Endeavors toward his late Conversion?


Div. None at all, it seems; for in the same breath he tells us, That How well
soever such Disputes may be intended, they are certainly needless in this
Cause, and serve only to confound it, by carrying Men into such dark Labyrinths
of Law and History, etc. as very few know how to find their way out of again,
Ibid. and Page 2.


Capt. He Is an admirable Advocate the while, to betray his Cause thus at the
first dash, by telling the World in effect, that we have neither Law nor
Precedent to support it.


Div. Nay, if the Doctor does not play Booty, I don't understand him; for let
but the foundation-Claim of Legal Right be once removed, and our glorious
Superstructure must infallibly come to the ground; for what any one wrongfully
possesses (be it a Crown or a Cottage) most Men will think ought to be restored
to the right Owner. And what if none of those many Writers he talks of, have
been so happy in their Endeavors to justify the Legal Right of K. W. and Q.
M. as a body might wish, does it become him to declare so to all the World? And
over and above, to lay an Embargo, as it were, upon all future Attempts of that
kind? We have known how fruitless, for a long time, the Endeavors of some Men
to prove the Original Contract, were rendered by the contrary Endeavors of
others, till Time, that brings all things to light, has made it as plain and
legible as now it appears. Now I my self (I speak it without Vanity) dare
undertake to produce Law and History enough in half an hour, not only to
justify his Majesty's late doings, which some Men seem to take so much
pleasure in censuring, but to free all the honest Loyal Party from that
Reproach they have labored under from the beginning of the late Troubles to
this day, upon the score of their Duty to their King and Country.


Capt. Explain your self a little however, that I may know what King you mean,
and who those are which in your esteem are the honest Loyal Party.


Div. That is such an odd Question now, when the Doctor tell's us, Page 14.
(how consistently with him self it matters not) that we can have but one King
at a time; but to humor you for once, by King I mean a Lawful King; or if you
had rather have it in Latin, a King de jure, which I take our King to be; and
by honest Loyal Party, I mean those who have in all times, even in the worst of
times, strictly adhered to such their Lawful King, in opposition to all the
injurious Claims and Pretenses of Oliver, the Rump, Monmouth, and the like.


Capt. I understand you now. But it is hard to say what the Doctor would be at;
for after he had led us out of the dark Labyrinths of Law, etc. and put us
under the conduct of Providence, and Page 17. taught us to follow Her step by
step, in such sort as to proportion our Duties of Allegiance to all her Events,
and to take for the Object of those Duties any Powers whatever (tho destitute
of all Legal Right) so settled (no matter by what means) as may agree with his
Definition of thorough settled Powers, Page 9. After all this, I say, the
Doctor (having probably found more Difficulties in Providence, than that one
which he mentions, Page 32.) brings us back again into the dark Labyrinths of
Law. -- I hope he means us no harm.


Div. No, no, we ought to judge charitably.


Capt. However, let us walk warily the while.


Div. Ay, where are we now?


Capt. Why the Doctor says, Page 54. that what Prince we must obey, and to what
particular Prince we must pay our Allegiance, the Law of God does not tell us,
but this we must learn from the Laws of the Land; And so he proceeds, Ibid. to
state the Question, whether the Subjects of England (when such a Case happens)
must pay their Allegiance to a King de jure, who is dispossessed of his Throne;
or to the King de facto, who is possessed of it without a Legal Right?


Div. But to whose Determination will he submit that Point?


Capt. He tells you in effect by a pair of other Questions, Ibid. Is it not
(says he) most reasonable to think that to be the sense of the Law, which
learned Judges and Lawyers have agreed is the sense of it? And again, Is it not
reasonable to take that to be the sense of the Law, which has been the sense of
Westminster Hall, and is like to be so again, if we think fit to try it.


Div. He had done well though to have told us, whether by his Learned Judges --


Capt. Take heed how you step -- there is a what do you called, a Trap or a
Pitfal, or something like it, just before ye. Lend me your hand,


Div. Thanks good Captain -- Now I see my way. But as I was saying, the Doctor
had done well to have told us, whether by his Learned Judges he would have us
to understand Judges de facto or de jure? For who knows but by his Learned
Judges who have agreed, etc. he may mean Bradshaw and his Companions, and by
his Learned Lawyers that Cook who pleaded in quality of Solicitor before the
High Court of Justice, so called, and Prideaux and the rest of that Tribe of
Mercenaries to the Usurpers of those times many of whom (it cannot be denied)
were sufficiently Learned.


Capt. But I think they had no Honesty to spare, For it is well known that Glynn
and M -- d
To make good Subjects Traitors, strained hard.
Hudib. in MS.



Div. The Doctor you see has not made Honesty a necessary Qualification to
Authorize the judgments or determinations of his Judges and Lawyers: But if he
had, it is all one to him, for according to his Notions those Sparks were very
honest Fellows; they acted by Commissions from the then Powers who, according
to his account of the matter, were thorough settled Powers, and the Ordinance of
God, to whom all Allegiance was due, and which ought not to be resisted. Now
though the Doctor would not be thought a friend to the Usurpations of the Rump
Parliament, the Late Protector, or Committee of Safety, etc. but in his
Preface, and in some other parts of his Book, seems to cast them all off, yet
to the Objection page 45, 46. that upon his Principles we might submit and
swear to a Rump Parliament, or to another Protector, or to a Committee of
Safety, etc. and that his Principles arraign all the Opposers of those
Usurpations as the Resisters of Gods Ordinance, etc. He gives such an Answer
you will see as effectually acknowledges them all to have been God's Ordinance,
which ought to have been complied with and not resisted, his Answer is, that it
is a great prejudice, but no Argument; for if these Principles be true, (says
he) and according to these Principles they (the Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and
Clergy) might have complied with those Usurpations; that they did not, is no
confutation of them. It is plain, I think, by this that the Doctor himself
found that he could not support his Argument upon any other Principles than
would justify those Powers, and Arraign the honest Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and
Clergy, etc. as resisting God's Ordinance by their Opposition to those Usurped
Powers, and their attempts to restore their King to his Throne.


Capt. Well, But he cannot expect to top upon many the Judgments and Opinions of
the Judges and Lawyers of those times, for an Authentic Sense of
Westminster Hall.


Div. Where will he be then? for if he means public Judgments or Opinions of
any who either have sat, or do fit as Judges in any of the Courts at
Westminster by K. W's. Commission, or any Opinions of Lawyers delivered at any
of the Bars of those Courts before them, in favor of his Doctrine in this
Point, he should have cited one Case at least; since most People, I presume,
are Strangers to any such Judgment given in Westminster Hall during this Reign,
and do think that if the Doctor at any time since the New Oath was appointed to
be taken, could have found his way from the Temple to Westminster Hall, whither
he is so ready now to direct others, some of the Learned there might have told
him another Story. And if he means by his has been agreed, etc. and has been
the sense of Westminster Hall some Judgment or Sentence given in
Westminster Hall, antecedent to the Usurpations upon King Charles I. and II. in
favor of Submission and Obedience to any Powers de facto, not having Legal
Right, it is probable such Judgment was extant in Print before the Trial of the
Regicides, who might then have offered it in their own defense, and if that
they did not was owing to their Ignorance of the Law, it may however be
reasonably supposed that some of the many Honorable Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, Learned in the Law, before whom they were tried, would have found it
out, and accordingly have directed the Jury to have acquitted them from the
crime of High Treason, of which they were Indicted; for doubtless if Powers no
otherwise settled than according to his account of a thorough Settlement, page
9. have Gods Authority, are his Ordinance, etc. then those by whose Commission
the Regicides acted, being such settled Powers, had Gods Authority too, were his
Ordinance, etc. ought to have been submitted to and obeyed, and consequently
the Actings of those Regicides, etc. were warrantable and Legal, though their
Masters were Usurpers, for want of a Legal Right to Govern, what can he say to
it?


Capt. No more, I think, than what in effect he said before page 46. That this
is a great Prejudice, but no Argument, for if his Principles be true and
according to his Principles, those who sat as Judges in the High Court of
Justice, and their Assistants at the Trial of King Charles I. did no more than
became them to do, and so ought to have been acquitted; that they were not is
no confutation of his Principles: For if Learned Judges, and Lawyers have
agreed, etc. And if it has been the Sense of Westminster Hall, etc. And if that
be the Sense of the Law, and is like to be so again if we think fit to try it;
that it was not sufficiently urged or insisted upon in their favor, and that
they were not acquitted does not prove that it might not have been so urged and
insisted upon in their favor, or that they ought not to have been acquitted.
Now though, I am certain the Law condemns all Usurpations whatever upon the
Regal Office, yet I will not deny but it has been the constant Sense of
Westminster Hall, under every Usurpation, that all the duties of Allegiance
ought to be paid to the Usurper, but not eo nomine, not as Usurper I hope, no
those who at any time, by Commissions from Usurpers, have sat as Judges in
Westminster Hall, knew well enough that to admit in the least the Legal Right
of their Masters to be disputed, would be to admit their own Authority to fit
and determine Causes there to be questioned, and therefore even that same High
Court of Justice would have told the Doctor if he had demurred to their
Authority, or (which would have been the same thing) to the Legal Right of
their Employers, as they told the Blessed Martyr King Charles I. Sir, I must
interrupt you; you may not be permitted: you speak of Law and Reason; it is fit
there should be Law and Reason, and there is both against you. Dr. Nalsons
Journal, page 44.


Div. The Doctor himself says indeed page 44. That it seems to him to be unfit
to dispute the Right of Princes; a thing which no Government (he says) can
permit to be a Question among their Subjects.


Capt. But they might permit it, a body would think, i(...) (as the Doctor
would persuade us) nothing depended upon(...) it. But the mischief of it is,
that all who take upon them to Govern, etc. know that all their claims of
Allegiance, or of any duty of Allegiance from the People, do depend upon their
Legal Right to Govern them, etc. But what d'y' say to his Divinity.


Div. Why, I think all the Texts of Scripture that he brings to maintain his
Doctrine, will stand him in no more stead than Bishop Overals Convocation-Book,
till he has proved tha(...) every Act done, by force of any Natural Powers
which Go(...) Almighty has given to any one, has Gods Approbatio(...) merely
because by restraining those Powers he could have hindered its execution. And I
think the Fellow had received better Instructions than the Dr. would have given
him, who being asked who made him? gave this answer, God made me a Man, my
Father made me a Tailor, and the Devil made me a Thief.


Capt. A fair Distribution! The Man made a Conscience, it seems, of giving the
Devil his due.


Div. As every one ought, I think, instead of making the good God the Author of
the worst Villainies, committed by the instigation of the Devil, as the Rebels
in the late times did, and as many now adays are too apt to do; but then as to
what the Doctor says, is like to be the Sense of Westminster Hall again, if we
think fit to try it. I know not, I confess, what may be the Sense of
Westminster Hall in Case his Principles should universally obtain; but the
present Sense of Westminster Hall I believe is against him in some things; he
may try his own Cause when he pleases.


Capt. Ay, and We'll try ours when we see our own time. But I cannot imagine, I
confess, to what end he quotes Dan. 4. 17. For the most High rules in the
Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the
basest of men, page 11. Not having first proved what as you say he ought to
have proved.


Div. That you must know was to anticipate an Objection which the Doctor
foresaw would arise upon another Text of Scripture which he brings in page 35.
viz. Hosea 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me; They have made Princes
but I knew it not: But you will pardon me, Captain, that I must take my leave of
you a little abruptly, I see a worthy Gentleman there that I must have a word
with.


Capt. Farewell then.


Divine. Adieu.


LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
1690.


