ANGLIAE SPECVLVM: A GLASS That flatters not; Presented to a Country
Congregation at the late SOLEMN FAST, April 24. 1678.

In a PARALLEL between the KINGDOM of ISRAEL and ENGLAND.

Wherein the whole Nation is desired to behold and consider, our SIN, and our
DANGER.

By a dutiful Son of this Church.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred MAJESTY,
MDCLXXVIII.

A GLASS That flatters not; Presented in a SERMON At the last Fast.
ISAIAH v. 25. latter end. For all this, his anger is not turned away, but his
Hand is stretched out still.


WE are assembled here, by His Majesty's Proclamation, to humble our selves
before Almighty God, for the manifold sins and provocations of this Kingdom, to
beg his blessing upon it, and to beseech him to avert his deserved Judgments
from it.

In Order to which you have heard now read (in the first Lesson for Morning
Prayer this Day) another Proclamation from God himself, the King of Kings,
directed particularly unto us his Ministers, by the Mouth of his Prophet,
Isaiah 58.1. saying, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet,
and show my People their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sins. For
we cannot be humbled for our Sins, unless we know them; and unless we be
sensible also how heinous they are; and how displeasing to our Heavenly Father,
who has already testified, many ways, how much He is offended with us.

Now the best way to understand this, will be to consider, what Sins they were
which heretofore were most provoking to Him and destructive to others: causing
Him to cast off, even the whole House of Israel and Judah; his own peculiar
People, whom He had separated to Himself from all Nations upon the Face of the
Earth. Whose Condition is so like to that of ours here in England; that he is a
Man of little observation, and of slow conception, who is not able to draw the
resemblance. If I should endeavor to express to the life, how God dealt with
them, and how they requited Him; and again, how He corrected them for their
Ingratitude; you would say, This is England under other names; or Here is
Israel again revived. The same things are acted over again in the World; only
the Scene is changed, and new Persons are come upon the Stage.

I know no better way to affect your Hearts and to make you both understand my
Text, and the dangerous condition wherein we are; than by presenting you with
some few touches, at least, of a Parallel between them and us.

I.
First then if we consider the Singular Privileges, they enjoyed above other
Nations, the Excellent Laws which God gave them, and the true Religion which
was established and for a time flourished among them; you may easily find
something to match them here in England. Which is a Country, that other People
have admired more than our selves; for the Excellent Frame of our Government,
for the Liberty of its Inhabitants, and especially for the Enjoyment of the
Blessed Gospel of Christ in great Purity, Cleerness and Splendour; which has
continued many Years.

II.
And if we consider Secondly, what strange deliverances God vouchsafed that
People, whom He had made so near to himself; and those both upon the Sea and
upon the Land; we are not without some resemblance to them upon that account:
having been a People very often saved by the Lord, who has marvellously
preserved us, when we were in great danger of being swallowed up, by several
Enemies of our Peace and Happiness. They have been wonderfully defeated in
their open Hostilities; and no less miraculously disappointed in their Secret
Plots and Conspiracies: Witness, in the Days of our Fathers, the Spanish
Invasion, and the Gunpowder Treason, which can scarce be paralleled in any
Story; and the strange Restoration of his present Majesty, to the astonishment
and confusion of his sworn, insolent Enemies; of which our own Eyes have been
the Witnesses.

And it were well for us if we could stop here, and be able to carry on this
Parallel no further; if we could only recount the great Favors and Kindnesses
of God to us, and admire at his unexpected Salvation which He sent us, when, of
our selves, we were utterly helpless. But alas! We must confess also in the
third place,

III.
That as their Ingratitude to God was exceeding great, and their Rebellion most
shameful against him, who had been kind above measure to them: So we have
equalled, if not exceeded them in this; being a Nation prodigiously forgetful
of his benefits, and that soon let his wonderful works slip quite out of our
minds.

As it was said of them ( Psalm. cvi. 7.) that they provoked God at the Sea,
even at the Red Sea: That is, immediately after God had vouchsafed an
extraordinary deliverance to them, from a very fierce Tyrant, they made no
other use of it, but to take the Confidence to affront his Goodness: So may it
be truly said of us, At the Restoration of the King and Kingdom, even at the
Restoration of the King and Kingdom, we provoked him to Anger against us.
Instantly, I mean, after He had rescued us from a miserable, forlorn and
confused condition, from the power of Usurpers as insolent as Pharaoh; and had
restored us to Peace and Settlement; we betook our selves to our old or worse
Wickedness; revolting most perfidiously from all the Vows we were apt to make
in the time of our trouble; and behaving our selves so basely and
disingenuously toward Him, that it is a wonder he has endured us thus long,
or that we dare take the confidence to appear before him, and to expect any
further favor from Him.

The Description which the Prophet gives in the beginning of this Chapter, of
the happy Estate of the Jews by the Divine Favor to them, is exceeding
beautiful: and He no less lively sets forth their Horrid Ingratitude to their
Sovereign Benefactor. Read the first and second Verses, with this brief
Exposition of them, and you will scarce be able to refrain from thinking with
your selves (though I should make no comparison) how like are we to them in
every particular? He compares them to a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill; which
every one easily conceives is a representation of the prosperous estate of the
Jews in an exceeding rich Country, abounding with all delightful things. This
Vineyard He fenced, or hedged in, by the Law (say the Jews) whereby He severed
them from all other Nations; or by his special Providence, which was their
Guard and Defense, securing them from all invasions while they observed his
Law. And He gathered out the Stones thereof (as Men you know are wont to do,
when they have a very choice piece of Ground) that is, cast the Gods of Stone,
and all their Worshippers out of the Land of Canaan, as He did the Romish
Superstition out of this Kingdom. And He planted it with the choicest Vine;
Joshua and the Judges, that is, and a number of holy and gallant Men, came and
took root in that Country; as ours also has produced many choice and admirable
persons of all sorts, who were the Glory of their times, in the Age before us.
And then it follows, He built a Tower in the midst of it, by which we may
safely understand the famous City Jerusalem; which was in the heart and
strongest part of the Country. And then He made a Winepress, that is (we may
probably conceive) the Sanctuary and the Altar, flowing with the Blood of the
Sacrifices, and with their Drink Offerings, which were poured upon them; and
which He testified his acceptance of, by sending down, at the first erection of
it, Fire from Heaven to consume them. And now after all this care He expected
some fruit, as the next words tell us; and looked that it should bring forth
Grapes. But what did He find, when He came to examine how they had profitted
under his Heavenly Culture? Behold, this Vineyard brought forth nothing but
wild sour Grapes; which could not but be infinitely distasteful to him: That
is, all manner of Sin and Wickedness abounded among them. This was the effect
of all his care and pains; they lived as if they had been a wild barbarous
People, that were under no Laws, no Restraints, no Discipline in the World; but
were left to follow merely their brutish inclinations.

Shall I give you a Catalogue of those Wicked Fruits, that all his Love and
Kindness produced? And I will trouble you with no more than those which the
Prophet mentions in this Chapter; when he comes to explain and apply this
Parable of the Vineyard. And he must wink very hard, who does not see it to be
a Map of those very Crimes, which we have been guilty of in this Kingdom.

I.
First, they were grossly unjust and unmerciful to their Neighbors, Verse 7.
The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel, and the Men of Judah
his pleasant plant: and he looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression, and for
Righteousness, (or Mercy) but behold a Cry. Woeful lamentations, that is, and
complaints of many Miserable Wretches, who were undone by the great and
powerful, who should rather have protected and relieved them. These were some
of the Wild Grapes they brought forth. The very same with those Rapines, and
Spoils, and Plunderings, nay Sacriledges, which have been committed among us,
(and not yet, it is to be feared, repented of) besides all the violence and
cruelty, which is everywhere too common; and the private injuries that we have
done one another.

II.
Then Secondly, follows their Insatiable Covetousness and greedy desire of
Riches, which was the cause of the other; that which provoked their hungry
appetite to devour so many Houses, and swallow up so much Treasure. Verse 8. Woe
to them that join House to House, that lay Field to Field, till there be no
place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth. They were so
ravenous, that is, as if that fertile Country were made for them alone; and
they would have no body have any share in it but themselves. Such Cormorants,
we need not go far to seek in all sorts of Men among us in this sinful Nation.

Then, after a terrible threatening Verse 9, 10. against these Crimes (for the
Sin of Oppression, denying Men their right, or taking it from them, nay,
greediness of wealth, and endless heaping one gainful place upon another, are
highly displeasing to the Just and Merciful Lord of the World) there follows
in the third place,

III.
Their Gluttony, Drunkenness, and riotous Excess. V. 11. Woe unto them that rise
up early in the Morning (a thing very preposterous to begin the Day with a
Debauch) that they may follow strong Drink; that continue till Night (as if
they would never give over as long as they could see) till Wine inflame them.
And you know to what filthy sins such Beasts are wont to be inflamed: nor need
I tell you what impure Fires have burnt, nay raged among us; which, Woe be to
us, are not yet extinguished.

IV.
How should they? When, as the Prophet proceeds to inform us, these sins were
attended among that People, with a hatred of all that was serious; even then
when Gods Plagues, the tokens of his heavy displeasure, were remarkable upon
them. V. 12. Read it; for it is the very Picture of too many among our selves.
And the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts:
but they regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his
Hands. As much as to say (if we put it into our Language) they love nothing but
merriment and jollity, feasting and dancing, Balls and Plays, treats and
entertainments: but never regard what God is doing in the World, nor mind into
how miserable a condition their Country is already reduced by their folly. For,
as it follows there, V. 13, 14. Therefore the People were gone into Captivity,
their honorable Men were famished, and their Multitude (i.e. the vulgar sort)
were dried up with thirst: Hell, or the Grave, enlarged her self, and opened
her Mouth without measure (just as it did in the late devouring Pestilence,
which consumed so many thousands of us) nay, He threatens that their glory, and
their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices should descend into it.
This madness, that is, will inevitably bring all to an end.

V.
For, Fifthly, they devised all ways to be wicked. It was a piece of Art, and
Skill, to invent new Modes of Villainy; and they took a great deal of pains to
destroy themselves and others. V. 18. Woe to them that draw Iniquity with Cords
of Vanity, and Sin as it were with a Cart-rope. They were not merely drawn in
(as we say) to sin, by the allurements of pleasure and gain, and such like
things; but they drew in themselves, and forced themselves to be wicked; even
when there was no inclination, in Nature to it. They studied something out of
the common rode of wickedness; and, as if they loved wickedness for it self,
they dragged and haled some sins into the Nation, to which Men had no mind.
They set themselves, as the Scripture speaks, to do wickedly; and set
themselves to it with all their might. They made a very laborious business of
it; and did violence to themselves and others, to make them monstrously
impious. For that seems to be the meaning of drawing Sin and Iniquity, as with
a Cart-rope: unto which, I doubt, too many have put their hands, and made it
their work, in this sinful Kingdom; as formerly in Israel.

VI.
And in this lewd course they were so impudently confident, that they mocked, as
the Prophet next of all relates, at those who told them they were in any danger
of being punished for these impieties. They made themselves pleasant with such
Monitors, and laughed and jeered even at the threatening of Gods Messengers:
saying, ( V. 19.) Let him make speed, and hasten his work that we may see it:
and let the Counsel of the holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may
know it. Which are words of abuse, uttered by way of taunt and scorn, at those
who told them God would be avenged of them. They derided the Prophets, who said
God had pronounced a heavy sentence upon such evildoers; and that a dreadful
judgment was coming from the holy One of Israel. If He be so angry, said they,
why does He stay so long? let us see what he can do: let him make more haste in
his executions, that we may know you to be his Prophets. And do you think there
are no such profane Scoffers among our selves, who go on fearlessly in their
sins; and dare the Divine vengeance to do his worst against them? O that we
were but thus innocent, as not to come within the reach of this Woe, which the
Prophet denounces to all such contemners of Gods threatenings!

VII.
The ground of all which obdurate wickedness was, that they had utterly
confounded all the known notions of good and bad, right and wrong, holy and
profane, pure and unclean. Between which they made no distinction at all; but
looked upon them as Names, which had no real difference. That Is the meaning of
the 20th. Verse. Woe to them that call evil good, (it is plainer in the Hebrew
as you read in the Margin of the Bible,) that say concerning evil it is good,
and concerning good that it is evil: that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: that is, make no
difference between these; but look upon those things which we call Virtues and
Vices, as Words and Fancies, there being, in their opinion, no such qualities.
Nothing is good but what fits the turn they have to serve, and nothing bad but
what crosses it. As much as to say, these Men labored to dig up, by the very
roots, all Principles of Conscience, as a foolish scrupulosity; and to
introduce a persuasion that all things are alike lawful in themselves, so that
no body need consult any thing else but his own pleasure and safety. Which (it
is no Libel to speak it) is the very Character of that profane, ungodly Crew,
which in these later years have sprung up among us in this Kingdom.

VIII.
And yet these very Men were wonderfully conceited of themselves, and had an
high opinion of their own wisdom and skill, in managing affairs: as if business
would go on with sport and laughter, and flouting at others. Nay, they were
confident they should prosper; without maintaining any of those old thredbare
Notions of good and evil. Which seems to be the meaning of the next words, V.
21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own
sight. They will see, that is, e're long, what Idiots they are, that have so
little understanding, as not to know the difference between falsehood and truth,
fraud and upright dealing, oppression and mercy, soberness and debauchery,
devotion and utter neglect of all the Offices of Religion; which all Mankind
have ever thought to be as opposite as light and darkness, sweetness and
bitterness. Woe be to them that are thus depraved, and have so perfectly lost
all spiritual sense and taste, that they can swallow any thing: and yet fancy
themselves very wise and prudent Men, if by any means, though never so vile,
they can bring about their ends. Woeful at last was the end of these
Politicians, who trusted to such weak and rotten Counsels.

IX. X.
Especially since, Ninthly, they had no other valor but either that of
drinking stoutly; Or, Tenthly, that of boldly perverting all public justice.
So the Prophet concludes their abominable Character, V. 22, 23. Woe unto them
that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to mingle strong drink.
Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. They were mighty Men at a Debauch; and resolutely broke the
established Orders and Rules of common Right and Equity. For if they were
entrusted with the Administration of Justice, they judged the Causes that were
brought before them, not according to their merits, but as their hatred, or
affection, or hope of gain directed them. Rich and powerful offenders escaped
without any punishment, and the poor innocent could have no redress of the
wrongs he suffered by them.

I might tell you also of the Idolatry whereby some had corrupted themselves,
(as this Prophet complains in the first Chapter) and the foul Hypocrisy of
others, who still continued true Worshippers: But then I should exceed the
limits wherein I promised to contain my self, when I entered upon this
Discourse. The intention of which is to set before your Eyes those sins which
brought a People, as dear to God as we can fancy our selves, to utter ruin:
and to possess you with such a dread of his Almighty displeasure, that you may
prepare your selves, by true repentance of your own particular sins, to be
humble supplicants to God for the whole Kingdom; which, we have too much reason
to think, is defiled, if not with all, yet with most of these woeful Crimes.

For certain it is that we are very like them in another regard; from which we
may evidently conclude, that our Sins are of as deep a dye as theirs: In those
heavy Judgments, I mean, that God has sent upon us; which have a cause, no
doubt, as weighty, and that can be none else but our crying Iniquities. And
since God, as you have heard, has made us so like them in his Benefits, in the
enjoyment of which He has also preserved us, by wonderful Deliverances; and we
have made our selves so like them in our Ingratitude, that it is hard to
discern the difference between their Character and ours: What marvel is it, if
there be a Fourth resemblance between us; that is, in our Plagues?

IV. It is said, I remember, in the 28th. of Deuteronomy (where Moses foretells
the Fate of Israel, if they sinned against God.) Verse 58, 59. If thou will not
observe to do all the Words of this Law that are written in this Book, that
thou may fear this glorious and fearful name THE LORD THY GOD; then the LORD
will make thy Plagues wonderful, and the Plagues of thy Seed, even great
Plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses and of long continuance.
Behold now, out of the records which the Prophet Isaiah has left us, how
exactly this prediction of Moses was fulfilled. For they having offended God by
those Sins before mentioned, and cast away his Law, and despised his Word;
therefore v. 25. was the Anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he
stretched forth his Hand against them, and smote them: So that the Hills did
tremble, and their Carcases were torn in the midst of the Streets: And For all
this (says my Text) his Anger was not turned away; but as the Plagues were
great, so they were of long continuance, as Moses had said; for his hand was
stretched out still.

When one Judgment was past, then He sent another to succeed it; as you may see
if you look forward into the Ninth Chapter of this Prophecy, V. 11, 12. where
the same sad words are repeated again upon this Occasion. They were so vain as
to imagine themselves secure (notwithstanding all their Sins) from the Power of
the Syrians, by the Assistance of Tiglath Pelesar the King of Assure; who was
their Ally, and an Enemy to Rezin King of Syria. But even these Allies, and
Confederates, in whom they confided, at the last turned against them. They from
whom they expected Succor and Deliverance, proved their greatest Adversaries.
And so the Syrians before and the Philistines behind (who always watched
Occasions to fall upon the Israelites, when they were in distress,) made a prey
of them, and devoured them with open mouth: and yet, for all this, his Anger
was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still.

He had not yet done with them, because, as it follows V. 13. The People turned
not unto Him that smote them, neither did they seek the Lord of Hosts. They
never heartily acknowledged their faults, nor went about to amend them. And
therefore He proceeded to punish all the Senators, and the Prophets, and the
leaders of the People, together with their young and valiant Men; nay the
Fatherless and Widows and all: because every one was an Hypocrite, and an
Evil-doer, and every Mouth spoke Villainy (as you may read V. 14, 15, 16, 27.)
and yet for all this his Anger was not turned away, but his Hand stretched out
still.

How should it be expected that He should withdraw his Vengeance when they
ceased not to provoke him? For, as it there follows, Wickedness burns like
Fire V. 18. and so through the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts the Land was darkened
V. 19. Which seems to have been in the Days of Senacherib King of Assyria: when
Manasseh was against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh; that is, some of
the Kingdom of Israel joined with the Enemy, and others opposed them; they
could not agree among themselves, but continued their Divisions till all the
ten Tribes were subdued; and then they were all together joined against Judah
V. 21. And yet for all this his Anger was not turned away, but his Hand
stretched out still.

Were not Moses his words strangely fulfilled, that their Plagues should be
great, and of long continuance? The Reason was, their Sins continued, the very
same Sins for which they had thus smarted, as you read, Chapter 10.1, 2, 3. So that
after a New Visitation and a Desolation which came from far, (V. 4.) his Anger
was not turned away (it is repeated there once more) but his Hand was stretched
out still. The truth is, it was stretched out so long against them, that they
were brought to nothing; Jerusalem it self, that Impregnable Fortress, was laid
in Ashes, and came down wonderfully, as Jeremiahs words are in his Lamentations
1.9. Which sound to me as if he would have us understand, that not one tittle
of Moses his Prophecy failed; who said that their Plagues should be wonderful.

And what difference, I beseech you, is there to be found between us and them,
as their case stood in the Days of this Prophet Isaiah? His words and those of
Moses are verified again in this Kingdom; which has lain under Plagues, great
Plagues, and of long continuance. We that in former Days were the Admiration,
if not the Envy, of our Neighbors for the Happiness we enjoyed, became not
long ago, an Astonishment, a Proverb, and a Byword, by reason of the many, very
many and sore Calamities, which fell upon us. Who has forgotten the bloody and
tedious War, wherein we were embroiled? when the Land trembled, and our
Carcases were torn in the Streets? How dreadful is the remembrance of the
slaughter of such multitudes of brave men, by the Hand of their Neighbors? the
dethroning, nay beheading of the best of Kings? the extirpation of Monarchy?
the abolishing of the Apostolical Episcopacy? the defacing of Holy Places; with
all the rest of the Miserable Desolations, which were wrought by our own
foolish hands? And yet, for all this his Anger, it is apparent, was not turned
away, but his hand was stretched out still.

For after His Majesty's most happy Restoration, how soon were two Branches of
the Royal Family lopped off? What Floods were there in most parts of the Realm,
by immoderate Rains; which threatened a general scarcity of provisions, and were
a kind of presage, of the deluge of calamities which were coming to sweep us
away? (It was the year after His Majesty's return to his Kingdom; and there was
a general Fast, I very well remember, appointed merely for that reason:) And
yet, his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still.

For, not long after we were engaged in a new War; and that was accompanied
with the greatest Pestilence that has been known in this Nation. And yet, for
all this, his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still.

For, the next year followed a most dreadful Fire; which consumed the Houses,
as the former Judgment had done the Inhabitants, of our Capital City. And yet,
for all this, his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out
still.

For, not long after, part of the Royal Navy, the Walls and Bullwarks of this
Kingdom, were burnt in an ignominious and disgraceful manner. And yet, for all
this, his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Our
Plagues are of longer continuance; another War being commenced, attended with a
great number of ill successes: as if the Lord should say; I have not yet done
with you, though all this evil be come upon you.

Why? what can be worse than all this? when we may say with the Prophet
concerning his People, Isa. 1.6. From the sole of the foot, even unto the head,
there is no soundness, in the body of this Realm, but wounds and bruises and
putrefying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, nor mollified
with Ointment. It is a great mistake to interpret this, as Men commonly do,
concerning their sins: it is plain by what goes before, and follows after, that
he describes the grievousness of their punishments; which were so many, and so
great, that the body of the Kingdom was just like the body of a Man, who has
been beaten so long that you cannot find one part whole, where there is not a
bruise, or a wound, or a putrefying sore; and those strokes so continued, that
there was no time to close one wound, before another was made.

What a mortifying Spectacle is this? That is, in what a lamentable condition
is this poor Nation, whose very Picture this seems to be? what can we expect
but a total dissolution of a body so wounded and putrified; for which we can
find yet no Plaster, no healing? what can we expect, but that we should fall
wonderfully (as Jeremiah speaks) our Plagues having been so wonderful?

For now at last, which seems to me the most wonderful thing that has been
mentioned, we are threatened with the danger of losing our Religion; than which
nothing ought to be dearer to us. I should not have presumed to say it, if His
Majesty had not told us so, in his Proclamation for the last general Fast
before this, Feb. 4. 1673. where we are invited to the same Duty we are now
about, because the restless practices of the Romish Recusants (whose numbers
and insolences His Majesty there declares, are lately increased) threaten a
Subversion both of Church and State. So the words are in that Proclamation;
without whose Authority, my small acquaintance with the state of affairs would
have forbidden me to frighten you with so dismal a Calamity: which all
considerate Persons cannot choose but look upon as the most fearful Plague that
has yet befallen us. It puts me in mind of the swarms of Locusts which covered
the Face of the Earth, and filled the Houses of Pharaoh and the Houses of his
Servants, and the Houses of all the Egyptians, (Exodus 10.5, 6.) which
immediately preceded the Plague of thick and palpable darkness which overspread
the whole Country. And it may justly be thought a prodigious thing, that we
should be so sleepy, so stupid, or so negligent and indifferent, as to suffer
those Romish Sorcerers to come so freely to bewitch us again with their
Enchantments.

Are we become so sottish, as to believe the Bishop of Rome ought to have any
Authority in this Kingdom? There are no stripes severe enough for such Fools
backs. What? in this Age of Light and Learning? and in this Kingdom, where his
Instruments have been so often convicted and stigmatized for Cheats and
Cozeners? Are these Romish Factors come again in a confident and open manner to
play their tricks, and to put off their pitiful VVares among us; as if we were
blind Indians, that will take their painted Glass and Bugles, for some great
Jewels and Precious Stones? I cannot but say again, that this exceeds all
wonder. It amazes my thoughts; and I cannot tell what to call the blindness
wherewith we are struck, if we let our selves be deceived by them.

Beloved; the Usurpations of the Pope have been so visibly exposed to all Men's
view in these later times; it has been so manifestly proved that he has been
the greatest disturber of the Christian World by his encroachments; and the
Maxims of the Jesuits, who are the chief sticklers for him, are so apparently
horrid, and destructive to all Government, nay and good Manners; and their
pretenses that the Church of Rome is the sole Catholic Apostolic Church, have
been proved to be so frivolous, or rather ridiculous; that our Divines in the
Reign of the last King, of blessed Memory, thought their Pranks to be
discovered so plainly to the Eyes of all the People, and all their frauds and
fooleries so fully detected, that they would not venture to appear here again
with their Impostures and holy Trumperies; but rather go and play their Parts
upon the Stages of Japan and Mexico among their new silly Converts, and not
here in this Kingdom, where an Ass is easily known from a Lion.

I find these very words in an Epistle to the Keeper of the Great Seal in those
days. And yet, it seems, they are as busy here as ever; or rather more
active: and they brag and vapor, we are told, in some places, as if we were
all ready to submit to them, by a blind obedience; and were but as so many
unclean Beasts, that will swallow all their Morsels without chewing.

O God! what Spirit of slumber is this, that is fallen upon us? What a Mist
have they cast before our Eyes, that we cannot discern between things which so
vastly differ? but are become such tame and easy Fools, that they hope, it
seems, to impose upon us that heavy Yoke, which our Fathers threw off, with so
much reason and Christian resolution. This looks like a kind of fatal
stupidity; that we so far follow the old Israelites, as to imitate them in
their first provocation, by entertaining so much as a thought of returning back
again into Egypt.

What shall we assign to be the cause of all these Divine Judgments; and that
there is so little hope to see any conclusion of them? But after all this is
come upon us, his anger is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still; and shakes such a Rod over us, that all the former are no more to be
compared with it, than the Whip of Solomon, to the Scorpions wherewith the
Israelites were threatened to be chastised by Rehoboam?

It can be none else, but our foul ingratitude to our most gracious God and
merciful Father; and our bringing forth no better Fruit, than that Vineyard
did, which his own right hand had Planted. We are a sinful Nation, a People
laden with Iniquity (as Isaiah complains of them, chap. 1.4.) a Seed of evil
doers, Children that are corrupters, who are gone away backward; which may
justly provoke him to continue our punishments, and to send us such strong
delusion, that we should believe a Lie; seeing we received not the truth in the
love of it, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. There are few, if any, of
those sins, against every one of which you heard a most terrible VVo denounced,
that are not to be found among us; and if we will not forsake them, no not when
God has begun to strike, as well as threaten, he may in his righteous
judgment, after all his Plagues on our bodies and goods, inflict the greatest
of all upon our minds, and strike such obstinate Sinners with an incurable
blindness.

V.
Now what signs are there, that we see, of our repentance and turning from
those evil ways; in which we have proceeded to such an height of provocation?
what do we do, to prevent those judgments, which we say we fear? What
effectual course do we take, to avert such an utter destruction, as the
Israelites brought upon themselves by their continued wickedness? You have seen
in too many things, how little difference there is between us, and that People.
The Lord their God, I have shown you, cast them into a most excellent Order and
admirable Form of Government and Religion; in which we have been praised by the
Nations round about us. Many wonderful deliverances He granted them, from those
that hated them; wherein He has not been wanting to us neither. And all the
Bible shows how ungrateful they proved to him; as all the World knows, and
Posterity I believe, will be astonished at it, how wickedly we have behaved our
selves since He has done the most marvelous things for us. And therefore He
has made us, you have now heard, as like in our punishments, as we have made
our selves like them, in our sins. And, for any thing yet appears, to complete
the parallel, we are like to imitate them in their impenitence and hardness of
Heart, notwithstanding all Gods Judgments upon them: And so at last to fall
under that heavy sentence which the Prophet pronounces in the next Chapter,
against such a cross-grained and gainsaying people.

Read it, and be seriously afraid lest it should be our portion. Isa. 6.10,
11, 12. Make the heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut
their Eyes, lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Hearts, and convert and be healed. Then said I, Lord, how
long? And he answered, until the Cities be wasted without Inhabitant, and the
Houses without Man, and the Land be utterly desolate; and the Lord have removed
Men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the Land. O
dreadful doom! What means do we use, that none like it may pass upon us?
wherein do we difference our selves from that rebellious Generation? what
tokens are there, that we intend to become more obedient to the Voice of the
Lord our God; and to meet him in the way of his Judgments, by a timely
repentance?

We talk indeed often of repenting, and acknowledge that we shall perish,
unless we repent: but still every Man goes on in the way of his wicked heart,
and does not at all repent of the evil of his doings. After all the Plagues,
the great Plagues, and of long continuance, which God has sent upon us; and
after all our Fastings and Humiliations, and Confessions that we are a wicked
people who justly deserve sorer Judgments; we continue still the very same that
we were; unless this render us still more wicked and justly obnoxious to his
severer displeasure, that we will not amend those things which we our selves
confess are so provoking to his Divine Majesty and so destructive to us.

We are met this day to confess we are very great Sinners; and to beseech God
to bless our Dread Sovereign and his Kingdoms, and to avert his Judgments from
us, which our provocations deserve: But how do we hope they should be averted?
merely by our sorrowful Confessions, and Prayers, and Supplications for Mercy?
They rather accuse us as obstinate Offenders and may hasten his Judgments, if
we do not what in us lies to amend those faults, which we say we are sensible
will bring them upon us. Why then do we not seriously set upon this necessary,
this saving work of through amendment, and reformation of our lives? Gods Anger
we pretend to believe, is not yet quite turned away, but his Hand we fear is
stretched out to give us another stroke: And the cause is visible; no body
denies, that the reason is, because we do not repent. Why then do we not
heartily engage in that long neglected duty of repentance, which we know will
do the business, and save us all this trouble, sadness, sorrow; and more blows
which we may be sure are prepared, for the back of such Fools, as wilfully
refuse to go in the only way, which they see leads unto their Peace and
Happiness? Let me ask a few more questions.

I.
Are we indeed so foolish as to think, that God will be thus angry with us for
nothing? that He can send one Plague after another, and make a miserable
Destruction and spoil among the best of his Creatures here on Earth; when there
is no cause for it, but merely to satisfy his own Will? Does He delight in the
death of Sinners, or willingly grieve the Children of Men? Is it any
contentment to him, to see us kill one another? to behold our Carcases fall by
the pestilence? to rot and corrupt the Fruits of the Earth, which He has made
it naturally to produce? Does He love to turn a pleasant Garden into a
Wilderness? or to vex those whom He has made capable of so much pleasure, with
any other Mischiefs and Calamities? We are all better instructed sure, than to
harbor any such Opinion of the Just and Gracious Lord of all; since no good
Man can take any delight in the mere Miseries, Cries, and woeful Lamentations of
the most inferior Creatures.

II.
What then do we think of our Condition? Does Gods Anger exceed the cause,
though there be some reason for it? Is it disproportionable to the provocation?
And do we fancy him more displeased than he need? If we think his Justice and
Goodness are so great, that they will not suffer, that He should smite when
there is no offense; we may be as confident they will forbid, that the stroke
should be above what the offense deserves. He never sends heavy Punishments for
light Crimes; nor Common General Judgments for some Private Offenses: But as
Men sin, so they suffer. When a great Calamity overspreads a Nation, it is, we
may be sure, for a great and contagious Iniquity. And when those Plagues are of
long continuance, as Moses speaks, it is because that Nation goes on still in
its Trespasses.

III.
But though in those days the Prophet said, Our God shall wound the Head of his
Enemies; and the Hairy Scalp of such a one as goes on still in his Trespasses
(Psalm. 68.21.) yet now perhaps you think there is no such danger; and that all
these are but fanciful Applications, which we make; when, from Gods proceedings
against his ancient people, we put you in fear of further severity, which you
may expect, if you do not repent of your evil doings. Does this Imagination
rise in your minds, to obstruct the passage of these Truths to your hearts?
Read then I beseech you, and attend to the Second Lesson appointed for Evening
Prayer, this Day: and there the Apostle will teach you another Lesson. 1 Cor.
10.6. Now these things (speaking of what befell the Israelites) were our
Examples; to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also
lusted. Nor be Idolaters, nor commit Fornication, nor tempt Christ, nor murmur,
as (in the following Verses) he shows they did to their cost, and then
concludes as he began, V. 11. Now all these things happened to them for Types:
and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are
come.

Why then do we not, without any delay, repent and turn to God? since it is so
apparent, both that we are Offenders, great Offenders, in an high and insolent
manner; and that all those woes (which I have so often mentioned) in the
Prophet Isaiah are a warning to us, to beware of these Sins, or presently to
renounce and forsake them all, when their danger is discovered to us;
especially when we have suffered already so sadly for them, and felt such heavy
strokes of God's Revenging Hand; which is not yet with drawn, but seems to be
stretched out still. Why I say, are we so senseless, so Foolhardy, so desperate
as still to live in all those wickednesses, which are so hateful to God; though
one Judgment have come tumbling upon another, and still there are more behind?
For his Anger is not turned away (let me repeat it, as the Prophet does four or
five times) but his Hand is stretched out still.

To resolve this question, it will require a new Sermon, though no great pains
to compose it. For I see the Reasons (I think) of our impenitence as plainly,
as if they were written with the Finger of God upon the Walls of your Church,
as legibly as you read many Texts of Scripture there. And I am confident, one
is (which is all I shall now mention) that there are great numbers of
Offenders, who are not at all sensible, that it is the Hand of God which has
been stretched out against us, in so many Plagues; but impute all to ill
Fortune and blind Chance, which has fallen unluckily upon us. This was one of
the things that helped to undo the House of Israel and Judah, as you have heard
( V. 12. of this Chapter) they regarded not the work of the Lord, nor
considered the operation of his Hands. And it will inevitably ruin all those
who walk on the same tract. For how should such Men repent, when God is not in
all their thoughts, and they will acknowledge no Divine Hand in any of our
Calamities, but stick merely in lower Causes; above which they are resolved not
to look?

If any of you be in the least infected with this dull Atheism, endeavor to
cure that in the first place; that a sense of God awakened in your mind may
cure all the rest of your Diseases, and move you to stand in fear of him, and
of his judgments. You cannot but be afraid, I am sure, if you see, and be
sensible of the Hand of God in all that we have suffered. It will make you say
as the Jailer did, when he came in trembling before the Apostles, What shall we
do to be saved?

What? but repent of this, that you have no more laid to heart the works of
God, or so soon forgot the operation of his hands. Which I beseech you now
seriously consider and ponder, and keep in mind; that you may be afraid to
offend him any more, by going on still in those trespasses, for which you have
been so sharply handled, and are in danger to be punished with far greater
severity. If you do but mind how God has proceeded in the method of his
judgments against us, till they are risen to high and dreadful degrees, you
cannot but be awakened to think how dismal the next stroke is like to be; and
so consider, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

I need not, if I were able, to set every one of your particular sins, who are
here present, before your Eyes: for God has done it by his judgments, if they
have at all awakened your drowsy Consciences. They have called upon you to
examine, and search, and try your ways; which if you have done, you soon found
what was amiss. There is none here, I verily believe, that has lost that
discerning faculty, which distinguishes between good and evil. You very well
know the one from the other; and are not grown so stupid, as to put light for
darkness, and darkness for light. If you would but make as exact a difference
in your Lives and Actions, as you are able to do in your Minds and Notions, all
would be well with you; whatsoever becomes of those who are past feeling, and
therefore commit all iniquity with greediness.

As for such senseless Souls I know not well what to say of them, but must
acknowledge it to be a very discouraging thought, when I consider that they who
are most concerned in what I have said in this Sermon, are neither here, nor
(it is to be feared) in any other place of Gods Worship and Service. They to
whom the Character, which the Prophet gives of a People in a woeful condition,
most of all belongs, never so much as read it; nor will come to receive our
Admonitions, nor think of humbling themselves before God; no not when they are
required and strictly charged by his Majesty so to do, as they tender Gods
honor, and would avoid his just wrath and indignation against this Land. They
make no more of the Kings Proclamation (how should it be expected) than they do
of Gods holy Word: but are, perhaps, at this very time feasting and making
merry, when we are fasting and testifying our sorrow for our sins. These are
the most forlorn Wretches of all others: a great part of the Plague of the
Country where they live. We do well to separate our selves from the Herd of
such Brutes, as have no fear, no apprehension of any thing that is future. You
are to be commended for addressing your selves to God in this place; and I
hope, when you go from hence, you will continue to apply your selves to him, in
the most humble and earnest deprecations of his displeasure; resolving that
you, for your part, will have no farther hand in provoking the Lord to anger
against these Kingdoms; but endeavor rather to live the more strictly, because
there are so many loose-livers, of whose amendment there is little or no hope
remaining.

And here it will be necessary to give you a caution; which it is easy to
observe, but is not well followed. As the greatest provokers of God to anger,
will never, I doubt, think of atoning him: So they who have most power to
reduce them to some sense of their duty, will not, perhaps, employ it
sufficiently, for the correction of them, and all other bold offenders. The
Magistrates, I mean, in their several places, notwithstanding the Laws for that
purpose, will neglect, perhaps, by their execution, to give a check to open
profaneness, and insolent wickedness. The neglecters, or contemners, of so
religious and necessary a duty, as that of this day, may escape the punishment
which his Majesty puts them in fear of in his Proclamation. And they who come
to seduce the People from the established Religion, may meet with no control;
though his Majesty, and great Counsel, have declared, that their practices
threaten the subversion of Church and State. Many more such enormities may be
supposed; and should it so fall out, as I have put the case; yet we must take
great care of this plain Truth, which every body has at their tongues-end, but
few Men live by, That we neglect not our duty, because others mind not theirs.

This is a very common and grievous sin, which we are all to resolve this day
shall be amended. We are ever finding fault with others, more than our selves.
Some are still laying the blame upon the Court, that things are no better;
others throw all the Dirt they can upon the Bishops: there are sober People,
who have got an evil custom of making complaints, on all occasions, of the
Fathers of the Church; and others cry out as loudly against the negligence of
all the Officers of Justice: But in the mean time, do nothing themselves, but
what they should not do, to remedy all that is amiss.

Is this the way, think you, to avert Gods Judgments? to be continually
arraigning the Vices of others, of which we have no knowledge; nay, judging at
all adventures, those who are our Superiors, and in the mean time letting our
own apparent sins escape without correction? Does this look like the way of
God, in which we hope to meet with his blessing? or are these rash censures
which we carelessly throw out, likely to redress any disorders? Or can we find
so little work at home, that we know not where to busy our selves, but in
other Men's concerns? Why do you suffer your selves to be thus grossly abused by
the Devil, whose Art it is to divert you from that wherein you may do some
good, by employing you there where you have nothing to do; or if you had, have
no power to make any amendment?

Grant, if it may be done without offense, that what you surmise is true; that
there are faults in those, whom out of respect to their high Office we would
willingly excuse: and which is more, that they will still be in fault, and not
do their duty as they ought (though I hope in God, they will not be truly
charged with this guilt:) What then? Does this authorize your irreverent
speeches of them? Are they like to do better, by your talking against them? Or
does it tend to any thing, but the disgracing those whose honor you should
preserve, and the bringing all things into greater confusion?

Come, come, if you design any good to your selves, or this Kingdom; set your
selves to work in that place, where you have power to make things better. If
you mean really to do what in you lies, to turn away Gods anger from us; turn
then your zeal (if you have any) that way, where it may be profitably employed,
and work some amendment. There is something I am sure which every one of us may
do, (and if we do not, shall be reproached out of our own Mouths, which are so
censorious of other Folks negligence) to procure a blessing upon our Sovereign
and his Kingdoms. In that let us employ our most serious endeavors; and
consider impartially, are there not a number of things out of order at home? Do
you not hear them calling upon your care and diligence to see them amended?
Spend your zeal then first of all in that place, and let it be your business
this day, when you are alone by your selves; as to bewail, between God and your
own Souls, all the wickedness you know of abroad, to lament the neglects of
those who you see do not execute the Laws, to sigh in secret for the faults of
those, which you ought not openly to discourse of: So to descend into your own
breasts and make a search there, what duty toward God or Man there is, which
you neglect; and what commands there are, which you break. And when you have
found them, set them before your Eyes in all their foul Circumstances; most
sorrowfully bewail them; express your abhorrence of them; and faithfully
resolve to reform all your negligence and remissness, as well as your open
disobedience.

In this search, and examination, you must be strict and exact; and when you
have sifted your selves narrowly, and resolved to amend all there; the next
thing you have to do, is to amend all those over whom you have any power, and
who are committed to your charge. Your Children, I mean, and Servants, whom you
ought to call upon to be more careful in their performance of the duties which
they omit, and to break off those sins into which you see them run: resolving,
with Joshua, that whatsoever others do, You and your House will serve the Lord.

And next of all we ought to express our detestation, as much as we are able,
of those lewd courses which we cannot reform. What hinders, for instance, but
you may frown and show your dislike, when you hear a Gentleman, or one that is
much your superior, rap out Oaths, and Blasphemies, at every word, in his
common discourse? Is this any incivility or rudeness to him, in his House or in
your own? And what can detain you, if you have a love to God, from going to do
your duty to him; when others are resolved to omit it? Why should you not leave
any company, when you are called to Church? and not be so complemental, as to
stay at home with those who have no regard to the Divine Service; and for fear
of disobliging them, be guilty of an open neglect of Almighty God?

Nay, may not every one of you do very much for the preservation of the true
Religion; which Gods own right hand has planted and established among us? By
studying, that is more seriously, the grounds of it; by informing your selves
what indeed, and none else, is the true ancient Catholic Apostolic Faith,
which is so much talked of; and especially by endeavoring after an holy
Conversation answerable thereunto. Cannot you be careful to principle your
Children with all the diligence you can use, in the Religion here professed;
nay, and your Servants too, and all that are under your charge? what hinders
you from bringing them constantly to Church along with you; and to see they
stay there, and wander not to other places? And why cannot you examine them,
what they have learnt? and remember them of that which was most remarkable; and
read in the Evening of the Lord's Day, some good Book to them, that may instruct
them in their Duty; and make them understand the difference between our
Religion, and all that oppose it?

These are proper things for you, in which to express your zealous desires of
bringing things to a better pass. And do not think to throw off the guilt from
your selves, unless you set your hearts to do something of this nature: nor
imagine that it is none of your fault, that we are in so ill a condition, and
in danger of a worse; for if the thing be well scanned, there is never a one of
us but is less or more to be charged with it. And, to speak a little more
particularly, I doubt our Religion suffers exceedingly by this; that we do no
more value it, nor thank God for it; nor stir up our selves to serve God with
fervent spirits in it. For if we did more esteem the knowledge of God our
Savior, and really look upon it as Eternal Life, and think his service the
most perfect freedom (as we pretend to do in our daily Prayers) we need not
fear the power of any Adversaries; but be confident God would hear our Prayers,
when we say, From our Enemies defend us, O Christ. But alas! we are negligent
and careless hearers and readers of his holy Word, and too many talk all the
time the Chapters are read: as if that were not one end of our daily
Assemblies, to hear Gods most holy Word; as well as to pray, and to set forth
his most worthy praise, and thank him for his benefits. Nay, all these, God
knows, are but slightly performed: We see People talk out all the Hymns; and it
is well if they can forbear whispering to one another while they pretend to be
at their Prayers. A most dreadful profanation! which must be amended, if we
hope for any mercy. For God will not be moved by our constant show of Religion
and Devotion, if we want the truth and sincerity of it: and how are we
religious, how dwells the love of God in us, when we mind no more what we do
in religious Offices?

Let me beseech you again to reform these things thoroughly; and instead of
accusing others of their carelessness and negligence, gird up the Loins of your
own minds, and go about that effectually, which you know you ought to do, and
which you can do, by Gods assistance, for the healing of those Wounds, which
are not yet closed, in the Body of this Church and Kingdom.

It is not too late, I hope; nay, I am sure it is not; if we be in good
earnest. For, the Lord, as the Prophet Jeremiah speaks, is in the midst of us,
and we are yet called by his Name; and if we will return to him with all our
heart, and with all our soul, He will not leave us. So Moses declared to the
Children of Israel, long before all those evils befell them, which I have
related. If when all these things are come upon thee, the Blessing and the
Curse, which I set before thee (Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2, etc.) thou shall call to mind,
and return to the Lord thy God, and shall obey his Voice in all that I command
thee, thou and thy children, with all thine heart and with all thy soul: Then
the Lord thy God will turn thy Captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and
will return and gather thee from among the Nations whither he has scattered
thee: and the Lord thy God (V. 7.) will put all these Curses upon thine
Enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.

We need not doubt but the same gracious Lord will do the very same for us,
when we, in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our souls, cry unto
him; if we also turn unto him with all our heart, and with all our soul. Let us
but thus reform our selves, and others, as far as our Power extends; and we may
comfortably hope that our Prayers this Day, will become prevalent for all the
Nation. Such Supplicants may do much, to the turning away Gods wrath from us;
or to the obtaining a forbearance, that it may not come in our days; or, if it
do, that it may be (as it is admirably expressed in the Prayer after Sermon)
effectual to our Correction, and not to our Destruction.

And if the Reformation of our Lives were any thing General throughout the
Kingdom, I persuade my self, it might quite avert Gods Judgments;
notwithstanding the great and desperate Provokers which will still remain among
us. They might only bear their own Burden; but He might graciously spare the
Kingdom, for the sake of those many pious Supplicants that are in it. Though we
stand so guilty before him, that for our evil deeds, we do worthily deserve to
be punished; yet He might hear the earnest cries of such Penitents, which sue
unto him, that by the comfort of His grace we may be mercifully relieved. He
might have a regard to our constant Litanies, or Supplications, that He would
mercifully look upon our Infirmities; (or afflictions) and for the glory of his
Name, turn from us all those evils that we most righteously have deserved: Or
if such a Blessing could not be obtained, those devout Souls would still be
able, in all their troubles, to put their whole trust and confidence in his
mercy; and rejoice, in the midst of tribulations, in hope of his glory. To
which God of his infinite mercy bring us, by such ways, and in such Methods,
as He sees best: And let us never cease to pray to him, according to the daily
Collect for this Week, with which I conclude.

Almighty God, who show to them that be in error the light of thy truth, to
the intent that they may return into the way of Righteousness; Grant unto all
them that are admitted into the fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may
eschew those things that are contrary to their Profession, and follow all such
things as are agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.

