THE TESTIMONY Of that Dear and Faithful Man, JOHN MATERN,

Who had Lived Six Years and Faithfully served the Lord in his Vocation in the
Family of C. T. now Dwelling at Edmonton in Middlesex.

ALSO, Other Blessed Testimonies concerning Him, and the TRUTH it self;

With something concerning his Blessed Condition in the time of his Sickness,
and when He was near his Departure.

WITH Several Testimonies of Sensible Children who had been under His Tuition.

Published that God may have his Glory in Preserving his Faithful ones Faithful
to the end. A. P.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be S^^d by Ben. Clark in George-Yard in
Lumbard-street. 1680.

TO THE READER.
DEar Friends, to whose Hands these following Testimonies may come, here you
may see the wonderful dealings of the Lord God, whose faithfulness fails
neither Young nor Old, who Travail in their measures for the prosperity of his
blessed Truth, both in their own particulars, and that the Increase thereof may
be great in the Earth. These Testimonies both of that faithful Servant of the
Lord J. M. as also of others who are considerable members of this Family,
together with the sensible Childrens Testimonies concerning the aforesaid Man,
We thought good to Publish, that the Goodness, Mercy, and Loving, Kindness of
our tender and Compassionate Father, may be Proclaimed in the Ears of many,
that through the Traveling Birth in others, who at any time may have the
occasion to peruse them, there may Praises ascend even on this account to the
God of Heaven; this I believe will be the Effect, that they will have in the
Hearts of all Zions Favorites. And not only so, but the Love of God constrains
us to send them abroad, as so many Messages and Invitations to others, who may
have been under the profession of Truth for some time, and yet Strangers to the
Life and efficacy thereof, as to leaven their Hearts and Souls, with it is
Savoury and Soul refreshing virtue, that they may be awakened and alarmed to
bestir themselves, to make their Calling and Election sure, while it is called
to Day; as the aforementioned Deceased Person had done. There are Subjoyned
some Testimonies, of the more serious and sensible Children; concerning their
Deceased Guardian, which I know will be Servicable where they come, especially
amongst young ones, and may also be of some use to some Teachers and
Instructers of Children. The unprejudiced and Impartial Reader may feel and
savor the Power of Truth, even in these Childrens Testimonies, who are but
young in Years, neither can it be in any probable manner supposed, that they
could frame such things by their own acquired Abilities, but must with me
confess that it is the Lords work; and who can stop it, or who can shut when
the Lord opens; and how can we sit silent, and not invite others to come and
share with us of that Heavenly Food the Father is pleased to hand forth unto
us, and that in a plentiful manner, for which I render and return, the Praise
the Honor, and the Renown of all, unto Him who is Worthy, God Blessed for
ever. Amen.

A. PATERSON.

THE TESTIMONY OF John Matern, etc.
I Cannot but Praise and Magnify the Lord our God, who in the abundance of his
Love and tender Mercies, has oftentimes, (even to this very day) Graciously
and Powerfully visited my Soul with the Dayspring from on high, and has
livingly Refreshed my Soul, with many others in our Family, who in Sincerity of
Heart and Mind, in his Fear and Dread, have quietly and patiently waited for
his Loving, Glorious, and Powerful appearance; more than they that watch for
the Morning; O how has he often broken in upon our Hearts, with his Holy,
Heavenly, Almighty Power, and has tendered our Spirits before him, that in the
sense of his overcoming, and quickening Power, I have been constrained to Speak
forth his Praises, even admiring his goodness and mercies unto my Soul, who
when I was a Stranger to his Heavenly Truth, going astray like a lost Sheep
without a Shepherd, not knowing the way to his Blessed Fold, and to the
Pastures of Life, where he makes his flock to rest at noon, watering and
refreshing them with the Water of Life, he was pleased in his everlasting
mercy, and endless goodness to follow me, as the good Shepherd seeking that
which was lost, and not giving over, till he found me wandiring from Mountain
to Hill, and from Hill to Mountain, dry, barren and unfruitful in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; I say, the Lord in his everlasting Love,
and tender Bowels of compassion followed me, and found me, revealing himself
unto me in my lost and undone State and Condition, not knowing whither to go,
or where to rest, till he opened and enlightened the Eyes of my mind, in and
through his Heavenly Light, which he commanded to shine out of darkness, by
which I came to see and to know my self, and him who I had often pierced with
my Sins and Iniquities, unto which the enemy of my Soul did lead me Captive at
his will, till the good Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul did unstop my Ear, that
I could hear his voice and knockings at the door of my Heart: Yea, in and
through his Heavenly Almighty Power begot in me a willingness to forsake the
Evil of my ways; and to deny my former Teachers and Leaders that caused me to
Err from his Holy Heavenly word of Truth, which was, and i^ nigh in the Heart,
and in the Mouth, and directed me to outward things; seeking the Kingdom of God
and his Righteousness, which was to be revealed within, not in outward
observances and Ceremonies, one crying, lo here, the other lo there* leading
away from the Principle of Life and Truth in the inward parts, by which my Soul
should have been quickened and made alive unto God* Thence it came to pass,
that even in the strictest observation of such things as I was directed unto,
having a ^e^l for God, but not according to the knowledge of God, that I my
self also directed others to the sa^^, when according to the wisdom of Man, and
acquired natural Learning in Colladges, where I was bred up, I had got
Learning, intending to be a Priest, a guide for the Blind, a Light to them
which are in Darkness, an Instructor of the Foolish, a Teacher of Babes, as
having got the form of the literal knowledge, but destitute of the Power, Life,
and Spirit, without which I my self was Blind and Foolish, Dead in Sins and
Trespasses, till it pleased the Lord to reveal his Son in me, in his holy, pure
and Heavenly Light, by which I came to see out of Obscurity and Darkness, which
was in my Heart; and the vail of Iniquity which was over my Mind came to be
rent by his Almighty Power, that so I came to behold him whom my Soul loved,
not afar off, but nigh in me, in and through his Holy. Heavenly, Quickening
Spirit, by which my Soul was quickened and turned from Darkness to Light, and
from Satan's Power to his pure and Holy Power, Grace and Truth in my inward
parts, in and through which he taught and enabled me to deny Ungodlyness and
worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present
World; Glory and Honor be to his Name for evermore.

Now as the Lord God in his Love and Mercy, has reached unto my Soul and
redeemed me out of the Hands of my Enemies through the power of his strength:
he also made me willing to deny my self every way and respect, as to out ward
Honor and Preferment, which I could have enjoyed, if I would have conformed my
self to their way, and Worship, and vain customs and manners, in life and
conversation: but the fears and dread of the Lord being upon my Heart, I could
no longer conform my self unto them, but I freely gave over my School-office
and employment in Teaching Children, trusting in the Lord, he would not leave
me and forsake me, if I did faithfully follow him in the Regeneration, which
Work I felt begun upon my Soul in and through his Holy Heavenly Spirit of
Grace, and Truth manifested within me, because of which I counted all my former
knowledge and Honor as Dung and Dross, for the excellency of the Truth and
knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, whose power I felt Operating in
me, to destroy the Works of the Devil, to serve him in Holiness and
Righteousness, according to the measure of Grace which he had given me, and
enabled me withal. And seeing my self with some others, were like a Pelicane in
the Wilderness, and as a Sparrow alone upon the House top, sojourning in Mesech
and dwelling in the Tents of Kedar, amongst a Crooked and Perverse Generation,
covered with Gross Darkness, hating the peaceable way of the Lord, which
according to that ability and knowledge I had then in the Lord, I made known to
them, the Lord raised a desire in my Father-in-law, who was a Priest to go out
from amongst them, and to go to the People of the Lord which he had Raised,
Gathered, and Chosen for himself in England, to enjoy his Holy Living, Powerful
presence in their Meetings, and to partake of the quickening and refreshing
virtue of the Life and Love of the Lord in his Light, where the Saints
Communion stands.

And as soon as he made it known to us, his Wife and Children, we found the
same willingness, and freedom also in us to go out from our Fathers House, and
Kindred, not consulting with Flesh and Blood what would become of us: But being
freely resigned and given up into the will of the Lord to dispose of us as he
pleased, we chose rather to suffer afflictions with the People of God, and to
undergo all Trials and Exercises which the Lord might suffer to come upon Them
and Us, then to enjoy the pleasures of Sin, and Vanities of this World for a
Season.

And after we had made known our Desire and Intent to some of our Dearest
Friends, which several times did Write to us on the behalf of Truth, and we
understood that they were willing to receive us in the Love of the Lord, we
left all for the love of Truth, and went away to save our selves from that
Perverse Generation; in all our Journey the Lord was with us, and brought us
safe and well, with Joy and Gladness of our Souls, to his Beloved People here
in England, where I now have been these six years employed according to the
Lord's, good will and providence amongst tender Children, to instruct them in
Languages, and other necessary Sciences appertaining to this outward Life. What
troubles and exercises within and without I have met withal, I willingly pass
by, as being light and momentary, in comparison of that inward comfort and
blessing of my Soul which I have received of the Lord.

For he in his endless Love and Mercy has in a very great measure satisfied
the Travail of my Soul, and answered the earnest desires and breathing of my
Spirit for the Children of our Family, that he in his goodness would be pleased
to appear unto their Souls, and to manifest himself in his Holy Everlasting
Power, by which they might feel their Hearts melted, tendered, and broken
before him, the Almighty God their Creator, to Fear and Dread him in their
Youth, that at length that rough and perverse, disobedient and stubborn Spirit,
which reigned in some of them, to the grief and sorrow of our Hearts, might be
wrought out, and a meek, low, and humble Spirit might be created in them,
through the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, which we also in the Lord's time
have seen brought to pass, in and through the Almighty, Heavenly, Blessed
appearance, and powerful opeperation of his Heavenly Spirit in our
Family-meetings, whereof we have formerly born our Testimony, and do bear the
same at this present time, that the Power of the Lord is still self and
experienced in and amongst us, in our Meetings; O the Glory of that first great
and notable day of the Blessed, Glorious, and powerful appearance of the Lord
God, in and amongst the little ones of our Family! The Remembrance whereof
makes glad my heart, and rejoices my Spirit, blessed be the Name of the Lord
forevermore; we cannot be still, but are constrained in his Love, which he has
shed abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us, but speak
well of his Name, because of the Savior of his Life, which we still seel in
the midst of us.

For the Lord has not been with us as a Stranger, that stays but for a night,
but we can say it of a truth, that he has hitherto made his abode with us, the
blessed effect upon the Hearts and Spirits of many Witnesses confirmed it. For
instead of the thorn comes up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Pryer, comes up
the Mir-tree, in as many as have Subjected their Souls unto the power of God,
bearing Fruits of Sobriety, Righteousness, Meekness and Godliness, in and
through the Blessed Operation of his Holy Spirit, which he has blessedly
poured forth, and is pouring forth upon them, to the Glory and Honor of his
name, and for an Everlasting Sign that shall not be cut off. Now the Lord has
been and is gracious unto our Souls, and in his Grace and Love he daily renews
his goodness unto us, manifesting himself in his Love, Life and Power, when we
meet together in his Holy, Heavenly Fear. O how does he shed abroad his Love in
our Hearts! O how does he receive our Spirits, that many times we are even
Ravished with his Love, and so filled with his Power, that our Cups are made to
overflow with Praises and Thanksgivings unto the Lord.

The desire of my Soul is, that I and every one of us, that have tasted of the
good Word, and Power of the World to come, by which we witness, our Hearts, and
Minds in some measure changed, into the Holy and Righteous Image of the Son of
God, who is the Light and Life of our Souls, may never forget it, nor give him
any occasion to Withdraw his Love and Mercy from us, but that his Holy and
blessed Work of Regeneration, and Renovation of our mind, as it is begun by
his Holy and Glolious Power; it also may be carried on by the same, that daily
we may Witness an increase with the increase of the Lord, and a through change
in our inward Man, from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, that thus
his Praises may be perfected out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, unto
which he has made known himself in his Heavenly Light and Life, Mercy and
Power, Grace and Truth; by which many of them are come to know the things of
God, and of his Spiritual Kingdom revealed within them, in his Holy power,
Righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, which things are hid from the
Wise and Prudent of this World, because they hate and despise the Light of
Jesus Christ, in and through which alone they should receive the true and
Saving Knowledge of God, and his Son Jesus Christ whom to know is Life Eternal;
wherein also the operating virtue of the Living Blood of the Son of God, is
only effectually felt, and Witnessed, cleansing away all Sin and Iniquity unto
the saving of the Soul from the Wrath to come; that so an entrance may be
adminstred unto it abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, wherein the Righteous live with God, in unspeakable Joy
and full of Glory.

O that many of the young and tender ones here with us, may be kept in the Life
and Virtue, Wisdom and Power of the Lord God, to the confusion of many in their
Earthly Wisdom, and the conversion of them, from their Evil ways, O thou
Shepherd of Israel lead them on Gently and Tenderly, and go before them out and
in, as a Shepherd goes before his Flock, and lead them to the Green Pastures of
Life, that Feeding there they may have Light and Life in them, and that, they
may have it more abundantly, and by it become an Eternal Excellency to thee,
and a Joy of many Generations.

O Lord I humbly beseech thee, Bless our Godly undertakings, and indue us with
thy Heavenly Wisdom, that we may bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
thee! O Bless this Family here, and all the Families of thine inheritance every
where, with Heavenly and Spiritual Blessings in thy Son Christ Jesus! O Lord
keep, keep and preserve me, and every one of us, that have tasted of the sweet
Love and Heavenly Power, by which our Souls have been reached, convinced and
converted, faithful unto thy self, keep us always in a Living Sense of thy
manifold mercies and tender Love to us, that we may live in thy holy Fear, and
never return to folly any more, but walk low and humble with thee our God, and
tender Father in Christ Jesus. O Lord establish our Hearts with thytruth, that
we may never depart from thee; Season our Souls with thy Holy Powerful Word of
Grace, that all our Words and Works may be Savoury, and good for the use of
Edifying; strengthen our inward man with might by thy Spirit, that under thy
banner of Love we may fight the good fight of faith, and keep a good
Conscience, and finish our course with joy, and receive the Crown of
Righteousness, which is laid up for all them that love thy appearance in thy
Heavenly Light. So, O Lord, for all thy goodness and mercys and benefits, both
Temporal and Spiritual bestowed upon me and our Family, my Soul praises and
glorifies, exaltes and magnifies thy holy Name, Glory and Honor, Wisdom and
Power, be unto thee, who art God over all, blessed for ever and for evermore,
Amen.

Edmonton the 24th. of the 6 Month 1680. J. Matoi^.
He died about 7 Days after that he brought in his Testimony, and caused it to
be read amongst the Scholars.




My most Loving and Endeared Friend and Colleague John Matern, being taken ill
of a Fever the 24th. of the 6 Month 80. was called out of this Life the 1st.
day of the 7 Month, a little after the 7 hour, in the Afternoon.
THis is my Testimony and belief concerning him, that he is entered into
everlasting favor with the Lord, who in his lifetime much regarded the Honor
of his Maker, and it was the delight of his Soul to be employed either amongst
young or old in his Fathers business; it was his hearts delight and Souls great
joy, to have the oppertunity to benefit others. He was a Man very much Dead to
the World, the sense whereof I felt Livingly upon my Spirit at present, and I
hope the comfortable fellowship and Heart-gladding society, that I have had
with him for these three years and more, and that wherein we have mutually
enjoyed in one another, shall never be forgotten by me, but shall be matter of
Praise and Thanksgiving to the God of true unity, who was pleased to bless us
together, and work up our Spirits into an oneness, so that I may truly say, my
Dear Friend (to my knowledge) was never exercised one way or another, with
sorrow or grief, but my Soul was engaged to sympathize with him, and to feel
the weight of his Burdens, and then we both breathed together to the God of
Grace, whose Mercies are infinite till he in his tender Bowels of compassion
was pleased to afford ease and Relief. And as in his Lifetime we were
Indisolveably knit together in our Spirits, so that at his Death our Loves were
not abated, but much more Large then ever.

About Four hours before he departed, we kept our Family Meeting in the room
where he Lay, i^ being his desire, and there Lovingly together, we enjoyed one
another in the Lord, to the melting and tendering of (I believe) the hearts of
all that were present; And in the time of the Meeting, he was filled with
Divine praises and Heavenly Hymns and a Heavenly presence was felt supporting
his Spirit all the time of his Sickness, but more especially during the time of
the Meeting, so that he was first exercised in Singing Praises to the Lord, and
in magnifying his great Power, evidenced in himself, and in this Family; his
cries were strong tha^ the Lord might carry on his Blessed work begun in this
Family, and he besought the Lord to prosper his truth daily more and more,
every where till all were Subjected thereunto, which he declared should come to
pass, he likewise confessed the many Singular favors he had Partaken of in
this Eamily and as it were with regret bemoaned his absence from it so long,
that he should have so long wandered not knowing his place and service in the
Body When the Children were all sitting round about him in the Meeting, his
Heart was open, and large toward them, in exhorting and beseeching of them, to
persevere and go on in the name and authority of the mighty God, and that they
might be faithful unto him in their measures, and not to despise the day of
small things; but as they were faithful in a little, more should be added; his
Mouth and Heart was full of Praises to the Highest for many particular mercies,
but more especially that he had received the knowledge of the everlasting
Truth; and had walked in it for some time perfectly and uprightly, in his
measure, for which at that time he declared he had the Testimony of a good
Conscience, and was entered into Eternal Peace with the Lord, which I do firmly
believe, and without doubting, am persuaded that it is true; and it is the
desire of my Heart, that I may so walk in my Generation, that in the end I may
enjoy but such a comfortable Death as he did.

It was as hard a Trial as ever I met with, I may say, which I desire may be
sanctified of the Lord; but now am well satisfied that he is gone into
everlasting bliss, to be with the Lord for ever.

And it is the belief of my Heart, that when ever it shall please the Lord to
call me out of the body, that as we were lovely together in this Life, that
forever we shall be Joined, (as I am preserved faithful,) and that in a more
nearness then could be enjoyed here, we shall sing Praises to God and the Lamb
for ever. So in this belief, I rest my self contented with my condition at
present.

Edmonton the 2 of the 7 Month, 1680. A. Paterson.

DEar John Matern Died not as a Fool Dies, that feared not the Living God, but
his Heart was bent to seek after a City, whose Builder and Maker is God; He
made his Calling and Election sure, and a good Savor he has left behind him,
and his Works follow him; he was a diligent Man in his Vocation, and very
zealous for Gods Glory, his aim was at Eternity, and through the mercy of the
Lord he missed not of it; so that when he lay on his Deathbed, the Glory of
the Lord over-shadowed him, and his Innocent cries were unto him, that all
might be kept faithful that professed his name; and more particularly, that
both small and great in our Family might be preserved to the Lord, and his
Heavenly Sounds of Praises to God, with a raised up voice by the Assistance of
the Power and Glory of God upon his Spirit.

I believe I shall never forget, me thinks mine Ears are full of them still;
hearing the sound of that sweet Harmonious melody, with a raised up voice, when
otherwise, if Gods power had not enabled him, confessed he was scarce able to
move his Tongue, he have Heavenly Exhorations to the young ones, to persevere
and go on in obedience to the Lord, in that truth they had received; and
encouraged his honest and faithful companion, and assistant to go on in the
work of the Lord. I dearly loved him because of his simplicity and lowliness of
Mind, his faithfulness and diligence in his place, and because his Heavenly
care was entirely to do good; when I remember his dear simplicity, how like an
Innocent Child he was in his place, my Soul breaks within me, and I am melted
even into great tenderness and love unto him, more then can be uttered; Tongue
cannot utter, nor Pen set down the excellency and eminency of this love, which
is so overcomming, he was a very wise and learned man, as to outward Learning;
but how he denied himself, and how humbly he behaved himself, and how free he
was from priding himself, because of his Great parts and natural endowments as
a man, I can say according to my Judgment he went before many; well he is gone,
and in the name of the Lord he blessed the Family he had lived in, and praised
God that he had placed him in it, such blessed things, he acknowledged he had
been partaker of in it, and after he had done his work, he went to his Father,
even as an Innocent Lamb unconcerned about his Death, as fearing it not, but on
the contrary praising God, for the certain trust he had in his Power, telling
us how certain he was of Eternal Salvation; the Glory of the Lords power rested
upon his Spirit, and sweetly did he give up the Ghost.

O blessed, art thou my dear companion, my Soul loved thee, and embraced thee,
and I love thee still, and thy life is with us, I pray God as that sincerity
that was in three, may remain in Thousands, and Ten Thousands, that Gods Host
in this day may be innumerable, Amen.

God is with us, and we know though we may be taken out of this Life according
to his pleasure, yet his Truth and Faithfulness, departs not from the Families
of his faithful ones, who can truly say, they seek his sweet Face and
countenance, and Glory in all things; and we can say that the secret hand of
the Lord, works not against us, but for us, Oh! my Soul be glad in the God of
thy Mercies, everlasting praises be to thy name for evermore.

Edmonton the 8th. of the 7th. Month, 1680. C. T.

DEar Friends and Children, but especially you Children of this Family, it is
upon me to relate something unto you of my exercise, which I have gone through
since the Lord did put it into our Hearts, to take upon us the exercise of
Educating of Children; and indeed the very first step into it was with fear and
trembling, but though I was very tender, the Lord has called me to a blessed
Work, and had blessedly assisted us by his mighty power and outstretched Arm
to this very day. O the days of Sighing and Mourning that I have gone through
amongst disorderly Servants and Children, that sometimes I did not well know
how it was with me, or whether I went backwards or forwards in my condition, O
the travel the Travel that was in my way to Zion, that indeed some times I was
almost ready to despair; but it did please the Lord sometimes, to arise in his
mighty power to strengthen, and encourage, and uphold me in his blessed work,
and when his Glorious Light shone round encouraged to walk in his way, and then
I thought I should run swiftly; when Exercises came again, and when the Fogs
and Mists did arise again, and the Sun was Darkened again that I could not see
which way to go; then did I cry unto the Lord, that he would be pleased to
keep me in the measure of his blessed Truth, for I said in my Heart, that it
should be my reasolution, that I would never turn back again to folly; Thus I
passed on through much Difficulty, and the Lord did mightily uphold me, but
sometimes I knew it not; and indeed when I have beheld others Eating of the
Dainties of Gods House, I have been ready to murmr, and say, O Lord why do I
fare so hardly, my meat being bitter Herbs, and of an unsavory taste; Thus I
Traveled in Sorrow, through a long Winter, and in the Lords blessed time, he
was pleased to arise with healing under his Wings, and did scatter the Clouds,
by his mighty Power, and outstretched Arm, and what we have been Travaling and
Laboring for amongst Children; we have seen a blessed increase, and I can
truly say it is God's Heavenly Interest; Praised be to his name for evermore.

For he has made his work pleasurable, easy, and delightful unto us, for his
arm is about us day and night, and his Sun is arisen upon us, and our days are
very sweet unto us, and we can look back upon our exercises and dark places,
where we have stuck and behold them with delight, for the Lord has been, and
is abundantly kind unto us, praises be to his name for ever more.

O a blessed time, and happy it is for all them that fear the Lord, for thou O
Lord have made our days, sweet, and thy blessed work easy unto us, for we can
sing of thy mercies all the day long, and behold the work of thy own right hand
to prosper, and the fruits of our Labors to flourish as a Rose, and we can
glory in thee for evermore; and when the work of our day is pleasently spent,
in the fear of the Lord at evening tide, when Shiloh's Brook runs softly, as it
is in our wonted practice, we do assemble together before the Lord, with our
Family and Children, to magnify his power, and Speak well of his name, and to
crave a blessing upon us, and his tender Plants, and then he arises in his
mighty power, and his bedewings descend, and his fatness drops from Heaven, and
over-comes our hearts, and enliveneth our Souls and Bodies, that every member
may magnify his Holy Name; O blessed day indeed, can we desire more then we
have, or ask more then we receive, Oh! no, no, the Lord has been abundantly
kind, and has filled our hearts with his Heavenly Treasure; for now we can
gather Grapes off our own Vines, and they are Pleasant to our taste; O what
shall we render unto thee O Lord, for thou art worthy of all Honor and Praise,
and with all that we have and are; We give the Glory unto thee for ever and
evermore.

Now I have a Testimony lives in my Heart, for dear John Matern whom the Lord
has taken away, a dear Man indeed, one that truly feared the Lord, and was a
faithful Steward; and when he came to lie upon his Death Bed, he had Reaped an
hundred fold, and he brought in his increase with much rejoicing into the
storehouse of the Lord, yea with great joy and rejoicing, for the Lord
embraced him, and kissed him with his lips, this was the last day of his
appointed time, and I my self was pretty much with him, he was a weak man as he
confessed, and scarce able to stir his Tongue, but the Glory of the Lord shone
round about him, and did raise up his pure life, that he lay praising the Lord,
and the harmony of Heaven was in his Mouth, that his weakness was pressed down,
and the sting of Death not regarded; we had a sweet meeting with him, as other
Testimonies will further relate, with many of the Children, and a part of the
Family, so when he found himself almost spent with the blessed Exercise that
was upon him, he held up his hands, and we caused them to depart the Room, so
then he lay still and Slumbered a little time; and when he stirred I went to
him, he desired me not to speak, except to praise and magnify the Lord; but I
asked him if he knew me, and he smiled upon me, and said yea; and I said thou
lie sweetly; he again answered yea, as I remember these were the last words
he Spoke, so he lay a little time, and went sweetly away.

Frances Tailor.

My Testimony Concerning my lately deceased Master John Matern.
HE was a man that truly feared the Lord, and was an instrument in his hand in
his day, for the help of others. He labored daily for us his Scholars, both
for our Souls and Bodies; he taught us with diligence, that we might not
frustrate the intent of our coming to the School, as to our learning, and
prayed continually to the Lord, that we might be Edified as to our inward
condition.

O what a blessed end he made!

O he was full of Praises and Songs of joy to the Lord. And I am satisfied that
his reward was the greater, for his labor and prayers for us; he is with the
Lord, and blessed of him for ever.

The 10th. of the 7th. Month, 1680. William Penington. 15 years old.

My Testimony concerning my dear Master John Matern, is as follows.
HE was a just and an upright man in his generaration, fearing God and hating
evil, he cherished the good, and purished the evil in whomsoever of his
Scholars he found it, without respect of Persons, which caused him on his
deathbed to enjoy peace unutterable.

He has fought the good fight of faith, and kept his Garments clean from the
spots of this World, and is entered into rest and joy with his maker for ever,
which no man can deprive him of.

Edward Penington. 13 years old.

This Testimony do I bear for my Teacher John Matern.
THat he was a just and an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil,
in his day, and generation, and the Lord was with him in his do^ngs, and he did
that which was right in the sight of ^he Lord, and the Lord supported him, and
carried ^im through all Trials, and he had done the Lord's work faithfully in
his day and age, and now he is ^one to his rest prepared for him in Jesus
Christ, he ^ath been saying up a treasure, and now he enjoys it, ^e has heard
the joyful sentence, well done thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been
faithful in a few things, I will make thee Ruler over much, enter thou into be
joy of the Lord. So now he is entered into the joy ^f his Lord, and is happy for
ever, and magnified be is name for redeeming him out of the Jaws of Sa^^n, and
I wish all may make such an end as he did, then will they be blessed of the
Lord to all eternity, world without end.

John Crouch. about the age of 12 years.

I have a Testimony concerning my dear Schoolmaster John Matern, Who is
departed out of this Life, and lives with God for evermore.
OH he was a blessed Man, one that I believe in his measure feared God and
eschewed evil; as Job did, Oh he was a good Man, I believe the fear of the Lord
was always before his Eyes; Oh I can say he is in Heaven with the Lord, Oh he
is in a better place then we are yet in, for he is with God the Father, where
the fullness of all joy and comfort is; Oh that we may all be as faithful to the
Lord in our places as he was, and then God will gather us to himself, and then
we shall be blessed of him and receive the sentence; Well done thou good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a few things, ^ will make thee
ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of the Lord, Oh it is a blessed
sentence to al^^ them that receive it, as he has; Oh how sorry h^ used to be
if he saw any of us do amiss, I can say i^ would very much grieve him, but when
he saw an^ of us do well; Oh he would be glad, and incourag^ us to go on in the
way of the Lord, so I cannot bu^ give him the Glory, the Honor, and the Praise
both now for ever and evermore.

Ezekiel Wooley, Jun. 11 years old.

This I have to Speak to the Praise of the Lord God and his Truth, as
concerning our dear Teacher John Matern.
HE was a man that feared the Lord and walked in his path, and I can truly say
the Lord was with him, and the last day that he lived, he lived to the praise
of his name, and it was his endeavor and intent as long as he lived, to fear
the Lord his maker, and the name of the Lord was praised by him, as long as he
breathed in this World.

O that all People would arise for the name of the Lord, that none may stick in
the deep pit of Darkness, but that they may come and fear the Lord, that none
may stay behind, but come on with the Lord's people, and walk on hand in hand
with them, and so press forward to the mark Christ Jesus, as this man did, who
is gone to his rest in peace.

O Lord it has pleased thee to take away one of thy Servants who served thee
in uprightness of heart, O Lord I humbly of thy Children, thy presence ^s with
us at this time, and Oh pluck up the root of iniquity, and throw down the great
Tree, of Wickedness, that is growing in the hearts of Peo^^^, that thy work may
prosper, and the light of thy countenance may shine through the Nations.

Oh raise up yet more Witnesses for thy self; tha^ all may fall down before
thee, and magnify thy name who art God over all blessed for evermore.

William Loosvelt 12 years old.

O Lord thy love is unspeakable, when th^^ scatterest the Clouds and make the
Ram (...) descend as upon the tender grass, and visitest us with the day Spring
from on high, then are we constrained to praise thy name; Oh thou refreshest u^
from time to time, for we have none in Heaven bu^ thee, nor in the Earth in
comparison of thee; O^ we have fresh encouragement to follow hard after thee; O
thou have often broken our hearts before thee the living God, and haste caused
abundance o^ melting tears and Soul-ravishing gladness among us, and a remnant
can say that one day in thy Court is better then a thousand elsewhere, and it
is better to be a doorkeeper in thy house, then to dwell i^ the Tents of
Wickedness; Oh Lord what shall w^ say unto thee, or what shall we render unto
thee for thy mercyes; for thy Arm of power has been about us to this very day.

Thy Hand is not slackened, nor thy Ear dull t^ bear the Sighing of the needy,
thou look dow^ upon them with an Eye of pity and compassion, an^ thy love is
the same that ever it was unto thy Children, and thy all-seeing Eye is every
where, and in every place to watch over them, who art the watchman of Israel,
who never slumbers nor sleep, but feedest thy sheep, and make them to lie
down in the green pastures of Life. O that when we depart out of this world, we
may lay down our head in peace with thee, as the blessed man John Matern has
done who is deceased; Oh he is gone to his resting place, who was faithful to
the end of his days; and when he had finished his course in this world, the
Lord took him into himself, Oh how pleasantly ^e lay upon his Bed, praising the
Lord whom he served in his lfie time, he made his Calling and Election sure,
and is at rest with the Lord his maker, who aboured for our good every way, and
is gone to a very pleasant habitation, where he will have joy for ever.

Mary Tailor. 10 years old.

This is my Testimony concerning my Dear Teacher John Matern.
THat he was a man that feared God, with the uprightness of his heart, and his
greatest Travel was to do the will of God, making it manifest amongst us, and
telling us what the Lord would have us to do, and exhorting us to leave off the
evil of our doings and to follow the Lord and to fear him, and it was his
greatest joy if he saw any of us bring forth a Testimony for the Lord, O how
would it refresh him, yea that he could nor forbear but must praise the Lord
before he went out of the Meeting, and if there were any that did grieve the
Lord Spirits, and Rebel against him, then he would be so grieved and troubled,
that he could scarce take his rest upon his Bed, I can truly say that he was a
man that sought the welfare of our Souls and Bodies too, and he taught us
with all the might he had, and that faithfully, and if he found out a nearer
way, he told it us, and if there be any that have not improved their time, I
can truly say that the fault is theirs, and nor his, for he did as much as he
could for us; and when he was upon his Death bed, he exhorted us to fear God;
and he Praised and Glorified the God of Heaven, unto the last breath that he
fetched in this world, so that the Lord has taken this good man out of this
world, and he is gone to his rest in peace, with the Lord Jesus Christ, where
is joy for ever and evermore.

Thomas Green. 16 years old.

This day the Spirit of the Lord gives me utterance that I can bear a
Testimony for my deceased Teacher John Matern.
THis I can say of a truth, he was an upright man in his generation, serving
God with his whole heart, he had a very great care that he might teach
faithfully, that so he might not bring any guilt upon his conscience; and
moreover he had a great Travel in the Lord for us, who were under his tuition,
that we who felt the Power of God in us, and had in some measure regenerated
and changed us, that we might walk uprightly and according to the truth* he
also had a Travel for them that had not felt the Power of God to change them,
but were yet in rebellion against God's Spirit, that they might come to feel
themselves in some measure changed, and his Travel was great for the prosperity
of truth every where (and we whom he taught find a great want of him, but the
Lord supplyeth it;) and this can I say for him, that the very same day about
four hours before he Dyed, we had a meeting with him, where he being raised up
by the Power of God, (though very weak in body, but of Perfect understanding)
^e exhorted us even with a mighty Power that most, (I belive I may say all,)
were broken, and tendered before the Lord; and all the while I was with him he
did Sing Heavenly Praises unto the Lord, in the inward man, and dyed in the
Faith of Christ Jesus the Son of God, and then his Soul ascended up to the God
of Heaven, and now he enjoys pleasures without end, and at this time
considering the manner of his Death, my Soul cannot but render to the God of
Heaven, Glory and Dominion for ever, Amen.

The 13th. of the 7th. Month 1680. Philip Dymond. 14 years old.

A Testimony concerning my late Decensed Master John Matern.
HE was a man that feared the Lord, and wa^ very serviceable in his place, and
I can trul^ say he was a fit Instrument in the hand of the Lord, and taught us
his Scholars with all the diligence as could well be expected; In his life time
h^ labored through hardships that we might be educated in the truth, as well
as in other things. and believe he dyed in the Lord, and his reward follows
him; for assuredly the Lord did bless him, an^ will bless all others that lived
as he did.

Oh that we may all walk as he did, in the wa^ of Christ, and follow his steps
for ever* I can sa^ with many more of my School-fellows that we ne^ desir^d a
better Tutor then he was. When I hea^ he lay upon his sick bed, many times I
have cried the Lord, in my heart to raise him up again; but has been the will
of the Lord to take him awa^ and now he is at peace to all eternity.

John Woolley. 10 years ol^

This is my Testimony concerning our Dear Teacher John Matern, who is lately
departed out of this Earthly Tabernacle.
THat he was a righteous Man, walking uprightly with the Lord his Maker and
Creator; he was a man with whom the Lord was, both in his goings out, and
commings in; this can I truly say in living experience: He was an adversary to
all manner of evil, but he cherished the good as the apple of his Eye;
wherefore I am sensible that he is departed in peace, and though I was not here
at the day of his death, yet my Soul was sensible of the goodness of the Lord
toward him on his Deathbed; as praising and magnifying the name of the Lord;
and now I am sensible he is at rest and peace with the Lord his Maker and
Creator, in that desired Heaven, wherein never any unclean can ever enter.

This was the Lord pleased to put in my heart to Write concerning our dear and
well beloved Teacher, who is departed, and entered into the blessed rest with
the God of our Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, world without end.

John Butcher. 14 years old.

I have this to say for my Dear Teacher John Matern.
HE was one that lived in the fear of the Lord; and when he lay upon his
Deathbed, he Glorified the Lord, and made a sweet melody in his Soul; and at
the present time we had a blessed Meeting, and the presence of the Lord was
amongst us, and he also pleased the Lord, and made a happy end, for surely he
made a Covenant with the Lord, and I am sure he was filled with the presence of
the Lord; Oh, he was a blessed man indeed, he had made it manifest, for in his
lifetime it was his greatst joy to see any of his Scholars grow up in the fear
of the Lord; and if at any time he saw the enemy to prevail over any, he would
with grief of heart admonish them to return, and repent, that they might find
mercy with the Lord, and beseech them to have a care least the Enemy should
prevail again, he also was greatly exercised, if any of his Scholars did not
mind their business and Learning, as to the outward, and would encourage them
that minded the same, assuredly he Preached Righteousness in his life and
conversation, assuredly he has made his calling and election sure, and now he
is at rest with the Lord, for he has left a good Savor behind him, and the
rememberance of him is blessed, he is gone to the Lord, and is at peace with
him, for ever and evermore.

Margaret Rouse 12 years old.

This I have to say for my dear Teacher John Matern.
THat he was an upright true honest man, one that feared God and eschewed Evil,
one that labored for the good of the Souls of them that he taught, he taught
them inward as well as outward knowledge; he was a man that spent himself much
for the Lord, he was a true labourer in the Lord, and one that Preached his
Holy name unto us, and made it known, but now he is gone out of this Body of
Flesh; O he has laid down his Head in Peace with the Lord, and is at rest with
the highest in the Holy Jerusalem, the City of the everlasting God. I can truly
say that he has been much troubled when any of the Boys had been disorderly,
and he would often exhort them to fear the Lord. O he was a Man that spent
himself much for us, but now he is repayed for it; he would often cry unto the
Lord for us, that we might all fear the Lord, from the least to the greatest,
and the last day he lived he praised the Lord; and we had a Meeting in his
Chamber which he desired, and he did exhort us, and pray the Lord for us.

He was a righteous man, the Lord has blessed him, blessed be his name for it.
O how he would fight against the Devil, to the praise of the Lord, and honor
of his name, in whom he trusted and had his life and being,

Thomas Hutson 14 years old.

I have a few Lines to Write concerning my Dear Husband.
HE was an upright hearted man in his doings, he served the Lord with all his
Heart, and was faithful in his place to every one that he was concerned with,
to do them good, and it was his greatest delight to see truth prosper,
especialy amongst the young ones, with whom he was concerned, it was his
greatest joy and satisfaction to see the Lords power breaking in upon them, so
that he could not but Praise and Glorify the Lord many a time for it, often
upon his very Deathbed he lay praising and glorifying of the Lord for his
great mercies bestowed upon him.

And although I lost a dear and tender Husband, who was very dear to, and
tender over me, yet (being in the Lords will,) I am content with the will of
God, being also that he now reaps the reward, which many a time he traveled
for; and in forsacking his country, and his Fathers house, to come amongst a
people that served the Lord with uprightness of heart, he had his desire
answered, and what great joy and peace he departed this Life, and is gone into
everlasting happiness, to be with the Lord for ever and evermore.

Rosina Matern.

THE END.

