Mr. Patridhe's FAMOUS PROPHESIES AND PREDICTIONS: TOGETHER With the
Observations of sundry other Great and Learned Astrologers, touching the
wonderful things that are expected to happen in the Year, 1690. in great
Britain, France, and Ireland, and other Kingdoms, States, and Countries in
matters of Peace, Negotiation, War, Casualties, Contingencies, and other
Transactions more particularly the Happiness promised this Nation, and the
Danger that threatens the French King, and his Dominions; also the Popish Army
in Ireland: Also the Union of Protestants, Reciting likewise a strange and
wonderful Vision on the Subject of these Affairs lately happening, foretelling
the quieting Scotland, reducing Ireland, and the Conquest of France, and by
what means it was proposed to be confirmed as a Truth, and what has since come
to pass in order thereunto: The happy Reign of our Glorious Monarch, and his
Triumph over his Enemies.

three blazing suns comet and arrow battle scene with two opposing armies

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, J. Back. 1690.

(...) ^^dinary Matters are likely in hand; but as the Seasons grow on for
Action, the Issue may be expected: and the many Configurations promise somewhat
Extraordinary; for those that crowd together (except Jupiter) behold each other
with malignant Rays; and Saturn and Mars, who afflict all other, are in
opposition from Taurus and Virgo, which may denote some underhand Affairs; one
of them being the Horoscope of the Kingdom of Ireland: so that we may in all
likelihood hear of the taking of some Towns, or Castles by Surprise or
Surrender, if not some brisk and brave Action, wherein Valiant Men win Honor,
and occasion their Preferment according to their Merits, and those that have
ill deserved may probably fall into Disgrace.

Saturn is likewise Stationary and Retrograde in the Ascendant of the French
King, being also in Square to his Mid-heaven: and in this Case the Party so
posited, is threatened with loss of Honor, bad Success, Treacherous and
underhand Dealings. And now diverse of the Planets being in the watery, Signs,
and the Sun Eclipsed in Pisces, denotes great Storms and Rains, which may
occasion some Over-flowings, and do damage to Shipping at Sea, and Houses,
etc. At Land however, the Congress of the Planets in Pisces, signifies great
Meetings and Consults of Eminent Persons, to adjust and carry on weighty
Affairs, pointing but little favorable to France; for there we still find
Saturn afflicting the Horoscope of the French King, which may give him trouble
by Domestic Jars, through the Discontents of his People, Oppressed with Taxes
and other Grievances, which they have long groaned under without Redress; by
which means, in all likelihood, he may find work enough to defend himself and
his Countries, without being capable of making Inroads into his Neighbors, to
give Europe the dismal Marks of his Implacable Fury, by laying Waste with Fire,
etc.

The Season coming on and growing ripe for Action, the Armies will begin to
move with Courage and Resolution; for Mars will be in the Mundane Trine to
Jupiter, applying to a Zodiacal Trine, which promises favorably to the Low
Countries, and a happy success to the Confederates in general. About this time
we may expect to hear considerable News relating to the Affairs of Ireland,
whilst things go on prosperously in England: however, That Country seems much
Impoverished by the Spoil and Ravagement that has been made, which obliges many
that stood out, to submit themselves to the Government of England; and strong
Places will in all probability Surrender: Skirmishes frequently happening, in
which Blood is shed, etc. And now the Sun and Moon being both in the Parallel
with Saturn and the Lord of the Tenth and Eleventh Houses; though some Contests
may arise, they will have a favorable Issue, and an Increase of Trade is
promised by Sea and Land, especially Prosperity to the City of London; though
Merchants must expect some Losses, by Pirates and Privateers, as well as by
Storms: for the Sun and Moon are also at the same time in the Mundane Parallel
with Jupiter, a most auspicious Planet.

Saturn in the beginning of July is Stationary in the French King's Horoscope,
and in Square to his Mid-heaven; denoting that he will find disappointments in
his Purposes of troubling Europe, and see his Armies Unsuccessful; his Grandeur
perhaps daily declining: for the Sun will soon after touch the Square of Saturn
and Mars, in Square to that Planet; but the Northern Climates are in a happy
way of seeing good days, and enjoying their Wishes. About this time we may
happen to hear great News from Sea.

The Trine of the Sun and Jupiter, is ever held to give Honor to the Law, and
those that profess it; and Jupiter Stationary promises to advance the Honor of
England, and that great Negotiations will be on foot, and Ambassadors from
Foraign Countries may be expected, to the advancement of her Interest and
Grandeur, through the farther Alliances and Establishment of Trade.

Now Mercury appears employed to dispose the minds of Great ones to Weighty
Affairs and Intelligence, and Correspondencies Amicably to be held; and herein
it may be very considerable, for as much as he is not Angular, but in Cancer,
which is a Tropical Sign, in the Angle of War and Contention, with considerable
Negotiations attending; and toward the latter end of August we may expect some
Diseases to be Rife, but nothing extrordinary relating to any considerable
Mortality: And France in the ensuing Month is threatened with some more than
ordinary Disaster; perhaps an Inroad by the Confederate Armies, or some
Insurrection of the People, who have so long groaned under the Yoke of
Opression, for Saturn is exactly in the Horoscope of that King.

In the mean while, Jupiter is favorable to England, and we hear of Success
abroad; some Storms may be expected about this time, with considerable
Robberies, even in the face of the Sun, though the Robbers being Detected, may
be brought to a late Repentance.

There being five Lunations in the succeeding Month, and many of them in Libra,
a Cardinal Sign, as also a Conjunction of the Sun, and Mars, near Virgo; in
Libra they denote violent Motions, and some considerable Encounters beyond the
Seas, and particularly in some parts of Germany, and Flanders, by which we may
expect good Success. Mercury likewise joins twice this Month with Saturn in
Scorpio, which threaten the French Policies with Discovery, and little or no
Success.

The Season now being far advanced, Action begins to cease, and Armies to
retire into Winter Quarters, leaving many strong places Garisoned, to secure
what has been gained, etc.

And the Sun in November being in Conjunction with Saturn, and the Sun and
Mercury, and Mars, and Mercury in Scorpio, which denote the French Affairs in
no very good Condition, and the Councils of that Monarch disturbed and
disordered, Division and Distraction reigning, by which Advantage may accrue to
his Enemies.

Many various Discourses will be broached about this time, and several Men's
Minds filled Notions and Fancies, though perhaps to little or no purpose, and
many and various Aspects will follow, influencing public and private Affairs;
but the sharpness of the Weather dulls Action abroad; however, it may be more
than probable, that things are in hand, and ripening to great Success. Ireland
by this time inclining to a better and more favorable Condition, and breathing
a freer Air of Hope toward Happiness, and the Affairs of Scotland seem Calmer
and in good Settlement, though no favorable Aspect shines this Year on the
Affairs of France, which seem to decline and retrograde that Kingdom; perhaps
having but too long Tyrannized over its Neighbors that are on the Frontiers,
even to the Hanging, was many thousand Cities, Towns, and Villages, at sundry
times, with great Effusion of Blood; so that God no doubt in his good time will
bring low that Haughtiness that has so long exalted it self, and defied, as it
were, Heaven and Earth, by an unparalleled Audacity in violating the most
sacred Oaths, Leagues, Treaties, and whatever has been contrived to bind the
Consciences and conserve the Honor of Mankind; and his Allies the Turk is
threatened with no less favorable Success, and Disgrace by the loss of Armies,
and larger parts of his vast Dominion so unduly detained from its Rightful
Owners, and gotten from the Christians, at the Expense of so much Blood, and by
such a world of Treachery. The Venetians are promised Success against the
Common Enemy by Sea and Land, and are in a very fair likelihood of recovering
what they have lost in many Years tedious and bloody War, especially those
famous and flourishing Islands, and a great part of Greece.

The Tartar by this time begins to grow weary of his Alliance, by reason of the
Fear he has of the Moscovite, and the Danger that threatens him from that part;
and from Poland, and the Emperor of Germany, and the Princes of the Empire my
expect to hear Welcome News on that side the Empire of the East, by the Success
of their Army, being perhaps in a very fair way of Recovery, if vigorously
pushed on, and the French Confederacy prove but little advantageous to the
Ottoman part, to which that Monarch has given such pregnant Hopes, by promising
to divert the Forces of the Empire in the West, and embroil all Christendom,
that so the Turks may have time after so may reitterated Losses to breath and
recrute, whilst he finds himself mistaken in the Account, and sees the French
Monarchy, as well as his own, tottering, and the perfidious Success returned
upon the Head of him that thought to cast Chains about his Neighbors; for he
is this Year very much threatened by the ill Aspects of Saturn, which look
asquint upon his Ascendent, and oppose his Designs; for this Year is in
probability pointed out as one of his unlucky Ones, and indeed is likely to
prove a Year of Wonders, perhaps such as have not lately happened; however, our
share in the Benevolent Planets is considerable, and gives us no suspicion of
any Danger; and all this Year the Famous Astrologer, Mr. William Lilly pointed
about Twenty Years since, as we find it in his Writings left behind him, etc.

About this time Men may expect great Alterations and Changes, in the World:
The Lord fit us to embrace his Mercies, and patiently to wait his coming, Amen.
And we have it upon no ill grounded Report that a person lately living about
Charing Cross, suddenly falling down at a Table amongst Company, and to their
apprehensions seeming dead, after some hours came again to himself, and
declared he had seen a Vision, and been in a very glorious place, where it was
revealed to him, that this Year Scotland should be quieted, Ireland reduced to
its Obedience, and France subdued, or humbled by the Courage and Valor of the
English Arms under their Victorious Monarch; and questioning the Truth of it,
it was farther told him, that in Confirmation thereof, he should die himself at
such a time; and, if we may credit Report, we since hear he died exactly at the
time, or however is since dead.

And thus much may suffice as an insight of Affairs for this Year of Wonders,
viz. 1690.
FINIS.

