Hen: Do: Carry Baro de Leppington Comes Monmouthen^is. et Hon mi: Ord: Balni^
Eques.



Politic DISCOURSES; Written in ITALIAN BY PAOLO PARUTA A Noble VENETIAN,
Cavalier and Procurator of St. MARK. Whereunto is added, A short SOLILOQUY, In
which the AUTHOR briefly examines the whole Course of his Life. Rendered into
ENGLISH By the Right Honorable, HENRY EARL of MONMOUTH.

LONDON, Printed for H. Moseley, and are to be sold at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1657:

THE CONTENTS Of the Several DISCOURSES
The First BOOK.
DISCOURSE I. WHat was the true and proper Form of Government observed in the
Commonwealth of Rome; and whether she could be better ordered in Civil affairs,
having Armed people on foot. page 1. II. What success the Roman affairs would
have had, if Alexander the Great had turned with his victorious Army into
Italy. 18 III. Whether was the better and more laudable advice; That of the
Carthaginians in offering to assist the Romans against King Pyrrhus; Or that of
the Romans in refusing their offer. 23 IV. Which of the two famous Roman
Commanders, Quintus Fabi^s Maximus, or P. Scipio Africanus, brought more of
(...) the Commonwealth of Rome in managing their War. 29 V. Whether war being
to be made against the Romans, Hannibals counsel was good to carry it into
Italy. 34 VI. Whether it was well done by the Romans, to carry the War against
the Carthaginians, into Sicily and Spain; and into Macedonia and Greece,
against King Philip; whilst Hannibal waged War with them in Italy. 39 VII.
Whether the destruction of Carthage was the rise of the ruin of the Roman
Republic. 45 VIII. Why Rome could not regain her liberty after the death of
Julius Caesar as she had formerly done, by driving the Tarquin^ first out, and
then Appius Claudius and the other Decemviri. 50 IX. Which is the safer way to
be taken, to arrive at Honor and Glory in a Commonwealth; that which was held
by Cato, or that which was pursued by Caesar. 55 X. To what Age of the City of
Rome the greatest praise and merit is to be given, for the prosperity and
greatness whereto she arrived. 59 XI. How the Roman Empire, though it fell
oftentimes into the hands of base and wicked m^n, was notwithstanding able to
maintain it self in the Reign of many Emperors, and how it came to be finally
destroyed, 67 XII. Why the Commonwealth of Rome, though she suffered many
Defeats in diverse Battles, yet did still prove victorious at last. 78 XIII.
Whether the City of Rome could have maintained herself longer in the glory and
majesty of her Command, if she had preserved her Librty, and Form of
Commonwealth, then she did under the Government of Emperors. 85 XIV. Why the
Grecians did not much extend the Confines of their dominion, as did the Romans;
and how Greece came to lose her liberty. 93 XV. Whether Ostracism used by the
Athenians; be a just thing, or no; and whether it be useful for the
preservation of a Commonwealth. 104
The Second BOOK.
DISCOURSE I. WHy the Commonwealth of Venice has not so for enlarged her
Pr^cincts, as did the Roman Commonwealth. 111 II. Whether or no the
Commonwealth of Venice be to be blamed for having taken upon her the defense of
the City of Pisa, when it was app^gne^ by the Florentine^. 1^3 III. That the
Commonwealth is not to be blamed for the unfortunate successes of War, after
the routing of the Venetian Army in the actio^ of Giaradada. 131 IV. Whether
the Princes of Italy did well, or no, to assault the Army of Charl^ the Eight,
King of France, when after having gotten the Kingdom of Naples, he hasted to
pass over the Mountains. 140 V. Whether or no the Forces of Leagues be fit for
great Enterprises. 146 VI. Why modern Princes have not done actions equal to
those which were done by the Ancients. 156 VII. What the cause is why Italy
has enjoyed so long peace and quiet in these latter times. 164 VIII. Whether
Citadels and Strongholds, much used by our modern Princes, be commodious, and
of true safety to a State, or no. 168 IX. Whether the Opinion of Pope Leo the
Tenth were good, or no, and his counsel safe, of driving Foreign Nations out of
Italy by the help of other Transalpine Forces. 179 X. Whether the Counsel taken
by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and by his Commanders, of not parting from the
walls of Vienna, when Solomon was come with very great strength from
Constantinople to assault it, deserve praise, or blame. 185
A TABLE Of all the more notable Things contained in the present Politic
Discourses.
A.
ADrian the Emperor, why he resolved to go on progress over all his States, and
to visit every part thereof -- Page 71-91. Where he set the bounds of his
Empire -- ibid. Agesilaus, though he were King in Sparta, was obedient to the
Laws of the Country -- 48 Alcibiades, by too much desire of glory, ruined his
Country -- 10. Had higher thoughts then the rest of the Greek Commanders -- 95
Alexander the Great, the greatness of his enterprises -- 19. His Militia --
20-83 An Indian Gymnosophist shows him how in a large Kingdom insurrections
fall out -- 71. How far he extended his Empire, and in how little time -- 157.
and how -- 159. His artifices, and laudable way, for opening the way more
easily to his great achievements, and greater glory -- 162 Ambition
precipitated Rome into very grievous disorders -- 15-16-51. When discovered,
makes men distastefull -- 58. It, and Fear raise in Princes minds a desire of
innovation -- 164. The important mischief of it, if once gotten into men's
hearts -- 106. How it is to be cured in Statesmen -- ibid. An Army keeping the
field, how greatly beneficial -- 169 Armies, maintained by the Romans to carry
on the war in diverse parts, taken only out of Italy -- 64 Arragonian Kings of
Naples, what they did for fear of the French forces -- 138 Artillery, of what
use in war^^ -- 160. That in their stead the Ancients had miraculous Engines,
called Tormenta -- 173 Assaulting the Enemy in his own State, how advantageous
-- 34 Attalaricus King of the Goths descends into Italy -- 76. is afterward
entertained for a Stipendiary to the Empire -- ibid. Attila content to lose the
day, so the Roman Commander might be slain in the battle -- 89 Athens, why she
soon lost her liberty -- 5-13-54 Athenians of great power in Greece -- 94. By
what people followed and favored -- ibid. Too hard for the rest in Sea-forces
-- ibid. Hindered by the Spartans from taking in Sicily, and from assaulting
Persia -- 95. Why they could not enlarge their Dominion -- 98 Augustus Caesar,
in many places enlarged the Empire -- 68. Remained sole Lord of the whole World
-- 71. Reduced it all to Peace, though he was troubled with some Insurrections
-- 7^. See Octavianus.
B.
BAttails, subject to diverse unexpected accidents -- 31 When they are to be
adventured upon -- 192 Brutus, Junius Br. how he stirred up the people to
Liberty -- 51. Why he condemned his own sons to death -- 52 Brutus, Marcus Br.
why he could not preserve the liberty of Rome, recovered by Caesar's death --
51. That he endeavored it when 'twas too late -- 53
C.
CArthaginians, why they came to aid the Romans against Pyrrhus -- 23 For a
long time friends to the Romans -- ibid. Should rather have been afraid of the
Romans then of Pyrrhus -- 25. Were stronger at Sea then they -- 36. Often
subdued -- 45 Cat^ Major, causing sigs to be brought from Carthage into the
Senate House, gives counsel that that City should be destroyed -- 45. How such
counsel might be useful -- 49 Cato Uticensis, what things they were which
ingratiated him with the Senate and the People -- 55. Did many times prevail
against Caesar -- ibid. Founded his greatness upon nobler courses -- 57. What
demonstrations he received from the People of their singular favor to him --
58. Because his manners were not suitable to the form of that Republic, he
could not hold out his reputation among them to the utmost -- 59 Charles the
Great, having freed Italy from the slavery of the Northern Barbarians, made his
son Pipin King of Italy -- 183 Charles the Eighth, King of France, his passage
into Italy for the conquest of Naples -- 140. At his return assaulted by the
Italian Princes; and whether they were well advised in it, discoursed upon at
large -- ibid. Charles the Fifth, Emperor, compared with Solomon -- 22. His
great wars with Francis the First, King of France, and his famous expeditions
-- 157. Why his enterprises against the Kingdom of France proved vain -- 158.
Why he shunned hazarding a set battle with Solomon -- 162. How the State of
Milain fell to him -- 165. Whether he was well advised in not parting from
before the walls of Vienna, when Solomon was come to assault it -- 185 A City
well ordered, how it should be qualified -- 10. For preserving of unity among
the Citizens, whether the courses which Caesar took, or those used by Cato,
were more available -- 5^. When it is grown to a great height, it is a hard
matter to order it aright -- 14. That which aspires to a large Dominion, must
have two things -- 1^1. What is most necessary for its long continuance,
especially such a one as is cast into the form of a Republic -- 104* Of how
great importance the situation is -- 114 Citizens of singular quality banished
from Athens for ten years -- 3 -- 104 To make them virtuous, three things
necessary -- 7. By what means they may acquire greatness -- 56. That quietness
and concord between them is of main importance for the felicity of the State,
and how it may be preserved -- ibid. and -- 121 A Citizen very potent, how to
be corrected, that he disturb not the common Quiet -- 95 Cleomenes King of
Sparta, accounted the riches of the Persians not worth the trouble they would
stand his Soldiery -- 98 Colonies, when first used by the Romans, and how
beneficial to them -- 63 and 172 Of the Venetians why sent into Candy -- ibid.
Constantine the Great divided the Empire between his three Sons -- 67. Why he
transferred the Empire to Constantinople -- 71 Constantine son to the
abovenamed, what part of the Empire fell to his share -- 67 Consalvo Ferrante,
why kept under by King Ferdinand -- 106 Consuls, of what authority in Rome --
2-4-5 Customs, how profitable good ones are to Cities -- 10
D.
DAlmatians, with much difficulty subdued by the Venetians -- 119 Decemvirate,
held the form of a Republic -- 50. Why Rome was able to free herself from its
tyranny -- 51. Why driven out from thence -- 52 Docius Emperor of
Constantinople, routed by the Goths, flies, and is drowned in a Fen -- 75
Discords sprung up in Rome from War, not from Peace -- 48 Dictator, upon what
occasions chosen by the Romans -- 12. Of what relief to Rome, and who was the
first -- 62. Esteemed necessary in times of great danger, and what his dignity
was -- 86
E.
EDucation good, how useful to a City or State -- 9 Elephants employed by
Pyrrhus in his wars against the Romans -- 26 Emperors of Rome, favored,
assisted, and maintained by the Soldiers and the People -- 69-72-73. Thirty at
one time assumed that title -- 70. Why some were chosen to be their Companions
in their lives, and their Successors after their deaths -- 72. When those of
Caesar's race ended ibid. Which were slain by the Soldiers, for desiring to
reduce them to good discipline -- 73 Empire of the Romans, when it began -- 68.
When it began to decline -- 6^ The causes of its declination and ruin -- 71.
When it was void of worthy men and valiant Commanders -- 89. became tributary
to the Goths -- 76 Equality or parity of goods, why observed in Sparta -- 3. Of
all the Citizens in government, is not good -- 6. What equality is convenient
for a Commonwealth, that it may last long -- 104 Event, the surest way to know
what is likely to follow -- 19. That War is far more subject to diverse
unexpected events, then any other actions of ours -- 31 That it is the master
of Fools -- 38. Not the event of things, but the advice wherewith they were
done, makes them either praiseworthy or blameable -- 132
F.
FAbius Maximus, his action and worth -- 29, etc. Deserved to be praised not
only for Prudence, but for Courage -- 31. Feared by Hannibal -- ibid. overcomes
Hannibal when Conqueror -- ibid. Why he took a contrary course to that of
Scipio's -- 33 Fame and Reputation, of great importance in all our actions, but
especially in War -- 85 Ferdinand King, brother to Charles the Fifth, why it
would have been far better for him quietly to have suffered John King of
Hungary to be his neighbor, then to pull upon himself the Turks forces -- 196
Ferdinand King of Spain, why he kept under Consalvo -- 106. Not just in his
league with the Venetians -- 152 Florence, why she could not keep herself in a
firm state of Government free from civil dissentions -- 54 The Florentines
succoring the Dukes of Milain and Ferrara with men and moneys, hindered the
Venetians in those enterprises -- 124. Not well thought of, and indeed hated by
the Italian Princes, for the correspondence which they held with the French --
128. How their Fortresses put them to much trouble and damage, when they were
seized upon by the French brought in by their King Charles the Eighth -- 171
Forts or Fortresses, of how great furtherance to a State -- 148. The doubts for
which it may seem they are not available -- 168. Other more certain, and no
less grievous -- 171. Why called i ceppi della Toscana -- ibid. Arguments and
reasons to demonstrate the great benefit of Forts -- 172. How to be rightly
disposed and regulated -- 176. The defense and praise of rearing Forts -- ibid.
The doubts and arguments against them resolved -- ibid. Fortune, what is to be
understood by that name -- 18 The Fortune of the Romans overborn by Hannibal --
41. Why she easily rose up again, changing for the better -- 45. When she
proved cross, they still kept the same minds -- 48 Fortune very cross to the
Venetians -- 106 France, the Romans put sore to it ere they could take it in --
48. Whence the late troubles and discords arose -- 106 The French oftentimes
assaulted Rome -- 61-63. How timorous they showed themselves when the wars in
Italy grew unlucky -- 138. Why they have not been able to make great
achievements in Italy, nor to stay long there -- 166 Francesco Foscari Duke of
Venice, said, That the Republic could not much increase in power, unless she
made some enterprises by Land -- 115 Francis the First, King of France, how he
palter'd in the League with the Italian Princes -- 152. For endowments of the
mind, and other qualities, most eminent -- ibid. Though his fortune gave way to
that of Charles the Fifth, whom yet he put to much trouble -- 157. Why his
furious endeavor to assault Spain proved bootless -- 159. and as much in vain
his enterprises in Italy -- 161
G.
GEnoeses conquered by the Venetians -- 41. Whereupon it was that at first they
entered into competition, and afterward into a deadly fewd with the Venetians
-- 118 The Goths, famous for the destruction of the Empire, and of many
Provinces -- 76 Their original, and why they fell down into Italy -- ibid.
Other actions of theirs under diverse Commanders -- 77. They also took pay under
the Emperors -- ibid. Government, how the quality of every one may be known --
1-2. What the right Form of it is -- ibid. What it was in Rome -- 2. What in
Sparta -- ibid. What in Venice -- 54. Every Form is not convenient for every
State -- 2 The Form of the Government is, as it were, the soul of the State --
131 From a Popular government men come to Tyranny -- 54. The Change thereof in
Rome, occasioned so much the sooner the end of her Empire -- 90 and of the
corruption of her Militia -- 92 Greece, why the Romans strove to keep her from
falling into Philips hands -- 45 Had a general Council called the Amphictiones,
like the Diets of Germany -- 94 In many of her Cities had men of eminence for
all manner of worth -- 93 Not being at unity in herself, could not compass any
great achievements abroad -- 95. By reason of her dissentions, could not make
use of her victories against the Persians -- 97. minded Arts more then Arms --
ibid. Whence her victories against the Persians proceeded -- 98. How she came
to fall into the hands of the Macedonians -- 100. then, of another Philip --
101 lastly of the Romans -- ibid. Why after the death of Alexander, she could
not recover her liberty -- 100. For the same reasons, having afterward the
Empire of Constantinople, she could not preserve herself in that dignity -- 103
How highly her Soldiers were esteemed by Philip of Macedon, and Alexander the
Great -- ibid. and 104 Guido Ubeldo Duke of Urbin, why he would allow of no
Forts in his Dominions -- 170-171
H.
HAnnibal, upon what ground he made war upon the Romans in Italy -- 34 What
reasons should have removed him from that resolution -- 35 Honorius the
Emperor, his cowardice and simple saying -- 77 Hungary, whence so called -- 77.
The occasion of the Wars for her, between the House of Austria and the Turks --
195
I.
ITaly, how much she abounded in Soldiers -- 84. The Romans meetly out of their
own Citizens, and of their other Territories in Italy, were furnished with
Commanders and Soldiers for all their Armies -- 62. Was long obedient to the
Western Emperors; yet withdrew herself from under their command, and submitted
to Lords of her own -- 184 Italy, through her own Princes fault, at present,
under the Command of Strangers -- 140. Her late Quietness and Peace, and from
what causes -- 164 When it began -- 165. How it may be continued -- 167. Before
the times of Pope Leo the Teath, in great misery for thirty years -- 182
Italian Princes, whether they were well advised in setting upon Charles the
Eight King of France, at his departing out of Italy -- 140 Iugurth with a
bitter saying, taxed the extreme grippleness and avarice of the Romans -- 13
Julius Caesar, what fierce people he conquered in France -- 91. Why it was
difficult and troublesome for him to tame them -- 159. He would always charge
his Enemy first -- 187
K.
KIngdoms large and ample, why apt and subject to Insurrections -- 72
L.
LAws, what benefit they bring -- 17. They ought to be confirmed by good
Customs -- 11. Their aim ought to be, to take away the abuse of things, not the
things themselves -- 109 Leagues (or Confederacies) why they are made, their
force and power -- 146 Made by the Christians against the Infidels --
147-151-156-191. Which are the firmest -- 147. The defects which they may, and
use to have -- 148 For what causes they are made -- 154. How and when men may
with reason expect benefit by them -- 154. Why they are no better esteemed --
ibid. That famous one of Cambray against the Venetians, why made, how soon
dissolved, and how unjust it was -- 154-155 Leonidas, his famous victory
against the Persians -- 98 Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, his nature and
qualities of mind -- 135 Why he conspired against the Venetians; and how
injuriously -- 132 -- 135 Lodowick Sforza Duke of Milain, how fearful he showed
himself upon the League between the French and the Venetians -- 139. He calls
Charles the Eight King of France into Italy, and then to his own great damage
repents himself of it -- 140 Lycurgus, why his Laws proved good -- 11. Had many
means to help him in the settling of his Laws -- 12. Ordered his Republic so,
that it should not much increase its Dominions -- 47
M.
MAgistracies, the confirming of them proved very dangerous in Rome -- 3 They
ought to be of limited authority, and for a short time -- 5 Malta, why it
preserved it self against the assaults of Bolyman -- 175 Marius, by what ways
he began his greatness -- 8. By his ambition he much endamaged the Commonwealth
-- 10-47. His discreet carriage in the enterprise against the Cimbri, which
were come down into Italy -- 194 Medici, how that Family got the superiority in
Florence, and kept it -- 105 The Militia of the Greeks or Macedonians, what it
was -- 21. Of the Carthaginians, mercenary and incommodious -- 39. Of the
Romans, proved very profitable to the Commonwealth, by being in the hands of
many -- ibid. Well understood and practiced by the Romans -- 38-49-61-80.
Afterward grew corrupted and abject -- 69-73-74-75. Of the Turks, how numerous,
well ordered, and in continual Pay -- 186-193-195-196. Of the Christians, much
inferior to that of the Turks -- 186. Naval, cannot of it self much enlarge the
Dominion of a State -- 113. The Forces thereof are increased and maintained by
those of the Land -- 114
N.
NAtural inclination ought to be followed in the choice of our actions -- 58
Nicolo Orsino, Count of Pitioliano, like Fabius Maximus, and not like him --
135 Nobles, why a^ first of little authority in Rome -- 2. Opposing the
Communalty, and hated by it -- 4. Authors of the destruction of Tyrannies -- 12
O.
OCtavianus, why easily entertained by the Army after Caesar's death -- 52
P.
PEace, how it remains of it self, being brought into States -- 164. How, in
these last times it is established in the minds of the Italian Potentates --
165 How Peace, Concord, and Unity amongst Citizens ought to be preserved by
Laws -- 121 Plutarch, prefers Lycurgus before Numa -- 11 Pompey, set up by the
Senate to take down Caesar -- 47. His triumphs -- ibid. After the war with
Mithridates, quitted the Army -- 51. Subdued for the Romans above eight hundred
Cities -- 65. The laudable way and art by which he brought people to obey the
Romans, and facilitated his enterprises -- 163 The People of Rome, of what
authority in the Commonwealth -- 5. How from the beginning it was of great
power, and increased it more and more -- 15 Loving liberty, how it came to lose
it -- 51. Sought by seditions to obtain from the Senate all things, though
never so unjust -- 52 The People; That to curb it, Severity prevails more then
Meekness -- 16. That out of its natural fickleness, it uses to favor a Foreign
Prince, and by seditions and violent attempts to plot against the present Power
-- 170 A Prince shall do well and wisely to have a care, that no Subject of his
grow to be suspected for his greatness -- 106. Must not for his own relief make
use of Foreign aids, that he may be too strong for his Native forces -- 103
Princes, what sort of Militia it is best for them to make use of in their
expeditions, and other matters of War -- 155. Sage advice to them in points of
War, and the choice of Commanders -- 145. Those of Italy have used to employ
foreign Commanders, and foreign mercenary Soldiers -- 122 See more in States.
R.
Republics, how their diverse Forms may be known -- 6. How their continuance
may be known -- 18. How at last they grow to be Tyrannies -- 54. That a State
deserves not the name of a Commonwealth or Republic, where the Decrees of the
People, and not the Laws, carry all the command -- 6. For the long preservation
and quietness of them, nothing more necessary then a Parity -- 104. A poor one
cannot enlarge its Dominion -- 112 Rome, was a mixed, but imperfect
Commonwealth, and why -- 3-11. Was too Popular -- 3. Why it could not free it
self from many disorders -- 14 How long it held its greatness -- 68. When, and
how she might have freed herself from her many bad qualities and defects --
ibid. How she abounded in Soldiers and Commanders -- 39-64-74-80. How she made
way for Monarchy -- 39. She scattered her corruptions amongst the Nobles and
the Communalty -- 50. That those Citizens proved worst oppressors to her, whom
for the mere conservation of her Liberty she had too much exalted -- 51 Her
first, second, and third Age -- 59. Her first seven Kings, of what considerable
benefit they were to her -- 60. At what time she deserved the praise of good
Government -- 61 Romans, why they refused the Carthaginians aid against Pyrrhus
-- 26. Refused to have peace with Pyrrhus -- ibid. For what causes chiefly they
had the better of the Carthaginians -- 39. They regarded not so much present
dangers, as future -- 45. Out of one War they still framed another -- 46 Why
they were invincible, according to Polybius -- 78. The two pretenses under
which they made their most notorious acquisitions -- 161. How by Colonies they
kept their new Subjects in loyalty and obedience -- 173 Romulus, a man fierce,
ambitious, and desirous to enlarge his Estate, trained up the People according
to his genius -- 113
S.
SCipio Africanus, his worth and actions -- 29-33. Why he took a course
differing from that of Fabius -- 33. His passage into Sicily, of what benefit
it was -- 35 Scipio Nafica, when Carthage was taken, dissuaded the Senate from
destroying that City -- 46. Whether that counsel of his were founded upon good
reason -- ibid. The Senate of Rome, what number it consisted of, and when first
instituted -- 14 Its authority -- 4. The generous answer she gave to the
Ambassadors of Pyrrhus -- 26-89. Little esteemed of by Julius Caesar -- 46.
Subject to corruptions -- 50. Severity, in what sort of Commonwealth it does
good -- 57. Was very great in Cato -- ibid. Sylla, brought into Rome licentious
living -- 51. Increased the Order of the Senators, to counterpoise the
Communalty, -- Gave honors and riches to his Favorites -- ibid. Sultan of
Caire, how and why he lost all his Kingdom in a short time -- 160 Solomon
paralleled with Charles the Fifth -- 22. His endowments of mind and fortune --
157. His great achievements -- 158. Why he made no great progress in Hungary
-- 159. nor at Corfu against the Venetians -- ibid. Why he made that expedition
into Hungary -- 195. Had under his command four Empires, and eighteen Kingdoms
-- 196 Sparta, a mixed Republic very excellent -- 5. Her Laws not written -- 11
That authority which the Kings had there, not prejudicial to it -- 48. Many
worthy men flourished in it, by reason of the form of its government -- 58 For
want of money, could not enlarge her Empire -- 82 Spartans, when and why of
great power in Greece -- 96. By what people followed and favored -- ibid.
Stronger then the rest in Land forces -- ibid. Why they would not have their
Cities begirt with walls -- 171 States; whence their diverse changes come -- 53.
How men grow desirous of their change -- 72. Are augmented and preserved by the
same things which gave them their beginning, and corrupted by the contrary --
73. Where they have been ruined by intestine discords, the overgreat height of
some of their own has been the cause -- 105. That they have their beginning,
increase, stay, declination, and ruin -- 86 S^ilico, a Barbarian, and by
nation a Hun, called to the command of the Roman Army, betrays the Empire -- 89
T.
THebans much esteemed of for the discipline of their Soldiers, called the
Sacred Band -- 94. Pelopidas and Epaminondas, famous Commanders of theirs --
ibid. Themistocles, what his advice was, and his Naval victory against the
Persians -- 99 Tiberius Gracchus slain by the Nobles of Rome, without any
revenge from the People -- 17 Tribuneship in Rome, of how great power, and its
insolence -- 6. Called Sacrosanctus -- 52 Triumph in Rome, when first
instituted, and to whom first granted -- 62 Turks, their assistance refused by
the Venetians, and yet sued for by other Christian Princes -- 136. Why they
cannot so suddenly nor easily do any signal enterprises by Land -- 161. Are
accustomed, for their own security, to destroy the inhabitants of such places
as they take in, especially those of the better and richer sort -- 172. Their
chiefest strength consists in their Cavalry -- 187 Their Law promises
everlasting reward in heaven, to every one that loses his life in their
Sovereigns quarrel -- 194
V.
VAlerius Publicola, why in reforming the government of Rome, he yielded many
things to the People -- 14-15. That he might have ordered the City better --
ibid. Venice, in time brought her Government to perfection -- 12. How she has
been able to preserve her Liberty thus long -- 54. What her Government is --
ibid. When it began -- 77-116. Her Founders lovers of Peace, and of an intent
and end differing from that of the Founders of Rome -- ibid. Her greatest and
most difficult attempts have been either in their own Defense, or for Religion,
or in Assistance of others -- 115. What wars and efforts of fierce Nations she
at her first beginning underwent -- 117. Why she made use of Foreign Soldiers
and Commanders -- 121. That for having accustomed to employ Foreign Commanders,
she has not been able (by reason of their disloyalty) to prosecute such
Enterprises of hers as had been well begun -- ibid. Venetians, what course they
took to free themselves from the danger they were in of the Genoa-forces -- 43.
That the practice of Merchandising is not to be blamed in them -- 116. Some of
their illustrious and famous Princes -- ibid. What title their Dukes assumed
for the taking in of Constantinople -- 118 How prejudicial to them the Ottoman
Empire has been -- ibid. That, had it not been for the treachery of their
Commanders, the State of Milan had been theirs -- 121. Their weighty and
glorious enterprises by Sea and Land against the Saracens, for the Emperors of
Constantinople, and against the Genoeses -- 129. Why they called Lewis King of
France into Italy -- 130 Why almost all Christian Princes entered into a League
against them -- 132-180 How discreetly they have continued Neutrals in the
discords of Princes, that thereupon Peace might follow in these latter times --
167. Why they sent into Candy new Colonies of their own Gentry -- 172 Virtue,
what two virtues are necessary for him that proposes great matters to himself,
and aspireth after glory -- 88 Virtuous, To make men virtuous, three things are
needful -- 11
W.
WAR, brought home to the Enemies own doors, how advantageous -- 28 When it
ought to be carried on with protracting of time -- 31. War, and not Peace, was
the cause of Romes ruin -- 46. It is subject to diverse successes and chances,
more then any other action of ours -- 31-183-185 Wars, made by the Romans after
the subduing of Carthage -- 48. Made and maintained by them in many places at
once -- 65. Particulars most necessary for them -- 149. The manner of Wars now
used, is the chiefest cause why the enterprises of modern Princes prove not
equal to those of the Ancients -- 148
The end of the second Table.
ERRATA.
Page lin.

4-45 AFter not read only.

5-7 Dele not.

8-17 For license read licentiousness.

10-27 For temperance read temper.

11-38 For them read those.

15-25 Before what insert do.

ib. 48 Dele more.

19-19 For of read and, for and read of.

25-38 Dele only;

26- ult. After obedience insert i^.

35-26 After ^ighting read they.

37-43 After these insert rather.

38-14 After of Insert all this.

39-12 Before the insert to.

43- pen. After as insert if.

53-12 After (...) insert the less.

55-31 After not insert only

60-3 After not insert only.

73-17 Dele and (the first.)

Page lin.

74-27 Before Goths insert great valor of the ibid. 31 For Commanders read
Soldiers.

82-50 For Rhodosius read Rhodanus.

89-30 For Soldiers read Commanders.

112-30 For where read were.

113-48 Dele then by.

116-20 For a read the.

124-7 For them into his, read him into th^^.

126-34 After men's insert thoughts.

152-25 Before Pope, insert with Francis King of France.

157-5 After if insert we.

158-45 For sadly read easily.

159-26 For Cor^^r read Corf^.

ibid. 29 For Corfee read Corf^.

176-47 After thereof insert more.

199-2 Before not insert it.

ibid. 3 Dele it.

20^ -- 19 Dele be.

THE FIRST BOOK.
The First DISCOURSE.
What was the true and proper Form of Government observed in the Commonwealth
of Rome; and whether she could be better ordered in Civil affairs, having Armed
people on foot.
THere are many, who reflecting upon the Greatness of the Commonwealth of Rome,
wonder at her so many prosperities, by which she flourished a long time, and at
last obtained the mastery of all other Monarchies: And thinking that it is
enough to admire her feats of Arms, and management in Peace, do not care for
enquiring into the reason thereof; so as ballancing thereby every of her
several operations, they may know what they were that were truly worth praise
and imitation, and what blameworthy and to be avoided. But certainly these men
seem not to know, to how many and how great and various accidents all humane
works are subject, and what the true rule and measure is whereby the perfection
of States is comprehended: For that is not simply the greatness of an Empire,
to which she at the beginning rises by Fortune, and which is increased by
Injustice; but that may well be said to be the true Form of Government, by
which people living in peace and union, may work righteously, and obtain Civil
felicity. He therefore who will judge aright of the actions of that
Commonwealth, without suffering his eyes to be dazeled wi^h the splendour of the
Roman greatness, let him consider them nakedly, as void of that reputation
which Antiquity and the power of Empire purchased them, and he will find some
things peradventure amongst the many for which she worthily deserved to be
cried up by all men, which are more to be observed for the amendment of present
Governments by their example, then for imitation, out of hopes of attaining any
true praise or apparent good. But as there is nothing of greater importance in
a City, then the Form of Government, by which, as by the soul thereof, every
good act is produced; so of all other observations which may be had of the City
of Rome, there is not any more worthy, or of more use, then to examine what was
the truest Form of her Government, that we may afterward see whether she might
have been be^ter ordered in Civil affairs then she was, without disordering her
Militia; and whether she could keep together the People armed, and obedient to
the Laws. To know then what the condition of her Government was, and thence to
comprehend whether that supreme excellency were in it, as has been thought by
some men; following the Rule which Philosophy teaches us, which says, that
every Form of Republic is not convenient for every City, but that they must be
varied according to the diverse natures of the people, and according to other
accidents; we must examine what that State was in it self, and then what
proportion it held with that City. But because it would be too difficult a
business to assign any certain condition unto her, which may equally correspond
to all times, she not having so punctually observed one and the same Form
continually, but varied it somewhat accordingly as it inclined more or less to
a Popular State; we must have our eyes most fixed upon that Age, whe^ein the
glory of that Commonwealth did most flourish; not so bearing notwithstanding to
touch upon such things in other times, as may conduce to our purpose.

He who would diligently consider all the parts of the Republic, will find not
only so much diversity, but even contrariety in them, as he will not be able
easily to resolve which was her properest Form of Government: For if respect be
had to the great Authority of Consuls, especially in Armies, we may, not
without reason, believe, that that City under the name of a Commonwealth, was
governed with Laws befitting a Kingdom; since that Form of Magistracy did use
such Autho^ity in managing of Arms, in concluding Peace, and in agreeing
differences between potent Kings, as one only Prince could hardly have treated
of those thing with more absolute power: differing from Monarchy only in this,
that they kept this Authority but for a short time, and did acknowledge it to
proceed from the will and favor of the People. But he who will consider what a
share of the most important resolutions of the Commonwealth the Senate had, as
that which governed the public Treasury, the chief foundation of a State, and
to which the privilege did belong first to treat of, and then to resolve of
such things as were to be propounded to the people, will be of opinion, that
such a Commonwealth did lean more toward Aristocracie, then any other
Government. Yet passing on to further Considerations, and finding the Authority
of Consuls, Senate and Tribunes to be so often baffled and nullified, and the
Supreme Magistracies oftentimes contaminated by the meanness of popular men who
have had the exercise thereof, will vote otherwise, and think the Government to
have been merely Popular. Wherefore ^olybius being willing, in the sixth Book
of his Histories, to assign some certain Form of Government to the City of
Rome, would not restrain it under any one particular Form, but called it a mixed
Republic, as was that of Sparta. Which opinion is sithence followed by some
modern Writers, who treating of the differing Forms of Commonwealths, and
particularly of that of Rome, do punctually agree with Polybius. And certainly
they were thus far all in the right, to wit, That the diverse manners of Rule by
which that City was governed, could not be expressed by any one name. For what
gives the true Form to a City, but the communication of Government? which as it
is participated by Citizens, makes such alteration or mutation in a State, as
the Philosopher was of opinion, that though the City did totally remain the
same, the variation of this only was able so to metamorphose it, as it cannot
be said to be what it was before: For it is not the Walls, nor the Inhabitants,
but the Form of Government which makes it be so. Therefore he who will
determine the Form of a City, must have respect to whatsoever does therein help
to the attaining of Magistracy, that he may infold all parts that belong to
the managing of a Commonwealth. So as since men of all conditions, according to
the diverse respects either of Liberty, Nobility, Wealth or Worth, were admitted
into Government, these diverse communications will not admit the ascription of
any peculiar or particular form.

Agreeing therefore herein with Polybius, we will now endeavor to find out
what is more hard to know, and is better worth knowledge, to wit* what sort of
mixture this was. For though a mixed Commonwealth may be perfect, it follows
not, that all mixtures may make her so; nay rather where several differing
parts are wound up together, so as a third kind of nature is produced by their
connection, such a composition will rather increase the imperfection of the
State, and be the reason why it cannot long continue under such a
disproportionate mixture. And as it falls out in our bodies, which being
compounded of four Elements, continue so long in life, as that proportion is
maintained, which when it is destroyed, they are likewise wasted and corrupted;
(For that part which becomes too prevalent, changes the rest into its self,
and dissolves the form which they made when all together:) So that Commonwealth
which is composed of diverse parts, may continue in one and the same State, as
long as the Authority of Government is proportioned with equal temperament, as
it ought to be, to each part. But as soon as any one part begins to domineer
too much, it is apparent that she grows toward corruption: For the prevalent
part by consuming the rest, does by little and little reduce them all into its
self, and alters the aspect of the City. Therefore such a disposition is
required to this Form of Government, as no disorder may be therein found
whereby that mixture may be broken or confused. Wherefore as diverse Faculties
concur together to the forming of Man, but are notwithstanding so well ordered
in that union, as all of them partaking of some office or other, they have
their several degrees of dignity; so diverse Citizens reduced to live together
in one City, though all of them may in some sort participate of Government, yet
the ^mployments must be diversely disposed of, so as some of them may hold the
first place, and as certain primary Causes, must give motion to other things
which are done in the Commonwealth.

These considerations being applied to the City of Rome, will make it appear
clearly that there was no such equality nor order in her, as is to be desired
in a mixed Commonwealth to render it excellent, and long lived. For the
immoderate Authority, which was by the Laws granted to diverse Magistrates, but
much more the extraordinary power which was entrusted in many Citizens, shows
how ill that so necessary proportion was observed in her: And on the other
side, the Peoples power, and the admittance thereof without any difference to
all manner of Negotiations, gives manifest tokens of a confused disposition,
all Orders being mixed together without distinction either of Office or Degree,
and the baser sort being oftentimes exalted above the more worthy. Hence it
was, that amongst such confusion, many customs might be introduced, which were
not only corrupt, but even contrary one to another; as was that of prolonging
the time of Magistrates, which was repugnant to the great Authority which was
reserved to the people; and that other of suffering the wealth of private men
to increase to such a height in a City, where there was no prefixed boundeur of
wealth appointed by the Laws for being a Citizen: Which Laws or Customs do some
of them tend to the power of a few, and other some of them are proper for a
Popular State. But if we proceed further, we shall find their disorders so far
advanced, as not being able to consist together in one subject, they were the
occasion of that Commonwealths dissolution. The confirming of their Authority,
whose Magistracy was by the usual time appointed by the Laws exp^red* was
introduced at first with some appearance of advantage, but with very bad
example, for that having begun important affairs in Countries far off, they
might finish them, and weaken the Enemy before their return home. Thus was the
charge of the Province lest to Marcus Fulvius, who fought in Asia against
Antiochus, after he was out of the Consulship; the which was done likewise to
Gneus Manlius to bridle the daring Aetolians, and to appease the affairs in
Greece, and the like upon many occasions was done to diverse others, and very
long in ensuing times, with very pernicious example, but the disorder ceased
not here, for, without need, the City Magistrates were so far prolonged, as the
same were seen to return ten times to be the peoples Tribunes. Which made the
Citizens infinitely ambitious, and afforded them occasion by being so long in
Power, of plotting many things, and of molesting the Commonwealth diverse ways
by the peoples Insurrections. Nor was it less prejudicial to permit private men
to grow to such immoderate riches, as equalling therein the most Potent Kings;
there was a Citizen of Rome who arrived to such greatness, as he said, He ought
not to be esteemed rich who could not out of his own Revenue maintain an Army:
Whence it arose that the Nobility, being much envied and suspected by the
people, the way was opened to the Gracchi to excite those hemous disorders
which ended not but with the utter ruin of the Commonwealth.

Provision was long before hand by the Law against such disorders, Licineus the
Tribune having instituted, so to curb the Avarice and Ambition of the Nobility,
that no Citizen should possess above Five hundred Acres of Land; But these
Orders in Civil Affairs were so weak and imperfect, as one Law might easily be
broken, by introducing a contrary custom* The Nobles therefore little esteeming
the Licinean Law, did very much increase their wealth, and fraudulently
usurping the public Territories, which were wont to be kept for the benefit of
the people, brought in Forainers to manure them; so as the people being become
very poor, and seeing the Nobility enjoy all the fruits of the common labor of
the Militia, did very unwillingly suffer such an injury, and did very willingly
listen and adhere unto any one who would feed them with hopes of bringing
things to a just equality; wherefore such as were seditious took occasion to
try Novelties, so as at last in the times of the Gracchi, recourse must be had
unto Arms, and civil Differences must be thereby decided: which (as shall by
and by be more clearly shown) might have been long before foreseen; for such
Customs did much disorder the Commonwealth, not only in that they partook not
of civil modesty, but by their being clean contrary to the Laws of that City,
which lent most toward a Popular State, all Authority being given by them to
the People in their suffrages, and also in the most important
State-resolutions. So as it seemed respect was only had to the liberty of
dividing the Government amongst Citizens: All places of Magistracy were
equally common to all, and small means kept not any one far from the
Commonwealth; they might marry togeth^r, Foreiners were easily made Free
Denizens; the Tribunes had power to nominate all Magistrates; the manner of
living was not free, but very licentious: And the supreme Authority of the
Tribunes does of all other things most clearly show what that Government was,
who being greatly respected and reverenced by all men, and called by the
superstitious title of Sacr^sancti, they were so insolent in their office, as a
Tyrant could hardly have used more severity in his commands. See how boldly a
Tribune of the People made Marius Viola^^^, a Nobleman, be seized on,
commanding that he should be suddenly thrown headlong down the Tarpeian Rock,
for no other reason, but that in a Speech which he had made, he used some harsh
words against the People. But the Tribune Sulpitius using more violence, came
one morning into the Piatza with many armed men and driving away the Consuls
who would have opposed such an action, made Mar^^^ be decreed for the
undertaking against Mithridates, not caring though therein he went against the
Laws, which not being in any thing observed, all good Institutions were made in
vain, whilst the Laws were violated and destroyed by the Tribunes too great
power. He then who shall consider these things, will not say that they tended
not to the making of a Commonwealth totally Popular; yet many things were
contrary to these, as has been considered in perpetuating the Government of
the Armies, and in the excessive Riches of some Citizens. Some Popular
Commonwealths, as that of Athens, used by a quite contrary advice, to ban^sh
such Citizens ten years from the City, who did for some excellent quality far
exceed the rest; In some others, because they did in some sort partake of
popularity, the equallity of means, or levelling was introduced, so to content,
and please the people, as in Sparta; and certainly to grant but a limited
power, and but for a short time, to Magistrates are excellent precepts of such
Legislators as will constitute a free City; For so all the Citizens may have
their share of Government, but none freely dispose thereof, to his own proper
use, and then endeavor to bring things to an equality, or at least provide so,
as they may not increase so immoderately, as any one Citizen may be envied or
suspected by the rest, for his too great Power.

It is then no wonder, if Rome were much divided, since these things were not
observed in her; for by such a diversity of Orders she became a Body with two
Heads, and of two several shapes, which occasioned continual domestic
disorders in her. For the Nobility glorying in the dignity of Consulship,
wherein they used great Authority, and which they for the most part kept
amongst themselves, and being also proud of their wealth, would usurp all the
Government to themselves: And on the other side, the people, bearing so great a
sway in all things, and relying much upon the Magistracy of the Tribunes were
so insolent, as they would acknowledge no obedience, nor bear any respect to
the Laws, or to the Magistrates thereof; but would resolve all things according
to their own fancy, and as made most for their advantage; which made that City,
which was so potent in Military and Foraign Affairs, very weak in such as were
Civil and Domestic; for such a division of power in men of contrary minds,
keeps the forces of the City, with much prejudice divided; whilst the one of
them contesting with the other, they hinder the resolutions and executions of
important Affairs, as it often fell out in Rome, for necessity urging to list
Forces to march against the Enemy, the Tribunes were presently ready to incense
the people, so as there was none that would give a name to the Militia, which
Insolences were increased by the peoples being able to do it safely. For, the
Tribunes minding nothing else but how to make their Faction powerful, accepted
of the Appeals of every popular man, though in unjust causes, to the end that
the people might be the more respected by the Nobility, and more ready and bold
to raise seditions, whereby they did always increase their power, and had by
these means obtained many things from the Senate. The Nobles likewise, no less
sollicitous to increase their authority, that they might keep back the Peoples
insolency, sought always to keep them low, and did with like endeavors
maintain those of their own Order in all Judgments. So as in punishing or in
absolving of faults, it was oftentimes a thing of greater consideration,
whether the party concerned were a Nobleman or a Plebeian, then whether he were
guilty or innocent: And hence great prejudice arose unto the Commonwealth; for
all Justice was soon corrupted, without which no good Order can be kept; and
each Party, valuing the public welfare but a little out of a desire of their
own greatness, the City was reduced oftentimes into eminent dangers. Thus the
Roman Plebeians, thinking almost that they had not a common Country, but that
it did only belong unto the Nobility, forsook it, and retired into the
Aventine; valuing more the increase of their own power, by necessitating the
Senate to yield to their desires, then their putting the City into such a
disorder. The Nobles likewise more sollicitous to abase the People, and to
increase their own fortunes, then to preserve peace and union in the City, did
nourish Civil discord by usurpi^g the Common goods, and by reducing the People
to great Poverty through Usury.

By this discourse it may be comprehended, how badly proportioned the Orders
were in that mixed Government: But it may be more clearly seen, by comparing
this Commonwealth with that of Sparta, which proved more excellent then any
other in that mixed Government, and preserved it a long time free from all
discord, by virtue of her most excellent Laws. In Sparta, the Princes power
ended not but with his life, to the end that he being preferred before all
others for making the Laws be observed, he might the better do it, being
detained by no self-respect from deposing of Magistrates, or from being judged
by the People. But his Authority was notwithstanding so limited, as he was
rather a Custos of the Common Liberty, then a true Prince in the City. The
People had as great a share in Government, as their condition required: For it
being they who were to make use of the Magistrates, it seemed they might better
know their abilities; as we see it falls out in other Trades, that the
excellency of the work is better known by him that is to use it, then by the
maker thereof. The People had the power given them of choosing and of
correcting Magistrates; but greater authority was granted to the Senate, which
was placed as in the midst to defend the Commonwealth from the Princes power,
and from the peoples insolency, to the end that thereby it might the better
temper the one and the other. Now let us see how in the joint union of these
three Governments, certain Conditions were appropriated unto every of them; but
neither so many, nor yet such as made them of clean contrary qualities, but so
as they might very well be united in one and the same person. The Prince had
perpetuity of power; but this stood so corrected by the Laws, as it might
easily consist with the other States. The Senate, which was made up of Forty
eight of the prime Citizens, represented a true Aristocratical Commonwealth;
but because they acknowledged their Dignity from the People, their power was
not such as bereft others of their Liberty. But the Peoples authority in
ordering rewards and punishments, as it was not dangerous, so it afforded place
for a modest Popular State, and rendered that Government more perfect, by
mixture of all the three best. But above all things else, there was a
miraculous proportion observed in Sparta, in sharing out those things, which
use to cause Civil dissentions amongst Citizens: For the Noblemen had the
greatest part in Honors, but the People were equal to them in Wealth, all the
Revenues being in common; so as the ambition of the one, and the necessities of
the other were satisfied, and all of them being content, they enjoyed much
Peace and Tranquillity, so as that Commonwealth may endure longer then any of
the ancient Reipublicks. And if at the first she had been a little more large
in communicating her Government, by increasing the number of her Senators, so
as there had been no occasion in Theopompus his time, for the better regulating
their too great Authority, of introducing the Magistracy of the Ephori, whereby
the City began to be a little too popular, and leaving Licurgus his ancient
Institutions, gave it self over to licentiousness, nothing could have been
desired in that City to have reduced her to the highest p^tch of perfection.
Therefore as far as the Roman Government differed from this, it must be confessed
it fell so far short of true excellency. The Consuls of Rome had great
Authority, and it may be more free then became any Magistracy in a
Commonwealth, but the little durance thereof made it less beneficial to the the
Republic: For their Power being soon to be given over, made them less
diligent, and less bold in undertaking Public Affairs: For Consulship being
laid aside, the way was opened of revenging private (...) by the Tribunes. So
Cicer^, who freed his Country from Catalius Conspiracy, when he was out of
Place, was banished. But the Senate, because it had not any Ordinary
Magistracy, from whence no Appeal might be made, by which is might curb the
Peoples Insolency, had not that respect given to it, by which the ignorant
common people is Governed: So as the people, not being held back by this
Bridle, ran into such l^centiousness, as they dared to commit diverse
Indignities even against the chief Magistracy of Counsulship; as they did when
they plucked the Consul Camillus Hestare from the Tribunal, that they might by
force ob^a^^ admittance to that Supreme Magistracy. The weakness of the Senate
was likewise the occasion of the increase of the power of some Citizens, for
the peoples resolutions prevailing over the like of the Senate, the way of
ariving at great power by the favor of the people, in despite of the Senate,
was opened to such as were ambitious. Thus did Marius cause himself to be
declared Consul, contrary to the Laws, and Caesar to be confirmed in his
Province: And to suppress these men's immoderate greatness, which tended toward
Tyranny, it was requisite (since the Commonwealth had no usual means to do it)
to prefer other Citizens of the Nobilities side, whose greatness proved
afterward no less pernic^ous, then that of those whom they thought through
their Authority to suppress, wherefore the City became wholly divided; so that
private injuries were with horrid cruelties revenged by Sylla, though he
professed to vindicate the Common welfare: And Pompey, to maintain his
Greatness put rubs in the Treaty of Agreement with Caesar: Wherefore betaking
themselves to Arms, the Commonwealth could not at last but fall.

These disorders were occasioned through the weakness of the Senate: But the
people, possessing themselves of other men's Places, usurp^ the best employments
of the Commonwealth, and being equal to the Nobility in p^^nt of liberty,
would without any respect to other things purtake equally of Government. So the
right disposure of the Honors and Orders of the City were confused, which
require Geometrical, and not Arithmetical proportion, in such sort, as the same
things be not granted to all men, but to every one that which is most
convenient for him. And certainly to constitute a City of that form, as all her
Citizens should be equal, would be no better then to make a Consort of Music
consisting all of the same voices; for as the latter produces no true Harmony,
so does no good concord result from the former. Therefore care must be had,
that every Order may keep its own state, and be neither too much exalted, nor
too much abased, lest the too (...), or too sharp Tone occasion diss^nance, as
it was seen to fall out in Rome, where this just proportion was but badly kept,
people of unequal condition and worth, being often times made equal in Dignity,
which caused a Government full of confusion and disorder, not bounded in any
one Form, but disposed to receive all Forms.

But if we will assign any particular State to the mixed body of this City, as
predominate over the rest, there can be none more properly given her then
popularity. Which though it may be already comprehended, yet it will be better
known by passing to some other more particular considerations. The state of the
Commonwealth is known by observing in whom the chief command is found, but the
majesty thereof appears clearly in the creating of Magistrates, in making new
Laws, or repealing old ones, in making War, in disposing of Rewards or
Punishment: All which things being by many examples seen to lie in the power of
the People, do evidently witness that the State of this Commonwealth was
Popular. The People were they who gave authority to Magistrates, nay even to
the Senate it self, by authenticating and invigorating the Resolves thereof;
and as the soul of that Government, they did in diverse manners move the other
parts of the Commonwealth in their operations. So as her truest and properest
Form can only be taken from them; nay, it was seen that the resolutions of the
Republic did bind the Senate, and were of equal force with the Peoples
commands, prolonging Magistrates in their places, and by the authority thereof
putting a period to begun Wars. Wherefore the corruption of a Popular State may
be further seen, by the immoderate power of the meanest Citizens.

Let us next view the ultimate end of that Commonwealth, which by a certain
ordinary, and as it were natural change of condition, will show us what her
first Form was. For it being changed into Tyranny, which usually arises from a
Popular State, it appears that that City was formerly governed by the People,
and had by corrupt manners opened the way to Tyranny; so as this Transition was
easily made by the likeness of State: For, that City where the People commands
with license, may be said to be subject to many Tyrants; nor admits it of any
change, saving that one man becomes the master of those disorders, which a
multitude were masters of. There were likewise always many popular Pick-thanks
in Rome, who, like the Flatterers of Tyrants, tracing the People in their
humors, went a birding after favors, whereby they won credit and preferment.
Which, as the Philosopher says, is a manifest sign, that in such a City the
People command, not the Laws. Which is seen by many experiences, of which
Marius was an evident example; who being born of very mean parents, and
appl^ing himself from the beginning to the Government of the Commonwealth, not
guided by the glory of his Predecessors, or any noble action of his own which
might first introduce him thereinto, but confiding in a certain greatness of
spirit, began to think of acquiring great power, so as being become Tribune of
the People he betook himself wholly to abase the authority of the Nobles, as he
did in publishing the Law of Suffrages, threatening Consul Cotta to imprison
him, if he forbear not to oppose him. By which boldness he won so much favor
with the People, as he was able to dispose of them afterward as he listed in
any affair, how unjust soever, or in working revenge upon his Enemies (as he
did in banishing innocent Metellus) or to aggrandise himself; insomuch as he,
contrary to the Laws, was created Consul, against the Cimbrians, being absent,
and in a contumacious time; and lastly in making the Province be assigned unto
him, which belonged to Sylla. By such means the way was opened to the
immoderate power of Citizens, which in the height of their prosperity brought
that Commonwealth to its final ruin. For these disorders being long before
begun, were afterward by the spaciousness of the City so in^^eased, as the
People being become powerful by reason of the numerousness of the Citizens, and
growing more free and bold by their so many prosperities, not content to be
equal to the Nobility, would become greater then the Laws. They banished many
Citizens without hearing the cause; they granted places of Magistracy before
the usual time; they confirmed the Authority of those that were already out of
it, and disposed of all things, not according to civil equity, but as they
liked best. Which things do sufficiently manifest the imperfections of that
Government: For the Philosopher says, that that State where the People command,
and not the Laws, is so corrupt, as it deserves not the name of a Commonwealth,
no sort of Government being to be thereunto assigned. Which easily happens in
Cities which are very great and powerful, as was that of Rome. But i^ we shall
then consider the Conditions of those men into whose hands that Government was
put, we shall thereby likewise find, that amongst the several Forms of Popular
States, this may be thought the most corrupt, as that whereinto even Artificers
were admitted: which being usually but ill conditioned, and frequenting
Assemblies only that they may talk together, do constitute an imperfect State,
and subject to alterations. And hence it may be deduced, that this part being
most prevalent in that so corrupt and imperfect Commonwealth, the others must
partake of the same imperfection: For no such union can be framed out of two
good Governments, and one very bad one, as is requisite to give form to a good
Government; neither could they continue together for never so small a time.
Whence it may be likewise inferred, that those other parts of the Commonwealth,
which may seem to resemble Monarchy and Aristocracy, as the Consuls and Senate,
came short of such perfection as is proper to those States, declining to the
contrary party For many things may be observed to have been done by Consuls
with more authority and boldness, then what became a Commonwealth. To pass by
many other examples, Caesar being confirmed in that power which he had received
as Consul, usurped the Liberty of the Commonwealth. There were likewise many
corruptions in the Senate, which show how subject that part was likewise to
various disorders: For when the Commonwealth was at the very height of her
perfection, Senators were become so mercenary, as Iugurth having corrupted many
of them, and purchased his own sa^ety by moneys, it may well be said, that the
Citizens of Rome would have sold their City, if they could have met with a
Chapman for it. Another Consideration may be added, to wit, That that
Commonwealth cannot be said to be well ordered even in the very Popular State
which she so much affected: For it is easy to frame any Government for a short
time in any whatsoever Estate; but the sufficiency of a Lawmakers, and the
excellency of Laws, is found by the long continuance thereof, Therefore those
Orders by which the Peoples authority was too much increased, cannot be said to
be truly Popular; but such may be so esteemed, whereby the State is long
preserved. Wherefore many things being ordered in Rome without this temperance,
in favor of the People, they of themselves bereft the State of all solidity.
Thus Licentiousness of living, frequent Meetings, Appeals to the Tribunes.
Freedom in accusing, and other such things as seemed to be done in favor of the
People, served for the building up of Tyranny, and wrought Romes final ruin.
Which was formerly seen in Athens; which being constituted by Solon in a too
Popular condition, soon lost her Liberty, and was possessed by a Citizen of hers
named Pisistratus, who followed the same way which the Legislator himself had
opened unto him, by attributing too much to the People. So what is intended for
good, proves often, fatal, if not well understood.

But having discoursed sufficiently of the Form of the Government, it will not
be amiss to examine some other more general Conditions, by which the perfection
of every State may be the better known. In ordering a City, respect is to be
had to two things; to what belongs to War, to what belongs to Peace; to the end
that she may not be governed by Chance in either of them, but by certain Laws,
and may be equally preserved from foreign plots, and from home discords; and to
endeavor, that as she cannot always enjoy Peace, so she should not be
continually molested with War. But he who will consider the Actions of the
Romans, and the Institutions of their City, will find them so seriously addr^st
to Military affairs, as he may easily judge that they proposed no other things
to themselves, then how to increase Empire, by making one War beget another*
wherefore many Armies were instituted, and many rewards for military valor, to
make men bold and valiant against the Enemy; but not any thing wereby to
accustom them to Justice, Temperance, and to other civil virtues, whereby the
City might be maintained in peace and unity. It Is therefore no wonder if that
Commonwealth won so much Empire, and such Glory in times of War; and in times
of Peace, like rusty Iron, lost all her luster: So as troubles from Enemies
abroad were no sooner ceased, but much greater were excited at home by
dissentions amongst the Citizens, which did not terminate till things were
recalled by occasion of War to the same Warlike order and discipline in which
the City was excellently well instituted: Which might for a while preserve her;
but when through the want of occasion of War, she could not by that means
correct her many disorders, nor reduce herself to any settled condition for any
space of time, being still agitated by storms of Civil sedition, she must at
last be miserably lost, when it was time to begin to enjoy her greatness and
prosperity. For this cause Scipio Nasica, a very wise man, would not consent to
the destruction of Carthage, knowing that that Commonwealth which was ordered
only for war, could not last long in idleness. How can that Government then be
termed good, which is so ill disposed toward the attainment of a Cities chief
end? And who can doubt but that the true end of a City is to have her Citizens
live virtuously, not the enlarging of her Empire? Therefore the Philosopher
said well; That true civil Felicity was not to be expected from astions which
relate to things abroad, but from those which are used amongst Citizens. It
argues not then an excellent Government in that Commonwealth, that she overcame
the whole world, since the perfection of Government lies in making a City
virtuous, not in making her Mistress of many Countries. Nay the increasing of
Territories, as it is commonly coupled with some injustice, so is it remote
from the true end of good Laws, which never part from what is honest.
Governments which aim at Empire are usually short lived; which denotes their
imperfection: Which happens not only because they were not better accommodated
in times of Peace, but that for the great enlarging of Confines, it is
necessary to nourish ambitious thoughts in Citizens, and such as are too
desirous to domineer, which are easily turned to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth its self. For it is not to be affirmed that the same thing can be
good in respect of the public, and bad in private Affairs. For the general
felicity of the whole City, and the particular good of every Citizen, is one
and the same thing, they only differ in some certain respects. Then taking
ones argument from these things, the end of this great Commonwealth might
easibly be conjectured, which (as one said well) was overthrown by the wait of
its own bulk. But grant, that the lives of such States may be prolonged, it
cannot certainly be done without falling upon many other troubles and dangers.
Let Marius his example serve us to see what advantage Citizens got by the
immoderate desire of Glory and Dominion; who being always bred up in Arms, and
having wone Credit and Preferment thereby, finding that his ancient Reputation
began to fail by ensuing Peace, raised Mithridates King of Pontus, against the
Commonwealth, to the end, that being to make use of his Valor, he might
recover his former Repute. Thus Athens who once in^oyed a peaceful condition,
under Pericles his good Government, when she turned her endeavors of Peace and
Quiet, to Arms and Dominion, and would change her manner of life, she reaped
the like Fruits of Ambition, which by such Orders she had sowed in the minds of
her Citizens. For Alcibiades out of too immense a desire of Glory, was he, who
of himself did incite the Lacedaemonians against his Country, by whom she was
afterward robbed of her Liberty and Empire. For all this, you hear me not say,
that the study of Arms ought to be neglected, which are very necessary in what
soever State, to defend ones self against the Injuries of Neighbors, and to
preserve Freedom and Liberty: Nay, Aristotle reprehends Plato, for that he
thought Cities had no need of Arms at the first; but only when they began to
have Dominion. But though they may be useful for some other respects, Citizens
ought not to fix their studies so much upon Military Exercises, as not to know
nor value any other praise but that of the Militia, and to place their greatest
and chiefest Good, and the welfare of their City therein; But they must know,
that a man must travel further to find out felicity, which is derived only
from virtuous actions, reserved in Peace, as the true fruits of the labors of
War. Let us then conclude, that this part which was very excellent in Rome,
lost much of that praise, which otherwise it might have deserved for the
exquisiteness of its Orders, because true use was not made thereof, as a means
to obtain the true intent of the City. For if Aristotle laughed at those who
praised the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, because she had made her Citizens so
valiant in War, by her excellent Military Discipline, because she exceeded the
other Cities of Greece in the largeness of her Confines; What would he have
said of the Commonwealth of Rome, where certainly Military Exercises were
studied much more, to the end, that she might vanquish the furthest distant
Nations: For in Sparta, too boot with such Institutions as appertained to the
Militia, there were excellent customs for the breeding of Citizens in Civil
Virtues: And it is seen that Licurgus his intention aimed not so much at
Empire, as did that of Romulus; the former much more respecting the peace of
the City, and the agreement among Citizens, minding Military Affairs only so
far forth as they are necessary for the preservation of Liberty against
Foreign Forces. Another consideration to be had, in regard no less then these,
is, that in a well-ordered City, the Laws ought to be confirmed by the Manners
and Educations of the Citizens, the which is of more force to make men honest,
then is the fear of punishment; nay, from hence Actions arise according to true
Honesty and Virtue; for they proceed from a virtuous Habit, which is only
acquired by Exercise. Therefore where good Institutions of life are wanting,
the severity of Magistrates is not sufficient to make Citizens obedient to the
Laws. For when the appetite has already gotten power, and is accustomed to
vice, it is too hard a matter to overcome her by force. Therefore Aristotle
said, That Laws, though very useful, do but little good, if men be not endued
with such Customs and Discipline as fits with the state of the City. Wherefore
teaching in the eighth of his Politics, how Citizens are to be made good and
honest, he proposed three things requireable, joining Reason and Custom to
Nature. But Custom may be thought so much more necessary then the other two, as
that a man's natural inclination to Virtue, makes him not virtuous, unless he
confirm his natural disposition by habit, accustoming himself to do well. Nor
can Reason force Appetite, but must first find it well reduced by good
Education, if she will make use thereof in virtuous operations. As much more
then, as this part is necessary, so much more failing will be found in that
Commonwealth, where such orders were not taken by a civil way, for the good
Education of Citizens: Whence it arose that their Laws met not with such due
observance, as did them of Sparta, not written in paper, but (as it were)
engraven in the hearts of every one by the force of custom; wherefore she
proved truly miraculous, by reason of the excellent customs introduced by
Lycurgus, to breed up Citizens in a virtuous and civil life. Therefore Plutarch
comparing Lycurgus with Numa, preferred Lycurgus, for that his having confirmed
Citizens by good customs in those orders which he had introduced into the City,
was the reason why they were long observed; Whereas Numa, contenting himself
with bare written Laws, though good, and tending to peace, not taking any
further care for the education of Citizens, could not make them be observed for
so short a time, but that they terminated together with his life. And it is
found by experience, that Lycurgus his Orders were of such force, as they
preserved the Liberty of Sparta longer then the like of any other of the
ancient Commonwealths. Wherefore Philopomenes having overcome the
Lacedaemonians, yet would he not totally tame them, and reduce them under the
Achaean Commonwealth, till he had cancelled all the ancient Institutions of
their City, wherein whilst young, they were so bred up to Liberty, as they
could by no means be brought to undergo servitude.

From this discourse it may then be concluded, That the Government of the Roman
Commonwealth was of a mixed Form, but ill proportioned within its self, too much
inclining toward the corruption of a Popular State; and that she came short of
the Spartans in three things: In the excellency of Government, in the
endeavors of Peace, and in good Customs. The other part remains now to be
discussed; Whether the City of Rome might have received a better Form of State?
For the good Orders of a City depend not always upon the Legislators wisdom,
but upon many other joint Accidents. The first thing to be had in respect, is
the Nature of the People, with which the Form of Government ought to have a
just proportion. Wherefore Politicians say, that the Legislator ought not only
to consider which is the best Form of Government, but what best befits every
City, and such other Accidents which make so many alterations in States, as it
cannot be denied but that Fortune has a share therein. Lycurgus was justly
esteemed an excellent Legislator; but many things concurred in him which helped
him very much to put his thoughts in effect: He was a King, and using force at
first, as it was fit to do, he might introduce such a Form of Government as
would bridle the Peoples insolency, and increase the au^hority of the Senate;
it made likewise much for his purpose, that wealth of the City lay but in a few
men's hands, so as by bestowing Honors upon them, he could as it were by the way
of bartering the easilier dispose them to content themselves with an equality
of Goods, whereby he satisfied the people of Sparta's desire, who were but few
in number, and consequently but weak, and the more easy to be ordered in any
sort of Government. Hence it was that the Legislators of other Cities, though
they were wise men, could not notwithstanding form a Republic throughout so
well ordered as did Lycurgus, because they found not a Subject apt to receive
such a Form, and because they wanted that authority and power which was
thereunto needful, or for other such like accidents, which did not correspond
well with what they did. Therefore Solon, though he had had the same intents,
could not have introduced such a Government in Athens; because he was a private
Citizen chosen by the Nobility, and consent of the People, to reform the City;
so as it behoved him to comply in many things with the one and the other, and
his small Authority took much of that respect and reverence from the Laws
ordained by him, which ought to have been given them. Wherefore many blamed him
and his Institutions; so as at last, to shun such ve^ation, he was forced to
part from his ungrateful Country. He met also with another difficulty; He found
the City divided, the People much accustomed to enjoy Liberty, and at that time
much incensed against the Nobility by the oppressions of Usury under which they
suffered; so as he was compelled, to the end that they might rest content with
their new Government, to ease them in their Debts, and give them a share in the
Government; which he could not do without much injury to the Nobility.

The Commonwealth of Venice has gotten an excellent Government; but was not at
first governed by those Laws which she now is: But diversity of Occasions have
opened the way to the wisdom of many of her Citizens, who adding new Orders to
the old, have brought her to such a height of perfection. Which might the
easilier be done, because that City was freeborn, and was from the very
beginning ordered according to the true Civil end, to wit, to Peace and
Concord, and to the Union of her Citizens. But on the contrary, other modern
Republics, the Cities wherein such Governments were formed, having been
formerly long accustomed to obey Emperors, since they got their Liberty by many
Accidents, they knew not, as not being well acquainted therewith, how to use
it, by reason of the Citizens various dispositions of mind: So as wheeling
often about with an uncertain Form of Government, they in process of time
returned under the command of one.

These Considerations being applied to the City of Rome, will prove that the
prudence of her Citizens, though they were very wise and valiant men, was not
sufficient to reduce her to a perfect Form of Commonwealth; but they might have
amended many great disorders in her, which did much shorten her life. For he
who will consider the conditions of the people of Rome, will find them to be
such, as no Form of Government could better agree with them then a Popular
State; for they were all warlike men, bred up even from the very first
foundation of the City in the exercise of Arms. And though a Commonwealth may
be formed amongst these, which may have a certain similitude to an
Aristocratical State, when the Citizens being governed by certain Laws, partake
every man more or less of that Government according to their worth; (For,
Military discipline has a certain species of Virtue, though it be none of
those that do immediately serve to purchase the ultimate end of a City) yet
this Government is very seldom met with; and though it want the true and proper
Form, is commonly called by the usual name of a Commonwealth. So as though at
first the City of Rome leaned much thereunto, in a short time the People had a
great share therein; who not knowing how to moderate themselves, made it grow
licentious. But he who will look back even to her first beginning, will find
that the Peoples authority did thereby ever increase together with the City:
For the Peoples power and liberty was great not only after the driving out of
the Tarquins, but even when it was commanded by Kings; that City seeming even
from that time to be naturally more disposed to the Form of a Commonwealth,
then of a Kingdom. For, after the death of Romulus, the People being powerful,
as having the weapons in their hand, and as being the first Founders of that
City, usurped the authority of choosing Kings: who on the contrary side, that
they might the better confirm themselves in their new Kingdom, endeavored to
accommodate themselves to the nature of the People, and to purchase their love
by granting them many considerable things. So as even under the Kingly
government it had the power of Appeals, as appeared in Horatius his case, who
being condemned by the Magistrates for his Sisters death, appealed to the
People, and was by them freed. In favor of them likewise the City was divided
into Centuries, with a certain Order of a very small Tax, according to which
the Degrees of the Militia, and the Authority of the Public Courts (things
which did all of them appertain to a Popular State) were to be distributed.

To boot with these Laws, the great number of Citizens, which did even then
arise to One hundred and thirty thousand, made the Peoples party very powerful;
as also their having been so ready and so successful in engaging themselves in
so many enterprises for the Commonwealth, without receiving any pay for their
pains. But the Nobility was a long time very weak, and in but little esteem:
For the first Founders of the City being Shepherds, and all of the same
condition, there was no distinction of degree amongst them, save what was soon
after brought in(...) Romulus; who choosing the Senate out of all that former
number, that they might be assistant to the King in providing for things
requisite for the State, by this order he divided some of the worthiest of the
People in this new City from the rest, who gave the rise to the Roman Nobility.
But even this Order was very weak; for it was at first instituted by Romulus
but of a small number of men; and though others were afterward added
thereunto, yet till such time as the City got her liberty, (...) never exceeded
the number of Two hundred Senators; nay, even these were much lessened by the
cruelty of Tarquinius Superbus, and their Authority narrowly bounded by the
Counterpoise of Regal power. So as when the City put herself into Liberty,
there were not Noblemen enough to form a State of Optimati: in this case did
Publius Valerius find the City of Rome, after the driving out of the Tarquins,
when he through Brutus his death, rema^ning sole Consul, was to constitute
Laws, and new mould the Commonwealth. Wherefore desirous to introduce a State
differing from the former, under the name of Liberty, it behoved him not to
lessen, but to increase the Authority of the People: For else they would not
have endured it; and by fiding with the Tarquins, they might easily have
confounded that Government, and reduced the City again under the power of
Kings. For which reason also, Brutus, though he was first created Consul, not
willing to lose the favor and assistance of the people, without which he
thought the new Orders of the City could not be well established, persuaded his
Colleague Tarquinius Collatinus, that to give satisfaction to the People, to
whom the name of Tarquin was become odious, and suspicious, to lay down his
Consulship: By these Reasons it appears, that Valerius was compelled to ordain
many things in favor of the People, as were the Appeals from the Consuls; The
order, that upon pain of death no man should enter into any place of Magistracy
without the Peoples approbation; the petty punishment appointed for them who
should not obey the Consuls commands, which was no more but to pay five Oxen
and two Sheep. Moreover he eased the poor of many grievances, and made many
other very Popular Laws, whence he purchased the name of Publicola.

But which it is understood, that in ordering of the Commonwealth, respect was
to be had in many things to necessity and to the condition of those times: yet
if we shall consider other Accidents, we shall find them much contrary to such
a necessity; for the new Legislator was not Prince, as was Licurgus, but
possessed a place of Magistracy for a short time, the Authority whereof was
hardly yet well known, and not much valued: So as he could not use force to
withdraw the people from a Popular State, as it would have been needful,
finding the People so disposed, as has been said. Therefore the City being
after a while to be reformed again, the Magistracy of Ten was chosen, with
greater Authority then was that of the Consuls, which took away all Appeals, to
the end that being more feared and reverenced by all, it might without any
respect constitute new Laws with great firmness. And if Appius his ambition had
not ruined the business, that Commonwealth might perhaps have been reduced to
some better condition: but yet not to any very perfect one, it being too hard a
thing to order Cities well, which are already much augmented; just as we see it
falls out in every particular man, who in his tender years may be easily made
to undertake any manner of life, but when by practice he is settled in, as it
were, a certain proper nature of his own, he cannot easily be altered from it.
And if there have been any one, who has been able to order a City already well
grown, yet we shall find that that City was not so great nor potent, as was the
City of Rome, at this time of the new Reformation; and therefore the
difficulties were much less, it being a very hard thing, and which, as says
the Philosopher, (...) almost exceed humane power, to dispose of a great
multitude in an excellent (...) of Government. Then as these things were the
reason why this Commonwealth was not well ordered at first, so did they in time
bring her to great disorders and seditions, and finally to her destruction. For
it is usual, that the further he advances that is once out of the way, so much
does he return backwards, is so much the more pusled, and the further from the
place he intended to go to. So the Authority of the people being by these new
Institutions always to increase together with the greatness of the City, she
swarved the further from the end, true Liberty, to which she seemed to address
her self. And because this Commonwealth was born with this infirmity, the worth
of none of her Citizens, though it were never so great, was sufficient to cure
her thereof, or to prolong her life, As it happens in our humane bodies, which
contracting some ill disposition of humors at their first entering into the
World, are soon thereby oppressed and brought to death, no natural virtue, though
of force for other things, being able to afford any cure. It Is notwithstanding
very true, that though such like accidents rendered the City incapable of any
excellent Government, by inclining her to a Popular State, yet had they not so
determinately disposed of her, but that she might have freed her self of many
of her bad qualities, had not the ambition of her Citizens by increasing these
her natural imperfections, made her fall into greater disorders.

Let us begin to consider what Publicola's actions were from the very beginning
of the Commonwealth, and we shall easily discover his ambitious thoughts by
which he was moved to study so overmuch how to please the peoples appetite in
every thing. These his intentions were apparently seen, by taking his being
refused in the Election of the Consuls so heinously, as that he kept a good
while from the Republic, as if he had put his hand to the Government, for his
own Greatness, not for the common Good: But much more for that having compast
that Degree, and finding the People jealous of him, for having built his house
in a high and strong situation, fearing lest together with the Peoples Love he
might loose his own Authority and Power, he chose so to humble himself, as
forgetting the dignity which belonged to the Supreme Magistrate of so great a
City; he made the Fasces, the ensigns of Consulship, be held in a posture of
Homage, whilst he made his Oration, to show, (as he himself said) That the
Authority of the Consuls was subject to the Authority and Dignity of the
People. This his desire of being esteemed Popular, was the reason why in this
new Reformation, he went not about to what was very necessary; to amend in part
those defects which could not totally be taken away; to wit, to give a just
counterpoise to the Authority of the people, tempering it with that of the
Senate, by very much increasing the number of the Senators, and by apropriating
the weightiest affairs of State, to that Order, which how necessary it was, was
afterward seen, but too late put in execution; to wit, in Sylla's time, by
whom the first number of Senators was doubled, yet but to little purpose, the
Peoples Authority being already too mightily increased, and many seeds of
corruption being by this means sown abroad in the minds of the people. But
Valerius added but one hundred to the uumbea of the Senate, neither did make
any Law in savor of them, both of which he might at that time easily have
done. For being at the time of the new Reformation to choose new Senators of the
Equestral Order, or of some other of the people, he would not only have been
content, but would have wone much honor, by exalting many of his Friends to
that Dignity, as it was seen he did by those few that were chosen: And the
People would have had sufficient power in the Commonwealth, if without
communicating the weightiest Affairs of the Kingdom unto them, the indemptnity
of choosing and of correcting Magistrates had been reserved to them: And then
that Appeals might have been granted them, by which means they would not only
have had a hand in the City Affairs, but likewise they might have secured
themselves from being injured by the Nobility (a thing much desired by the
People) and from danger of loosing their Liberties. And the Authority and
Reputation of the Senate being by this means augmented, the Peoples Insolency
might the more easily have been moderated in those accidents which afterward
happened. Which though it seemed (as has been said) more harder to have been
done in that City, for another respect, yet the revolutions of Government in
the first birth of this Republic, did a little lessen ordinary Difficulties.
For passing from Monarchy (which in the Tarquins time was almost become
Tyranny) to a new condition* the L^gislator might have made it an Aristocracie;
it being as it were natural in the change of States, that the Government which
had wont to be in the power of a Tyrant, passes into the hands of the Nobility,
who are usually the first who lay hold in pulling down Tyranny, as in Rome,
where Tarquin and Brutus were the first Founders of Liberty.

Therefore if the People deserved to be made partaker in the new Government,
for having assisted herein, much more ought the Nobility to have their
dignities and privileges increased, this common benefit of the City having had
its chief rise from them; nor would the People have had any reason to complain
thereof. But Publicola, in stead of increasing the honor of the Senate,
introduced by a very pernicious example, small respect to the Magistracy of
Consuls; which occasioned many disorders, which might easily have been
corrected by a just fear, as is clearly seen by many examples, but chiefly by
this; that the People being in insurrection, and contumacious against the power
of Consulship, the creating of a Dictator, a Magistracy of supreme authority
and reverence, proved a sure remedy to assuage the Tumult. And what more
manifest sign could there be given, that the people might have been tamed and
made obedient by fear and by respect unto the Magistrates, then that which was
given upon the occasion of Appius his Decemvirate? For being so ill dealt with
by him and by his Colleagues, as they wanted not reason to apprehend Tyranny;
yet the authority of this Magistracy, from which there was no Appeal to be
made, and the severity wherewith it was administered* did so bridle the people,
as they patiently endured all injuries; nor durst they go about to shake off
that slavery, till the Senate interposed it self, and that Horatius and
Valerius declared themselves Heads of the Insurrection against the Decemviri.
There ought therefore either greater respect to have been given to the
Consulary Authority; or else, if the more severe and free power of an ordinary
Magistrate seemed not to be convenient for the state of that Commonwealth, the
respect and reverence due to the person of the Magistrate ought to have been
transferred to the authority of certain Laws, of which the Magistrate should
have been chief Guardian, inflicting severe punishment upon the not observers
thereof: For by this means the People would have had no occasion to be off^nded
with the Nobles, when their insolency should be punished by virtue of the
Laws; this arising amongst many other be^efits from the Laws, that he who is
punished for his faults cannot complain of any one, being condemned by order of
Law, not by the Judge his will.

But what has been noted of Publicola in this first beginning, may also be
known at all other times, and in many other of the chief Roman Citizens; who
through ambition siding with the People, were the cause of their pride and
insolency. So the Consuls Valerius and Horatius, not being able to obtain
Triumph from the Senate, sought to have it from the People; and the whole
Senate (not to multiply examples) by creating a Dictator to suppress the
authority of the Consuls Titus Quintus Cincinnatus, and Geneus Julius Mento,
who opposed them therein, had recourse unto the Tribunes, who by threatening
imprisonment forced them to give way to the resolution: And those Noblemen did
usually take another course then what is to be held with the People, with whom
grave and severe proceeding does avail more then humble and mild demeanor. But
they were so blinded by Ambition, as not knowing, or not caring for such
errors, they strove who should most ingratiate themselves with the the People,
by Presents, Shows, and submiss comportment. And this instruction might be
learned by the example of the People of Rome themselves: For it was ofttimes
seen, that greater respect was given to those few who had known how to use
severity to the People, then to those who carried themselves submissly unto
them. And certainly, amongst other things, the Judgment which followed upon the
cause between Menimiu^ and Spurius Servilius, was very remarkable: who being
both of them accused of the same fault by the Tribunes, to wit, that being
Consuls they had opposed the Agrarian Law; Menimius, who by entreaties and
submiss carriage endeavored absolution, was condemned; but Spurius Servilius
stoutly withstanding the Tribunes fury, and speaking severely to the People,
was acquitted. And Furius and Manilius, who had both of them been Consuls,
being not long after accused, the Nobles being willing totally to free them
from such danger, killed the Tribune in his own house who had impeached them;
which did so affright his Colleagues, and the People, as none of the Tribunes
would afterward reassume the same cause: And all the Insurrections which were
then in the City being suddenly appeased, all of them did willingly subscribe
the Militia.

Appius Claudius was always very severe against the People; and amongst other
of his actions, the punishment which he took upon the Armies insolency was
very observable, for he made them be decimated, very tenth man be put to death;
which was submitted unto without any the least tumult, by reason of the ancient
opinion of the Captains severity, and for the fear infused into the Soldiers by
the sentence of death against some Centurions who were accused for having been
Authors of that Insurrection. Which was sufficient so far to curb them all, as
though they were all of them then in Arms, every of them stood peacefully
spectators of the death of so many Kinsmen and Friends, and of their own
doubtful chance; and (which peradventure is a greater wonder, and does the
better confirm this truth) Appius being accused for this sentence by the
Tribunes, after he had laid down the Consulship, using the same severity in
defending himself, he was not held less guilty for having been formerly Consul:
So as the People neither willing to absolve him, nor daring to condemn him, the
cause was put off, and he suffered to depart. And in the latter times, when the
Peoples power was greatest, Tiberius Gracchus endeavoring to propound the
observance of the Licinian Law, the Nobles, changing their habits, and showing
great humility, labored to win favor from the People; but since they saw they
could do no good by this means, they resolved for their last refuge to use
force, and killed the Author of those seditions. Which action of theirs did so
astonish the People, as they suffered the Tribunes death, whom they had so
dearly loved, and who had lost his life in defense of their cause, to go
unrevenged. And soon after, Caius Gracchus reassuming the cause which his
Brother had in vain endeavored, the Nobles, using the same cunning, sought
first by fair means to deprive him of Popular favor, making use of another
Tribune to this purpose, by causing other popular Laws to be propounded by
consent of the Senate. But humility availed no more at this time, then it had
done formerly; so as it behoving them to betake themselves again to Arms, they
slew Caius Gracchus in the Aventine, and after the death of two Brothers,
annulled all the Laws made by them; nor did the People ever seem to resent it.
Which if it might have been done by an usual way of a Magistrate, as has been
touched upon, doubtless these ruder remedies, as better suiting with the
infirmities of that Commonwealth, might have freed her from many mischiefs.

This is likewise confirmed by many other experiences: For as long as the
Senate kept up the authority thereof, threatening to create a Dictator, it kept
the Terentilla Law from being made, of creating a Magistracy of five men, who
were to correct the Consuls power. But when it chose to appease the People by
giving way to their importunities, it did only invite them to endeavor more
novelties; so as Humility made them not more quiet, but more insolent.
Wherefore having obtained Appeals, they would have a Magistrate of their own,
endowed with supreme authority; and having gotten the power of the Tribunes,
they could not stop there, but would be admitted into the Consulship, into the
Dictatorship, and to all other sort of Dignities; and having obtained all sort
of Honors, they began to aspire to the Estates of the Nobles; who being too
late aware of their Error, to keep themselves from being quite dis-robed of
every thing, and not being able to remedy themselves by the Laws, or by
Magistracy, they were forced to have recourse to Arms, to moderate the Peoples
Insolency.

Whence it may be concluded that the Romans not having used those means,
neither at the first making of their Laws, nor almost at any other time, in any
of their Actions, which were proper to overcome certain bad qualities, which
they had contracted even from the birth of the Commonwealth, was the reason
why, remaining always, as it were a distempered body, wherein ill humors did
continually increase, she was always sickly, perplexed by so many civil
Discords, and and came to a shorter period of life, then she ought to have done
for many other of her most noble conditions. The example of this powerful and
famous Republic, if we will well obserserve her civil Orders, and what
proceeded from thence, and if they shall be measured by truer and more general
Rules, may instruct us excellently well, how to discern the perfections and
imperfections of Modern States. And say it will not serve to correct Errors,
already too much confirmed by corrupt Customs; it will at least be of use to
know what value ought to be put upon every Government, and what length of days
may in reason be allotted thereunto, holding notwithstanding that Disorder, for
a truer Rule then all Orders, which is often times introduced by various and
unthought of Acciden^s upon which our civil Actions do depend, not only
regulated by humane wisdom, but subject (for ought that appears to us) in many
things to a certain casualty; though they be indeed directed by assured, though
hidden causes, reserved in the bosom of Divine Providence, whereunto our Reason
cannot reach. Therefore if following the usual manner of speech, we shall in
these our Discourses, make often use of the names of Chance and Fortune, let
them be understood in this true and pious manner.

The Second DISCOURSE.
What Success the Roman Affairs would have had if Alexander the Great had
turned with his Victorious Army into Italy.
THE Republic proved more fortunate then any other State in many things, so as
he had reason on his side, who said; That Fortune, who was usually an Enemy to
virtue, had made Truce with her, that she might exalt that City to the highest
pitch of Greatness. But this may chiefly be acknowledged from her, being freed
from the necessity into which the course of time had brought her, of making
trial of her Forces, against those of Alexander the Great, who after having
conquered Darius, and subjugated Persia, together with other Nations, did not
bethink himself of turning into Europe; and chiefly into Italy, rather then
into the utmost parts of the East: Or that from having accomplished so many
famous Interprizes in Arabia, and in the Indies, being as yet but in his youth,
he lived no longer to carry his Victories over the other parts of the world,
not as yet concerned in his Forces, though invaded by his immense desire of
Dominion. It will certainly be worth the consideration, whether if Alexander
had at first had any such thought, or that he had had time afterward to put it
in effect, to think what influence he would have had upon the Affairs of Rome.
This doubt was put by Livy, who in the Ninth Book of the first Decade of his
Histories, betook himself to discourse of what might have happened, if the
Roman Commanders had been to have made War against Alexander. But without
considering any thing which might make against his opinion, he bends all his
reasons to prove that the Roman Forces would have proved Victorious if they had
chanced to have fought against those of Alexander the Great; which he resolves
for as great a certainty, as if the effect had ensued. Yet many Arguments to
the contrary may be taken out of diverse of those things, which Livy relates of
his Romans. We can take no surer way to know what would have been the success
of things not done, then to consider what has been done; which may guide us by
conjecture to penetrate into what might have happened in other things, if
occasion should have served. Let us then cast an eye upon what Alexanders
actions were in those times, and what those of the Roman Commonwealth; and we
shall see what might have been expected from the worth of Force, and either of
them, if trial had been made thereof.

Alexanders Enterprises were sufficiently famous, and known to all men, since
the recounting of them has wearied so many Writers. And Plutarch who writ the
Lives of the valliantest, and most magnanimous men of so many ages; In his
Preface to that of Alexander, excuses himself (with he does not in relating
the lives of any others) if he be not able sufficiently to write all his
actions, by reason of their number and worth. But the Romans Enterprises in
that age, were not in themselves very great, nor very greatly cried up by
others. Though those which they afterward performed, did for glory outdo,
what ever was done by any other Potentate; So as Reputation and Fame (which
bear so great a sway in all our operations, but chiefly in what belongs to War)
was without all doubt greater in Alexander, then in those Roman Captains who
flourished in his time, when the greatness of the Roman Commonwealth was but in
its rise, and first beginning. But let us come to some further particular.

The Commonwealth had not as then enlarged her Confines, further then into
Latium, into some parts of Umbria, and into Picenum, amongst people who were
very near the Volsci, and the Aequi. Their Armies were not yet marched out of
Italy; which they did not till they made War with the Carthaginians. Whence it
is to be gathered, that the Commonwealth was as yet but weak, and not
accustomed to those more weighty and important Actions of War, wherein in after
Ages it must be confessed she did great and wonderful things. But at this time
many virtues in the Citizens of Rome, and the customs of the City, not as yet
corrupted, were more to be exalted then their Military valor, which though
their souls might be full of, yet they wanted illustrious occasions to exercise
it. And those so many famous Commanders, which as Livy says, may be paralelled
with Alexander; Fabius Maximus, Valerius Corvinus, Lucius Papyrius, Titus
Manlius, Torquatus, and others of that Age, what great Fears of Arms did they?
The War was as yet made, as it were, underneath the City Gates; Nor did these
as Consuls, or Dictators lead Armies to fight against any save the Aequi,
Sanniti, Toscani, and other neighboring Nations, which were but weak
Commonalties, whose Dominions extended no further then their own Cities, and
the Territories thereof: None of all those Countries being as then reduced
under the power of any one Lord. Yet Livies words, and the deed it self, of
having had recourse so often to the Dictator, and having had War so many years
with the same Nations, shows how much so weak Potentates were feared by the
Romans, who cannot notwithstanding be said to have been much superior to them,
either for strength, and worth of their Militia; since it behoved to fight so
often with them, and hardly could they after so many dangers, and a long course
of time extinguish them, or rather make them their Companions and Friends.

Who can then justly compare these things to Alexanders great achievements, to
his so many Victories won over the greatest and most potent Kings of Asia? What
though Darius his men may be said to have been rude and base? it cannot be
denied but that they were Three hundred thousand armed men, and of that Nation
wherein the Monarchy had long been: And Alexanders victorious Forces overran
more Countries in little more then ten years, then did the Romans in a much
longer time, when they were at their greatest. The before-named Roman
Commanders are deservedly praised for diverse virtues: But what could there be
desired more in Alexander, to make him be an excellent Commander? Who had his
share in more Battles then he? Who showed more boldness in undertaking
enterprises, greater constancy in prosecuting them, more hopes in effecting
them? What other Commander was ever more highly esteemed, and dearly beloved by
his Soldiers? Those virtues which divided amongst many men, have made many
Captains worthy to be praised, met all of them abundantly in him. Would
Alexander peradventure have been afraid to pass into Italy, who showed his
undauntedness in entering into the Deserts of Arabia, without any other hope of
bringing himself and his Army safe back, save what his courage and his happy
Genius promised him? But how easily might he have passed into Italy; Greece,
which was formerly conquered by his Father King Philip, being at his devotion;
and to boot with the abounding commodities which that Country and his own
Forces might have afforded him, might not he have hoped to be received and
assisted by so many people who were express enemies to the Roman Commonwealth?
who would not have refused to have obeyed so great a Prince as was Alexander,
so to avoid submitting themselves to the Dominion of a City like to one of
theirs, and with which they had long and grievous contestations: Nay, the
hatred and envy which they bore to the Romans greatness, would have made them
all have sided with Alexander against them. Was not Pyrrhus invited into Italy
for this purpose by the S^mniti and Tarentini? and did not many of the Cities
which were under the Romans obedience, put themselves for the same reason under
the power of Hannibal, being thereunto moved rather out of their hatred to be
commanded by the Romans, then their fear of being suppressed by the Carthaginian
Forces?

It now remains, that we consider some things of Alexanders Militia, and of
that of the Romans. By which it will not be hard for him who will not willingly
be deceived, to know on which side the advantage, and the disadvantage might
have been: Since, if the numher of Combatants be to be valued, who can doubt
but that the Armies of which he was Lord, who was Lord of so many Provinces as
was Alexander, were much to exceed those which one only City, though very
populous, and very watlike, as was that of Rome, could put together: And if
Alexander would do most of his famous Actions with his Macedonians only, it was
out of his choice and judgment, not out of any weakness; for he thought an Army
of a few valiant and expert Soldiers fitter to undertake a great enterprise,
then a great mult^tude, which oftentimes bring more confusion then aid. So as
having, when he had overcome Darius, made that so memorable Order of his
Soldiers of Thirty thousand young men, chosen out of the Flower of many
subjugated Provinces, and made them be instructed in the Macedonian Militia, he
little regarded his own Macedonians; whom (as it is written) he permitted out
of favor, and in reward of their former service, and at their own requests to
follow his Ensigns, and to pass with him into India to new undertakings. But
the so many Battles which he so successfully made, may sufficiently witness the
excellency of his Discipline in the Militia, as also his taking of so many
Cities, his long Voyages, the perpetual exercise in military works: By which
things it may be conceived, that no more Veteran Army could be found in those
times, which was more expert in all that belonged to the Militia, more obedient
to their Captains, and more observant of all Military order then then was that
of Alexanders, The ordering of Soldiers used by Alexander, which was called
Phalanx, is at this day celebrated; in which the Ranks of Soldiers standing
close, being as it were woven together, and covered over with great shields,
they made a solid and safe body of an Army, able to sustain whatsoever charge
of the Enemy.

Livy does afterward consider, that the Counsel of a wise Senate, as was that
of Rome, would have prevailed over any one man's Resolves, such as was
Alexander; but he considers not on the contrary side, how that in affairs of
importancie, and chiefly in matters of War, the supreme authority and command
of one alone is requisite. The Romans themselves were of this opinion, who in
cases of great difficulty had recourse to a Dictator, whose Commissions were
not limited, but he was only charged to take such care as that the Commonwealth
might undergo no loss nor prejudice. Nor for all this is the authority or
reverence due to a Dictator, who is Magistrate but for a short time, and
subject to give an account for what he does, in this to be compared with the
majesty of a Kings command, and of so great and so esteemed a King as was
Alexander. How often fell it out in Rome, that when supplies were to be sent to
an Army, discords were importunately solicited by the Tribunes, and the Army
hindered from being listed? Was there any such thing in Alexander, in whom
supreme Authority and Empire did consist? Nor did he yet want some more
confiding Friends, whose counsels he was accustomed to make use of, and those
but a few, wise, and wholly intent upon the good of that Prince, upon whom all
their greatness did depend; as Counsels ought to be in business of great
weight, to the end that they may be maturely resolved upon, and readily
executed. Which happens not where any command with equal authority, and
oft-times with much differing thoughts and ends.

But it may yet be more clearly seen what success the Romans would have had
against Alexander, by looking a little forward, and considering the affairs of
the ensuing Age. The first Carthaginian war lasted for the space of four and
twenty years, in which time the Carthaginian power was weakened by the Romans;
but not so quenched, but that it could soon get up again and trouble the very
Romans that were Conquerors. And when Hannibal passed with his Army into Italy
four and forty years afterward, Rome being much increased in power and
reputation, was not the Commonwealth of Rome not only robbed of all the State
which she possessed, but the very City of Rome reduced into great straits? And
yet Hannibal was not Alexander; he had not the Fortune, the Forces, nor
Authority which Alexander had: He led his Army a long way by Land, and the Sea
was blockt up by the possession which the Romans had in Sicily, and by their
powerful Fleets at Sea, to keep him from receiving succor: Nor were his own
Citizens a less impediment to him, (who envied his glory) then were his
Enemies, in keeping out his Army. But there was no such thing in Alexander, who
by a short cut at Sea might have brought his Army to the Italian shores, and
have easily been accommodated with all things necessary. Nor can that be
objected to Alexander, which lessened Hannibals honor, to wit, That be knew how
to overcome, but not how to make use of Victory: But amongst many of his
singular endowments, he was very ardent and sollicitous in prosecuting
Victories; so as no difficulty nor danger whatsoever did ever retard him the
least of time, from making good use of his prosperous Fortune. Which afforded
Plutarch occasion to introduce Alexander, speaking of himself, in such manner
as he challenged all the Praises which was given unto him, as more due to his
own merit and worth, then to the favor of Fortune.

For these Reasons then, that which was first said, may be asserted, that is,
that it may be numbered amongst Romes greatest good Fortunes, that Alexander
the Great bethought himself not sooner of coming into Italy, or that he lived
not long enough to do it afterward; For had he done so, that Commonwealth must
either have been oppressed by so much greater a Power, or if we will speak more
mildly, and with more respect to the Roman Greatness, she must have run great
hazard in her Fortune. And certainly, that happy Genius which guided both these
Empires to such a height of Greatness and Prosperity, kept them at such a
distance, as that their Forces should not meet together, which had they done
some one of their Armies must either have been totally routed, or at least
their Fame and Glory must have been much obscured. The like may be said to have
happened in these latter Times, between Two Great and Fortunate Princes, The
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the Ottaman Sultan Solomon, who did both of them
flourish in one and the same time, and being both of them (if it be lawful to
make this comparison by reason of their diversity of Faith) endued with great
Emulation, grandeur of Spirit, and Warlike Worth; it seems that either their
own Election kept them from encountering one another, or else that they were
always kept far assunder by some certain occult cause, so as they might not
hazard that Glory which with so much labor and danger they had won in the
Wars, against other Princes. But it was particularly observed by all men, and
not without great wonder, and it was attributed to the same respect; That the
numerous and powerful Armies of both these Princes being brought into Austria,
and come very near one another, with an intention, as it seemed, to try by
Battle the force and worth of themselves and Armies, so great a preparation for
War proved altogether vain: Solomon not advancing with his Camp to challenge
the Germans to join Battle, as he had first professed he would; nor Caesar not
budging with his men from the walls of Vienna, though before the approach of
the Enemy, he had proudly boasted that he would assault him to revenge the
former Injuries done to his Brother, and to all Germany. But because these
considerations suit not with our present purpose, and for that we may
peradventure have occasion to treat thereof hereafter; we will hear end this
our present Discourse.

The Third DISCOURSE.
Whether was the betrer and more laudable Advice, That of the Carthaginians in
offering to assist the Romans, against King Pyrrhus, or that of the Romans, in
refusing their offer.
AMongst many Wars made by the Romans, that was of very great weight and
danger, which she had to sustain against Pyrrhus, King of Epire, when he past
with a powerful Army into Italy in behalf of the Tarentines. Other Wars were
made for the most part by the Romans against others, this was made against them
by a King of greater power then was theirs, and of greater worth in himself,
and of better experience in Affairs of War. Insomuch as he deserved after
Hannibal, to be e^eemed the prime Commander of his, and of former Ages. This
War was likewise commenced when the Commonwealth had not so well confirmed her
Power as she did afterward; this being before the first Carthaginian War,
which brought the Romans first to make war out of Italy. But as the Romans upon
this occasion gave many examples of their undoubted worth, so, opportunity of
handling some State Affairs, from whence useful precepts for Civil Government
may be drawn, to him who shall discourse upon their Actions.

Whilst Pyrrhus was with an Army in Italy, the Carthaginians sent their General
Mago with One hundred and twenty Frigates to assist the Romans; But the Romans,
thanking the Carthaginians for this their readiness to assist them, sent their
General back, with all the Carthaginian Forces.

This being the matter of Fact, it deserves consideration, whether the
Carthaginians, or Romans are more to be praised for their Wisdom and
Magnanimity.

To proffer and lend assistance to one who stands in need thereof, especially
to one who has formerly been very fortunate, is a thing befitting Great and
Generous Princes, and to refuse it, so it be done modestly, and without
Arrogance, shows no less Generosity, since men do thereby appear to conside in
themselves. So likewise to maintain War in another Territories, so to keep it
far from ones self is a wise and useful counsel, and not to value present
dangers so much, as altogether to neglect things of a further distance, is no
small sign of discretion. But let us come to a more particular consideration of
these things, that we may the better see into them, and know what judgment to
give of them, either in praising or dispraising them.

The Romans were at this time in Amity with the Carthaginians, and had often
formerly renewed their Confederacy with them: The Confines of their Dominions
being as yet far distant one from another, whereby the occasion of offense was
taken away, did ratify the Peace and Amity between those two States: So as it
was a thing well-beseeming so great a Principality, as was that of the
Canthaginians, not to forgo their friends in time of danger, though they were
not bound by any particular Obligation, to assist them. And as the failing in
such a duty might have cast some blut upon their City, so deserve they no small
praise for their reediness in performing it. But these things are peradventure
of less force, and estimation amongst Princes; Whence it may be worth
consideration, Whether the Carthaginians were not persuaded out of other
reasons to assist the Romans in this War. Great was the Fame of King Pyrrhus
his Valor, and Forces at this time; and no less the report of his Ambition, and
of his vast Designs of assaulting Sicily, and Africa, when he should have
overcome the Romans. Wherefore the Carthaginians had reason to use all their
endeavors not to make trial of their Forces and Fortune with this Prince: And
nothing was more opportune for them, to keep such dangers far from them, then
to keep Pyrrhus in Italy; who finding himself more withstood by the Roman
Forces, thorough the assistance of the Carthaginians, would be necessitated to
make the longer abode in Italy, and (as it falls out in long Enterprises) to
waste many of his People there, and lessen that Reputation and Terror which
usually accompanies great Armies, in their first and unexpected Assaults. To
make war in another man's Country is always good Advice; but best for those
that are farthest off, especially when it may be hoped that such a fire may be
long fed in another man's Country. The Forces of the Romans were sufficiently
strong of themselves, but much stronger being joined with those of the
Carthaginians, and fitter to withstand Pyrrhus his Forces: Who on the other
side, having undertaken this Enterprise, with vaste thoughts, and being
resolved to hazard his whole Fortune, out of a desire of new Glory, and greater
Empire, and being himself a valiant Commander of a valiant Army, it was not
easily to be believed that he would quit Italy, unless Victorious, or else
quite over come and destroyed. If Pyrrhus should have overcome the Romans, when
they were abandoned by the Carthaginians; and being afterward big with
Reputation of his Victory, should have passed into Sicily, to molest the
Affairs of the Carthaginians, as his Design was to do when he left his Country,
what danger would they have been in, or what succor could they have expected
from the Romans, since they had not been aided by the Carthaginians in their
great necessity, and must have been much weakened by the Defeat given them by
Pyrrhus? But if the Romans had been assisted by the Carthaginians, and Pyrrhus,
weary of trying his Fortune in Italy, should have turned his Forces upon the
Carthaginians, how could the Romans have refused to have assisted the
Carthaginians, in like manner as they had done them? Whence it follows, that
those men which the Carthaginians should have sent into Italy, should have
fought not only for the safety of Italy, but for the like of Sicily and
Africa, and with no less advantage to Carthage, then to Rome. But though it
had been apparent, that the Romans might of themselves have resisted Pyrrhus,
and have got the Victory, it had made no less for the Carthaginians, to make
use of this occasion, thereby to oblige the Romans, whose Power was then very
great, and their Worth very much esteemed, and their intentions of enlarging
their Empire, being already known: So as it became the Carthaginians for their
own safety sake, to have an eye to the greatness of this new Potentate; and not
being able to quell him, they had all the reason in the world to keep him their
Friend, to the end that he might turn his Forces somewhere else, and not upon
them. But what Friendship is more firm then that which is bound with the Tie of
great Benefits? For the receiver, must by an occult force of Nature incline to
love his Benefactor, and the doer, loves this the noble Product of his good
turn in another, and by so doing makes himself be the better beloved. Great was
the Romans need at this time, who had not as yet met with a more formidable
Enemy then Pyrrhus, and therefore the occasion was likewise great, which
offered it self to the Carthaginians to contract a near Friendship and
Confederacy with the Romans.

But to this it may be objected, That by succouring the Romans, the
Carthaginians would draw another War upon themselves; Nor was it so easy a
thing to overcome the Romans, as that Pyrrhus could end that War so suddenly,
or with so entire Forces, as the Carthaginians had cause to fear them: Nay,
rather the irritating of Pyrrhus by Injuries, might provoke him to revenge, and
make him forgo the Romans, and fall upon the Carthaginians. But say that the
Affairs of Rome, though assisted by the Carthaginians, should have succeeded
amiss (as things of this nature are always subject to variety of Accidents)
what hopes had the Carthaginians to defend either what they possessed in
Sicily, or even the African coasts, when they should have sent the greatest
part of their Shipping and Soldiers to assist the Romans? And why should the
Carthaginians rather fear Pyrrhus his Greatness, then that of the Romans?
Pyrrhus his Dominions lay further off, and more incommodious to molest the
Carthaginians, then did the Romans; he was but one man, and though valiant, yet
his life was subject to various mischances (as it proved afterward, he being
slain by a stone, thrown by a poor old woman) But Rome abounded in valiant
Commanders, and was come to the pass, a man may say, of preserving herself
still the same: So as all other Princes ought rather to have had a care to keep
the Romans from growing stronger, then any other Potentate: For Romes power was
more stable, and therefore like to cause longer, and greater dangers to others.
Wherefore to keep the Romans long busied in the War against Pyrrhus, by which
their Forces must have been weakened, was the means to preserve other States
from that Ambition of Dominion which was already discovered to be in the Romans.

On the other side; To assist the Romans in ridding themselves of the Troubles
of War, especially if this should have happened by their obtaining any signal
Victory, what was it but to increase the Reputation and Courage of others, so
to hasten their own dangers? For being freed of such encumbrances, and aspiring
after greater things (a thing which is always occasioned by good success) it
was not likely the Romans would stand idle, but ready to embrace any Enterpise,
as it happened afterward. For the first Carthaginian War ensued soon after the
War made with Pyrrhus: For the Romans meeting with no resistance in Italy,
after the Honor which they had won in their Victory over Pyrrhus, they began to
march with their Forces into other Countries; they past into Sicily, being
invited in by the Mamertini, as Pyrrhus was first called ito Italy by the
Tarentini. And the weakness of Pyrrhus his Forces did not so much occasion the
Victories won in the War, asdid his inconstancy in prosecuting Enterprises once
begun, which though it was a natural defect in him, yet may it be believed,
that his sudden departure from Italy might be occasioned by the injury done him
by the Carthaginians, who unprovoked had taken up Arms against him, and were
ready to come and find him out in other men's Countries. But it may be another
greater respect might have moved him to assault the Carthaginian State, to wit,
That he might only have to do only with the Carthaginians, as he had at first
fought only with the Romans; beginning to suspect, as having already
discovered the Carthaginians good will, that if he should tarry longer in
Italy, and that the Romans danger should increase, that Confederacy might be
made between them and the Carthaginians, which was first refused: So that
whatsoever he should afterward undertake against either of them, might
afterward prove more difficult. This was then the reason why Pyrrhus, whilst
the business in Italy was not yet finished, nor the danger of the Tarentines
not well secured, marched to go for Sicily; which caused so much trouble and
danger to the Carthaginian Affairs, as if he had known how to make good use of
his Victory, the Carthaginians might peradventure have been brought then to
those final Extremities which were deferred for another time, more for the
Romans Glory, then for their Welfare and good Fortune. Thus what has been
already said, may suffice for what concerns the Carthaginians.

Let us now see what the Romans did, and consider whether they did well or no
in refusing the help which was voluntarily offered them, nay brought home to
them by the Carthaginians. The War which was made by Pyrrhus against the
Romans, must be thought to be both great and difficult, being made by a Warlike
Prince, who brought many many men with him, well trained up in Arms, so as by
the very Name and Fame of his Forces, he had almost brought many Cities of
Italy to his devotion, withdrawing them from the obedience of the Romans; and
though he were a stranger, yet having firm footing in Italy, whither he was
called by the Tarentini, he was not likely to undergo those dis-accommodations,
which Armies use to suffer in another Country; but his Forces appeared the more
formidable by reason of that terror, which things of great Fame, and not
formerly known, use to bring with them. And the Elephants were a great cause of
fear, the Romans not being formerly acquainted with that manner of Militia. In
so much danger therefore, when the whole Rest was at Stake, to presume too much
upon ones self, and upon ones proper Forces, and to dream only of Glory, when
they were to have been more sollicitous of Safety, has the appearance rather
of Rashness, then of mature and wise Counsel. And why should the Romans promise
so much unto themselves against Pyrrhus, as to despise the Carthaginians help,
being as then accustomed to fight with the Tarentini, a weak Nation, given over
to delights, of which they were reprehended by Pyrrhus himself; and being now
to fight with true Soldiers, expert in all sort of sufferings, and all
military Discipline, in the recent Wars made by Pyrrhus in Macedonia. And when
nothing else, but even Fortune (which in matter of War is so uncertain) should
have proved averse unto them in any thing, to whom could they afterward have
had recourse for succor, having despised so great helps, readily sent by so
great a Power, of so great esteem and Authority, as was then the Commonwealth
of Carthage?

Yet on the other side, it may seem no ways to agree with the Romans Greatness
and Generosity, to confess themselves so terrified by Pyrrhus his Forces, as
that they needed Foreign help to defend themselves. The Romans might have had
Peace from Pyrrhus, who when he came into Italy, sent his Ambassadors to Rome,
informing the Senate by them, that he was come to compose the Difference
between them and the Tarentini, with whom, if the Romans would have Peace, he
proffered them the like: To which, answer was made, That the Commonwealth of
Rome had not chosen him for their Arbitrator, neither did they fear his enmity;
therefore let him first return to his own Kingdom, and then, as a Friend to the
Commonwealth he might treat of Peace, and should be willingly listened unto.

But the City of Rome did already begin to envy and emulate the Commonwealth of
Carthage, which she did peradventure more esteem then open enmity with the
Kingdom of Epire, wherewith she thought she should not so soon have to do
neither in matter of Peace nor War, though Pyrrhus his ambition had then
brought him into Italy. Therefore if the Romans would not accept of Peace from
Pyrrhus, they oughtless to acknowledge their Safety from the Carthaginians. They
likewise thought they might so much rely upon their own Forces, having valiant
and well disciplined Soldiers of their own, as that there remained no doubt of
Victory in that War, then what does never part from the uncertainty of Chance
in War. They considered that the number of Armies or Fleets might be increased
by Foreigners, and yet the power to resist an Enemy not be made the greater;
whilst either the differing ends of Princes, the little agreement between
Commanders, or the contrary Custom and Discipline of Soldiers, do often
occasion many discords in matter of War; which are not found where one only
Chieftain commands, and disposes of all things, and where better obedience
shown by Soldiers of one and the same Dominion. Therefore was it that the
Romans did sundry other times refuse foreign aid; as particularly, in the War
against Antiochus, when refusing assistance sent unto them by other Kings of
Africa, they with their own few, but valiant Soldiers, routed Antiochus his
numerous Army, made up of many several Nations. Such respects as these might
have been liable to consideration, even when their Faith and Friendship, who
were to have lent assistance, had been for certain to be credited; but who
could secure the Romans, who having already extended their Dominions far into
Italy, could not grow much greater without injuring Nations further off: from
being jealous of the Carthaginians, who were ancient and powerful Lords in
Africa, and in Spain, and possessed of the greatest part of Sicily; and as
there were none who could more hinder the increase of their Greatness then the
Carthaginians, so was it necessary that they being apprehended for such by the
Romans, should likewise fear them for the preservation of their own quiet and
security. And what charity is this, might those wise and ancient Senators of
Rome say, which has moved these Affricans to be so careful of us, as without
any obligation of Confederacy, and not sought unto, they should send so prime a
Captain as Mago, with such a number of Frigates and Soldiers, to assist us, and
to bereave their own State of such defense, to preserve the States of other
men? The greater the appearances seemed outwardly, the more might it be
suspected that these things proceeded not from sincerity of heart: If the
Carthaginians had done this, because they held the Romans to be so unworthy, as
that they were to yield to Pyrrhus his first assault, and so their States might
be exposed to the same danger, it was not good to nourish such an opinion in
the Carthaginians, by which they should no sooner be quit of Pyrrhus, but the
Carthaginians, who were as willing to keep the Romans low, as Pyrrhus was,
might come and set upon them. So whilst they should endeavor to secure the War
which was on foot, and from which, if they were the same men which they had
always used to be against their Enemies, they had great hopes they might defend
themselves, they might have raised another more dangerous and difficult; if the
Roman generosity had not suffered that by another fraud, whereunto they
should, only have given consent and some small reward, Pyrrhus should have
been slain (as they were offered by an acquaintance of his, he should be)
though thereby they were freed from all danger; but rather to exempt the
Commonwealth from such a blemish, the Roman Commander chose to acquaint the
enemy with what was plotted against him; how could they, or ought they to
tolerate that the Carthaginians, who had sent aid, not out of any desire of
Romes welfare, but as those that envied her glory, should boast themselves of
being the preservers of the Roman Liberty? If it should have so fallen out by any
adverse accident that Pyrrhus, who came to assault them, should have proved
Conqueror; nothing had been to be blamed but the Fortune of War, since they
themselves should have carried themselves gallantly and advisedly in the
maintaining of it: But if they should have accepted of the Carthaginian
succor, men might think, that the Romans gave themselves for overcome, before
a blow was given and that they were much inferior to the Enemy, not in Forces,
but in Valor: That Pyrrhus had not undertaken that enterprise out of necessity,
but only out of a desire of novelty, and hopes of glory: That therefore if his
first assaults should be stoutly sustained, he should have enough of it, and
that being invited by another occasion, which he understood was already brewing
against him, by the Sicilian Discords, being naturally of a fickle humor, he
might readly turn to some other undertaking; and that as he had come into Italy
slightly, and upon no occasion, to make War against them, so he might easily be
persuaded by any adverse Fortune to give over the Affairs of Italy, and fall
upon something else; had he been so strong in Men and Forces, as it seems men
thought he was, he would not have sent his Orator Cineas to seek friendship
with the Senate and people of Rome, and to endeavor that by words which he
might easily have obtained by force, which was, to grant peace to the
Tarentines his Confederates.

Something like this we may believe was said by that Appius, a Senator of
experienced wisdom; who was employed in answering Pyrrhus his Ambassador, and
in readily accepting the intimated War. And whosoever shall duly consider these
so many and so sprightly reasons which they had to dismiss the Carthaginian
assistance, must needs be persuaded that it did agree with the Roman wisdom and
generosity. Yet he who will ground his judgment aright, and justly weigh what
the Carthaginians did, must reflect upon diverse respects, by which such actions
are usually governed. If then the advantage of the business be only considered,
it will appear to consist well with what the Carthaginians did then advise
upon: For, to hazard those few Forces which they sent to assist the Romans,
tended toward the preservation of their own State from Pyrrhus his incursion;
and it appeared rational enough, that the war made against him by the Roman
forces, joined with those of the Carthaginians, might draw on to a length of
time: For it was believed by the resolution which Pyrrhus took when he went
from his Kingdom, that he should not have so soon given over his attempt; and
the Carthaginians being with a considerable strength in the Roman Armies, might
at their pleasures, and in diverse manners have so prolonged the War, and spun
it out into such a length, as they might have so weakened both their Forces, as
they needed not for a long time to fear either Pyrrhus or the Romans. But in
the Romans resolutions to refuse the Carthaginian succor, the magnanimity of
their minds is chiefly to be praised: For the War was not slighted by those who
refused to make Peace with their Enemies, and to accept of assistance from
their Friends; but full of dangers, which if they should be able to overcome,
they thought it would be an action of great worth, but of greater difficulty.
But this resolution, out of the aforesaid reasons, made not so much for their
advantage for the present, as for the future. And it was known, that Fabritius
his generosity in preserving Pyrrhus his life (though his Enemy) from the
Treachery of other men, made no less for the overcoming of Pyrrhus, then did
the military discipline of Valerius Corvinus, and the Roman Armies which fought
against him. Wherefore he sent Cineas to Rome to grant liberty to such
prisoners as he had taken, and to desire peace with the Romans, being moved
thereunto rather by that noble act, then by any loss he had received in the
conflict. And it may be believed, that it was this which made him resolve to
forego Italy the sooner, and leave the Roman affairs quiet.

Yet such a Consideration may appear to be very weak, being compared to the
advantage which might thereby have been gotten: For it had regard to things of
uncertainty, and to dangers far off; whereas the Carthaginians help might have
made for the good of present affairs. Wherefore the Romans might be herein
convinced; if it were not to be said, that the desire of Glory was so great in
them, as aiming only and chiefly thereat, they put on their resolutions with
such fervor, as they did not only exceed all others, but even themselves. They
thought they should make their condition the worse by accepting of Foreign
assistance, whatsoever should befall them: For if they should overcome Pyrrhus,
assisted with the Carthaginians, the military valor would be much lessened,
which otherwise did belong to so great an undertaking, and to the so great
hazard which they ran; but if they should be overcome, their shame would be
increased; the Roman Forces, though assisted by so great a strength of
Foreiners, not being able to resist Pyrrhus his Army. They might likewise
peradventure doubt, lest by reposing some part of their hopes upon Foreign aid,
they might make their own Senators less fervent and sollicitous in providing
things fitting for the War, and their Captains and Soldiers less diligent in
their military employments; as it often falls out in what is recommended to the
care of many, that whilst one to ease himself a little, seeks to lay load upon
another, the burden is more weakly sustained by many, then it would have been
by a few: But the truth of these things can but only be discussed by probable
Arguments, to delight our selves in the variety of affairs which present
themselves in the ballancing of several reasons which may happen in these great
actions: For to give a determinate sentence therein, we want the ground work of
those particulars, which we cannot take notice of now in things done so long
since, and by which all our works, especially such as are subject to so many
alterations as are all Civil and Military affairs, can be only best regulated.
It is most certain, that the Romans, who were formerly full of high and
glorious thoughts, got so much boldness and reputation after having driven
Pyrrhus out of Italy with their own proper Forces, and overcome him in so many
Battles, as they did the easilier undertake any War, and no Nation in Italy
durst ever after oppose their designs, whereby they soon opened the way to a
large Empire.

The Fourth DISCOURSE.
Which of the two famous Roman Cammanders, Quintus Fabius Maximus, or P. Scipio
Africanus, brought more of advantage to the Commonwealth of Rome in managing
their War.
FAbius Maximus, and P. Scipio Africanus, descended from noble Roman Families,
and endued with excellent parts, did flourish in the same Age; which happening
to be at the time when the Commonwealth of Rome was much molested by the
Carthaginian Forces, they had occasion to show their valor in the behalf of
their Country, and to purchase much glory to themselves. They had alike zeal to
the common good; their love to their Country, their strength of mind, and
knowledge of military affairs was alike; but they differed in opinion concerning
the management of the War, and different was the occasion which they had in
exercising it. Great was the service which the City of Rome received from these
two; but they differed much in their ways and ends. Fabius led the Armies
through Italy against Hannibal, for the safety of the City of Rome: Scipio
fought in Africa against the same Hannibal, for the glory and grandezza of
Rome, being already freed from so many dangers of the Carthaginian Forces. The
former brought succor and help in a very seasonable time to the affairs of Rome
when they were much distressed, and raised up the tottering fortune of the
Commonwealth: The latter, by discomfiting many of the Carthaginian Commanders,
and even Hannibal himself, did not only put his Romans in perpetual safety from
the Carthaginian forces and stratagems wherewith they had been so long
molested, but brought whole Africa under their obedience. Fabius preserved
Italy from the slavery of Foreign Nations, into which she had certainly fallen,
had it not been for his actions and advices, Hannibal having already possessed
himself of all the chief Cities: But Scipio did much enlarge the Roman
Confines, and made the Africans confess they were overcome by Italian valor,
and submit their necks to the yoke of the Roman Empire. These excellent
Commanders showed great worth, and great experience in military affairs by
these their actions, each of them using therein their proper qualities and
endowments: Fabius loved constancy, gravity, followed late taken resolutions,
but such as were secure. Scipio, measuring all things according to the
greatness of his conception, did wilingly embrace new Enterprises, nothing that
was glorious seemed hard to him. Fabius feared Hannibal out of wisdom, not out
of any cowardly mind; Scipio despised him, confiding in himself and in the
valor of his Army. Wherefore Fabius thought he had ended the business, if
Hannibal being reduced to much hardship, should be forced to forgo Italy: But
Scipio as if he had been sure of Victory, refusing all offers of Agreement how
advantageous soever, made by the Carthaginians, would hazard the day in that
famous place of Zama, where the height of Empire was to be decided between two
powerful Nations. And truly it seems, that it was Romes good Fortune, which
made these two so excellent men be at this time Coetaneans, though with
different thoughts applied to the Safety and Glory of that Commonwealth: For
the one, with much patience overcoming the bitterness of Fortune, and the
Insolency of the Enemy, freed her from so many dangers into which she was fallen:
the other, finding the Commonwealth already restored, and knowing how to make
better use of his good fortune then Hannibal, did by his noble daring add
greater splendour, and glory to her.

But here it may be worthy consideration, which of these two may be thought to
have done things which were better, and of more use for the Commonwealth.
Fabius his actions tended to the safety of his Country, when she was reduced
into great danger, and put a period to her troubles more by good Counsel, then
by many Forces: But the Affrican proposed unto himself the increase of Glory,
and of Empire of the City of Rome. Wherefore not satisfied with what he had
succesfully done in Spain, he resolved to pass into Africa, where refusing all
conditions of Peace, he would needs join battle with Hannibal, wherein his
prosperity continuing, he won a great and glorious Victory. On the one side
then, Fabius deserts appear to be very great, he having preserved the City when
it was in a desperate condition, so by saving it from the utmost of dangers, he
made himself a sharer of that praise which is given to the first Founders of
Cities: And certainly such was Hannibals fortune at that time, the worth and
reputation of his Army such, as all Force endeavored against him, would have
proved not only vain but prejudicial; and his being judged by the Senate and
People of Rome to be a Commander fit to cope with Hannibal, and only fit to
suppress his Forces, even then when Scipio that valiant and famous Captain, did
live and flourish, shows that Fabius worth was so highly esteemed, as it was
not to be exceeded. And this is afterward confirmed by the grave testimony of
Paulus Aemilius, famous among the most celebrated Romans; who being, as Consul,
to go into the Camp against Hannibal, highly extolling things formerly done by
Fabius, whilst he was Dictator, said that he would rather be praised in matters
of War by him alone, then do things which might differ from his actions, though
they pleased all the people of Rome therein. Fabius was indeed excellently well
advised in all he did; for he was no less valiant in withstanding the Enemy in
Battle, and in correcting the error and rashness of Minutius, Master of the
Cavalry, who had importunely, and contrary to his opinion begun the Skirmish,
then he was formerly wise in foreseeing the danger, and in endeavoring to keep
it off. His constancy of mind in adversity witnessed his no want of Courage,
but out of abundance of Wisdom he shunned the hazard of giving Battle.
Wherefore after the discomfeiture at Cannae, no man was more constant, and
ready then he to take a resolution. It is therefore said, that in the dejection
of souls, and confusion of all things, the Citizens had recourse to his
Counsel, as to an Oracle: And the comparing the actions of others, in what
concerned the administration of War against Hannibal, made Fabius his worth
appear the more; for before he took upon him the Dictatorship, the Consul
Flaminius was routed at the Lake Thrasymenus, and when he laid down the
Dictatorship; Terentius taking other courses then did Fabius, gave occasion for
that famous and grievous overthrow which the Romans received at the Battle of
Cannae; whereby it may be known, that wise Commanders (just like understanding
Physicians when they meet with weak bodies, do oftentimes make use rather to
prescribe quiet and good government, free from all disorder, then Physic) when
they know the Forces of the Commonwealth to be but weak, as were those of the
Romans at that time, ought also to free the State from great and eminent
dangers, by temporizing, and by proceeding leasurely with all advantage, then
by using Force of Arms and hazarding a Battle. Which made Hannibal say, That he
feared Fabius his fearfulness more, then the daring of the other Roman
Captains: And finding all his Designs at other times frustrated by Fabius, he
affirmed that the Romans had also their Hannibal. Nor could his cunning be
indeed overcome otherwise then by cunning, and by knowing how to make use of
fitting occasions, and how to bereave the Enemy of the like, which indeed was
peculiar to Fabius.

It may moreover be said for Fabius, and in praise of his advice, that as no
humane Action is more subject to diverse unexpected Accidents, then in Battle,
wherein great Effects are often produced from very small Accidents, so cannot a
Commander attribute at any time so much praise unto himself in Victories, but
that good Fortune will challenge a great share therein: Wherefore it is
numbered amongst the chief qualities which are to be desired in him who would
prove a good Commander, that he be fortunate. Besides, no Victory is ever won
by mere fighting, without much blood, and much loss of ones own men; so as to
overcome an enemy by such means as Fabius knew how to do, and without exposing
himself to the danger of a set Battle, to overthrow an Enemies Army by
reduceing it to great hardships, is a thing of more rare virtue, and which
makes the Commander more praiseworthy. By these cunnings were Hannibals
cunnings deluded, by these was his fierceness tamed, and the reputation won
from him, and from his Army, which he had won in Battle, by having so often
worsted and overthrown the Romans. So as it may be said, that Fabius conquered
Hannibal a Conqueror; but that Scipio overcame him when he was already
conquered. For Fabius had to do with him, when he was in Italy with a puissant
Army, and in the height of his greatest prosperity; But Scipio made not trial
of his Forces against those of Hannibal, till he was returned to Africa, with
his Army beaten and wasted by sufferings, and when by the usual change of
humane Affairs the state of things between the Carthaginians and Romans was
sufficiently altered. Wherefore Hannibal, who had formerly endeavored nothing
more then to fight his Enemies in a pitched field, when he was returned to
Africa, persuaded the Carthaginians to Peace, and proposed all conditions of
Agreement to Scipio, so to shun joining Battle with him* in which, as if he had
foretold his own misfortunes, he lost the remnant of his Army which he had
brought from Italy.

Wherefore should it not then be thought, that it was harder for Fabius to stop
the course of Hannibals Victories, then it was for Scipio to overcome him in
Battle, when the Carthaginians were at their greatest loss, and (...)? Nay, it
was objected to Scipio, when he endeavored to lead his Army into Africa, that
he did it to shun encountering with Hannibal in Italy. It is a very common, but
a very true saying, Non minor est virtus quam querere, parta tueri.

Fabius preserved the Glory, Reputation and state of the Commonwealth, which
his Ancestors had won; Scipio increased them. So as had it not been for Fabius,
the Name, at least the Fame of Rome had been almost lost: But she had only
been less glorious without Scipio.

On the contrary, who will consider Scipio's great actions, how can he judge
him to come short of any other Roman Commander whatsoever, either for glory or
dedesert; since he may be said to have been the first who opened the way unto
the Romans of conquering the whole World, as they did in a short time? For by
his means Africa was conquered, and a curb put to the greatest and most
powerful Enemies that ever the Romans had; so as none ever after durst
withstand the Roman greatness by force, or did disdain to humble and submit
themselves to their worth and fortune, whom the most powerful and fortunate of
all other Nations did already obey? Scipio brought all Spain under the Roman
obedience, driving away the Carthaginians from thence, whom he overcame in four
several battles: Nor did he make the way easy to greater acquisitions, less by
his excellent gifts of mind, then by force of Arms; making those people
affectionate, and faithful to the Romans. And yet as not much valuing these his
great deeds, being returned to Rome full of glory, he endevaoured to return
again with his Army into Africa, knowing that the Carthaginians could not keep
quiet at home, but must be troubling and endangering the the Romans: Nor had he
less difficulty to overcome Fabius his obstinate opinion in the Senate, who
blamed this advice, then in routing the Enemies in the Field.

But if Fabius be to be esteemed, because he in a short time freed the Romans
from the danger of the Carthaginians; what must we say of Scipio, who did for
ever secure them from these their Enemies, bereaving them of their Landforces
by taking the Flower of their men away from them in Battle; and the like of
their Maritime strength, having by agreement forced them to burn all their
Ships? Which won him so great respect from all persons, as at his return from
Africa people ran from all parts, only that they might see him. To say truth,
what can be said of Fabius, save that he did not lose? But in Scipio's
Victories, what can be desired to make them greater or more glorious? In the
space of forty five days he raised a powerful Army; and followed by more
Volunteers for the fame of his worth, then he carried Soldiers with him by
Decree of Senate, he marched into Africa: He conquered People and Cities, that
were enemies to the name of Roman; he overcame Asdrubal and Hanno, two famous
Carthaginian Commanders; he discomfited Hannibals Army, and ending the War with
the overthrow of the Enemy, he returned time enough to Rome to lay down his
Magistracy. Hannibal being withdrawn from the walls of Rome, and kept at gaze
by Fabius his cunning, stayed in Italy, expecting succor from Africa, to renew
the War with greater Force. Scipio's advice and actions were only able to draw
him out of Italy; so as carrying the War elsewhere, at the same time he freed
his own home from the troubles and danger thereof. He who should have asked
Fabius, what the signs were, what the fruits of his Victories; what could he
have shown? No Enemies taken, no Cities won, no Gold nor Silver brought into
the Comon-Exchequer. But many things prove the glory and deserts of Scipio: So
many Prisoners taken, amongst which Syphax, the great and famous King of
Numidia; so many Cities subjugated in Africa, and in Spain; the annual Tribute
imposed upon the Carthaginians; the rich Pillage brought ^^me from the Enemy.

What is there then (...) like, not to name equal, between these two, which may
make them contend for military glory? But certainly it may be affirmed for
truth, that the one and the other of them are come to the height of glory,
though they took several ways to arrive at it: For each of them showed wisdom
and valor in their actions, becoming advised Statesmen, and great Commanders.
Diverse accidents concurred in their several actions, which persuaded them to
proceed after a differing manner: For Fabius being to withstand Hannibals
violence, who being already advanced into the very bowels of Italy, and being
drawn veryneer to Rome herself, had filled all things with fear, did not think
it fitting in this confusion of affairs to hazard all the fortune of the
Commonwealth in a day of battle: For the neerness and power of the Enemy did
not allow time to recruit and stop the course of Hannibals Victories, in case
that Army wherein the chief hopes of Romes welfare did consist, should have
been beaten.

But Scipio having to do with the same Hannibal, when he and his Army were in
Africa, and near the City of Carthage, knew that if any thing of ill should
befall him, he should only lose those men that were with him; which loss might
easily be recovered, the condition being considered wherein the Commonwealth
then was: And it being his fortune to overcome Hannibal, he reduced the affairs
of the Carthaginians (whom he had worsted in diverse other battles) to the
utmost of dangers: Wherefore by the victory he got great rewards for himself,
great glory, and increased the Empire of his Commonwealth. Scipio had also
other reasons which persuaded him to fight; his being in a foreign Country, his
keeping of the Enemy from recruiting after their late losses, and he being
shortly to lay down his command; so as to spin out the War in length, was to
deprive him of his conceived hopes of victory, and to lessen what he had
already done. Scipio therefore had as much reason to engage in battle, as
Fabius formerly had to refuse fighting.

This is confirmed by the several ways of proceeding of the same Hannibal, an
excellent Commander; who at first, when he was in Italy, desired nothing more
then to come to a pitched battle, out of the aforesaid reasons; so afterward
being withdrawn with his Army into Africa, shunned encountering Scipio as much
as he might, the different condition of affairs advising him differently. And
it is a general rule, That those things ought to be avoided which please the
Enemy; for the respects being different, that which makes for the one, must
needs be bad for the other. It must afterward be considered, that if Fabius
had pleased, when he was made Dictator, after the unfortunate Fight at the
Prassemine Lake, to lead that Army into Africa which was destined for the
safety of the very City of Rome, it must have been exposed to apparent dangers
of the Enemies victorious Forces, with uncertain hope of success in Africa; nor
would this diversion have been then peradventure a sufficient means to have
freed it from danger, as it did afterward when Scipio's counsel was followed
in an opportune time, when after diverse bad successes both in Spain and Africa,
Hannibal was sent for back to assist the much weakened affairs of his
Commonwealth.

He therefore who will go about to imitate the actions of these two Captains,
if he will reap good thereby, must first very well consider every particular of
those things which he goes about, and therein accommodate himself, either by
hazarding battle, and hasting on to the end of the enterprise with sudden and
resolute Parties, or else must harass and overcome the Enemy by drawing things
out to a length, and by reducing him to many inconveniences. He also who will
advise wisely touching the assaulting of another man's Country, to keep his own
from danger, or who will else make good his own affairs only by way of defense,
must have diverse respects in consideration, which lead to the knowledge what in
his case is fittest to be done; and by so doing he may hope for the good
success which these two famous Roman Commanders had. But howsoever, though
their affairs fall out less prosperously, he will win the praise of being
either a wise and circumspect, or else a valiant and bold Commander; as befell
Scipio and Fabius, because each of them knew how to manage the War so, as the
condition of Times, the quality of their own and of their Enemies Forces, the
diversity of the Place, and other respects and accidents, which in such cases
ought to regulate our actions, did advise them to do.

The Fifth DISCOURSE.
Whether War being to be made against the Romans, Hannibals Counsel was good to
carry it into Italy.
HAnnibal, a cried up Carthaginian Captain, intending to wage War with the
Romans, resolved to lead the Army which he had already raised in Spain into
Italy by land, passing first over the Pyrenean Mountains, and then over the
Alps, that he might approach as near as he could to the City of Rome, the Seat
of the Empire. This is thought by all men to be a bold and generous advice, but
it is much doubted whether it were advantageous for the Carthaginians, and for
Hannibals own defigns. He thought, that being to quell the Roman Power, he must
shake it in those parts where it had taken deepest root: That the Romans would
be furnished with Soldiers, Victuals, Moneys, and all things else from Italy,
wherewith they were wont to maintain War against several Nations, and to
increase their own Glory and Empire: that whilst they were Masters of this,
they could not be much prejudiced by any thing that could be attempted against
them in other parts: That usually his advantage was very great who assaulted
another at his own door, because he keeps the perils, and greatest losses of
War far from him: He increases courage in his own men, and takes in from the
Enemy, and makes the way more easy to Victory, not only by Forces but by
Reputation, and also by the fear which he infuseth into the Enemy: but the
farther off the War is catried, and the nearer the Enemy is assaulted in the
Center and very heart of his State, the more are such advantages got. If the
Romans, who were always wont to molest other men's Affairs, should be forced to
fight within their own Confines, and were to wage War, not to enlarge their
Dominions, but to defend themselves and what they held dearest, they would
prove less then themselves, because their courage would fail them, and the
splendour of the Roman name would be obscured, which did so much help to the
atchieving of their Enterprises. Therefore the Romans knowing by experience the
disadvantage of making War at home, and open enmity being professed between
them and Phillip King of Macedon, fearing least the Carthaginian War being
ended, he would assult Italy, as Hannibal had done but a little before, would
be the first who should pass with their Army into Greece, and carry the
greatest trouble and danger of War into the States of others. But the longer
and more difficult the way was for Hannibal to conduct his Carthaginians into
Italy, so much greater Honor would he win when he should have overcome these
difficulties: That without great constancy and worth in the Commander and
Soldiers, so hard an Enterprise could not have been undertaken, such craggy
mountainous feats passed over, and their way be made by the Sword amidst an
Enemies Country.

To this was added, that there were many in Italy, who were not pleased with
the Romans Empire, by whose Colonies sent by them into other peoples Countries,
they were robbed not only of their Goods but of their Liberty: That the fame
given out that Hannibal would free these from the Roman slavery, and the whole
world from the fear of their ambition and power, might alienate the minds of
such as were Neighbors to the Romans, and reconcile them so much the more to
him. Hannibal did likewise consider, as he whose intention it was not to make
In^odes into the Roman Territories, to make a sore and long War with them, that
there were many in the Carthaginian Senace who were not well pleased with this
enterprise, some being moved by respect of the contrary Faction, others by envy
to his glory, and others by zeal they bore to their Countries quiet. That if he
should be with his Army in some neighboring Country, and that the Romans should
be but weakly invaded, and not soundly set upon, it might in likelihood fall
out he should be sent for home, and Peace be concluded. He feared likewise lest
his Army, which was composed of diverse Nations, when his Soldiers should find
themselves near their own houses, they might the more easily disband. Being
therefore only intent to come with his Forces into Italy, he would shun all
occasions of trying his men against the Romans in a pitched Field, when Publius
Scipio went to encounter him at the Banks of Rhodanus. Moreover it would not
satisfy the high and magnanimous end which he had prefixed unto himself, of
freeing Carthage, his Country, from the Tribute to the which she was made
liable by the Romans, to molest them in any part further from the State, but he
must march against the very City of Rome, the Seat of the Empire, to allay, or
at least to weaken much their power. Other smaller things might have given some
trouble to the Romans, and have retarded their greatness; but in the same
danger and uncertainty of War, whereby she had provoked so powerful an enemy
against her, the reward, and the benefit were not equal in both the cases. Very
great and difficult undoubtedly was such an enterprise, but befitting Hannibal,
who, as it was said, had through the magnanimity of his spirit, proposed unto
himself to imitate the deeds of Hercules, and had taken up arms against the
Romans, not out of any hatred he bore them, but for the dignity of Empire. So
as what would have infused fear into another, did set his mind the more on
fire. He thought likewise by force of necessity to infuse into his Soldiers
that strength and constancy of mind, which was as an excellent virtue in
himself, whilst fighting should be enforced, all occasion of flight being taken
away, to put all their hopes of safety in their Swords. This most expert
Commander knew likewise wherein his Forces did exceed, and therewithal he would
make trial of their worth. Wherefore passing with his Army safe over the
Mountains, he foresaw he should find large Plains in Italy, wherein he might
fight the Romans upon great advantage, his Army abounding in Horse, and the
Infantry being the Romans chiefest strength.

Then as this counsel was taken by Hannibal with reason, so if this action be
particularly considered, it may be said, that he was very successful therein:
for the first time that he had to do with the Roman Armies in Italy, thought
the Armies of two Consuls were joined together against him, that which was
first sent against him into France, and that which was destined to encounter
him when he should have descended the Mountains, he came off with such victory
as he put Rome into great terror, both for that the City was not wont before to
hear such bad news from their Captains, as also for having so powerful, and so
victorious an enemy so nigh at hand. But what can be added to the victories
gotten at the Lake of Thrasymenus and at Cannae, (places made famous for the
calamities which the Rom^ns suffered there) to make his glory greater? and the
good thereof was answerable to the greatness; for those of the Empire rebelling
every where, and flying from the Romans distressed fortune, to Hannibals favor
and obedience, he soon made himself Master of almost all Italy, and put the
very City of Rome to great danger and confusions. So as it was either his noble
daring which begot such prosperous effects, or else it was thereby accompanied.

Yet there wanted not other reasons, and respects, which may make Hannibals
advice of leading his Army into Italy appear less useful, and less praise
worthy; and it may be said, that if he had passed into Italy with almost all
the whole Carthaginian Forces, bringing along with him Veteran Soldiers, and
the greatest strength of the Carthaginian Empire, he ought to have considered,
that undertaking to make War against the Romans, a warlike, powerful, and
fortunate Nation, the Carthaginian State was not likely to keep unmolested by
their Forces; Reason not permitting it to be believed, that they who formerly,
not provoked by any injuries, but rather excited by a desire of Government, had
happily waged war with the Commonwealth of Carthage, would now stand only
spectators of their own misery, and repulsers of offense, but that they would
rather endeavor to carry that fire which was kindled in their own houses,
either into Africa or Spain, to keep the Carthaginian Forces from succouring
that part where their own danger was increased. And so did the effect ensue;
for the Romans having first assaulted Spain, and after Africa, and finding them
both but badly provided of Garrisons fitting to withstand so potent an Enemy,
they reduced the first under the obedience of their Commonwealth, driving all
the Carthaginians from thence, and did put the other into so great confusion,
as little more then the bare name of a Republic remained to the very City of
Carthage. But how could Hannibal hope to tarry long in Italy, and to be able to
receive such succors and supplies as he must of necessity stand in need of? The
way was shut up by Land by the craggy mountains, and by the Enemy; and the Sea
was less open to them, the Romans not being only masters of the Sea, but of
Navigation; for their Fleet was greater then that of the Carthaginians: whence
it was, that the succor came neither time enough to Hannibal for him to
prosecute his Victories; neither when it was sent, could it come safe to him,
his brother Asdrubal, who conducted it, being cut in pieces, together with all
his men by the Consul Claudius.

Out of these respects it may be thought, that it had been better and safer for
Hannibal to have commenced the War against the Romans in Sicily or Sardinia.
The pretense of taking up Arms against the Romans, for the recovery of such
things as were granted out of great necessity to them by his Commonwealth, was
more just. Wherefore he might have bethought himself of not provoking the
disfavor both of God and man against him; as it appeared on the contrary, that
his breach of Articles, and his too bold design of driving the Romans out of
Italy, their own proper seat and dominion, made all things prove cross unto
him. The business would likewise have proved more opportune and easy, by
reason of the ill satisfaction which the people of those Islands received from
the Romans power, which occasioned in them a great mind to rebel, as was
afterward found. The Carthaginian Commonwealth was strong enough by Sea; and
though Fortune had not been propitious to them in their Naval conflict with the
Romans, yet was their experience in Maritime affairs greater; and the City was
then so well provided of Shipping, as we read that they were above five hundred
Ships which they were forced to burn by command from Scipio, after Hannibals
Rout in Africa. If Hannibal would then have put his Army into these Bottoms,
and have turned with powerful Forces upon Sicily and Sardinia, and being also
assisted with the Peoples inclination, he could not almost have doubted to have
reduced them in a small time under the Carthaginian power. And having won these
Islands, what way would he have made for the enterprise of Italy? He might have
made use of this situation, and of his Fleet, to have kept the Sea open to
himself, and blocked up to the Romans: whereas doing the contrary, it happened
otherwise; for the Carthaginian Fleet being very weak, the greater part whereof
were employed in other places, it was overcome by the Romans, their Navigation
and Succor was hindered, and finally all Hannibals designs were frustrated. But
the advantage which Hannibal might have reaped by such an enterprise, and by
the getting of Sicily, may easily be known by what Scipio got, who being to
pass with his Army into Africa, putting in at Sicily, he thereby got great
assistance and accommodation. And the Carthaginians themselves were aware, that
the War ought to have been handled thus: For after the death of Hier^, Lord of
Syracusa, they sent their Fleet to regain Sicily; but the counsel was too late
and unopportunely taken; for Fortune beginning now again to smile upon the
Romans, and the enterprise being undertaken with but weak Forces, they did
little else but raise Tumults, with more of loss to those that had rebelled
against the Romans, then any advantage to the Carthaginians. It seems likewise
that Hannibal, when he first endeavored to join in league with Philip King of
Macedon, whose strength by Sea was very great, and his jealousies of the Romans
likewise very great, as also his desire to secure himself therefrom, had laid a
better foundation for his designs, and might have had better success in his
endeavors against the Romans; which because out of vainglorious ambition he
would accelerate, he overthrew them.

Let us then bound Hannibals praises within straiter precincts, though his fame
sound very gloriously in the memory of all Ages, for the greatness of his
attempts, and his success therein at first; since that advantage cease which
might first have counseled him to the affairs of Italy: And let us only see
whether he may have purchased any true glory by his so great daring, and by the
readiness wherewith he buckled to battle. He who will weigh things with reason
and experience, will find that Wisdom ought to be of greater consideration in a
worthy Commander, then force of Arms. Which may be seen in Hannibal; for the
wisdom of Quintus Fabius did that against him with safety, which the War waged
with much loss, and more danger, by Flaminius and by Sempronius, and afterward
by Gaius Terentius, all of them Consuls, and Commanders of the Romans Armies,
could not do; who rashly hazarding the doubtful events of Battle, were overcome
by Hannibal, and brought the affairs of Rome to almost utter despair. The
praise then which is given to Hannibal, is great eagerness of mind against
dangers: which though of it self it may make him worthy some admiration, yet
such a virtue falls easily into vice, and in stead of Boldness, may be termed
Rashness. But if we will consider Hannibals Actions yet a little more narrowly,
we shall the better discover, that Hannibal having undertaken this War
unjustly, and violated the Articles made between the Carthaginians and the
Romans, he cannot deserve to be truly named valiant, the virtue of Valor not
consisting in the maintaining of an unjust Cause. And if Hannibal ought to
glory of his having routed the Romans, his glory will prove the less, since the
Captains whom he overcame were not so much cried up, and were of lesser
experience and worth then many other Romans, who never had to do in any great
enterprise; and that it was not his own worth, and the worth of his Soldiers
which made way to his Victories; more then did the ignorance, rashness, and
chiefly the discord of the Roman Commanders; to whom, through some unlucky
Star, it was the misfortune of the Commonwealth at that time to commit the
guidance and command of her Forces. But when he met with Fabius, Marcellus, or
Scipio, the face of affairs altered. And yet Hannibal ought to have believed he
should have met with these, or at least such as these, then with the others, or
such as them: For the Carthaginians had experienced much to their loss, in the
preceding War, what the worth of the Roman Commanders was. Hannibal might
likewise have considered, how hard it would be for him to vanquish so many
Cities, so many Roman Colonies, defended by Citizens who did partake of the
Roman name and vilor. But this was seen afterward by experience, when he first
began to undertake the taking in of Cities, and when entering into Umbrid* and
being encamped about Spoletum, he spent much time there to little purpose; and
finding how strong defense was made by a little Roman Colony, he saw how vain
his designs would be of stom^(...) City of Rome.

And though many of the chief Cities of Italy fell into his hands, this
happened through the renown of Victories which he had won; which working upon
many people who did accommodate themselves to the Victors fortune, they gave
themselves willingly over to the Carthaginians, and rebelled against the
vanquished Romans. But to besiege Cities required time, and time afforded means
to the Romans, who were at their own homes, to recruit their Forces, and
reduced Hannibal, who was a stranger, into many inconveniences and
necessities. Insomuch as it is a^^rmed by Writers, that when Hannibal had the
means of fighting afforded him (which he so much desired, but had little reason
to hope for) by Terentius the Consuls rashness, who was afterward routed and
overcome; his affairs were reduced to so great and desperate straits, as
manifest signs of revolting over to the enemies Camp were discovered, and in
himself a mind to save himself by flying away into Africa by Sea.

But let us take the end of War into consideration, which we will be better
able to judge by, then by its beginning: And though it is usually said, that
Event is the fools Schoolmaster, yet it often falls out, that things are known
by the event, which would never have been formerly thought upon; and the best
instruction is that which is learnt by experience. Hannibal, after having with
various and uncertain success, but with very great and certain dangers,
oftentimes tried the event of sundry Battles with the Romans, was constrained,
not so much out of obedience to the Carthaginian Senate, as out of necessity to
forgo Italy, and to lead the remainder of his Army, which was already very much
lessened, back into Africa, to relieve the City of Carthage, which was by
Scipio reduced into great danger; and with his like former boldness, though not
with the like prosperous success, come to a day of Battle with his enemy:
Wherein his Army being overthrown, and with that Army, which was the strength
of the Empire, all hopes lost of ever being able to make head against the
Romans, the War was finally ended upon new conditions, and by the agreement,
but in effect by the ultimate ruin of the Carthaginian Commonwealth: And
together with the loss of her Liberty, she was bereft of all her maritime
Forces; for amongst other grievous conditions, she was enjoined to burn all her
Ships, whereof she had great store; so desirous were the Romans to keep her
from attempting any novelty.

But how can we pass over these great actions, without reflecting upon the
wonderful variation of humane affairs, and without marvelling at the several
fortunes of these two powerful Nations? For the Carthaginians having as
Conquerors overrun all Italy, and bereft the Romans of almost all their Forces,
when it seemed as if their Commonwealth, following this her miraculous
prosperity, was in a short time to mount to a supreme greatness of Monarchy,
they fell from these high hopes into the extreme of misery, being bereft not
only of the gallantry of Command, but of Liberty. And on the other side, the
Romans, who having not many years before her Armies so notably defeated by
Hannibal, as they were glad to employ all their care about the safety of the
very City of Rome, did on such a sudden rise to such a height of reputation,
and power, as driving the Carthaginians out of Spain and having put the affairs
of Africa into great confusion, they forced them to recieve their Laws from the
Romans. This victory of the Romans was that which opened them the way to that
Monarchy, at which they afterward did in a few years arrive; for having
quelled the Carthaginians, and increased their own Power by the ruin of the
Forces and Dominion of others, there was not any other Potentate who could long
resist them. Other people seemed not to be ashamed to yield to them who had
conquered the Carthaginians, and made themselves Masters of their Commonwealth.
No truer, nor better reason can be (...) for this indeed so miraculous
diversity of condition and fortune which (...) two great and powerful
Commonwealths, then the excellency of Military Discipline, which was better
ordered, and understood by the Romans, then by the Carthaginians. For hence it
rose, that every Citizen being amongst the Romans employed in the Militia, they
had greater store of Commanders and Soldiers. So as though they were oftentimes
worsted by Hannibal, they could notwithstanding soon muster other Armies, and
get new Forces: Which the Carthaginians could not do; who having had a notable
rout at Zama, were totally oppressed, not being ever able to rally again, because
they had no other Soldiers nor Commanders under whose conduct they might hope
for better events. But when the Romans were overcome, they wanted not Fabius
Maximus, Marcellus, Claudius, Scipio, and many others, who behaved themselves
more fortunately in that War, and did better service the Commonwealth; and they
could easily send Recruits unto their Armies, and supply the places of such as
were slain in Battle, out of their own Citizens of Rome. Which was caused by
the committing of the Government of the War to their Consuls, which place of
Magistracy enduring but a year, occasion was offered to many other Citizens, to
get experience in military affairs, and all others were so obliged to the
Militia, as after the Carthaginian War was ended, they who had not served in
the Wars for the space of four years at the least, were by the Censors noted of
Infamy, and blotted out of the public Muster books. But the Carthaginians
having through the power of the Barchinian Faction, transferred the Supreme
Authority of administration of Arms, upon some few Citizens, as it was formerly
upon Hannibal, the Father to this man, and after him upon this Hannibal, and
his brother Asdrubal; when Asdrubal was slain in Italy, in the conflict which
he had with Claudius, and when Hannibal the Son was abandoned by his former
good Fortune, and by the reputation he had formerly gotten; and the
Commonwealth being also wonted to make use of mercinary Soldiers; the Army of
ancient Soldiers being lost in the Battle of Zama, they could not recruit it
with their own Citizens, nor withstand the blow of so dire a mischance. These,
and such like things may be argued, concerning this great action of Hannibals,
and these important successes of War; but rather out of probabilities, then any
certain demonstration. Yet these very considerations, may serve for useful
instructions in hard and difficult resolutions, to foresee what end is likely
to befall the undertaking of great Princes.

The Sixth DISCOURSE.
Whether it was well done by the Romans, to carry the War against the
Carthaginians, into Sicily and Spain, and into Macedonia and Greece, against
King Philip; whist Hannibal waged War with them in Italy.
AS amongst all the Wars made by the Romans, none was more long or troublesome,
then that which they made with the Carthaginians, especially when their
Commander Hannibal did flourish, so from hence chiefly may noble matter of
discourse, and useful Instructions for matters of State be gathered. Whilst
Hannibal was in Italy, which was for the space (...) Fourteen years, the Romans
made War notwithstanding in other Countries (...) Sicily, Spain and Africa
against the same Carthaginians; and against Philip King of Macedon in Greece.
But as War was made against them in Italy, so were they the first Authors of
these other Wars; which affords occasion of no small wonder to him who
considers, and does well weigh this their proceeding. One would think, that the
Romans being set upon at home by so powerful Enemies, as it was apparent that
their whole Forces were not able to resist, should not have resolved by
dividing the same Forces to make their defense weaker; since the main of all
their affairs depended upon the success of their Armies against Hannlbal, how
can it be thought a good advice, to hazard with part of their Forces the whole
Fortune of their Commonwealth? A thing which when forced by necessity, is
thought a great misfortune to the State wherein it happens. And when Italy
should be lost, as it was in great danger to be whilst Hannibal was there with
a puissant Army, to what purpose could any acquisition serve which should be
made in Spain or elsewhere, which must of necessity fall of it self? And with
what courage could the Romans fight in Foreign parts, when their own Country was
wasted with War, their houses, wealth, and all that they had exposed to utmost
danger? So as whilst fighting against Hannibal, and all their minds being
inflamed, not only out of a military obligation, and out of charity to their
Country, but out of the natural and powerful love which every man bears to his
own affairs, one man stood for many: So when abroad, the unquietness and doubt
of mind keeping them afflicted and in jealousy* by reason of the dubious case
wherein they left whatsoever was most dear unto them, would not permit many to
stand in fight for one. Who can praise the suffering of danger to increase at
home, out of hopes of purchasing abroad? Had the Romans Armies been in another
Country, and employed about other affairs, reason would have advised them to
have sent for them back into Italy, when they saw so powerful an Enemy upon
their backs. For, Vis unita fortior; Force when united is stronger, and better
able to keep what is harmful afar off, Thus we see it falls out by virtue of
mother Nature, in our bodies; when the Heart is ill at ease, all the spirits of
the body flock thither to defend it, as the most noble part, and whereupon life
it self depends.

Hannibal was a powerful Enemy, formidable for his excellent worth and military
discipline, and for the many Forces which he brought with him; and moreover
Italy was as it wereunarmed at this time, and wanted her valiantest Commanders,
and best Soldiers. What could the Carthaginians have more desired for Hannibals
prosperity, then to see the two Scipio's, Gnus and Publius, on whom only the
welfare of the Commonwealth; now so much in danger, did rest, sent into parts
afar off, so as they could not, in her very greatest extremity, return to
succor her? If Hannibal had had a mind to have lest Italy, was not this parting
of the Roman Forces, and the want of their best Commanders, a powerful reason
to make him stay? And what advice was it to provoke other Princes and People to
enmity, as must needs be done by sending Forces to molest Spain, whilst the
Commonwealth was in such trouble and danger, as she ought to have made friends
on all sides? By which they incensed that Nation, and drew other African
Princes upon their backs, who were Friends and Confederates with the
Carthaginians. And the increasing power of the Romans being formerly
apprehended by other People and Princes, the condition of those times should
have rather advised them to have cloaked such thoughts, and not to draw hatred
and envy upon them: For every one must needs hold, that if the Romans, being in
such calamity and danger, would vex other Countries with war, no Province would
have been free from their Forces when they should have been rid of Hannibal.
Which made the Romans cause worse, and Hannibals better, with those in Italy,
who did not much affect the so much greatness of the Commonwealth, and much
(...) foreign Nations. Wherefore the French, who first opposed Hannibal
whe^^^^^nt into Italy, did for these respects favor his brother Asdrubal
afterward, (...) he past with succor through their Country; nay, many of them
joined with his Camp, and follow the Carthaginian Colors in Italy, to maintain
the War with them. If the Romans did not know themselves to be sufficiently
able to withstand Hannibal in Italy, where they had all conveniences, and he
being a stranger wanted all, and could only come by them by force; what reason
could persuade them to maintain War in Spain at the same time? which War must
be as incommodious to them, as it was advantageous and convenient for their
Enemies; both for that that Province was at their devotion, for the neerness of
the City of Carthage, and for the accommodation the Sea afforded them, in
furnishing them with all things necessary to make War; which certainly may be
done better and more commodiously at home. Thus the Cimb^ians, after having
given many defeats to the Romans in Gallia, were by them overcome in Italy. War
is likewise made at home with less danger, out of the easiness of recruiting an
Army, when Battles prove unfortunate. Thus the Romans being oft-times worsted
by Hannibal, did maintain and raise up their abject fortune: And the Venetians
being assaulted at their own homes by those of Genoa, by reason of the
commodity they had of assembling all their Forces together, did not only
wi^hstand, but did overthrow the Assailants, who were gotten even into their
Washes, and were settled in the City of Chioggia.

But if we will then consider the particular condition wherein the Romans were
at that time, we shall find all their affairs in great disorder, and such as
did advise them rather to lessen then to increase new Expenses, by undertaking
new Wars. The public Treasury was sufficiently decreased by loss of the usual.
Rents of so many places which Hannibal was possessed of in Italy; for that what
they were masters of in Sardinia, was to cease paying usual and great
contributions; for that the people who were subject to the Romans, were so much
wearied with continual Wars, as they were hardly able to maintain those few
Soldiers which they had need of for their own defense, not in a case to furnish
other Armies with moneys, as Writers affirm. Others add, that the affairs of
the Romans were grown to so great a strait, by maintaining so many Armies so
long a time in several Countries, as that the Scipio's writing to the Senate,
that they could no longer maintain their Soldiers who were grown needful of all
things, the Commonwealth was fallen to beg aid from those who had gained much in
former times by public Impositions, so to provide out of private purses for
the paying and victualling of the Army: An example of much charity to their
Country, which was brought to so great a necessity; but withal of ill advice,
and but little wisdom in those who had brought it to that pass. The Romans
affairs were so weakened in Spain, as Gneus Scipio, contrary to the custom of
the Romans, was forced to make use of many Soldiers of that Nation to recruit
his Army: which though the deceit of those Barbarians, was the cause why he
received a notable Defeat, wherein he himself likewise lost his life.

It might at first peradventure be thought an useful advice to assault the
Car^haginian States, so to remove Hannibal by diversion from Italy. But since
experience proved the contrary, how can the increasing of danger at home, to
carry it abroad, be praised? 'Twas already eight years that Gneus Scipio had
made War in Spain, and Marcellus had labored long with various successes in
Sicily, when Hannibal was notwithstanding still so powerful in Italy, as
marching with his whole Army from Capua, he went to assault the very City of
Rome, where all things were full of tumult and confusion: And had not the
Romans had good fortune by the great store of rain and water, which falling
from the skies, retarded the first assault of Hannibal, all the ho^^^ of so
flourishing a Commonwealth had been disparch'd. Who then in such (...)ity of
danger, in which with great uncertainty of success the Walls and Gate^ of Rome
herself were guarded, did not wish that Marcellus, the two Scipio's, and the
rest that were at war in Sicily, and in Spain, had been there present, who if
the City of Rome should be lost, must be made a prey unto the enemy? The very
fame and honor of such a Victory being sufficient to make all that the Romans
in so long process of time had taken from the Carthaginians, return to their
former obedience.

On the other side, if so many Commanders and Roman Soldiers, wasted in wars so
far off, had been all joined together in Italy, how could Hannibal have so long
withstood so great a power? The first onset of the Carthaginian Army was great,
when it advanced so far, as the fortune of the Romans began to give back, and
the Romans to confess themselves overcome, having had many great routs. But
when Fortune began to face about, and the worth of the Carthaginian Soldiers
began to flag, who were deboished with the delights of Capna, (which was the
cause why Hannibal tarried long in Italy without doing any thing of note)
reason tells us that if he had been assailed by so many Roman Commanders and
Soldiers, he must have been forced to have left Italy. And he being gone, and
the danger removed to further distance from home, the Romans having a valiant,
and an expert Militia, and having won great reputation by this Victory, the
other enterprises which they should have afterward have undertaken either
against others, or against the Carthaginians themselves at their own homes,
would have proved more easy, and more certain: And experience proves clearly,
that the Affairs of Italy would have given the Law to all other proceedings;
and that upon the success thereof the whole War did depend; for the Romans
could never drive the Carthaginians totally out of Spain, till the rout given
to Asdrubal, Brother to Hannibal, by the Consul Claudius, by which the power
and fortune of the Carthaginians growing less in Italy, they fared alike in
Spain.

But the War undertaken by the Romans, against ^hilip King of Macedon, at the
same time when Italy was all on fire with the Carthag^nian War, may
peradventure be thought a business of greater importance. For Philip was a
great Prince; and might easily have troubled the Romans affairs, by reason of
the neighborhood of Greece, whose people were his friends and confederates. And
though Philip had showed himself not to be very well affected to the
Commonwealth of Rome, since he had first sent his Ambassadors to Hannibal, to
treat of joining with him in confederacy against the Romans, and had afterward
set upon, and taken the (itics of Apolonia, and Orico, that he might have, (as
it was suspected) the better opportunity to offend the Romans; yet the present
condition of Affairs seemed rather to advise them, to dissemble their injuries
and suspicions, then by unimportunely revenging the one and assertaining the
other, put their affairs in greater danger, and make him a certain and open
Enemy* who was as yet concealed and doubtful. And time might have opened the
way unto them to have made him their friend, and to have brought him into their
parts; which it was formerly known he had mind enough unto of himself; but
being put in fear and jealousy of his own affairs by Hannibals so great
prosperity, he was diverted from it. And counsels which bring certain mischiess
with them, ought not to be undertaken out of hope of evading another evil which
is further off, and uncertain, when he who uses it is in so weak and dangerous
a condition, as the addition of any new inconvenience how little soever, is
sufficient to ruin him: and this was the condition of the affairs of Rome at
that time. Yet it may be said that the very Authority of the Romans name was a
thing of great moment, and so much the greater as the event approved of their
counsel. For Hannibal could not have been drawn out of Italy, but by troubling
the affairs of Africa, and by putting the Car^^^nians into the same hazard and
dangers, as they had endeavored to put the (...) to. They considered then, that
Hannibal having showed such constancy, and worth in leading so numerous an
Army, consisting of diverse Nations into Italy, and having found that Fortune
(according as is usually said) favored his boldness, their chief hopes of
overcoming him lay in making him be his own ruin, and suffering his Army to
moulder away through harpships. And this manner of warfaring, used by Fabius
Maximus had saved, and restored the Commonwealth, which the different opinion
on of other Commanders, by hazarding themselves upon the fortune of a Battle,
had almost quite undone. Now to compass this, it was necessary to keep the
Carthaginian Forces so employed abroad by diversion, as they could not relieve
Hannibal in Italy: For if so, many of the Carthaginian Armies might have passed
safely into Italy, as the Scipio's did defeat in Spain, they would have so
overflown Italy, as there could have been no escape for the affairs of Rome.
This very advice was followed by the Venetians, when they had their Enemies at
their own own homes, and were in the same danger and disorder by reasou of the
rout given them by the Genuses, as the City of Rome was in, after the defeat at
Cannae. For they joined in confederacy with Barnaby Vis Coute, Duke of Millan,
and making a great Effort, sent many Soldiers against the City of Genua, and
did so molest their affairs by Land, as they kept off those succors, which
otherwise would have been sent to their men who had taken the City of Chioggia,
who missing of supplies, and being fought withal, and besieged by the Venetian
Forces, of Conquerors became conquered, and fell into the hands of the
Venetians.

Moreover the Romans considered, that in the Wars which they made in Sicily and
in Spain, they had this great advantage that they fought not with Honnibal, a
Captain of singular and unparalleld valor. It was likewise held, that the Roman
Commanders and Armies, might more securely make, trial of their worth and
fortune, in Wars made out of Italy, as they had oftentimes done; for when they
had any loss abroad, they lost nothing but those men which the fortune of War
bereft them of; but if they should overcome, they got the Enemies Country; just
as it befell them in Spain. Wherefore it being disadvantagious for them to fight
in Italy, it proved the better advice to temporize with Hannibal in Italy, and
at the same time to fight with Mago Asdrubal, and other Carthaginian Commanders
in Sicily, and in Spain. So as the losses in Italy were recompeased by
acqusitions made in Spain, the which of all other Countries, was the first that
was reduced into a Province, and did much enlarge the Confines of the Roman
Empire. But if the Sea had been open for the Carthaginians, as it would have
been if the Romans neglecting their Fleet, had not provided for the affairs of
Sicily, Hannibal might easily have been furnished with things necessary from
the Carthaginians, wherewith to reinforce his Army: So as no part of Italy
should have been free from his forces, who unassisted or succored, could
notwithstanding keep his Army so long together, and attempt so many
enterprises; they therefore thought they had done enough, in entertaining
Asdrubal, a Captain of great authority and valor, so as he could not (as they
knew his design was) pass with a new Army into Italy, to join with Hannibal, as
he did after the Scipio's death, and after the rebellion of many of the Spanish
Cities, the Carthaginians being moved to do their utmost, since they had lost
Syracusa and Cap^a, which were both of them fallen into the Romans power. So as
no assistance being given unto Hannibal, all the labor was lost which he had so
many years undergone in Italy. On the contrary, the Romans persevering in their
first opinion, when the two Scipio's were dead, sent P^blius Scipio into Spain
to keep Asdrubal from making his passage, diverting the Forces which were to
pass over with him into Italy, by keeping the Carthaginians molested at home:
It follows not therefore by a general rule, that what was good for one of the
enemies, must be hurtful for the other; so as it were good for the
Carthaginians to wage War in Italy, far from their own homes, this very same
thing must be harmful for the Romans. But since they could not be the first
Assailant, Hannibal having fallen upon them with such violence, it was reason,
that the Romans taking the same course, should assault the Carthaginians
Territories. We read also, that the same Hannibal, being still of the same
opinion which once he was, being with Autiochus in the time of his Exile,
whilst he was treating of making War against the Romans, he persuaded him to
pass over as soon as he could, and with as great a strength as he could put
together, into Italy; affirming that all other enterprises would be to no
purpose, whilst Italy was at peace and quiet, and that the Romans had means to
maintain War abroad.

This very same thing, for the same respects diversely considered, ought to have
instructed the Roman Commanders and Senators in the Carthaginian war; to wit,
that they were not to suffer their Enemies to rest quiet at home, so as ^ree
from all thoughts of defending themselves, they might the better turn all their
Forces upon Italy, and the very City of Rome. And if they had taken that
resolution at first, which they did afterward by the advice of Publius Scipio,
(who from the conquering of Africa, took the name of African) to wage War with
the Carthaginians nearer their own home, they might peradventure have freed
Italy sooner from the so many troubles and dangers which she underwent by
Hannibals long abode. But it may be moreover said, that many other things did
force, or at least persuade the Romans to undertake these Wars. Sardinia was
first assaulted by the Carthaginians with those very Forces which were destined
for Italy to relieve Hannibal; so as it behoved the Romans to march with their
Armies thither, not only to maintain and defend that Island, which was of such
importance to the Commonwealth, but for that they therein defended the welfare
of Italy, by keeping so many Warriers afar off, who if they were free, were
ready to assault her. And this advice proved very fortunate; for Quintus Fabius
gave so notable a Rout to the Carthaginians in Sardinia, as they lost about
Forty thousand of their Soldiers. The death of Hiere the Tyrant of Siracusa,
occasioned the War made in Sicily, and the great commotions of that Island, by
which it was comprehended, that if these their designs had not been hindered by
the Romans, that great and famous City would have fallen into the power of the
Carthaginians, to the great prejudice of the Romans, who for the same reason
(being assisted by the Mamertines) undertook the first Carthaginian War;
judging that if the Carthaginians should be absolute Masters of Sicily, it
would be a step to pass into Italy. But this would have been the more
incommodious at this time, for that by reason of the so many places which
Hannibal had taken in Italy, they might have had a more easy and secure
receptacle there. Moreover, the Romans were invited to make War with the
Carthaginians in Spain, and to divert their Forces, by reason that they
understood how that Province was but ill satisfied with the Carthaginian
government, and that it was well inclined to the Romans; which did much
facilitate those enterprises which were boldly undertaken, and fortunately
achieved. The City of Saguntum was also the first rise of these Wars in Spain;
which they thought it did not become the generosity of Rome to leave in the
power of the Carthaginians; so as upon any other good success, they might seem
to have lost the chief cause in this contest: Neither did they notwithstanding
take Saguntum till after eight years War in Spain, when the other affairs of
Rome began to prosper very much; as if the City which was the beginning of so
many Wars, had been reserved to be the end thereof.

These and other such like reasons may be alleged for the War undertaken
against the Carthaginians; but that which they made against Philip may be said
to be caused rather by necessity then choice: For Philip, for his part, being
already resolved to follow Hannibals fortune, and expecting large recompense,
had sent his Ambassadors several times formerly to him, to conclude a
confederacy with him: wherefore the Romans thinking it better to prevent the
Enemy, then to be by them prevented, fell suddenly upon him with their whole
Fleet and Army, hoping to suppress him, though they did not wholly effect their
design. But they continued their War against him afterward in Greece, incited
by the commotions already raised in that Province by the Italians; knowing that
unless they should interpose themselves, Greece must either fall into Philips
hands, whereby the power of a People that were Enemies to the Romans, and
already very formidable of themselves, would be greatly increased; or else they
must have recourse to the assistance of King Attalus, as the Grecians had
already protested to the Romans, and so they must suffer the neighborhood of
another King, who was already powerful in Asia, and might at another time
trouble the affairs of Rome. And the wisdom of the Romans was always such, as
not being cast down by any adversity, they never seemed so much to apprehend
present dangers, but that they had an eye to those which might ensue, and in
time grow greater. And this peradventure was that which did prove the Romans
power and worth more then any thing else; since, when as they were as yet but
masters of a small State, and that their affairs were reduced into great
difficulties, both by their so many bad successes in battle against Hannibal,
and by the risings of their Friends and Confederates, yet they resolved to
maintain War at one and the same time in four several Countries, to wit, in
Italy, Sicily, Spain, and Greece; and they were able to manage them all. And
certainly such advice was no less useful then generous: For he who should
overcome the Romans in any one place, could not hope quite to subdue them,
since they had other Armies and valiant Commanders who might make good their
fortune, and raise it up again.

So as things formerly alleged for arguments to asperse this their
resolution, may peradventure be allowed of in such States, and amongst such
Princes, where there is not that worth, discipline, or power as was amongst the
Romans; but in them, or such as they, they are of no force; and very
Experience, by the issue of those Wars, seems to confirm and approve of the
Counsels by which they were undertaken.

The Seventh DISCOURSE.
Whether the def^ruction of Carthage was the rise of the ruin of the Roman
Republic
CArthage, a glorious and famous City, both for the command she had in Africa
and Spain and for being long Rival in glory with the Commonwealth of Rome,
being at last to yield either to the great worth or happy genius of the Romans,
was not notwithstanding made tribu^ary to Rome, but was burnt and destroyed
even to the ground. The Carthaginians were often times overcome in battle by the
Romans; and had severe Laws imposed upon them; yet were those undaunted fierce
minds never well quelled, but beginning to heighten their hopes and augment
their Forces, after the second Carthaginian war, they molested those that were
friends to the Romans, and contrary to their Articles, began to sail upon the
Sea with Men of War. These things being therefore treated of in the Senate of
Rome, caused variety of opinions: Some were for the total ruining of the City
of Carthage, since otherwise the Commonwealth of Rome could not be free from
their injuries and molestations; and Cato was very ^tiff of his opinion, who
bringing some fresh Figs which were gathered in Carthage, showed what dangers
they were always subject unto by reason of their Enemies neigborhood.

But others endeavoring the contrary, sought to prove that totally to
extinguish the Carthaginians was no good advice; and Scipio Nas^ica, a man of
great authority, was greatly averse to this resolution, being thereunto moved
(as he said) not through any pity to the conquered enemy, but for the
advantage of his own Citizens, who when they should be free from the fear of
the Carthaginian Forces, would suffer many evils through Idleness. So as it was
the common saying, and opinion, that the destruction of the Carthaginians would
hasten on the ruin of Rome. And Salust in the beginning of his History of
Catilines Conspiracy, describing the abusive customs of the City of Rome at
that time, seems to be of opinion, that the overthrow of Carthage did more harm
to the Commonwealth, by introducing idleness and pleasure, then the keeping of
her flourishing and in arms, would have done. Yet there were other
considerations which did thwart this opinion, showing that it was not peace and
idleness, but the continually being verst in Arms and War, which was the true
cause of the Civil discords, and change of Government in Rome. This it was
which fomented ambition in the Citizens, this it was that did too immensely
increase their power. Finally, it was this that divided the City, and through
discord brought it to utter ruin. And how can it be said that the City of Rome
was ruined by Peace since she never tasted thereof? Insomuch as for the space
of Six hundred eighty five years, that famous Temple dedicated to Ianus by Numa
Pompillius, that it might stand open in time of War, and shut in time of Peace,
was only twice seen to be shut; once in the Consulship of Titus Manlius, after
the end of the first Carthaginian War, and once more in Augustus his time,
after the Naval Victory over Mark Anthony. Thus were the Romans, and chiefly
the most valiant amongst them, great enemies to Peace; not so much endeavoring
to procure greater strength to the Public Empire, as to increase their own
glory and power. Therefore one War was made to beger another, no time being
ever to be found wherein the City was to enjoy, honest and civil leisure. And
Provinces, and the authority of administering War, was often times confirmed to
those who commanded their Armies, who either desired to continue in their
command, or occasion requiring it to be so, that they might put an end the Wars
begun: As it fell out in the second Carthaginian War; where the time of
tarrying in that Province, and the continuing of his command was prolonged to
the Consul Scipio, who waged War in Spain, to the end that he might finish what
he had begun.

The like was done to Fabus in the Wars which he made against Hannibal in
Italy, and upon other occasions; a thing which being done contrary to the rule
of Law, though it made somewhat for the Public advantage at the present, yet
was it cause of great disorders afterward. Thus Marius whilst he was abroad in
the Ju^urthan War, was created Consul, and made chief Commander against the
Cimbrians, though he ought not in his absence, and in time of contumacy, to
have been chosen to that Magistracy. Caesar, after having commanded the Roman
Armies five years, when he was sent to wage War in France, had his place of
command cont nued unto him for five years longer; and not herewithal content,
but being accustomed to rule, he asked leave of the Senate to keep abroad, and
to continue in the Army; which when the Senate would not give way unto, they
too late opposed his desire, he being grown so powerful, by reason of his
continuation in military command, as he valued not the Senates Authority, nor
the being declared an enemy to the Commonwealth. But if we will consider the
beginning of Civil Discords, how, and where the siding began, which insected
the minds of the Citizens with pestiferous corruption, we shall find that this
happened not in time of Peace in Cities, or by reason of Civil Affairs; but in
the Camp amongst Weapons, and when the Commonwealth was bufied in weighty Wars.
For Marius being drunk with the desire of military glory, and not being able to
endure that it should be taken from him, or diminished by Sylla, as he imagined
it might happen by reason of Syllas happy success in the Jugurthan War, wherein
having taken Iugu^tha alive, he had the glory to have put an end to that War;
He began to think of establshing yet more greatness in himself, by making many
of the Order of Cavaliers, and of the people partial to him, and impudently
corrupting the Citizens, first with moneys, and afterward with open force of
Arms; making the Magistracy and command of the war be conferred and resolved
upon in him, as he did in the Consulship, and Proconsulship against
Mithridates. The Nobility being afrighted at this man's greatness, by reason of
his authority and reputation with the Soldiers, they mightily increased Sylla's
power, who was an enemy to Marius; till at last they came to taking up Arms and
shedding of civil blood. But who knows not that Caesar, moved thereunto more
out of a desire of his own greatness, then out of his alliance with Marius,
raised and maintained his Fraction in Rome; and that his power increased not in
Peace, and in the Marketplace, but in War, and in the Camp? So for the same
reason for which Sylla was advanced a little before, it behoved the Senate to
confer more greatness upon Pompey then became the condition of civil
Government; so as the whole City was divided; and with those arms, by which,
though taken up, and made use of against enemies, the first occasion of
contention among private Citizens was given, the very Commonwealth must be
wounded, which stood in the midst between them, so as her vit^l spirit of
liberty being taken away, her throat was cut by those whom she had most
favored. But whence did the so many other corruptions of those times arise,
save from the so many prosperous successes of war, by which the Citizens being
much enriched and made proud, could not betake themselves to live
parcimoniously, and with civil equality? And it is said of Caesar, that he
corrupted the people of Rome by moneys which he had got in the War, so to make
them confer places of Magistracy as he listed, upon such as were his friends,
and partial to him. Out of these respects the wise Legislator, Lycurgus,
intending to lay the foundation of a long lasting Government in Sparta, though
he introduced Military exercises, to the end that the Citizens might be able to
defend their Country; yet he ordered the City so, as it could not much increase
its power by any Forgein War. But the Commonwealth of Rome not being ordered
for peace, could never find out, not enjoy a peaceful condition.

How is it then given out, that peace and idleness was the ruin of that City?
How should she believe that her Arms should remain idle, if she would have the
whole world for her enemy, as Mari^ said to Mithidates; that who would not
recieve Law from the Romans, must make themselves more powerful then they? So
as the counsel which Scipio gave to his Romans of not utterly destroying
Carthage, might be good in another respect, for the preservation thereof might
increase that glory to their Commonwealth, which many of her valiant Citizens
seemed greatly desirous of, to wit, to have easily pardoned their enemies, when
they should have humbled themselves; as the Carthaginians had then done,
having not only with great humility begged peace of the Senate by their
Ambassadors, but given many of their chief Citizens for hostages to Scipio, and
great store of Arms, to secure the Romans that they would keep their Articles.
And truly the destruction of that noble City, did differ from the usual
generosity of the Romans, who had wont, after Victory, to gr^^t the Cities and
Kingdoms to those very enemies with whom they had fought, making both King and
People in all parts or Tribu^ory, or Confederate to the Senate and People of
Rome. But I see no reason at all why they should forbear the rooting out of
these the Romans ancient enemies, for fear lest they should be undone with
idleness, and that civil discords should thereupon ensue. How many years were
there between the second and third Carthaginian war? and yet when was the
Commonwealth of Rome free from Foreign war, though these her Enemies did not
appear to be so? The last Carthaginian war being hardly ended, did not they
wage war in Spain with the Numantines for the space of fourteen years? And yet
in these times the bounds of the Roman Empire may be said to have been very
narrow, in respect of what they were afterward. France, which then was
Mistress of more Provinces then now she is, was not as yet subdued; nay, the
difficulty and length of that War bringing along with it the prorogation of
Command, since Caesar commanded the Armies for ten years together, did much
increase those disorders which did at last prove the ruin of the Commonwealth.
But how much did Pompey enlarge the bounds of the Roman Empire in Asia? over
how many conquered Kings and Provinces did he triumph? Armenia, Cappadocia,
Media, Iberia, Syria, Arabia, Phaenicia, and other Nations were reduced under
the Romans power by this sole Commander. It will seem strange, and yet it is
related by authentical Writers, that nine hundred Cities were made subject and
tributary to the Roman Empire by Pompey, and almost as many more by Caesar: And
he who will consider it well, shall find that the Roman Commanders did flourish
most, and were most cried up, after the destruction of Carthage. Rome wanted
then neither means nor will to exercise her Arms: not to mention so many Wars,
which were all of them famous, if not for the greatness of acquisition, at
least for other weighty accidents; and if not for their strength, yet for the
wisdom of the Enemy: That of Tigranes, Mithridates, Iugurth, and so many
others, where the then almost lost name of the Carthaginians did not concur.

But if it had proved true, that the Commonwealth of Rome, when Carthage should
be destroyed, should have remained in idleness, so harmful to her liberty, if
Scipio's counsel had proved successful, and those evils had been taken away
which be feared would befall the Commonwealth, Carthage was not only not to
have been undone, but her power should have been suffered to increase; for it
is seen by what has been said, that War of it self was not able to keep the
Citizens united, but was rather that which did divide them. But this
peradventure might have been done by War wherein their own defense had been
only conceined, and the keeping of themselves from danger: And yet it is an
absurd thing to say, that an Enemy must be preserved, and men must be
continually in trouble and danger of War, for the conservation of a City. But
say, I beseech you, was th^re not forty three years between the first and
second Carthaginian war? And yet though Rome was free from dangers, and from
being troubled by the Carthaginians, nay, for some years every where more quiet
then she ever was at any other time, yet fell she not upon those great
mischiefs of civil contentions, which she afterward incurred in the greatest
heat of her ^orest Wars. This was occasioned, because the City was not as yet
corrupted, as it was afterward, because it grew old, and because there was not
any that knew by correcting her disorders to return her to her first
principles. What danger can ensue unto, or can harm the common liberty or
authority of Citizens either in War or in Peace, whilst the Laws are observed?
And when the Laws are trampled under foot, what State can be free from the
snares of the Enemy? The Spartan Kings had not supreme authority in War; but
War being governed by good Laws, could never injure them. Power entrusted in
Citizens with due measure and temper, was never prejudicial: And behold an
example thereof. On the one side, Agesilam King of Sparta, being Commander in
chief of the Army against Far^^bassus, and being entered Asia with great hopes
of signal victories; when he was called home by the Magistracy of the Ephori,
readily obeyed. On the other side, Caesar, being already returned into Italy
from the French enterprise, will, contrary to the will of the Senate, keep the
Army together, and despises the authority thereof, Cato's counsel of
destroying Carthage might then have proved good, not of it self, but when the
Romans, being safe for these Enemies, and settled in a condition of not being to
fear any Foreign forces, could have ordered unto themselves a firm and quiet
Civil State.

It was known by experience, that the other agreement made with the
Carthaginians had done but little good: For they keeping still the same mind,
though not the same fortune, did not let slip any occasion of throwing off the
yoke of slavery which the Romans had put upon them. So as the only means to
rest secure from their Forces, since their words were not to be trusted, was to
put them out of their ancient nest, and to make them live far from the Sea, as
they were commanded to do after that their Country was destroyed, so to bereave
them of the opportunity of the Sea, by means whereof that Commonwealth was
grown great and powerful. But wherein was the quiet of Rome bettered by the
ruin of Carthage, if they would have to do with more barbarous Nations, and
Nations further off, not moved thereunto through fear, nor provoked by any
injury, thinking their Empire was only to be bounded by the Confines of the
Earth? What had the Parthians of common with the Commonwealth of Rome? what
injury had they then done her, to make the Romans take up arms against them?
yet Crassus had a mind to find them out in those far distant parts, whereby to
draw upon himself and the Roman Armies so many great losses and ruins as they
were to undergo in that War. The overthrow of Carthage should peradventure have
taken from the Citizens of Rome their desire of continual warfaring, as it took
from them the occasion of being in Arms; but it did not so; for the cause which
produced and nourished these thoughts, was internal, not external. So as they
were not provoked to Arms, but did rather provoke others; and when they fought
not for the welfare, they fought for the glory of the Empire: For all the
Orders of that City consisted only in the exercise of the Militia. But how
could a City be long preserved, which was wholly bent upon those things which
were the means to bring her to her end? how could she enjoy true civil
felicity, if she knew not what it was, and did not value it, but did abhor that
peace and quiet which begers civil felicity?

Therefore if that Commonwealth had been well instituted in civil Orders, and
that when Carthage was destroyed, she had known (which she did not) how to lay
down Arms, this had been the way to bring her to much good, nay, to the true
and chief good of civil felicity, not to the ruin and perdition thereof. So as
if Scipio doubted that the introducing of Idleness into Rome might bring with
it such notable disadvantage, it was perhaps, because knowing the imperfections
of that Government, he feared not that Idleness which the laying down of Arms
is wont to produce, but that which is born, and does increase with the corrupt
customs of Cities, by which contrary, but wholly pestiferous effects are begot
en; as the making of some Citizens love pleasures, and hate labor and toil; and
others strangely proud, lovers of brawls and novelty. The Athenians endeavoring
to banish this sort of Idleness from out their City, committed the care thereof
to the chief and most severe Magistrate, called Areopagus. But that true and
virtuous Quiet which is opposed unto Toil, and which as a thing to be desired
ought to be sought for in a City, does not banish, but does nourish true
generosity of mind, which makes men willingly enter, when need requires, into
the dangers of War, for honesty sake, and for the defense of their Country, not
out of ambition and desire of self-greatness: And to free the City from the
fear of her powerful and bitter enemies, the Carthaginians, was not contrary to
this. So as I may conclude, That it was not the destruction of Carthage, but
the ill Government of Rome, which wrought her ruin.

The Eighth DISCOURSE.
Why Rome could not regain her Liberty after the death of Julius Caesar, as she
had formerly done, by driving the Tarquins first out, and then Appius Claudius
and the other Decemviri.
MAny do not without reason wonder, why the City of Rome, which after having
droven the Tarquins out, who had reigned for above Two hundred and forty years:
And which having afterward made App^us Clandius, and the other Decemvirl lay
down their Magistracy, who usurp^d Tyranny, could put her self into a free
condition; why I say she could not do the like when Brutus, and Cassius had
slain Julius Casar: when it appears they ought rather to have done so now; the
people being more numerous and powerful, and the City in such greatness, as the
liberty, nay rather power which the people had in ordering that Commonwealth,
ought to have been more esteemed and held dear. To this may be added, that in
the time of Kings the very name of Liberty was not well known, much less was
the good thereof enjoyed; Wherefore a good which they had not known ought to
have been of less power with them: And in the Government of Kings the City had
been so successful, as it seemed she might run a hazard by choosing a new form
of Government, which she had not formerly experienced. And in the time of the
Decemviri the affairs of Rome were also in a very weak condition; nor ought the
Liberty, or command of that City be reputed a thing of such moment as it became
afterward by the wonderful felicity by which she marched to the height of all
Glory and Greatness. Besides, the Government of Ten, retained a certain show of
a Commonwealth; and many being therein interessed, she seemed to have thereby
also a better ground for her subsistence; Whereas in Caesar's time, he having
reduced the main of all affairs into himself, and begun to accept of the Title
and Honors of a King, all Form of a Commonwealth and of Liberty was lost; and
he having maintained himself in that degree only by his own Greatness, and in
a City so full of Nobility at that time, and of so many generously minded men,
his Principality must of necessity be the weaker, and easilier to be
eradicated; which when it should fall, it seemed that the former Government of
Commonwealth must of it self rise up again. These and other such like reasons,
afford occasion of seeking into the cause why contrary effects were seen to
ensue.

We will herein consider first, what the customs of the City of Rome were in
each of these times; and what effects were prevalent in the peoples minds, men
not being accustomed to embrace such things as are truly useful, but often such
as by the predominate affection are held to be so. Whilst the City was in an
humble condition, and that her Citizens were not begun to be corrupted by an
immoderate ambition of Governing, there was no siding nor partaking studied
amongst them, which crept on by little and little, and did so contaminate all
orders, as it reduced the Commonwealth to such weakness, as wanting strength to
rule her self, she must fall, and being once down could not rise up again. This
corruption began amongst the Soldiers, in whom the Commanders did permit such
unbridled licentiousness, to the end that they might dispose of them as they
listed to oppres their particular enemies, and sometimes against the very
Commonwealth: As Sylla did to lessen Marius his power, and Marins no less to
counterprize Sylla by the same means, things growing into such disorder, as he
made the servants of the Commonwealth to take up arms against his enemies the
Syllania^s; and this authority did so continue in great Citizens, and in the
Commanders of Armies, as it seemed a wonder, that Pompey the Great, who had
exceeded all others in Glory and Power, after his return into Italy, having
prosperously ended his enterprise against Mithridates, should be content to
quit the Army, when every one feared that he would enter Rome therewithal, and
do even then with Rome as Caesar did not long after, assume unto himself the
chief Government of all public affairs: So great was the disorder, and so
little was the Authority either of Laws or Senate esteemed. But his Design, who
plotted tyranny in the succeeding time, prospered the better, for that this
corruption which was first entered into the Soldiers, was past into the
Nobility, and spread every day abroad amongst the people: For those who had
been Generals of the great Enterprises of War, being grown exceeding rich, did
several ways purchase the popular votes, turning and winding them as they
liked best, to the end that the places of Magistracy might be conferred on
them, or upon their Friends and Adherents. Neither was the very Senate free
from this contagion, but being long before accustomed not to be at their own
command, but to depend upon the power of those who were of supreme Authority in
the Armies, they fell headlong into the same errors into which the people were
fallen, manifestly adhering by way of Faction, not by any civil favor, to
particular Citizens who headed parties, and the authors of novelties; which was
at first done with some appearance of honesty, to maintain the Commonwealth,
and to defend Liberty against those who had been too immoderately exalted by
the peoples favor, to the injury of other more deserving Citizens, and to the
prejudice of Liberty. But in the process of time and affairs, those who had
taken up Arms in behalf of the Commonwealth, proved no less burthensom, much
power thereby increasing in one particular person, then those themselves
against whom Arms were taken up. For an immoderate desire of increasing in
power and wealth, began to possess the souls of many who were already
accustomed to rule longer, and with greater authority, then was sitting to be
done in a Civil Government. So as all things were put into great confusion; and
now, not those who were worthy and valiant, but those who were most bold, and
insolent found places of greatest honor in the Commonwealth. Hence it was, that
it being observed that those who had adhered to Sylla's party (when his
Adversary being overcome, he was become almost the sole Arbitrator of all
things) had often gotten great riches, and preferments in reward of their
wicked actions, the wealth of those who were proscribed by Sylla being given to
these, and such being easily proscribed at his Favorites pleasure, whom they
would rob of their Palaces or of what they valued most: Many allured by hope of
getting better things, and more easily then they could have done in a
well-governed Commonwealth* loved confusion, and favored the Government of one
alone, thinking that they might obtain Honors, and many other favors, which are
usually bestowed freely upon such as are partial to them, by those, who will
preserve themselves in height of Power.

Hence then it arose that Brutus and Cassi^s, the murderers of Caesar, were not
so backed, nor met not with that general approbation from the City, to uphold
their fact, and the common Liberty, as Iunius Brutus and Virginius did, when
they raised* the people to free themselves from the Tyranny of the Tarqui^s,
and of the Decemviri: The latter had recourse unto the Camp, and kindled a
servent desire in the Soldiers to vindicate the injuries, and msolencies used
by the Tarqui^s and by Appi^s: But what favor could Bru^^i and Cassius expect
from the Soldiers, themselves being contaminated, and more desirous to preserve
the chief command in one only person, that they might keep the power in
themselves, then to remit the Commonwealth into Liberty, whereby their uncurb'd
licentionsness was to be corrected? Therefore as soon as Octavius, the adopted
son of Julius, and who afterward took upon him the name of Octavius Caesar,
and of Augustus, returned after Caesar's death into Italy, he was freely
accepted by the Army, he being well beloved by the Soldiery, out of memory to
Julius Caesar, and out of hopes that if he should succeed him in power, they
might share in the same favors and privileges. But Brutus and Cassius were
compelled to gather together sufficient Forces to defend themselves, to have
recourse for help to Foreign Princes, and with their Soldiers to fill those
Armies, which were to defend the Liberty of Rome. So much were the Customs of
the City altered in those times, and those generous Roman spirits extinguished,
who for a long time had loved the name of Liberty more then any other thing,
and then any other Nation. And though the fact committed by Caesar's Murderers
was approved of by the Senate, yet there were many chief men, and of great
authority, who being Caesar's friends, and depending upon him, did much de^est
it; amongst whom were Marcus Antonius, and Lepidus, Caesar's intimate friends,
who did openly and powerfully maintain, that Br^tus and Cassius were to be
pursued by the public Arms, as Enemies to the Commonwealth, and that Caesar's
death should be revenged.

This diversity of inclination in the People, and in the Senate toward the
former and these latter Vindicators of the Liberty of Rome, to boot with the
diversity of Customs by which the City was swayed at these several times, were
much furthered by the differing conditions of the persons interessed: For the
name of the Tarquins was become hateful to all the common people of Rome, not
only because they kept them always busied in laboring their own grounds, but
because they were become hateful to all people by reason of their haughty
carriage; so as they had no Fautors who did desire or endeavor their return to
Rome, but some few young Noblemen who were well pleased with that former
Government, by reason of their intimacie with the Kings sons, which secured
their insolences. But these were not of themselves of any authority to disturb
the peace and common liberty; and those in whom the public authority did
reside, were so well disposed toward the good of their Country, and so
uncontaminable by any other affection, as Brutus condemned two of his sons to
suffer death, because they were of the number of those who had conspired in
favor of the Kings sons. And in the time of the Decemviri, Appius was not held
to be proud, but cruel; and yet not so really, but in appearance, which by the
common people is held to be as bad: For he had ordered many Lictors to walk
always before him and his Colleagues, with many Fasces in their hands; and
having afterward taken away Appeals, he seemed in all his actions to aim at
Tyranny, which is always injurious to the People. So as it is no wonder if they
did not afterward resent that such men should be removed from Government
wherein they had behaved themselves so ill, and did desire to return under the
Government of Consuls and other Magistracies.

To this may be added, that the People had then almost the same authority which
some particular Citizens did afterward usurp, and did go about to obtain all
unjust things from the Senate by sedition, as these did in the ensuing times by
force of arms. So as no such way being opened in the first State of the City,
the People knew that when the Decemviri should be driven away, they might
obtain many things of favor to themselves, as indeed they did. For, Appeals
were not only again allowed of, but much amplified, and the Tribunes of the
People were declared to be Sacrosancti. But Caesar, using therein either his
natural endowments and worth, or some wonderful cunning, had wrought himself
into much favor with the People, by his humanity, magnificence, liberality, by
his familiarity with all men, by easily pardoning offenses, making of noble and
frequent Shows, by his sump^uous and costly Feasts, and by his rich Gifts; and
by these means secured his Tyranny upon the sound foundation of universal
favor, and upon the favor of many partial Friends, whom he had made great, and
by many singular favors bound them fast unto him, and interessed them in his
own greatness and power. So as he who will consider these things duly, must
confess, that in Brutus and Cassius the intention was more to be commended then
the act; for their danger could bring no true safety to the Commonwealth, as
they themselves were soon aware of, by flying from that City, which they ought
to have summoned to Liberty, and making themselves the Heads of those who
should rise up in their behalf. But the business being inopportunely
undertaken, missed of that success which opportunity might have brought it: For
Caesar might easily have lost the Peoples favor, either for that thinking
himself sufficiently settled in his Dominion, he might value it so much in the
future; or for that they being naturally given to love change, might grow weary
of his too great power, which was already begun to be much suspected by his
having accepted of the title of King, and of many other Honors which he had
formerly refused: Things which made the People aware of their error, in being
too conformable to the will of one sole Citizen. If such an occasion had been
waited for, he who should have had a mind to have restored the Commonwealth to
her Liberty, might have had some better foundations for the effecting of his
desire. And if it shall be objected, that the City could not throw off the yoke
of servitude after the death of Caligula and Nero, though they were very
vicious, and much detersted by the People; it may be answered, That then the
power of the Emperors, and authority of the Soldiers were too strongly
confirmed, who put Caligula and Nero, and other of their successors to death,
not out of any desire of restoring the City to liberty, as Brutus and Cassius
had done, but for that they were weary of their Empire, and hoped to be better
rewarded by those who were by them cried up for Emperors in place of those that
were flain.

The cause of such diversity of success may likewise be known, if we will
consider some things more in general. Whilst the City of Rome was in such a
condition by reason of her Laws and Customs, as she was of herself well given
to Politic Government, it was impossible to introduce Tyranny, so as it could
be continued there: For the Body of the City not being organized so as became
such a Government, which is the Soul of the City, such a Union could not be
settled there, as might assume vital Form: And as it falls out in natural
affairs, every thing is not made of every thing, but from this or that other
assigned matter, such, or such a thing is particularly generated, answerable to
the quality of the said matter, and to the virtue of the generating cause; so
in our civil actions, every State cannot be fashioned out of every State, but
these things are likewise determined by a certain order; so as from
Aristocracie we pass into the power of a few, from thence to a Popular
condition, and at last to Tyranny.

Yet are these Transitions very hard to be observed in the City of Rome; for
that her Government was always mixed with diverse species of Regiment: yet it may
be seen how diverse Parties prevailed in diverse Times, so as they came to
constitute a different Form of Government. At the beginning Virtue was highly
esteemed, the greatest Honors and chiefest Places were conferred upon some few
that were the most famous, and most virtuous Citizens, though the People had
always a share therein. But Ambition, and the desire of Rule and Riches, did
afterward mightily increase in the Nobility; who deceiving the Multitude by
several artifices, they reduced so much of the public Authority into
themselves, to maintain their private greatness, as the Laws having lost their
efficacy, and the choice of the Magistrates, and the resolution in all weighty
and important affairs, depending upon the will of some few powerful Citizens,
the City wholly lost the resemblance that she had of an Aristocratical State;
and took the form of being governed by a few: And those very Citizens, that
they might preserve the power amongst themselves, were forced to favor the
multitude, by promising and permitting unto them things that were both
unworthy, and unlawful. So these men, that they might domineer over more noble
personages, were forced to obey the hase will of the Soldiers, and of abject
and insolent Popular men, which reduced the Commonwealth at last to a base and
corrupt Popular State (though in former times the peoples Authority was always
great, but better moderated notwithstanding by the Laws and certain
considerations) from whence it was more easy afterward to pass to Tyranny,
the Plotters using those very means, which it has been observed Caesar made
use of, to usurp unto himself the sole Government of the Commonwealth.

Such changes have usually been seen in other Cities, and at other times, where
the condition of Government has given the same occasion. So Athens was always
subject to frequent alterations of Government, and particularly to Tyranny;
Insomuch as the wise Legislator Salon, who had the charge of reforming it,
before his death saw it fallen from the state whereinto he had reduced it, and
tyranny brought in by Pisi^^atus: for the corruption which was amongst the
Inhabitants, afforded matter and means to any one who had a mind to possess
himself of the Liberty thereof. And it is likewise seen of Modern
Commonwealths, that those wherein the people have had much authority, or rather
licentiousness, they have not been able to keep in a constant Government, free
from Civil Seditions, and have been but short-lived. As happened is the City of
Florence, wherein for the consideration above said, it was easier for them who
had a mind to suppress the liberty thereof, and hard for him who desired to
preserve it. So as though the House of Medici has by various accidents been
sundry times driven from thence, and though Alexander the first Duke thereof
lost his life; the City, though otherwise noble and magnificent, being much
infected with parties, and corrupted by popularity; all endeavors of preserving
it in the form of a Commonwealth, and in true liberty, proved vain: And on the
contrary, the Commonwealth of Venic^, by reason of hen excellent Form of
Government, which though it be mixed, has little in it of Popular Government,
and much of the Optimati, not having given way to such corruptions as use to
trouble the quiet of civil life, nor afforded means to any who should go about
to plot against the public Liberty, has been able for a very long space of
time to maintain her self in one and the same condition, and free from those
dangers, into which other Commonwealths have fallen, for not having a Government
of equal temper with that of hers.

The Ninth DISCOURSE.
Which is the safer way to be taken, to arrive at Honor and Glory in a
Commonwealth; that which wa^ beld by Cato, or that which was pursued by Caesar.
JUlius Caesar, and Marcus Cato, who was afterward called Uticencis, both of
them very famous, and greatly cried up persons, both for their excellent
indowments of mind, and for the great Authority which they held both with the
Senate, and with the people, did both of them flourish at the same time in the
Commonwealth of Rome: But they did so differ in Manners and Customs, as it may
afford occasion of wonder, if we will consider how, stearing several courses,
they happened both of them to arrive almost at one and the same end: And of
doubt in him who shall propound unto himself the example of these two great
Personages, to purchase Fame and Power in a Commonwealth, whether of the two he
ought most to imitate. Caesar won much love by his great humanity, liberality
and magnificence; but Cato was reverenced for the austerity of his Comportment,
by the integrity of his life, and for the zeal he showed in the managing of all
public affairs. Those who were oppressed either by poverty, or by enemies had
recourse to Caesar for protection; and those who hated wicked men, and the
inventers of novelties, trusted that Cato would chastise and suppress them.
Caesar never spared for any labor by which he might hope to purchase renown
and glory; and Cato by despising glory became glorious: Caesar desired to show
generosity, and greatness of spirit in all his actions; and Cato delighted in
nothing more then in modesty, and innocence of life: Caesar was much given to
all acts of Grace; and Cato constant in all acts of Justice: Caesar seemed to
take delight in Sports, Feasts, and Banquets; and Cato professed openly to scorn
all favor, save what the merit of his own worth brought with it. So as the
greatness wherein the Commonwealth then was, was said to be most resplendent in
Caesar, so the preservation of the ancient Form of the Commonwealth, and of the
customs of her first age was held to be preserved in one only Cato. These two
so excellent Personages took these two differing ways, yet each of them
acquired great Renown, Fame, and Authority. Great was Caesar's glory by the many
things he did in War, but Cato was no less celebrated for Civil Affairs. Caesar
by his great Authority could make France be first assigned unto him, and then
confirmed upon him, where he kept in chief command with his Army for the space
of Ten years; He also made use of the peoples favor, not to aggrandise
himself, but to make the greatest honors be conferred on his Friends, and upon
such as depended on him, which was that which made his faction so potent. And
truly, he who will consider it well, will find that as long as Rome retained
any Form of a Commonwealth, Cato's power was no less then was Caesar's, for he
oftentimes bore it even against Caesar: As when the business of those that were
Accomplices with C^iline in his conspiracy, was in hand in the Senate, they being
accused by Cato, and defended by Caesar, were condemned to be put to death. And
also another time, when he opposed the publishing of the Law proposed, and
favored by Caesar, touching the division of Lands in Latium, wherein Cato's
authority appeared to be the greater, by making Caesar's am^^tious designs fail
of success is so popular things as were the Agrarian Laws. The same success had
the things maintained by Caesar against Po^^pey, though he was more powerful
then any other Citizen, for having stoutly opposed Metellus, who moved at the
time of Cataline's conspiracy, that Pompey should together with his Army be
recalled back to Rome, he carried the business; which was the cause why these
two prime Citizens endeavored the friendship and good will of Cato, for they
doubted of compassing what they desired without his good will, so great was his
Authority. Caesar, when Cato appeared to be his bitterest enemy, procured
Cato's releasement, when he was imprisoned by order from the Senate: And
Pompey, that he might be fastened to him by the bond of Alliance, endeavored to
have his Niece for Wife. Whence it is conceived, that Cato's austere behavior
had purchased him more Authority, though unarmed, in the management of the
Commonwealth, then the reputation of having commanded Armies, and their so much
obsequiousness to the people, had done to Pompey and Caesar.

A just occasion then offers it self here of consideration, whether was the
better, and safer course taken to arrive at Glory, and Civil Greatness, or that
which Caesar, or that which Cato took? Caesar's comportments seem to have been
more noble, and better defitting a Civil life, as also more easy to be
imitated; and what indeed is of more importance for the happiness of a City,
then quietness and concord amongst Citizens? What more proper to produce and
preserve this, then Magnificence, Grace and Affability? all which virtues were
proper to Caesar, and which by a straight and speedy way guided him to the
height of greatness and glory. He who desires to obtain this favor from
Citizens, must abstain from doing any injury, must seek out all occasions of
doing good, must attribute much to others, must speak moderately of himself,
must do good things, and make them appear to be so, so as he may help not only
by his actions, but by his example. Rigor, Severity, the neglect of all other
respects, where there is only an upright mind to do well (things which are
sufficiently commendable in Cato) may of themselves peradventure border nearer
upon true virtue, but bear a less proportion with civil virtue, if respect be
had to that which is found, not to that which is desired. Who does not value
the love of his Citizens, or will not endeavor the acquisition thereof save by
very upright ways, which are not always possible, meets with continual occasion
of contention, from whence great and open enmities do often arise, which do at
last put the City into confusion. So as such men do first ruin themselves, and
then the Commonwealth. When laws are observed with such extremity of rigor, it
seems to be done to oppress Citizens, not to preserve Justice; Wherefore such a
Government is but little acceptable, and therefore easier to receive alteration
upon any accident that shall happen: This was seen in Cato's actions; for his
way of proceeding got him many enemies, who that they might make themselves
able to bulk with his Authority, made themselves strong by Alliances and
Friendships, and became not only formidable to him, but even to the
Commonwealth. If Cato had not despised the Parentage offered him by Pompey,
Caesar had not joined alliance with him by giving him his Daughter Iulia for
Wife, which was the occasion of both their too excessive greatness, by which
they ruined the Commonwealth. The people were not pleased with Cato's severe
way of proceeding, which made them the more easily adhere to Caesar, and his
Associats, and so not perceiving it, became enemles to the Commonwealth.
Therefore Caesar might still continue in the peoples good opinion, and long
preserve his Authority and Power: But Cato, though his counsels did sometimes
prevail, yet was not his Dignity and Power grounded upon so sound foundations,
as that he could always keep himself in the ^^me condition: Nay, sometimes
things were born against him in the choice of Consuls, when people much more
unworthy then he were Corrivals with him. The little pleasingness of his
proceedings was also cause, though under pretense of honor, and public
employment, why he was sent from the City, and in a manner banished, being sent
by Sea to Cyprus for some concernments of that Kingdom; so as the Commonwealth
suffered by his absence; and particularly Cicero, who was formerly upheld by
Cato's authority, and held for a Defender of the public Liberty, was banished.
By these things the question seems clearly enough decided, that Caesar's way of
proceeding is much more easy and certain to bring a man to dignity and
greatness, then the way which Cato took.

Yet he who on the other side shall examine Cato's manners and actions, as he
will find them more praiseworthy, so will he think that they may lead by a
righter and more direct way to true Honor, and to that greatness which is to be
desired by him that lives in a Commonwealth. For he takes a safer and a more
noble way to arrive at Dignity, who walks by the way of true Virtue, of
Justice, Modesty and Temperance, then he who endeavors the like by Popular
Favor: For that Favor which is won by a good repute, and by virtuous actions,
is easily preserved by herself, and of herself; nay, the cry'd-up Honor which
arises from public Employments and Places, if it be not grounded upon true
worth, soon vanishes, and leaves that in obscurity which did before shine
forth so bright. But he who deals uprightly, does always advance as it were by
a certain natural motion, and confirms himself more and more in the habit of
well-doing. So that Favor which has so good a leaning-stock, is more firm and
stable; whereas that which is purchased by extrinsecal appearances, as it is
easilier gotten, so is it upon any slight occasion more easily lost. For those
who are moved to favor for such reasons, are incited so to do rather out of
their own humor, or for their own advantage, then out of any true affection
that they bear to such persons: And therefore growing either glutted of the
same things they did so like at first, or thinking that they may receive them
in a larger proportion from others, they change their minds, and turn their
liking elsewhere.

Moreover, he who does that which of it self is good, can never want a reward:
For though he do not purchase those exterior demonstrations which are usually
gotten by worth, and which do more illustrate it, he notwithstanding feels that
true content within himself which springs from well-doing, and which is held by
wise men to be the best reward of good actions. For he who loves and favors
Equity and Justice, makes the Laws be observed, prefers the public good before
private interest, thinks nothing an injury wherein the Commonwealth is not
offended; this man may be truly said to be a great Citizen; for that public
dignity and greatness maintains his private credit and estimation: Nay, such
men as these, if by any ill fortune or bad accident they fall from favor, they
find always, as it were by some occult power of Virtue, some others to protect
them. As was seen in Cato, who having drawn upon him the enmity of the greatest
part of the Nobility, and being but little befriended by the People for
impeding the Agrarian Law, though he were for a while held low, he was
notwithstanding created Consul in rivalship with Metellus, who was favored by
Pompey. And by a more notable example, Murena himself, who was accused in
Judgment by Cato, was not only not his Enemy afterward, but defended him
against Metellus; and Cato's reverend authority prevailed over Metellus his
fury, who being accompanied by a number of armed men, was come into the Piazza
to promote the Law of making Pompey return with his Army to the City in the
time of Catalines Conspiracy: And we read, that when he returned from Cyprus,
the Magistrates, Priests, the whole Senate, and very many of the People went in
such numbers to meet him, as the banks of Tybur were full of them on both
sides, as if he had entered into the City in triumph. And another time being in
the public Assemblies put by the Pretorship, by the violence of the Consuls
Crassus and Pompey, yet he, being but a private man, was accompanied home to
his own house that very day with more men, then followed the Magistrates.

If then we will know in this diversity of affairs, which of these two courses
it is best to follow, since by what you have heard, equal credit may almost be
given unto both, we must weigh what his natural inclination is who will set
these examples before him to follow them; what the true end is which he
proposes unto himself, and after what Form of Gornment that Commonwealth is
ordered in which he is born, and which he serves: for without such
considerations it is hard to know what course of life a man must take. He who
seeks to win favor, must above all things shun affectation, as that which makes
a man always suspected to be ambitious, and his actions not acceptable. For he
whose genius is naturally given to humanity, and to a sweet and pleasant manner
of conversation, if leaving that, he will put on a Socratical severity and
gravity, he cannot hope to use it so, but that some other end being discovered
to be in him, he will not only not win credit, but will sometimes become
ridiculous. So on the contrary, when a man is known not to be wittily or
facetiously given, but that his nature is rather given to be grave, if he will
appear to be civil and very familiar, fauning and flattering with humble words,
and in a base manner, he incurs the same mischief; for such forced behavior
denotes affectation, and grows tedious. Cato was born with this sevetity, as he
had witnessed all his life time, by all his actions. He was a Sloven in his
feeding and in his apparel; he went on foot to his Country House, and sometimes
when he was in place of Magistracy he would give Audience unshod, and in
Garments unfit for the Bench. In fine, all his actions were unpollished,
severe, despising such things as others did most value. The clean contrary was
seen in Caesar, who was given to quaint behavior, humanity and grace. They
therefore by their several ways proved both of them great men, and famous,
because they followed their natural genius and inclinations.

In the next place, the end which a man propounds unto himself, who endeavors
to get Honors and Employments in a Commonwealth, is to be considered: for if he
aim only at the public Service, and at his Countries good, it is fittest for
such a one to lay aside all particular interest, and not valuing any private
favor, to attend only a punctual observance of the Laws, and the depression of
such Citizens, who to the prejudice of the public Liberty, will become too
powerful as did Cato. But if one who is merely biased by ambition, propounds
unto himself the becoming great and powerful, by any whatsoever means; those
arts and applications which are pleasing to most men, and which purchase
applause, and universal liking, will certainly lead him more safely to that
end, and conduce most to his purpose, as they did to Caesar; who abasing
himself that he might mount the higher; giving, that he might get the more;
being subservient unto others, to the end that he might command over them, knew
so well how to cover his most affected and ambitious thoughts, as at last he
did not only attain to the greatest Authority that is usually granted to any
one in any Commonwealth, but drew all Dignity and public Authority upon
himself.

Next it must be had in consideration, what the Form of that Commonwealth must
be, in the which a man who lives therein, propounds unto himself the
acquisition of place and honor. For if the Form be Optimatical, wherein virtue
is esteemed above all things, certainly Cato's Manners and Customs will better
suit with such a Government; for in such a Commonwealth, the Magistrates in
their dispensation aim chiefly at those things which were very eminent, and
much commended in Cato: But if the peoples authority be great in the City,
Caesar's Manners and Artifices will be better beloved, and likelier to win
approbation, and consequently the peoples savor in their s^^trages, which may
carry them to the height of Civil preserment. Therefore in Sp^rta, which was an
Optimatical Commonwealth, diverse men did flourish, who in their lives and
manners did resemble Cato; as on the contrary, those Citizens were most
esteemed of in Athens which was a Popular Commonwealth, who knew how to win the
Peoples good will, after Caesar's way: whence it was that she fell easily
afterward into the power of many Tyrants; insomuch as the liberty of the
Commonwealth was possessed at one and the same time by Thirty such men. But in
Rome where the Government was partly Popular, partly Optimatical, both Caesar
and Cato might win renown, for diverse Citizens were diversely minded, according
to the diversity of Government in the administration of public affairs; but in
that mixture, Caesar might get firmer, and more settled authority then Cato in
civil dissentions, because the Popular Faction was much the greater. So that
Cato siding with the Senate to the very last, and being, according to his wont,
and worth, unwilling, to be exposed to the licentious will and pleasure of the
Conquerors, he was born down, together with the Senate, and reduced to the
necessity of making himself away. And Caesar being by the Soldiers suffrages,
and by force, confirmed and settled in Power and Authority, which were already
too immoderately granted him in the Commonwealth by the peoples favor; he
possessed himself of the common public Liberty, and destroyed all Form of Civil
Government.

The Tenth DISCOURSE.
To what Age of the City of Rome, the greatest praise and merit is to be given,
for the prosperity and greatness, whereto she arrived.
SUch and so many are the Grandeurs and prosperities of the City of Rome, as
the consideration thereof affords always new matter of discovering diverse
mysteries therein very well worthy to be examined and observed: but if we shall
consider amongst many other things, how her prosperity did still from time to
time increase both in state and reputation, a particular desire will arise in
us, of knowing to what Age the chief pra^se and merit of that Cities arrival at
such a height of Greatness and Glory, is to be attributed. Three Ages may
chiefly be numbered wherein that great City did still more and more increase,
and grow greater in Reputation. To wit, the first, which may be termed her
Infancy; from the foundation of the City till the driving out of the Tarquins,
and to the first Consulship of Iunius Brutus, and of Tarquinius Collatinus
which was the space of Two hundred twenty four years: The second, which shall
be her Adolesence, from that time till the beginning of the second Carthaginian
War; betwixt two which times, there passed the space of Two hundred forty six
years: The third, her Youth, which was the flower of her years, and of her
greatest prosperity, may be termed the rest of that time which past from the
beginning of the said War, which was in the Consulship of Appius Claudius,
surnamed the Bold, till Caesar's Dictatorship, the space of Two hundred and
twenty years, which makes up the full number of Seven hundred and ten years,
which the Commonwealth of Rome lasted, which might be so termed for the
temperate Government of the first Kings, and for the authority which the Senate
held therein also, as long as their Dominion lasted. For what concerns the
times of Emperors, no mention needs to be made thereof, for what concerns our
purpose: For to boot with the corruption which insued of the first ^orm of
Civil Government, they enjoyed, and for the most part but unworthily, the
labors of other men; and though the City maintained herself in great height for
the space of four hundred years, nay, though many gallant and magnifick things
were by the Majesty of the Empire, and by the Emperors power, yet these did not
concur to the first foundation of the Empire, which is that which is now
particularly enquired into; but the Emp^re did for the most part decline in
diverse parts, and in sundry times, till at last it began to hasten more
headlong to ruin.

The chief and greatest praise then of this most noble and most artificial
Fabric may be attributed to the first that laid the first foundation: For
those that succeeded them, finding that they might thereupon safely erect the
great structure of the Roman Empire, their Counsels were excited, and their
work chiefly helped by those who did first think thereupon, and did so work, as
the City being well ordered and disposed of with good principles, might rise to
a greater degree of dignity and Empire. But those of the third Age, having
noble examples of worth before them, and seeing so good and gallant a work
already so prosperously increased and raised up, went more courageously on to
greater and more noble works, having framed a conceit unto themselves out of
the former prosperous successes, that they might be able to make (as they did)
their City the Mistress and Monarch of all Nations. The first Age was governed
by seven Kings, of differing natures and customs for the most part, but well
fitted to what concerned the service of the new City, and Romes rising
greatness. For Romulus, the Father and Founder thereof, was excellent at Arms;
so as accompanied by other military men, he began the first habitation, and did
so order things, as the new City might subsist of herself, without putting
herself under the protection of any neighboring people. But Numa, who succeeded
him, that he might give the form of a true City to the new Inhabitants,
ordering them by certain Laws, and chiefly by Religious worship, did so behave
himself, as in all succeeding times that City was always much given to
Religious affairs; which though they were false of themselves, yet did he
thereout draw good advantage concerning Civil affairs. The third King, Tullus
Hostilius, reassuming Arms, bridled the boldness of the neighboring people, who
conspired the ruin of the City; and getting many victories over them, began
not only to think of such things as concerned the safety of the City, but to
enlarge her Confines by way of Arms in her neighbors Territories. Anus Martius
did study Civil affairs more, and minded the multiplying of people in the City,
and the making of diverse Orders which might reduce it to the form of a great
and well-governed City. Tarquinius Priscus accustomed the People to know the
majesty and dignity of Empire; by which reverence he, to the great service of
public affairs, increased obedience in those who both then and afterward were
to command in the City, and in the Armies. But Tarquinius Superbus, the City
being already got to her full growth, procuring his own ruin by his rashness
and unbridled licentiousness, opened the way to the liberty of Rome, and to her
greater greatness.

By which things it may be conceived, that the second Age found the City
already well instituted in Arms and Religion, much increased in People and
Buildings, accustomed to know the dignity and majesty of Empire, she being
esteemed and feared by the neighboring people, an Enemy to Tyranny, and finally
fit to receive a good Form of Civil Government, and able to govern herself by
her own Orders and Forces. So as those who followed in the ensuing Age, finding
the way chalked out unto them to lead the City on to a greater degree not only
of safety, but of glory, they found less of difficulty in all their
undertakings: As it is usual in all things, whereunto it is harder to give a
beginning, then to augment them. Wherefore the praise is due to those first
Romans, which is given to the first Invertor of things, of knowing how to put
on generous thoughts, and use good counsels, when the City was so weak as she
knew not how to nourish them, nor had any example of her own men. Therefore in
the following Age, the height of praise which was given to any one that had
deserved well of the Commonwealth, was to honor him with the name of Pater
Patriae, and to compare his actions to those of Romulus, and of those that
followed next after him; from whom, as from the first Founders of the City of
Rem^, it was generally granted that the rest had received power and virtue to
imitate them. The custom was therefore always observed in Rome, of honoring her
Birthday with solemn sacrifices, as that which by its happy Auspices had not
only given excellent Auguries, but as it were a certain vigor to the so many
other Felicities which did at all times accompany her. And it was particularly
interpreted for an excellent Augury of the City of Rome's greatness, and of her
increase in power and authority over all the Latins, that she was born and
increased from the ruins of Alba, most of the Latins having been Colonies of
the ruined City of Alba.

Now if we shall consider what may be alleged on the behalf of the second
Romans, we shall find such and so many things to be said for them, as the first
Garland of the glory of Rome's greatness may seem to be due to them, without
offense to any others. For he who shall weigh things well, shall find that this
Age brought forth more noble and truer Examples of real worth, then any other;
so as they did not only excel themselves, but even all Foreiners: For the
military valor which flourished in the Citizens of Rome of this Age, was
accompanied with other excellent virtues, and especially with vast charity
toward their Country, not for their own glory, but out of love to her
greatness and prosperity. Danger was so despised by some of them, as some
famous men amongst them did even sacrifice themselves and their lives for their
Countries welfare; as the examples of Curtius, and of the two Decii do even at
this day, much to their glory, show. The generous Commanders in that Age did
contemn riches as well as danger; so as they overcame not only their Enemies,
but even themselves; things which were praised and admired in Quintus
Cincinnatus in Fabritius, and in Paulus Aemilius. But how famous did they prove
in matter of War, and worthy of that praise which is given to excellent
Commanders? He who shall consider how Enterprises were managed by the two
Papyrii, the Father and the Son, against the Samnites; what the Forces of the
conquered Enemies were; of what advantage their victory was to the Romans; will
confess that their merits came not short of any, neither in those, nor in the
following times. This Age was often to withstand the Galls, who were powerful
and bitter Enemies to the Romans, by whom the very City of Rome was assaulted
and endangered; for the delivery whereof Furius Camillus grew so famous. But
this was not the only occasion of trying the Roman Forces against the French in
those times: Quintus Servilius Ala, and Q. Fabius withstood them; when the
French returning more powerful then before near to the City of Rome, by means
of these illustrious Commanders, their whole endeavors proved vain. In this
Age, diverse People of Italy did sundry times jointly conspire against the City
of Rome; which, the more formidable she grew to her neighbors, the more did a
common apprehension make them arm against her: And notwithstanding, she did not
only seem not daunted amidst those dangers, but having still the better of
those by whom she was infested, she increased by the ruin of others. For these
reasons Foreign forces were called in by the very Italians, and Pyrrbus was
received into Italy, that he might wage war with the Romans; whose renown was
so great, as the chief honor in matters of war was given by Hannibal to
Pyrrbus. And he who in a few words will conceive the worth of the Commanders in
this Age, let him say that Livy, who was much versed in the Roman affairs, did
attribute so much to the Commanders of this Age, as he esteemed them not only
equal, but superior to Alexander the Great: holding for certain, that if
Alexander after he had conquered Darius, had turned into Italy, he would have
left the glory that he won in Persia, when he should have met with the Roman
Forces, commanded by Fabius Maximus, Valerius Co^vinus, Papyrius Cursor, and
Titus Manlius.

But above all things it is worth consideration, that in this Age, the City of
Rome, was confirmed and established with more certain and useful orders, as
well in Civil as in Military Affairs, whereby she long after was governed, and
by virtue whereof, she chiefly arrived at such a height of greatness. Great
were the rewards which were given in Rome to military worth, and those Citizens
were much egged on by glory to great undertakings, and sharp sufferings.
Triumph was a great ornament and glory to victorious Commanders; which was
first used to honor the Consul Post humius, for the Victory he wan over the
Sabins. The first equestral Statu^s, were likewise an invention of this Age,
which were granted to Consuls who overcame the Latins in Battle. In this Age
the Mural and Civick Garlands were first used, to the end, that there might be
rewards for every man's worth. The wintring of Soldiers in the Fields and under
Tents, was begun to be used by the Romans in this Age: a thing which proved so
useful and necessary afterward in greater and farther distant enterprises.
What did more advantage the City of Rome in her greatest dangers and weightiest
occasions, then the authority of Dictator; a Magistracy of reverend majesty,
and which proved so often the true and only remedy to maintain the affairs of
Rome in their less prosperous times. This was first created in Rome, to resist
the forces of Forty Populi Latini, who were joined in league together against
the Romans, and against whom Posthumous was created the first Dictator. But how
reverend and unviolable the observance of military orders were with the
Commanders of this Age, may be demonstrated by the famous examples of the
severity of Posthumous, and of Manlius Torquatus against their own Sons, who
for not obeying the command of their Superiors, though it were accompanied with
noble daring, and happy success, was punished by death.

And as this age was busied in perpetual Wars, new Wars being perpetually
raised up by the same people of Latium and Toscany, whom they had often
overcome, so to it that Fortitude, Virtue of mind, and Military Discipline is
chiefly to be attributed, by which the people of Rome proved more excellent
then all other Nations. For this so continual exercise of Arms for so many
years together, did so accustom the City to Military Affairs, as it was not
only easy for those that followed after, to tread in the footsteps of these
their Predecessors, but almost necessary for the preservation of the City;
which being long accustomed to labor and warlike occupations, could not, nor
would not without intestine disorder, live in idleness. And as for the orders
in Civil Affairs, certainly no small praise is likewise due to this Age; for
not to touch upon many particular Laws and Institutions; the most famous Laws
amongst the Romans of the Twelve Tables, made in the Decemvirate of Appius
Claudius and his Colleagues, by which the City of Rome was chiefly governed,
were Institutions of this Age; industriously taking diverse things from the
Grecians, amongst whom more then in any other Nation, all learning, and all the
most noble Arts did then chiefly flourish. Amongst other things, great was the
wisdom of allowing the Latius to be free Denisons of Rome, for hereby the City
was notably augmented, and her Empire established For she did not only for
ever free her self from the vexation which she had had for the space of Four
hundred years by the Forces of these people, whom they had often subdued, and
who had often rebelled against the Romans, and could not by Force be kept
within the bonds of obedience; but being hereby obliged so fast, and so
interessed in the same Affairs with the Romans, she was much assisted by them
in the so many Wars which the Romans made afterward. The use of Colonies was
of great advantage likewise to the Roman Empire; for it served to ease the City
when she was oppressed with too many Citizens, and to keep others in obedience
who were daily reduced under the Roman Empire. And this use of Colonies, though
it had a certain weak beginning, when Romulus sent some to inhabit in the City
of Fidena, yet was it oftener and more orderly introduced, and confirmed in
this second Age; So as experience showing the good of this institution to those
that came after, this custom was ever after followed by the Romans. This Age is
likewise a great argument of the civil wisdom of the Citizens: for though there
were therein important Insurrections often made, and so great broils between
the People and the Nobility; and though it were harder to keep those in
obedience, who had continued to serve in the Commonwealth in her Wars for the
space of a hundred years after the driving out of their Kings, without pay, yet
were they able to appease all discords without the effusion of any civil blood,
as it happend afterward in the third Age, wherein great tumults arose from
little ones; so as Civil Wars, or at least dissentions and partakings continued
amongst the Citizens for about Fifty years, from Sylla's Dictatorship to that
of Caesar's, thereupon the final ruin of the Commonwealth ensued. It also gives
a great proof of the perfection of the orders observed in the City of Rome in
these times, that she was twice able to shake off slavery; First, that of the
Kings, and then that of the Decemviri; which the Third Age could not do, which
being once fallen under the command of Sylla, though he himself forewent the vast
authority which was granted him, and left the City in Liberty, continued
notwithstanding still in factions, which soon after brought her past all remedy
under Caesar's most express Tyranny. And certainly great was the endeavor after
Liberty in this second Age, in respect whereof all things else were set at
naught; insomuch as Brutus did not pardon his own Sons life, it being suspected
that he had had to do with Tarquin to the prejudice of Liberty; and the whole
people of Rome condemned Manlius Capitolinus to death, he who had saved the
Capitol and the City of Rome, for being suspected his actions tended toward
Tyranny. Those who lived in the hardest times of this second Age showed their
constant generosity, when the City of Rome being burnt and destroyed by the
French, they would not abandon her, and go to live at Veij, as their forlorn
fortune, and the condition of these times seemed to advise them to do; but kept
their hopes alive for better things, which if they had then abandoned, that
name and fame of Rome had peradventure been for ever lost, which her happy
genius promised her. So as he who shall consider the works and actions of those
Citizens of Rome of this second Age, may with reason think them worthy of great
praise; so as it may seem they had nothing to desire, whereby to have been made
as illustrious in the sight of the world, and their actions equal to those of
the Third Age, then to have had occasion of greater enterprises, as they had.
But on the contrary, these men's actions are more to be commended for the
integrity of their manners, for their love toward their Country, and for their
other noble virtues; whereas in those of the last Age the splendour of their
glorious actions in War, was oft-times obscured, and stained by other vices, by
Ambition, Avarice, and immoderate Liberty; to which things the Third Age was so
addicted, as they brought her in the height of her greatest prosperity, to
utter ruin.

But before we pass this sentence, it will become us in justice to hear what
those gallant Romans can say in their own behalfs, who by the cried up Fame of
their stupendous actions, have filled the world with the glory, and wonder of
the Roman greatness. And how much shorter the time was wherein the supreme
Monarchy was founded and established, so much greater demonstration is thereof
the generosity and worth of these men, who had the boldness to undertake so
many Enterprises, and could bring them to a good end. For, the first time that
the Romans carried their Forces out of Italy, was by reason of the Carthaginian
War; wherein amongst other things, it was not only a thing commendable, but
much to be wondered at, that the Romans, being till then unexperienced in
Maritime affairs, did so soon learn that manner of Discipline, as they overcame
the Carthaginians in many Sea Fights, who for so long a time before had
professed themselves to be Seamen, and had the first place given them by all
other Nations for their Naval preparat^ons.

But whereby can the excellent Military Discipline of the Romans be better
known, and their unvanquish'd worth, then by their deeds done in the second
Carthaginian War; wherein at one and the same time they were able to maintain
so many Armies in Italy, Sicily, Spain, and Greece? And yet one only City of
Rome could furnish them all with Commanders and Soldiers out of her own
Citizens, and Italian Colonies; and that in so great a number, as that there
was above Eighty thousand fighting men of the Roman Army in the Fight at
Cannae. On the contrary, Carthage, though her Dominions were large and
powerful, after she had been several times routed by the Romans in Spain, being
willing to defend Africa, nay the very City of Carthage, the head of the
Empire, was forced to recall that her Commander in chief, and those her
Soldiers which she had in Italy. The Romans thrice overcome in battle by
Hannibal, took still fresh courage, and assuming new Forces, did even face
Fortune, whom they won at last to be their friend, and in a manner obedient to
their deserts. But the Carthaginians, when once overcome by Scipio in Fight
near Zama, yielded, and humbled themselves to the Romans. But the last Punick
War, as it ended in a shorter time, and with less trouble then the former two,
so brought it more glory and security to the Romans; for the very name of the
formidable Roman Forces, was sufficient to put an end to that War; and the
final ruin of Carthage which ensued, did for ever secure the Commonwealth of
Rome from the false faith of the Cathaginians.

But other great and noble feats of Arms, undertaken at the same time with
great courage and happy augury, as the War against Philip in Macedonia, and in
Asia against Antiochus, did sufficiently illustrate the Roman Forces, and did
enlarge the Confines of their Empire in farthest distant Nations. In the three
Punick Wars, which lasted forty three years, with variety of fortune, they
fought sometimes more for safety then for glory: But herein the People of Rome
showed not only the power of their Forces, but the generosity of their minds;
having undertaken the one War to revenge the injuries received from Philip, in
his having supplied Hannibal with succors; and the other to preserve some
Cities in Asia, ancient Colonies of Greece, in their Liberty, and from being
injuriously oppressed by Antiochus. And if it be said, that these so many
Enterprises were made by the Italian Forces; the first and chiefest difficulty
consisting in the subjugating of Italy, the first and chiefest praise seems to
be due to this Age: But take this for granted, it must be added, that a great
share of this very praise is due to the last Age; for the Insubri and Liguri
were not assubjected by the Romans, till after the end of the second
Carthaginian war; the first being conquered by Marcellus, the second by Quintus
Fulvius; who wan so much the more glory thereby, for that these are very noble
parts of Italy, and that the Country of the Ins^bri was possessed by the Galls,
who were at that time very potent in those parts, and Liguria was inhabited by
a very fierce and warlike people. These are not then things altogether so great
and glorious, as that they surpass all other things done by other men at other
times: But if we shall look further into this very Age of Rome, we shall meet
with other actions so great, and as miraculous, as their splendour will obscure
the glory of those very Romans, who were so cried up in comparison of other
Nations, For when the City of Carthage was utterly ruined, with which the City
of Rome had fought so long, and oft-times with variety of fortune, and those
dangers being secured for ever, there not remaining any other Potentate who
could of himself gave a just counterpoise to the Roman power, they marched so
fast on to Monarchy, as in the space of one hundred years, between that time,
and the time of Caesar's Dictatorship, they extended the Confines of the Roman
Empire almost over the face of the whole Earth. Amongst the rest, great was
that War which was taken against Mithridates, under pretense of defending
Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes, who were Friends to the People of Rome, but in
effect to oppose his vast designs, wherein aspiring at the dominion of all
Asia, and of Europe also, he became formidable even to the very Romans; who
though they had to do with this potent E^emy, who could put together in t^is
War an Army of Two hundred thousand Foot, and Fifty thousand Horse, and a Fleet
of Three hundred Ships, yet did they not only ^is^omfit Mithridates, but took
occasion to make other Victories in Nations far off; for they marched with
their Armies into Armenia against ^igranes, because he had favored Mith^dates,
and received him into his Kingdom, when he was driven away by the Romans. And
he who will observe the Roman History, will have occasion of wonder, that
though the Roman Commanders and Armies were often overcome in battle, yet in
all the Wars that ever they made they have at last proved Victors. But the
things that were done in the last years of this Age, do exceed whatsoever could
a^ first have fallen into the thought of man, thereby to settle the Commonwealth
in a flourishing and fortunate condition. To pass by so many other glorious
Victories and Triumphs, who can choose but admire the great deeds of ^^mpey and
of Caesar? the speed which the first made in finishing so many Wars, his great
good fortune chiefly in subjugat^ng so many Eastern Provinces in a very short
time; and the seconds constance and for^itude, demonstrated in so many battles,
and in cu^bing so many Western Nations Insomuch as it ^s said of both these,
that each of them won above eight hun^red Cities to the Roman Empire; which
certainly has dimmed and obscured the glory and memory of a^l Ant^quity.

What ^esolution shall then be given in this so doubtful question, in which so
many reasons may be alleged on al^ sides? It is a great matter certainly to
give a beginning to things, which being afterward increased, are won usually to
proceed on more easily: And yet on the otherside, according to the known
saying, they are no less to be commended who add to things begun, and do
preserve what is already go^ten, (...) are the original Authors. But neither
th^se nor those may be said to have won the Gole; which they can only properly
be said t^ do, who br^ng things already begun, and since much augmented, to the
highest pitch of p^r^ection w^^ch such a thing is capable of, or whereunto,
being measured with due respect, it can arrive. And these degre^s are found in
almost all things that are effected by ^umane industry; that ^s, the beginning,
the increase, and the perfection: After which two other things follow;
declination, and final ruin, whereof we do now treat. But these several
degrees may clearly enough be obse^ved in Empires. In these then did the
Citizens of Rome adoperate themselves in all the aforesaid Ages so worthily,
and so much to the good of the City, as each of them may seem to lay claim to
the chief Crown of the Roman glory. It may then be said, that though many
things concur to the production of any thing, yet do they not all do it after
the same manner, nor are they all of equal dignity in themselves, or of equal
force for the constituting of that work. Thus in the foundation of Romes
Mona^chy, certainly the Founders of the City did concur from whom she received
her first ^utr^men^, which helped so much to strengthen that body, and made it
fit to sustain the weight of so great an Empire. Those also who did next
succeed them, who did add to her Militia, her Government, to her good orders
both for War and Peace, and made her ^itter for greater things, have their part
therein; and finally, those who by so many, and so signal Victories, placed
her, as it were, with her own hands on the top of her greatest power and
dignity. But in this connumeration of things, what can be affirmed, but that
the last Age, which by her particular Acts, and labors saw the Commonwealth
seated, as it were, in the Throne of Majesty, may with reason challenge the
greatest part of this merit and glory, because she concurred as the nearest
cause to the founding, and establishing of the City in that state and
condition, wherein she was in her greatest excellency and glory amongst all
Nations. It is true, that he, who in another respect, will more consider the
necessity then the dignity of the thing, may peradventure be of another mind;
for it is most certain, that had not the City of Rome been first founded by
Romulus, and maintained by other Kings in her beginning against her insulting
enemies, if the Capitol had not been saved afterward from the Gauls, if the so
many conspiracies made by the people of Italy against her rising greatness had
not been repulst, there could have been no such thing as the Victories and
Triumphs of the Scipio's, Marcellus, Fabritius, Metellus, Pompey, and Caesar,
and of so many others; who achieved those things by the strength of the City,
already happily begun, and increased with much industry and valor.

But as it usually falls out in natural things that their augmentation,
changing as it were that first Form, proves the corruption thereof, so as that
subject being reduced to another condition, little count is held of precedent
affairs; so in these things which are formed by man's industry, as a more
unpolished Form is succeeded by another, which renders that subject more
excellent and perfect, no man values the former, or considers it with a thought
of praise or imitation: So we see it falls out in the more noble Arts, as in
Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, and the like, which daily grow to more
perfection, those are most commended in them who therein prove the greatest
Masters; so as their particular praise walks hand in hand with the perfection
which by their industry they have brought to that Art, wherein they have with
much industry and study spent their time.

Cincinnatus his poverty was praised, and the like of some others of those
Commanders, who were called up from the Plough to be Consuls and Dictators,
because they bore a certain proportion to the condition of those things, and of
the City. But the magnificence of Crassus, and of Lucullus, had more coherence
with the greatness to which the City of Rome did afterward arrive. It seems
then that neither can there be any comparison made between these ages, for as
they were sufficiently different between themselves, so different thoughts,
studies, and exercises did become them: which things, if they had any thing of
conformity between them, it was rather by likeness, or figure, or rather some
dispositions of those first weaker operations, to the other greater and more
noble. And as it is seen in every individual man, the same things are not
proportionate nor proper to all Ages, but diverse things do accommodate
themselves to diverse Ages, though the one be subordinate to the other, so as
the exercises may both be the same, and different, because they are
accommodated to the same aim, and end, but are notwithstanding otherwise put in
use, in Childhood, Youth, and Manhood; just so in the point we are now upon,
things suit not with a City in the second Age, which were proper to her in the
first, neither could the second do those things which were reserved to the
third, and which would not be praised in the third, had it not done more then
either the first or second. So to end this Discourse, it may be said, That the
City of Romes happy genius produced men well adapted to her three conditions,
and very excellent for what each Age and condition brought forth. For if the
first would have made too much have in agrandising, and making the City famous,
they might rather have disordered themselves, and by making many enemies, have
increased the difficulty of effecting those things, which when riper, proved
afterward more safe and easy: And likewise if the second should have embraced
things disproportionable for her strength, and have carried her Forces out of
Italy, before she had therein settled the Roman power, it might have proved
rather the corruption then the perfection of the Commonwealth. The first
therefore, and the second are very much to be praised, for such things as
became that Age and state of the City wherein they were done. But by how much
more the adoperating cause does work upon a more noble a perfect subject, by so
much does the work prove more perfect and excellent. Therefore those of the
third Ag^ having occasion to act in greater matters, as finding the City
already very spacious and powerful, the off spring of their industry and labor
has proved more noble, and they have won such praise to the Commonwealth, as
greater is not to be pretended unto.

The Eleventh DISCOURSE.
How the Roman Empire, though it fell oftentines into the hands of base and
wicked men, was notwithstanding able to maintain it self in the reign of many
Emperors, and how it came to be finally destroyed.
AS amongst all humane actions; those Commands and Powers are noblest, and of
greatest worth, by which a man gets to be above other men, and does govern them
in a manner as God does rule and govern the world, so of all Dominions and
Commands that ever were, the Roman Empire was greatly remarkable, and held in
great esteem and reverence by all Nations; and did so far extend her self, as
it may almost be said with the Poet, That her Confines were those of the whole
world which was known to antiquity. Which may be comprehended by this, that
Constantine the Great having divided the Empire between his three Sons, the
elder Constantine, to whose third part fell the Provinces of Spain, France, and
the greatest part of Germany, together with the Island of Great Britain, made
War with his Brother Constantine, to whose share many other Countries fell, to
come to a better aggiustment of division, wherein he thought his Father had
dealt unequally with him. But now this so stupendous Fabric erected in the
concourse of many years, by the worth and labor of so many gallant men, must
finally run the fate of all humane things, must be dissolved and fall to the
ground, and by her ruin occasion vast revolution of things. Hence it was that
so many noble Cities were ruined, and the groundwork of some others laid,
which proved afterward very noble Structures. Hence it was that many entire
Regions, had their ancient Inhabitants driven away, and were possessed by new
Citizens had new Customs, new Laws, new Tongues and new fashions brought in;
and hence it was that Italy, which had been the Seat of so great an Empire, was
subject to greater alterations, and more heavy calamities then other Provinces.
It will not then be an unacceptable labor (man being so naturally given to the
desire of knowledge) to seek out how, and for what causes chiefly these things
happened. For that general rule, That whatsoever has had a beginning, must
have an end; will not satisfy our inquisitive understandings. Empires, as all
other earthly things, have their beginning, increase, perfection, declination,
and last ruin and destruction, all of them ordained and disposed of by certain
causes: And though they may be seen to vary according to the variety of
Accidents, that is not notwithstanding Chance which appears to us to be so,
when we cannot penetrate into the true causes of things.

In the beginning, the Roman Empire was governed in the form of a Commonwealth,
her first Founders having begun to enlarge her Dominion amongst her neighboring
people. She continued in this her infancy, as I may call it, many years, till
the times of those famous Scipio's, who brought Spain and Africa under her
dominion. But afterward in the ensuing Age, wherein Caesar, Pompey, and so
many other famous Commanders did flourish, she mounted to the height of her
greatness and glory: Neither did Augustus Caesar degenerate from the worth of
them, though the Form of Government was changed; but he likewise did much
increase the Empires Confines in the Eastern parts amongst the Indians, and
other exterior Nations, and established excellent Orders both Civil and
Military in the Empire But this Monarchy may be said to stand at a stay at this
time, being constituted in a Throne of Majesty, reverenced and obeyed by all
Nations; and in this condition she preserved herself for well nigh three
hundred years, wherein though many and great Wars were made by the so many
Emperors who governed in those days, yet were they rather made for the
preservation, then for the enlarging of the Empires confines: For there was not
almost any of the barbarous and far distant Nations, as well of the East, as of
the West, which those Emperors were not forced to vanquish and overcome several
times, and reduce them to the obedience of the Empire, from which they had
rebelled. And if any one did enlarge the Empire in furthest remote parts, as
did the Emperor Trajan in Armenia, India, and some others in other Regions and
Provinces, it was notwithstanding at the same time lessened in other parts by
new Rebellions. But in Galienus his time, who was the thirty fourth Emperor,
the Empires supreme greatness began to decline: For though she received her
mortal wound afterward in the time of Arcadius and Honorius, which was above a
hundred years after, yet in this intervening time, the Empire being in her
decaying age, grew weak, yet sustein'd herself, and like a Tree whose root has
been for a long time very deeply fixed, could not be easily eradicated; so as
though she were oftentimes shrewdly shaken by Armies of sundry Nations, yet was
she able to resume her strength, and keep herself on foot.

Thus stood the Roman Empire then, wherein many miraculous things offer
themselves to our consideration, and invite us to seek out the true occasion
thereof. For on one side it appears a strange thing, that an Empire arrived at
such a height of greatness, when she once began to decline, hasted so fast to
her ruin, there not being any other Potentate left in the World, which was
able to counterpoise her power, yea, which did not obey her, as subjugated by
her Armies; having also so many Soldiers to defend her, desirous for their own
advantage to preserve the Empire. But on the other side, he who shall consider,
into the hands of how many base and wicked men this so great Empire fell, he
may very well wonder how so violent a thing could endure for so many Ages, and
how a Dominion governed by so many Tyrants could pass from hand to hand through
the series of so many Emperors, whereof there were above five hundred between
Caesar's time, and that of Arcadius and Honorius, in whose days the Roman Empire
began visibly to fall, by the taking of Rome, by the ruin of Italy, and of
other Provinces belonging to the Empire: And yet it is known, that the Persian
Monarchy, which was of so great esteem amongst the ancient Kingdoms, was
quickly ruined by its falling into the hands of Princes given to idleness and
pleasure, and was by Alexander carried to another Nation; whereof there are
many examples seen almost in every Age.

Let us then say that another violence helped very much to sustain this
violence; of such a force is the union of alike things. Thus did the corrupt
Customs of the People and Militia of Rome help to maintain the State and Power
of these Tyrannous Princes: For since People lived in Rome with much
licentiousness, and were ente^tained with many Pastimes and public Shows made
by the Emperors, wherein those appeared to be most splendid who were most
overgrown with vice, as were Caligula and Nero, who did not only make the
wonted sports of Hunting and of Comedies be often represented with more then
usual magnificence, but introd^ced new Shows, as Naval battles, Chariots drawn
by Camels and Elephants, and permitted all licentiousness to the Soldiery, no
man desired to change condition; and the Pretorian Soldiers enjoying all things
of use and privilege near unto the City, did not greatly care to be commanded
by generous men: And when such Princes grew tedious to them, they put them to
death, proclaiming a new Emperor, and receiving from the new Prince many gifts
in reward of their wickedness: And the disorder grew so great* as sometimes the
Empire of the World was by the Soldiers sold by Outcry to who would give most
for it, and at low rates, as it fell out in the time of Didius-Iulianus. Nor
was the authority of the Senate able to correct this so great inconvenience; as
well for that being trodden under foot by force, it was grown very weak, as
also for that the ancient Roman generosity was wanting in them. So as the
Senate having resolved, after the death of Caligula, to free the City and
Empire from the like Tyranny, and to restore her to her liberty, they could not
be constant iu their resolution; but being abased by fear, submitted soon to
the obedience of Claudius, of Caesar's lineage, and accepted of him for their
Emperor, as soon as he was cried up by the Pretorian Soldiers. The like to
which happened afterward in many Emperors; those being confirmed by the
Senate, which were chosen by the Army.

This license was diversely used by the Soldiers themselves: For the Pretorian
Bands; and that Army wherein the Emperor was at the time of his death,
pretended a particular privilege in the choice of the new Emperor. Yet Emperors
were so often cried up by other Armies also, which were in several Provinces of
the Empire, as all of them desirous in Galienus his time to usurp this
authority, there were thirty two, who at one and the same time made use of the
name and title of Roman Emperor. So as it seems it may be truly said, that the
Roman Empire was preserved, not in respect to unity, or to the same form of
Government, but only in respect of that Authority which Roman Armies held of
making Emperors, whom by reason of the said Armies all Provinces were to obey,
there being no Militia like to that of the Romans, or which could resist them,
or withdraw themselves from their yoke. But great was the diversity in all
things, almost in all Ages; for the height of Empire was arrived at by several
ways: Some got it by Inheritance, as Tiberius, Caligula, Nero; and in the
following, Constantinus, Constantius, and many others; some, though very few,
were c^^sen by the Senate, many by the Emperors themselves, who in their
lifetime chose some one for their Companions and Successor in the Empire,
calling him Caesar, to whom after the former Emperors death, the Title of
Emperor, and of Augustus was given: But their number were most, who got the
Empire through favor of the Sol^iery; wherein one and the same respect did not
always prevail, but many much different considerations; regard sometimes being
had to the birth and affinity that any one had to the former Emperors,
sometimes to worth, and to some singular action of War, sometimes to favor,
which Commanders knew some way or other how to come by from their Armies, and
sometimes to some other such like things: Whence it was that persons not only
of much differing condition, but even of diverse Nations, were made Emperors of
Rome; Trajan and Theodotius were Spainards; ^robus, Giovinianus, and
Valentinus, Hungaria^s; Dicclesian a Dalmarian, Cato a Slavonian; and some
others. But that which made the difference greater, was that this Empire as it
was diversely gotten, so was it diversely administered: By some so tyrannically,
as there is no so infamous and wicked vice, whereof you find not shameful
examples in the lives of Tibe^us, Caligula, Nero, Commodus, Caracalla,
Heliogabolus, and other of those Emperors; whereas the Empire was governed by
some others with such Wisdom and Justice, as no more perfect Regal Government
can almost be imagined. And what excellent virtue (not to speak of Augustus)
was there to be desired in Vespatian, Titus, Trajan Adrian, Antoninus, Marcus
Aurelius, Alexander Severus, and such like? Whence it was, that there having
been good and bad Emperors in diverse Ages, as much of Dignity, Authority and
Power as this Empire lost through the bad Government of those wicked Princes,
it recovered as much by the valor and good Government of these good and
virtuous Princes.

And this may be alleged for the first reason, why the Empire was able to
preserve it self for so long a space of years. For being for a while run into
many disorders, such as were introduced by the baseness and negligence of other
their Predecessors, were by the worth of generous Princes amended, and returned
to their first channel. The Romans ancient and confirmed use of good military
orders, did likewise help well toward this: Wherefore though the Empire were
in the hands of unworthy persons, yet finding the usual Armies already raised,
and ready for any enterprise, they were able by means of their Commanders, to
wage war successfully, and to quiet such rising, and rebellions, as continually
arose in so great an Empire. Thus Tiberius did not only return France, which
had rebelled to obedience, but subjugated Comagena, and Cappadocia and driving
out their Kings, reduced them to Provinces. Nero drove the Parthians out of
Armenia, and placed King Tigranes there, making that Kingdom Tributory to the
Empire. Claudius did not only reduce Mauritania, which by means of her
Commanders made insurrection against the Empire; but did himself in person pass
with his Army into England, to appease the Risings of that Island; and yet
these Princes were not thought to have of themselves any great worth in them.
These and some other such like causes may perhaps be alleged why this Empire
could maintain it self in that greatness to which it was arrived.

But to come to that which men are more curious in inquiring after, as a thing
very strange of it self, as also for many other notable consequences; to wit,
to the causes of its declining and ruin, Three may, in my opinion, be chiefly
alleged; The immeasurable greatness of the Empire, the simplicity and
wickedness of those who governed it, and the corruption of customs, which were
far different from those with which it was first founded, and wherein it grew
great. Humane imperfection is the cause why man's virtue, as it is not only
finite, and bounded, but weak ^^d brittle; so has it to do with things not
only finite and bounded, but circumscribed within no very large limits; which
were it otherwise, it would loose it self in an Ocean from whence it would not
know how to escape safe. And of this, to omit the examples of many other of our
actions, we will only consider, for as much as appertains to what we have now
in hand, That his worth must be exceeding great, who is to rule, and command
over others. Philosophers have affirmed, That such a one ought to exceed others
as far in Wit and Worth, as he does in Dignity and Power; nay that his worth
and virtue ought to we^gh against that of all those that he will rule over. But
let us pass by these supreme Eminences, which are rather to be desired, then
ever hoped to be found. It Is very certain, that it is very hard to govern an
Empire well, and the greater it is, the greater is the difficulty of governing
it. Wherefore Lycurgus, a very wise Legislator, knowing that the quiet of a
City, and the long preservation thereof in one and the same condition, and with
a certain Form of Government, ought to be the true cause of ordaining good
Laws, would of his own election so dispose of his Spartans, and of the orders
of that Commonwealth, as she should not be able much to enlarge her Confines.
But on the contrary, Rome, as all the constitutions of the City, and the Cities
Armies aimed chiefly at the enlarging the power of the Commonwealth, so did she
never know what belonged to the enjoyment of Peace, not only by reason of
foreign Forces, but not by occasion of discord between the Citizens. The bounds
of her Empire grew to be almost immense, and she marched with her Forces to the
utmost parts of the Earth, subjugating the farthest distant and most barbarous
Nations. But at last, not having almost any foreign Enemies to fight with, her
Citizens begun to make use of their Armies which had conquered other Nations,
in long and deadly contentions amongst themselves; till at last the worth and
fortune of Caesar prevailed, so as Augustus remained sole Lord of the World,
and Tiberius, who succeeded him, entered peaceably into so great an Empire,
wherein were an infinite number of Soldiers, trained up in a perpetual Militia,
and by reason of Civil Wars, accustomed to live very licentiously. The greatest
acquisitions of the largest and farthest distant Provinces were very lately
made, there having been above 1700 Cities taken by two only Commanders, Caesar
and Pompey, and powerful Nations vanquished. So as it behoved to keep a great
number of Soldiers in those Garrisons, to keep the people in obedience, which
were in pares farthest distant from the Senate of the Empire. But the very same
thing which was introduced to provide against those dangers, was cause of
others, by reason of the Authority which the Armies had already usurped, and
out of hopes afforded to the Commanders of attaining this supreme dignity, by
being by the Soldiers cried up Emperors. Wherefore one only man, though of
never so much worth, not being able to supply all places, and provide for so
many things as so great an Empire stood in need of, and less able to correct
the disorders, which in so many States, as civil humors in members farthest
distant from the heart, did daily more and more increase, the Empire must needs
be continually ^ext both by foreign Nations, and by its own Soldiers; so as it
was hardly ever free from such troubles; nor was War sooner ended in one place,
but it broke forth in another; nay for the most part, diverse Roman Armies
fought in several places, at one and the same time, each of them endeavoring to
sustain him whom they had chosen to be their Emperor. Therefore Adrian to
remedy so many disorders in the Empire, which he thought did only arise by
reason of the Emperors being so far off, and the largeness of the Confines,
resolved not to keep his certain abode in Rome, but spending his whole time in
traveling to visit all the parts of his Dominions, to keep his Subjects in
their duties; and knowing how hard a thing this would be to do, and almost
impossible in so large Confines, he resolved to shorten them in the Eastern
parts, making the River Euphrates the utmost boundeur of the Emire, and
rest^ring all the people of the higher Provinces to their Liberty, even to
India; who being by his successors reduced under the obedience of the Empire,
and many rebellions ensuing thereupon, and much difficulty, not only in the
further dist^n^ parts, b^t even in those that were nearest at hand; Constantine
the Great, knowing that these evils could not otherwise be help^, but by
carrying the seat of the Empire nearer those parts, chose the City of Byzantium
to be the place, which being rebuilt by him, took from him the name of
Constantinople. And hence it is that the Indian Gymnosophist, being desirous to
show Alexander the Great, that whil^t being born away with a desire of Rule in
far distant Regions, he was gone so far from his own Kingdom, as he gave it
occasion of rebelling against him, made a hard and stiff Oxe-hide be laid upon
the ground, and walking upon the utmost skirts thereof, showed him, that when
the part that was trod upon gave way to the foot, another part rose up: And
that so it befell many great Princes, who whilst they seek to keep one part of
their States low and quiet, the rest, which they keep far from, rise up in
rebellion.

Hence it was, that many Emperors, not only such as were unfit for Government,
but even the wisest and most valiant, knowing and confessing themselves to be
oppressed by the weight of so great a mass, c^ose others who in their li^e-times
were to be their Coadjutors in Government, and who should succeed them after
their deaths in the Empire, which was seldom quietly possessed by one alone, the
Armies of far distant Provinces re^^sing oft-times to obey those who were
chosen to succeed in the Empire by other Armies, though they were with all
solemnity allowed and accepted of by the Sen^te, as befell Galba, who being
created Emperor by the Spanish Army, was not accepted of, nor obeyed by the
German Army. The like befell many others; so as sometimes it was not well known
who was the true Emperor. And certainly, tall^in^es of the great^st height of
this Empire it may be known, that no one man, though of never so great worth,
was able to govern it in peace and quiet. And even Augustus himself made trial
of many Insurrections in Spain, Germany, and in the Eastern p^^ts, amongst the
^cythians and Parthians; though at l^st, through his sin^ular worth and great
good fortune, the whole World being reduced to an universal Peace, he was able
to shut up that famous Temple of Ianus, which was kept always open afterward,
his Successors having always occasion to modest themselves with war. So as the
saying is made true, that Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit. But his her ruin
was certainly accelerated by the lewd conditions of those into whose han^s the
Empire often fell: For through their fault, the internal causes of the States
corruption were either occasioned, or much increased; since by their ignorance,
baseness avar^c^ cruelty, lust, and other enormous vices, they drew on contempt
and injury, the first and chief roots of all change of Government: For by
contempt the Subjects take occasion to rebel, and chiefly the richest and
noblest and from injury comes hatred, and desire of change of Government. And
it was the grea^er misfortune for this Empire, in all other respects more
fortunate then all other Empires, that in those very times wherein there was
greatest need of a continued succession of wise and generous Princes to confirm
the State, which by virtue of the great Augustus was reduced from War and past
disorders into Peace and good Government, should after him fall into the hands
of three very lewd and base Emperors, Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero; from whose
enormous vices those chief evils arose to the Provinces of that Empire, which
we but now mentioned, the contempt of that supreme dignity, both amongst For in
and her own Soldiers. The former, by rebelling, strove to free themselves from
their obedience; the other, through insolence, bere^t them of Empire and life.
Ha^red, and desire of change arose likewise in the Senate, which was deprived
of its authority; and particularly in those who were offended, or had any thing
of generosity in them. Hence ^t was, that soon after, to wit in ^ero's time,
Caesar's lineage ended; and tha^ the Soldiers accustomed to much licentiousness
under such Princes, usurped the authori^y of making Emperors, as they did in
Galba after Nero's death, in Otho after Galba, and so in many others. His worth
who commanded in chief, and his good fortune who was to succeed in the Empire,
was sometimes able to make a Successor, but not to take this authority totally
from the Soldiery, through confidence of whose favor many aspired, though by
bad means, to usurp the Empire; and amidst these contentions the Empire must
needs be divided, shattered, and weakened. From this root another disorder
arose, which was cause of many heinous mischiefs, to wit, the general
corruption of Customs in all the Orders of the City of Rome: For Subjects
following, as usually they do, their Princes inclinations and exercises, men
began to give themselves over to an idle life; and Virtue being neither
nourished, nor at first maintained, still languished more and more; so as the
Art of Commanding failing, good Obedience was also wanting; every body made his
will his law; nor was there any sort of wickedness, how infamous soever, from
which the Commanders or Soldiers were restrained by any respect borne to the
Majesty of the Prince. All reason was reduced to the sword, and every one dared
to attempt as much as his power encouraged him to compass. Such and so great
were the vices which crept daily into men of all degrees and qualities, as it
would be too laborious a thing to number them up all. This one example may
suffice to show, to what dissolu^eness and licent^ousness The affairs of Rome
were reduced, when Galba having chosen Piso Lasinianus, a man very famous for
his civil behavior and military worth, his election was neither accepted of by
the Army, nor by the Senate, because it was thought that if he should come to
the Empire, he would correct the many misdemeanors both of Citizens and
Soldiers: But both of them being killed, and in stead of him Otho was made
Emperor in Rome, and Vitellius at the same time cried up Emperor by the Army in
Germany. the affairs of the Empire were then governed with such confusion, and
grew so much worse in the succeeding Age, the disorders growing to be confirmed
by a bad habit, as when any Emperors should go about to correct the immoderate
licentiousness of the Soldiers, by reducing them to their ancient discipline,
were they never so good and wise Princes, they were slain by the Armies; as was
Alexander Severus, Probus, and some others. So as no certain Form could be
given to such a Government, wherein the Soldier had so great a stroke in
Authority, making and unmaking Emperors at their pleasure; so as it might seem
to resemble a Popular State; and yet the Emperors commanding with supreme
authority in so ample a Dominion, Monarchy might appear to be there formed.

It is not much to be wondered at then, if this monstrous body of the Roman
Empire being composed of almost incompatible, ill-govern'd, and m^sproportioned
parts, should be sick of diverse infirmities, and must at last suffer
dissolution, sooner then otherwise her greatness and power promised. The
negligence and pusillanimity of some Emperors were likewise cause why the
City-Soldiers, who kept still about the City, as it were the Life guard of the
Princes person, and who were the flower of all the rest both for valor and
discipline, being long kept idle, grew so effeminate, and so unaccustomed to
labor and military exercise, as when some more valiant Prince would make trial
of them, they found themselves deceived in the hopes they had of their prist^ne
worth. Wherefore the Empire having already received great losses and damages in
diverse battles, things grew to that height, as (not to mention many almost
innumerable particulars which in this case might be produced) when the States
of the assaulted Empire would defend themselves against the Northern nations (as
you shall shortly hear) they were forced to take others of the same Nations to
oppose their violence: To so great a want both of Power, Soldiers, and Military
discipline was the Empire reduced before it was so rent and so bereft of many
Provinces, as it was afterward. Then, as the Roman Empire was got to that
height of power and greatness by the worth of those first ancient Romans, and
by the excellency of their military discipline, so her good Orders being
afterward corrupted, she took so clean contrary a way to her first beginning,
as it behoved her soon to fall to ruin; it being a certain and true rule, That
States do increase and are preserved by the same means by which they had their
first beginnings, and are corrupted by the contrary.

And he who shall consider the ancient ways and works of those who laid the
first foundations of this Empire, and shall compare them with those which
insued in the time of Emperors, will find such difference therein, as the
necessity of coming to such an end may soon be seen. The Roman Armies and their
Leaders, were once excellent examples of worth and discipline. Who does not
praise and wonder at what Titus Manlius did, who punished his victorious Son
with death, because he fought the enemy before the sign of Battle was given?
Very remarkable were the severe punishments which were oft-times imposed upon
the Soldiers disobedience, even for slight causes, whose tumultuous proceedings
were oft-time punished with decimating the whole Army. But how different from
these examples were those which were afterward in the following Age shown by
many of those, who waged War, and commanded the Roman Armies? The Commanders
indulgence toward the Armies, the Soldiers uncurb'd licentiousness, the
authority and boldness which they assumed unto themselves, both over the
people, and over the very Emperors, whom they were to obey, are not they
monstrous things in a well ordered State?

Those ancient Romans did so study Military Affairs, and so frequent were the
exercises of the Militia with all Citizens, as when the ^^ity of Rome had not
extended her bounds beyond Italy, she had so numerous Armies, as she was able
to maintain at one and the same time, but in several parts above One hundred
thousand men in Arms; and yet when so many calamities and ruins befell her by
the Barbarians, when she commanded over so many Provinces and Kingdoms, her
ancient Discipline was so lost, as for want of Soldiers she was forced to make
use of mercinary Barbarians, who getting at last to be very powerful, did
jointly turn their Arms against that Empire, for whose defense they were called
in, and whose pay they took. Nor is the vanquishing and beating of the Roman
Armies, which was for so many years unconquerable by other Nations, to be
attributed to the Goths, or those other Northern people; but rather to the
corruption of their Customs, to the loss of their good Discipline, and to the
discord and baseness of the Commanders, and Soldiers of those times. For were
not the French a valiant and stout Nation? to overcome whom, it behoved Caesar
to fight so many Battles, and to make so often trial of the Romans worth and
fortune, and that not without much danger. Did not the Romans wage War in Spain
for the space of almost Two hundred years together, before they could well
conquer that Nation, and get quiet possession thereof? How often did the
Saxons, Bavarians and other people of Germany take up Arms to molest the States
of the Empire? Yet all their commotions were still suppressed. And had not the
Roman Empire almost continual War by reason of their so many Insurrections,
with many other Eastern Nations, and chiefly with the Persians? And though
sometimes they tasted of adverse fortune, yet their loss was always recovered,
as also the prejudice of the reputation of the Romans Forces by their own
Commanders and Soldiers, so as they were always forced to keep within their own
Confines, and under the obedience of the Empire. But when they stood in
greatest need, when the Empire recieved so sore and so irreparable blows from
the Barbarians, it was brought to such weakness in the Eastern parts by reason
of the many great disorders which were in the Head, and in all the Members,
which were now become incureable, ^s it was not able to sustain the force of
the fierce and warlike Northern Nations. And beginning once to fall, when its
worth was but little, it could not get up again, as it had done at other times.

Now if we will apply these more general considerations, to some particular
chances of this Empire, the true cause of its declination will the more easily
be known. The Affairs of the Empire were almost at all times greatly molested
by diverse of the Northern People, many of which were never reduced to the
obedience of the Empire, some of which had not been known till they took up
Arms, but of all the rest the Goths proved the most famous for the ruin of the
Empire, and for the so many calamities of Italy, and of many other Nations; and
he who shall consider their beginnings and their progress, must needs wonder
very much, and through confusion lose the discourse of humane wisdom; To think
how this barbarous people, and so far remote from our Regions, and unknown by
them, insomuch, as at this day their original is not by Authors agreed upon,
without or Kingdom, or Military Discipline, falling down tumultuously at first,
to possess themselves of other men's Countries, should soon become so powerful,
and formidable, as that they should overcome the Romans, who had overcome the
world. Who could have imagined that a new, and unknown people, were to come
from forth the utmost Northern parts, to destroy so vast an Empire, by which so
many powerful Kings, and famous warlike Nations were subjected? The most
general opinion is, That these men who destroyed the Empire, came from Scythia
into Europe where they were possessed of many large Regions, differing amongst
themselves in name and habitation; those who lived more toward the East being
called Estern-Goths, and others, more Western-Goths. But they were thought to
be but new Inhabitants of that Country, into which they were first come from
certain Islands in the Sarmatian Ocean; and that being worsted by some of their
neighboring people, after many contestations had with them, their Country being
moreover of two small a circuit for their abounding numbers, they betook
themselves to seek out new seats, and other habitations. And thus they passed
over very many times in very great numbers into the Provinces belonging to the
Empire, possessing and indamaging many Countries: The things a little before
mentioned, being the cause why these evils, and the greater ruins which ensued
were not remedied. For the Empire being of a very vast extent, was continually
troubled with sundry commotions in sundry parts. The Princes who commanded were
of little worth, and the former ancient valor and discipline was no longer
found in their Armies, which were given over to licentiousness.

Hence it was that whenin the time of Philip, the first of that name, but in
order the Nine and twentieth Roman Emperor, the Goths fixed themselves in Mysia
and Thrace, such forces were not sent against these novelties, as might appease
them, and quell the then but small strength of these tumultuous people. For
there being no loyalty in the Commanders, nor valor in the Soldiers, those who
were sent by the Empeor against such enemies, intended their own particular
interest more then the service of the Empire. Insomuch as Macrinus and Decius
being sent the one after the other to be chief of the enterprise, made
themselves be cried up Emperors by the Army, having first permitted much
licentiousness in the Soldiers, that they might win their good will. And when
the same Decius was truly possessed of the Empire, after the death of Macrinus,
and of Philip also, joining battle with the Goths, he found the effects of
nourishing sedition in Armies, and in winking at their disobedience, and at the
nonperformance of their military duuties; for his Army was routed and put to
flight by the Goths, and he seeking to save himself by running away, was
drowned in a marrish ground. And when after these losses, the Empire ought to
have been restored, and the honor thereof vindicated by the Successor with new
Forces; Gallus who had obtained this supreme dignity by the Soldiers rashness,
and who was a poorly spirited man, and had come by the Empire by indirect
means; That he might enjoy his leisure time in Rome, which he leudly spent, he
was easily persuaded to make a shameful peace with the Goths, not only
permitting them to ^arry in the Provinces which they were possessed of, but
obliging himself to pay them a certain sum of money yearly.

Thus the City of Rome, which was Mistress of the whole World, became tributary
to a Barbarous people, who knew not till then what belonged to Imperial
dignity, to Wealth, nor to Military glory: This base Agreement gave a great
blow to the reputation of the Roman Empire; so as in Galienus his time, who
soon after succeeded in the Empire, so many mutinies and insurrections arose,
as Italy it self was hardly kept in obedience; and the Goths grew so insolent,
as breaking the Peace which they had made with the Gauls, they took many Cities
in Bythinia, in Thrace, and in Macedonia: By which prosperous successes others
of the Goths being encouraged, who had tarried all this while at home, where
they lived in narrow precincts, they sent to the Emperor Valens to demand abode
in the Provinces of the Empire; with whom fear prevailing more then the ancient
honor of the Empire; and the Roman generosity, gave way to their request,
allotting Bulgaria and Servia for these new Inhabitants to live in; suffering
the Northern Nations thus to get footing, and to increase in strength, which
had always been the greatest Enemies to the Empire, and from whom the Emperors
had received such injuries and shame. These easy acquisitions, and the hopes
of greater matters, made Alaricus King of the Goths march not long after with a
numerous Army from his own Kingdom toward Italy, demanding that a place of
residence might be allowed him by the Emperor Honorius in France; and receiving
a denial, did in his fury do greater mischief.

But the same Emperor Valens soon felt the harm of this his ill-taken advice:
For the same Goths increasing through the baseness and negligence of others,
and the Huns, Alani, and other Northern people conspiring together with them,
they besieged the City of Constantinople, and other noble Cities were
endangered: which made Gratianus choose Theodosius for his Companion in the
Empire, for the great repute which was had of his valor, though he were a
Spaniard by Nation. But though he behaved himself gallantly against these
Enemies, and wan some brave victories; yet since they had already got great
strength, and were governed in obedience under their valiant Masters and
Commanders, and for that the Empire was still busied in other Wars, it was
thought expedient to come to peace with Alaricus King of the Goths, leading him
and a great number of his men under the Empires pay, to make use of them in
other undertakings. For the Goths being kept in continual pay by some former
Emperors, amongst other Soldiers which served the Empire, and being of
themselves conversant in many Wars, they were become a valiant People, and had
learned the Roman discipline, though not the corruption which overthrew it, in
the Roman Camp. Which, though it might be good for the present occasions, it
did certainly prove very pernicious afterward. For though by this Peace
Theodosius was safe from any fear of this Nation, whilst he governed together
with Gratianus, and also afterward when he held the Empire alone by himself,
he being a person of singular worth, and one who by his industry had somewhat
renewed the ancient discipline amongst the Soldiers, yet after his death the
Forces of the Empire beginning again to flag, and the Empire falling into the
hands of his two sons, Arc^dius and Honorius, who succeeded their Father whilst
they were but young, and proved not to be of such gallant parts as the
condition of those times required, many of those who commanded under Theodosius
in several parts rebelled, who were all of them cried up Emperors by those
Armies wherein they commanded; by which occasions being invited, the Goths did
not only return to rise up in Arms against the Empire, but also other Northern
Nations who did then inhabit Germany, as the Alani, Franks and Vandals, took up
Arms, and did at one and the same time assault the States of the Empire in
several parts; many of them marching more particularly toward Italy, and
against the very City of Rome, which after diverse passages remained in prey to
these Barbarians, the ancient Roman worth being so decayed, as there was not
any one who did so much as provide for the welfare of so stately a City, which
was the Queen of the World. And the Emperor Honorius (a thing which is not to
be mentioned without much marvel) whilst Italy and other Countries were wasted
with War, and the very City of Rome was reduced to the utmost extremity,
remained in Ravenna an idle Spectator of his Subjects so great calamity, and of
the ruin of his State, in so base and stupid a manner, as being told he might
do well to provide for the preservation and safety of so many of the Empires
Provinces, which being miserably torn in pieces, were falling into the power of
the Barbarians, answered, That he could live without them.

After the ruin of Rome, these victorious Barbarians past into France, and
into Spain, where being recruited with other people of their own Nations, and
the Roman Armies being busied in Civil seditions, and in maintaining those
Emperors which each of them had chosen, they had leisure to fix themselves
there, and to take possession of those noble Provinces, the greatest part of
whose ancient Inhabitants being extinguished, they settled themselves there, and
did long govern those Dominions; and others of them passing into Africa, and
having won large Territories, did with the same Fortune and same thoughts
institute their proper Kingdoms. But on the other part, other People called the
Huns fell into Pannonia, called now by their names, Hungaria, and possessing
themselves likewise thereof, fixed their abode and dominion there. So as there
was hardly any Western Province of the Empire which was not at this time
troubled by this fury of War, the Roman Princes and Soldiers not having
sufficient worth to withstand them: Insomuch that when Attila marched with a
furious Army to destroy Italy, the Empire not having any Soldiers that they
durst confide in to impede his passage, the Romans were forced to take King
Theodoricus with a good number of his Goths into their pay; by whose assistance
that cruel Enemy was at that time kept off. But the Empires weak Forces being
at last tired, and some Commanders being lost in whom there remained yet some
worth and discipline, the greater, and almost fatal ruins of Italy began;
whereinto when these cruel Barbarians entered, they put all to fire and sword,
bringing total destruction to many noble and populous Cities. Which (according
to the natural order of all things mortal, wherein Corruption unius est
generatio alterius) gave occasion to the birth of the City of Venice, whereunto
the remainder of the Italian Nobility had recourse, and saved themselves.

The Twelveth DISCOURSE,
Why the Commonwealth of Rome, though she suffered many Defeats in diverse
Battles, yet did still prove Victorious at last.
HE who shall narrowly consider the great actions of the Romans, will still
discover new things therein not only worthy of praise but of admiration. Their
prosperity was certainly very great, but proceeding, as it is to be believed,
from their worth, and from certain and ordinary causes. The People of Rome made
more Wars, then ever any Potentate has been known to do, but that which
occasioneth the greatest wonder is, that their success in all of them was
prosperous. And that though the Roman Armies were in many Battles overcome, yet
still in the conclusion of every War the Victories sided with them:

It will then be worth the while to seek out the truest, or at least, the most
truthlike causes thereof, by reasoning thereupon. The City of Rome waged
continual Wars from the first foundation thereof till Augustus his time, which
was for above Seven hundred years. The gates of that famous Temple of Ianus,
which were never to be shut but in time of Peace, stood always open, unless it
were once in the Consulship of Titus Manlius; nor was there almost any Nation
known in those days* with whom the City of Rome has not at some time made
trial of her forces and worth. That Commonwealth in so many, and so long
contentions of War, was likewise sometimes favored, sometimes frowned upon by
fortune; so as sometimes she was brought into very great danger; yet still she
prevailed at last, and triumphed over her formerly victorious enemies. Long and
heavy was the dispute* which in her very beginning she had with so many people
of Italy, and chiefly with those that were nearest, who singly by themselves,
and jointly with others, did conspire against the Romans, and did by all their
best endeavors seek how to keep the powea of the Empire low, which was
ordained, as was afterward seen, to the height of all greatness. Nor was the
Commonwealth of Rome secure from the efforts of foreign Nations; nay many times
she was to withstand the fury of the French, who assailed her with great
Forces, that they might totally subdue her, and possess themselves of her
Territories, as they had done of so many other parts of Italy. The Commonwealth
made trial of her Forces, even in the beginning of her greatness with other
Kings; till beginning with the first Carthaginian Wars, to wage War further
from her Confines, she proved at last a terror even to the most remote foreign
Countries, which she at last subjugated assuming always greater and better
courage, as her Empire did increase, and her Military Discipline bettering by
exercise, as did also her worth by prosperous success.

Who will not then admire these so great and unparellel'd things? Who can
consider them without endeavoring to know the reasons thereof? Polybius, whilst
he recounts some of these wonderful things, terming the people of Rome
invincible, adds (that he may in a manner give the reason thereof) that these
people brought whatsoever enterprise, how hard and difficult soever, after many
and various successes, to a good and desired end, because they were modest in
prosperous, and constant in adverse fortune. These two excellent virtues are
certainly requisite to whosoever propounds true and perpetual Glory for his
end, and does aspire thereunto: for the variety of humane affairs does not
tolerate that man should arrive at the height of power, and at supreme honors
by a straight and short path of continued prosperity; therefore constancy, or
let us rather term it Magnanimity or Fortitude is requisite for him, to the end
that he may persevere in the same gallantry and grandeur of spirit, wherewith
he did propound any great action to himself, without being weary or quiet till
he has effected it. And modesty is likewise necessary for him, that is to say
a temperate affection, so as he may not lose himself in prosperous successes,
and being puffed up with pride and vain glory, may not think he is come to his
journeys end, when he is not gotten half way thither; which is the cause why
many have lost their good fortune, and not reaped the true fruits of many
worthy and well begun labors. So as it may be numbered amongst those things
which made great Kings amongst them, and which brought them to so great an
Eminency of power, and command, that they were endowed with these two excellent
Virtues, whereby they knew how to make use of both fortunes.

But these may peradventure be but general rules, and not such as may give
satisfaction; for if we will look into the Commonwealth of Greece, we shall
find many eminent examples of both these virtues, yet were they not able to
carry them half the way so far toward the Goal, whereat the Romans arrived;
therefore are not their actions worthy that high esteem which is deservedly put
upon the Roman Affairs. There have likewise been many famous Princes in several
ages, who neither wanted generosity of mind, constantly to prosecute noble
actions by them begun; nor modesty and temperance in all other affections,
merely out of a desire of glory; and yet their enterprises have not always
succeeded well, nor have they enlarged their Power and Dominions, as did the
Romans. Let us pass on then to other considerations which shall hereafter be
looked upon, how the Romans governed themselves and their counsels in their
Militia, what their military orders and institutions were, what state they were
at first possessed of, which served as it were for a ladder for them whereby to
climb up to the height of such greatness and command, and we shall find that
these were such amongst the Romans as were not all of them together, or in such
excellency in other Principalities and Nations, so as they were with reason to
produce such effects as they did. All the Offices of War were admin^stred
amongst the Romans by their Citizens; varying sometimes the condition of the
persons, together with the names and authority of those who commanded the
Armies; for they made sometimes use of Noblemen, sometimes of Plebeians. But
they still kept amongst their own Romans, all the degrees of the Militia, and
afforded occasion to many to exercise themselves therein, so as there was not
any witty Citizen, or hopeful Young Man of noble extract, who was far from
them. Nay, it is seen, that those who were more given to the study of
speculative Learning, when the places, and Governments committed to their
charge, did so require, betook themselves, as others did, to the managing of
Arms, and to warlike Affairs; in such sort as even Cicero, wholly given to
Philosophy, and the study of Eloquence, when he went Pro-consul into Cilicia,
waged War with the Parthians. Hence it was that they never wanted Commanders,
and if at any time the Roman Armies suffered any thing by the imprudency or
infelicity of one Commander, they knew quickly how to make amends by the worth
and fortune of another, as it fell out at all times; For in that Commonwealth,
by reason of her orders, and by her being still employed in War, the way was
always open to many Citizens to employ themselves in Arms, and in commands of
the Armies. Nor was the obedience which is due by Soldiers to their Commanders
the less for this. For a Consul, or Dictator had the like authority in the
Camp, as the person of an absolute Prince could have had, who commanded his
Army personally.

Therefore by descending to more particulars, the benefit may be the more
easily discerned which redounded to that Commonwealth, by means of these her
good orders: For if any disorder did at any time happen (as usually there does
in any, how well soever ordered Government) through the fault of any particular
Citizen, whereby the Commonwealth suffered prejudice in the administration of
War, this might soon be amended, and the prejudice received from the enemy,
might quickly be restored by the presence and worth of some other Citizen. Thus
it fell out, that when the Roman Armies, whilst the bounds of the Commonwealth
were but small, were overcome by the Sabins, by the Equi, by the Capennati, by
the Falisci, and by others of their neighbors, with whom they waged War, they
could easily stop the course of that their bad fortune, and shun running into
greater dangers. The rout which was given by the Equi, and Sabins, and which
was the greatest given in those times, was known to be occasioned through the
distaste which the Army took at Appius the Decemviri and at the injustice, and
cruelty which he used toward the Soldiery. Wherefore returning to the former
Government of Consuls, Quintius the new Consul had the means given him of
recovering the Militia's formerly lost honor and credit; by giving a great
overthrow to those very enemies, who were grown so proud and insolent for their
victories had over the Roman Army.

Thus likewise, when the Roman Armies were shamefully put to slight another
time by the ^qui, ^idenates and Falisci, first through the defeat of Papyrius
Mugelanus; and then by the like of Genutius, and Titinius the military
Tribunes, who were mean and unexpert Plebeians, and who without much authority
had the care of the Army; When Quintus Servilius was created Consul, and after
him Furius Camillus, they won the most famous victories that the Romans had
ever gotten till that time (which was Three hundred and fifty years after the
building of the City) against the Aequi, and other of their Enemies. But this
may be better conceived in greater affairs, when the Commonwealth was much
increased. The Roman Armies rec^ived so notable defeats in the War which
Pyrrhus made against them, as the whole affairs of the Commonwealth seemed to
be in no little danger, having so potent and victorious an Enemy within their
bosoms: yet at last not being dismayed for any adverse fortune, but treating
freely with their Enemy, rather as vanquishers then vanquished, they reduced
their affairs to such a condition, as Pyrrhus thought it his best course to
quit Italy, and leave the Romans quiet. It is herein to be considered, that the
Romans being so long accustomed to continual Wars with their neighbors the
Italians, and particularly with the Samnites a little before this time, against
whom the Romans marched with numerous Armies, and had good success winning many
famous victories; insomuch as Val. Corvinus killed above thirty thousand
Samnites in one day, made much for their withstanding so great an Enemy as
Pyrrhus, and for their maintaining themselves against Foreign Forces, against
the use of Elephants, and other new ways of warfaring, which Italy had not
known before; whence it was that the City of Rome did at this time abound in
valiant men, and who were expert in the Militia. So as Cynneas who was sent by
Pyrrhus to Rome, told him, that he had seen a City so very full of Inhabitants,
as he feared if his Highness should continue his war with the Romans, he should
go about to overcome an Hydra: And Pyrrhus himself has more then once admired
the worth of the Roman Commanders.

Who does not even with wonder consider, how many Commanders, and how many
Armies the Commonwealth of Rome could set out in the War with the
Carthaginians, and especially in that with Hannibal, which did more endanger
the affairs of Rome then all the rest? since it main^ained War in so many
several parts at one and the same time, in Italy, Spain, Africa, and Greece.
Which they were able to do by reason of the infinite number of men wherewith
Italy was then inhabited, who were all well disciplined, by reason of their
long exercise in War. We read, that when the Romans made War with Hannibal,
they had sometimes, what of their own proper Soldiers, and what of their
Associates, who did all neighbor near upon them, twenty three Legions, which
made about an hundred thousand Soldiers, for defense of their Empire. Moreover,
whilst the Commonwealth kept her Forces divided in several parts, as she did
with wonderful judgment in the Carthaginian war, which was the sorest of all
the rest, though she tasted of adverse fortune sometimes in some parts, yet
were not all her Forces utterly destroyed; for that part of their Forces which
was yet safe and entire, was able to make good the fortune of the whole
Commonwealth. Thus after those notable Routs which the Roman Armies had, the
one by the Tygurian Gauls, when the Forces were commanded by Lucius Cassius;
the other by the Cymbrians, when they were led on by Caius Servilius Cepio, in
which two Battles the Romans lost above Eighty thousand Soldiers, they were
able notwithstanding to recruit themselves, and defend their affairs; because
they had another victorious Army at the same time, commanded by Marius, who had
just at that time gloriously ended the War against Iugurth. Thus when the
Commonwealth of Rome seemed to be utterly ruined by reason of the two
discomfitures given them, the one at Thra^ymenes, the other at Cannae, she was
restored again by her prosperoussuccess in War with Spain. Thus when two of her
Armies were worsted in Spain, the Commonwealth was preserve in safety by
fortunate success of their Wars in Sicily and in Italy. When the Romans were in
greater danger then ever, there being at the same time two great Carthaginian
Armies in Italy, and two most valiant Generals, Hannibal and Asdrubal; yet
would not the Romans keep all their Warriors in Italy, but did at the same time
maintain and reinforce their Armies in Sardi^ia, Sicily, France, and Spain. And
though by reason of so many Wars which begot one another, the Commonwealth must
needs oftentimes run great hazards, especially since she ofttimes exposed her
Armies to the doubtful event of Battle; yet did they thereby receive this of
good and safety, that by reason of their continual exercise of Arms, they were
the more easily provided of valiant and experienced men, and were the better
able to govern themselves in adverse fortune. The Carthaginians, on the
contrary, not being able to make use of many good Commanders or Soldiers, (for
they did not make use of their own peculiar Militia, as did the Romans, but did
employ some few of the chief of their City-Factions in commanding their Armies)
could not so easily recruit and reinforce their Armies, when they were weakened
by any adverse fortune; nor had they whereout to pick better or more fortunate
Commanders, when any of theirs were faulty. Insomuch as when the Carthaginians
were overcome by Scipio in Africa, they were forced to recall Hannibal from
Italy, suffering the Romans to take breath in those parts where they were most
molested; and Hannibal himself not having means to recruit his Army, which he
had brought with him from Africa, and which was wasted and weakened by long
march, and adverse fortune, was necessitated to give way to the valor and
fortune of the Romans.

It made not a little likewise for the Government of the Roman Commonwealth,
and for the maintaining of her in her weak beginnings, that the Militia was
exercised for many years without any pay to the Soldiers. So as wh^lst their
means was yet but small, and yet they must still be in Arms, by reason of their
being still infested by many of the neighboring Nations, the want of moneys was
no cause of not maintaining their Armies, as it has been the ruin of many
Stat^s; but if they happened to receive a Rout, the Army might be recruited by
other chosen and commanded men. But afterward when the City was much better
peopled, and much stronger, so as she was able to make greater undertakings,
the public Exchequer was so enriched, answerable to what became a well-ordered
Government, and which aspired to the height of Empire, as she was not for this
cause so incommodated, as that she must yield under the weight of War, nor yet
for any her greatest mifortune. Whereas in some other Commonwealths, as in that
of Sparta, the poorness of the Exchequer introduced by Lycurgus his Laws,
hindered her from enlarging her Empire; and when she aspired thereunto, she was
forced for want of things requisite to fly for help to the Kings of Persia; so
as in lieu of domineering over the rest of the Grecians, she became a servant
to Barbarians, because she exceeded those Terms and Rules wherewith her
Government was founded and established.

After these considerations, some things may be added which proved likewise
very advantageous for the securing of the Romans greatness: As the continuation
of the Militia, out of a duty imposed upon every Citizen, of spending almost
all the best years of his life in the Camp, every one being bound to militate
till he had advanced fifteen Pays at least: So he who had fought in one or two
Battles, was not permitted to sit down and rest, but continuing in the Militia,
by reason of the experience he had gotten, became more useful and advantageous
in the Wars. Amongst others, we have a notable example of one L. E. Siccius,
who was slain in the Camp in the time of Appius his Decemvirate, after he had
followed the Wars for Forty years together: and after having been in above a
hundred Battles. It is also a thing of great consideration, that the nerve of
the Roman Armies consisted in their Infantry, though they had some Horse to
strengthen them; whence it was, that they were sooner recruited, and reinforced
after a rout, for that men are sooner recruited then horses: there being
greater store of them: And which the Romans could the better do, because they
made use of men of one only Country for their Soldiers, that is to say, of
their own men, and those of their Associates who were at hand and ready to be
joined together, and be employed in any action; which does not fall out so when
Armies are to be raised and recruited out of many Nations, and from Far distant
places. But it was a great help to the Romans above all other things, for the
maintaining of themselves in all events of so many Wars, which they made with
so many powerful Kings and Nations, that they were possessed of Italy; a
Province, which in those times did more abound in men and arms, then any other
Country; as may be known by many things, but chiefly by this, That the
Commonwealth of Rome had labored very long ere she could subjugate Italy, which
was not wholly subdued, in all the parts thereof, till after the Commonwealth
had extended her Precincts very far: when afterward by the Forces of the same
Italy, she in a few years overcame all other Provinces, and Nations. Therefore
the War which was made against the Romans by the neighboring People, the
Piceni, Pel^gni, Marusini, Lucani, Marci, and others, which was called Bellum
Sociale, because they termed themselves fellow^companions to the People of
Rome; though there were but a small part of the Italian Forces in it; yet that
Country being excellently well inhabited with warlike men, it was thought to be
one of the hardest, and most dangerous Wars, that ever the Commonwealth of
Rome made; nor could it be ended out by allowing those People, the Franchise
and Liberty of Roman Citizens, which was as much as to grant them the thing
they fought for; for the obtaining of that, was that for which they fought. And
we read, that a muster being made throughout all Italy of all the Soldiers
which might be assembled to withstand the danger which was threatened by the
Barbarians, when the ^ransalpine Gauls which dwelt about the Rhodosius, were
^^mmoned by the other Gauls, who were already possessed of some parts of
Lombardy, that they might prepare to assault Italy; the Muster role of such as
were able to bear Arms, amounted to Seven hundred thousand Foot, and Threescore
thousand Horse, who were fit to serve upon such an occasion. And yet the
greatest part of Lombardy, which was possessed by the said Gauls, nor some other
of those Provinces which are now comprehended within the Confines of Italy,
were not numbered in this Muster-roll. Which is so much the more to be wondered
at for that this happened after the Carthaginian War; to wit, when the
Commonwealth of Rome was not yet gotten to that height of Power whereunto she
arrived afterward; people multiplying through the greatness and felicity of
the Empire, and many men having been consumed in that long and sore War.

To these things may be added the excellency of Military Discipline, which as
it was in great perfection with the Romans, so was it of great advantage to the
obtaining of so many Victories, and to the completing of so many enterprises.
For though the Grecian, Macedonian, and Roman Militia were of great esteem at
one and the same time, yet that of the Romans did so far exceed the others, as
that it was not only stronger, and more secure, but better fitted then the
rest for all places; and times. Amongst other Orders of the Grecian and of the
Macedonian Militia, wherewith the Armies of Alexander the Great did in
particular so miraculous things, the Phalanx was much celebrated; but this,
though it were in it self of very great strength, it oft-times proved not so
serviceable, if upon any occasion it became to be divided, or disordered: But
the Roman Orders were not only firm and stable, as was the Phalanx, but were
more adapted to every place, and every season, and proved very congruous for
all warlike actions; so as to their own great advantage, and to the prejudice
of their enemies, making use of their own Soldiers, the Romans performed the
Office of whatsoever military Discipline by their own men, fighting in all
postures, either in whole bodies altogether, or Squadron to Squadron, or man to
man, so as not any man was idle or useless in their Camps, or Battles. For
whilst they minded fighting, and not flying, or free-booting, the routs which
their Armies did oft-times receive, were not such, but that they did in some
places make their party good against their enemy, and keep some part of their
Army safe; which proceeded principally from the exquisite orders of that
Militia. Insomuch as Hannibal when he came first into Italy, having after his
first conflicts learned the excellency of this Militia, made his Soldiers use
the Romans Arms; and Pyrrhus did not only betake himself to use these Arms,
but did mingle many Italian Soldiers, the better to accommodate his Militia to
the Roman Ordinances; saying, that that Discipline of the Barbarians (a name
given by the Grecians to all other Nations) was not at all barbarous. So when
it happened that the Romans receive any rout, as they did in the Battles made
against the two aforesaid Commanders Hannibal and Pyrrhus, very experience in
other successes made them know that it was not the goodness of any foreign
military Discipline which bereft the Romans of the Victories which they were
wont to bear away, but for that the Romans wanted such excellent Commanders as
those two were. Therefore when the worth of the Commanders came to be equal,
the goodness and excellency of the Roman Military Ordinances prevailed before
those of those very Armies, which for some other respects had the better of the
Romans.

But to proceed upon our late consideration, we must say that the Arms used by
the Romans were thought very convenient, and better then those of other
Nations, as Lances which were usually given to Soldiers of the first Files;
whereby they received much benefit, as well to withstand the first fiercest
efforts of the Enemy, as to weary them in cutting those arms in pieces, being
to come to closer fight; and then whole bodies of fresh and well armed Soldiers
succeeded in the Roman Armies. For their bodies were covered with their
Bucklers, which were very large ones, and the short, but very sharp swords and
finely tempered, used by the Romans, were of great advantage to the Soldiers,
who might wield them in a long fight, as well to defend themselves from their
Enemies blows, as to let fly upon them; which was not practiced in other
Militia's of those times; particularly not amongst the French, with whom the
Romans had often and dangerous fights, for they used very little Bucklers, and
long heavy swords, very sharp at the point, so as they were easily wrested, and
made unuseful. Therefore the routs which the Roman Armies received, were very
few in comparison of those they gave their Enemies; and being but seldom
worsted, and often victorious, the state, strength, and reputation of the
Empire did still increase; so as when some adverse fortune happened, it was not
sufficient to extinguish, no nor so much as long to weaken the greatness of
that Commonwealth. Diverse particular good rules observed in the administration
of War, were likewise of great moment for the carrying on of the Roman affairs.
Amongst which the diligence which was used by public constitutions in dividing
of the prey, may be numbered for one; for they used to place the prey or booty
first in public, and did then so divide it amongst the Soldiers, as those who
were upon the guard shared as well thereof, as those that were forwardest in
the action, and who had sacked the Enemy. Whereby occasion was not given for
those notable disorders which have been observed to happen in these latter
times, wherein upon such an occasion the loss of the whole Army has ensued.

The faith also which was so exactly observed, and the fair proceedings with
such Cities as were subject to that Dominion, won the Romans the good affection
of the people; by whose favor Empires are usually more upheld upon any adverse
accident, then by any other thing. Of these we read of many notable examples;
it being as far from that good Military Discipline, to bear with the insolency
of Soldiers, as it is introduced in these our last Ages to the great prejudice
of people, though friends and subjects. For such faults as these were severely
punished; the which is observable amongst so many other actions, for what the
Romans did to those people, to whom they did not only restore the goods and
liberty which had been by the Soldiers wickedly taken away, and so their
grievances were redrest, but those were severely punished who had committed
such things. To this may be added, that the Romans, to the end that the power
of the Commonwealth might still prevail, and might upon any occasion be made
use of, endeavored as soon as they bent their minds to greater matters, to
accompany their Landforces with Maritime-aids, so as the one might help the
other, and the one not only be made more powerful by the other, but more
secure, as it fell out, and as it may be observed in many of their actions; but
chiefly when seeing their affairs succeeded but ill with the Carthaginians, who
prevailed by reason of their ancient Maritime profession, and had likewise
great advantage in their Land-Militia by their use of Elephan^s, which the
Romans had not as yet well learned how to resist; they bent themselves wholly
to Naval preparations, wherein they did afterward behave themselves with such
valor and prosperity, as they overcame these their so fierce and cruel Enemies
in a Naval fight, and raised their fortune.

Let us in the next place observe, that the greatness and generosity of the
Romans was such, as not content to secure their near neighboring dangers, and
out of a desire of quiet to leave the sparkles of those Wars unquench'd, from
whence another fire might soon be kindled, they always endeavored to see the
last sparkle quite put out. The Roman Army was overcome, and much endamaged by
the Galli Gessati after the death of Consul A^ilius, where their liberty being
exposed to much danger upon this so sad accident, the Romans would once more
try the fortune of battle, wherein they had good success, and cutting in pieces
above Forty thousand of that Nation, they did vindicate their former injuries.
Nor yet did they then lay down their Arms, though they were freed from that
their greatest danger; but knowing that there remained yet other powerful
Armies of the same Gauls is other parts of Italy, they would continue war
against them, and of assailed become assailors; which afforded them occasion of
those Marcellus his notable victories, and of making themselves masters of the
chiefest Cities of Lombardy, which were possessed by the Gauls. The Commonwealth
of Rome was never in greater danger, then when Asdrubal passing over the Alps
with a numerous Army, entered Italy, whilst his brother Hannibal was there
likewise with another powerful Army. They fought Asdrubal, and to their great
joy their Consuls were victorious: which notwithstanding, they forbear not to
continue war in Spain, though they were free from their greater and nearer
dangers; but with the Forces they had there, went to find out, and to fight
other Enemy-Armies of the Carthaginians which were in that Province; for they
knew if those Armies should remain entire, the War might easily be renewed, and
other impediments being removed, Hannibal would be the more easily succored
with necessaries which he wanted, and so might still molest the Romans in
Italy. Thus not allowing of any Peace, then what might be purchased by either
having totally quelled, or at least very much weakened the Enemy, the Romans
never laid down Arms but when they were entire Victors: which other Princes not
being able to do, have deferred their ruin for a short time, but have not
totally kept it off.

Many other things might likewise be thought of, by which it might be evidently
proved, that the Romans did always prove victorious at last, and did
perpetually increase their State and strength. But what we have already said,
may suffice to teach such Princes and Nations as shall aspire to the highest
degree of glory, whither it is that they ought to bend their thoughts, and
which are the best means to arrive thereat: And when all other necessary
accidents shall correspond, those who shall imitate the excellent worth and
discipline of the Romans, will not find themselves any whit deceived.

The Thirteenth DISCOURSE.
Whether the City of Rome could have maintained herself longer in the glory and
majesty of her Command, if she had preserved her Liberty and Form of
Commonwealth, then she did under the Government of Emperors.
AFter that Caesar had robbed his Country of her liberty, and changing the
ancient form of Government, reduced the Commonwealth of Rome into a Monarchical
form, she continued therein in a continued series of many Emperors, safe and
entire, or at least without any remarkable alteration or declining, for the
space of about four hundred years, till the time of Arcadius and Honorius,
wherein Italy underwent many miserable ruins, as did also the very City of
Rome, which was the Metropolis of the Empire; so as she could not resume her
ancient greatness, as formerly she had done after some adverse events.

It appears to be, and truly is a thing worthy of deep discourse and
consideration, how this so great and well-founded Empire, after it began to
totter, did so soon precipitate into final ruin. If the time of this its
duration be measured in respect to the ordinary mutation of humane things, and
more particularly of State-Governments, the time of its continuance may appear
to have been long enough: but if the greatness and power of the Empire be taken
into consideration, which was such as that there was no other Potentate that
could weigh against it, or rather no Country which was not in some sort subject
thereunto, it may very well invite us, so far as may be probably conjectured by
so great success, and where so many various accidents concur, and have a share,
to conjecture whether the Roman Empire would have been longer or shorter lived,
if it had been still governed in the form of a Commonwealth, then it did when
it fell into the power of one only man, under the government of Emperors. Many
things may persuade us to believe that in whatsoever condition or form of
Government, this Empire must have run the same fortune, and walked on with some
little variation of time to the same end it did. First the vicissitude of
humane affairs, which by reason of their natural imperfections, will not suffer
sublunary things to be still in the same state of being, but will have it so,
as being carried about in continual motion, they must sometimes be raised
higher, fall sometimes lower. Other People, and other Nations, besides the
Romans, have flourished in other times, though not so much, nor so highly cried
up. Other Ages have seen other great Empires, so as the rise of the one has
been the fall of the other; and it is a great truth, that Lordships and
Empires, as do men's lives, nay as befalls every thing that is born, in time wax
old, and proceeding on by ordinary and natural gradations, have their
beginning, increase, time of perfection, declination, and final ruin. Till
Honorius his rule, at which time the Empire began palpably to wander from its
grandeur and dignity, it had continued for so many years, as the longer
duration thereof would have almost exceeded the common condition of other
things; this may well be a general reason; but one that is so approved of by
other reasons, and continual experience, as it may be reputed certain in
particulars, though sometimes we ignore the proximate reason. But to proceed to
more particular considerations, why should we believe that the Roman Empire
should have been of longer duration if it had been governed by a Commonwealth,
then under Emperors? Not only reason, but experience shows, that (...)
Government of one alone is fittest to keep up supreme power in large Dominions;
since all other great Powers and Lordships have been founded and governed by
one only King or Emperor.

The City of Rome is the only example of a Commonwealth which has purchased
large Dominion; nay, we may therein also observe, that as soon as she grew to
be Mistress of many Provinces, that Form of Government behoved to be altered,
as not fit to sustain so great a weight. In the very times of the Commonwealth,
when any thing was to be agitated or treated of, especially in Wars of great
importance and difficulty, they ran to create a Dictator; because the supreme
authority which by virtue of that Magistracy was granted to one man alone, was
held requisite for the good administration of the most difficult businesses.
The Magistracy of the Dictator did punctally represent the Majesty, and
Dignity which the Roman Emperors did after retain; Wherefore Caesar, when he
made himself the Master of the Commonwealth, made himself be declared
perpetual Dictator; And the name of Emperor was taken from the very name used
by the Roman Commanders, and showed the Authority which they had of Emperor,
which is to command over Armies. And certainly the uniting the power of many in
one alone, does not only not weaken, but does much to the strength and power
of a Government or State: For it increases obedience, facilitates resolutions,
and hastens the execution of weightiest affairs. So as had not the Roman
Forces, when military Discipline flourished most amongst them, been withheld
oftentimes, as if oppressed by internal seditions, sprung from that sort of
Government whereof they did so much partake, and which did oft-times retard
great enterprises, it may be argued that the City would have sooner gotten to
that height of greatness and Empire, which she arrived at, born even even by
main force against all these difficulties, by the great worth of her Citizens.

Let us observe in the next place, that though the Empire of Rome had changed
the Form of Government, and reduced the supreme power into one alone, yet we
find not, that she was bereft of those arms, and helps wherewith she had been
preserved whilst she was a Commonwealth; but did rather increase them, and did
very much establish Forces; for the Emperors kept always about their persons a
great number of Soldiers, for the defense of Imperial Majesty, which were
therefore called Pretorian-bands, and Armies in the Garrisons of Provinces,
which might defend, and keep them from any commotion which might be raised,
either by their own Subjects, or by foreign Nations. Nor were the Emperors
themselves wanting in taking order for Arms and all things belonging to War;
nay, not only those that were held valiant, but even who for all things else
were esteemed cowards, and given over to all manner of vice, did either by
themselves, or by their Commanders undertake and finish many Wars. So it seems
likliest that the Roman Empire might govern her self, and so long preserve her
greatness as she did, chiefly for being sustained by the chief Authority, and
reverent Majesty of one only Lord, which was of such force, as it for a long
time did overcome that weakness, which otherwise might have befaln the Empire,
by the abject baseness of many Emperors; where on the contrary, whilst it was a
Commonwealth, it was divided, rent, weak, and easy to have been oppressed, if it
had then met with the power of any great, and valiant Nations, which would have
suppressed it, as did so many Northern People do to the Empire. And if the
corruption of ancient customs may be judged to have been the readiest and
truest occasion of the ruin of this Empire, the Commonwealth was never free
from the like, but even as for this very cause, of having fallen from her good
Principles, that first Government was altered, and the City lost her Liberty,
so might she have done, though she still kept the Form of a Commonwealth.
Avarice, ambition, immoderate ^ensuality, were the maladies wherewith the City
of Rome began to be infected, not when she was governed by Emperors, but whilst
she was ruled by her Citizens in Civil Government; And if it be objected that
this did not hinder her from giving the greatest testimony of her valor in War,
since in the last Age of the Commonwealth, when these vices and corruptions
were rifest among the Citizens, Military Discipline did flourish most, and
greatest actions were done: It cannot then be said, that neither the corruption
of manners in the times of Emperors, did destroy the Empire, nor that the
integrity thereof could have longer preserved the power of the Commonwealth.
But so much the less for that the Empire did not fall to ruin (though it was
sufficiently agitated by home-disorders) in such sort, as that either the
Subjects did vindicate their Liberty, or the Commanders of Armies divide the
Empire amongst them, as did Alexanders Commanders after his death; but the
roman Commonwealth, though it was oft-times thrust at by such commotions, was
still notwithstanding able to subsist, and to raise it self up again when it
began to fall. But barbarous and foreign Forces overthrew it at last; with whom
the famous Commanders in the time of the Commonwealth, not having had any
occasion to t^y their worth, it cannot be said what would have succeeded upon
such an occasion if the Government of the Commonwealth had continued till that
time. It is likely, that the disorders and factions increasing much more,
whereof so many p^stifero^s seeds had been sowed in all the Orders of the City,
the City, and Territo^ies belonging thereunto being to remain the weaker, and
the more exposed to the injuries of foreiners, would have been the easilier
oppressed, if she had been to have withstood the terrible shock of these fierce
and wild Northern Nations, which the Emperors Forces did notwithstanding long
resist; insomuch as the Roman Empire maintained it self for the space of two
hundred years after it was molested by these sorts of people; nay, it
maintained it self in dignity and majesty for about si^ty years after it was
shrewdly shaken, till in the time of the Emperor Leo the First, Rome and Italy
being totally abandoned, the name and power of the Western Empire did totally
terminate.

It may therefore be thought a gallant and well-advised action, that the
Emperors did so long temporise, and keep the Arms of these so powerful Nations
from the more inward parts of their State, of Italy, and chiefly of Rome
herself, like so much venom from their hearts; with which if they should have
tried the fortune of War; hazarding one Battle or more, as upon other occasions
those ancient Roman Commanders had done, they might peradventure have brought
the Empire sooner to its ruin, since they had to do with a very warlike
people, and whose condition was such, as they must either die, or overcome. And
certainly they had done worse, if they had therein trusted and relied upon
Fortune, since they could have gotten nothing by the victory when they should
have won it, were it not the saving of themselves for the present against those
Armies, who might have been succeeded by others of the same Nations, and so the
War to have been renewed more hotly and direfully then before, out of a desire
to revenge the death of their friends; whereas the loss of a Battle or two on
the Romans side, might have drawn along with it the ruin of a most noble
Empire. It was then fortunate for the Commonwealth of Rome, that she met not
with these people in such necessity and danger; for if that had befaln her,
which happened in the time of Emperors, that Fame might peradventure have been
obscured which she was happy in, of being glorious and victorious in all Wars;
and the course of her so many prosperous successes might have been interrupted
or broken off by this unfortunate end.

Yet if we will look on the other side, we may peradventure meet with other no
less prevalent reasons which peradventure persuade us to the contrary.
Experience shows us how good the Orders were wherewith the Commonwealth was
founded, to make great acquisitions: But it is a general rule, That States are
preserved by walking in the same ways wherein they were founded; for every
thing is preserved and maintained by alike things, and are corrupted by the
contraries. If the Roman Arms, governed by her own Citizens with Civil
authority, were sufficient to reduce so many States and Kingdoms under the
power of the Commonwealth, what reason have we to believe that they should not
still be as able to preserve what they had gotten; which is more easily done?
The baseness and carelessness of many of those Emperors did doubtlesly open the
way to the Empires ruin; for they oftentimes suffered those Northern people to
settle themselves in diverse Provinces of the Empire. Alaricus was permitted by
Honorius to inhabit with his Goths in France; and soon after becoming his
Colleagues, they likewise obtained some Cities in Spain from him. Valentinianus
granted likewise Servis and Bulgaria to other Goths; and before these, Gallus
had bought peace of the Goths; so as becoming more bold and insolent, they made
themselves masters of Thrace, Thessaly, and of Macedonia. Thus the very
Emperors themselves having through their pusillanimity suffered mischief to
increase at home, and these their fierce Enemies to grow powerful, they could
not afterward drive them out of those places which they had possessed themselves
of, nor keep them long out of Italy. This would not have been suffered by the
generosity of the Roman Commanders and Citizens, who when they were in a much
worse condition, would by no means agree with King Pyrrhus, who had assailed
Italy, unless he would leave them, and return to his own Kingdom. And that they
might draw Hannibal out of Italy, they betook themselves to molest the
Carthaginians in Spain and in Africa, after they had for so many years
generously withstood their Forces. And whilst that State continued in the form
of a Commonwealth, as if Liberty had infused noble and generous thoughts into
them, the City of Rome was an example to all the world of all sorts of virtue,
chiefly of Magnanim^ty in undertaking great enterprises, and of Fortitude and
Constancy in managing them, and in bringing them to a happy end. But when the
Commonwealth was ^uin'd, and a new sort of Government brought in, that ancient
Roman worth went astray by little and little, till at last it was quite lost.
So as the ensuing Ages gave as many examples of ignorance and baseness in the
very Emperors themselves, and in others who were of greatest degree and
authority in that Empire. Hence then it was, that the good and ancient Customs
being corrupted, both in Civil government, and chiefly in the Militia, the
State being reduced to great faintness, and growing old, had not strength
enough to govern it self when it met with stout opposition. The Roman Empire
was brought to so miserable a condition when it was set upon by the Northern
Nations, which wanted all manner of order and military discipline, as well in
their Commanders, as in the Soldiers of their own Nations, whereof the Roman
Armies had been for a long time full; insomuch as for above twenty years
together, before the Goths passed into Italy, they put themselves into the
usual pay of some of the Roman Emperors: And when Theodosius the Second, who
was to make head in France against a valiant and numerous Army led on by
Attila, it was found that the Army which he had then got together retained only
the bare name of a Roman Army, being totally composed of Barbarians, Vizigots,
Franks, Burgonians, Alani, and others, who notwithstanding bore away the
victory for the Roman Emperor. The like happened in Gratianus his time, who being
set upon by Atalaricus King of the Goths, was fain for the defense of Italy to
make use of Goths, Huns, and other Soldiers of those Nations.

But the ancient valor of the Romans was no less lost in their Soldiers then in
their Commanders: For so great an Empire was grown to so great a scarcity of
valiant men, and such as were fit to command the Armies, which were to
withstand the raging violence of these fierce and barbarous Nations; as
Honorius found none to whom he could commit such a charge, but one Stilico, who
was himself a Barbarian, a Hun by Nation, and very perfidious; who moved by his
own interest and designs, sought to maintain his authority, and to the end that
he might place his Son in the Empire, whilst he commanded over those Forces
which were raised to extinguish the Gothish Armies, he did not only not beat
them when he might have done it, but solicited other Northern people to
assault diverse Provinces of the Empire, and so procured them more Enemies. And
Theodosius the Second, having placed all authority and hope of defending the
Provinces of the Empire from the fury of Attila, in one Etius, when he had lost
that Commander, he had not any one fitting to undergo that charge, but was
forced to leave the passage into Italy free unto him. That which is reported of
Attila, does greatly witness the weakness of the Empire, and in what need it
stood of valiant and faithfulness; that being fore told by his Southsayers, that
if he should come to a day of (...) with the (...) Army in France, he should
lose the day, but that his los^ would cost the Empirs dear, for they should
lose one of their best Commanders, ^e did put so high (...) esteem thereupon,
as notwithstanding such an (...), he r^fused (...) battle.

The Wars made by the Empire many years before the times of this greatest
calamity and ruin, were made against their own Roman Commanders, who commanded
over their Armies in several places, and who being in far off Provinces,
rebelled against the Emperors, hoping that they might usurp the Empire, to the
which every one of them did aspire, since they saw that all ways, even the most
indirect, lay open to a succession therein, so as the Discipline and worth was
alike in both the Armies, and still the Romans got the victory, that is to say,
those who had the greatest Power and Authorety in the Roman Empire. But as soon
as occasion was offered of trying the worth of those Soldiers who served the
Empire against foreign Forces, and that whatsoever the Roman Empire lost,
proved an addition to their cruel and mortal enemies, the weakness thereof was
soon seen, and what a loss it had suffered by the total corruption of
Discipline, and good ancient orders. Which could not have happened, if the
Commonwealth had still continued; for it is not likely that valiant Commanders
would be found wanting in that City, where by the virtue of good military
Institutions, Soldiers did so much flourish; since those who had betaken
themselves to other employments, when once they took upon them the Government
of Provinces, behaved themselves so in the Militia, as they deserved
commendations, for there was a certain spirit of glory in them all, and a
desire of propagating the common good, as also an aptness for all things which
did befit Roman spirits. But as soon as the Form of Government being changed,
the same Romans began to degenerate from their ancient worth, and that the
chief employments, nay the Empire it self fell into the hands of foreigners,
all things else must likewise suffer alteration; and in particular, disorders
in the Militia, and the licentiousness of the Soldiers grew to be such, as so
great an Empire seemed sometimes to be governed by chance: There not being any
one therein who took care for the common good, nor for the observance of good
Orders, neither at home nor abroad. And the making of the Militia mercinary,
was cause of the going less in worth and discipline, as also of treachery;
Insomuch as those very Soldiers, who served the Emperors, favored the Enemy; as
it happened in Theodosius his time, when those who were to guard the Pirentian
Mountains, were bribed to let the Vandals and Sweeds pass into Italy, without
making any opposition; which was the occasion of other mischiefs. And the
treachery of his Commander Gallus hindered the Emperor Decius from pursuing a
famous victory gotten of the Goths, when not being so well flesht as they were
afterward, nor yet so powerful, they might have been the easilier kept back.

But in time of the Commonwealth, the Roman Commanders, and Soldiers, fought
for their own Grandezza; the Nobility grew famous and powerful, and the people
in whose name, and in that of the Senate all Wars were made, got honor and
advantage by those things which by their Arms they added to that Dominion: So
as amongst other actions of the Commonwealth, it is not without wonder to be
considered, how she could maintain so many and so numerous Armies as she did,
merely out of Roman Soldiers. But when these respects began to fail, and that
the Militia grew mercinary, and that the Soldier grew past all measure
insolent, by reason of their Commanders leudness, who permitted them to do all
manner of foul things, to the end that they might have their assistance in
their usurping the Empire: The Roman Empire which had formerly wont to be so
formidable to their Enemies, so obedient to their Commanders; began to behave
themselves poorly against their Enemies, and insolently against their Lord and
Master, troublesome to their friends whom they were sent to assist, and too
unable to defend them against foreign Forces: which things, as they were
begotten by the change of Government, so is it most apparent that they were the
occasion of bringing the Empire to a sooner and more miserable end. So many,
and so heinous disorders could not have risen, if the City had continued in a
Form of Commonwealth, or of Civil Government; for though all the Citizens might
not have peradventure proved good and valiant, yet amongst so many there would
still have some one been found, of such excellent worth and charity toward his
Country, as would have been able, if not totally to cure such disorders, at
least so far to have bounded them, as they should not have run into so great a
precipice. And though amongst the Emperors, there were some who were endowed
with excellent virtues, yet could not the affairs of the Empire revert to its
beginning, because there past sometimes a whole Age betwixt one and another of
these good ones: And the Empire, for a continued series of many Emperors was
administered by base men, plunged in a multitude of vices; Insomuch as it became
almost impossible for those who succeeded to reduce the affairs to any good
condition, which had so long run to the worse.

Moreover no one man's abilities, though never so excellent, were able to govern
so great a body, as was the Roman Empire, much less those of such as were so
unfit, even for Governments of less importance, as were many of the Roman
Emperors. Whence it was that Adrian, a wise Emperor, thought it fit for the
welfare of the Empire, to go in his own person, and consolidate it with his
presence, and visit in perpetual progresses, sometimes one, sometimes another
Province; for the good Government whereof, they being so many, and so remote,
the example of so many rebellous Commanders and Armies, showed how false and
unworthy the Ministers had been who had been by the Emperors sent thither. But
in the Commonwealth there were a great many Citizens who were interessed in the
Government and Greatness thereof, so as though some valiant man went to the
Wars, the City remained not without Government or Obedience; nor did the
appointing a Commander in chief over one Army, bereave them of others who might
command more Armies, if they had need to wage War at one and the same time in
several places, whereof the Commonwealth of Rome did in all Ages give notable
examples.

Nor can it be affirmed, but that the Commanders, and Armies of the
Commonwealth have made War with people as powerful in Arms, as were those
Northern Nations, whose fury the Roman Empire could not resist. For, not to
mention so many bitter Wars made by those ancient Romans, the enterprises done
by Julius Caesar in France, were they not undertaken against people, in whom
all the respects met which were considerable in those Northern Nations? very
numerous Armies; for we read, that one only Army, amongst many sundry people
whereinto France was then divided, which was venquish'd and wholly overcome by
Caesar, consisted of above Three hundred thousand ^ighting men. (...) went over
the Mountains to encounter them; so as those Barbarians began to be routed, and
met with a rub to their greatest Forces: And afterward those who had advanced
by another way, being gotten safe into Italy, they sent to desire Marius the
General of the Roman Armies, that he would assign them some Territories where
they might live quietly, and they would therewithal rest contented, without
endeavoring to advance their Fortune any further by their Arms. But they did
not then obtain it of the Roman General, as did the Goths and other Foreiners
afterward from some of the Emperors, who not trusting in themselves, nor in
their Armies, permitted those Barbarous hostile Nations to live peacefully in
those Provinces of the Empire, whereof they had injuriously possessed
themselves. Nay, though there were not above Fifty thousand Foot in the Roman
Army, and that they were to fight with six times as many of the Enemy, the
Roman Commanders did not refuse to join battle with them, and did totally
overthrow the Enemies Army, thereby securing Italy for that time, and for many
years after, from Transalpine incursions. But it is seen, that neither the
number of the Enemy, nor the desperate-mindedness of them with whom they
fought, nor the discipline nor induration in Armies and military duties, (all
which things were in these barbarous Armies overcome by the Romans) were
sufficient to discourage the Roman Commanders and Soldiers, whilst the
Commonwealth did nourish generous thoughts in them, and in their Forces. And in
Augustus his time also, because Discipline in War was observed, Drusus and
Tiberius Nero were able to drive away the Vandals, who were then called
Borgondi, and to frighten other People of the furthermost Northern parts from
coming to infest Italy, as they were preparing to do.

No good argument can then be enforced from what has been said, nor can there
be any rational judgment given of what would have befaln the Roman Empire, if
it had still been kept under the ancient government of a Commonwealth, till the
great combustions made by these Northern people, by whom it was destroyed.
Certainly the acquisition, or preservation of States, does not depend upon the
Form of Government, whether it be of one alone, or of a few, or of many; for we
have examples clear enough of great Empires which have been won, and preserved
by a King, by the Optimati, by a People, and by a Commonwealth mixed of diverse
sorts of Governments. But the strength or weakness of every State depends upon
particular Orders, chiefly in point of the Militia, wherewith it is instituted,
and the force and virtue whereof uses to be such, as even Tyrannical
Governments, which carry with them so much of violence, ^^ve risen to a great
height of power, and have preserved it long, as by woeful example to others we
may this day discern in the Ottoman Government. As then the City of Rome grew
great and powerful, not for being either formed of an Optima^ical, or Popular,
or mixed Government, but for her good Orders and Institutions in military
affairs; whence it was, that when at any time the Romans had ^^d success in
their battles, yet all their enterprises did still end in victory: So cannot it
be alleged for a true and immediate reason of the ruin of that Empire, that is
fell under the government and obedience of one alone. For this Supreme
Authority, were it either by succession, or by election, if (as it has been
for a long course of time in so many other Countries) it had p^ssed in a settled
and usual manner from one Prince to another, whereby the Soldier should have
had no occasion to have usurped a very ^^due and harmful licentiousness in all
things, and that the ancient discipline, obedience, and military worth had been
observed in the Roman (...), a^ it might have been, under one only Lord and
Master, it may be safely said and believed, that that the Roman Empire would
have suffered no more by the fury of those Northern ^^undations, than it would
have done if the State had continued (...) a Commonwealth; but as the Ci^^bri,
(...), Ambr^^^, all of them people of the same Nations, were formerly withstood
by the Roman Arms, so the violence of Goths, Huns, V^ndals, and all such like
might have been stopped. It is only so far true, that the change of Government
afforded occasion to the ruin of the Empire, forasmuch as the good orders and
Roman discipline were peradventure easilier corrupted, when recommended to the
care and diligence of one only Prince, who was oft-times unfit for Government,
then it would have done, had it been guarded by many Citizens at once, as it
was in the Commonwealths time. But it is very hard to penetrate into the true
causes of so great events, and so remote from our memory, which are reserved to
the deeper judgment of him who is the true and Supreme LORD, and who governs
and does dispense States and Empires by ways and ends, which are unknown to
humane reason.

The Fourteenth DISCOURSE.
Why the Grecians did not much extend the Confines of their Dominion, as did
the Romans; and how Greece came to lose her Liberty.
OF all other ancient People, there are two that have been greatly famous; so
as their names, and the glory of things by them done, has been conveyed over
to the memory of Posterity with large acclamations; to wit, the Romans and
Grecians; alike for notable examples of all worth and virtue, but sufficiently
unlike for the greatness and duration of Empire. For whereas the Grecians did
not extend their Confines beyond the bounds of Greece herself, nor did she long
flourish in the same splendour of dignity, nor greatness of fame and dominion;
the Romans did command over almost the whole World, and their Empire, although
the Form of Government was changed, endured for many Ages; for there past above
eleven hundred years between the building of Rome, and the time wherein she was
taken and sacked by the Goths. They then who shall consider these things, may
with reason desire to know why these two Nations did differ so much in fortune,
since they were equally worthy. It was not in any one City alone, that choice
men for both all civil and military worth did flourish in Greece, as in Italy
they did in Rome; but many Cities did at the same time produce Citizens
excellent in all manner of things. It would be a tedious thing to number up the
gallant Actions of Miltiades, Themistocles, Aristides, Phocion, Alcibiades,
Age^ilans, Cimon, Leonida, Epaminondas, and of so many others whose ^^me rings
loud amongst us: And Plutarch, when he writes the lives of the most excellent
Romans, finds as many Grecians almost to parallel to them, who are as highly
cried up for the same virtues. Yet did never any of their Cities, nor Gre^^e
herself the Country common to them all, ever rise by any of their actions to
that high pitch of Fortune and Command, as did the City of Rome, and whole
Italy, by the illustrious deeds of the R^mans. This diversity of success ought
not to be attributed to Fortune, but their certain and natural causes. If
Greec^ should have enlarged the (...) of her Empire into the farthest distant
Regions, as did Italy through the power and gallantry of the (...) she must
either have been reduced under the power of one only (...) or they must all of
them have been joined in an uniform (...) designs: But so many difficulties
discover themselves in both the^e things, when they are considered the wonder
cease, why she could not increase her Dominions, answerable to the Fame,
Virtue, and Glory of things done by that Nation. Greece was divided into many
several people, who were all of them totally, or for the most part governed by
proper Laws, and Civil Institutions in the Form of a Commonwealth, though they
were of diverse States. And though they had a general Council, which was called
the A^phictyo^^s, wherein men met, who were sent from all the chief Cities, to
treat of the most important affairs, and such as did concern the common
interests of all Greece, yet did not this Council give one only and certain
Government to all Greece; but it was such an Assembly as are the Diets which
are in these times sometimes called in Germany upon some particular
Occurrences; wherein many Princes, and free Cities of that Province meet, which
do much differ in State, Dignity, and Form of Government, and who have free
votes in counselling and in resolving upon such matters as are therein treated.
But amongst other people of Greece, the Spartans and the Athenians, ancient
people of Greece, and who for a long time, had by their worth purchased much
authority, were very numerous and eminent when Greece did flourish most, both
for public power, and for the admirable worth of particular Citizens. For
though the Corinthians, the Argives, the Achaeans, and some other people, were
of greater consideration, in respect of other lesser Cities, yet they for the
most part did rather follow the fortune of the Lacedaemonians, and the
Athenians, then their own. And the Thebans, who for a while were in better
esteem then the rest, by reason of their Soldiers Discipline, whom they called
by a particular name, of the Sacred Cohort, yet because of all her Citizens,
only two arrived at any celebrated honor, to wit Pelopides and Epaminondas,
and for that her Militia consisted but of Five hundred men, their City never
arrived at that degree of Dominion and Glory, as did Sparta and Athens. But as
much as these were greater then the others, so much did they the more emulate
one another, both for private worth and glory, as for public Dignity and
Reputation. To these did the other people of Greece adhere, some being by them
commanded, others by virtue of particular considerations. These two Cities were
highly esteemed for the orders of the first Founders of such Commonwealths, to
with Lycurgus in Sparta, and in Athens, Theseus; so as these people who did
long before inhabit the same Country, began to take name, and authority over
the rest: Those who did inhabit the Terra firma, held for the most part with
the Spartans; and those of the Islands with the Athenians. But yet every City
was free, and hugely intent not to let the power either of the Spartans or
Athenians increase too much, but to keep the strength of these two chief Cities
so equally balanced, as when the one of them should go about to oppress the
other people of Greece, the oppressed might have recourse to the other.

It is therefore to be observed in all the actions of the Grecians, that the
rest of the people were never firm in their friendships, either to the Spartans
alone, or alone to the Athenians; but when the one of them began to exceed the
other, they sided with the weakest; not valuing any tie of friendship or
confederacy, when they met with any such respect: So as for a long time the
affairs of Sparta, and of Athens marched hand in hand, though each of them both
gave and received many routs, and partook both of good and bad fortune in War.
Sparta was strongest by land, and Athens by Sea; so as they did counterpoise
one another; and therefore, and for that (as it has been said) they had each
of them many dependants, and confederates, they kept the forces of whole Greece
divided, nor was there means afforded to either of them, much to exceed the
other. Wherefore neither of them could busy themselves in far off affairs, nor
against strangers, because they were still at contestation between themselves.
And if at any time they went about to do it, they were either hindered or
diverted, as were the Athenians, when they past with their Fleet above Sicily
under pretense to assist the Leontinians, but in effect, to get the Island to
themselves; aspiring, by advice of Alcibiades (who had higher conceptions, then
any former Greciah had had) to pass over into Africa against the Carthaginians;
the Spartans having discovered the design, and not being able to endure, that
the Athenians should to their prejudice, grow more powerful, resisted their
Forces, and succor'd Messina, when the City was ready to be lost, and also
assailed the Athenians in their own Territories, to divert them from that
enterprise. The same thing, for the same occasion fell out, when the Athenians
passing with their Fleet into Egypt, had induced the Egyptians to rebel against
the Persians; and very powerful Forces were already brought by Sea from Greece
to Cyprus, to assault the King of Persia's Territories; But the Lacedaemonians
growing jealous of their greatness, frustrated that design, opposing them so
many ways, and by so many Forces, as if the business had been not to have
abased, but to have exalted the power of the Persians, the common, and
continual enemies of Greece. But these things were done by the Spartans, as
they gave out, only to curb the immoderate ambition of the Athenians, and to
maintain, and defend the liberty of whole Greece; upon which pretense they
undertook, and for many years maintained that famous War, of the people of
Morca, which did much molest whole Greece, and kept their Forces very low.
Therefore in the time when these two greater and more famous Commonwealths did
flourish, they made use of their Forces more against themselves then against
foreiners; and in domestic War, which was the cause why Greece grew weaker,
not more powerful: For whatsoever of prejudice befell either of the parties, was
prejudicial to Greece her self, and the fame and glory of their victories was
blemished and lessened by the loss of those Grecians that were overcome.

Therefore she never became formidable to other Nations, as did Italy, where
when the fame and worth of the Romans began to prevail, and the other
neighboring Potentates were extinguished, her force and power being all of a
piece, the Roman Arms were dreadful to all people, nay they were all finally
overcome by them. But Greece never having been able to reduce her self to a
condition, that all her forces should be under the power of one only
Potentate, and that War was administered under the Auspice of one only
Commonwealth, she was of necessity to be always too weak and impotent to
enlarge her Confines much. So as that which made the Grecians be much esteemed,
to wit, her having so many Commonwealths, did much diminish the glory and
dignity of Empire, to which otherwise her many signal virtues might have
carried her, if her Forces had been in the power of one only or Prince, or
Commonwealth; or at least if there had been a greater union, and better
intelligence amongst the so many Commonwealths that were in her. But too great
a desire of Liberty, which made it harder for one People to be obedient to
another People, was directly that which made them enjoy it the lesser while.
For being weak, and divided amongst themselves, the way lay open to any who who
would assault, and oppress them. But the better the Grecians were accommodated
with all virtue and discipline, which made them esteem all others besides
themselves barbarous, so much the more were they born away with too much
vivacity of spirit, to such an el^tion of mind, as none of them could endure to
see themselves equaled either in public, or in private by mother, nor any
City to his, nor any of his Citizens to himself. So as every more valiant man,
and every more generous action grew suspici^^^ to others and were more envied,
and disturbed then the rest, all their ambition (...) upon themselves.

It is reported that Pausanias, who was (...) against the Persians, did in
token thereof present the Temple of Apollo in Delphos with that famous golden
Trevet; whereat the rest of the Grecians being greatly scandalized, made
Pausanias his name be raced out, and placed in stead thereof the names of all
the Confederate Cities, whose People were present at that Victory. And it is
said of Alcibiades, that full of vexation, he had wont to say, that he could
not sleep for thinking of the Triumphs of Miltiades. But there are a thousand
examples of such like things, which shows how fervently they did contend one
with another in point of glory. Themistocles and Aristides were professed
Enemies; so were Alcibiades and ^icias, and many others of the most famous and
valiantest Citizens of Athens: Where there was such contention amongst
themselves, and so great care was had that no one man should exceed another
very much, notwithstanding any action which might make him more glorious and
potent, as Ostracism was ordained, which was, the banishment of such Citizens
for ten years, who were very remarkable either for excellency of parts, or
prosperous fortune, more then were the rest; by which means they lost their
best Citizens, nay sometime made them bocome their Enemies, as was seen in
Alcibiades, Themistocles, Pericles, and some others, who were born for the
aggrandising of that Commonwealth, and yet through the corruption of the Orders
thereof proved prejudicial to it. Whereupon Xerxes, who favored, and gave
entertainment to such men, had wont to say, that he prayed God that his Enemies
might still banish such Citizens.

The diverse Forms of Government made likewise much against the union of the
people of Greece. Some of their Cities were much for Democracie, as Athens; and
some others leaned more to Aristocracie, as Sparta. Such d^versity of
Governments produced diversity of Customs and cogitations; so as they could
hardly be all of them pleased with one and the same thing, every one measuring
their actions with peculiar respects divided from the rest. So as when in the
time of Lysander King of the Spartans, the City of Athens was taken, to the end
that they might master it the better, they changed the Form of Government,
reducing it from a Popular condition, the form of its former Government, under
the authority of a few, as that which did more resemble the Spartan Government.
And in the following times, when the Spartans ran the same fortune with all the
other Grecians, and was compelled to obey the King of Macedon, it was requisite
to alter the Laws and Institutions of that City, which were at first ordained
by Lycurgus. These things did beget and maintain so great a disunion in Greece,
as she could not only not unite her Forces together to carry them against other
Nations, but hardly could she defend herself with them: As was seen, when being
mightily endangered by an Army of the Persians, which came with a great power
to assault her, the War was diversely administered, they not agreeing what City
should nominate the Commander in chief; the Spartans would have reduced the
defense to narrow passages by Land, and the Athenians would have put the whole
fortune of Greece in their Fleet; the situations of their Cities, and the
condition of their Forces, would not permit that one and the same thing should
be equally useful and commodious for them all. Nor was the eminent danger of
the Persians so potent Army able to unite the Forces of all Greece, but that
some of the chief People, as the Thessalians, Argives, and Thebans would be
exempted from out the League; and the Argives being requested to adhere to the
Confederacy of so many other Cities, answered, that they would rather obey the
Persians, then give way unto their ancient Rivals and Enemies, the Spartans.
Finally, the Grecians having obtained a great and unexpected Victory in the
Sea Fight at Salamine, when they were to have pursued their Fortune, after
having beaten the ^leet, and made the Enemy retire, they of themselves gave
over all further hopes, and came home to their own Havens; for that the
Spartans envied the glory of the Athenians, and fearing by reason of their
being stronger at Sea, that if they should have proceeded on in their success,
they would not have spared their own Grecians, but have domineered over them;
and soon after being more moved by envy, and their ancient home-contentions,
then by any hatred to the Enemy, when they should have driven the remainder of
the Persian Army out of Greece, the associate Cities fell upon the Thebans,
because severing themselves in these common dangers from the Grecians, they had
recourse for friendship to the Persians. So as Greece reaped no good by this
prosperous success, because the Grecians knew not how to value it, nor knew
they how to use the Victory when they had got it. Mardonius was overthrown at
the Battle of Platea, together with his whole Army, which after Xerxes his
flight he commanded in chief: But what advantage got the Grecians by so great a
victory, save their dividing of the prey? which made them return all of them
the sooner to their own houses. Nay, there arose greater and more cruel civil
wars between them afterward, then had ever been before; and the business grew
to that height, as the Spartans who had always professed themselves more bitter
Enemies to the Barbarians then all the rest, joined in league with them, and
conspired with Tissaphernes, who was Governor of Libia for King Darius, to
ruin Greece. Truces made between them were also often broken; and out of too
great proneness to adhibit faith to the suspicions which they had one of
another, the public faith was broken; no tie being strong enough to keep those
minds fast together, which were so divided by perpetual emulation. But of all
the rest, two things are very considerable as touching this present Discourse,
and the Judgment which is to be given thereupon; to wit, of what strength the
Grecians were in military affairs, and with what Princes they had to do, in the
time when Greece did flourish most, and had most reason to aspire to enlarge
her Empire. Certainly he who shall well consider it, will find that warlike
Discipline was neither so highly esteemed of, nor of that excellency and
perfection amongst the Grecians, as it was amongst the Romans; for the Romans
valued nothing more then military valor and discipline; nay, for a long time
they studied no Sciences nor Liberal Arts, (wherein those who took any delight,
made use of Grecians) but did wholly give their minds to military exercises,
and sought for praise from nothing but from War. Whence it was, that more
Soldiers excellently well trained up in millitary affairs, were to be drawn out
of the City of Rome, then out of other whole Provinces, whereas the Grecians
did not give their minds to the study of War, but to Learning, and to the
Liberal Sciences, which flourished a long time amongst them, as either born
with them, or very well cultivated by them. There were as many of them that
frequented Universities to become Philosophers, as of those who studied the
Soldiers craft. How many Professors were there amongst them of Oratory and
Poetry, wherein they proved so excellent, as all that ever desired to prove
good therein since, have observed their rules, and trodden in their steps. How
many rare Artificers have there likewise been of Grecians in all the most noble
Arts, particularly in Sculpture and Picture-drawing? The original, or at least
the perfection whereof, knows no other beginning then from Greece: In the
memory of all Ages, the names of Phidias, Polycl^^us, Alcamenes, Agl^^^hon,
(...), Parrhasius Zeuxis, Apelles, and of so many others are celebrated.
Wherefore Greece was more famous for the excellency of Learning, and of the
Liberal Arts, then for skill in the Militia. Yet was the City of Sparta better
then the rest at millitary affairs; and Athens was sufficiently famous for her
Fleets by Sea, and her skill in maritime affairs: yet the Spartan Militia was
bounded within (...) ere the Athenians did much mind their (...) mistocles his
time. And certainly, (...) ordered for the acquirement of Empire: For Sparta,
(...) tended to Arms, yet did they aim more at their own defense, and at the
pres^rvation of Liberty, then at the acquisition of Empire; not only private
Citizens, but even the public weal being constituted in great poverty, and
restrained to a small number of Citizens; they were forbidden all commerce with
foreiners, least they might corrupt the Laws and Customs of their Country,
their lives were austeer, and they were contented with a little; Whence. it was
that those Citizens were a long time from desiring any further greatness, it
being therefore propounded to Cleamenus King of Sparta, by one Anaxagoras of
Miletum, who had caused many of the Cities of Ionia to rebel against the King
or Persia; to make use of that occasion, and take up arms; showing him that he
might penerate even to the Cities of Susa, and possess himself of the wealth of
all those Kings; The Spartan laughed at the proposition, and considering only
the length of the voyage, said, He would none of those riches, which were not
worth so much labor. Yet because the Government of Sparta preserved it self
for a long time without any great alteration or change, and grew therefore the
stronger, it was able to get the Dominion of whole Morea, and had afterward
the prime place for dignity, and Empire amongst the Grecians. On the contrary,
Athens, which by the opportunity of the Sea, and by diverse of her institutions
aiming at the increasing of the City, seemed as if she onght to have enlarged
her Dominion beyond the Confines of Greece, could not make good use of her
Forces, nor reap the fruit which became the worth of some of her most excellent
Citizens, who were highly spirited, and were minded to raise their Country to
further greatness, because she could never order her self so as to preserve
herself long in one and the same Form of Government, but was busied in
perpetual Civil disorders, precipitating herself sometimes into a corrupt
Popular State, sometimes into the tyranny of a few.

But the Grecians seemed as if all their thoughts were usually bounded within
themselves; insomuch as it is said of some of their most famous Commanders,
That they did more willingly exercise themselves in Wars made amongst the
Grecians themselves, then in Wars against the Barbarians; since come what
would, the advantage and honor of the Victory did remain in Greece. But as for
what belongs to the Militia, some may peradventure think, that it may be proved
by some famous Victories that the Grecians won from the Medes and Persians,
that they did much study Military Affairs, and were very good at Military
Discipline, insomuch as for that part, there was no more to be wished for in
them. To this it may be answered, That it is not to be denied, but that the
Grecian Militia might be thought to be good and laudable when compared to that
of the Barbarians, withwhom they had most to do; But that it is no ways to be
held comparable to that of the Romans, who did excellently well understand
whatsoever belonged to the true Militia, better then did any other Nation in
any whatsoever time. Insomuch as by reason of their good orders, and of the so
many Victories which they wan, they propounded unto themselves the conquest of
the whole world; which out of the same reasons they effected. But it is
observable in the Victories which the Grecians got against the King of Persia's
Forces, that they were occasioned, not so much through the good ordering of
their Militia, as by reason of a certain obstinate resolution which they had
put on, to defend Greece from the eminent slavery of the the Barbarians, the
fear whereof made them bold to encounter whatsoever danger. Many of their
actions prove this, as amongst others, that of Leonid as was sufficiently
famous, who being left with only. Five hundred of his Lacodimonians to guard
the Strieght of Thermopla, fell boldly with them one night into the Persian
Camp, where were sundry Hundred thousands of men, not being persuaded thereunto
out of any hopes of victory of safety, but only out of a desire to revenge the
injuries done by Xerxes to Greece, by the slaying of so many enemies, and by
his own voluntary death. Who knows not that in the Naval fight at Salamina, it
was necessity that made the Grecians so courageous? Since the Athenians, who
were of greatest power in that Fleet, were already without any Country, their
City being burnt by the Enemy; so that their ultimate hope of any good
consisted in that days good success. And to make the necesfity the greater,
Themistocles, who was their Commander in chief, chose wisely to join Battle in
a place which was far from any friends Territories, thereby to bereave every
one of any other hopes of safety but by being victorious. And the great
multitude of the Persians Fleet, served rather for confusion to them then for
any strength, for of above a thousand Vessels which were therein, it is said
that hardly Two hundred entered the Battle. And the Victory which was obtained
not long after by land against the Army led on by Mardonius, was rendered the
less difficult by the reputation which the Grecians had won by their Naval
Victory, and by King Xerxes his running away, whose Soldiers proved no more
courageous then did their Master, for whose glory it was that they were to
fight; whereas the Grecians fought for themselves, for the safety of their
Country, their Houses, and of all that they had.

But to boot with all this, it may peradventure not without truth be affirmed,
That the actions of the Grecians have been transferred over to the memory of
posterity, for greater then what indeed they were. For Greece had great store
of excellent Writers, who according to the custom of the Nation, amplifying
such deeds as might purchase glory to them, have studied very much to set them
forth to the best, and to make them appear praiseworthy. Wherefore Salust in
the beginning of his History, rendering as it were a reason why he took the
pains to write, says, That the Actions of the Romans may appear to be the
less, out of the little care they had of putting them into writing, every one
being more intent to do praiseworthy actions, then to celebrate the actions of
other men; whereas the Grecians actions were made to appear, not what they
really were, but such as the most excellent wits of good Writers could by their
adornments set them stately forth.

Moreover there met many things in the Romans, much differing from what has
been said of the Greeks; for their whole study was to make their City powerful
by any whatsoever way, that they might, as they did, draw upon any occasion
great store of Soldiers from thence. This was the original of the sanctuary,
wherein wicked men driven out of other Countries were received, and afterward
People of many of the neighboring Cities, were allowed the privileges of the
City of Rome, the more to interess them in what belonged to the honor and
greatness of Rome, as to that of their Common-countrie, yet was not the War
administered under diverse names or auspices, as it was in Greece, by reason of
the several Leagues had between several People, but by the sole authority of
the Roman Commanders* and still in sole respect to what made only good for the
Commonwealth of Rome. Now if we will consider with what foreign Potentates the
Grecians had to make War, we shall find that this also made it the harder for
them to acquire other men's Countries, for just when the Grecians, by reason of
their having many gallant men amongst them, might have aspired at the
aggrandizing of their Empire, the Persian Monarchy was grown so powerful as it
ruled over all the East; And was not only got near to Gr^^a, by the possession
of Lydia, but did also possess Ionia, an ancient Colony of the Grecians* So as
it was a very great and difficult undertaking, to go about to possess the
Territories of so great a Prince, who though he should receive a rout might
easily recover his loss, and put himself in a safe posture of defense, by
reason of the largeness of his Dominion, and the multitude of Soldiers that
were at his command. So as join this outward impediment to the inward, which
lay in their home discords, and we shall see that the Routs which the Grecians
gave to the Persians, did no further incommodate the Persians, then the loss of
those Armies; nor did the Grecians receive any further benefit thereby, then
the defending of themselves, and their safety for no long time from further
dangers. But the Kingdom of Macedon, though of much less strength for extent of
Empire, became very formidable by reason of its good Discipline in War, and for
the great worth of some of her Kings, amongst which Philip the Father of
Alexander, who as he proved a great Prince, and of deep designs, so was he very
pernicious to Greece: For diverse People of Greece having recourse to him for
help against some other Grecians that were their Enemies, they were willingly
received, and their request graciously listened unto, that so he might nourish
their discords, and weaken all their Forces by continual Wars; by which means
he made himself Arbitrator of all Greece; insomuch as there were not any of
them who did not sometimes apply themselves unto him, either for Peace to
themselves, or for help by War against others.

Wherefore Philip discovering his intentions at last, that he was resolved to
rule over all Greece, he entered thereinto with powerful Forces, and was no less
grievous to those who first called him in, then to the rest against whom he
declared his coming to be. So Thebes, which was the first City which made use
of his Forces, and did it oftener then all the rest, was one of the first
(though with prejudice to all the rest) that tasted the bitter fruits of her
unadvised Councels, being ruined and destroyed by the same Philip; who being
much allured by the taking of that City, and by hopes of greater matters,
resolved to make himself Master of other Cities of Greece: To which design
whereas all Greece ought to have opposed themselves for the common interest,
they went about, though by several and divided councels, to join themselves
with him, and to place their own safety in his friendship and fidelity. Thus
did all Beotia, Thessaly, and other Regions adhere unto him; and the Athenians,
who, encouraged by Demosthenes, took up Arms themselves, and endeavored to
raise whole Greece against Philip, being but in weak condition after the so
many defeats received from the Lacedaemonians, they also had recourse to him for
safety by the way of favor and peace, not only for themselves, but for all
Greece. So as the Spartans being left almost alone to oppose Philips Forces,
they proved much too weak to withstand such a power; so as Greece being oppressed
by Foreign forces, fell at last into the hands of the Macedonians. And when
there was a likelihood, by the death of Philip, who had not as yet well
confirmed his government over them, that the Grecians might have shaken off
their yoke of servitude, Alexander succeeded in the Kingdom, so valiant a
Prince, as he was a terror not only to his neighbors, but to all the East; who
by his supreme greatness, and excellent worth, made all his Soldiers so
inamor'd of him, as some of the Grecian Commanders, who had followed him in the
Wars in Persia, stuck not to affirm, that there was not any one in Greece, who
ought not to desire as the greatest happiness that could befall them, that
Alexander might sit in the Throne, as King of Persia.

But after Alexanders unexpected death, Greece seemed to have a better
opportunity offered her to remit herself into her former liberty, being just at
that time in Arms; for the Athenians with many other people were rebelled
against Alexander, and had an Army on foot of Thirty thousand men, besides a
numerous Fleet, discontented because he would have received into their Country
a great many of Citizens, who had been banished for diversity of Factions. And
moreover, the divisions of Empire made by Alexander among so many of his
Commanders, and the contentions which suddenly arose amongst them, were things
which gave Greece great opportunities of not being any more subject to be
commanded by a Foreiner. Yet could she not lay hold thereon, either because
their former valor and generosity began to fail in them, and their ancient
Customs to be corrupted, (for many who had received favors from Philip and from
Alexander, loved better to be governed by one man alone, then to restore their
Country to her liberty; and chiefly for that the People having for the most
part had great authority in those days, the best and most valiant Citizens were
rewarded with banishment and other injuries for their service:) Or else it may
rather be said, that the same reason of Civil discord which had at first made
Greece weak, and not able to maintain herself in a free condition, did concur
at this time likewise to make her relapse into slavery. Thus the Achaeans, and
the Argives, who together with the Athenians had taken up Arms against the
Macedonians, either out of fear of Antipaters Forces (to whose share in the
division of the Empire after Alexanders death, Macedonia and Greece fell, of
which Provinces he was formerly Governor) or else egged on by envy, they soon
forewent the League which they had contracted, lest the City of Athens might
have returned to her former greatness, and so suffered the Athenians to be made
a prey of by the Macedonians. And the Spartans, out of their same ancient
respects, standing idle Spectators of other men's miseries, and not thinking
that the same afflictions might befall them, minded more to secure their own
City with new Fortifications, then to oppose themselves, as they ought to have
done, to these Forces of the Enemy, and not have suffered them to increase by
the Forces of Greece herself, and by those whom they had subjugated.

After this, Greece enjoyed peace and quiet; some of them enduring patiently
the Macedonian government, and others not fearing (as they ought to have don.)
the like mischief, because it was not as yet come home unto them. So when by
the various accidents which befell the Macedonians in their own Kingdom, Greece
might have kept them low, or at least have kept them from further domineering,
permitting Cassander, Antigonus, and Demetrius to live peaceably and quietly
for all them, and sometimes too much believing their flat^eries, and allured by
a certain appearing Liberty wherewith those Princes thought good to keep the
Grecians in obedience to them, they knew not how to make use of any of so many
occasions, till at last in Philips time (that Philip with whom the Romans had
Wars so long, who proved so gallant a Prince, and possessed himself of Macedonia
together with other Provinces) she returned to her ancient revolts. And as
Philip the Father of Alexander made himself Lord thereof, by the same means
whereby he had got entrance thereinto; for King Philip entered Greece, being
called in by the Argives and Achaeans, who were made War upon by the AEtolians,
with whom many of the Cities of Greece were so ill satisfied, as to shun being
governed by them, they voluntarily put themselves into the power of King
Philip; who hae the way at last opened unto him (to the end that no part of
Greece might be safe from the Macedonian Forces) to fall upon Sparta, with
which City Philip was before upon good terms and in peace: For the
Lacedaemonians not being able to endure that the Achaeans, by Philips favor,
should grow too great in Morea, the Principality whereof they had for a long
time held, breaking their former agreement and confederacy made with Philip,
were joined with the AEtolians, assisting them against the Achaeans, who were
Friends and Confederates of the same ^hilip. And after many revolutions, the
business came at last to that pass, as the Grecians being too late aware that
they had suffered the authority of the Macedonians to grow too great over them,
by which some of them had been formerly tyrannically dealt withal, and others
apprehending the like imminent danger, not able to endure these yet greater
mischiefs, they fled to the Romans, craving help and succor from them against
Philip; as did the City of Athens chiefly, as having suffered greatest
injuries, and being wont to be the head of the greatest, and most important
innovations in Greece. Nor was it hard for them to obtain it; for the Romans,
making profession, that they had made it their business that there should be no
unjust power upon the earth, but that Reason, Justice, and Law should rule
every where, did willingly embrace the protection, and defense of the weakest,
whom they found to be oppressed by the more powerful: which thing under pretense
of defending others, and of a noble piece of generosity, made the way to diverse
acquisitions the easier to them; covering by these means their ambition of
Government.

But the Romans were very cunning herein, who in all their actions showed as if
they desired nothing but glory, by which they did miraculously win the hearts
of all Greece: For in the Expedition which they made against Philip, their
Armies having, at the instance of the Grecians themselves past over the Sea,
run many hazzards, and endured much hardships; when they had conquered Philip,
and drove him out of Greece, they restored all those Cities which had been
formerly under his Dominion, to their Liberty; suffering them to live under
their own Laws, but yet so, as made advantagiously for them, placing some of
their own Roman Soldiers in some of the bordering Towns; alleging that they
did this for the good of Greece, that being freed from the slavery of Philip,
they might not fall into the like of Antigonus, a powerful King at that time in
Asia, who might be the better kept out of Europe, for fear of not offending the
Roman greatness, then for fear of the weak forces of Greece, which were already
very low. But the truth was, that these places opportunely held by the Romans,
served to secure them of the Grecians fidelity, if at any time forgetting
their obligation, and desirous of novelty, as they had always appeared to be,
they should have a mind, with prejudice to the Roman affairs, to join with any
other stranger Prince; for they desired that they might depend on the Authority
of the Commonwealth of Rome.

So as that Greece which had so many valiant Soldiers and Commanders, and was
so famous amongst other Nations, not having known how to make use of time,
whilst the name of the Romans was but obscure, and that their Forces were
busied elsewhere, to make way for their further greatness; was forced
afterward to follow the fortune of the Romans, and to confess themselves to be
overcome by their more excellent worth; and to acknowledge all that remained of
good or safety to them, from their favor.

But to rerurn from whence we have digrest; and to proceed with the successes
of Greece in diverse Ages, let us say; that it being the fa^e of Greece to fall
upon two so potent neighboring Princes, as were the Kings of Persia, and
Macedonia, it did not only foment their Civil discords, but did hasten their
final ruin, for if the Grecians had had less powerful neighbors, they would
either not have had recourse unto them, or else the use of their Forces and
assistance in their own Greece would not have proved so prejudicial to them: It
being a true and general rule in State Affairs, that no foeign Forces are to be
made use of, for a man's own safety, which are much greater then his own; for by
so doing, a man must depend upon another man's will; which where rule is in
question, is usually more ready to endeavor its own convenience and greatness,
then to keep word, and to consider another man's good, though he be a friend and
confederate: Yet it may be affirmed, that Greece having for neighbors not only
one but two great Potentates, it was a thing which as it hindered her from
making acquisitions abroad, so it might have been of great help unto her for
the preservation of her self, and Liberty, if she could have made good use
thereof. For if at any time she should be oppressed by one of them, she had means
to have recourse to the other, from whom she might safely build for help, since
self-interest concurred therein, for it would be dangerous for either of them
to suffer the others power increase too much, by the ruin of Greece. So as if
the Grecians, when they were threatened ruin by Philip, had known how to make
use of the help which was offered them by the King of Persia, they might
peradventure have escaped that bad fortune; but being exceedingly jealous one
of another, they had all of them recourse to the same Prince, because none of
the rest might make use of his friendship and favor. Thus Philip the first had
greatest opportunity offered him, of making himself by degrees, First, chief
Captain, next, Arbitrator, and lastly, Lord of all Greece, by keeping some of
her people quiet, and in peace, which he easily granted them for his own ends;
and by making War at the same time upon some others of them, and he who shall
compare these ancient successes of the Grecians affairs, with others of the
ensuing age, and nearer unto us, shall and will find very like effects which
have sprung from the same occasions. For Greece being once humbled, and as
subjected by the Roman greatness, was afterward returned to great honor and
dignity in the time of Constantine who placed the seat of the Empire in the
ancient City of Biz antium; but she knew not how to keep therein by reason of
her discords. For after that the French and the Venetian, had taken
Constantinople, though the Empire returned to the aforesaid Grecians, yet
through many and various chances which happened afterward, whole Greece was
divided; some of them following the Princes of the Grecian extract, and some of
them the Latins, the people for the most part holding with the former, and the
Nobility with the latter. So as recourse being had to Arms, for the deciding of
so many controversies, they applied themselves for help unto the Turks, and
causing a great number of them to pass over into N^tolia in Greece, Greeces
ultimate ruin did ensue thereupon. For these Barbarians, who were accustomed
to live among craggy Mountains, inamored of the beauty and pleasantness of this
Country, and moved, as some say, by a certain good augurie, whereby they were
advised to tarry there, promising them much happiness in that Region, whereinto
they were come, and called, they possessed themselves of diverse parts and Cities
of the Empire, sparing no^ friends, nor enemies; and placing their Regal Seat
amongst them, they grew soon much more powerful, being favored therein by the
great dissentions which still continued amongst the Grecian Nobility, and other
neighboring Lords, as those of Servia, Bulgaria, and Albania, interessing
themselves therein, they, together with their own interests, drew along with
them the destruction of many other States, and gave just occasion to postery,
for ever to blame their ill taken counsels. For if the Grecians had been at
unity within themselves, and as solicitous to keep the Turks from advancing
their power, as they were to abase that of the Latin Princes, they might
certainly have hoped to have kept that fire a far off, which has burnt and
consumed so many noble parts of Christendom. Since it is seen that the Grecian
Forces, whilst their Lords, after being driven from the City of Constantinople
by the Latins, kept in the parts about Natolia (which was for above fifty
years) although they had already begun to be governed by one alone Prin^e,
under a just form of Empire, were yet able to keep them bounded within the
mountains of Natolia, in barren places, not suffering them to make any
acquisitions of moment, nor to enter into Europe, as they did afterward. But
it was the particular imperfection of this Province, and of that in all other
respects, most noble Nation, that she understood not, or knew not how to make
use of her many and valiant Forces; Since if we will look back upon ancient
stories, when Philip had reduced Greece into his power, he put so high an
esteem upon the value of those Soldiers as he undertook by them chiefly to
effect his ancient desire of making the enterprise of Persia, whch not being
able (as hindered by death) to effect, was after so gloriously ended by his Son
Alexander, And it is related, that being thus minded, Philip had already
mustered Two hundred thousand Foot, and Fifteen thousand Horse in Greece; and
that Alexander desirous to prosecute his Fathers intentions, but by different
advice, building his chiefest hopes in the body of an Army of but Thirty
thousand valiant Soldiers, many of which he raised in Greece, did by their
valor chiefly end so many glorious Enterprises.

The Fifteenth DISCOURSE.
Whether Ostracism, used by the Athenians, be a just thing, or no; and whether
it be useful for the preservation of a Commonwealth.
IT was instituted by the Laws in some ancient Commonwealths, that such as were
very eminent above the rest either for Riches, Glory, Friends, or for any other
Civil power, or who did exceed the other Citizens for any particular worth,
should be banished the City; not out of punishment or penalty, but for the
common good, to the end that Equality being the better maintained, and as it
were a certain Consonancie amongst the several ranks of Citizens observed, the
Government might be the safer, and more durable. Which custom was for a long
time observed by the Athenians, and chiefly then when their Commonwealth did
flourish most; and ten years was the limited time for this exilement. This Law
was commonly called Ostracism, whereof Aristotle touches a little in his Third
Book of the Politics. But whether such a Law be just, or no, and whether it
may make for the preservation of a Commonwealth or State, for which end it was
instituted, is a Consideration of no small moment in point of Police; there
being much to be said on both sides, both in praise and dispraise of so strange
a Law and Custom.

In the behalf thereof, these things may be had into consideration: That
nothing is more requisite for the long preservation of a City, especially of
such a one as is governed in form of a Commonwealth, where the Government is in
the hands of many, then Equality amongst Citizens; whereof the more excellent
the temper is, and the more it is tied fast by strict Laws, so as it cannot be
exceeded on any side, the life of that City or Commonwealth will be so much the
longer, more quiet, and more secure. A City may be resembled to a humane Body,
compounded of diverse Elements, and consisting of many Members: and that as that
humane Body is more healthful and more handsome, wherein every elementary
quality is better distributed, and every member better proportioned; so that
City or Commonwealth wherein every degree of Citizens has a moderate
authority, state and fortune, and well proportioned to the whole, does preserve
it self the longer, and keep freer from the contagion of civil seditions.
Though the Head be the noblest part of the Body, and the Eyes the like of the
Head, yet would they not be of ornament, when either that or these were bigger
then their ordinary and natural form; they would rather take away all Decorum
and beauty, which is nothing but a due proportion in all things. Then, though
it may seem a gallant thing to show the greatness and nobleness of a City or
Commonwealth that there be many very wealthy men therein, and of excellent
civil gifts, and that the supreme Degrees and Negotiations of the Commonwealth
be bestowed upon these; yet another reason may persuade the contrary* for this
eminency spoils the proportion of the whole, and does not represent a City of
Freemen, and partakers of the same Government, but the form of a Tyrannical
Government, consisting of Lords and Servants, hateful names in good
Governments. Therefore all the best Legislators have chiefly aimed at the
reducing of all things, as much as may be, to an Equality, in that City where
they would introduce a Politic Government, and a peaceful and durable
condition. Insomuch as Plato, to take away all occasion of civil discord, would
have all goods to be common, in that his Commonwealth which he propounded to
himself for the most exact form of Government: So as there should be no such
name as Rich, or Poor, but only that of Citizens of the same Country, and who
live under the same Law. So as no man could out-doe another, by altering this
so necessary and useful Civil Equality: which not being to be had where there
is a Propriety of Goods, the Athenians would provide against those
inconveniences which the unequal condition of Citizens produced, by driving at
a certain time out of the City such as had caused the disorder, and who were
suspected to be the Authors of Novelties, and of trouble to peaceful living.

And truly, he who shall consider what the beginnings of those evils have been,
which have inwardly vexed and troubled both Commonwealths and other States as
well in ancient, as in these more modern times, shall find, that all the
confusions and civil disorders which have after a long time brought many States
to their ultimate ruin, have sprung from this root. How was partiality, and
the corruption of good and ancient Orders introduced in the Commonwealth of
Rome, whence all great things may take example, if not from having suffered
avarice, and the power of some Citizens to increase too much? Who having made
themselves so great by the continuation of military Commands, and for having
many ways whereby to purchase popular favor, as the Commonwealth could not keep
them within any bounds, nor could the Laws curb them, did totally subvert that
Government: insomuch as it was said of Caesar, that he would not have any
Superior to him in the City; and of Pompey, that he would have no Equal. And
Cato had wont to say, that Caesar's immoderate greatness had enforced Pompey
likewise to exalt himself above what otherwise became the public service, to
the end that the one might counterpoise the other. So grant one inconve^ience,
others will easily follow: And as too great eminency in any Citizen, although
he be not ill-minded toward the Public, ought to be suspected; so it is hard
to rid ones self thereof when it is once brought in and tolerated, where those
usual means and institutions are wanting which the Carthaginians had, without
falling upon violent courses, which in stead of Physic proves poison to that
State. The House of Medici began to lay sound foundations for its greatness in
Florence, by means of old Cosmo's great wealth; it afterward increased very
much by the virtue and wisdom of Lorenzo; and so by little and little getting
to a great height of power, which exceeded the ordinary condition of a Civil
State, it was no longer able to live under the Laws of the Country, but would
assume unto it self the superiority of that Government: So as when the
Florentines were too late aware thereof, they could not moderate that too
immease greatness; for the continued power of that Family, wherein there had
been excellent men for worth, and eminent degrees and dignities, purchased by
them both in their own Country, and elsewhere, had got them so many to side
partially with them, as their own Faction was able upon any occasion to sustain
them.

The like happens also in some States wherein there is not so express a form of
a Commonwealth, but a supreme Prince, yet also many particular Lords of great
authority. In such States, the too much greatness of B^rons has oft-times
proved too pernicious: For there being in all men naturally a desire of growing
greater, and they having means to do so, where their power is not limited by
the Laws and Customs of the State, they are easily induced to mount higher then
stands with their degree, to equal their authority to that of the King himself,
and to put for innovations prejudicial to the State. Amongst many others we
have a notable example hereof, in the present troubles of France, which were
occasioned by having suffered some prime Lords to grow too great in power,
whence civil discords have risen in the Kingdom, and the better to foment and
sustain their parties, and to perfect their designs, they had recourse to
foreign forces, and kindled that fire which is not well quenched yet. It has
therefore been thought a very wary and well advised course which has been used
by some Prin^es, to have an eye upon such, whose greatness and eminency above
others may render them suspected, and to allay th^s their greatness, by not
admitting them into chief employments, by taking away or lessening their
Privileges, and Immunities, and by lessening their authority, and universal
favor by other means, according as occasions have counseled. Consalv^ a great
and famous Commander in the former age, had done excellent service to King
Ferdinand^; and when in all other respects he was to have looked for great
rewards, as having by his own worth gotten, and preserved the Kingdom of
Naples, he was taken off from all employment, and brought back into Spain to
spend the remainder of his years in a private condition: That prudent Prince
was moved thereunto, as knowing that such a man who was so generally cried up,
and who was so followed and appla^ded both by the common people and the
Nobility, could not but be to be suspected: So as he knew it was requisite for
his own security, and the like of his Dominions, not to suffer him to grow
greater to his Masters prejudice, and therefore to take from him all Command
and Employment.

The Instructions given to this purpose in a figurative way, first by Periander
to Thrasybalus, and after by Tarqui^ the proud to his Son S^xt^^ are very
observable, to wit, to cut off the tops of the highest Poppies, o^ ears of
corn; whereby they would infer, that he who will rule in safety, must not
suffer men to grow more eminent then others, for what concerns any Civil Power,
which though it appear to be a thing proper to only tyrannical Si^es, yet when
it is used with discretion and wisdom, has another aspect, for all particular
interests ought to give way where the public good, and the preservation of
universal Peace and Quiet of the State (which is of a^much greater concornment)
is in question. But when this may be done by any ordinary way, as by Law and
Custom (as it was among the Athenians and other ancient people) then this
remedy proved the more just and secure. There is not any mischief in the City
which stands in more need to be cured by the physic of the Law, then Ambition;
for Ambition is such a sickness in the mind of man, as where once it takes root
it never leaves the mind free and healthful till it be torn out by main force;
but rather the malady increasing by length of time, it makes men as it were
frantic^, so as the ambitious man covets all things, and is not satisfied with
any thing, having neither mean nor bridle. Honors, Dignities, Preferments how
great soever they be, serve rather for tinder to make this inward fire flame
the higher, then for water to quench it, insomuch as some of these
vainglorious men thought it a small matter to command the whole world, when
they heard it disputed that there were more worlds then one. Now to this almost
natural, and ordinary defect of humanity, and altogether as harmful to the
quiet of all States, as it is of it self incorrigible, (...) will prove a
wholesome cure; and which the Atheni^ns in particular (...) their Commonwealth
stood in need of. For as Greece did in that Age abound (...) men, who were
really valiant, so ambition seemed to have set up its rest amongst them.

Wherefore miraculous things are written of that Nation in those times. But
such as wherein it may be found that true worth was greatly con^^^isnated by an
immoderate desire of glory, and haughtines^. The Laws of canvassing, and all
other provisions thereunto tending have always proved fruitless, for every
little sparkle that remains of this fire, though it be covered over with ashes,
may cause great Combustions. It seems therefore that no other remedy is
sufficient for those evils which proceed from pride and ambition, then totally
to rid the City or State of such men as are desirous to exceed all others.

Plato said, that men who were truly wise would be as contented with not ruling
over others, as most men do what in them ^ies to get pr^cedencie, and command
over others. Therefore where such a desire is discerned, and where there is
matter to occasion it, as are great riches, high places, and vain glory, a man
may with reason suppose that there is there an unsound soul, which ought to be
taken away lest it infect the whole Commonwealth. To take all Nobility, all
riches, all civil preeminencie, totally away from a City or Commonwealth, as is
now done in Turkey, and as formerly it has been d^^e by diverse Princes, that
they might rule the more securely, relisheth too much of Barbarism, and
Tyranny, though it has not proved an ill taken advice to them that have known
how to use it, reputing it just, though not in self, yet as it has suited well
with such a Form of Government; but to rid a City of such things, and of such
men for a certain prefixed time, is such a provision as tends to the
preservation of splendour and reputation, without either prejudice or danger.
This is a means whereby virtue and other civil preheminences may be rewarded;
but not so, as the greater part be scorned, and oppressed, for the haughtiness of
some few. And he who shall well consider it, shall find that banishment from a
man's Country is not a thing simply, and of it self evil, or at least not so
great an evil, but that it may be easily and willingly born withal, by him who
values the common good so well as he ought. But that which makes banishment be
thought a mischief, is the bad quality which is thereunto annexed, when it is
inflicted for punishment; there being thereby imprinted as it were in indeleble
characters, that such a one is leudly given, and has committed some fault,
which is a thing naturally abhorred even by the wickedest sort of men. But set
this respect aside, to live out of a man's Country, has no resemblance of
evil, but is willingly embraced by many as an advantage, and some endeavor it
as a badg of honor, that they may have occasion to serve their Prince, and to
deserve well abroad. He then, who to obey the Laws and Ordinations of (...)
Commonwealth or State shall live for a certain time from his own home, is so
far from suffering thereby in his honor, as he merits thereby; for he may say
that by this his obedience he is ^erviceable to his Prince and Country; though
he do not act any thing. So then he receives no injury, and may, and ought to
pass by any particular inconveniency, for the public good. Nay it may so
happen, that that very power and great^^ss, by which a man becomes liable to
the Laws, is the longer and with less danger preserved unto him, though he
cannot enjoy it without some parenthesis of (...). For we see by experience,
that these greatnesses and continued prosperities do easily precipitate a man,
either through the envy of others, or by being too immoderately used, and
sometimes draw along with them the total ruin of the whole Family.

It may in the last place be alleged, that this exemption from public
employments, and Court service, may make him retire to his private studies, and
enjoy himself, which ought to be esteemed one of the chiefest blessings which
man can attain unto in this life. Insomuch as the Philosopher said, that to be
kept from preferments is a pleasant breath of wind which sweetly co^^eys the
wise man to the Haven of peace of mind, and of his lawful studies, which many
forbear to do of themselves, least they may be thought by the world to be vile,
and abject men, and of no abilities. By these things it is concluded that
Ostracism is a good thing, and to be praised, and that this custom of the
Athenians is fit to be followed and ^^tated by others.

But now let us face about. What is more necessary for the preservation of a
City or State then Justice, without which no sort of Government can last long,
nor merit the name of a Commonwealth or State: For, take away Justice, and you
take away the very being thereof, and leave nothing but a misshapen matter,
made up of corruption and disorders. But in distributive Justice, which imports
so much toward good and quiet living, Reason does advise it, and all good
Customs do approve of it, that a Geometrical proportion, not an Arithmetical
ought to be observed; insomuch as it is not all men who ought equally and
indifferently to share of Ho^er and Preheminencies in a City, but those who for
some good qualities and endowments do deserve them. Therefore that Government
where the Law of Ostracism is observed, must needs be subject to all change and
revolts: For it cannot but be displeasing to the chiefest and best of the City,
who seeing themselves whilst they are present, threatened with exile, and the
overthrow of their grandezza, and having recourse when they are absent to the
favors of other Princes to revenge themselves for the injury they have
received, may easily disturb the Peace of the City, and put the whole
Government into a hazardous condition. Those who have been driven out of their
Country by reason of any Civil faction, as it fell out long ago in diverse
Cities of Italy, have always been instrumental to the keeping of those Cities
in perpetual troubles, and of reducing some of them to slavery, which had wont
to enjoy liberty. And yet what was this banishment but a kind of Ostracism? For
in these civil seditions, none but such as were of greatest power and
authority, and of whom the rest were most jealous, were driven out: Nor was
this done by the will of one only, but by their Decree in whose hands the
reformed Government was. So as it may be said, that these Cities used the Law
of Ostracism; which has notwithstanding always proved prejudicial, and at long
running mortal. And to say truth, to what purpose could such a Law or Custom
serve, unless it were the more to exasperate Civil diffention? Which the same
Athenians having learned by experience, they did ann^ll this their Law; for the
business was come to such a height, as they drove ou^ Citizens out of
particular spleen, not out of any public respect; as was done by Hyparb^l^, a
man of a mean condition, and no ways liable so Ostracism, who for being an
Enemy to Alcib^^les and Ni^^as, was by their means banished by virtue of that
Law.

But say the Law were kept within its due bounds, and used only against such as
bore greatest sway and were most eminent; to reduce all things to an Equality,
is ^^^ only an unjust, but a violent action, and which does even contradict
Nature herself, which did not only make so many different species of things
created in the w^^ld, but gave various instincts and hidden qualities to those
of the same species, so as some might prove more generous and of greater worth,
as is seen not only amongst Men, but amongst bruit Beasts, yea even amongst
Vegetables. Then since this Equality is not to be found amongst Men, it is
great injustice to distribute things equally in a Government to those whose
parts and deserts are unequal: For in conferring of honors or p^eferments in a
City or State, a Geometrical, not an Arithmetical proportion must be observed:
It is the virtue and merit of every one that must be weighed. He who is richer
then another, may be serviceable to his Country by great and frequent
contributions to the Public. He who has many Clients and Friends, may by his
power and authority dispose (...) Peoples minds to believe ^ell, and act well
in the Cities occasions and affairs. He who is advanced above others in glory,
must have de^er^^d it well of the Commonwealth by some noble action, and (...)
confir^t himself therein by some other like action. And he Who is ^^^re
generally given to any Virtue, be it or Warlike or Civil, is always (...) then
others to serve his Country and Prince upon all occasions. So as to drive (...)
men as these out of the City, is no better then to cut that member from the
body which is loveliest, and fitter then the rest to be serviceable thereunto.
Such an Insti^u^ion then can have no admittance but in Tyrannical governments:
And the examples alleged of Thras^^al^^ and Tarquin, are examples of Tyran^^,
who being resolved to preserve themselves by violence in their usurped
dominionr, were to be jealous of all the best and most powerful men, and
endeavor to be quit of th^^ for their greater security. But a just Prince must
not imiteate such examples, ^ay, even in a Politic Government, these
Proceedings would be pernicious. For he who will thereby preserve himself, must
change the Form of the whole Government, and reduce it to a Despo^ical and
servile condition: with which such Orders holding some proportion and
conformity, they may for a certain time prove useful for the maintaining of
that Tyranny; as it has done to the Turks in these later times, and formerly
in some other Nations, wherein the whole Government has related to the sole
and peculiar accommodation of the Lord Paramount, without any respect to the
good of the Subject, and more according to will then to Law. Nor is it true,
that the power of Citizens, or greatness of Barons in a Kingdom, proves alwas
harmful; it may rather upon many occasions prove the safety of that City or
State. But this may be ill u^ed, as many other things are; the which
notwithstanding whosoever should go about to take totally away from a City,
would ruin it, not bring it to perfection. Therefore the Law ought to provide
for taking away the abuse of things, not the things themselves, when they are
not simply and in themselves evil. And if the Authority which the Roman
Commanders held in their Armies had been well regulated, and their continuing
is their military Commands moderated by a shorter time, Caesar could not have
made use thereof as he did to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, he having
continued so many years Commander in chief of the same Army, and in the same
Province. Nor had they needed to have raised Pompey to such a height, to oppose
Caesar's greatness: But when when they had let it run on too long, to declare
him an Enemy to his Country, and drive him out of Italy, proved a violent
remedy, and mortal to the Commonwealth.

Neither can that benefit be expected as is pretended, (by the banishment of so
many Citizens, who being become too great, are for suspicion drives out of
their Country) of securing themselves from their power: rather Injury added to
Ambition, serves for another incitement to make them endeavor some innovation
in the City, and makes them the more sollicitous in plotting by the means of
such as are their friends and adherents in their own City or State, to r^ise
some revolt in it, for which they have easy recourse to the favor of other
Princes: So as the trouble of being offensive to those States from whence such
men are expelled, is rather increased then diminished. We have infinite
examples in all Ages of those, who being driven by banishment out of a City or
State, have been the occasion of notable mischief and ruin thereunto: For
though it cannot be denied, but that the ^o great power of Citizens in a City,
or of Lords and Barons in a Kingdom, begets suspicion, and is dangerous, and
does usually cause no small difficulties to the good and peaceful Government of
that State; yet some other remedy th^^ (...) may be used to obviate those
disorders which such excesses do (...) For that is only to suffer a ^ore to
grow old and to gangrene, that they (...) wards forc^d to (...) or sword to
heal it. In a well-governed State, (...) be had, and ca^^ taken both by the Law
it self, and by the Prince who rules is chief therein, not to suffer any one to
grow to too (...) And if any (...) do arrive at such a condition, as he begins
too far to overtop the re^^, the foundation and groundwork of his power must
dexterously be taken away, and of his ploting thoughts, so as he may not
thereby be able to work any novelties, or disturb the public peace: Which may
easily be done by his wisdom who commands in chief. the same men ought not to
be suffered to continue long in the same employments, and especially not to
exercise them too long in the same place; such things ought not to be left in
their power, which may serve for fuel the more to kindle their ambitious
though^^ to the prejudice of the public good, which may be done under a
pretense of honor, so as the Princes may not be noted for injustice, nor can
the particular pers^nages account it as an injury done them.

If any one do abound in riches, let him have expensive employments, that he
may lessen that wealth, which made him appear more eminent then others. If he
be of too great authority in the Court, or amongst the People, as having had
the management of important affairs along time, send him to some place of
Magistracy, or other employment a far off, and change him often from place to
place. If he be great and remarkable for glorious actions done by him, give him
hard and difficult employments, wherein if he succeed not well, his reputation
will soon grow less with the people, who judge by the events. But if such a one
appear too much ambitious, and be so, as many men are seen to be, out of a
certain vainglory, but without any malice of heart, he may be contented and
kept quiet, by confering honors upon him of glorious appearance, but little
profit. But the remedy will prove peradventure harder in those who boast
themselves to be more nobly descended, and of better blood then others, f^r
many several respects meet often times in them, to make them great and
powerful; yet even against these remedies may be found, without passing by a
violent and illegal way to the driving them out of the City or State; their
friends or kindred, may be kept low and humble, whereby their power is
lessened; if they commit any excess in case of Justice, as such men out of
arrogancy often do, be severe unto them, take their privileges from them,
declare them to be for a certain time incapable of any Public employment, and
do some other such like things; which being done, upon some just occasion,
although the parties concerned be therewithal displeased, yet not being
disliked by the generality, their hatching of mischievous plots against the
present Government and Weal public, will have less fuel to feed upon.

But what shall be said of him, whose worth and virtue does exceed that of all
others? by what pretense can a just Prince, or a well-governed Commonwealth
humble such a man, or keep him low, or aloof from partaking of their Councels?
To this it may be answered, that if this supposed personage be endowed with
true virtue, he will not be subject to any suspicion, nor will it be imagined
that he will do any foul or wicked thing which may be prejudicial to his Prince
or Country; but that all his endeavors shall aim at the common good, and it is
just and convenient that such a man should always bear sway in every
well-ordered Commonwealth. But if the virtues which render him so great and
eminent, tend to policy, that is, when a man does that which is good and
honest, having his mind bent upon some other object then mere worth and
honesty, as most men use to do, out of hopes of glory, or of bettering
themselves; which things notwithstanding are so far vertue^ as they are helpful
to the State, and have a certain resemblance o^ true worth; it will not be
amiss that such a one who may be suspected to misimp^y his good endowments, be
proceeded against in manner aforesaid. We may then conclude that the custom of
the Athenians concerning Ostracism ought neither to be praised nor practiced in
relation to the act it self; but may admit of commendation and imitation as far
as the intention thereof reaches, viz. to provide that the ambition or malice
of a few, rob not many of their quiet, nor do perturb or confound the whole
State.

The end of the First BOOK.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The First DISCOURSE.
Why the Commonwealth of ^enice has not so far enlarged her Precincts as did
the Roman Commonwealth.
MEN may be allowed to wonder not a little, if they take it into their
consideration, why the Commonwealth of Venice, having so excellent Laws and
Institutions, and having so long preserved her self in power and authority,
has not notwithstanding much enlarged the preci^cts of her Empire, as did the
Commonwealth of Rome, in a lesser space of time and in a form of Government
which was not void of many imperfections: The thought thereof has made me
oftentimes desire to search into the true causes of it.

I find this has been taken into consideration by some other modern Writers,
but to b^ot that his discourses are already buried in oblivion, it may be the
things by him alleged have not been such, as may give full satisfaction to
one who shall look narrowly into the ^arrtiage of our civil actions. He was of
opinion that the greatness of the Roman Empires was ^oly to be attributed to
the virtue of her Ordinations, and Form of Government; from which since the
Venetian Commonwealth does differ^^ he thinks that the cause why she has not
been able to make so great acquisitions. And he is so resolute in this opinion,
as without distinguishing between things and things, between (...) and times,
he does so equally extol all the orders and actions of the ^eman Commonwealth,
as he does propound some things for example to all (...) Princes and
Commonwealths, as are rather to be blamed then to be imi^ated, and which were
the reasons of the ruin of that Commonwealth, as the di^^en^ions which was
between the Nobility and the Common People, and other such things which are
rather disorders then orders, and more apt to confound, then to establish
States. Insomuch as his opinion is, That if there were a City at this day in
Italy which had the same from of Government as Rome had of old, that City
might, as the other did, make herself Mistress of the World. As if the
condition of times, and the so many variou^ accidents upon which humane
actions, and especially the augmenting and change of States do depend, were to
be held for nothing; and that it be in the power of a wise Legislator to give
the Empire of the World to that City, which he knows how to govern by good
Laws. But experience teaches us much otherwise; since we have known many
ancient Commonwealths founded by very wise men, and confirmed with excellent
Orders, equally for what concerns Peace as War, yet not any one amongst so many
has been able, I will not say to acquire so much Dominion as did the
Commonwealth of Rome, but nor hardly able any ways to extend their Prec^ncts
amongst their Neighbors. The int^insecal Orders of the State are not simply of
themselves sufficient to make so great Achievements, (though they may
peradventure concur very much thereunto:) Nor ought the State of Venice her not
being Mistress of larger Territories, be attributed to any defect in this
behalf; but many other things are to be taken into consideration, whereby the
truest causes of such effects, which amidst the uncertainty of such like
affairs can be found out, may be discovered by looking into.

To know then whence such a diversity proceeds, we must take the business a
little higher, and examine, First, what was the original beginning of these two
Cities, Rome and Venice; what their Founders were; and then what their
situation, what the inclinations, studies, and virtues of their Citizens; and
lastly the condition of times, and qualities of their neighboring Princes must
be examined. All which things appertain to this Consideration, as well as the
Orders of the Commonwealth, and their Form of Government. He then who shall
look upon the first Founders of these two Cities, willfind them, even in these
the^r first beginnings, not a little differing: which occasioned differing
intentions, and differing ends; and therefore peradventure a differing state,
and differing condition. The first Erectors of Venice, where men who were
peacefully given, as those who having been wearied by the so many calamities of
Italy, occasioned by the inundation of the Barbarians, had withdrawn
themselves, that they might shun the danger of War, into that piece of marish
ground in the Adriatic Sea, which was then greater then now it is, and the
chiefest of many small Islands, which by a common name were called Venetiae. So
as they lived for a while without any Orders either Military or Civil; those
first Inhabitants contenting themselves to live in peace and quiet, without
dreaming of any greater matter: For it neither stood with the end which they
propounded unto themselves in this their new abode so to do, nor did the
condition of those times permit it: And they were so fenced from the Arm sof
Enemies as then, both by the natural condition of their situation, as also by
the salt waters, as they needed not to arm themselves for their own defense.
Therefore their Citizens being by long custom inured to these thoughts, they
had no thought of taking up Arms, though the City were already much increased
both in Forces and Authority, unless when they were provoked, and more to keep
themselves from being injured by others, or to assist their Friends and
Confederates, then out of ambition of Rule, and of enlarging their bounds. And
he who shall consider what their greatest and and most difficult enterprises
were in those first times, will see they aimed all at this end. The Venetians
fought first with the French, and afterward against the Huns, in defense of
their Country, and of their Liberties; and long after with the Genoeses,
enforced thereunto by necessity, and provoked by many grievous injuries: For
this very valiant and generous Nation would not rest quiet, out of an emulation
of glory in Sea-affairs; wherein though they were oftentimes worsted by the
Venetians, yet they still found occasion of new Contests. The Commonwealth of
Venice has oft-times taken up Arms likewise, in times nearer this our Age,
with greater preparation for War, and with more courage to defend their State
in Terta firm^, which they had already gotten with much ado, and whereof they
were justly possessed; insomuch as they have sometimes valian^ly repulsed the
fury of most powerful Leagues of Princes, who were resolved upon their ruin.
But it becomes not the mo^th of a Venetian to say how often they have taken up
Arms in defense of their Friends and Confederates, lest he may seem to upbraid
others with the services his Countrymen have done them. But diverse People and
Cities assisted and preserved by their Forces, do witness this. And to speak
only of things of more recent memory, how great a desire has this Commonwealth
shown to the common good? and to this purpose how careful has she been of the
liberty and glory of Italy, in sustaining long and heavy War, to preserve the
noble Neapolitan Territories in the Italian Princes, and the like of Milan? But
he who will look further back, and see what they have done, will find that the
Venetians have undertaken and finished famous enterprises out of zeal to
Religion; as they did in the Wars of the Holy Land against the Saracens, and
diverse other times against other Princes, to preserve and increase the glory of
the holy Church, and the Papal dignity: which amongst many other actions, is
clearly and nobly witnessed by the famous Naval victory won from the Emperor
Frederick Barb^rossa; for the which Venice does at this day enjoy many great
privileges, in witness of her great worth and singular merit. But it is
needless now to particularize in those things whereof all Histories are full:
It will suffice to touch upon some things, whereby it may be conceived what the
first beginnings of the City were, and what were the intentions and end of her
Citizens.

Romes ends were far different from these, who from her very beginning aimed
only at Empire and greatness; being built by Romalus, a fierce and ambitious
man, who not content to have recovered his Kingdom to his Grandfather Numiter,
and opened the way to the Lordship of Alba longa, resolved by the assistance of
a great many young men who followed him, to purchase a better fortune and
condition for himself, and to build a new City, which must have a warlike
institution to keep the minds of those stirring youth busied in military
exercises, and to defend himself from his neighbors; who finding that the new
City aimed at greater designs, thought to keep is low. Romulus might with
reason promise himself to purchase more Dominion, and to enlarge his Confines;
for he built his City in a Country which was possessed by many people, who were
weak, and at odds within themselves, so as he needed not fear any potent Prince
who might oppose his designs, or suppress his Forces before they were somewhat
better established. This was the first foundation of Romes greatness; for the
City beginning soon to habituate herself to military discipline, and to turn
her thoughts upon War, and aggrandising her State, she grew so confirmed
therein with time, and with continual military orders, as the Militia and all
things thereunto tending did continually flour^ sh in her. For those that came
after, following (as it falls out for the most part) the example of their
Predecessors, her Citizens were always desirous of warlike glory, and of
Empire; proving to be like Romulus, and those other valiant men from whom they
had their beginning and increase. Thus they always made one War beget another,
not being able to endure the suspected power of their Neighbors, nor yet the
injuries done unto them by their Friends and Confederates; under which two
pretenses they made first many notable acquisitions in Italy, and afterward
(passing over the Sea) in Africa, in Spain, and in many other Provinces.

But to pass on now to another Consideration, let us affirm that the situation
is of great moment for the Rule and Dominion which one City is to have over
another, as that which affords security for self defense, and opportunity to
subjugate others; this helps likewise to make a City plentiful and wealthy,
without which States are hardly acquired. For where there is scarcity of
livelihood, poverty is more to be fought withal then Enemies, and want of
wealth renders a City always weak, and easy to be wasted and oppressed. Hence
it was that Sparta, though she had excellent Laws and Institutions, yet whilst
she observed them, she could not much enlarge her Dominions; for by them the
City was bound for what concerned both the private and public condition, to be
kept poor, and far from any commerce with others; and in our time the Cantons
of the Switzers, though they be a very valiant Generation, yet being poor, and
seated amongst Mountains, and for the most part in barren places, their
Soldiers being fighting under the pay of other Princes, they have not been able
to do any thing for themselves, or to make any acquisitions, but have only
preserved their Liberties.

If we shall then consider the situation of Venice, we shall certainly find it
very opportune for most things, and miraculously well for some things. For if
we have respect to safety; what City can be compared to this, which without any
Bulwarks of Walls, or Garrisons of Soldiers, defended by her natural
situation, is of her self safe from all injuries, and inexpugnable? So as she
is the only example after so many Ages of being untoucht by the Barbarians
violence. If we respect abundance of plenty and wealth, the accommodation that
the Sea affords her, and the so many Rivers which disgorge themselves, either
into the neighboring Sea, or into sher own Gulf, are such and so many, both for
the conveyance of victuals, and of merchandise, as it is no wonder that so
great a multitude of people can live in her with such abundance of all things,
and not only her own Citizens, but even foreiners who inhabit there, grow rich
therein. But as for Empire and command, as she is miraculously accommodated for
the employment of Forces in Sea enterprises, so for what belongs to the like on
land, she has not those conveniences which peradventure are requisite.
Therefore it was long ere she bethought her self of purchasing any Territories
in Terra firm^, minding only Dominion at Sea, whereunto she was invited by her
scitua^^on, and by the institution of her Ancestors* touching which it is
worthy consideration, that the Sea Militia and Discipline, upon which the
Commonwealth was for a long time bent, are not such as can naturally give
occasion of great command, because their Fleets cannot of themselves penetrate
further then the Rivers which fall into the Sea; wherefore all her acquisitions
were only Islands, or places on the Sea shore, because she had not then
numerous and well disciplined Armies to dive into the hearts of Dominions, and
to pursue victories.

All Cities which have placed the pitch of their power in their Fleets, have
had the like success. For though they may have purchased some reputation, and
some precedencie by Sea, yet have they not been able much to enlarge the
Confines of their command. Thus the Athenians and other people of Greece,
though they were very strong in these kind of Forces, proper to that Nation
from whence the art of building of Ships, and of Navigation is thought to have
its original, yet have they always been esteemed weak, and but little valued
by such Nations, which they could not by their Forces make subject to their
Dominions. But the City of Rome, which studied more the Militia by Land, then
by Sea, and built her greatness more by Armies then by Fleets, having more
field-room wherei^ to exercise her Citizens valo^, made much greater
enterprises, and made many Provinces subject to her Dominion. Not did the
Romans make use of Fleets by Sea before they were necessitated, that they might
sail into Sicily and Africa, to oppose the power of the Carthaginians, which
they had reason to be jealous of, by reason of their too great power, and
vicinity

But when they had occasion to make use of their Soldiers by Sea, they showed
no less forwardness and daring therein, then they had done by land: Insomuch as
the skill and experience of the Carthaginians, who had long been Masters at
Sea, was oft-times overcome and deluded by the valor and military Discipline of
the Romans; till at last that Nation which was held to be so powerful at Sea,
was destroyed and beaten by the Romans, who had a long time been unexperienced
in Maritime Affairs, but very expert in Land-Armies, and Military Discipline.
So as the Empire of the World being contested for by these two Commonwealths,
it was seen that it more availed the Romans to be a little superior to the
Carthaginians by Land, then it did the Carthaginians to exceed the Romans much
by Sea. For the good Orders of their Armies, the valor and discipline of their
Soldiers, got them the victory over the Carthaginians, and opened the way to
the Monarchy of the World; which had sundry times before been done by the same
means, by the Assyrians, Persians and Macedonians; Landforces having always
in great acquirements prevailed over those of the Sea, and the Discpline of
Armies over the experience of Maritime Affairs. This is likewise more clearly
seen by reason of the new Monarchy founded in a short time by the Turks in
Asia, and in Greece, which was not done by Sea-Forces, wherein they were not
any ways considerable, till of later times, but by the multitude of their
Cavalrie, and more by the firm ranks of their Ianizaries. And to say truth, the
very Forces by Sea are increased and maintained by those of Land, for larger
Territories do easily furnish men, moneys, victuals, and other necessaries for
the well ordering of Fleets at Sea. The which is likewise known by experience
of the very Commonwealth of Venice, which before she had got any State in Terra
firma, could never make so numerous Fleets, though she did very much study
Maritime Affairs; nor could she prevail in the important Wars against the
Geno^ses, as she did afterward, when her power was much increased and
confirmed by her Land Territories. Thus in this last^Age, she has been able to
set forth at first above a Hundred nimble Galleys, and afterward more Galleys,
and greater vessels of all sorts, as has been seen by experience in the two
last Wars against the Turks, wherein nothing more gallant and glorious could be
desired on the Commonwealths behalf; whereupon also, as the worthy and becoming
fruit of such industry did the Victory of Lepanto ensue, which will be
memorable in all Ages. And it may suffice to know what the Maritime Forces of
the Commonwealth are, and how they are abundantly supplied from Land with all
things to make them powerful at Sea, yea, even then when the Sea was blocked up
for what concerned them; that they were able to maintain so great a Fleet in
all seasons, for three years together. Wherefore Francisco Foscari, Duke of
Venice, a Prince of singular wisdom, by whose advice, and under whose happy
auspices, great acquisitions were made on firm land, was wont to say, that the
Commonwealth could not have increased much in power, if she had not employed
her Forces on land enterprises; which because she had no^ formerly done, was
the cause why that greatness was much retarded and hindered, whereunto she might
easily have arrived if such counsel had been sooner taken; and by setting
before her the example of the worth and glory of the Romans, she might have
aspired to greater Empire. But those who governed the Commonwealth were a long
time far from any such thoughts; being more intent upon peace and quiet, or
upon such Wars as might enlarge and secure her Dominion by Sea; which may be
clearly witnessed by what past with ^zzelino de Romano, with the Scalligers,
the Carr^^si, and with others who ruled in the next neighboring Cit^es; whereby
it is seen that the Venetians being contented with defending their friends, and
vindicating their own injuries, dreamed not on their Dominions, of which they
might easily have berest them; till when overcome by necessity, and by the
insolency of the Carraesi, and by other accidents of those times, they were
compelled to apply their minds and Forces thereunto, and to fix their Dominion
there.

Let us consider on the contrary, how opportunely Rome was s^^ted to for^ent
her Citizens dispositions much to augment her Dominions, almost in the midst of
Italy, just sitting for a principal City, being placed (as may be said) in the
Center, to the end that she may equally extend her Power and Forces on all
sides. The City of Rome stands on firm land, or Terra firm^, but so near the
Sea, as she may reap the commodity thereof, without being thereby endangered:
she is apt to breed up Armies, and to nourish men in the exercise of the
Militia; not is she inconveniently seated for the transportation of her Forces
by Sea into other far off Provinces. This diversity of situation has begot
diversity of inclinations in the Inhabitants. Thus does Nature always adapt
men's minds to those Arts which they are to exercise themselves in, or else
Custom does inform the Habit, and turns it into Nature. For as the Romans
following exercises conformable to the situation of their City, were more
inclined to Land-war, and in Peace to husbandry: So the Venetians invited to
other things according to the diversity of place, applied their studies
otherwise to defend their Liberty, and to increase their wealth, using the Sea*
Militia for the one, and Traffic and Merchandising for the other. Which
whosoever shall upbraid our Citizens withal, seems, not to know, that without
these a City could neither have long preserved it self, nor increase in state
and wealth, as it has done: For not having any particular Territories whereout
to extract their livelihood, she would have been always poor and weak, and
wanting other employments, she would have been destroyed, if not by foreign
Forces, by her own Idleness, as many other Cities have been, the Citizens
wanting wherein to employ their thoughts, and to exercise themselves in quiet
times. But if the Citizens of Rome were much commended for their husbandry,
insomuch as of this day many famous men of that Commonwealth are as much
celebrated for having been good Husbandmen as good Commanders; as were Curtius
Dent^tus, Quintius Cinci^^tus, Attalius Collatsinus, Marc^ Regulus, Scipio
Afric^^ons, and others; wherefore should the Venetians be upbraided with their
Merchandising, this being an exercise as fitting and requisite for the
situation of Venice, as was that of Tillage and Husbandry to the like of Rome?
If the care of cultivating the Earth did not abase the minds of those ancient
and reverend Romans, who have left so evident examples of worth to all other
Cities and Nations, why should the industry of Merchandising redound to the
opprobry of the V^^^tians, seeing to the contrary with how much glory and how
much public benefit they have for so long a feries of years governed the
Commonwealth?

The studies and actions of the Romans and Venetians have then been different,
but notwithstanding alike in this, that they aimed at the same end, though they
took several ways there unto; to wit, a^ Glory, at the Grandeur and Liberty of
their Commonwealth. Many famous examples of Fortitude, of love to their
Country, and of all other sorts of worthiness have been seen in each of them;
so as in our men nothing was more to be desired, unless (...) and more frequent
occasions wherein to have employed themselves, that the greatness of their
actions might have corresponded to the magnnimity of this minds. Yet do not we
Venetians want (...) of many (...) who have been very famous for fortitude of
mind and military worth, and he who stall examine the life and actions of many
Princes of the Commonwealth, will find them to be such as deserve praise and
celebration. Such have Ordel^so Faller^ Vi^^l^, (...) Mic^^li, and H^^^rico
Dandule, (...) bastione (...) Cantarem, Pietre (...), Andrea Grit^i, Sebastiano
Veniero, and diverse others been; whose words might be (...) to that of the
Fabri^^i, Marcelli, Fabii, (...) and others of their so much (...) then if they
had had a larger field to exercise themselves in, or had the (...) of their
Commonwealth afforded them same equal to the merit and valor of those (...)

But let us now come to consider those (...) important (...) of the condition
of Times, and their Neighbors qualities. The City of Venice (...) her beginning
when Italy was possessed by the wild Northern Nations, and when being perplexed
with all other sort of miseries, she fell finally into the slavery of
Barb^^ians, wherein she lived for the space of many years: How then could a new
City aspire to Empire, while the Forces of the Barbarians were so powerful in
that Province, as the most powerful Roman Empire was not able to withstand
them, which was shook and destroyed by their fury? It rather seems a wonder,
that a City in her first and weak beginnings was able to manage so great a War,
and withstand (as she did afterward) the violence of two fierce and potent
Nations, to wit, the French, and Huns: The French, when their King Pipin being
entered Italy with puissant Forces to drive out the Lombards, and being
scandalized that the City of Venice had leaned to the friendship of Nicephorus
Emperor of Constantinople, turned his Forces upon her to subjugate and destroy
her: And the H^ns, when parting from Pannonia, (which took from them the name
of Hungary) having overcome a very powerful Army of the Germans, and killed
their King Lodovic^s, they fell to (...) again, their fury was withstood by the
(...), which (...) a powerful Prince, was forced to give way unto. But
afterward, the Forces of these Western Barbarians being in time weakened by
Ch^^^ the Great, the State of Italy fell again in to the Western Emperors who
being then very powerful, and masters both of Germany and France, the Forces
of a weak Commonwealth were not likely to contest with so great Princes, with
any hope of acquiring (...) These difficulties being added unto by the Cities
situation, withheld the Venetians a long while from thinking how to enlarge
their Dominions in Terra sirms; in which opinion being for a long time
confirmed, and having very (...) employed their studies and Forces in Sea
enterprises, (though the (...) of times did counsel them to the contrary giving
them hopes of noble acquisitions on Land) they either despised, or knew not how
to make use of the occasions which afterward were offered. Thus when the
German Emperors, troubled with the domestic troubles of that Province, did
forgo their possessions in Italy, the Venetians not minding then that
opportunity, left the advantage to others, which they might easily have reaped:
whereupon other Cities of Italy purchasing their (...) from the Emperors at low
ra^es, framed a peculiar Government unto themselves, as did Florence; and
others were possessed by others powerful men, as (...) and other Cities of
Lombardy: when if the Commonwealth of Venice, whole power was already much
increased, had been minded to have (...) themselves of any of the Imperial
Territories, it is not to be doubted but they might in a short time have made
notable acquisitions. But when they began very late, and more provoked by
injuries then by ambition of dominion, to think upon Territories by Land, they
found diverse other Princes become very powerful both in (...), and Authority,
and confirmed in the States which they (...) under (...) a shore lawful (...).
Wherefore they met with many difficulties, and amongst the test the Wars proved
very heavy unto them, which they were forced to (...) did not join against
them, because they saw that if that Dukes State fell into the power of the
Venetian Commonwealth, the way would be laid open to her for much greate^
matters in Italy; whereupon a noble Victory which was already almost gotten,
was impeded.

Hereby it may be then conceived how much the condition of the times was averse
to the Commonwealths enlarging her Precincts by Land, partly by reason of her
self, and partly through other various accidents; which though they were
somewhat more favorable unto her in what concerned the Sea, yet met she not
with small interruptions therein to her enterprises. For the Eastern Emperors
being Masters of Greece, and of other States and Countries, wherein the
Commonwealth was to have enlarged the Confines of her command by Sea, she could
not make any great acquisitions whilst they preserved themselves in such
reputation and strength, as became their State. But afterward, when that
Empire began to decline, she began to increase and flourish gloriously, and her
worth was waited upon by much prosperity; as was seen when the Venetians went
in company of the French to the business of the Levant, and after many noble
warlike actions they took the City and Empire of Constantinople; of which
acquisition the Commonwealth had so great a share, as that their Dukes did then
assume the title of Signoridella quarta part, e Mezza, di tutto L' Imperio
della Romania. And soon after with the like prosperous success, they did by
sundry means reduce many Islands, and chief Maritime Towns under their
obedience; and the Commonwealth marched on apace to greater power and command.
But this course of glory and victory by War was much slackened by the
original Customs and Orders of the City (as has been said) which related more
to Peace, and Merchant affairs, then to War.

Insomuch as the Venetians seemed for a while to make use of these new
acquisitions, rather for the better accommodation of their Navigation, and
Traffic, then for any occasion of other enterprises, Their business did
therefore infinitely increase at this time; insomuch as there was not any City
famous for merchandising in the Levant, whither the Venetian Ships and
Merchants did not flock. Nay, a great number of men of that Nation did usually
remain in those Cities, through whose hands the most precious Merchandise of
those Countries past, to the great advantage of the City, and of her private
Citizens. So as the Genoeses plying the same places, at first a certain
rivalship and emulation arose amongst them, as well for the profit of
merchandising, as for the expertness, and glory of Sea affairs, till at last
they came to open and cruel War: which kept the Commonwealth so busied, and
perplexed by disturbing Navigation, and even private affairs, as for a long
while they had no leisure to undertake other enterprises, though they had met
with opportuity for it, and that they had been thereunto disposed. For the
Venetians having sundry times hazarded their Fleets upon the doubtful event of
Battle, they tasted both prosperous and adverse fortune; insomuch as they were
to fight in their own Gulf, not more for Empire, then for the safety of the
City.

Thus whilst the Commonwealth spent her best years, partly in these private
affairs, and merchandising business, partly in the so long and troublesome Wars
against, the Genoeses, another Power arose in the Levant, much greater, and
more formidable then was the Grecian Empire. For the Ottaman Lords, beginning
by diverse accidents, but chiefly by reason of the discords among Christians, to
make notable and successful progress in their rising Empire, grew quickly very
great and powerful not only by Land, but also by Sea, having reduced the City
of Constantinople into their hands, a very fit place for Sea enterprises,
whereby the Commonwealth of Venice was not only bereft of all hopes of further
increasing their Dominion by Sea, having so great and powerful an ^nemy to near
at hand, but even what they had already got, was exposed to hazard; so as being
to maintain a bitter and difficult War, and to manage it with unequal Forces
against this their sore and perpetual adversary, she had more reason to think
upon her own defense, then by force of Arms to win what belonged to others.

Let us in the next place consider the conditions of the nearest neighboring
people amongst which she was to enlarge her Confines, whereby we may also know
what difficulties the Commonwealth met with; for at the very first she was to
overcome the Dalmatians, a Nation not only very valiant, but of a quick wit,
given to sedition, and desirous of novelties. Whence how great her difficulties
were in quelling these, may be conceived by this, that the Commonwealth of Rome
having so many, and so far distant Nations, yet could she never handsomely put
the yoke upon Dalmatia, which never was under the Roman Empire until the time
of Qctavius Augustus, but had still before notably indamaged the Roman Armies.
It is then no wonder that the state of a Commonwealth should be less, which had
to contend with such Enemies; and who may not know by the actions of this
Commonwealth, that she rather wanted occasion then worth for the further
increasing her State and fortune?

Let us now likewise consider the condition of the times wherein the
Commonwealth of Rome had her happy beginnings, and made the first progress to
her Empire. Which we shall find to differ much, and to be free of the so many
difficulties, which the Venetians met with. Rome had not at her first rise any
powerful neighboring Prince; for the Assyrians had then the Monarchy, whose
confines did not extend beyond Asia; and after the concourse of many years it
was carried by Cyrus amongst the Persians, with whom it remained for about Two
hundred years, till it was destroyed by Alexander of Macedon, who though he
made greater conquests, and made his Forces be felt and dreaded much further
off, yet dying young in the height of his Victories, he could not get into
Europe, nor afford the Romans occasion of making trial of their Forces with a
powerful and valiant Prince. And by his death (he having left no issue, either
legitimate or illegitimate behind him) that Monarchy was soon destroyed, and
his Empire was divided between his chief Commanders; so as several Kingdoms
were thereout framed, with which severally the Romans did afterward much to
their advantage make War. So as Asia having then been the chiefest Seat of the
Empire, the Provinces of Europe were not at that time any ways annoied by the
power thereof; and those that were further from thence, as was Italy, less then
the rest. But Greece which was then in high esteem for the excellency of her
Inhabitants genius, for what concerned both Civil and Military virtues, was
divided into many several Peopledoms, who contending within themselves for the
dignity both of the soveraigntie of that very Province, it so fell out that
aspiring either wholly or chiefly thereat, they minded not the annoying of
other Nations by their Forces. In Africa the Carthaginians were very strong,
the power of Carthage being almost at the same times as much increased, as was
the like of Rome in Italy: So as she had the Dominion of many provinces of
Europe, and did possess the greatest part of Spain: but this power did not any
ways molest the Romans first designs, not did it hinder them from making
qcquisitions in Italy, not from confirming therein those Forces with which she
afterward did subdue the World. For the Carthaginians came not near the Romans
for little less then Five hundred years, till such time as both the
Commonwealths enlarging their Confines, they grew to be neighbors; Whereupon at
last they commenced War, out of the envy and jealousy that each (...) of
other. This was the condition and (...) of times wherein the Commonwealth of
Rom^ had (...) rise and increase.

Whence it may be observed, that though there might be some great (...) then,
yet was there none which might compare with the Roman Emperors, who had a
greater Monarchy then all the rest; besides they were so far off, as their
greatness could not impede Romes increasing, though she were as yet but a
new-begun City. But she met with the like prosperous condition both of affairs
and times, in relation to her nearest neighbors: For Rome had not only not any
great contestation with any powerlike Prince in her first and weakest
beginning; but for the space of three hundred and sixty years, till the first
French war, she had no occasion of making trial of her Forces against any
powerful people; for then Italy was not only not subject to any one Prince
alone, who might be greater by other Forces and other States, as it happened
afterward in the Venetians times, but being divided into many parts, as well
in respect of dominion, as of other separations, each Country contained many
people of differing government and power: So as Latium alone of herself, which
is now called Campagna di Roma, contained four Nations, or rather Communalties,
the Hernici, Latini, Volsci, and Equi; with whom the People of Rome did for a
long time make war. I mention not the Cecinensi, the Crustumeni, Antinati,
Sabini, Albani, and other Nations of less esteem, against which in her
beginning she exercised her Forces, whilst she learned (as a man may say) the
first rudiments of her Militia. Tuscany, though being taken all together she
were very powerful, and whose Confines were then much larger, yet was she
divided into so many Signories or Lordships, as the Forces of every People
apart by themselves must needs be weak and of small moment: which may easily be
known by this, that bare Three hundred men of the Family of the Fabli were able
to wage War with the Veienti, who were the chief of that Region, with whom they
often times fought with displayed Banners, and with dubious event, and were at
last suppressed more by the fraud, then force of their Enemies. So likewise the
other parts of Italy which were nearer Rome were so weakly inhabited, as it is
not much, that a new City, but yet well instructed in weapons, might get unto
herself State and Dominion: Nay, he who shall consider what the increase of
that Commonwealth was from time to time, will wonder how that People, who got
afterward the dominion of the whole World, was so late in enlarging the
Confines of her Territories upon her Neighbors, when they were to contend in
War with those that were weaker then they, and that the bounds of their Empire
did extend to beyond Italy. For, for above the space of four hundred years,
when the City was so much increased in Citizens, as she raised Armies of Forty
thousand Foot, besides Horse, the affairs of Rome were notwithstanding in such
condition, as they made War even under the Walls of Rome with the Equi, Volsci,
and Veientes, her first Enemies. And this wonder is not a little increased,
when you shall consider that Military discipline did flourish even from the
very first in Rome, and was ever afterward held in great esteem by her
Citizens, who were bent with all their might to augment the power of their
City, not being content, as were the Venetians, to enjoy peace and security.
Wherefore the Romans gave easily way for friendship to all Foreiners, that they
might by the multitude of their Citizens render their City more powerful, and
fitter to worst Adversaries: And their first King Romulus set up a Sanctuary,
where all sorts of men, whether free or slaves, good or guilty, might have
receptacle. But that Commonwealth had also her imperfections, whereby being
troubled with perpetual civil discords, she found many impediments, and much
difficulty in effecting her Citizens generous designs. But being gotten to a
great height of power, the Counterpoise of foreign Forces ceasing by her own
greatness, she was able for a time to bear with her so many discorders, till at
last she was brought to her final ruin.

We must now be permitted to take some other things into consideration which
appertain to particular order of this Commonwealth. A City which aspires unto
Empire, must above all things else be well provided of Arms, so as she want not
any thing that is requisite for War: but she stand^ no less in need of good
Laws, which are for many respects of great importance in all Governments; as
also for that when the licentiousness of Arms, entrusted in the hands of
Citizens, is not corrected by the authority of Law, that which was destined for
the good and preservation thereof, it turns at last to her ruin. Therefore it
is requisite that a City be constituted with such Laws as may result both to
safety from foreign Enemies, and to union between her own Citizens; by which
civil agreement the strength and reputation of a Commonwealth is much
increased. Of these two conditions which ought to make a City powerful, and so
as that power may continue long, the Commonwealth of Rome had the first in
perfection, but was very faulty in the second: On the contrary, excellent
provision was made by the Founders of Venice for the second, but much remains
to be wished for in the former. Thus then had Rome a naturally warlike people,
which she kept continually exercised in Arms, observing exactly Military
discipline and orders: But she was much disorderly and confused in Civil
affairs, nor knew she how to keep any settled from of Government, leaving too
much authority in the People, and wanting usual means to suppress the
immoderate power of Citizens. Whereas in Venice, the form and order of Civil
Government is in every particular well disposed of, and excellently well
understood; so as she is the only example which in so many Ages, and so many
accidents both of good and bad fortune, has never been troubled with any
important domestic discords. But then, as for Military orders, they are not
altogether such as are requisite for the acquiring of a large Command; for at
(...) beginning, she applied herself (as has been said) to maritime affairs,
not with any intent of subjugating other Cities and Nations, but rather (as the
condition of those times and businesses did require) for what concerned
Traffic and Merchandising, to which the preservation of Peace did much
condu^e; and the keeping of open and free. Commerce with all men; but having
since had some such thoughts too late, they were not very sevently pursued
neither, but only as necessary or some occasion did dictate: For the City was
nor disposed and established with certain and perpetual Orders, not with any
very ambition^ ends for what concerned. War, and for Land^ Militia, it has
already been said* that for a long time the Commonwealth was totally a stranger
unto it. And therefore when at last she made it her business, for want of any
fitting preparation for it in her own people and Citizens, she had recourse for
help to Foreiners, and this (...) growi^g stronger by time, she has always
made use for the most part of Foreign Commanders and Soldiers, brought under her
Pay from elsewhere: which, as experience shows* has turned much to her damage
and disorder; for her Forces being under the command and power of **** other
men, she has not bee^able upon many fi^^ing ccasions to make good use of the
Victories* which she with great danger and (...) has ^on. And not to mention
many other things, it is a thing very well known, that had not the (...) great
fidelity of the Commandess (...) the Commonwealth of her just hopes, in the
(...)

The Romans did not thus, who being to rig out Fleets against the Carthaginian,
did not seek out Sicilians, or Grecians, or people of other Nations, to command
over them, but made use of their own Citizens as well by Sea as by Land.
Cinci^natu^ was taken from the Plough, and made Dictator against the Subins;
Cicer^ being taken from pleading at the Bar, was sent to the government of
Cilicia, and to make War against the Parthians; Scipio, who parted a fresh
Soldier from Rome is said to have gotten the knowledge of the military Art, by
the way, before he arrived at the Enemy; Sylla, being sent Questor into Africa,
with the Consul Marius, being till then Puney in the Militia, became in a few
days so well instructed therein, and raised so great an opinion of valor and
military Discipline of himself, as the Commonwealth did very soon put their
chiefest hopes in him, in all their weightiest affairs. In brief, people that
are of a ready wit, and noble spirit, do easily accustom themselves by exercise
to all things, and prove excellent therein; the experience whereof has been
seen amongst our selves, for those few who have betaken themselves to
Land-service, have given such proof of their valor (which is witnessed by
particular Histories) as it may very well be known, that the Commonwealth might
have promised unto her self all gallantries from her Citizens, if she had known
how to make use of them. But she was run into this error, because she would (as
the conjuncture of times did almost require) follow the example of the other
Princes of Italy, who long before, and chiefly at that time when the
Commonwealth did most apply her self to Land-affairs, made use of mercinary
Militia's, which was then heightened to a great esteem by two famous Commanders
of that Age, Braccio and Sforza, who were afterward imitated by others in this
sort of Militia; Wherefore the Captain^ whose Troops did ordinarily consist of
horse, led them along to the service sometimes of one, sometimes of another
Prince. So the Venetians who were but learners in this sort of Militia, saw
that the Popes, and Kings of (...), the Dukes of Mi^an, the Florentines, who
bore great sway and authority in Italy, made use of this sort of Forces, they
began no follow the footsteps which were (...) out unto them by others. Another
respect may be added hereunto, which has already been touched upon, that the
Commonwealth having then put her self in a certain course, which she had for a
long time observed, of making use of her people and her Citizen in Sea-affairs,
it seemed dangerous to some to make such an innovation in a City ordained for
civil Government, and which was greatly ^ixt therein by long custom. But it is
not to be denied, but that when the aggrandizing of a State or Empire is in
question, this which has been spoken of is a great fa^lt in a City which does
aspire thereunto.

And it is to be observed in the Roman Monarchy that the happy success of their
famous victories is chiefly attributed, to the discipline of their Malitia,
because it was excellent, and because it was exercised by their own Soldiers;
and particularly in the Carthiginian W^rs, which were (...) then all the rest
which the Romans did ever make; it is observable, that the Carthaginians being
equal to the Romans both for the re^^ration and w^rth of their Commanders, and
superior to them in the numbers of their Soldiers, to boot with the strength of
their Elephants, which they made use of in their Battles, yet their Armies were
overcome, which consisted of (...) people, and assembled out of many (...), and
yet not by the greater worth, but by the greater fidelity, constancy, and love
of the Roman Soldiers toward their Country.

But for such abuses as (...) it may be alleged in behalf of the Commonwealth
of (...), that she did it to (...) th^se mischiefs into which (...)
Commonwealth of (...) can by giveng these military commands to (...); yet he
who will truly examine the state of affairs, will find that the (...) which is
granted, limited and corrected by the Laws, cannot be prejudicial to the
public good; and the experience of the very City of Venice confirms this,
where so great authority being so often granted in commands at Sea to her own
Citizens, yet it was never known that the Commonwealth suffered any mischief
thereby, and certainly a great mystery lies in the well disposed orders of a
City, by which Citizens are easily kept within their duties, wherein if any one
chance to fail, he is soon chastised without any disturbance to the peace of
the City. Which if by nothing else* is sufficiently proved in the City of
Venice, by the long duration of that Commonwealth. So as these things were very
well understood and ordained by her; and she might the more easily do it, by
reason of the conditions of those her first inhabitants, as has been said. But
such freedom and licentiousness was given in Rome to that warlike people,
together with the government of their Forces, as the Laws were not so
reverenced as they ought to have been* and the orders of the Militia being
instituted by Rom^lus, before those of Religion and civility by Numa Po^pilius,
military discipline was always in greater esteem then the study of civil
affairs.

By all which considerations it is manifest, That the diversity of success in
these two Commonwealths, has sprung from this diversity of institutions, and
from so many accidents, and not from any one reason, as was said at the
beginning; but in this diversity both of them have their praises, and all those
perfect^ons and felicity, which is grantable to humane affairs. Rome was
Mistress of the World, but could not long enjoy this greatness and prosperity,
nor yet with the quiet of her Citizens. But Venice, though of much meaner
Precincts, and condition, has preserved her self (as an only example) in her
liberty for so many Ages, free from all domestic troubles, and with the
miraculous union and concord of her Citizens.

The Second DISCOURSE.
Whether or no the Commonwealth of Venice be to be blamed for having taken upon
her the defense of the City of Pisa, when it was oppugned by the Florentines.
I Have often, not without some, to me appearing reason, wondered, that some
Historians should so much blame the Commonwealth of Venice for having taken
upon her the defense of the City of Pisa against the Florentines, whereby they
may seem to reproach the counsels of those wise and stout Senators, who had
then the managing of public affairs in their hands, for those very things, for
which other Princes and States, have been by other Writers much celebrated. He
who will know the truth of such judgments; must take unto himself more
particular, and inward considerations, for it oftentimes falls out, that
looking into the very pith and marrow of business, the clean contrary is found
to what did first appear, and the face of things do seem to alter. Such actions
may then be measured, either by the ordinary reasons of justice and equity else
by the reasons of State, which are the more proper. If you consider (...)
action of the Commonwealth according to the first measure, what is it that
(...) consciences of these so ^eruplous me^? to take upon ones self (...) a
pio^^ action, and be^itting great and generous Princes* and how miserable was
the condition of the poor Pisans, how much it did deserve to be embraced and
favored both out of compassion and justice, is demonstrated (to omit for the
present other particulars) by what was done at the same time by Charles the
Eight, King of France, whilst he was in Italy, and by the so many favors
afforded to the cause of Pisa by all the chief of his Court. Charles had
promised the Florentines to keep the City of Pisa under their Dominion, being
obliged unto them for their readiness in receiving them into his State, and for
having afforded them all assistance and accommodation; yet did the afflictions
of the Pisans appear to be so grievous, as he was moved more by compassion then
by his own interest, or by his promise made to the Florentines.

A foreign Prince used this charity to the Pisans, with whom he nor his Kingdom
had never held any friendship or confederacy, his interests being not only
separate from, but contrary to their welfare: And shall it be thought a strange
and irrational thing, that the Commonwealth of Venice, which had had the Pisans
for their friends and associates in diverse enterprises, and who kept still
friendship and commerce with that City, from whence also some of the noblest
Families of the Commonwealth draw their original, and whose cause for the same
respects was straightly annexed unto their own, should interest herself in behalf
of the Pisans, to comfort them in their great affliction? Nor ought the
Commonwealth of Venice to use greater respect to the Florentines, then they had
used toward her, against whose designs they had so opposed themselves in the
Wars formerly made against the Dukes of Milan and Ferrara, assisting their
Enemies both with men and moneys, as they were thought to be the chief
hinderance, why the business undertaken by the Commonwealth with great hopes of
good success, had no better an end. The Venetians were thereunto likewise moved
by the example of others: For if the Duke of Milan, the Genoeses, the Lucheses,
and those of Sienna had assisted the Pisans as much as they were able, how
could the Venetians, whose Forces in Italy were much superior to theirs, stand
idly looking upon the Pisans miseries, and upon the prosperity and greatness of
the Florentines, whereby the common troubles of Italy were augmented, since
they alone adhered to the French faction.

But let us consider a little more particularly the cause which was undertaken
to be defended by protecting the Pisans, and what it was that they did
endeavor. Certainly nothing but the recovery of their ancient liberty, whereof
they were bereaved either by their several misfortunes, and by the violence of
others, or at least (as they said) to reduce themselves to a less severe
government then that of the Florentines; under whose dominion being fa^n but a
little before, and the City of Pisa being sold at a low rate by the Vis^onti,
the Pisans pretended first by the favor of Charles the Eight, King of France,
and afterward by the like of Maximilian the Emperor, to be returned to their
former liberty: The former having used his power, and the other his anti^nt
pretenses of the Empire, to put them into that condition. And grant that
respect were to be had to the possession which the Florentines had of that
City, which notwithstanding was but of later times, the Florentines were
likewise to have released the Haven of Ligo^n to the G^noeses, from whom they
had taken it by violence. The Venetians did not persuade the Pisans to forgo
their obedience to the Florentines, as Lodovick Sfoza had formerly done; for
they minded (...) the appeasing of the commotions of Italy, then the raising of
more; they did not free them from the bond of obedience to the Florentines, as
did the Emperor and the King of France, because they (...) such an action did
not belong unto them; they were not the first that did (...) the (...) of that
City, as the Genoeses and those of Sienna had done, because they had no
intention to advantage themselves by the discord and ruin of others: But the
City having already totally rejected the obedience of the Florentines, being
thereof ^^eed by the authority of other puissant Princes, and assisted by other
more petty Princes to maintain their liberties; the Venetians being requested
and conjured by the Pisans, when they saw them ready to fall into the depth of
misery, if not assisted by them, and that their ruin would draw along with it
great prejudice to the peace and liberty of all Italy, they at last took upon
them their protection and defense. And I herein say nothing but what is most
true, and confirmed by the testimony of those who have written upon the
passages of those times.

But let us consider other more particular accidents, and more weighty
respects. Charles the Eight, King of France, was at that time passed into Italy,
to get the Kingdom of Naples; an undertaking wherein he had prosperous success,
which was an ill omen to Italy: All the other Princes of Italy opposed him
afterward in his designs, (instructed by the fall of the King of Arragon, to
have an eye to their own danger) except only the Florentines, who still
continued in adhering to the French, the counsel of the most po^ent Citizens
prevailing over the opinion of the more wise. So as the French preparing to
return with mighty Forces into Italy, they had friendship with none, nor had
they any other receptacle, save with the Florentines, with whom they had
already made a new agreement to be by them assisted with men and moneys. Pisa
was at the same time straightly beleaguered by the Florentines; and had she not
been succor'd by the Venetians, all her other aids were so weak, as she must
speedily have fallen into the Florentines hands; who being freed of the expense
and trouble of that Siege, would be more powerful, and more ready to assist the
French, and to facilitate the enterprises which they were to attempt in Italy.
Then if it were judged by the common opinion of all men to be just, honest and
laudable to take upon them the defense of the safety and liberty of Italy
against the French; how can those actions be blamed, which did tend (as it is
seen) necessarily thereunto, by keeping foreign Forces afar off, and by
bereaving them of their ^riends assistance? The affairs of the King of France
did at this time ebb and flow, but for the most part ebb in the Kingdom of
Naples: Great were the King of Arragons hopes of recovering the State, being
therein assisted powerfully by the same Venetians: The King of France, though
his Forces were in a readiness, was doubtful whether he should come into Italy,
or no. So as at such a conjuncture of time, every least thing which tended
either to the augmenting or lessening of his hopes, was of great moment. Pope
Alexander moved by these respects, did much press the Venetian Senate to be
resolute in assisting the Pisans, whilst he himself was somewhat doubtful and
(...). The Venetian Senate had the Florentines in good esteem, and laying aside
the memory of what was past* would have had them for their friends, if they
would have separated themselves from the French (who were then the (...) Enemy)
and have entered into that Confederac^e whereinto all the rest of the Princes of
Italy were entered, and by whom they had many fair offers made them,
particularly to (...) the (...) of their State, if they would put on a generous
(...) those Forts, which as (...) Towns for their fidelity ^ere held by French
garrisons, and do this by Force of Arms, not by Treaty (...) Agreement. But if
these things could not be listened unto out of a (...) such a resolution, that
they might keep the Florentines busied about Pisa, and the French from those
succors, whereby the troubles and dangers of Italy were increased.

But I find that these transactions have been diversely interpreted, and the
Senate blamed, who did not aim at succouring the oppressed Pisans, not at the
common safety of Italy, but at their own thirst of bringing the City of Pisa
under their Dominion. To this it is answered, that where the actions are
evident, no judgment is to be given contrary thereunto; nor ought the secrets
of hearts to be searched, which is reserved to a more excellent power then what
humane discourse can arrive unto; it is certain that the defense of Pisa, which
was oft-times denied them, was at last undertaken by the Venetians, when they
being forsaken by all others, they were necessitated for the aforesaid reasons
so to do. The Pisans offered to put themselves wholly into the power of the
Commonwealth, and to set up her colors in their City, the Venetians would not
yield hereunto, nor accept of this large offer; but the Pisan Ambassadors were
sent back with many thanks for their affection, and were heard in what they
desired, though in a differing manner; for the Commonwealth took upon her to
defend the liberty of the City with the forces and authority of the
Commonwealth, which she did for many years, with such fervencie and general
consent, sparing neither expense, labor, nor danger, as she could hardly have
done more in her own defense; they sent both Foot and Horse several times to
the Pisans under their best Commanders, as also moneys and victuals, and
shipping to accommodate the City with all things necessary, and to free them
from the siege of the Florentines by Sea. Yet to give a greater testimony of
what their minds and intentions were in this, when it was propounded to put the
City of Pisa into Caesar's hands, and to remit the right of their cause to him,
the Venetians did not only not oppose it, but counseled them so to do,
desirous that this controversy might be ended, whilst their faith, and the
common interests were preserved safe; and when there was yet some opinion, that
the Florentines allured by this advantage, and hope, might have adhered unto
the league; but on the one side, in progress of time, the Florentines obdurate
resolution was discovered of governing themselves by Counsels, apart from the
rest of the Italians; and on the other, the deep deceits of L^d^wick Sforza,
who under the shadow of procureing peace and quiet, growing jealous of the
greatness which the Venetians might a^^ive at by the acquisition of Pisa, and
calculating other men's by his own, did in reality endeavor to secure himself
from this his imaginary fear, by hindering the Venetians from pursuing that
enterprise, to the which not long before he had exhorted them.

The Venetian Senate was enforced to maintain the cause which they had
undertaken, to keep from breaking their faith unto the Pisans, and to free
themselves from the infamy and repute of weak advice, to which they should be
subject, as if they had condescended for fear of L^d^wicks Forces, or else as
not knowing his cunning; when it was already known to all men, that the
endeavor of agreement with the Pisans, which was agitated under the name of the
Colleagues, was managed only by him, and according to his will and interests.
But say I pray, is this the only enterprise wherein the sincerity, and
candidness of the Commonwealth is to be known in just things, and such as do
concern the common good of Italy? How often has she maintained Wars, to the
end that there might be a right, and an Italian Governor in the Dukedom of
Milan? which cannot be denied since the effects thereof be so appar^nt, as she
would not lay down Arms before she had compast this her intent, as she did by
that famous agreement which was made in the City of B^l^guia the year 1529. in
which year, by means of the Venetian Senate Maximilian Sforza was restored unto
his State, to whom the Dukedom of Milan did of right belong: and their end^ in
the business concerning Pisa may likewise be discovered, since when the
agreement was come unto, the Venetians had no respect to their own advantage,
but only to the benefit of the Pisans, to the preservation of their liberty as
much as might be, and to the right of what belonged to their Territories, which
they were possessed of when they put themselves into the Commonwealths
protection, wherein the Venetians were always very constant; though the
imminent War with the Turks might have made them forget the dangers and
interests of other men's, for their own concernments. And at last, as they would
yield to nothing which might be prejudicial to the Pisans, so to witness to the
World that in reality they had no thought in maintaining this controversy, to
any peculiar design of their own, in making themselves Masters of that City,
they put the determination of these differences, into the arbitrament of
Hercules Duke of Ferrara; which though it had not any effect afterward, the
Pisans not consenting thereunto, yet it might be discerned, that the Pisans
averseness thereunto, or the constancy wherein they persevered, was not
fomented by the Venetians, but rose either out of the mere election or
necessity of the Pisans themselves:

But let us come to another consideration, more proper for this business, that
is, to the reasons of State, wherein the many of the same things do concur, yet
they are clothed with other respects, wherewith Princes building either only
or chiefly upon what may most redound to their own advantage, do not advise
with counsel of equity, or do not attribute thereunto what is requisite. It is
most certain, being already reduced to the greatest extremity, if they should
have been abandoned by the Venetians, they must have put themselves either into
the power of the Duke of Millan, or of the Florentines; but reason of State
would not permit, that in this conjuncture both of times and affairs this City
should be joined to the Dominion of either of these. As for Sforza his vast and
disordinate drifts were already known, and how he would be the sole Arbitrator
of Italy; so as if he should become more haughty, and p^ft up by this important
acquisition, no part of Italy could remain quiet or secure either from his
force or craft. And as for the Florentines you have heard how resolute they
were not to part from the friendship of the King of France, by how much greater
the danger of whose Army was in recent memory, so much the more were his
friends and associats to be kept weak and under, to the end that they might not
increase to the prejudice and apprehension of the rest. It was seen in what
danger Italy was put by foreign Forces, how soon the Kings of Aragon were driven
out of their Dominion, how little resolute the other Princes of Italy were to
withstand foreign Forces, which having once found an open and easy way into
Italy, it was to be imagined that they would be cause of greater dangers and
molestations to her. So as the Commonwealth being to be put into a condition of
being able to resist the Forces of greater Princes, and of not being exposed to
their wills, she was necessitated to think upon increasing her power and
reputation, that she might depend upon her own Basis, and be well esteemed of
by others. She knew particularly that (...) was a State which might accommodate
or dis-accommodate the French designs, accordingly as it was well or ill
affected toward them. And the keeping of the City of Pisa dependant upon the
Venetians, might several ways be helpful unto them in their intentions, in
seeping the French from ^according the ^ingdom of Naples, and in securing
themselves afterward from the Florentines, as also in winning such strength
and reputation to the Commonwealth with friends and (...), as she might provide
for her own preservation, and for the like of (...) other Italians, who had the
like intentions with her to maintain peace in Italy, and to keep her safe from
foreign Forces. It was not their only useful, but necessary for the Venetian,
in this conjuncture of affairs, to have footing in Italy, and to have the City
of Pisa, if not subject to their dominion, at least dependent upon the
authority of the Commonwealth. Now take it for granted, that that suspicion
might be true which they have so much divulged, who have endeavored to cast a
blur upon the honor and dignity of the Commonwealth, to wit, that the Venetians
intended to make th^mselves absolute masters of that City, only out of a design
of increasing their dominion. Certainly the actions of a Philosopher, and those
of a Prince, ought not to be measured by one and the same Rule; nor must we
fancy the condition of men, and of affairs, to be what peradventure they ought
to be, but what they are for the most part. Magnanimity is the proper virtue of
Princes, which makes them always busy themselves about great matters, and
whereby they make themselves be dreaded and reverenced by others. Therefore the
desire of Glory and Empire is highly praised in such Princes as have been
greatest and most celebrated, as Alexander, Cyrus, Caesar, Charles, and all the
rest of the most famous men, in whom a spirit of Grandeur and Generosity, which
did still egg them on to new and glorious enterprises, is not only commended,
but even admired. If the Romans, whose actions are praised and celebrated by
the general consent of all men, had been content to contain themselves within
the precincts of Latium, their worth would have been hidden and obscured, nor
would their names have been so highly cried up to the memory of posterity: And
had not the Venetians had larger thoughts then to keep within their private
merchandising affairs (as it became them to do in their weak beginning)
dispising or neglecting such occasions as they sundry times met with of
enlarging the bounds of their Dominions, the Commonwealth would not only not
have gotten such esteem and reputation as it has got, but could not have kept
herself so long in liberty, amidst so many revolutions of affairs, and such
movings of Foreign Armies.

It remains now only to see whether the opportunity of the Times, and condition
of Affairs did counsel them to purchase new glory and greater Empire to their
Commonwealth. Which though it may be known by what has been formerly said, yet
it will more clearly appear by adding some other particular Considerations* The
Commonwealth was then in a more powerful condition then any Prince in Italy,
being much stronger then them all both in Land and Sea-Forces; the Pisans cause
was generally well wished unto; the Florentines were but little acceptable to
the rest of the Princes of Italy, by reason of their friendship with the
French, and for this and other respects were particularly much hated by their
neighbors, the Genoeses, Seneses, and Lucheses, and all the actions of the
Commonwealth seemed to be favored by a certain Genius. She had lately gotten
the Kingdom of Cyprus; she had enlarged her Confines in Friuli, by the
acquisition of many Towns in the Country of Go^itia; and she prospered greatly
in all that she took in hand, and won much honor. So as in this happy
conjunction, the Venetians ought not to abandon their good Fortune, lest they
might too late repent for not having known how to make good use of their
prosperity. They were to be ruled by the example of things past: For having
oftentimes let s^ip many opportune occasions of increasing their Dominion by
Land, whilst their Enemies were but weak and not well settled in their States,
the like enterprises being by them undertaken afterward in a less convenient
time, proved more difficult unto them. Others thought, that for the like
reasons the Venetians should have forborne to meddle with the affairs of Pisa;
for (said they) the City was so situated, as it could not be defended by them
without much expense and inconvenience, they being to take a long compass about
the Sea before they could furnish it with things necessary, and then the City
it self was not so great a purchase, as deserved so much labor to purchase it.
They added moreover, that at the same time, the friends of the other Princes
did much envy the Commonwealth for her great prosperity; so as it had better
become the wisdom of that Senate to endeavor by concealing their thoughts of
aspiring to greater things, to allay this envy, then further to increase it, as
they did by attempting so great a novelty.

No doubt but those wise Senators who sat then at the helm of Government, did
reflect upon these doubts and suspicions; but it is to be believed that they
were easily free of them, considering that the Commonwealth, when she was not
yet so powerful nor strong, had undertaken many difficult, but glorious
enterprises in parts far off, and had gotten notable victories against the
Sara^ens, who were then very strong both by Sea and Land, and had placed
Trophies of singular worth, and great zeal to Religion, in the Holy Land; that
she had many times taken up Arms in the behalf of the Emperors of
Constantinople, against diverse other Potentates, and upon occasions, had
reduced many Cities into her power, which had formerly belonged to that Empire;
and that likewise she had for many years maintained sharp Wars against the
Genoeses, and had put a period to many other gallant affairs by apparent
victories: So as they thought that the Commonwealth had reason to promise
herself good success in this her noble design of taking upon her the defense of
Pisa, and of the affairs of Tuscany. Wherefore then ought they to distrust that
the Commonwealth might keep the City of Pisa at her devotion, in times when her
power and authority was much increased, and being accommodated with so many
Ships and Galleys which were usually upon the Sea, and having the Island of
Corfu in the Gulfs mouth, to receive the Ships in the midway which sailed from
the one Sea to the other? But on the contrary, who does not know how very
opportune this situation was for many other things, and of what use for the
Commonwealth? Their having got footing in Tuscany, might, according as
occasions should be offered, open them the way to greater acquisitions; and the
Haven of Ligorn was extremely commodious for the Navigation and Traffic which
the City of Venice holds with the Western Provinces: which may the better be
known now, for that since the affairs which had wont to be transacted in the
East, being now turned to the West, Ships which come from thence laden with
sundry sorts of Merchandise, putting into the Haven of Ligorn, to shun further
Navigation, do there unload themselves, from whence their Loading is afterward
brought by Land to Venice. So as it seems those wise Senators did even then
foresee what high esteem was to be put upon that situation. But their desires
have at least prevailed thus far, as that this Country is possessed by very wise
Princes, who are great friends to the Commonwealth; with whom an excellent
intelligence being held, as has been of late, and as it is to be hoped it will
be for time to come, Commerce will always be open, safe, and free in those
Countries. So as no reason can persuade, that the fear of being envied by other
Princes, should keep the Venetians from attempting so beneficial a thing: For
if these thoughts (which ought not to be admitted of by any generous Prince)
should have been sufficient to have stopped the course of the Commonwealths
good fortune, she must not only have abstained from this, but from other
enterprises; and so her Dominion and Fame would have been shut up within her
own Washes, if that peradventure might have been permitted them.

It was therefore necessary for the preservation of themselves, and of their
liberty, to provide themselves of sufficient Forces (which cannot be had
without Territories) to resist such as would offend them; for the keeping of
others well-affected, is not sufficient to keep off injuries. But War is not
always made out of fear of another Princes power, and with a mind to secure
ones self therefrom, but most commonly out of contempt, and out of a belief of
being able easily to effect what you undertake against them; and envy is
oftentimes more suppressed in the very height of good fortune, when a man's
condition is raised much above that of others, then when it is kept within
common and usual precincts. But what Princes envy ought the Commonwealth to
have feared? If you will say any Transalpin Princes, they had not as then any
such firm footing in Italy, nor so ready Forces, nor peradventure had they
their thoughts so interessed, as that they were to make War upon that account
with the Venetians; if you mean Italian Princes, every one of them were weaker
then the Commonwealth, and the diversity of their ends and interests would be
sure to keep them from joining together. Nor was it likely that they would
conspire with greater Princes against the Venetians, since it became all of
them to apprehend foreign Forces, lest they might all suffer in a common ruin.
And if it be said, that notwithstanding it fell out so afterward, as was seen
by the league of Cambray which proved so pernicious to the Commonwealth, it may
be answered, That things are not done (especially among Princes) as reason
would persuade; and no certain judgment can be given of Actions wherein Fancy
reigns. But let it be said, that the condition of things, times and respects,
were altered by reason of many much differing accidents and actions, when these
more heavy Wars began; but chiefly, because the French being become more
powerful in Italy, by their acquisition of the State of Milan, and more
desirous of subduing her, they resolved to leave nothing unattempted, which
might bring this their design to effect; so as it was from hence that all the
troubles and dangers came upon the Commonwealth, whereas she ought rather to
have expected thanks, and good offices from the Crown of France; so as
peradventure there may be more reason to blame the Commonwealth for having
called the King of France into Italy, had she been thereunto moved out of a
desire of enlarging her Dominions, and had not been thereunto compelled by the
fraud and insufferable insolences of Lodovico Sforza, to suppress the which
she was enforced to have recourse to foreign Forces, which afterward turned
themselves upon herself. But in the defense of Pisa things were otherwise; the
end was very honest, for the business was to comfort the oppressed, not to
oppress others; and enterprise which was to be approved of for the common
welfare of all the Italians, whereby they only were weakened, who favored the
affairs of foreign Princes. The reward, if the War succeeded well, was very
great, for it made much for the advantage and reputation, especally at that
time, of having the City of Pisa either her Subject, Friend, Dependant, or
Confederate.

The Third DISCOURSE*
That the Commonwealth is not to be blamed for the unfortunate successes of
War, after the routing of the Venetian Army in the action of Giaradada.
HE who has sought out an occasion to blame the Commonwealth of Venice, out of
envy to her glory, and particularly to the excellency of her Government,
falling upon the times of her greatnest misfortunes, says, That when by her
unfortunate success at the rout of Giaradada she lost her State by Land, she
witnessed that there was neither worth, nor strength, nor power in her orders
to govern an Empire; and that she had had her increase, and had to this day
maintained her greatness, more out of a certain appearance, and opinion, then
by any excellency of power of counsel. I find these things written in some
Authors, but chiefly amplified and affirmed by Nicholas Machiavel, a name which
has formerly been very famous for the curiosity of the matter which he took
upon him to write on in his discourse* but it is now so condemned to perpetual
oblivion by the holy Apostolic Sea, as it is not lawful to name him.

The misfortunes which the Commonwealth underwent in those days were certainly
very great, but such notwithstanding as ought rather to move compassion in all
men's minds, and show the instability of humane affairs, then to afford matter
of blame, and further oppression. It is said that the imperfection of the
Commonwealth was discovered by these public adversities; and (that I may give
the very words of some men) that there was no true worth or excellency in her
orders; yet prove they not this by any other reason then what is taken from the
action it self, to wit, because she lost the day to the French, and that by the
loss thereof the public affairs were brought into exceeding great danger. But
he who shall penetrate more inwardly into the truth of these things, will not
rest satisfied with this judgment, framed rather from the event then out of
any reason, and will speak much otherwise, and will take many other things into
consideration, before he give his judgment. And if we will by this our
Discourse penetrate into the more inward considerations, we shall find that the
Form of Government is as it were the soul which gives a true being to a City.
For a multitude of men assembled together could not have whereof to live, nor
would their place of habitation deserve the name of a City, were it not for
certain Orders and Laws. But as the sensitive soul, which informs the animated
body, cannot always make equal use of all her sundry powers and faculties; for
though she preserve her self in her own purity, and perfection, yet needing the
parts of the body, and ex^rinsecal objects for her operations, she must often
times cease operating, and sometime produc^th imperfect operations; so will it
happen in a City, that though the form of government, which is as it were the
soul thereof, be of it self very vigorous and perfect, yet can it not always,
nor in all things show its force and excellency, by reason of the need it
stands in of instruments, and by its encountering with many extrinsecal
accidents, so as it must sometimes rest wholly idle, and other sometimes do but
little good by its operating; Whence I infer, that though a City be exceedingly
well ordered for Civil and Military Affairs, yet cannot she promise herself to
enjoy peace long, nor long to keep herself in one and the same condition save
only as long as she shall be permitted so to do by the condition of other
things, which are out of the Legislators power. So likewise the adverse fortune
of a Commonwealth or Kingdom, which may depend upon so many other occasions, is
not sufficient to infer, that such States are ill ordered: But rather as he may
deserve the name of a good Orator, who handles his cause so as he does persuade
handsomely, though he he do not always attain his end; so ought not the
Legislator to be accounted less wise, nor those Laws less good, by which the
Government is well regulated as touching Peace, and the preservation of the
City or State, though various accidents may produce the contrary effects.

These reasons and examples do clearly show, how ill-grounded those oppositions
are, by which, without any consideration of so many other circumstances, men
will conclude that the Orders of the Commonwealth of Venice were weak, and of
no worth, because her Army was worsted in the Battle of Geradada; and because
after that Rout, the loss of the State, and so many other great losses did
ensue. It is not the Event, but the Counsel by which things are done, which
ought to give the true praise or blame to our actions. Let us then see in this
Case which we are now upon, what the counsels were, what the hopes, what the
condition of times were, and of Princes, and let us look into other such
circumstances, and then we shall be able to give a better judgment. The times
are three; and the affairs which upon this occasion may fall under our
consideration, are of three sorts; to wit, such as did precede the action,
those wherewith it was accompanied, and those which followed after. The
Commonwealth, before this unfortunate accident fell out, was not only in a very
prosperous condition, by reason of her happy success in the last War against
the Emperor Maximilian, but also (as it was thought) in a condition of much
safety, being joined in league and amity with the powerful King of France, when
unexpectedly she understood that almost all the Princes of Christendom had
conspired against her; and almost at the same time she heard that the King of
France had denounced War against her. Where will you find a mind so constant;
as will not be much disturbed at such an advertisement as this? The affection
must needs be moved at the novelty of the action, and Reason troubled by the
greatness thereof. What had the Venetian Senate reason to fear at this time
less then this? The King of France, in league, friendship and confederacy with
the Commonwealth for many years, out of observancie whereunto the Venetians had
not only refused friendship with Caesar, which was offered them with so much
advantage to themselves, but had taken up Arms to defend and preserve for that
King, their Friend and Confederate, the State of Milan; little mindful of such
a service, (as the usual affections of other men are seldom found amongst
Princes) conspires her ruin, and tu^ns those Arms against her, which through
their friendship were grown so powerful in Italy. What should move him
thereunto? Not desire of revenge; for there appeared no injury: Not any fear of
his own affairs; for he had found them already very constant unto them: No
self-interest; for he ought to have been jealous of Caesar's greatness, who had
been his perpetual Enemy, and to have wished well unto the Venetians, who had
been his ancient Friends. But what shall I say of the rest? Had not Caesar the
like obligations to the Venetians, as the King of France had, which should have
kept him from such a confederacy? Nay, had he not peculiar respects which
counseled him to the contrary? The injuries which the French had done to the
Empire; the King of France his particular hatred to him; the high aspiring
thoughts of that King, pernicious to the dignity of the Empire* and to the
German liberty. Wherefore as he could never promise himself safe and firm
friendship from the French, so be ought rather to have obviated their power,
then have helped to advance it. But who could have expected that such an action
should have proceeded from the admired wisdom of Ferdinand King of Spain, so
unusual, and so harmful to himself, by reason of the prejudice and danger which
he was to receive, in not preserving the State which he had won in the Kingdom
of Naples in peace and quiet? For which cause, the greatness of the French,
their fidelity, and natural desire of novelty ought to have been ^^spected by
him; yet he assented to the increase of their power, and of his own danger. But
how did those generous thoughts which Pope Julius the Second seemed to bear to
the greatness and liberty of Italy, correspond with his joining in confederacy
with the Transa^pine Princes who went about to oppress her by the ruin of that
Commonwealth, which was confessed by all men to be at that time the Maintainer of
the Glory of Italy, and the hope that she might again rise to her ancient
greatness and reputation? What safety could the Apostolic Sea expect, by
increasing the power of those Princes in Italy, who were great of themselves,
whom he feared, and upon whose authority he foresaw the Popes of Rome must
depend?

These certainly were such things as did transcend whatsoever could have fallen
into the imagination of the Venetian Senators, or of any other men how wise
soever: Nor was the immensity of the danger less, nor less able to molest and
confound the minds of those who were to prepare for resistance against so great
a War. The King of France his Forces were of themselves very powerful, that
Kingdom being then more flourishing then it had been for many years before* and
become more formidable by the possession which the French had got of the
Dukedom of Milan, which afforded them mighty conveniences to assault the
Co^fines of the Commonwealth. And though Caesar's Forces were not of themselves
greatly considerable, yet were they increased by the fame he gave out, that he
led his Army into Italy to make a certain and noble prey thereof, and with a
mind to restore the Empire to its almost lost greatness, whereby he reconciled
the minds of the German Princes and people, and got them to join their Forces
with his. Moreover, the King of Spains Naval preparation was in particular to
be feared; to prevent the which, those Sea-Forces of the Commonwealth were to
be employed, which should all of them have been employed in defending the State
by Land from so fierce an assault. The Pope added no small reputation to the
League by his authority; and his Spiritual arms being accompanied with Temporal
forces, became the more dreadful. And though the other petty Princes forces
were but small, yet was their will to offend the Commonwealth great; and the
Kings of England, Poland, and Hungary were sought unto and solicited by all
these together to join with them, and to declare enmity to the Venetians.

If then the Venetians had yielded to this so new and great preparation for
War, which like Thunder made both its noise and harm be heard and felt at once,
what could have been said unto them? Ought not they to have been judged worthy
of excuse, and their Commonwealth free from the imputation that their Orders
were no ways good? For as an object of immensurable force does not move, but
corrupt the sense; so the encountering with so weighty a conspiracy, was a
thing not likely to incite the Commonwealth to show her virtue, but rather to
disorder and to confound her. Yet it is seen how she behaved herself upon such
an occasion; and whether it may be inferred from these her first counsels, as
from a thing that was in her own power, that she was not worth much, or that
she did any thing unworthy of herself, of her fame, or of the reputation which
she held amongst other potent Princes of that Age. What appearance was there in
her of any fear, or rather what greater sign could be desired in her of
generous confidence and most noble daring? What did she resolve to yield up of
free will? What noise, what complaints were heard, which showed that she would
terminate that contention with vain words, which could not be ended but with
Arms? The Answer which was given to the French Herald who came to denounce unto
them, that the King was upon his march in Arms against the Commonwealth, was
only, that that War was intimated them from the King, when they had more
reason to expect Amity and Peace from him; but that they would not be wanting
to their own defense, being confident that they should be able to defend
themselves by their own Forces, and through the right of their cause. The
effects were answerable to their words; for they betook themselves forthwith to
provide for so great a War. The most expert Commanders were sent for from all
parts, veteran Soldiers mustered in all places, in so great numbers, and so
qualified, as it was agreed upon by the common consent of all, that neither
that Age, nor any other, for many years before had seen such an Army of mere
Italians in Italy. Great and very miraculous was the union and concord both in
the Senate and City, wherewith men of all conditions and ages to lend their
helping hand to assist their Country at so great a need. There appeared so
great a zeal in every one to the common good, such resolution to maintain the
state and liberty of the Commonwealth even to the last gasp, as those who have
appeared to be no very good friends to the Venetians in other things, do praise
these proceedings, being forced so to do by the power of truth.

But let us come to those other things which accompany the action it self; The
Senate upon mature advice, resolved wisely how that War was to be managed; they
knew the enemy was very strong, the danger great, and that the wel^are of the
Commonwealth depended upon the preservation of that Army which they had now got
together. But as it would be a great rashness to hazard it upon a Battle, so to
keep it only to be a safeguard to the City, showed timorousness in them, would
discourage their men, and increase the courage and reputation of the enemy.
Whilst they bethought themselves what to do in this great exigencie to evade
both these inconveniences, the Senate ordered their Commanders to march with
their Army to those Confines of the State of Milan where the Enemy should
appear to be likely to make their first assaults; to the end that following
their Army in near, but safe quarters, and that keeping them still
incommodated, and in jealousy and fear of being assaulted, they might keep
them from advancing further, and from falling upon any enterprise. The
Commonwealths Army was very strong in Horse, amounting to the number of Ten
thousand; and in Foot, to boot with a great number of Soldiers of their own
Country, commanded by their own Orders, they had Twelve thousand veteran
Soldiers, under experienced famous Commanders, together with a great train of
Artillery, and all other instruments for War; so as the Senate had reason to
believe, that they might effect their e^ds of maintaining the War, and of
keeping the field; and so spinning out time (as it becomes those who are upon
the defensive part, and find themselves to be the weaker) secure their own
Affairs, and keep further dangers from them.

For it oftentimes falls out through various accidents, that the greater Armies
be, they do so much the more easily moulder away of themselves; and the Forces
of many several Princes, though they be at first great and formidable, prove
less fit for great enterprises, by reason of the Colleagues different ends and
interests. And as learned Physicians use no strong and violent remedies when
the sick party has but some grudgings of an Ague, and when the disease is not
yet well known; So these wise Senators were of opinion, that the Commonwealth
being set upon and almost oppressed by the sudden violence of so many Enemies, it
made not for their welfare and safety, to come to the violent remedy of a
pitched field, with enemies whose strength was not yet very well known. Together
with these reasons, the Venetian Senate had for their example the success of
the Commonwealth of Rome, which finding her self assailed by powerful
Carthaginian Forces, and her Affairs being reduced to a great straight,
preserved themselves from greater danger, by drawing out the War at length, and
by keeping the Enemy incommodated; but the Venetians had not a Fabius Maximus
for their Commander in chief, as the French had an Hannibal, for there were
many of those virtues in Lodowick King of France, which were praised in
Hannibal; chiefly a mighty thirst after glory, to purchase which he valued
neither labor nor danger. ^ut Alvian^ a famous and cried up Comm^nder, not more
for his own worth, then for this misfortune of the Venetians, was of a nature
much contrary to that of Fabius, in knowing how to make advantage of time; and
though he had many other noble qualities, as greatness of spirit in
undertakings, unda^nted courage in executing what he undertook, and great
experience in matter of War; yet were these virtues little advantageous for the
present occasion; better befitting a Commander who was to assist a puissant
Prince, desirous of glory, and in his most prosperous times, then a
Commonwealth, which not making use so much of force, as of occasion, was
slowly, but safely arrived at that greatness, and which was now, more then
formerly to proceed by the like counsels.

But it may peradventure be said, that the Venetian Army wanted not a Fabius,
having Nicolo Orsino, Count of Pitigliano, who in his other actions may be
truly said to resemble Fabius very much, for he always proceeded with the
slowest and safest advices; but in this he appeared much different, and
inferior to him, since he would not succor Alviano, who contrary to his order
had given Battle, as did Fabius Maximus, who readily succored Quintus
Minutius, chief Commander of the Cavalry, though contrary to his opinion he had
rashly exposed himself, and part of the Army to the danger of Battle. But on
the contrary, Lodowick, King of France, was not only like Hannibal, but did
much exceed him; for Hannibal knew only how to overcome, but knew not how to
make use of Victory, having spent much time to little purpose, after the rout
given to the Romans at Cannae; but Lodowick pursuing the Victory, stopped not
till he had regained all that he pretended unto from the State of Venice. But
the Forces of the Commonwealth did either prove less valiant, and less
fortunate then formerly they had done, or else they were hurried by some occult
cause upon this calamity. Yet can it not be said that the Senates advice was
less good, who in their Orders to their Commanders, did always lay before them
the importance of the business with express and particular command to shun the
necessity of joining Battle with the Enemy. Those prudent Senators knew very
well that that Army was not to be hazarded upon the dubious event of Battle,
wherein consisted all the hopes of preserving her State by Land, and that the
condition of affairs were such on their side, that if they came to the trial of
a Battle, it must be upon too much disadvantage. The War was made at their own
doors, so as if the Enemy should prove victorious, the conquered party could
not have time to rally or recruit themselves, for preservation of their own
affairs; but if the French Army had been overcome, the War would not
notwithstanding be at an end, the Forces of the other Colleagues remaining
still entire: which were likelier to be ru^ned by their own disorders, and by
the discords which use to happen in Leagues, then by force of Arms, which could
not be made use of without danger. The bad advice of some Commanders, or else
some fatal adversity of the Commonwealth would not permit that this advantage
of time should be waited for; whereupon they came to the conflict, not only
contrary to the so many aforementioned respects, but upon such disadvantage,
as with but half their Forces they hazarded the whole Fortune of the
Commonwealth. How valiantly they fought is witnessed by the general consent of
all men, nor do the victorious Enemies deny but that the victory was a good
while doubtful; but a few not being able longer to resist a much greater
number, that notable rout ensued which drew after it so many losses and ruins;
For the French Forces did not more secure the way to their Army in all places,
and facilitate their undertakings, then did the reputation of their victory.

Amidst so great amazement and astonishment, nothing was left unattempted by
Luigi Gritti, and Christofero Moro, who were the Provedatori del Campo, to
uphold the Commonwealths fading fortune: They betook themselves to rally the
remainder of the Army, they comforted the Captains and Soldiers with hope of
better success; they entreated the Nobility and people of Brescia, and of other
Cities, that being mindful of their, Loyalties, and of other things done in
service to the Commonwealth, in former Wars had with Philip Maria Visconte,
they would be like themselves, and with like constancy keep themselves under
the moderate command of the Venetians, and abhorring the severe Transalpine
Dominion, they would with one only inconvenience free themselves from many
grievous mischiefs. But they were all so possessed with a Panick fear, as no
entreaties nor reason could be listened unto; those who had escaped the Battle,
were unfit either for strength or valor, to attempt any thing against the
Enemy, no disposition to defense was found in the City, no not so much as to
keep themselves from plunder; there were but few Forts at that time in the
State, and those few of no condition of holding out long. What was then to be
done? to whom was any recourse to be had? If all Princes and Countries were
become Enemies, who were to be trusted? If all memory of former benefits were
laid aside, so as least gratitude was found in those who had been most obliged,
how could new men be raised, and provisions made for a new War? The armed Enemy
was already at the gates, nay, even within their houses, threatening assured
ruin. What was to be done in such a general dispait, but to give way and
suffer the cloud to pass, which they saw there was neither wit nor counsel
sufficient to withstand? And as sometimes it falls out in greatest Tempests,
that the skill and labor of the Mariners being overcome by the malignity of
the weather, they take down their sails and suffer the ship to drive up and
down whithersoever the Sea carries it; So in cases of greatest danger, into
which States do sometimes fall, he that sits at the helm must comply with his
fortune be it never so bad, till the fury of those tempests being past over,
the Commonwealth, though born down, yet not quite sunk, may rise again, and
make way for her pristine greatness.

The Army being then to retreat, and the loss of the City drawing other losses
after it, as one stone that gives against another, it was thought the best
course to free the people from their former oaths, so to preserve them from
sacking and plunder, which they must have undergone, if they should maintain
their loyalties, and to free themselves from the tax of rebellion, if they
should submit to the Enemy. Such a resolution might appear willing, and
therefore less generous, but it was really necessary; prejudicial to him who
does consider merely the present condition of things, but which might prove
useful in the future: At first sight, it appeared to proceed from rashness and
fear, and yet it proceeded from wisdom, from charity, and in respect to the
good of the State, and of the Subjects. The piety nor prudence of the Senate
could not admit of the only hope which was offered in this sad condition of
times, to be used for withstanding so many enemies, wherefore the Venetians did
magnanimously refuse those helps, and assistances, which were offered them by
the Turks; though but little before (as some writers affirm) they had been very
much sought unto by other Christian Princes, as by Frederick of Aragon, and
Lodovic^^ Sforza, for the defense of their Dominions; and not long after by the
Emperor Maximilian, to be made use of against the Venetians, but neither did
the justly conceived anger against so many conspiring Princes, nor the desire
of recovering what was lost, prevail with those most wise and religious men,
but that it was overborn with the zeal of Religion, and with a firm resolution
of preserving the glory of their other achievements against the Infidels,
immaculate* neither would the reason of State, if well-understood, considered
in the example of others, suffer them so to do; and especially in the
unfortunate success of the Emperors of Constantinople, who having unadvisedly
called in to their assistance the Ottoman Princes, who were much more powerful
then they, had drawn a greater ruin upon themselves, which proved the occasion
of the fall of that Empire. But being unwilling notwithstanding to give over
all hopes of accommodating the afflicted condition of affairs with some ease,
the Senate resolved to have recourse to the Pope, and to Caesar, (though they
had then appeared their bitter Enemies) to treat of some Agreement. They were
moved much hereunto by the respect and reverence due to that holy See, and the
pious and religious apprehension they had of Ecclesiastical censures, to which
they were subject; and they trusted more in prevailing with Caesar, then with
the King of France: For what hopes were there to do any good by entreaties with
him, who being first bound to the Commonwealth by obligation and confederacy,
had spurned at all those respects out of mere desire of novelties? To these
then they granted all that they pretended unto; for being to make them quickly
jealous of the King of France his greatness, they knew some way would be found
out for the Commonwealths better fortune.

But how is it possible to pass over here in silence another thing, not at all
differing from this, by which such base aspersions have been endeavored to be
cast upon the Venetians; since by this our present discourse we go about to
vindicate them, by searching into the truth? We read in Guicchiardine, a
Modern, and to give him his due, in many things an excellent Historian, an
Oration published by him in the name of Antonio Iustiniano, sent by the
Commonwealth to Caesar; wherein it is said, that the Venetians begging pardon
at Caesar's hand, with much subjection and servility of mind, did offer to
submit the Commonwealth to be perpetually tributary to the Empire, and to
acknowledge to hold their liberty, lives and livelihood from him: with some
other base unworthy expressions, not only not true, but not likely to be so.
For first, it is very certain, that Justinian being sent Ambassador to
Maximilian, and finding him at Trent, was never admitted to have audience,
peradventure for fear of offending the Confederates, and making of them
jealous. Then, it is most certain that the Senate gave no such Commission: And
let him who will not believe it, listen but to reason, and then he will be
persuaded to the contrary. The Commonwealth had then lost all her Territories
by Land; but at the same time she enjoyed all her State by Sea, wherein were
not only one or two Cities, but diverse Provinces and noble Kingdoms; their
Naval accoutrements were very great, and equal, if not superior to those of
whatsoever Potentate at that time; all entire and whole, not having suffered
any thing by this thunder of War, which had only overrun their Terra firma:
their Treasure but little diminished from what it was at the beginning of this
War, which continued afterward, and was maintained for the space of many
years: The City of Venice, placed by her miraculous situation in complete
safety, all attempts which could be made against it being to prove rash and
vain, as the effects proved afterward: A great Train of Artillery, and of all
things requisite for War; a quiet People, and obedient at the beck of their
Nobility; and a constant and resolute mind in all the Nobles to demonstrate all
the proofs of worth and love toward their Country. But that which followed
afterward in their defense of the City of Padua against the Forces of all the
Princes of the League, will suffice to prove, that the Commonwealth was not so
weak either in Counsel or in Power, as to have recourse to th^^ last extremity
of making that Ci^y tributary, which had maintained her first freedom for above
the space of a thousand years. Say, I beseech you, was not the Commonwealth
powerful by Sea, and sufficiently valued by all other Potentates, before she
had any State in Terra firma? Nay, she was oft-times seen to neglect occasions
which were offered of making acquisitious in Terra firma, thinking her self
safe and powerful enough without them

What was it then which could move them to make themselves Servants and
Subjects, who had no reason to doubt not only their liberty, but nor their
chiefest, most ancient, and most proper Dominion, which was that of the Sea,
for the preservation whereof, as affairs stood then, they had no reason to make
such haste to Caesar for friendship? Who can with reason blame the advice, as
the condition of things went then, of giving and yielding that up to Maximilian
which could not as then be kept from him; to wit, some of those Cities in Terra
firma which he pretended right unto; since some agreement ensuing with him by
such concessions, and injuries ceasing on that part, the way might be opened to
straiter, and more particular and advantageous conventions with the same
Caesar, who was naturally desirous of novelties, whereby the Fortune of the
Commonwealth was again to be raised up. And this counsel tried afterward with
others had good success, when they joined in a new confederacy with the same
French against Maximilian, who scorning their fr^endship, would not listen to
their propositions. These were the counsels, these the actions of the
Venetians, from whence, some would take occasion to detract from the praise and
dignity of their Commonwealth, and particularly from the excellency of their
Government.

But we may better know how injuriously this blemish is laid upon them, if we
will examine how other Princes and States did behave themselves, when they were
in like adversity; which I do not allege as taxing any one, but to show the
usual course of affairs, by the example of others. Observe what art the King of
Aragon used to preserve his State, when Charles the Eighth, King of France came
against them in hostile manner. Alphonso who possessed the Kingdom, having tried
the extremity of fear before the danger grew near, out of the mere report of
the French Forces, departed from Naples, leaving all things at six and sevens,
whilst their Army was yet in Rome; and Alphonso the Son, who had boasted that
he would defend himself, and to that purpose had mustered a great many
Soldiers, retired with them into the narrow passes of the Kingdom, without
making any trial either of his fortune or of his valor, and yielding rather to
the Fame, then to the Forces of the Enemy, suffered them to take free and quiet
possession of that most noble Kingdom. But Frederick of Aragon, who was
reinvested in his State, by the favor of the people, and by the assistance of
other Princes, with which the Venetians did readily join, what use did he make
of other men's labors, and of his own fortune? Soon after the Kingdom of Naples
was assaulted, by Lodowick King of France, and by Ferdinando King of Spain, at
which assault being much discouraged, he would not l^ sten to the advice of his
Commanders, who advised him to keep the field, but made some slender provisions
for the Towns, and soon after, thinking more how to escape, then how to defend
himself, he fled into Ischia, and went from thence into France, and put himself
into the power of the same King his Enemy, contenting himself rather to live a
private man in peace and safety, then to reign in trouble and danger.

But what shall we ^ay of the French, who boast so much of their valor, and
glory in War? How easily when they met with the first misfortune, did they
suffer themselves to be bereft of all they had before so happily acquired in
the Kingdom of Naples? And that so hastily, as it seemed that they had freely
yeeled up the possession of so many, and so noble Cities to the victors, the
Spainards, by agreement, and as it were in reward for the day which they had
won. Nor is this the only example; since we have seen the same French, who
were fallen with such fervency with their Forces into Italy, and had with
miraculous prosperity recovered the State of Milan but a little before, resolve
suddenly to forgo all that they had won, and to retreat to beyond the
Mountains, after the ro^^ which they had received from the Swizzers at Novara;
the succor which they met withal by the way as they fled, not being able to
make them halt. Who was more famous then for dexterity of wit for the managing
of weighty affairs, then Lodorica Sforza Duke of Milan? yet when a great deluge
of War came upon him, what use could he make of all his Artifices? Could he
show that constancy and generosity which he had many times before publicly
boasted of? The only news of the league made against him, by Lodowick King of
France, and by the Venetians, did so astonish him, as losing all understanding,
and leaving his Affairs unprovided for, he resolved at very first, upon what
ought to have been his last and most desperate advice, to fly into Germany,
foregoing the defense of that State, which being once lost, he did afterward
in vain seek to recover.

But in this point I may help my self in looking a little more backward, and
trying whether the gallantry of the ancients, so much commended, did produce
other effects then those that I have spoken of. The Romans, who conquered the
whole world, met sometimes with adverse fortune, wherein let us see how they
behaved themselves; for he is very timorous who is not bold and generous in
prosperous affairs. In what peril and hazard did Brennus^ Prince, and Commander
of the Galli Senones put the City of Rome after the defeat given to the Roman
Army, under the unfortunate conduct of the Fabii? no man thought of making any
defense, but sought how to save himself and the best things he had, in the
Capitol; their houses, and walls were abandoned, and the very gates left open
to the Enemy by the Roman Soldiers, who fled into the City to save themselves;
and had not the good genius of that Commonwealth, which was preserved for
greater things sent Carius Camillus to succor it, the rising glory of the
Romans had even then been exst^^ct.

But what shall we say of things that happened afterward, when their Fame grew
greater? Did not the Romans lose possession of all Italy, after the rout given
them by Hannibal at Cannae? Did not the Cities belonging to their friends and
confederates rebel every where? And did not they themselves give over all hopes
of defending them? the resolutions taken by the Soldiers, showed what the
^^ight, what the fear of the conquered was. For some, whilst they were yet in
their own houses, rendered themselves prisoners to the Conquerors; others
withdrew to the Sea side, intending if they could have the benefit of shipping,
to go to some other Prince, and seek out a new Country: But with what despair
the Citizens of Rome were possessed, when they heard the news of this misfortune,
in how great confusion all their Orders were, may be conceived by what Livy
relates, who undertook not only to write the History of the Commonwealth, but
to celebrate with perpetual praise the fame and merit of her Citizens. And it
was credibly bel^eved (for as much as we hear) that those valiant men,
unaccustomed to know what fear was, were stricken with such amazement, as if
Hannibal had known as well how to make use of victory, as he did to overcome,
the so great, and so long continued fortune of Rome, had not only been hereby
interrupted, but totally suppressed. And these very self^same Carthaginians, who
had so long, and so sto^^^y conte^^ed for glory, with their rival, the
Commonwealth of Rome, when they tasted of adverse fortune, went astray from
their former generosity, and suffered themselves to be born down by extremity
of despair, for after the defeat which they had received by Sea by the Romans,
they inclined to yield up unto them the Islands of Sicily, and Sardi^ia, and to
make themselves (...) for ever to the Senate and people of Rome, and afterward
being overcome in Battle by Scipio Affricanus, they fell to find (...), But why
do I instance in so many examples? Are not these sufficient to prove, that the
valiantest and wisest men are strangely te^^ified at great and unexpected
misfortunes; and that when Armies are lost, which are the instruments whereby
States preserve themselves from the evils of War, good Counsels must cease, as
not able to keep off other greater evils which do usually follow after that a
Battle is lost.

Therefore out of the abovementioned reasons, and by what has been done by
others upon like accidents, every one may be clearly satisfied, that the
misfortune which the State of Venice underwent by reason of the ill-fought
Battle of Giaradada, ought not to detract any thing from her other praises: For
her subsequent actions, by which with singular constancy and generosity she
recovered what she had lost, render her by the joint consent of all men truly
glorious.

The Fourth DISCOURSE.
Whether the Princes of Italy did well, or no, to assault the Army of Charles
the Eight, King of France, when after having gotten the Kingdom of Naples, he
hasted to pass over the Mountains.
AMongst those things of sad remembrance to Italy, the passage of Charles the
Eight, King of France, to the Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples, may be numbered
amongst the saddest, and most recent: For ever since that time, the Transalpine
Nations have had a power in Italy; and the greatness of the Italian name, which
began at that time to be raised up again with hopes of greater glory, all the
parts of Italy being under the command of our Italian Princes, returned to such
a declination by this blow, as it could never since recover its pristine
majesty. But that which most afflicts the minds of those who are any ways
generous, is to think, that this most noble Country fell into such misfortunes
through the fault of her own men; and that the Italian Princes, to satisfy
their own disordinate desires and immoderate ambition, did call in Foreign
Nations to the prejudice of Italy; and little valuing the truer and greater
dangers, they stood basely looking on, and suffered this their common Country
to be rent in pieces by Foreiners. The French Forces did at this time pass into
Italy, by which she had not for a long time been molested, being called in by
Lodovick Sforza, and maintained by other Italians: But ere long they were all
aware of their ill-taken counsel, being touched by the danger more at hand, by
rearon of the French-mens great felicity; which as it might have been foreseen
further off, so was it not now so easily to be remedied. They therefore joined
all of them together afterward in confederacy for the safety of Italy, and to
oppose King Charles his designs: So as after the acquisition of Naples, as he
would return into France by the same way which he had come in, with his Army,
which was notwithstanding much less numerous in men, he was opposed by the Army
of the confederate Princes, as he came to the banks of Tarus, who meant to
hinder his passage, and to fight his Army. For a little before, the Pope, the
King of the Romans, the King of Spain, the Commonwealth of Venice, and the Duke
of Milan had joined in confederacy to this purpose; the Venetians hav^ng been
the first mo^ioners thereof, and express Ambassadors from all the aforesaid
Princes had met in Venice, where the League was concluded and published. This
resolution was at those times generally commended, as being ge^erous, and
suiting with the honor of Italy: But notwithstanding, there wanted not those
then who desired they had been more moderate; nor will it be now from the
purpose to examine this business, so to draw some secure document for times to
come by a diligent examination of the things done, and to know whether they
were really such as deserve praise and imitation, or whether there was any
thing more to be desired therein: For they appear to be attended with that
wisdom, without which no action, though perchance it may have good success,
deserves either to be praised or imitated by wise men. The taking up of Arms to
drive the French out of Italy, was doubtless a resolution as much to be
commenped in the Italian Princes, as some of them were blamed for calling of
them in, and others for assisting them to the common shame and prejudice. But
how these Arms were to be made use of against them, and whether it was well
done to hinder them when they were marching away, and to stop their passage,
and force both the French and themselv^s to come to a Battle, is somewhat a
difficult case, and which may admit of diverse considerations.

It is an ancient and approved proverb, That a Bridge of Gold ought to be made
for an Enemy that flies. And this is grounded upon solid reasons; for no Battle
can be fought without much hazard and uncertainty of success, since there may
happen many unthought of accidents, wherein the use of wisdom is excluded.
Therefore where to join battle is to be thought a good advice, the condition of
affairs must be such, as that a man be not necessitated thereunto, but makes it
his choice, and comes to it with greater hopes of overcoming, then fear of
being worsted; and likewise the advantage must be more that is to be expected
from the Victory, then the prejudice which depends upon the loss thereof. By
thus measuring the carriage of these affairs by these rules, we may the better
know what judgment to give thereof. If we consider the state of affairs before
the Armies drew near, there appears no necessity of fighting at that time: For
the King of France led his men back over the Mountains to their own homes,
without prejudice or injury to any one; so as the meeting him to stop his
passage, and give him battle, proceeded from election, and from the determinate
counsel of the Princes that were Confederates against him: But what the end of
the combat was like to be, and how the business was balanced, might be guessed
at by many particulars, before a stroke was struck. The King of France led
along with him an Army consisting of French and Switzers; the former excellent
for the Horse-Militia, and the latter excellently well disciplined in
Foot-service: So as the Italian Militia was confessed by all men to be far
inferior to both these; for they had wholly lost all their ancient excellent
institutions, and had wanted true discipline for many years, being by Foremers
bereft of their ancient military glory. But the much different impressions
which were in the Soldiers themselves, was of great importance upon this
occasion. The French were haughty, and puffed up by their success at Naples;
they slighted the Enemy, their very name seeming to have infused so much terror
into all the Italians, as that neither Princes nor People had dared to oppose
them, but afforded them free and safe passage every where. On the contrary, the
Italians accustomed only to such Wars as were made in Italy, wherein little
valor was shown, and less discipline, without almost any loss of blood, as if
it were for mere show and sport, were to fear the unusual encounter with the
French, and to boot with their valor to apprehend their prosperity, which had
made the way so easy to them to so great and so noble an acquisition. The
Kings party was likewise favored by the Kings own presence, and the danger
which his own person was in; which occasioned no small daring in the French
Soldiery, some being thereunto stirred up by their natural love to their King,
others by hopes of reward, and others for fear of punishment. But of all things
else, the diversity of the cause ought to be of greatest moment. For the French
had no hopes of safety, save what lay in their Arms, being in an Enemies
Country, the way in their return home very difficult, by reason of the craggy
Mountains though they should meet with no impediment by the Enemy; the Army of
the Colleagues suffered not under the like necessity, for being at its own
home, it might be sure upon any adverse fortune to have safe receptacle in
every City. Moreover, the Italians were incited to fight, only out of a desire
of honor, or of revenge, and this was much more in the Princes and Commanders,
then in the common Soldier; which things being well considered, might by reason
of what is the usual issue of such actions, cause rather doubt, then hope of
victory, if they should come to a day of Battle; or at least might make it
appear, that businesses were so equally balanced, and so doubtful, as where
there was no enforcing necessity, to pursue a business so full of danger, was
not worth the while. We must now consider the advantage, as also the
disadvantage which might happen upon the good or bad success of the battle;
which though it be in all affairs doubtful and uncertain, yet out of the
aforesaid respects it was now both those in extremity. We will say that the
then chief moving cause was, to drive the French Army out of Italy, and to
restore those of Aragon to their Kingdom, out of which they were driven by K.
Charles. The confederate Princes might in all liklihood have compast this their
intention by other more safe, and more secure means. For what disturbance might
they meet withal, in the enterprise which they were to endeavor against the
French in the very Kingdom of Naples, from that Army which hasted to pass over
the Mountains, and was to dissolve of it self? And say that those people should
be routed and defeated, should therefore the Kingdom of Naples be disposed of
according to the pleasure of the Italian Victors? No certainly, for the King
had already left strong Garrisons there of his best Soldiers to secure it. The
victory could not be so great, and favorable for the Italians, but that they
must have lost some of their men; so as if they had a mind to attempt any thing
upon the affairs of Naples, it had been better for them to have gone with all
their Forces upon that enterprise, then to give battle to those, who did not
any ways oppose their design, since when they should have overcome them, they
were to go with that Army, lessened by the Battle, and wearied with marching,
to the main business of taking the Kingdom of Naples, where the things offered
at by Ferdinand would have had easier success if he had entered the Kingdom with
greater Forces, and as he was willingly received by the City of Naples, whither
he might come at first with those few men he had, so would the rest of the
Cities willingly have revolted from the French, and have put themselves under
the obedience of Ferdinand, if they had seen he had Forces sufficient to defend
himself, and to make good their rebellion. But say that the Colleagues would
have secured themselves yet better from the French, to the end, that their
intentions upon the Kingdom of Naples might not be hindered or diverted; had it
not been better for them to go with the Army of the league to find out Monsieur
d' Orleans, who at the same time had possessed himself of the City of Novara, to
drive him out of Italy, together with those of his party who had settled
themselves there, then to follow those, who did of themselves that which was
most desired by the league; to wit, hasten back over the mountains? Nay, it may
be further said, that unless the French should be necessitated, as seeing their
King in danger, as also that Army which was pursued by the Italians, they would
not peradventure have sent at that time more men into Italy, and Monsieur
d'Orleans would not have had any occasion to have possessed himself of Nevara,
which did afterward redound to the great prejudice of the Colleagues, and
particularly to the business of Naples: For part of those Forces which were
promised and intended to assist Ferdinand in the recovery of the Kingdom,
marched to the recovery of Novara, out of desire whereof, Lodowick Sforza did
at last draw himself out of the league. Whence it appears, that it was rather
revenge, or vainglory, then any just reason which the Princes proposed unto
themselves in this their confederacy, that moved them to resolve upon fighting
the French Army.

But let us now consider more particularly, what of advantage, what of good the
Colleagues might have got, if they had had the better of that Battle. The best
which they could hope for, for all these their pains and dangers, could be
nothing else but the routing of those Forces, which were not likely to make War
any more in Italy; and the Italians had as then no reason to think of any
Transalpine Affairs. It may be the person of the King, who was then in the
Army, might peradventure be considerable, if he had fallen into the power of the
Colleagues; But both his life in that hurly burly was exposed to great danger,
and say he had been taken prisoner, he might have found many ways how to
eseape. And say althings had fallen out according to the wish of the Colleagues,
what would the Italians have gotten by having so great a Prisoner, but the
drawing upon themselves an inundation of Foreiners, which would still have put
them into greater troubles and dangers? That warlike Nation, which was at this
time more then at any other, devoted to their King, would not have sat down by
such an indignity, such an injury without revenging it with their own Forces,
and by drawing other Transalpine Nations who wished not well to the glory of
Italy, especially in Military Affairs to join with them.

Let us see an example of this in what followed the next Age after; where we
shall find that the imprisonment of King Francis, though taken by so great a
Prince as was Charles the Fifth, to whom none of the Princes of the League, no
not the whole League it self was to be compared, produced nothing, but longer,
and more heavy Wars, which ended not till the conquerors had yielded many
things to the conquered. But on the contrary, let us imagine into what ruin
Italy would have fallen, if the Army of the League had been routed and defeated,
the Enemy being in the State of Milan wherein are so many and so noble Cities,
for defense whereof there were no other Forces on foot, then those which were
to hazard themselves in that Battle; and to raise another Army which might be
able to make head against so powerful enemies, and so victorious, would be a
business of some time, and very hard to do if not impossible. And if the very
name of the French, and the fame of their Forces had made the way to so great a
victory easy to them, and so easy the conquest of so noble a Kingdom, what
mischief had they not reason to expect, if by the discomfeiture of that Army,
the Forces, not only as formerly, of the Kings of Aragon, should have been
beaten of whole Italy, and also such foreign Forces as could be ready to afford
any succor, for in that Army were all the Soldiers, that the King of Spain had
in Italy? So as there was not any State which upon such an accident could
promise it self security. Affairs then standing upon this foot, who can praise
the advice taken by the confederates, of fighting the French? But on the other
side there want not other reasons to plead for the honor, wisdom, and maturity
of the Italians in this action, to boot with that noble daring which can by no
means be denied them, it is very likely that the flourishing condition, and
prosperity of Charles King of France began at that time to make him be hated and
suspected not only by all the Italian Princes, but also not very acceptable to
the King of (...); insomuch as he who had called him into Italy did already
repent his rash advice, and he who did not withstand him, blamed himself for
his slackness, and irresolution: so as they agreed all together to abate the so
great power of that King, and to curb his prosperity, and his thoughts of
further achievements. If then the King had been suffered to return without any
let, safe and triumphant into his Kingdom, was it not to be feared, that the
French not content with their having got the Kingdom of Naples, would pass over
the Mountains the next year again with greater Forces? to what danger would the
Dukedom of Milan and Tuscany have been exposed? upon which States it was known
that the French had set their minds, neither would they have spared the rest,
if they had had any opportunity offered them of advancing further.

And if the Italians should have seemed but to doubt their beating those
Soldiers, who were but the remainder of an Army which had first past the
Mountains, and ^ad left a good part of their Forces in several Garrisons in the
Kingdom of Naples, many whereof were likewise dissipated through several
accidents; what hopes had they to withstand their entire, and much greater
Forces, with which they were to return the next year on this side the Mountains
to new enterprises? Nor had they any reason to despair of victory, since the
Colleagues had an Army for number of men much grea^er then the Enemy, commanded
by experienced and valiant Officers, well provided both of Curasiers and Light
horse, well disposed to all actions, and which were to fight with people
oppressed with fear, and who may be said to have almost run away already of
themselves; especially the advantage considered which the assai^a^ts for the
most part have. It was further considered, that the French Army had done
nothing whereby to be dreaded, or to cool the courage of other men; since the
French had not only not met with any occasion of fighting, but had not so much
as seen the face of an Enemy; since the Enemy was the rather to apprehend this
encounter, for that it was unexpected, they being accustomed to find all
passages open, not needing to make their way by the sword. Nor was the
advantage small which they might promise unto themselves, by beating a
victorious Army, and a warlike Nation, the person of so great a King being also
in that Army; wherefore in such a case, the French-mens courage was rather to
fail, then to avial them. And it was to be believed that the Enemies to that
Crown would the sonner appear against them, as the Emperor Maximilian, Henry
King of England, and that Ferdinand King of Spain would continue the more firm
to the Italian confederacy. Then what courage, or what hope of succor would
those Frenchmen have, who were left behind for the defense of the Kingdom of
Naples? and the City of Novara, which though it were backed with the Kings men,
who to this purpose kept his Army a long time together after the Battle, was
reduced to so great streights by the Colleagues, as the King was compelled to
yeed it up upon Articles to Sforza; would it not soon have been taken by the
sole reputation of the victo^y? Neither would this have been an occasion of
dissension (as afterward it was) amongst the Colleagues, and which bereft them
of the chiefest advantage which that confederacy could hope for.

These are the Considerations which we may conceive did move those Princes to
resolve upon following the French Army, and to join battle with it. But that
which amongst such diversity of reasons seems more answerable to reason, is,
that the Battle was not occasioned out of an absolute resolution and resolute
advice, but happened party out of necessity, both Armies being already drawn
very near, and partly upon a resolution taken by the Commanders upon the very
place. But the Princes of the Leagues truest intention was to necessitate the
King of France, when he should see so great a preparation for War to be made
against him, to hasten his departure the more, and to enforce him to draw so
many more of his men from the K^ngdom of Naples, that so he might make his
passage the surer. And that the Kingdom not having sufficient Garrisons to
defend it, might the more easily fall into the power of the Aragoneses, for
whom the same Colleagues were preparing a Fleet by Sea to assault it. Nor was
it judged by the example of things formerly past, that the States of Italy were
free from the insolences of the French, unless the Pr^nces of Italy should
either put themselves into a posture of War, or if they should keep their
Forces far distant from the way whereby the King was to return for France;
since in his former passage to the enterprise of Naples, though he was more
necessitated to make have, and ha^ greater need of making himself Friends more
by favor then by force, he had notwithstanding used strange novelties in
Tuscany, which the Florentines did much ^esent. And who could have ascertained
that he would not do the l^ke in his return, in all other parts, where meeting
with no obstacle, he might meet with opportunity of pleasing himself, or
procuring any thing of advantage?

The Colleagues seeking to provide for these mischiefs, and rather to shun new
inconveniences, then endeavor to repair their past losses, they thought it the
best course that their Army should follow that of the Kings, so to keep him in
perpetual jealousy and suspicion, and hinder him if he should make any
attempt; hoping likewise, as they had like to have done, that this was the way
to make the King come to some good agreement with them, which had been often
endeavored, and not without hopes of good success, even when the Camps were
very near together. But the Colleagues, incited either by the Armies being so
near together, by the desire of glory, or hope of victory; or perchance being
enforced so to do, as it usually falls out when the Enemies Army is reduced to
straight passages, they fought the French; the Commanders of the Leagu^s Army,
were then to have considered, that they had more reason to hope for victory,
then to fear loss in that days fight, as the effect did in part prove, it
being the common opinion, that had not their own men been put into great
disorder, by their own light horse, who fell too soon to pillage the Enemies
Camp, they would have had a full and glorious victory. But though the business
should have succeeded otherwise, they knew the state of affairs to be such, as
the victory o^ the Kings behalf could not occasion them those great mischiefs,
which upon such an occasion have been considered, the Kings Forces not being so
great when most entire, much less being much weakened by the conflict, as could
prove very formidable. Such like events may teach us not to attempt such things
in which it is hard to resolve, and wherein the profit which may accrue is very
doubtful; nor to bring our selves to such a condition, as the necessity of
putting on another resolve, bereaves us of choice. Nor will it be a less useful
precept for Princes, to have a great care, and to be very well advised in
choosing their Commanders, which are to have the chief employment in great
enterprises; for if their nature and customs be not conformable to the thoughts
and intentions of the Prince, it is in vain to give them any Instructions or
Commissions; for oft-times a resolution is to be put on upon the main concern,
wherein a man's natural inclinations may prevail over whatsoever strict command
which the Commonwealth of Venice had experience of particularly in this days
fight, in the Marquis of Mantua, and some years after with much more danger and
damage in Bartholomi^ d' Alviano, at the Battle of Giaradada; in both which
personages, natural ardor and too vehement a desire of glory, prevailed over
the Senates wise and moderate counsels.

The Fifth DISCOURSE.
Whether or no the Forces of Leagues be fit for great Enterprises.
AMongst those things which fall into discourse when people talk of weighty
State Affairs, and of War enterprises, one, and a chief one, is that of
Leagues, and Confederacies, in which diverse Potentates do join, either out of
some particular design of their own, or for their better security, or to abate
the power of others. And the weakness of Potentates who are wanting in the
ancient military worth and discipline, has been the occasion why we read of
more examples of such unions, in these latter times, then we have heard of
formerly. So as now adays, as also in some later times past, when any great
enterprise is debated upon, recourse is forthwith had to Leagues, by means and
virtue whereof, it is usually thought, that greater ends may be compassed, then
can be hoped for from the peculiar power and virtue of any one only State; and
chiefly to curb and keep under those Forces which do threaten whole Christendom
with most danger and damage. Those who speak in the behalf of these Leagues,
and who heighten the hopes thereof, use these or the like reasons.

First, because reason, and natures self does teach us, that the multiplication
of the force and virtue of the movers, makes the motion the greater, and more
powerful; and that power and perfection which in humane affairs is denied to
one alone, is easily found amongst many. There is hard^y any one so weak, or so
little befriended by the gifts of nature or fortune, who may not be some help
to another, by adding that little which he has to the much more of the others.
This is the cause why in humane actions, and especially in such as are of the
nobler sort, the perfectest are those which are most compounded: The best
harmony is composed of differing ^ones of V^yces. The perfectest State
Governments (always provided that they be essential and not mere Idea's) are
those which being composed of the Three best, do comprehend the perfections of
all the Three; and it is easy to observe the like in many other things. And
Aristotle, when he would show the perfection which proceeds in every thing from
this concourse and union of many, does instance in the example well known in
those times of public banquets and entertainments, where those wherein many
were employed, some in one thing, some in another, proved more noble and
sumptuous, then those which were made by any one only, though never so wealthy
Citizen. Let us then gather by this, that such Forces likewise, wherein several
Potentates do concur, for some noble and important action, where every one
lends his assistance and advice, will be fitter to atchieve any great
enterprise, then those of one only, though never so great a Prince.

In War there are several Offices, and several employments, whereunto we see
that one N^tion is not so proper (be it either by reason of the several
influences of the Heavens, or through custom which is a second nature) as is
another: So in this mystery of War, several people prove proper for several
employments. In pitched Battles, the Dutch and Switzers have exceeded others,
and have purchased most fame; The Italians have been always esteemed for making
assaults, and storming of Cities; and the Spainards are held better then others
at defending a strong hold, by reason of their undergoing labor and disquiet,
and for their dexterity in military actions. Others are better at
Horse-service then on foot, as the French; others are good at Seafaring, and at
Mariti^e Discipline, as the Gen^^ses, P^^tugeses, and Venetians; and others
have been p^^ticularly addicted to other exercises. So as those who are able to
employ several people, and several Forces, as Leagues may do, (especially if
they be made between puissant Princes) may have great designs; for they shall
have wherewith to offend, and defend, both by Land and Sea, and numbers enough
of Soldiers, ^it to undertake and accomplish whatsoever Enterprise. But besides
this, many things are requisite for the maintaining a long War; Arms,
Ammunition, Victuals, Money, and other things, the which no one State can
sufficiently furnish, at least not without much incommodity, for any long time:
but where many joy^ together, and every one furnishes somewhat which they most
abo^nd in, the enterprise is s^^e not to be impeded, nor retarded, for want of
any thing, nor for the difficulties which are occasioned thereby. Moreover, for
great enterprises, as they cannot be so soon effected, so are they subject to
the hazard of ill success, when they depend upon one only Commander, who when
he is lost, there is never another of equal authority, valor and experience
left to succeed him; for there are but few of those that are fit for much
pains-taking, and for management of great affairs. Insomuch as that State is
very happy, which in more then one Age meets with a generous and warlike
Prince; and that Prince is very fortunate who when he will not follow the Wars
in his own person, has a Subject of his so qualified, as becomes him to be who
is to command an Army, when the War is difficult, and of importance; which is
the cause why we oftentimes see great enterprises which are we^^ begun,
precipitate into great disorders and ruins.

The death of Alexander the Great, without any legitimate Heirs fit to
undertake the Government of such an Empire, and of so weighty affairs, kept the
Macedonians and Grecians (of which two Nations his valiant and unconquered Army
did consist) from following his prosperous course, and from conquering the
Well, as he had done the East, and which whilst he was alive, he had proposed
to himself to do. The Carthaginians chiefest ruin arose from the want of
Commanders; for having placed their hopes in one only Hannibal, they were
forced to send for him back out of Italy, to defend themselves in Africa
against Scipio; and his fortune forgoing him, when he was beaten they knew not
whom to betake themselves unto, to uphold their tottering Commonwealth. But in
Leagues there is no such hazard run; since the best Commanders that are in any
of the Confederate Princes States may be employed, and the Princes themselves
may serve upon an urgent occasion; so as one Commander being lost, another may
be found to succeed him, of as great excellency and worth. For every State has
usually in all Ages had some one man more eminent then the rest, unto whom is
greatest extremities they have recourse. So as a League, if we suppose it to be
like a well Fabrickt humane body, may, since it has the strength of many
Dominions united in it, be resembled to Briar^^^ for strength; for as he had a
hundred hands, to make use of as he pleased in several actions, so many do lend
help to such a League, and make it stronger and fitter for any undertaking.
Moreover when we have to do with a very powerful Prince, as it falls out in
great Enterprises, if we will weaken his strength, we may endeavor chiefly to
keep his forces divided, and employed in several parts, for so they are
lessened, and become less apt to make resistance; but as this will be hard for
a single Prince to do, though a great one, for he who will drive another man
from his own home must be much stronger then be; so is it more easily done when
many are confedrates together, and this not only because several ^orces joined
together, prove the greater (as has been said) and several Armies abounding
with all things necessary may be thereout framed, but for the commo^iousness
which several confederate States have, of assaulting the Enemies Country, at
one and the same time, in several parts. Wherefore when any great and difficult
enterprise was to be undertaken (not to speak of ancient times) but of more
modren ones, against the Saracens, and the Turks, two Nations, which have
governed and domineered in these latter times with great fame and force,
recourse was had to Leagues, to C^^sadas, and to the unions of Christian
Princes, by means whereof notable things have been done against those cruel
Barbarians.

How many Princes, how many several Nations joined together in the time of Pope
Urban the Second, for the recovery of the Holy Land? About Fifty thousand
fighting men were raised, commanded in chief by Godfrey of Bullen, who gained
so many and so famous Victories, and so worthy of eternal glory; this holy
League having regained more then a hundred Cities in Asia, which were possessed
by the Saracens. And in the t^me of Baldwin the Third, King of Jerusalem, when
the Emperor Conradus and Lodowick King of France, joining together with other
lesser Princes, went themselves in person against the said Saracens, did not
they do excellent explo^ts, though couzened and be rayed by some Lords of Asia,
they could not continue on their enterprise with like success as at the first.
And has not this last Age seen one of the most signal and illustrious Naval
victories that was ever heard of? which was the fight at Lepanto, which was won
from the Turks by the League of the Christian Princes. But let us add somewhat
more in pursuit of our former considerations. Greatest enterprises, though
happily begun, are ofttimes left imperfect, when they depend upon the Forces of
one only Prince; for the rest of his neighboring Princes, either out of envy,
or fear of his greater prosperity, take up Arms against him to make him give
over the hopes of further acquisitions, and bethink himself of defending his
home-affairs; and to keep the scales more equal between him and his neighbors,
and to take away the jealousies of State, which are of all other things most
dangerous, and whereof we have infinite examples. But when a weighty War is to
be undertaken by the Forces of many Joint-Potentates, this suspi^ion ceases;
for Leagues are usually made with other Princes and neighboring States, or with
such as are concerned in common interest. And this Amity or Confederacy does
not only secure those States with whom the Confederacy is contracted, so as
the one fears not the other; but it preserves each of them from the injuries
that any may go about to do to any of the Confederates. For one State
supporting another by reason of their convention, things are so well and
stoutly governed as People not being able to worst them, keep from molesting
them, knowing that by offending any one Confederate, they shall draw upon them
the Forces of all the rest, and hasten their own ruin. Every one of these
Princes may then by reason of their strait conjunction and confederacy with
others, more boldly and more resolutely undertake and accomplish any whatsoever
enterprise, without danger of being diverted by any particular interest of his
own. And all these Considerations are better confirmed by many notable
examples. Greece was assaulted by Xerxes, that powerful Prince of Persia, with
an infinite number of men both by Sea and Land; almost all the several People
of that Province, united and confeder^ted together against this so great a
warlike power: And such was the efficacy of this un^on, as that though one
only Greece was to withstand the Forces of almost all the Eastern Nations who
were flocked together to that enterprise, but still under the Imperial command
and conduct of one and the same King Xerxes, they did not only make their part
good, but repulsed so puissant an Enemy, much to his own prejudice

The associate War which happ^ned in the time of Marius and Sylla, wherein many
Associates and Confederates of the Romans did conspi^e together against the
Commonwealth of Rome; though the Confederates were all of them but weak people,
as the Maruceni, Vestini, Samnites, Lucans, and other of their neighbors, yet
was this War held one of the most dangerous that the people of Rome did ever
sustain: For these people had joined themselves together with much fervor, to
revenge themselves of the Roman Nobility, who had first promised them, and then
denied them the liberty of being Citizens of Rome. And in these later Ages,
whole Germany having confederated together against the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, was able to raise so numerous an Army, though all the German Princes did
not concur therein, as did much perplex and endanger Charles. Which examples
prove what many Forces, though weaker being taken apart, can do when joined
together, against one potent Prince. These then may seem sufficient reasons and
examples to ground a favorable conclusion in the behalf of Leagues, and to make
them be held a strong and powerful means to order great enterprises by, and to
bring them to a good end.

Yet there be many good Considerations which may be alleged on the contrary
part; so as he who shall mind realities, and not what the magnificencie of name
or preparations do promise, will doubt much whether these Leagues and
Confederacies do really prove what they appear to be. It is most certain, that
as the truest perfection consists in union, and that whatsoever will partake of
that, must be reduced to this; so may all our humane actions prove the more
successful and perfect, the more reducible they are to this unity; and if it
happen to some sometimes otherwise, it is because those some are not capable
thereof either of themselves, or because their corrupted customs will not
suffer them so to be: But it is not to be denied, but that in all humane
actions, chiefly such wherein great affairs are concerned, and more chiefly in
matters of War, after mature advice taken, sudden execution is requisite; and
that it is necessary to reduce all things as much as may be to this unity: So
as the sovereign authority consist in one only, and not in many; for the
multiplicity of those that concur (especially by way of p^rity) in the same
action, does not help, but rather disorder and confound. Then look how much
harder it is to reduce things to an unity in a League, the less gallant do they
prove, and less fit for prosecution of great affairs: For they contain, and
almost naturally, such contrarieties, as must occasion the sudden corruption
thereof. Several are the thoughts of several men, the customs of Nations
different, and (which in this case is of most importance) the counsels and
resolutions by which confederate Princes govern themselves, do not only differ,
but are for the most part contrary, according as State-jealousies are apt to
breed occasion of falling out. The powerful desire after Rule never suffers
right to be known, nor people to be there with contented: It is therefore to be
observed, that in all Ages the greatest and most signal actions in War have
been done and accomplished by the worth and prosperity of one only Prince, or
at least of one sole Potentate, with a series of diverse Princes and Captains
who have commanded therein. Alexander the Great, the Commonwealth of Rome,
Charles the Great, and in these latter time; the Ottoman Empire, not to mention
many others who have been great and potent, though not altogether so highly
cried up, did all of them arise to that height of glory and power by the power
and worth of one only Command, with the true and proper military discipline of
each of them, and under the conduct of one and the same Principality. On the
contrary, Leagues show their weakness at the very first sight: For company and
multipl^city denotes always imperfection, and in this particular makes it be
known, that those things which a Prince or a Commonwealth cannot by reason of
their weakness do of themselves, and by their own Forces, they seek to effect
it by the company and help of others. Wherefore (as it has been said) in this
respect Leagues have been more frequently used in these latter Ages, then of
old: ^or many Princes and States are failing in military worth and courage, and
not able of themselves to do any notable action; so as one Nation, or one
Prince not being able to overcome another* and all of them wanting the
excellency of good Orders, he who has at any time endeavored to advance
himself by some design, has been forced to have recourse to the advantage of
Leagues; of which Italy, since by reason of the declination of the Western
Empire, she has been divided into so many members, and Scignories, has in
particular afforded many examples, which may serve to teach whatsoever belongs
to these Leagues: whereof we do not read of any great good effect which has
ensued at last, or at least which have continued long in their first
prosperity; for their Forces, though powerful enough of themselves, when met
withal by contrary respects, and wearied in their first attempts, have soon
gone but lamely off. And he who shall well consider such particulars as are
most necessary in great undertakings, will easily see how badly they do
correspond in Leagues. Deliberations would be wise and mature, but not slow and
unseasonable; execution would be speedy and bold; counsels are oft-times to be
taken upon unexpected accidents; the end of all ought to be one and the same,
though the Offices, Degrees, and Authorities be different; the respect and aim
one and the same, whereunto all resolutions do tend; to wit, the safety, glory
and the greatness of that Prince or State, for whom the War is made; the reward
and honor one and the same, and alike the loss and shame, so as the possibility
of having means to lay the fault on another, do not retard the doing of what
is ^itting.

These are things which have always been hard, and rare to be found; yet they
may the more easily be met withal in an enterprise which is undertaken by one
only wise Prince, or by one well governed Commonwealth; But in Leagues all
things run counter bias to these important affairs. It is not always
generositie, but fear which makes a Prince take up Arms, which likewise makes
others join with him, who otherwise do much differ from him in desires, and
interest: but that brunt being over, and every one being in their former
particular, and more natural condition, he who dreads War bends to idleness,
and willingly takes all occasions to change War for Peace; and he who was
become a friend by reason of some contingencie, not out of any good will,
discovering his real affection upon some other occasion, or by reason of some
change, returns to be not only as formerly, an Enemy, but more inveterate then
before; so as these Ties of Common interests being soon loosened either by
particular interest, or by some other affection, hatred, confusion, and
disorder does thereupon ensue.

The Moralists ^ay, That friendship cannot long continue between those where
one and the same thing is not interchangeably given and received; and that
therefore true friendship is only found, where the end is not that which is
advantag^ous or delightful (because equal correspondencie is not usually there)
but what is honest, which always is, and does still continue the same on all
behalfs. In the Friendship or Leagues of Princes, every one has his own
conveniencie, and particular benefit for his aimed at end, and then the like of
others only so far, as by accident it may square with his. But it commonly
falls out, that what makes for one, makes against another; so as the ^ame
things cannot please all: wherefore a thousand accidents do easiry cause
diversity of opinions, contentions and breaches, so as hardly any League has
been able to preserve it self any long time. It is also usually seen that no
man minds what is recommended to the care of many; and therefore in Leagues,
which are fastened together but with weak Ties, whilst one does either trust
upon another provisions, or is ill satisfied with others omissions, men
neglect their own daties, and study more to pick a hole in another coat, then
to mind his own business. The ignomi^y which may in^ue upon such defaults, and
the loss of reputation, which use to be great incitements to a noble mind, are
not so much valued in things which are undertaken and negotiated by many
together, because the way lies fair to excuse ones self, by laying the fault
upon another, or at least the fault is lessened by others being sharers therein.

Thus that common benefit, which is so magnified and cried up, and which ought
to be their only object, is found only in a certain fancied Idea, and in a
potentia remota, or in a vain and useless appearance, whilst none endeavor to
reduce it to its true, essential, and perfect being, by laying aside their own
proper and peculiar advantage, and by directing his actions to the common good
of his Colleagues. So as he who shall duly consider what the first intention is
of making a League, and with what degrees it is proceeded in afterward, and to
what ends it is directed, will by many evident examples find it quickly so
transformed, as though it meet not with any external forces, it easily
dissolves and moulders away of it self. Leagues made by Christians against the
Turks have oft-times in particular met with these impediments and difficulties;
the League between Pope Alexander the Sixth, and the three most powerful
Kingdoms of Europe, the Kingdoms of Spain, Fance, and Portugal, and the
Commonwealth of Venice, was stipulated with great hopes and noble intentions;
the Venetian and French Fleet came into the Archipelag^, where they had some
prosperous success; but the forces of the other Colleagues were in vain
expected the first year, and it ended the second year before it had fully
effected any thing, by reason of the discords which arose between the Crowns of
France and Spain, which were occasioned by the division of Naples, so as these
Princes turned their Arms each upon other, which were intended against the
Infidels. The league made between Pope Paul the Third, the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, and the Commonwealth of Venice, against Sultan Soliman, likewise ended
almost as soon as it was begun; and it is too well known, as being of rescent
memory, what occasions of victories were thereby lost, and out of what
respects. But what greater thing could be expected from any League, then from
that which God blessed with the famous victory at the Curz^la^^ Islands? Yet how
slight a matter was able to re^^^d the glorious achievements which were with
reason to be expected from thence, when a slight suspicion of the Spainards,
that the States of Flanders might be molested by the French, by reason of the
going of the Duke of Alanson, the Kings Brother toward those parts, was
sufficient to keep back the Fleet which was destied for so great affair in the
Levant, and to make the best season of the year pass over without any
advantage; whereupon all other things ^ell into great disorders, and the League
was quickly ^erminated. Neither can this natural motion of Leagues be so stopped
by any means or endeavors, as that all the Colleagues may have the same
intentions in preserving it.

What greater reason can one Prince have to promise unto himself the
continuance of friendship and fidelity from another, then had the Commonwealth
of Venice to expect, first, from Lewis the Twelfth, and then from Francis the
First, both of them Kings of France? Since to keep from any ways violating the
friendship and conjunction, which she held with the former; she drew upon her
the Forces of Maximilian the Emperor, and exposed her State to so much labor,
and danger; and did so long maintain a great part of the expense of a weighty
War, first, to free the Seconds own person from Prison, and then his Sons; yet
(as usually affection prevails more in the minds of Princes, then common
reason, or justice by which private persons govern themselves) Lewis, breaking
off his ancient Capitulation, which he held with the Commonwealth, was a great
means to make all the Princes of Europe conspire against her; and France, as
soon as he had made what advantage he could by the agreement, laying aside all
other respects, made peace for himself alone with the Emperor, leaving the
Commonwealth exposed to great toil and danger of War. So as when any
stedfastness is found in any Colleague, all that is to be said is, That as he
that does observe (...) deserves to be praised for his fidelity, so ^e that
does rely too much thereupon, is not to be much commended for c^vil wisdom. But
it may be moreover considered, that many times the Colleagues began to square
but badly in the very beginning of their agreement, which tends much to the
prejudice of the common interest. Whilst the last League against Selinus the
Turkish Emperor was in treaty, and when it was so high time to relieve Cyprus,
it was long and importunately argued in Rome, where they were first to employ
the Forces of the League; and some of the Spanish Ministers were so blinded
with their particular interest, as they propounded and stiffly maintained it to
the very great prejudice and loss of time, that as soon as the League should be
fully agreed upon, the Forces thereof should march to the Seacoasts of Africa,
to take in such places as they thought might make most for the advantage of
Spain; not weighing that whilst they should leave their Enemies powerful, with
the Fleet safe and entire in the Levant, it was very vainly done to think of
get^ing such things, which though they should succeed well, must be to no
purpose, and must qu^ckly prove unfortunate, as experience showed afterward,
and which reason could not persuade before.

But if these peculiar respects be at first concealed, they break forth in the
process of time, and work sometime worser effects in such of the Colleagues as
are either weakest, or do confide most in the Confederacy. Ferdinand King of
Spain, though falling off from the other Colleagues, he joined with great
offers and prot^stations with the Commonwealth of Venice; yet when the City of
Brescia was recovered, he would keep it for himself, and appropriate the first
fruit of victory to himself, which by the former, and by renewed capitulations
was destined to others. Pope Clement the Seven^h, the Commonwealth of Venice,
and the Duke of Milan joined together in League against Caesar; but their ends
were, if not apparently contrary, at least intrinsecally different. The King of
France desired by all means to free the Crown of France from some prejudice
which he had done it by the former agreement with Caesar, and to set his Sons
at liberty, who were left with him in nature of Hostages: But on the contrary,
the other Confederates chief endeavor was, to take the Dukedom of Milan from
Caesar, and to secure Italy from his power. The enterprise was begun with
prosperous success, the Italian Princes doing readily what became them; but the
King of France, when he knew how to obtain his ends by another way, and began
to suspect the Colleagues constancy, did neither make War on the other side
the Mountains, nor did he send his Forces into Italy, as he was bound to do:
Whereupon the League which was made with great preparation, with good
beginning, and better hopes, ended in an agreement, which was voluntary and
advantageous on the Kings behalf by the recovery of his Children, but enforced,
and not over-secure on the behalf of the other Colleagues, who fell short of
their conceived hopes, being abandoned by their Friend and Confederate, the
King.

To know then the truth amidst this diversity of reasons and examples, we must
distinguish and consider apart for what occasions, and with what respects every
League is made, what the end therein proposed is, and upon what terms and
conditions it is concluded; for by these particulars we may the better know
what good or bad may be expected by joining together in League, and whether the
League be likely to be of short, or of long duration. Sometimes Leagues are
made by Princes or Popularities out of necessary defense, and to provide
opportunely for their own safeties; the Confederates obliging themselves by
particular and stated obligations to defend each others State, when they shall
be assaulted by any others from without: And such Leagues as these have proved
profitable, as having respect to the preservation of Peace, and to a certain
and honest end; and whilst nothing but the common interest is treated of, so as
they have all the same object, as well in maintaining, as in making the
Confederacy. The Confederacy made between the Pope, the King of Naples, the
Commonwealth of Florence, the Duke of Milan, and other lesser Italian Princes,
did long preserve the Peace of Italy, and was for a while very advantageous for
the Colleagues; for the only drift thereof was to constitute some assured
bounds to every of their powers, and to settle them in a just temperature,
making the Confederates thereby the stronger and more able to withstand any one
that should attempt any thing against them. Sometimes again Leagues are made
for more necessary self-defence, and which must suddenly be actuated; to wit,
when a State is assaulted by one more powerful, and that the neighboring
Princes, lest themselves might suffer if they should permit a neighboring power
to grow too great by the ruin of that State, do take up Arms jointly for the
defense thereof, in whose defense they know their own safeties are concerned,
since they might soon incur the like danger, if they should not keep him at a
further distance from the others home. And such a League may also at first do
gallant and memorable things, if it so fall out that the condition of affairs
being altered in the same League, and the Colleagues interests becoming
different, they will advance further with those Forces, and with more full
intentions to ruin that Foe-Potentate, and take occasion by joining in League
to increase in State and power. When these respects, and their contraries
already han^led are considered, these Leagues do usually lose all their
efficacy, since they fail in their chiefest and surest groundwork, when the
truest conjunction fails, which is that of Princes minds, thoughts and designs,
whence conformable actions, and such as are of great efficacy and worth do
arise.

Almost all the People of Greece joined together to defend themselves against
Xerxes his Forces, a mighty King of Persia, who came to assault them with an
innumerable Army; and they got that famous Victory by Sea at Salamis, which
furnished them at the same time with prosperous successes at Land, where they
put the same King to flight: And Greece was preserved at that time by virtue of
that League from so great a danger, against which it appeared almost impossible
that she could defend herself. So likewise in these latter times, the Pope, and
Philip King of Spain joined with the Commonwealth of Venice in defense of the
Kingdom of Cyprus, (to whom that Kingdom, as part of her Territories, did
chiefly belong) when it was assaulted by powerful Turkish Forces; and having
put together a powerful and numerous Navy, they bore away that famous and
singular Victory, which will be celebrated in all Ages; the Turkish Forces were
routed and shattered at Sea, and their honor and courage lessened: But when all
this was done, what other thing did the victorious Grecians, answerable to the
hop^s which were expected from that their so great Victory, the whole fruit
whereof at their reurn home ended in the dividing of the booty? So also the
Christian League by Sea, did not only spend the rest of that Autumn, a fit time
for any enterprise which they could have undertaken, after the honor they had
won in the aforesaid Victory, in dividing the prey, and in other matters of
small moment, but also spent all the next en^uing Spring and Summer idly,
without being able so much as to keep together, so to keep the Enemy from
recruiting, to the great, notable, and woeful example of what we are now in
treaty of, and to show that the Forces of Leagues are weak, though made between
potent Princes. The purchase which is got, or which is hoped for, cannot be so
equally divided and agreed upon, but that some of the Confederate Princes will
happen to have a greater share then the rest; and every increase, b^ it ^^'r so
little, does easily cause jealousy, or at least envy in the rest. Almost all
the Potentates of Europe convened together in the famous League of Cambray
against the Commonwealth of Venice, allured by the hopes of being able to
divide her noble, rich, and flourishing State, which was so much a more
prevailing object in the minds of the confederate Princes to make them endeavor
by their joint Forces to suppress the Commonwealth, and bereave her of all her
riches. But as soon as the Colleagues first design began to discover
themselves, and begot jealousies and suspicion amongst them, insomuch, as the
very same Princes who had conspired together to ruin the Commonwealth, did
soon assist and succor her, being become bitterer Enemies one to another, and
amongst themselves (each others greatness becoming formidable and hateful to
their companions) then they had been before out of the same reason to the
Venetians, against whom they had jointly taken up Arms.

It was not hard, though not very reasonable, for Lodowick King of France, and
Ferdinand King of Spain, being blinded with the same desire of enlarging their
Territories, to join together in driving the Aragonians from out the Kingdom of
Naples, but afterward they did as easily disagree, touching the dividing of
what they had got; So as the League might help to bereave others of that
Kingdom, but other Forces were requisite for the appropriation of it to ones
self, and thereunto the proper and peculiar virtue of the Militia, and of good
counsel was likewise required. Leagues use likewise to prove advantageous when
many Potentates take up Arms against one new Prince, who is yet but weak, and
not well settled in his State; as was seen by the example of the League made by
the Princes of Italy, against the Scalligers, and certain other petty Lords or
Tyrants; for Leagues being of some validity in their beginning, and not meeting
with any stout resistance, may at the very first effort have ruined the Enemy
against whom such Legues were made, but when they have to do with a Potentate
of esteem, though he be inferior of himself, to the power of the Colleagues,
they have not produced any great effects; as may be known by diverse
confederacies made by the Princes of Italy, against the Commonwealth of Venice;
against which, as being become formidable to them all, though all Italy has
more then once taken up Arms, yet she has been able to defend herself against
such forces; for the first Efforts being withstood, the rest proved less
difficult, by reason of the usual weakness which Leagues are soon reduced unto.
And it might have succeeded so with her likewise, in the times of greater
danger in the Leagues of Cambray, had not Alviano with his unseasonable
resolution, of immaturely hastening on the the Battle, drawn that ruin upon the
Commonwealth, which she might easily have escaped by temporising, and the
League have been dissolved thereupon, as it was not long after.

Now by reassuming all these considerations, these general and true Conclusions
may be thereout asserted; that Leagues may prove beneficial, either when they
aim simply at defense, and at the maintaining of Peace, by the reputation of
such an union; or when one that is not able to defend himself by his own
particular Forces, is actually assaulted by one that is more powerful then he,
and whom he is not able to resist of himself. For if no other good be got by
such unions, yet the business is spun out the longer, and there may be a way
sound out to deviate imminent ruin, by diversion. But he who will conside too
much upon such Unions, or be less diligent in negotiating those Affairs which
of himself he is not able to do, will soon find he is deceived; nay if he be
not the more cautious, and circumspect, he may become a prey as well to him who
appears to be his friend, as to his formally declared enemies. Whence it is
inferred that to make Leagues out of a mere and voluntary election of
increasing Territories, is very uncertain, and falacious, yet may prove good if
many who be strong and powerful join against one that is weak; but at last the
fire is greater which breaks out amongst the Colleagues themselves, then that
which they carried home to another man's house. But that a State which is
already grown great and powerful, may be oppressed by the strength of Leagues,
unless it begin first to totter by reason of its internal disorders, from what
the experience of so many past passages teaches, and from reason which is
corroborated by custom, is a thing which no man ought to promise to himself,
unless he delight in flattering himself with vain and prejudical hopes.

There remains yet some things to be stated which have formerly been alleged
in the behalf of Leagues, lest they may get more credit amongst men then they
deserve. To that then which was said, That the multiplicity of the movers, make
the greater motion, and things are better done by many, especially things of
the highest nature, then by reason of the imper^ection and weakness of our
humanity, can be effected by a few, it may be answered; That it is true, that
the assistance of many is requisite to the affecting of great things; but it is
also as true, that for the right carrying on of affairs, it is requisite that
the second causes (to speak in terms of natural Philosophy) should be
subordinate to the first, as is seen in the Order and Government of the world:
So doubtlesly no great enterprises can be effected without Armies, Commanders,
and a thousand other necessaries; but by how much the more all these are
constituted under the power of one alone, by which their order and union is the
greater, the work they take in hand will prove so much the more excellent and
perfect. A Prince, though single in what he goes about, is not forbidden the
making use of Soldiers of several Nations in his Militia, to the end that he
may have an Army (as has been said) fitter for any military action, in
businesses which are at once undertaken against several States, so as all of
them be to be understood as Enemies, though they be not confederates; but the
truest and securest rule in this case would be, to be so careful and diligent
in training up, and in disciplining a Prince his own Militia, as that he may be
able to provide for all actions of War, out of men of his own Dominions, as we
see those have done who have done the most glorious actions. The same may be
said of other things belonging to War, for which a wise Prince ought so to
provide, as that he may rely upon himself, and not upon the friendship of
others. As for the assertion, that Leagues do abound in Chiestains fit to
command Armies; this proves not always true by reason of the scarcity of
excellent men which has been found in all Ages; or say that such be to be
found amongst confederate Princes, they use to cause more of discord and
contention, by reason that every one pretends to have the supreme command, and
chiefest honor in the Militia; and more of prejudice to the Leagues, then of
profit or advantage. And if it be found that some Leagues have effected great
matters, it has happened (though but seldom) where the particular respects,
which we have mentioned, have concurred. But in the forenamed unions made by
Christians against Infidels, no good reasons can be given which do suit well
with the business now in hand, if we speak of Leagues according to the ordinary
acception of reason of State; for such Princes or People as were signed with
the Cr^ciata had all of them but one only respect and affection, which was
more prevalent with them then any other, to wit, their zeal to religion;
therefore their Forces not being only kept together by that so powerful bond,
but even their souls, more heavenly then humane rewards being proposed to them,
they might work miraculous effects: though they could not, even in this case,
altogether sh^^ those disorders which are caused by the association of so many,
and by the multiplicity of sovereign Lords, and of Nations. The same may be
said of other Unions, as of those that did associate the Romans, and of the
Hans Towns of Germany; for amongst these certain particular respects did
concur, which were common to them all, no respects of States concerning
differing interests, and other things, which have been considered in Unions
which do truly and usually bear this name of Leagues: For when, though against
Infidels, any enterprises have been attempted by Leagues, out of other reasons,
and other humane respects concurring more principally therein, what success
they have had, and how different, though usual to Leagues, may plainly be known
by other examples already spoken of.

The Sixth DISCOURSE.
Why modern Princes have not done actions equal to those which were done by the
Ancients.
THere are some, who praising only the actions of ancient times, do equally
blame all modern deportments, and hold them in little or no account; as if the
way were blocked up to those who are born in our days, to keep them from
arriving at any height of glory. Others on the contrary labor to heap our
present Age with all manner of praise, and to compare it to the most celebrated
and most cried up former times; affirming that the ancient worth is sprung up
again in these our days, and in our now modern men, which come no^ short of,
nor differ from the former times or men, save in the veneration which is given
to Antiquity. They celebrate the ingenuity of modern men, for the excellency
and perfection unto which they have brought many noble Arts and Sciences, which
were obscured and of no esteem in former times; particularly that of the
Militia. In which respect, by the so many newfound ways of Fortification, and
expugning strong Holds by their Engines, and by other very miraculous
Inventions, it appears that the industry of Modern men has not only equaled,
but in many things much exceeded that of the Ancients; and that the glory of
many excellent Professors of the most esteemed Arts shines cleerer in the
present Age, for that they have not only sufficiently improved that of the
Militia, but also Architecture, Painting, Sculpture, and other noble Arts and
Disciplines, which are adornments to Civil life, and have drawn them out ^
obscurity wherein they were hidden for a while.

I do not differ so much from the opinion of these men; nor do I think that
other men's actions ought to be so much heightened, as that through a foolish
modesty or ignorance we should undervalue our own, when they deserve praise.
But as for Military actions, which as they are the most perspicuous to the eyes
of all men, so are they most commended, or blamed by the universality of men;
when I call to mind the warlike actions done by the Ancients, and those done by
our Modern men, methinks that those do so far exceed these, as they can hardly
admit of any comparison; though these latter Ages, as they have produced more
excellent Wits in other Disciplines, so also may they glory in the valor and
generosity of some Princes, no less great in worth then in Forces. But that
which peradventure affords no less cause of wonder, and which affords
particular matter for this discourse, is to consider whence it is that modern
Princes, though some of them have been generously minded, and of much
experience and worth in military affairs, of great possessions, and strong in
power, yet have they not been able to bring to pass such enterprises, as for
their weighty consideration, for the shortness of time, or for the easiness
wherewith they were done, can walk hand in hand with those of the Ancients;
amongst whom we see one only Alexander, one Pompey, one Caesar to have
subjugated many entire Provinces, and conquered many Nations. And not to go
further in search of the like examples, since one Age alone, very near this of
ours, can easily furnish us with them: Were not the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
Francis the First King of France, and (if will pass by the errors of Religion)
Sultan Solomon Emperor of the Turks, Princes great, and valiant in all
acceptations? in whom so many endowments both of Nature and Fortune did concur,
as hardly any thing remained to be desired in any of them, to make and
constitute a potent Prince, and an excellent Commander, fit to undertake any
action, how great or difficult soever. What was it that Charles with his
undaunted and dreadless spirit did not undertake? Who was ever known to be more
ambitious of praise and military honor then Francis, never weary, nor satisfied
with toiling in Arms, and in leading Armies? Solomon was so fervently bent upon
purchasing glory in the Wa^s, as his age, though very great, was not able to
assuage it; for he dyed in the Field amongst Soldiers, when he was eighty four
years old. These great Princes were so puissant, and so remarkable for the
number to Soldiers which they led to Battle, for military Discipline, and for
all that belonged to War, as their Age had no cause to wonder at, nor to envy
any preceding times, which were famousest for such affairs. Yet he who shall
particularly examine their actions, will find they come far short of the famous
acts of the Ancients, and that they correspond not with the fame and opinion of
such Princes and of such Forces. For if we we shall consider the deeds of those
few aforesaid, not to mention so many others, what, and how many were the
things done by Alexander the Great, who having in so short time vanquished the
powerful Persian Empire, victoriously overran the whole East, and made the
terror of his w^apons known to People almost unknown till then, and yet died
whilst he was very young? How many Cities and Provinces did Pompey and Caesar
bring under the Roman Empire? The first conquered and subjugated Pontus,
Armenia, Cappadocia, Media, Hiberia, Syria, Cylicia, Mesopotamia, Arabia, and
Iudaea; things which though done, seem incredible: And the other, though he did
not overrun so great a space of Land, did no less admired things, if we will
regard the condition of the conquered; He quelled the warlike Switzers, French,
and Dutch, and made so many and so fortunate expeditions, as by his means only
above eight hundred Cities were brought under the Government of Rome.

What can be alleged on the behalf of these modern Princes, which may compare
with these for military glory? Charles the Emperor led sundry times puissant
Armies upon several undertakings; but what was the fruit that he reaped by his
most famous Expeditions? The greatest and most victorious Army which he ever
put together, was that wherewith he withstood Solomon, when he came to assault
^ustria: yet he never departed with it from before the walls of Vienna; so as
all the Trophy of Victory which he got there for so much expense and labor, was
only not being overcome; for his Army never saw the Enemies face. The Wars of
Germany were very difficult in this behalf; yet therein he contended not with
any Prince, whose Forces were of themselves equal to his; nor were they made
out of election, or hope of glory by new acquirements, but out of necessity,
and for the defense as well of his own person, as of the Empire; and all the
good he got thereby, was only the restoring the affairs of the Crown to the
former condition, so as the Empires authority might not be lessened.

The Wars made so long between Charles the Emperor, and Francis King of France,
with no less hatred then force, did oftentimes weary both their Armies; but
though Caesar had several times the better, yet at last the power of France was
not diminished, nor the greatness of Charles his command made any whit the
larger, so as he was master of so many, and so ample States rather by his right
of inheritance, then by means of War; the enterprises of Tunis and Algier in
Africa, might have some greater appearance of generosity, the business being
very difficult, and attempted with great courage, and much danger, and wherein
the glory appeared to be more then the advantage; yet the unhappy success of
the one, did much lessen the honor and praise won by the other; and these
undertakings did finally produce no greater effects then the acquisition of one
or two Cities, and those none of the chiefest of Africa: whereas one only
Scipio subdued Carthage, the Head of so great an Empire, and brought all those
Regions under the Roman Eagles.

The Acts done by Solomon were somewhat greater then these, but not to be
compared to those of old; nor peradventure will they appear to be very famous,
if we shall consider his power, and the long time that he lived Emperor. He
consumed much time, and many men in Hungaria, making many expeditions against
it, and yet got but one part thereof, which was none of the greatest Provinces
neither. He wan the Island of Rhodes; but what glory could redound to so mighty
a Prince by overcoming a few Knights, who were weak of themselves, and who were
not succored by others? And yet he was therein assisted more by fraud then by
force. He past with his Army into Persia; but though he might say with Caesar,
ven^, vidi, yet could he not add vici; for as he with great celerity over ran a
great part of the Persian Empire, and came to the City of Ta^ris, so not being
able to fix in any place, or establish any conquest, he retreated to within his
own Confines, having lest the greatest part and the best of his men in the
Enemies Country, routed and defeated by diverse accidents. These things then,
and many other the like, give just occasion of wonder, and incite curious wits
to search out the truest causes of such diversity of successes.

Amongst which, nay, in the primary place, the different means of warfaring in
those times, and in these may come into consideration, wherein if we come to
more particulars, we shall meet with the use of Forts and Strong Holds, which
are become more frequent in these our Ages, then they were in former times, the
art of building being doubtlesly in greater perfection with us then it was with
them. There is hardly any State or Country now adays, wherein there are not
many Towns and Cities, either assisted by natural situation, or else by art
reduced to much safety by many inventions found out by modern Professors of
Fortification, so as almost every place is so fortified as it is able to hold
out with a few men, against many; and he who will in these times enter into
another man's Country with an Army intending to possess himself thereof, must
first win all the Castles and strong Holds upon the Frontiers; for it were ill
advised to advance forwards and leave such places behind them, since his
victuals may be thereby hindered, and he may several ways suffer much damage
and be greatly disturbed. Moreover to be ^aster of the field, and leave the
Cities and strong Holds unreduced, would be but to labor hard to get possession
for a few days, which being founded only upon the Forces of a field-Army, when
that should be worsted, all things formerly won, must of necessity fall of
themselves. Hence it is, that since much time must be spent in lying before a
Fort or Citadel, and that many men are requisite to take it, and all this
oftentimes in vain, the attempts of modern Princes meeting with this
difficulty, are not so soon nor so sadly compast, as they were by the Ancients
who met not with such obstacles. And how can it be expected therefore that many
great victories should be won, since they meet with so many rubs by means of
these strong Holds? whereof we see many clear examples in the actions, of the
aforementioned Princes.

The Emperor Charles made War several times with numerous Armies against the
King of France, propounding great matters unto himself, which proved all but
vain at last, by his having met with strong Cities well munited, such as
required much time and labor to take them; wherefore though his success in War
was sometimes prosperous, yet it came so late, as he hardly got any advantage
or benefit thereby; as was seen when after much time spen^, and many men lost
before the Fort of St. Desir which was sea^ed in the midst of France, whither
he was fortunately advanced, though he reduced it to his own power, yet was he
at last forced to come to agreement with the Enemy (as finding his Forces much
weakened by that acquisition) that he might fall upon another Enterprise. The
same, and for the same cause, befell Francis King of France, who having sent
his Son the Dolphin with powerful Forces to the Pyrenean Mountains, to the end
that he might break into Spain, promising himself easier success therein, by an
unexpected assault, and because he had assaulted at the same time other parts
of Caesar's Dominions with other Armies: The Dolphin being at the very first to
take Perpignano, a Fort placed upon those Frontiers, he there met with such,
and with so many difficulties, as this sole encounter was sufficient to keep
those Forces from pen^trating any further.

Solomon being entered with a powerful Army into Hungary, intending to pass
into Austria, wasted so much time in expugning the strong Hold of Buda, as it
proved the safety of that Country, and chiefly of Vienna; before the which he
was in that respect the longer a coming, and by this delay afforded the
defendants the more time to provide for their own security, so as the City
being of it self very renable, it may be said that she did not only save her
self, but by the preservation thereof, all Austria, and other Provinces of
Germany, were preserved then, and several times since. So likewise in the War
which was made by the same Solomon, against the Venetians, though he was come
thither himself in person, with powerful Forces both by Sea and Land, yet his
Forces being repulst by the Fort of C^rfir, which was forcibly, but in vain
attempted by the Turks, he was forced to withdraw from before it; whereas
without the help and advantage of such a strong Hold, both the Island of
C^rfee, and other places belonging to that State must have submitted to so
great and warlike a preparation. By reason then of these difficulties, and such
occasions, the undertaking of later times have proved less glorious for matter
of action, then those of former days. When Alexander had overcome in Battle
Darius the powerful King of Persia, he soon made himself Master of his whole
Kingdom, and passing further into the Country, even to the ocean Sea, he found
the way so open, as the only difficulty he met withal, was the overcoming of
those Fortresses of Rivers and Seas which nature had furnished the Country
with: Insomuch as those who writ his actions, speak but of two strong Holds of
any importance, about which he was necessitated to spend some time amongst the
Indians in his victorious overrunning so many Countries. But Pompey made such
way in following Mithridates, and in planting Trophies of victories, in all
places whereby he past in so many Eastern Provinces, amongst people that he had
rather marched over, then overcome, as it may be easily conceived that he m^^
no where with any impediments by strong Holds, which were able to stop the
course of his victorious Forces. Caesar found it somewhat a harder business to
subjugate those people of Europe, with whom he was to fight; but this was more
out of the nature of the situations and the savageness of the people, then by
reason of any stout resistance made by any well fortified Cities; yet in the
space of Ten years he completed so many victories, as he subjugated There
hundred several sorts of People.

It these, though great Princes, and most valiant Commanders, had been put to
the expense of months and years in the taking of one only Fort, certainly
their achievements would have been fewer, and their glory not so much cried
up. This was manifestly known by the example of other Ages: For it may be
observed, that the so great progresses of War have been made chiefly in the
Eastern parts, where at all times (peradventure by reason of the largeness of
the Country) the use of strong Holds has been least had; so as not only
Alexander the Great, and Pom^ey, both of them more famous then all other
Commanders, but some of the Roman Emperors have by their Chieftains subjugated
spacious Countries in a short time: And in later times, Selymus the Great Turk
by the same reason was able totally to subjugate the Sultan of Caire's Empire;
For having had the better in many Battles, and not meeting with any strong Hold
to withstand him, the whole Country which was under that Empire fell as a prey
into the power of the Turks, who were Victors and Masters of the Field. But
such acquisitions, as they are very easy to be made, so are they but seldom
peacefully possessed; which was the cause why the Roman Emperors could never so
govern those furthest Eastern parts but that either by the Inhabitants
themselves, or by their neighboring Kings, ^umults were continually raised: So
as it behoved them to subjugate the same Provinces several times. But if these
difficulties of winning Forts and strong Holds did retard the course of
Victories, certainly they ought not to lessen the praise of modern Princes and
Commanders; but when they deserve it by their own military worth and industry,
as great discipline, cunning, constancy, and sufferance is discovered in this
sort of Militia, and as such acquisitions are more stable, and less subject to
the various fortune of War; so the fewer actions of these men may for glory and
praise be justly compared to the many of the others, wherein perhaps they would
have equaled them, had it not been for the concurrence of such differing
accidents and respects.

But if we shall continue to examine other parts appertaining to the Militia,
we shall find that the diversity of effects has proceeded from the diversity
of other things. The invention of Guns is so new and so miraculous a thing, so
out of the way of all War-Engines which were known and used by the Ancients, as
it may well be bel^eved that this must needs have made a grert alteration in
the managing of the Militia; and the use and invention of Gunpowder is so
increased in these times, and so variously multiplied and perfected, as it may
be said that men make not War now a days with steel and iron, as they were
wont, but with fire. Then this formidable Instrument of Artillery, which makes
so great and irreparable havoc, is the reason why Commanders proceed with more
caution in giving Battle, and seek to spin out the War in length, to reduce the
Enemy to some necessity; and that ^sing more Art, and trusting less to Fortune,
they spend more time in bringing their enterprises to an end, but do it with
more security. Wherefore we seldom hear of pi^ch'd Fields in these days,
wherein whole Armies sight with all their Forces: And hence it is, that the
Forces of such as defend an assaulted Country not being to be vanquished, nor
much weakened but with time, unless they want fitting defense, no great
p^ogress is made therein. which is not done more by time and industry then by
open force. Where likewise it is to be weighed, that the necessity which is now
adays put upon Armies of bringing along with them a great Train of Artillery,
all their proceedings must be much more slow, and without them they can neither
keep themselves from being offended by the Enemy, nor yet can they undertake
any enterprise, wanting such Instruments without which no Town nor place of
importance can be taken.

Let us wind about a little, and see what has been done by the Ancients. What
a voyage did Pompey the Great make in the pursuit of Mithridates? He wi^h his
Army overran abundance of new Countries, continually conquering and subjecting
them, with as much ease, as if he had gone to visit them upon pleasure, and not
to wage War with them. When Alexander the Great would go into India, he made
his Soldiers leave all the Booty which they had got in Persia, and all their
Baggage behind them, and choosing out some of his nimblest men, be with them
made that long and difficult journey, and sent many back, thinking that a few
(but those valiant) Soldiers, would suffice him for that purpose; for in that
Age, it was only worth and power which bore away the weightiest affairs. So as
such Princes and Conductors of Armies as had a strong and able Militia, as was
that of Alexander the Great, and that of the Romans, not meeting with any
strong Holds to withstand them, nor with any Soldiers (...) worth and
experience as they were, not which could withstand their assaults, they
suddenly bereft the Countries which they assailed of all defense, by worsting
their Armies wherein their sole security lay, and so made themselves easily
masters of them; and by the reputation which their men won, and the terror
which they caused in their Enemies, who had no where whereunto to fly or to
have refuge, they made one Victory make way for another, so as they might in a
short time lay the ground-works of those great Monarchies which the World does
now so much wonder at.

To these things it may be added, That the chiefest strength of the Ancients,
and that wherewith they achieved their chiefest actions, lay in their
Infantry, which could easiliest and with greatest expedition wind about every
where, and be made use of at all seasons. But changing their custom afterward,
so as those that commanded great Armies would have their Foot aided
continually, and backed by good store of Horse, they could neither begin, nor
finish great enterprises, as made best for them; being to consider the Season,
the Country, and other conveniences, and their Horses being to have meat,
which they could not always, nor in all places come by. Wherefore now that by
reason of the greatness of their Empire, the Turks Confines are so separated,
and so far distant one from another, it may be hoped that other Princes may
rest the quieter, and the more secure from their ^ncursions, for that their
Landforces consisting much in Cavalry, they cannot move so suddenly, nor lead
on their numerous Armies so easily nor so commodiously, nor do such notable
things by Land; and which the self-same respect may make it be doubted that
they may bend their studies more to Sea-affairs.

Together with all these respects, the condition of Times and of Potentates is
not slightly to be considered, if therein we meet with a generous Prince, and
one that is desirous of military glory. For if he chance to make trial of his
arms and worth with a Prince of equal, or not much inferior state, valor, and
military discipline, he cannot hope by any power he has to make any great
acquisitions, because he will meet with a just counterpoise to his worth and
power: For though he may peradventure be puffed up with some good success, yet
is he not sure but that he may have some adverse fortune, whilst his Enemy is
still strong, thou^h as yet wo^sted. What did Francis King of France leave
unattempted to get footing in Italy? how many Armies did he lead thither? how
much treasure did he spend in those attempts? when was he ever weary or
satisfied with warfaring? Yet being withstood by the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
who was of equal force and worth, and was resolute to keep the French out of
Italy, all his endeavors proved vain, finding it very hard to get any thing,
and impossible to keep what he had gotten, that State being befriended and
backed by too great Princes. Whence it was, that by reason of the resistance
which each of these great Potentates made against the other, knowing that they
could not much exceed one another, and each of them having an eye upon the
affairs of Italy, they both of them did still much endeavor friendship and
consederacie with the Princes of Italy, and chiefly with the Commonwealth of
Venice. For, what neither of them could effect of themselves, which was to keep
the others Forces suppressed in Italy, they thought they might the easilier do
it, by joining with some other Italian Potentate; so the many Wars which
happened between them, and chiefly in Sav^y, and in the State of Milan, must at
last be ended by agreement without any advantage to either party, both their
Forces, being weakened, but neither of their hatreds or emulations slackned,
though Charles the Fifth, by the unexpected death of Francisco Sforza, did at
last reduce that State to his Dominion.

Hence it was also that Charles and Solomon, greatly fearing to encounter each
other, did very much shun the having to do together, and to hazard that glory
to the uncertain events of War, which they had ^^th so much labor arrived at.
And this was the cause why Charles though he was a bold and valiant Prince, when
his Brother Ferdinand was in great danger by reason of Solymans Forces,
resolved importunately to pass into Africa; for being resolute that he would
not march against Solymans Forces, nor contend with them, he would witness to
the world that it was neither labor nor danger, that kept him from turning to
the defense of Hungary, and Austria, which were then assaulted by the Turks;
but because he esteemed the business of Africa very necessary. And when a
greater necessity wrought it so that they were to take up Arms one against the
other, and that numerous Armies had taken the field, yet they kept still aloof
off, the fear, and apprehension which each had of the others power and fortune
being alike; so as at last so great an accumulation of Soldiers disbanded,
neither party having seen the face of an Enemy; whilst Charles would not give
way that his Army should go from before the walls of Vienna, to go find out the
Enemy, not would Solomon advance further to meet him, though he had at first
publicly given out that he went from Constantinople to fight with Charles the
Emperor before his own doors. So as you may clearly see, that it was the
counterpoise of these two great Princes of one and the same Age, which kept
their Forces confined within certain bounds, which for their valor and other
respects might have carried the Trophies of victory into the furthest remote
Countries.

Now on the other side let us examine the condition of Times and Potentates
with whom those famous Commanders of old had to wage War: Al^x^nder the Great,
found the Kingdom of Persia, wherein he successfully made his first
expeditions, for extent of Empire very rich and powerful, but wherein was an
ill disciplined Militia, and commanded by unexperienced Leaders, and men of no
valor; wherefore exceeding the Persians in worth and discipline, though he came
short of them in numbers, he may be said to have been better then they for
matter of War, and therefore willingly embraced all occasions of joining Pattel
with them. And for what concerns the Eastern Kings and Nations, which he
afterward brought under his power, who knows not how unfit they were for War,
of themselves weak, not joined in confederacy for common defense, nor
sustained by strong holds, nor by the strength of a well ordered Militia?
Insomuch as the greatest glory that can be attributed to Alexander, is for the
generosity of his mind, which moved him to venture upon so many enterprises, in
desert and almost unknown Countries, rather then for that he overcame great
difficulties in fight, and brought them to an end.

The same almost may be observed by the things done in the Eastern parts by
P^^pey the Great. It is true that Caesar met with greater difficulties in the
things he did in France and in Spain, for he waged War with people who knew how
to manage their Arms, and who were till then thought unvanquishable; wherefore
he spent more time there. Yet these Provinces were divided into many Kings and
Popularities, none of which were very strong of themselves, nor were they very
secure by the assistance of others to make them able to resist an Army of
veteran, and excellently well disciplined Soldiers, as was that which was
commanded by Caesar: So as it seems we may with reason conclude that if these
cried up Commanders had met with powerful and valiant Armies, able to be
compared with theirs, and that these had been guided and upheld by the
experience and worth of great Commanders, their fames would certainly have been
less, not would they have so easily have assubjected so many Countries, and
erected their Trophies of victories in so many Regions as they did.

But besides all these considerations, we may perhaps with reason weigh, the
arts and ways which these an^ient Warriers made use of (to boot with what
belonged to the Militia) to make their acqusitions and glory the greater: for
he who shall consider their actions, may therein discern so inflamed a desire
of praise and glory as it seems this was the only thing which they propounded
to themselves for reward of all their labor and danger, and for the end of all
their undertakings; for they have left many noble examples behind t^em, not
only of military valor, but of equity, clemency, temperance, and of other
glorious virtues which ^ssisted them very much in winning favor, and affection
with the people, and likewise the love of many of those very Princes who were
overcome by them.

Thus we read of Alexander, that he confirmed their Kingdom^ to many Indian
Kings whom he overcame, and did inc^ease them to some others; and being
contented with obedience from them, and rec^iving such things as were necessary
for his voyage, he seemed rather to aspire after the glory of new acquisitions,
then to reap any advantage by what he had already won: But Pompey, not like a
victorious Chie^tain in War, but rather like a Friend and Arbi^rator composed
the differences between those Princes of the East, restored the ancient Lords
to their Kingdoms, and gave new States to such others as did deserve them.
Insomuch as it was from his lib ral^ty that Phar^^ces was to acknowledge the
Kingdom of Bosphorus, Antiochus, that of Sile^tia, Tygranes, the Kingdom of
Armenia, Ariobarzanes, that of Cappadocia, Diotarus, the li^e of Galitia, and
did only reduce such Countries into Provinces, and made them im^edia ely
subject to the Senate and People of Rome, wherein he found no legitimate Lords
and Masters, as it fell out in Syri^, Judea and some other Regions. It was by
reas^on of these proc^edings, that many People and Pr^nces, did voluntarily
submit to the Empire of Alexander and of the Romans. Wherefore Darius when he
was overcome by Alexander, adm^^ing his great Continency and Humanit^e, prayed
the gods that if the fail of that Empire was destined, the glory and succession
of the Kingdom of ^ersia might fall upon Alexander. All ^istories are f^ll of
such examples of worth and virtue in things done by the Romans; But now adays
Princes and Commanders do but little mind the imitation of these men and wage
War, not out of a desire of glory, as did those magnanimous Artients; but only
out of revenge and cruelty. or else to turn all the fruit and benefit of
Victory upon themselves leaving nothing safe nor entire to the conquered.
Whence it ensues that they who fears these extremes, desperately resolve to do
their utmost, and hazard all, rather then to submit themselves to the power and
discretion of those on whom they (...) their ultimate ruin depends. ^y this
means, proceedings march a slower pace, and all acquisitions become more
difficult, so this immoderate desire of having all things for th^r own service,
working a contrary effect to their intentions, keeps the Confines of their
Dominions more narrowly bounded, and the^eby lessens that glory which they seem
to aspire so much at. If then our Princes and Chieftains will walk in the ways
of the Ancients, they will find that Justice, Clemency, and moderate Empire,
are stronger and more secure Engines to take strong Holds, then those which they
in these times make use of. And if they be not faulty in the tru^st worth, they
will find sufficient valor and discipline in their Soldiers, to bring to pass
wh^tsoever great Enterprises, and to exalt their name to such a height of
glory, and so illustrate themselves and their Age as they may in all things be
deservedly compared to the famousest and most cried up of the Ancients.

The Seventh DISCOURSE.
What the cause is why Italy has enjoyed so long Peace and Quiet in these
latter Times.
HE who shall call to mind what troubles Italy for a long time has suffered
under, which after the passage of Charles the eight, King of France, till the
Peace made at Bolognia, was for the space of thirty five years continually
infested with better Wars, and subject to all those greater evils which the
wickedness of man has found out to his own undoing, may justly think her very
happy in this present, and the last preceding Age, wherein after so long a
combustion she has enjoyed so happy and quiet a Peace: For though in this time
some little sparkles may have broken forth, yet have they not spread much, nor
lasted long; but being confined within some small circuits, the greater and
more noble parts of Italy have remained safe and untouched by this flame.
Wherefore those Princes who this mean while have had the government of the
several States of Italy, are certainly much to be praised, and the people of
Italy are chiefly to acknowledge so great a benefit from their wisdom and
vigilancie. Yet because there have diverse accidents happened, which have opened
the way to Princes wherein to walk directly on to this right end of Peace and
Concord, it may be worth the while, particularly to examine from what causes
this good has proceeded; for thereby it may likewise be known how the like may
be preserved.

It is a Proposition sufficiently known, and indubitably true, that Sublata
causa tollitur effectus; Take away the cause, and the effect which proceeds
from thence will cease. Wherefore by truly examining the causes from whence the
Wars and molestations of Italy did proceed, we may perceive how these ceasing,
she has remained in that peace and quiet, which may be said to be the true,
proper, and most natural condition of a State; all other workings in a good
Government, and even War it self being ordained for Peace: whereby as Ci^ies
and Kingdoms enjoy Civil felicity, so must that State be most perfect, wherein
the perfectest workings are exerc^sed to the most p^rfect end. Peace is of it
self introduced into a State by taking away the impediments which do disturb
it, just as health is introduced into our bodies by taking away those ill
humors which keep them from their perfect and natural condition. Now if we will
take into our consideration, whence as from the principal occasions, that
H^rmony (if I may so call it) which the Concord of the Italian Princes had so
long produced, and preserved with such liking and consolation of all men, was
spoiled and corrupted, we shall find that two affect^ons which do usually
accomp^ny Empire, and which at this time grew very powerful in some Princes,
were those roots from which so many mischiefs did afterward put forth, to wit,
Fear and Ambition; Fear of losing ones own State, Ambition of possessing what
belongs to another. The fear of the King of Aragons just indignation made
Lodovic Storza think upon Novelties, made him have rec^urse for help to France,
and made him believe that was best for him, which proved his ruin: But it was
ambit^on of add^ng new Territories to that Crown, and glory to himself, which
made Charles the Eight, King of France, but young both in years and experience,
think upon nothing but how to effect his desires, by accept^ng of Sforzas
proff^r of passing into Italy, which proved the Sepulcher of so many Soldiers,
and of so many g^lant Commanders of that warlike Nation, by the so many Wars
which arose from that Springhead, and which brought no other advantage to the
Authors.

But let us make a little further enquiry. The so famous, and as it may justly
be termed, so pernicious War to all Italy, made by the League of so many
Christian Princes, who had all conspired the ruin of the Commonwealth of
Venice, whence did it arise but from these two wicked seeds, Fear and Ambition?
Many Princes apprehended the greatness of the Republic, which was already much
increased by the prosperous success in War wherein she was associated by the
French, whereby she was become very formidable, especially to the Princes of
Italy; wherefore they all desired her abasement for their own security. Nor was
the Emperor Maximilian totally free from this fear, who had learnt by late
experience how powerful the Forces of the Commonwealth were grown, which had
bereft him of some Towns belonging to him. But Lodovick King of France (the
thir^t after Empire being always u^quenchable) growing still more desirous to
possess the whole State of Milan, whereof he had already gotten the greatest
part, and repenting himself that the Cities of Cremona and Giaradada were
fallen to the Ventians, was egged on by this spur of Ambition to join in
conspiracy with the other Princes against the Commonwealth, which had so
lately and so many several ways deserved so very well at his hands. After these
ensued many long Wars, though not equally grievous, which had many various and
uncertain events, and which were fomented and maintained by these seeds of all
discord, fear and ambition. When the greatness and power of the Emperor Charles
the Fifth was increased and confirmed in Italy, the Commonwealth apprehended
that her State in Terra firma would not by reason thereof be very safe: she
therefore willingly took up Arms, accompa^ied by the French, to secure herself
from the danger she conceived she lay under by reason of the continual
neighborhood of a greater and more powerful neighbor, by having a particular
Prince of that State, who might be Duke of Milan. Francis King of France
desired likewise to see the Emperor bereft of that State, but out of other
respects; to wit, because his ambition was such as would never suffer him to
give way to the fortune of Charles the Emperor, and to see Charles so much
superior to him, especially in Italy, where his Predecessors the Kings of
France, and he himself with no less fervencie, though with worse success, had
labored so long, with such expense, and with the loss of so many men, only to
retain and keep some Territories.

This was the tree, from which the boughs or sprouts could not be so fast cut
off, but that one War soon succeeded another; wherewith Italy was long
perplexed, till in the year 1529. the Princes being tired, and the People
ruined, agreement was made in that famous Meeting at Bolognia, in which so
sound foundations of the peace and quiet of Italy were laid, as they may almost
be said to have continued till now, with fair hopes of longer continuance. For
though f^r thus many years there have been some commotiens in Italy, made both
by her own Inhabitants, and by Foreiners, yet in respect of the calamities she
underwent in those former Ages, they may rather be termed uprores then wars.
This condition of affairs and of affection^ being changed, and the materials
being removed by which the fire of war was fed, Italy remained in great
tranquillity. Soon after this introduction of Peace, the Stat^ of Milan, by the
imma^ure death of Francisco Sf^rza, who left no issue behind ^im, fell into the
power of Charles the Emperor, and afterward into his son Philip's; in which
Princes no such respect concurred as lately have been mentioned, whereby the
peace of Italy might be troubled, as it had been before: For these Princes, by
reason of their other great possessions, being peacefully Masters of so fair
and noble a part of Italy, as is the Kingdom of Naples and Dukedom of Milan,
they had no reason to trouble the peaceful condition of affairs, either out of
any apprehension of their own businesses, or out of a desire to enjoy what
appertained to others. They were treed from fear not only by the friendship
solemnly established, and ratified by the other Portent^tes of Italy, but much
more by their own power and greatness, and the knowledge that to intreach upon
one, might easily move all the rest, and afford occasion of bringing ^orein
Forces into Italy, whereby to disturb their own settled possession of so large
and nobe a share ^hereof, kept them from dreaming upon the possessing of other
men's estates. So likewise the Commonwealth of Venice was at this time in such a
condition, as being only to covet peace, she might hope to enjoy it safely,
because she was neither so great nor powerful, as to hope after new
acquisitions, being counterpoised by greater Forces in Italy, who upon the
least discovery in her of taking up Arms, would oppose her, and not suffer her
to increase, to their prejudice; neither was she yet so weak, as she might
dread being easi^y oppressed by others, so as to secure herself from such a
danger, she might be constrained to think upon novelties, or to procure new
friends The C^u^ch Territories, being secured no less by the reverence due to
religion, then by force of Arms, remained safe and quiet; nor had the Popes any
reason either to fear their own affairs, not yet to desire a greater temporal
^state; for having recovered many Cities which the Church had formerly lost,
discords being ceased, and the faction wherew^th she had been troubled being
almost e^^inguished, and the authority of the Barons of Rome being moderated,
that holy See was in a condition of as great dignity and safety, as she had
been at any time before; and Duke Cos^o de Medici, Duke of Florence being
allied to the favor and friendship of a potent Prince, wherein he was very
fortunate, was safe enough; and being likewise a new Prince in ^uscany, he was
to think, as he wisely did, rather how to setle himself well in his noble
Dominon, then to dream of becoming the Author of new Wars, and of increasing
his State.

Hence it was that the Forces of these greater Potenrates being balanced and
theit thoughts tempered, all occasions of making any great change or alteration
of States in her was taken away, such as had happened in the former Ages, through
the commotions of the very Princes of Italy. As for such dangers as might
happen from abroad, Italy was at this time secured by various accidents. If w^
shall first consider the Empire, from whence her greatest troubles had often
t^mies come, those Emperors knew very well, by what had succeeded to Charles in
the Imperial dignity, that they had not Forces sufficient wherewith to betake
themselves to foreign enterprises out of any particular interest or ambition,
without the help of Germany, which was but little inclined to increase their
power and authority. But (though the moderate minds of those Princes, which was
alwa^es inclined to Justice and Equity must be greatly praised) the eminent
danger their States lay in by reason of the Turks Forces, was above all other
things able to keep them from thinking of molesting other men's States; which
Turks, being so near and so powerful neighbors, have kept them busied and
molested, and in a condition of thinking rather how to secure their own
affairs, then to increase their fortune by new acquisi^ons, not only when they
were forced to take up Arms for the defense of Hungary and Austria, but even in
time of peace, and greatest security. The French I must confess have been more
intent to trouble the peace of Italy, on which they had a long time set their
minds, out of a desire to get some footing there. But though the Forces of that
flourishing and powerful Kingdom were very formidable before these Civil
Discords, yet experience has showed that their attempts, when they have had
none to receive and to uphold them in Italy, have caused more dread then
damage; for their Armies being to be furnished with all necessaries from a far
off, they have been overcome by weaker ^orces, and ofttimes by their own wants.
Therefore because in these later times, when they past over the Mountains, they
were not con^ederate, as formerly they had been, with any great Potentate in
Italy, therefore have they been able to ^arry there but a while, nor have they
made the noise of their Trumpets be heard a far off, though they havenever let
(...) any occasion out of a desire of Novelty and glory; so as all those who
have at any time been ill satisfied by the Imperi^lists, and then by the
Spainards, have been easily received into friendship with them. This was the
defense of Sie^na embraced, a City oppressed by the severe Government of Caesar's
Officers.

Thus were the Ferne^s taken into protection, to keep them in their possession
of Parma and Piacenza, out of which the Emperor would have driven them: Thus
was the Prince of Salerno listened unto, who by his favor, and the insurrection
of the people furthered the hopes of great acquisitions in the Kingdom of
Naples. Thus Paul the Fourth met with good correspondencie in Henry King of
France, as soon as he discovered himself to be ill affected toward Caesar, and
that he would take up Arms against him; for he hoped to attain those things by
the friendship and conjunction of a powerful Prince, and one, who according to
his desire, was apt to commotions, wherein he had had but ill success at the
same time in Italy, by reason of the weak assistance of the Senesi; but all
this while, and upon all these ocasions, it may be truly affirmed that these
were rather Tumults then Wars; which (as has been said) was occasioned
chiefly, for that such a disposition of mind and of affairs, was found in the
Princes of Italy, as they did not much, ^or all at a time interess themselves
in these Wars. And though some of the Popes did busy themselves therein, yet
since these Wars were not treated of as any thing belonging to the Church, or
immediately appertaining to the Apostolic See, they were neither favored by
the other Princes of Italy, nor yet embraced by the succeeding Popes, with the
same thoughts, because their ends, nor interests were not the same; nay they
did rather endeavor to appease, then to foment them. And those who were the
raisers and furtherers of these novelties, and of the coming of foreign Forces,
being weak of themselves, and not being seconded by any, they could not long
make good the War, not having sufficient Forces of themselves, nor being able
to make such use of the Transa^^^ne Forces, but that they were exceeded by
those who opposed them, and who were of greater force and friendship in Italy;
as was particularly seen in the Wars of Sienna, which lasted longest, and were
the forest that happened in these latter times. For the ^rench having no other
receptacle in Italy then what was given them by the Senest, who had called them
in, and being stoutly opposed by Charles the Emperor, who was stronger by reason
of the many opportune aids which he received from the Duke of Florence, they
could not long continue, not fi^ their abode in Italy. In which occurrences the
State of Venice may justly challenge no small share of commendation. For that
notwithstanding the so many offers, and pressures made unto her, to take up
Arms, and to make use of such occasions as presented themselves, to augment her
fortune, she notwithstanding, with less aspiring thoughts, but certainly with
very wise and safe advice, continuing in her newtrality did rather endeavor by
her many good offices to withdraw fuel from the fire which had already burst
forth in Italy, then to make it flame the higher by intere^^ing herself
therein, and by joining with either party. Whereby she did not undoubtedly
advantage herself only, but whole Italy, where she being one of the chief
Potentates; by keeping quiet and newrer, not inclining to either party was the
reason why the Imperial and French Forces, counterpoising each other, could not
effect any of their designs, which might have proved prejudicial to the liberty
and peace of Italy.

Hence then it ensues, that the best advice for the preservation of this peace
and quiet of Italy, is to keep affairs so equally balanced, as that the
Princes who have Dominions there, may neither have reason of fear, nor of
ambition, which (as has been said) have in former times been cause of her
perturbances. In which happy condition she will still continue, if the Princes
of Italy shall know so to moderate their desires, and keep themselves so
closely annexed together by an union of mind, and by good intelligence, that
the one may not fear the other for any desire of novelty which may be found in
them, nor discover themselves to be so weak by their divisions as out of the
easiness of the prey, ambition may move others to aspire after their States.

The E^ghth DISCOURSE.
Whether Citadel^ and Strong Holds, much used by our modern Princes, be
commodious, and of true safety to a State, or no?
FOrts and strong Holds are of late grown into so great esteem, as Princes seem
now adays to mind nothing more then these for the security of their States.
Yet this business may admit of such various considerations, as it is not
peradventure easy to be discerned, whether a Prince that is thus advised be in
the right way to effect that which he propounds unto himself, which is, the
securing of his affairs. To know then what ought truly to be thought in this
case, we must first consider what this art of Fortification is of it self, on
which so much study, and expense is bestowed, and whether it be grounded upon
such undeniable principles and reasons, as by means thereof the benefit at
which it aims, of preserving Cities and States in safety, may be expected from
it. Certainly this first consideration admits of no ^ small doubt or
difficulty; for we are taught by modern exper^ence, that all the ways whereby
a strong Hold may be assaulted and taken, are not yet so well known, as being
reduced under general terms, as that it may be asserted, that thereby an art is
found out which contains all sorts of possible offense, and which is governed
by a cert^in and true rule to effect the intent thereof, and to come to the
perfection thereof. Nay, rather we find to the contrary, that the professors of
this Art do not agree well in their principles; and that time makes it subject
to such alterations, by reason of the new ways which the wit of man finds out
as well for offense as defense, as it seems it must be confessed, that this is
not in reality a true art, or at least, that it is so imperfectly known and
used, as that strong holds are but a weak foundation for the safety of a State,
though they be never so many, and be in esteem by military men. For, say
nothing else does it, the experience of more then one Age does evidently prove,
that is a short time they become vain and useless; since a Fort which was
formerly greatly esteemed, and held to be almost impregnable, has now by the
invention of new engines, and wa^es of opugn^ng it, lost that reputation, and is
thought little less then ridiculous: and it may be believed, that the same may
befall any strong holds which are in these days built, by reason of the new
ways of offending which many do daily with much study and industry labor to
find out.

Whence it is that Princes find they have often spent much time, workmanship
and moneys, in a business, which in time of need can but little avail them; and
^ they will reap any benefit thereby, they must continually be at new expense
both of moneys and men, keeping them continually busied in new works and
Fabrics, adding always, or altering many things about their Forts, to fit
them to the use of the present times and Militia. But give it for granted, that
such strong Holds may be brought to rather an imaginable, then a possible
perfection and security, certainly they are no way serviceable of themselves,
but are like dead and useless things, which have need to be as it were
inanimated and be made useful by good Garrisons, who may keep and defend them.

And if otherwise, they serve for the conveniencie and service of the Enemy
which makes it yet more questionable, whether strong Holds be a greater safety
or weakening to a State; and where there are many and very great ones, the
doubt is made the greater; since so many Soldiers must be employed in their
defense, as if the Prince be not very powerful, he shall hardly find Forces
sufficient to keep several Armies (as they may be termed) on foot, some within
the Forts, and some in the Campagnia. Nor can it be made good, that strong
Holds are of themselves sufficient to secure the whole State; for though they
may entertain the Enemy for a while, and stop the first brunt of an impetuous
assault, yet at last, unless they be backed with Forces from without, and
timely succored and relieved, being overcome either by power, length of time,
or necessity, they must yield and fall into the power of the Enemy: which
cannot be denied, no not by the very Professors and Favorers of Fortification.
And yet it cannot be denied, but if a Prince have sufficient Forces to keep the
Field in his own Country, he may thereby keep himself from being injured; for
men do not easily put things to hazard, where they think to meet with stout
opposition; and the only opinion and reputation of such Forces, is able to keep
off the greatest dangers: For the Enemy who did design to assault such a State,
becomes jealous and doubtful, nor is he bold enough to enter far into such a
State as is guarded by a good Army, and chiefly in situations (such as are
almost in all Countries) as are naturally fortified by Hills, Valleys, or
Rivers; where it is hard to enter, and harder to retreat. And if any well
experienced Captain command over such Forces, he will be likely enough to
defeat the Enemy, without endangering himself, by keeping him from victuals,
and so employed and busied in sun^ry ways, as he shall neither be able to keep
long in the Country, nor much less employ himself in the taking or sacking of
any Cities; since he knows he is hourly subject to surprisals, and to be
ru^n'd; and strong Holds securing nothing but those quarters where they are
situated, they do not secure the State, if they be but a few; and if many, they
require all the Forces for their own defense, and leave the Enemy master of the
Field, to the Prince his prejudice, and the Peoples despair. So also, if they
be but little ones, and incapable of such Works, and so many men as are
requisite to make them hold out long, they and the Soldiers which defend them
are lost; and if they be great, and contain large plots of ground, as is most
in fashion in these days, they may be more perfect in themselves, but they need
so many men to defend them, as those Forces which ought to be employed for the
safeguard of the whole Country, or a great part thereof, are bounded within a
little compass, in defense of some City or Ci^adel. And yet these very
Soldiers, when drawn out into the Field, may do much better service; for being
fashioned into the body of an Army, they become as it were a moveable Fort,
which secures at once many Cities, and a great Tract of Country: nay, by these
the Enemy is much ^^damaged, and the troubles and danger of War are kept far
from a man's own home. For (as has been said) diversions, and preventions may
be made by these Forces, they may be carried into another man's State, and set
another man's horse on fire, before it take head in ones own house; but he who
places his safety in strong Holds, puts himself into a condition of being at
his Enemies disposal, in whose will it lies to choose what shall make most for
his advantage, with great prejudice to the opposing party: For he may either
pass by the For^s, over-ru^ the Country, enrich his Soldiers by booty,
impoverish the Subjects of that Country which is assaulted, and cannot be
releived, by reason that the Forces thereof are dispersed and imploid in the
defense of the strong Holds; or if he will make any certain archievement, he
may sit down before any Fort, and without indangering his own men, whilst he
shall live upon the Enemies Territories, he may in time, take it by siege, and
effect his own desires (for as has been said) no strong Hold can promise it
self long safety where no succor is ready at hand.

But let us come a little closer to the business, and let us suppose that these
strong Holds may be brought to such a condition as they may be assuredly able
to resist any open force which shall come against them, and not be deceived in
that their belief, as often times they are; How can they secure themselves from
treachery, and from such dangers as they may be subject unto by the negligence
of Soldiers, or falsehood of the Commanders that have the custody thereof? in
which case the Princes danger is so much the greater, and more irreparable, for
that his Enemy is in the Dominions, in a well munited seat, from whence he
cannot hope to drive him, without much labor and difficulty. But in greater
Cities wherein are a multitude of people, and where these cautions and
suspicions are not to be found, others no whit inferior to these do arise; for
such quantities of victuals is requisite to feed the many men that are therein
enclosed, as no Prince is able to provide for so, as may serve them for a long
time; and if this fail, to what end serves Walls, Weapons, or Soldiers? To this
may be added that the safety of such strong Holds, does in a great part depend
upon the pleasure of the people, who being of themselves naturally fickle, do
often favor foreign Princes out of very slight reasons, and sometimes out of a
mere desire of noveltie; and plot by sedition, and by open force against the
present State, and deliver themselves, and the City into another man's power:
And though they may afterward repent themselves of their folly, they know not
how to mend it, when a powerful Army is within the City Walls; nor can this be
done by him who defends the State, because he cannot keep so many Forces
together as are able to defend several places at ^nce, and because loving his
Subjects, as a legitimate Prince ought to do, he is loath to destroy a City of
his own though whole Armies be therein.

But if the State be open and not pestred with Fortifications, though it may
the more easily be lost by sudden assaults, or by ill affected Subjects, it
will be the more easily regained, and as soon as the Prince who is deprived
thereof, shall have means to rallie his Forces which by misfortune may have
been beaten, he soon makes head again, and recovers what he had lost, the Enemy
not having any safe hold wherein to abide. And of this there are many apparent
examples. If the Commonwealth of Venice, in the times of her greatest
calamity, had had her State in Terra firma so well provided of strong Holds,
as now it is, she might not peradventure have run so great a misfortune, she
had not so soon lost so many and so noble Cities as she did; but it may be
alleged on the contrary, that if in that evil Crisis of affairs wherein she
was brought to such adversity, she had had so many important Forts as now she
has, and that they had fallen into the power of the Enemy, she would not
certainly have so soon recovered her losses, and restored herself into her
pristine power and greatness as she did. We likewise see the State of Milan,
which fell so often into the power of the French, it staid not long under their
Dominion, for not finding any strong and Royal Forts, wherein they could make
any safe abode, nor having time to erect any by reason of their continual Wars,
or for want of moneys, the defenders of that State did often times prevail; and
every accident, either of the change of the peoples minds, or of their Enemies
increase of Forces, were sufficient to drive them out: Which would not have
happened if they had but once been Masters of any strong Holds, from whence
they could not have been expelled, without a long and hard siege. Guide Ubald^
D. of Urbin, a Prince but of small Territories, but very wise, and well
experienced in War, moved by these respects, after he had recovered his State
which was formerly taken from him by Duke Valentine, he resolved to slight all
the strong Holds that were there, knowing that they could not at first preserve
his State unto him, and when he should lose it, they would make the
difficulty of regaining it the greater.

When Charles the Eighth, King of France, going to win the Kingdom of Naples
past through Tuscany, the Forts which the Florentines had built for their own
security, were the very things whereby they were most indamaged, and these
falling into the power of the French, whose Forces they thought they were not
able to withstand, they put the Florentines to vast expense, and made them
undergo great slavery, out of a desire of recovering them. Whereas if that
State had la^n open, the King, who was bound upon other enterprises, passing
forward, would no ways have troubled the affairs of that Commonwealth. The
like, and almost out of the like respect, did afterward befall Duke Cosimo,
when the Emperor Charles the Fifth would keep some Castles belonging to that
State in his own power, which should otherwise have been left free to Cosimo;
and which was the occasion of that saying, Chele fortezza sonoi ceppi della
Toscana, That strong Holds are the fetters of Tuscany.

These are the greatest mischiefs which strong Holds use to bring with them;
but there are others not altogether so grievous, but more certain and
irreparable. For who can deny but that the excessive charge which Princes are
at, not only in building Fortresses, but more in muniting, and guarding them
does sufficiently exhaust the public Exchequer, and necessitate the disbursing
of such moneys in times of peace, as ought to be kept for the more urgent
occasions of War. And certainly he who could see what vast sums the
Commonwealth of Venice has spent for some late years past in making and
muniting so many Forts both by Sea and Land, would be very much astonished, and
would confess that so great a mass of treasure would ^be^ sufficient to provide
for any War how great soever, and to withstand for a good while any potent
Enemy. It may peradventure likewise be said, and not untruly, that whilst a
Prince reposes much confidence in being able to maintain his State by means of
these strong Holds, and by the assistance of a few Soldiers, he is not so
careful as he ought to be of other things which belong to the Mili^ia, which
are notwithstanding real and secure foundations of a State. The Lacedaemonians
would not therefore suffer their Cities to be begirt with a wall because they
believed that by the thoughts of such security, their Citizens would become
more careless and negligent in managing their Arms, by sole means whereof they
thought that the Forces of an Enemy might and ought to be kept afar off. Which
that wise man would likewise infer who said, That the walls, which ought to
secure a City should be made of iron not of stone. And a Spartan being demanded
by an Athenian, what he thought of the walls of Athens? answered, That he
thought they were very handsome for a City which was to be inhabited by women;
inferring, that it is not necessary, nor honorable, for able, valiant men, to
secure themselves from their Enemies by such means. It is likewise usually
seen, that a Prince, who thinks he shall be able to curb his Subjects, to
gov^rn them and rule them as he pleases by means of Bulwarks and Castles, and
that therefore he needs not the love of his Subjects, is much less mindful of
those things which become a good Prince, and which purchase affect^on. Yet we
are taught by many evident examples that the peoples love or hatred is that
which does most preserve unto him, or bereave him of his State, and makes them
more ready or backward to render him obedient; as is of late seen in Flanders;
which so many Fortresses* and Armies has not in so long a time been able to
reduce to the devotion of its ligit^mate Prince. And it may generally be
observed, that such Governments as have lasted longest, have been preserved,
not by the advantage of strong Holds, whereof some have not had any, but by
virtue of a good Militia, and of the Subjects love.

The Romans were accustomed, when they had won any new Country, to send new
Inhabitants thither, who being placed either in the ancient Cities, or in
others built by themselves, they called Roman Colonies; and by these men's
valor, as People devoted and obliged to the Senate and People of Rome, out of
remembrance of their desert, and in gratitude for the good which they had
received, they easily kept the new Subjects in loyalty to the Commowealth, and
the Countries which they had won by their Arms, in obedience. The which, being
moved thereunto by the same respects, the Venetians did likewise in Candia,
sending many of their own Gentlemen thither to make Colonies, and to defend and
maintain that Island. But the Turks, in a very violent manner, but answerable
to the custom of their Government, do almost totally destroy the ancient
Inhabitants of their new-gotten Countries, chiefly the richest and the most
noble, from whom they take their l^nds and possessions, and give the revenues
thereof to be made use of by the Sold^ery, making Timari thereof (as they term
it) which are Pays or Revenues assigned over to the Soldiers, upon condition
that they are to maintain a certain number of Horse, by which means they keep a
great number of Warriors continually on foot, who se^ving for Garrisons for the
safety of the new acquired Country, are notwithstanding always ready to serve
in any other place, and upon all occasions as they shall be commanded, to the
greater benefit and safety of the State, then Forts and strong Holds can do to
those other Nations which make most use of them. But other Princes, who have
had greater abundance of Territories, if you will respect their Inhabitants,
did use to leave great store of Land upon their Confines desert and unmanured,
as at these times the Persians did upon their Confines toward the Turks, to
render it more difficult for a numerous Army to pass through them to their
prejudice, or in case they do, to make any long abode there: which has often
been of great use to them, as has been seen, when very mighty Armies have been
led on by the Ottoman Emperors against the Persians, they have most commonly
been wasted and destroyed by their own sufferings and wants.

From these things it appears it may be inferred, that there are other Arts and
ways which may much better do that for which Fortifications were first found
out, and for which they are now a-daies so much used, especially amongst
Christian Princes. And yet if we will face about, some other, and those no
contemptible arguments will be found, which will plead for the very great
advantage which Princes and States receive from Fortifications. It is most
assuredly certain, that to secure a man's self by all means possible from
offense, is a precept not only taught by Reason, but dictated by Nature, which,
as it were by some occult and miraculous counsel, has pleased to divide those
Nations by a long series of high towering Mountains, and to secure them from
the injuries which the diversity of Climate has produced in their several
affections and customs, and consequently a certa^n natural enmity; and has
likewise provided in all parts more eminent seats amongst Mountains, and more
enclosed ones amidst Valleys, wherein the Inhabitants may preserve themselves
safe from the force and violence, which the stronger use to exercise upon the
weaker. So as Fortification may be said to be an Art which does imitate and
help Nature, because her operations are like those of the others, and do
sometimes reduce the workmanship of Nature to more perfection and use. And
though this be not grounded upon so certain principles as those of the
Sciences, yet does she govern herself by a kind of Reason in such things
wherein she is versed.

And thus much may serve to prove that she deserves the name of Art; neither
ought she to be ever a whit undervalued, because new things and new rules are
daily found out by the industry of those that study her, since it is proper to
natural and eternal things to keep themselves always in such a condition, as
that they suffer not any alteration. But say what thing it is, which of all
humane operations, wherein such certainty and constancy is to be found? No man
will notwithstanding say, that men are to live idly, or totally to betake
themselves to Contemplation, and despise so many Arts, which are the ornaments
of Civil life, because we cannot proceed therein by way of demonstration to one
only and certain truth. Nor can it be said that this Arts of Fortification is
of late invention, for it is very ancient, and has been known almost in all
Ages, and by all Nations; but sometimes in lesser, sometimes in greater
perfection, according to a certain variety and vicissitude which Time causes
as well in Arts, as in all other things. The Ancients had their Forts, and
Engines of War to take them, which by a general name they called Tormenta:
Amongst other Engines which served to batter down Forts, the Rams were much
known and used; and we find mention made of many other sorts of Instruments
belonging to the offense and defense of Cities; and of these some so
miraculous, as their force may be said to cause no less wonder then do our Guns
now-a-daies. To this purpose we read, that when Scipio would vanquish a certain
City in Spain, the Defenders thereof threw certain Irons over the walls, so
artificially ordered, as they therewith drew up such of the Enemies Soldiers as
came near the walls, to the top thereof. And it is related of that famous
Archimedes, that he invented an Engine which was used in defense of his Country
Syracusa, by which an armed Gally might be raised by force out of the water,
and drawn up on the Town-walls. How can it be then said, that such Art of
Fabricking was unknown to the Ancients, if they used such study and industry in
defending and in oppugning Forts? Nay, many of their most cried up Commanders
have been praised particularly for this; and the Romans, who were very
excellent at all things belonging to the Militia, were very good at this also,
and did thereby preserve their State, which they had almost lost by fighting:
For Hannibal in his prosperous course of victory, was forced to keep so long,
and spend so much time before some small, but strong and well-walled Castles,
and Colonies of the Romans, as the safety of the City of Rome was in a great
part attributed thereunto.

But to speak no more of these ancient proceedings, do we not see that many
Forts and Castles have been built in not many Ages ago in many places, and
chiefly in Italy? Which though the use of Cannon renders now of no use, yet
compare such Fortresses with the manner of warfaring in those days, and they
may be held almost equal to ours, or at least they show that men did study as
much then to secure themselves from being injured by the Enemy, and the better
to maintain their States and Territories by that art, as they do now. The so
many Sieges and beleaguering of Cities, whereof mention is made in all Ages, do
clearly prove that the use of Fortification is of very ancient use, and has
been continued in all Ages, though it be now reduced to much greater
perfection. Now if we shall consider what advantage is made by Fortifica^ions,
we shall find them to be many, and of great importance: For it is sufficiently
manifest, that a Country wherein are no strong Holds, is always in apparent
danger, and left almost at the discretion of the Enemy; who whilst they may
safely at unawares enter thereinto, not meeting with any obstacle, have it
always in their power, if not to prejudice the main affairs of that State, at
least to vex the people by fire and rapine, of whose safety and preservation
the Prince ought alwais to be careful.

We may find sad example of this by the late and well known passages of the
Country of Friuli in the late Wars which the State of Venice had in Terra
firma; being totally destitute of strong Holds, it became a prey to whosoever
would assault it; insomuch as it was not only ruined and destroyed by regular
Armies, but by such as passed tumultuously over the mountains; the Inhabitants
thereof being only so long secure, as the Venetian Army was permitted to remain
amongst those Confines; but as soon as being summoned from thence, upon other
occasions, it behoved to be gone from thence, the Enemies returned again to
fresh and secure depredations; which will likewise befall any Region which is
not defended, and maintained by Fortresses. And where the members of a State
are far asunder, if it must be defended only by the Soldiers sword, many
Armies will scarcely be able to secure it; whereas by means of strong Holds,
the same people who are able to defend them, will likewise serve in a great
part to preserve the Country; as well because many of the Inhabitants may there
find safe refuge, as likewise for that is no good advice nor usually embraced
by good Commanders to advance forward, and to leave the Forts of the Enemy
placed in fitting parts upon the Frontiers behind them, the State is preserved
from greater dangers. As on the contrary, the State wherein there are no strong
Holds, though it be provided of a good and valiant Militia, yet must it depend
upon the various chance of War, and hazard all upon the uncertain event of
Battle; and if any thing of misfortune befall, the whole Country is left to the
discretion of the Enemy, and the Armies not having any safe place whereunto to
retreat are totally defeated by one rout; as it happened in the last Age in the
Sultan of Cairo's most famost Empire, which Sultan being overcome in several
Battles by Selymus Ottoman, and wanting time to rally his Army, and strong
Holds whereunto to have refuge, did in a short time lose his whole Kingdom and
the Empire of the Mammalucchi was overthrown; which was before very famous for
military discipline, and esteemed very secure, by reposing its safety in the
valor of strong and able men.

To this may be added, That strong Holds do not only secure States from these
utmost hazards of adverse Fortune, but make very much for the keeping it away,
and oftentimes they reap the intention of true security, without any hazard;
for when he who intends to assault a State, shall consider that his attempts
are likely to prove tedious and difficult, and that it is doubtful whether he
shall be therein victorious or on, he does not so easily fall upon the
business; but when the War is once begun Fortresses do assuredly sufficiently
keep from coming to join Battle; for the assailant will not easily hazard
himself upon the danger of a pitched Field; because he sees he shall be
debarred the chief fruits of Victory (which is the getting of some City or
place of importance) by strong Holds: And so also he who is assaulted, the more
he sees his affairs in a good posture by the means of strong Holds, the more he
endeavors to prolong the time, to the end that he may defeat him by his own
incommodities, without much use of weapons: Whence ^. is that in these times,
wherein the perfection of fortifying is much increased, field Battles are
seldom fought; for to fight makes not for the advantage of either of the
parties out of the above said considerations; Since the wit and industry of the
Commanders seems to prevail over Fortifications and do in a great part take
that uncertainty from War which uses to be found therein. In the condition of
the present affairs and times, it is also seen that as much time is spent in
the taking of one only Fort, as in former Ages, and when another manner of
Militia was in use, was spent in taking in whole Provinces. Which peradventure
is likewise the cause why the Princes of these later Ages, though some of them
have been very powerful and valiant, have not made any great progress in all
the Wars which they have made: Wherefore it seems it may be affirmed that
Fortification is a very noble and excellent Art, because it helps to compass
the ultimate and true end which ought to be the aim of War in a well regulated
State, to wit, peace and security.

What is then to be resolved upon in this diversity of allegations? It is a
true and general rule, that all things cannot suit with all things, nor ought
we in the actions belonging to civil life to seek for that which is simply, and
of it self good, for it would be in vain to do so; diverse things prove useful
to diverse ends, and to diverse persons, and they ought to be accommodated to the
condition of times, quality of customs, and to other particular accidents.
Therefore the same manner of proceeding in the Government, and preservation of
their States becomes not several Princes, but several ways. Such Princes as
have large Dominions, and powerful Forces, may securely repose (...) safety in
their Militia, and Soldiery, they have no great need of Castles or strong
Holds; and if they will have any, it may suffice them to have them placed upon
their utmost Confines, to secure their Country from sudden incursions, and for
the opportunity and security of such Garrisons as such Princes use to keep in
their provinces, which are furthest remote, and at a great distance from their
Imperial Seat; as the Roman Emperors did in former times, and as the Ottoman
Lords do now, who trusting in their own power, do endeavor much more the taking
of Forts which do appertain to other men, then the making of new ones
themselves, which they stand not so much in need of, for that their greatness
keeps them free from being injured by others. But lesser Princes ought to
govern themselves by another rule, and stand more in need of strong Holds; for
not having any large Territories, nor much money to keep a great many Soldiers
continually in pay, what they cannot do by force or reputation, they do by the
advantage of Fortifications; for they keep what belongs unto them so well
guarded by a few Soldiers, as sometimes the Forces of any whatsoever powerful
Prince are not able to pluck them out of their nest, nor yet to bereave them of
any part of their State: Whereof we have had many examples in these later
times. and amongst the rest, the defense of Malta is very remarkable, which
being assaulted by the Forces of so great a Prince as was Solomon, the few
Knights of Malta were so able to defend it, as the Turks were forced not
without some shame, and much to their prejudice, to quit it, after having spent
much time, and lost many men before that Fort.

And the Turks having learned by the experience of others, the good of strong
Holds being now to have a better esteem of them, then formerly they have had,
especially in places furthest off from the Seat of the Empire, where all things
necessaie cannot be provided for, but in a long time, and with much
inconveniencie. They have to this purpose built many Forts in the parts which
they have lately gotten in Persia; and have therein done very wisely; for
whereas the former Ottoman Emperors, reaped no good by their enterprises upon
Persia, but as soon as their Armies were withdrawn, the Country which they had
overrun, but not gotten, returned to the obedience of its former Lords, now,
by degrees from time to time, they have by their Forts so confirmed themselves
in the possession of such places as they have once taken, as the Persians,
being a people little verst in the expugning of strong Holds, have but small
hopes of ever driving them out from such spacious Territories, first gotten by
force of Arms, and afterward by such means maintained by them, and by a safe
possession secured unto them. So as the use of Fortresses are sometime
according as place and occasion shall serve of no small service, not only to
pe^tie Princes, but even to the greatest. But as for the number of these strong
Holds, for the time, form, and other accident, which ought to be observed in
the building of them, no such certain rule can be given as can serve all men at
all times. Only this may be said, that a wise Prince ought to consider herein,
not only what he designs to do, but what his Estate, and what his Forces are;
otherwise that which was intended for a cure and sustenance, may prove poison
and ruin to the State. As when a Prince will make such, and so many Forresses,
as that by reason of too great and inconsiderate expense in time of Peace, in
maintaining them, he must of himself consume; then that will prove true which
has formerly been considered, that a Prince of no great fortune, not being
able to garrisonise or furnish so many Fortresses with things necessary, not to
draw forth the body of a welladjusted Army into the field, in greatest danger
of War, will find he has not secured, but increased his own dangers, and has
put the total of his affairs in great disorder and confusion.

Fortresses then, as all other things in a well ordered Government, ought to be
disposed of with good judgment, and a well regulated temper; (...) as their
number and greatness may be proportionable to the condition of the State, and
of the Prince his Forces: They must not be placed idly in all places, but only
upon the Frontiers, and in places fit for that purpose; and so as the natural
situation of the place may assist Art as much as may be, and be also thereby
assisted; for such Fortresses may be maintained in greater security, and with
fewer Soldiers. But above all things, all possible care must be had, that in
time of greatest need they may be succor'd; for no Fort can hold out long
against a great force, unless it be supplied by new Garrisons, Munitions, and
with all other necessaries. It is also very advantageous for Fortresses, that
there be good store of good Earth or Mould within them, whereby they may
several ways accommodate themselves for defense, according as the approaches to
take them are made; and also to have ready opportunity to use the benefit of
many retrears, and to gain time, which is the proper and grearest conveniencie
for Fortresses. So as if fitting provisions and respects be had, Fortresses so
built will prove advantageous for a Prince or State, not only in the opinion of
Soldiers, but even of Statesmen. But when they are made without judgment or
art, it is not the ^ault of the Work, but of him who knows not how to use it,
if such good effects do not ensue thereupon as are desired: Which happens not
only in strong Holds, but in all other things, which being ill used, lose their
efficacy. Thus then those arguments are easily answered by these distinctions,
and by what has been alleged in the behalf of strong Holds, which might at
first occasion any doubt: For the Art of Fortification ought not to be
despised, because it has not always been the same; rather it ought to be so
much the more esteemed, because we see it grows every day to greater perfection
by new inventions, and by experiences. Thus it fares also with the Art of
building of Ships and Houses, with that of Sculpture, Physic, Painting, and of
all other excellent Disciplines, which (Experience being the best
Introductress) did not arrive at such excellency and estimation suddenly, but
in process of time.

And notwithstanding, this Art of Fortification has in this our Age gotten
some more settled Rules, and (as a man may say) more certain Principles, since
the use of Batteries and of other manner of Attaques introduced by modern men,
whereby she does govern herself in the whole, and in every one of her
particular members, in form, distance, proportion of parts, and in other
things, which are always the same, where the seat will permit it. Variety of
noble Wits have added so much of ornament and of perfection of late to this
noble Profession, as all doubts which may be put whether there be a true Art
thereof, or no, are evidently cleared: And though sometimes she may vary by
reason of the diversity of situations, or by any other accidents which cannot
be comprised within one and the same Rule, this ought not to detract from the
dignity of the Artificers thereof, then it does from the Politician (who
certainly is the chiefest Archi^ector in all our Civil operations) to proceed
by probable arguments, and oftentimes alter his advice, that he may fit his
actions to the circumstances which do accompany them. Nor does it follow, that
such an Art should be the worse thought of, because it does not always compass
its end, which is the preservation of such a City, or such a Country where such
Fortifications are erected; since that likewise depends upon various accidents,
which no humane art or wisdom is able to foresee nor when foreseen, to provide
always by any industry a due remedy against them. It may as well be said, men
ought to forbear building of Ships, and deprive themselves thereby of the
Traffic and Commerce which is held with far distant Countries, because many
Ships perish in the Seas. The Physicians care does not always cure the sick
party; the Orator does not always compass his ends by his persuasive oratory:
Ought men therefore to forbear Navigation, Physic, or Persuasion? If a wicked
and persidious man betray a Fort unto the Enemy which was recommended to his
trust, ought this to be attributed to the evil and imperfection of Forts? What
thing is there so good, as may not be abused by wicked men? it is only Virtue
which has this privilege; all other adorments of Humanity would be ex^inct,
and expelled the World. If a Fort be lost for being badly garrisoned, ill
defended, or by some other sinister accident; ought the fault which is
committed by the Prince his negligence, the Commanders ignorance, or by the
Soldiers cowardice, be laid upon the defect of the Fort, which is of it self
well made? But say, I beseech you, are such disorders and dangers as may arise
in a State, by want of care in a Prince, by the per^idiousness of Commanders,
or cowardice of Soldiers, become so peculiar to Forts and Citadels, as the same
by the same occasion may not happen in Armies, and in all other defenses
howsoever attempted? Wherefore then by seeking for such perfection in Forts, as
is not found in other things, shall we by the loss of that advantage which may
be thereby received, and is often received, leave the State in the hands of
Chance, and to the discretion of him who does design to assault it. Nor ought
it to be said, that strong Holds should be despised, and the whole safety of
the State be placed in the Militia, as in a thing of firmer foundation, because
it is not every Prince that can always keep an Army in pay, nor would this be
sufficient to keep a State from unexpected assaults, which has many several
Confines. Moreover, he who places all his hopes of securing his State in
Armies, and in openly fighting his Enemies, must oftentimes (as it has been
said) hazard all to Fortune, and put himself upon the danger of a thousand
accidents; and unless Field-forces be backed by strong Holds, and equal to
those of the Enemy who does assault them, they must remain idle and of no use:
For not being able to withstand the shock, what can they do else but retreat,
and suffer him who shall be stronger to make himself Master of the whole
Country? whereas by the help of Fortresses, a few are able to resist many, and
to gain time, the only true remedy of him who is the weaker, and who is to
resist and withstand the Forces of one that is more powerful.

Nor ought the example of the Spartans be of any validity to persuade the
contrary, who would not secure their Cities with Walls, or any other
Fortifications; because having only to do with other people of Greece who were
weaker then they, they thought themselves safe without such helps; and that by
doing so, they purchased more praise and reputation: But when they were to wage
war with the Persians and Macedonians, who were powerful Enemies, even they
sought to put themselves in a posture of defense, by having recourse to narrow
passages; and to keep off the Enemy, assisting the natural situations of the
places by Fortifications. Moreover, the Syartans had but small Teritories, and
but a few places to guard, and were much given to the Militia; so as they who
will reap advantage by following their counsels, must be Lords of Cities, all
the inhabitants whereof must be Soldiers, and all of them desirous to preserve
the State, as were the Spartans. But the reason why the Duke of Urbin did
slight some of his Forts, was peradventure because he knew himself too weak to
defend them; and besides, because he thought it better not to invite others to
wage war with him, either out of a jealousy of them, or out of a desire to
make themselves masters of them, he being to consider all Forces as they
related to his, or if he would make use of other men's assistance he must depend
upon them. And for what concerts the strong Holds of Tuscany, it may be said in
the first place, that it was the imprudencie of Pietro de Medici, not the
Castles which did trouble and disorder the Florentines: And secondly, that it
may be Duke Cosimo would not so easily have gotten Caesar to have confirmed him
in the possession of that State, had it not been that he might thereby secure
himself of his faith in that new Dominion; But the accidents which may occur
are so many, as it is impossible to comprehend every particular under one and
the same rule. And is it not a vain thing to affirm, that strong Holds ought
not to be made use of, because if it so fall out as the State which wants them
be lost, it may be the more easily recovered? For that is no more then to
expose a man's self to mortal wounds, out of hopes that when he is hurt he may
find a cure. And what Prince can assure himself that though he has been
negligent in muniting his State with Forts, his Enemy when he shall have made
himself Master of his State, will not fortify such seats as he shall find
commodious for his safety.

But if it be said, that a Prince grows wicked, covetous, and cruel toward his
Subjects through his too much confiding in strong Holds, it is no^ easily to
discern that these so far remote affairs have any thing to do with the vices of
the mind, and if they ought to be taken into such consideration, the reason
would reach no further then to Castles and Citadels; but in greater and more
important Fortifications, the Prince is so much the more bound to preserve the
love and loyalty of his Subjects, in that he stands in the more need of them
for the safety of the City thus fortified, for if it should fall into the
Enemies hands by the peoples rebellion, the loss would be the greater. But it
may be the consideration of expense which that Prince puts himself unto, who
builds many strong Holds, may seem to bear more weight with it then any of the
rest, whereas his chief care ought to be, to accumulate treasure in time of
peace, against Wars shall happen; to which it may be answered, That States
cannot be preserved without charges and expense; and that if a Prince should go
about to procure the like security to himself by his Militia, as he does by
his strong Holds: he must be at infinite more expense, and such as none but
great Kingdoms and Empires are able to undergo. But if a Prince proceed therein
with such temper and judgment as has been spoken of, and which is also
requisite in all things else, he can incur no danger by Fortifications, of
running into those disorders and necessities, which many careless men, and such
as know not how to govern do fall.

We will then conclude, that Fortifications are very useful in all States, but
chiefly in small ones, and those more then any others, which have many
Confines, and powerful neighbors, for such States have need of good guards, and
have not wherewith to keep Armies perpetually on foot, as the Turks do in these
times, nor to make Deserts as do the Persians, nor to institute Colonies in
several parts, as was the custom of the ancient Romans; and if the Commonwealth
of Venice did imitate them therein, it was but once; and with more desire to
the self-inhabitants of the Island of Candia at her devotion, then to defend it
from foreign Forces; But now that the Turks power is grown so formidable, it
would be altogether unuseful, and not of any moment, without strong Holds, and
a well paid Militia; therefore the care and study which Princes take more in
these latter times then they did formerly in Fortification must needs be
praised by whosoever considers things with a right judgment.

The Ninth DISCOURSE.
Whether the Opinion of Pope Leo the Tenth were good or no, and his counsel
safe, of driving foreign Nations out of Italy, by the help of other Transalpine
Forces.
ITaly had been molested with Wars by foreign Nations, almost continually for
the space of Thirty years, when in the time of the Popedom of Leo the Tenth,
she seemed to have some hopes of quiet, and of enjoying some better condition,
after her so many and so grievous vexations and ruins, which had called to
mind the unhappy memory of the former calamities which she had undergone by
the invasion of the Northern Armies. But the wounds of the late evils remained
yet uncured; for two noble members of this Province were fallen into the hands of
foreign Princes, the State of Milan being at the devotion of Francis King of
France, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth being possessed of the Kingdom of
Naples; which Princes being now weakened and weary with so many Wars, so as the
one could not exceed the other, and having at that time their thoughts
elsewhere bent, being governed more by necessity peradventure then by their
own wills, they seemed to rest satisfied with what they did already posses in
Italy, and that they would suffer her to enjoy at least some rest after her
past molestations.

In this posture of Affairs, Pope Leo, who had often negotiated with several
Princes about the business of Arms, and had endeavored (as he said) the liberty
of Italy, and chiefly the preservation of the Dukedom of Milan in the
Government of the Sforza's, was much displeased to have the power of strangers
any longer continued, and particularly that the Church should be berest of two
noble Cities, Parma and Piacenza, which were become members of the State of
Milan. Therefore with a haughty and generous mind, he resolved not to prefer an
unsecure quiet, before some present troubles, so to shun other molestations and
dangers, which he thought might grow the greater by such a peace, in future, if
not to himself, at least to the Church. And knowing that he should not be able
either of himself, nor by joining with other Italians, to drive foreign
Potentates out of Italy, he resolved to join with some foreiners against some
other foremers, with design (as he said) that when some of them should be
forced to forgo Italy, it might be the easier to expel the rest.

Leo having thus put on this noble and generous resolution, it may seem to
merit praise by all men, as to the intention; but as for the means he took to
compass it, it is not so easily to be agreed upon; for many and weighty
respects do concur thereunto; for some of which, this action may seem to be as
wise, as glorious; and if we will reflect upon other some, there will appear
much more of difficulty and danger therein, then of security and hopes. That
all Transalpin^rs might be driven out of Italy, was a thing desired, and not
without cause by all Italians, and which ought to be his chi^fest care and
endeavor who had such Territories, degree and authority in that Province, as
Leo had. The ancient dignity of the Italian honor seemed to appear in the Pop^s
majesty, and in the splendour of the Court of Rome. ^ut as for the effecting of
this business, it did planly appear that all the power of the Italian
Pot^ntates was too weak; since two great Princes and warlike Nations, had for
many past years, though with various fortune, got footing there, and still kept
their possession, so as their power could suffer no disturbance, but must be
confirmed and consolidated, and must become more formidable to the Church, and
to all the Italian Princes, unless it were by some of the same foreign Nations.
If the sole Forces of the Italian Princes, when Italy by reason of a long Peace
did flourish most, were not sufficient to stop the French Forces, which were
then but new in those parts, and but meanly assisted; what reason was there to
believe, that this Province should ever be raised up again of herself, and
should by means of her own Forces return to her pristine fortune and digni^y,
after having been so long vexed by cruel Wars, and having lost two of her
noblest Members.

Wherefore though to administer fresh fuel, as it were, to this fire of War, as
would be done by the authority and Forces of the Apostolic Sea, if they should
jo^n with Caesar, or with the King of France, might be troublesome and
dangerous, yet might it be beneficial, or at least hopeful, since it might so
fall out, that the fortune of War being various, and subject to unexpected
chances, some good effect might ensu^ thereupon for the liberty of Italy; the
Forces of those Princes who did oppose her, growing much the weaker, or else by
their growing weary of the work, and by their tu^ning themselves to some other
undertaking. Whereas on the contrary, to suffer them to settle there, and to
get in time greater authority over the people, and more love to the States
which they had gotten, was a certain and irreparable ruin, and an utter
abolishing of all hopes of ever restoring the States which were postest by
strangers into the hands of the Italian Princes. But the fear lest both these
Princes, who were grown so powerful in Italy, might join together against the
Territories of the Church, or those of other Italian Princes, to divide them
amongst themselves, as had happened not many years before, when the Emperor
Maximilian and Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, who had been formerly at such
great enmity one with another, grew good friends by dividing the Lands between
them which belonged to the Venetians; might chiefly persuade the Pope to quit
neutrality, and to side with the one or the other of these Princes. Leo knew,
that upon many past occasions he had done things not only of but little
satisfaction, but of much disgust to both these Princes and Nations, more
particularly to the French, who were always jealous of his cunning; so as
great emulation growing in them both, and a desire of commanding over all
Italy, and finding that affairs were so equally poised between them in this
Province, as the one could not much exceed the other, nor make any new
acquisition, it was with reason to be feared, that being void of all hopes of
having the Pope to side with either of them, from whose friendship they might
for many reasons expect very considerable assistance, they might at last
convene together to the total oppression of the Liberty of Italy. Nor was Leo's
Neutrality in this conjuncture of time and affairs able to secure him from such
a danger, since he had formerly openly declared himself and taken up Arms in
company with others; and chiefly since the French knew, that he was no ways
pleased with their Dominion in Italy, as well for the common affairs, as for
his own particular dislike that they had possessed themselves of the Cities of
Parma and Piacensa, which were returned to the obedience of the Apostolic Sea
by his Predecessor Julius. So as the Churches State, and that of the
Florentines, which was under the same Popes protection and government, grew to
be those alone which were exposed to the injuries of all men; for the Venetians
were still firm to the French, and the other lesser Princes adhered some to the
fortune of the French, some to that of the Imperialists. It was then the most
useful, safe, and requ^site counsel, to join in friendship by particular and
reciprocal obligations, either with Caesar, or with the King of France: By
doing which, to boot with security, many good effects might follow, to wit,
that the adverse party being suppressed and driven out of Italy, that party which
should yet remain there as friend, and free from the jealousy or rivdship of
any foreign Prince, was likely to afford a long Peace (a thing very necessary in
respect of the many late afflictions) and such accidents might the more
probably happen in process of time, whereby Italy might more easily free
herself from the se^vitude of one only Lord and Master, then she should have
done from the like of two; it being unlikely that two Principalities should
meet with one and the same fortune, at one and the same time. But if nothing
else of good had happened during this discord and contention between these two
Princes, their States must be subject to the expenses and troubles which do
necessarily accompany War; so as some revenge would be had upon these foreign
Nations, for the so many calamities which they had brought upon Italy; and that
saying of the Scripture would be verified, To revenge a man upon his Enemies,
by other Enemies.

The Emperors of Rome, when the Empire began to decline, and the ancient
Italian worth and discipline was almost lost, they not having Forces sufficient
of their own to withstand the Northern nations, made use of the Soldiers of the
same Northern nations to drive their Fellow-foreiners out of Italy; as
particularly of the Goths, of whom they had several times great numbers in
their Armies. But say that one of these foreign Princes could not have worsted
the other, though assisted by the Apostolic Sea, even in this condition of
affairs hopes would not be wanting, whilst War should continue between them:
For after having long wrestled together, especially since the quarrel arose out
of hatred and warlike emulation, it was not unlikely that they would rather
quit the Terititories which they held in Italy to some third persons, then to
yield one to another, so as it might remain in their own power: Concerning
which surrender, particularly of the State of Milan, many Treaties had been
formerly. Leo had likewise a very fresh example of councels taken by the
Venetian Senate, which in the same case was confirmed by experience to be very
wisely done: For that Senate finding that their State was fallen into great
misfortunes, and reduced to so low an ebb, as she was not able to recover of
herself, they joined with some of their very Enemies, against other some of
their Enemies; whereby they did not only separate them, but did revenge
themselves much to the prejudice of those that they had excluded from their
friendship, and did thus recover the State which had been usurped from them.
But Leo's advice was afterward the better approved of by the particular issue
of this very business: For having after many several cogitations of mind joined
in confederacy with Caesar, the City of Milan was taken from the French by
their joint-forces, and the Cities of Pa^ma and Piacensa were recovered to the
Church; not without great hopes, had it not been for the unexpected and
unfortunate death of Pope Leo, that the French should have then been totally
expulsed out of Italy, and Maximilian Sforza reinvested into the State of
Milan, according to agreements made by the Pope, which would have greatly
secured the liberty of the Church, and of whole Italy. Which when it should
have so succeeded, there was reason enough to hope, that the French would join
in driving the Imperialists out of the Kingdom of Naples, being satisfied
(without any other reward) with having revenged themselves for their received
injuries, and with seeing the Imperialists reduced to their condition, for what
concerned the affairs of Italy. And it might be hoped that this might the
easilier be done, by reason of the far distance of Caesar's Territories, and by
reason of many ill humors which began already to grow in several places;
whereby be might be necessitated to bend his Forces and thoughts elsewhere, and
leave his affairs in Italy but weakly defended. Leo then may seem to have
grounded his councels well, like a wise Prince (as he was) upon good
foundations, for as much as may be effected by humane wisdom, where so many
other accidents do concur. Yet were there not wanting some who did greatly
blame this resolution of Pope Leo's, taxing him with inconsiderateness, because
being led on by vain hopes, he had unnecessarily imbroil'd himself again in
War: And if we shall look more narrowly into this business, we shall find that
many Considerations were wanting; which may raise at least some rational
doubts, whether the Pope were more to be praised, or to be blamed for this
action.

It is most certain, that War in it self is troublesome to Princes, grievous to
the People, and subject to many various and uncertain chances. So that as every
wise Prince ought always to avoid it, where there is no express necessity, it
appears that this Prince ought to have had it in more horror then any other, in
respect of the times, and of his degree and place, which ought rather to have
made him endeavor peace and quiet between Christian Princes. The Dominion of
the Church was by his Predecessors means arrived already to such a largness, as
it might seem better to become the Succeeder to augment the safety thereof by
procuring friendship with other Princes, and by a constant neutrality, then to
expose himself to new troubles and dangers, by adding more States thereunto.
Italy having been much afflicted, and brought in almost every of her parts to
great misery and calamity, for having been the seat of War for the space of
thirty years, did not only much desire peace and quiet, but did chiefly expect
it from the Popes councels and actions, by reason of his supreme authority,
and of the zeal he ought to have born to the public good.

How could it then deserve praise, that when foreign Princes seemed to be
inclined to suffer Italy to remain quiet, he should afford them occasion and
means of imbroiling her in new troubles and calamities; which were certainly to
ensue by reassuming Arms, where the advantage which might (...) gotten was very
doubtful and questionable? But, that which in this case (...) to be considered,
is, that Leo's intention being to drive the foreiners out of Italy, and to
vindicate her liberty, he should have chosen some good means to have done it.
Many ancient and modern experiences might have taught him, how hard a matter it
might be to keep the French on the other side of the Mountains. The Romans were
not more troubled with any other Nation then with the French, in freeing Italy
from foreign invasions; for she was oft-times assaulted by them, and many of her
parts possessed by them, and the Empire it self was endangered by their Forces.
And of late years since the passage of Charles the Eighth, though they had
proved variety of fortune, yet kept they still the same resolution of waging
war in Italy, and of keeping footing in this Province, not being frighted from
this resolution by any misfortune how great soever; but being once beaten back,
they returned with great fury to seek out novelties; and at this very time that
we now speak of, they were possessed of the Duchy of Milan. Therefore to secure
himself from the French, it was not sufficient to drive them once out of Italy;
for the Forces of that large Kingdom being still very powerful, and they being
always prepared for novelty, their desire bore them chiefly thereunto, where
it had done formerly, so as Italy remained still exposed to new incursions, and
subject to the miseries of War. Therefore this intention of Pope Leo's, of
keeping the French long out of Italy, could not peradventure have been
compassed but in a long process of time, and with much variety of success, no,
not though Italy had been all of a piece, and in greater power and prosperity
then she then was.

Whereas at this time the Commonwealth of Venice being now returned to great
power, was joined in confederacy with the King of France by virtue of ancient
Capitulations; nor was it to be hoped for, that out of any uncertain hopes, and
of long expectation, she should easily forgo such a friendship: And as for
other Princes, they were but weak, and their ends not constant nor conformable.
And on the other side, Caesar was very bare of moneys, and had many other irons
in the fire, so as the greatest weight and care of managing this War was likely
to fall unto the Popes share, wherein if he should slacken never so little, all
that had been done would have been to no effect; and those places, which by
reason of this confederacy with the Church, were taken from the French, would
quickly and easily have fallen into their hands again. But say that Charles had
been able to have imploted all his Forces about this business, the greater they
had been, the greater share would he have pretended in the business: and the
less able had the Pope or any others been to oppose his Forces.

Charles the Great, a Prince of excellent worth, freed Italy from the slavish
yoke of the Northern Barbarians, driving the Lombards from thence, who had had
the chief command there for Three hundred years; but he would therefore make
the greatest advantage thereof unto himself, creating his Son Pipin, King of
Italy; nor ought any of Charles his promises to be thought sufficient to shun
such a danger, to which it was known he was much more moved out of a fervent
desire to draw the Pope into this confederacy of excluding the King of France,
then that he had any ways quitied his desire to the Dukedom of Milan. What
reason was there then to believe, that when Caesar should be become more
powerful in Italy, and should have driven out the French, he should likewise be
expelled from thence, when his Territories and Authority should be there the
greater? It is rather to be believed, that by his increase of power, Italy
should be in a worse condition, and the danger thereof the more, for whilst
these two Princes stood upon equal terms, and with an invererate mind did
counterpoise one another, the other States were the more secure, it being
unlikely that any one of the parties would permit that the others should
increase, or be heightened by the ruin of any of the Princes of Italy; but he
that should be assaulted by one was sure to be assisted by the other; so as Leo
ought chiefly to have endeavored in this conjuncture of affairs to have kept
these scales even by his neutrality; for whilst the business stood thus, it
behoved the very Enemies of the Italians to value their Friendship, for their
own good, and for the preservation of their States.

It is not easy to decide whether it did really conduce more to the good of
Italy, that the Pope should continue in his neutrality, or by his joining with
some one of these foreign Princes who at that time had so great an influence
upon Italy, the success being to depend upon many very much differing
accidents; for since humane wisdom is not able to provide against them all, she
cannot find any secure way which leads to that destined end. Let us say then
(still keeping our selves within some general rules) in the first place, that
to join in friendship and confederacy with a more powerful Prince, and one who
is a near neighbor, when the increase of power is intended by this conjunction,
is never to be done without danger, nor ought such a resolu^ion ever be taken
but out of great necessity; especially not by such Princes, who are not so
weak, as they need a leaning stock, not to depend in all things upon the event
of another fortune. Now Leo had no such reason to forgo the little quiet which
he had then purchased by plunging into a Sea of Leagues and Confederacies, which
are very hard to be laid fast hold of with Princes of great powerl, desirous of
glory, who pretend the same things, and between whom War is not so easily
ended, as it is reassumed. The Churches Patrimony was sufficiently secured by
the majesty of Religion, by Pontifical power, by the moneys which by many ways
she may be supplied with, and by her Dominions, being at this time much
enlarged by Julius the second. So as Leo's intention is to be praised for
having his thoughts so carefully bent upon the Liberty of Italy. It is
likewise to be desired that he had had either more judgment or temper, to know
and choose an opportune time, and a sitting occasion; and yet it is likewise a
general rule, that to wait for the advantage of Time, when Affairs are upon
great strieghts, do usually bring notable advantages, and sometimes by new and
unexpected ways. Italy was long under the obedience of the Western Emperors:
If at that time when their power and authority was so great, the Popes would
have called in foreign Forces, and made use of them to reduce the Government of
Italy under the Churches power, or else into the hands of some other Italian
Princes, Italy would in the first place have certainly been given in prey to
the insolency of foreign Soldiers, and at last she would peradventure have
been brought to a worse condition. But by temporising, such occasions arose, as
the Church increased her Dominions by certain lawful Donations without the
shedding of blood, and all Italy remained subject to her own proper and
particular Lords; and the Western Emperors being long vexed and troubled by the
Wars of Germany, were forced to forgo the affairs of Italy.

Moreover, though Caesar's fortune and power was then very great, yet was it
subject to great alterations, by reason that he was a new Prince in his
Dominions, because that they were far divided one from another, and for that
many were apprehensive of so fast increasing greatness. So as many more
opportune and better grounded occasions might peradventure arise of compassing
such an intent, and the War made against him by the Germans, which tended so
much to his danger, might prove such a one. By making fit use of which
accidents, Caesar's power might receive a rebuke as concerning the affairs of
Italy, if the French forces had been any ways received, or that the Italians
had been of the same mind as formerly they had been more unseasonably.
Therefore to separate the friendship of the French totally from the Italians,
as Leo did for as much as in him lay, discovering a double injury to them,
since the King of France might think that fraud was joined to ill will, could
not be but an ill-taken advice. He had done better to have somewhat allaied
their power as to the affairs of Italy, then to have quite extinguished it,
till the Italians might get some better light how to recover their liberty. The
Venetian Senate took another course, though they had therein the same intent:
For whilst the affairs of these two Princes, Charles the Emperor, and Francis
King of France, were in the greatest heat of War in Italy, they would apply
themselves to each of their fortunes, and according to the condition of time
and affairs, they often changed friendship; being still constant in their aim,
which was to keep their Forces as equally balanced as they could, and that
they should both be weakened by their contention one with another: But when
occasion was offered of falling upon one without too much advantage to the
other, (as it did in the last Wars made by the Venetians in Italy, after King
Francis was let out of Prison) they stood firm and resolute, not being easily
persuaded upon any conditions to lay down Arms. For on the one side, Caesar's
power did decline by reason of many adverse chances, and the affairs of Naples
were in great confusion and danger: And on the other side, the affairs of
France were not much bettered as to the prejudice of the liberty of Italy; for
a chief Article in this Confederacy was, That the State of Milan should be
restored to Francisco Sforza, as at last it was. But Leo in this conjuncture of
affairs did precipitate himself into friendship with the Imperlalists, and drew
the enmity of the French upon him, so as his danger became almost equally the
same, whatever event the War should have; and the sequel did more demonstrate
this by the imprisonment of Clement, and by the slavery which Caesar's greatness
threatened to all Italy.

So as it appears to reason, and by the sequel, that a noble and magnificent
fabric, as Leo's proposition touching the freeing of Italy from the subjection
of Foreiners, was really to be esteemed, was not built upon of true and solid a
foundation as was able to support so great a weight. But for the present, after
many various accidents, the condition of affairs may be esteemed either good,
or at least less bad; forasmuch as Italy, through Philip the King of Spains
great wisdom and moderation of mind, has enjoyed a long and peaceful
condition, and flourishes no was much as she has done in many preceding Ages,
to the Peoples great comfort, and to the singular praise of the late Princes.

The Tenth DISCOURSE.
Whether the Counsel taken by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and by his
Commanders, of not parting from the walls of Vienna, when Solomon was come with
very great strength from Constantinople to assault it, deserve praise, or blame.
AS two great and famous Princes, not only for the largeness of their
Dominions, but for their particular warlike valor, the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, and Solomon Ottoman the Grand Signior of the Turks, did both of them
flourish in one and the same Age; so amongst the most memorable things of those
times, the stupendous preparations for War made by the abovenamed Princes in
the year 1532. was most remarkable, and variously thought of. All possible
means was used by both of them, and the whole World put into Arms; so as the
fortune of these two Empires was judged to depend upon the worth and prowess of
these two Armies. But the success did no ways answer the fame of so great
Princes, and the noise of the preparation; for neither did the Imperial Army
stir at any time from the walls of Vienna, nor did the Turkish Army come within
many miles of them.

Now since more recent businesses have recalled this to memory, it may prove no
unuseful Consideration to represent what of praise, or of blame may be given to
this resolution put on by the Emperor Charles, and his Commanders. Many were of
opinion then, and the same may now be thought, that in this case, or in the
like, the managing of War in this manner, standing only upon defense, and
expecting to be assaulted by the Enemy, did much withdraw from the reputation
of the Christian Militia, which was already much in the wane, and was
sufficient to awaken fresh spirits and boldness in the Turks to undertake any
thing the more easily against them in the future; since the flower of all the
Soldiery of all the strongest and most esteemed Nations of Christendom, being
assembled under the conduct and auspice of a mighty Prince, the Head of all
Christendom, and in a business of such weight, which had drawn the eyes of the
whole World upon it, not any the least thing was put forth against these
Enemies, no Army brought to face them, nor put in a posture of seeming really
to desire battle; none of their Forts were assaulted, no Country of theirs
prejudiced: Why were so many valiant men brought from their own homes into far
distant Regions? why such expense? why such preparation for War? Was it that so
strong and flourishing an Army should rot and moulder away about the walls of
Vienna? What could have better decided the question which till then was
disputable, in behalf of the Ottoman Princes, and of the Turkish Militia, and
against the true honor of War, which our Princes and Soldiers have long laid
claim unto, and sometimes achieved, then after so great a preparation of Arms,
after so cried up an enterprise with intention to quell the Turkish forces, to
halt so long, and to so little purpose, not knowing what resolution to take,
but that that Camp, then which no former Age had for a long time seen a
greater, nor a more noble one, should stand still, like an unmovable Fort?
Being overcome by truth, we must confess that the hopes of Victory for
Christian Princes was lost, or at least brought to this pass, as not to lose,
must be termed Conquest; but neither could this be done by taking this course.

No Christian Prince had usually so great and so settled a Militia, as could
continually maintain such an Army in the field, as was at this time put
together with much pains and industry; so as by drawing out the War in length,
they might think to weary and disorder the Enemy, and finally to overcome at
last. But on the contrary, the Turks, who have continually a numerous well
ordered Army, may easily upon whatsoever occasion send forth very powerful
Armies to vex the Christian Princes, taking sometimes one place, sometimes
another, without ever quitting them, or being driven out from them: whereof
there has been so many proofs already made, whilst we do nothing but make a
defensive War against the Turks, as till this time has most commonly been done
in this very business, and by those very Princes who managed this War; the
experience whereof has been too evident, and too much prejudicial, by the
affairs which unhappily be^el King Ferdinand, whose whole Army being cut in
pieces in Hungary, and the noblest Cities of that Province totally lost, might
teach for certain, that wh^lst the Turkish Forces should remain safe and
entire, the danger of Vienna, and of the other Cities of Austria and Hungary
was not quite over, but only deferred for a season, which delay might
peradventure prove unfortunate, by reason of the weakness which is brought upon
the Forces of Princes by long lying idle, and especially those of such Princes
as keep not a continual Militia on foot. Whereas the Turks, who have an Army
always ready and well paid, and who by making one War continually spring from
another, keep them always well disciplined, might at another time with greater
Forces assault the same Territories of the House of Austria, as it happened not
many years after. So as had they not been freed from greater, and more eminent
dangers by Solymans death, the authors of this advice might have repe^^ed it,
and all the rest might have had cause of greater sorrow, for having lost so far
an occasion of making trial of the valor of Christian Commanders and Soldiers
in a pitched Battle; whereas we want not clear and memorable exampl^s, how far
the true zeal of Religion, and a noble forwardness has been often favored from
Heaven with prosperous success; as when diverse Princes of Europe crossed the Seas
to wage War with the Saracens, and to recover, as they did, the holy Land from
the Infides, driving them out of diverse Cities of Asia, whereof they were
possessed.

But these are not the sole examples; for he who shall call to memory greater
actions done by famous Commanders, will know that they were well advised when
they assaulted the Enemy, not waiting for him at their own doors; since the
advantages, and damages are great and evident which do accompany those who
manage the War diversely in this principal point. He who assaults the Enemy
within their own Confines, enheartneth his Soldiers, infuseth fear into the
Enemy, carries all loss and danger from his own home to that of his Enemy: But
he that stays expecting that the Enemies Forces should come home to him,
minding only to withstand him, encourages the very Enemy, and makes him the
more bold and insolent, puts his own Subjects in despair, by making them
maintain their own Armies, and exposing them to the rapine of the Enemy.
Moreover if any adverse chance befall whilst the Enemy is in the bowels of their
State, all that they have is made a prey of, and irrecoverably lost.

We read of Cyrus, in whom we have the character of a most excellent Commander,
that King Cyaxares being encamped in his friends Country, and staying there to
expect the Enemy, he advised him to change his resolution, and to enter the
Confines of the Assyrians, and set upon them at their own doors, and showing
him the advantage he might make thereof, persuaded him to do so; by which mean
he got a notable Victory, worsting a great many of the Enemy with a much lesser
number. It was always Caesar's course, who was the true Master of good Militia,
both to pre-occupate the Enemy, and to be the first that should assault, when
Battle was to be given; thinking that the courage which the so doing infused
into the Soldiers, did to boot with other benefits, help much to the getting of
the victory; wherefore he taxed Pompey of an error, because he did not so in
that famous Battle of Pharsalia. The Romans understanding that Hannibal was
coming with a powerful Army to prejudice them in Italy, though the first
defense was made by mountains and craggy situations which he was to overcome,
yet they thought fit to fight him before he could get into Italy, and so keep
the War the furthest off them that they could. But Scipio not being able to
bring him to Battle, though he met with him at the banks of Rhodanus, as soon
as they heard that the Enemy was got on this side the mountains, the Romans
would not notwithstanding withdraw their Armies, as if they had been afraid to
come before the walls of Rome, which Hannibal gave out he would assault, but
sent their men with the same Consul Scipio to beyond the River Po to fight him,
wisely knowing that the danger does increase so much the more, by how much
nearer the Enemy approaches to the heart of the Country. And the same Romans
understanding afterward that Asdrubal was coming with a great Army in Italy to
assist his Brother Hannibal, they resolved to meet him beyond the River
Metarus, to prevent the Enemy, knowing that to eschew this danger, was to
occasion other great dangers. Thus the victory gotten over Asdrubal bereaved
Hannibal of the victories which he was likely to have gotten, if the Romans had
been slower, or less resolute in encountering the Enemy. The Imperial Commanders
ought to have taken the same advice, and might have done it; for the Turks must
make a much longer march into Hungary and Austria, then we to assault their
Confines, which are now grown too near us. Moreover the Turks chiefest strength
lying in their Horse, which cannot march till the earth afford fodder for their
Cavalry, and being to come out of hotter Countries into a colder Region, they
cannot without much difficulty and incommodity march into the field in the
first season of the year, as others may do, whose condition does differ from
theirs, both in the condition of Militia, and in the temperature of the Air,
wherein the first skirmishes are to be made.

So as it appears to be very strange, nay, indeed a very great wonder, that
having made so great a preparation for War, they would not so much as in
thought pre-occupate the Enemy, and enter into the upper Hungaria, from which
Country they might have been furnished with many commodities, and upon
occasion, secure themselves by a fortunate day, a long time from Turkish
Incursions, for it was not likely that by Solymans departing that year without
having done any thing, he should forsake the Guardianship and protection which
he had taken upon him of the King of Hungary, but rather aspire to make himself
Master of that Kingdom, as he did, being more encouraged thereunto by the
weakness and backwardness of the Imperialists, who if when they had done their
utmost, had done nothing at all, and the Turks knowing that Charles the Emperor
being implo^ed in other very considerable Wars, would not be always able to
afford his Brother so great assistance, was not this a great incitement to them
quickly to renew the War, to the greater prejudice and danger not only of
Hungary, which Ferdinand laid claim unto, but even to the like of Ferdinands
own Territories? and not long after the fact it self showed what might have
been foreseen by reason; for Solomon could not only not be persuaded to quit
the protection which he had taken of his Pupil King Steven, but before he
should come to any accord with Ferdinand, demanded tribute from Austria; and
the conditions both of the War and Peace growing daily worse and worse, the
greatest part of Hungary being lost after the notable discomfitures of the
German Armies at Essechlo and Buda, and the other part continuing still in
great danger, the certain loss was known which did redound unto them by not
hazarding a Battle at this time, when the fears and hopes were at least alike
on both sides.

But say that this had been too rash, or too difficult a thing to have been
effected, what hindered them or dissuaded them from passing through their own
Countries, and marching with their Army to between Dava and Sava, a Country
which had not at all been prejudiced by the late Wars, and therefore fit to
furnish their Army with victuals, and where there are many mountainous seats,
which were advantageous for the Imperialists, and incommodious for the Turks in
respect of their Cavalry; whereby they might have preserved two Provinces,
which were Patrimon^al States of the House of Austria, and therefore ought to
have been the more carefully kept, Carinthia and Stiria; which being abandoned,
were left a secure prey unto the ^urks, who utterly destroyed them by fire and
sword, endangering likewise the loss of some of their chief Cities; for the way
would have been blocked up, and kept Solomon from coming thither, if it had
been first possessed by the Imperialists, and Solymans reputation would have
been much lessened, if he had tarried behind, leaving that Country untouched,
which he was come to assault with so great an Army. But to do as the
Imperialists did, to keep so many men with so great a Train of Art^llery and
all necessaries for War, barely to defend one City, which lay not open, but was
begi^t with walls, which was held to be a strong For^ress, and which being but
meanly provided of men, had formerly repulsed great Turkish forces; what was
it, but by this new and prejudicial example to confirm the Turks, and even our
own men, in the opinion, that the Christian Militia was inferior to that of the
Turks, and that our Princes being intent upon their own defense, and not
without some fear to employ their utmost endeavors therein, were for their
parts to suffer the Turks to enjoy their large Empire in peace and safety?
Which the Ottoman Princes have brought to so vast a greatness, not by letting
their Forces lie idle, and by being content to defend that Title which they had
gotten at first, but by going every where to find out the Enemy, fighting him
upon all occasions, and by making their way by their swords into other men's
Countries. How often have the Turks entered into the Consinus of Persia, nay,
wrought themselves in even to her inmost parts, chiefly intending to come to a
day of fight with the Persians Armies, which they have often enected? though
the Persians were rather to be feared, then to be despised, for their ancient
honor in War, and for the manner of their Militia; and yet at last they have in
these last Wars got safe possession of the chiefest part of this most noble
Kingdom.

What then is more to be said, but that if this way of proceeding have proved
prosperous to those that have walked therein, he who takes another way walks on
toward destruct on, and either through ignorance, or too great a thirst after
quiet and secu^ity, involves himself into greater troubles and difficulties?
And though the loss be made by peece-meal, which may peradventure make it
appear the less, yet at last the whole falls into more certain, though a later
ruin. And to speak of more modern affairs; how had not only the Commonwealth
of Venice, but several other States of Christian Princes been preserved from
the Turkish power and insolency, if the Leagues Fleet, shunning all occasion
of fight, had retreated without that famous Victory of Lepa^^^? But it was
afterward more clearly seen, that Charles his intent on in this War was far
from joining battle with the Turks, either that he would not hazard his glory
and honor, or manifestly confess himself interior to Solomon in Forces, when
Hungary and Austria being assaulted at another time by the same Solomon, in
stead of succoring of assisting his Brother who was in emient danger, he went
to try new adventures in Africa, of a much more inconsiderable nature. If a day
of Battle be ever to be had, what else was there to be done to keep off the
ruin which does threaten Christendom every day more and more? He who hazards,
may lose; but he may also win: And he who stands idly, and does nothing, whilst
he endeavors security by useless means, does by degrees daily fall into new
dangers, and does as it were voluntarily (but for certain, basely) submit
himself to the yoke of a grievous and unworthy slavery. If Germany and Italy
had been so forward to furnish men and moneys for this enterprise, (the
authority of so great a Prince who was the chief Author and Head thereof, being
considered) as upon other occasions which did happen not long after, these
assistances might have been sooner hoped for. When were the whole Forces of
Germany seen so united, as they were at this time? Nay, it was rather to be
doubted that many seeds of discord were to grow, which were already spread
abroad throughout this Province, by reason of Religion and State-policie,
whereby Germany might be weakened and divided. From whence then was there any
good to be hoped for against this so formidable Enemy, if so great a
preparation for war proved altogether vain and useless? The condition of
present Times, and of long Custom, will not suffer us now to hope that we may
see what formerly fell out in that famous Council of Clerement, that at the
words of an Hermit, at the bare exhortations of a Pope, Christian Princes and
people should readily take up Arms against the Infidels, being content for bond
of firm union to be all of them signed with the sign of the Cross. But now when
any such thing is treated of, such disputes are made upon every point, every
one looks so much to their own particular ends (not measuring things aright,
nor minding the common interest in comparison of their own) as Leagues and
Unions being contentiously handled, slowly concluded, and untimely dissolved,
there comes no good of them.

Wherefore it cannot be said, that they thought by delay to reserve occasions
prepared for Victory, to which the Cause which was then in hand ought not a
little to have excited them; to wit, the maintaining of King Ferdinand in his
just pretenses to the Kingdom of Hungary; from whom, without any right, and
unprovoked by any injury, it was attempted to be taken. Very shame should
likewise have been able to have made them not suffer so miserable a spectacle
of such devastations and ruins as were made by the Barbarians in Carinthia and
Stiria, whilst they stood looking on with so great an Army; at which the
Imperial Commanders being at last moved, they went about (though late) to
revenge these injuries; and their boldness being assisted by fortune, the
Freebooters were routed, and almost quite discom^^ted in all places where they
were assaulted. So as it appears it may be pleaded by this late example, that
they might have done greater things, if they had attempted it. Moreover, so
many military men might very well have known what advantage might have been
gotten by giving Battle, since in this posture of affairs great rewards were to
be expected from the Victory, and but small loss, had they been beaten: For the
Christian Army, if victorious, might have penetrated into the Turks Dominions,
where there are no strong Holds, save some few upon the Frontiers; and not
meeting with any obstacles, might have marched even to before Constantinople,
planting their Trophies in sundry places, by one sole Victory. Whereas on the
contrary, the Imperialists, upon any adverse fortune, had many strong Holds
whereunto to have retreated, and by maintaining them, might have retarded the
course of the Turks victories, and have recruited their broken Forces. But say,
I pray you, who could assure the Imperialists, that they should avoid the
hazard of a Battle? Was it not rather to be believed, (especially if we will
consider the boldness of the Turks, who are wont to meet but with weak
resistances) that answerable to what they gave out, they would advance and
force the Christians to give Battle, as the Voyage taken by Solomon did
promise, who kept not within his Consines, but was entered into the Imperialists
Country, so far as some of his Horse Troops made inrodes even to Newstat a Town
standing in the same Champaine Country, and not far from Vienna? And say that
being assaulted by the Enemy, they had been forced to fight, who can deny but
that both before, and after the conflict, the business would have proved
hazardous to the Imperialists, since they were to fight at their own homes, and
in their own defense? For great is that astonishment which is caused by the
bold coming on of an Enemy, and men are always readier to run away there where
they have best means of saving themselves; and in case of adverse Fortune, the
danger is greater when the Enemy is in the bowels of the State; and if the
inhabitants overcome, the less good redounds by the victory, because the enemy
has time to rally, and to defend himself. These were therefore notable
disadvantages, which were unaviodable whilst the Imperialists Camp remained
fixed before the walls of Vienna, and thereby made themselves to depend upon the
Enemies resolution.

Notwithstanding all this, he who shall duly consider the present condition of
the Affairs of the Empire, of the Militia, and of all other things which
belongs to such a business, may peradventure be of a different opinion, and
judge otherwise, and if not commend, at least excuse the resolution taken by
the Imperialists, of not parting with their Army from before the walls of
Vienna, and from the River Danubius. That the Turkish Empire is very great, and
potent, is a thing too well known by us to our cost; but the care how to
prevent the malady and weakness into which Christendom is fallen by the
greatness of such an enemy, has been so long in cogitat^on, as to use violent
means, might bring ruin upon her, rather then procure her safety. Christian
Princes have not in this age a settled, well disciplined, well ordered Militia,
and kept in perpetual pay, as the Turks have, and as the Romans, and some other
Empires have formerly had; Whence it is that numerous Arms cannot be raised
without length of time, and much difficulty; and for want of continual
exercise, by which the Soldiers of one and the same Nation have been known to
be able to supply every military Office, recourse must be had to several
Nations, for men fit for several actions in War; so as it is thought that
either by natural inclination; or by ancient Custom, or by mere opinion, every
Nation is best, some for one thing, some for another; as also because there are
but very few in any place, who are well instructed in Military affairs. For no
Militia is entertained except it be in time of need, or some few who are kept
in Garrisons, with little or no exercise.

The charge also of assembling Soldiers from several, and far distant
Countries, as also all things which belong to War, is much the greater; and
whereof not any one State of our Princes is completely furnished. So as put all
these together, it is from hence, that when any enterprise has been to be
taken against the Turks in these times, with numerous and powerful Forces, they
have not been able to be got together in any reasonable time, nor well ordered;
which delay arising from necessity, has hindered our preventing the Enemy, and
our assaulting them at their own doors. But particularly, is it not very well
known, that at this time whereof we now speak, Caesar was to assemble Soldiers
from so many Nations, subject to other Dominions, and to join together the
Auxiliary Forces of Germany and Italy, as in doing thereof so much labor and
time was spent, as before the Imperial Army was mastered at Vienna, Solomon was
already come to Belgrade? so as, to have resolved upon preventing the Enemy,
and of assaulting his Confines before the arrival of his Army, was impossible,
though it had been thought expedient to have done so; nor ought reason to
prevail over experience; and this so much the less, for that there wants not
other reasons to prove that the Turks are readier at their counsel, and
speedier at their executions, then we can be. But let us suppose that all
prolixity and difficulties therein might have been helped, and that it had
depended upon the free will of the Imperial Commanders to assault the Turks
within their Consines; say, I beseech you, what design could the Imperialists
have had to ever into the Enemies Country? Should they perhaps have stood idly
expecting the shock of the Turkish Army, if it should advance toward them? or
if Solomon should not have advanced, but have shunned the encounter, should
they have marched on and forced him to fight? Or should they have endeavored to
have taken some of the Towns, or Forts which were held by the Turks, by
assault; and carry the perjudice home to him, who would have brought it to them
in the defense of another man? Let us examine all these things, by considering
the last proposition.

In what place should the Imperial Army have encamped, which would not have
been very incommodious for them, and far off? they were not yet absolutely
possessed of diverse Cities upon the Frontiers of Hungary, as they were
afterward. But let us argue the business in general; if the place were weak
which they should assault, what honor should they win thereby? Or would the
advantage of such an acquisition have been answerable to the expense, and to
the expectation had of such an Army? Besides, such purchases are to little
purpose; for such places are soon regained by him who is master of the field;
and if the Imperialists would have attempted the taking of any strong place,
and should not have effected it soon and easily, to how great danger did their
Army expose it self? they must either raise their siege, with loss of honor,
and with those other bad consequencies which follow in such like cases; or else
they must keep their station, and be cut in pieces, when a powerful Turkish
Army should come, and find the Imperialists scattered and busied about the
taking in of strong Holds; as afterward fell out upon the like occasion of
Buda; which might teach Commanders, with what temper they are to proceed when
they fall upon such affairs, and when they have to do with a potent Enemy. But
it may be yet more strongly urged, that whilst the Turkish Forces should keep
themselves safe and inire, the Imperialists had but little hopes of keeping
what they should happily have gotten. Were not Modon^ and Corone recovered from
the Turks by the Imperial Forces, under the Ensigns of the same Charles? yet
these very Towns were soon after abandoned, and forsaken, because they knew
they were not able to maintain them against the Turkish pussant Forces. Have
not the Imperialists and Spaniards made oft-times many attemp^s in Africa, and
had good success therein? Yet in whose possession are these very places now,
which were gotten with so much charge and danger? Did not the Turks soon
repossess themselves of those places from whence they were driven? The League
made against the Turks in the year 1537. wherein the same and forces of the
same Emperor Charles were interessed, did it not (...) Castle (...) a Fortress
fit for their greatest designs? But how long were we able to keep it, though it
were strongly garrisoned? These experiences may serve to show, that the good
gotten by such cost and labor, has not at last proved any thing, save dishonor
in forgoing what was gotten.

But to fall upon the other head; If the Imperial Army should have continued
encamped in any strong situation of the Enemy which they might have taken,
without attempting any thing more; how would it have been in any better
condition, then it was when encamped before Vienna? rather on the contrary, the
danger was greater and more evident of falling into mighty disorder, especially
for want of victuals, by their going from the Banks of (...), from whence alone
they could have been safely and oppor^^^ely furnished therewithal; for they
were to provide for the victualing of a great many, and the Enemy did abound in
Horse, whereby their succors might have been cut off. It may peradventure be
alleged, that they might have preserved a great tract of Country from the
inrodes, plunder, and firing made by the Turks. But first, they were not
certain to make this advantage, the Country being large, and exposed to such
accidents as these; nor were they able, without dividing their Forces, to
supply all places: And the Turks seeing this place well guarded, if they should
have taken their way above the Danubius, as they did beneath it toward the
Alps, finding the fields more large and open in those parts in Moravia,
Silesia, and Austria, they might have made larger inrodes, and with less
danger: whereas having quartered themselves in the mountainous situations of
Stiria and Carinthia, they might at least revenge the injury, and in some sort
preserve their honor by killing many of them, who being disbanded, were gone to
pillage the Country.

It is commonly advantageous to advance toward the Confines of a State, where
the Passes are narrow and difficult, either by the ruggedness of the
situations, or by reason of ^orts upon their Frontiers, so as the Enemy may be
by these advantages kept afar off. But what was there in King Ferdinands
States, which could persuade him to take this course; the Country being large,
open, and where many Armies would not have been sufficient to have kept out an
Army which was resolved to enter, as these did? But it may be said again, that
this was not a loss which would counterpoise (as might very well have happened
by reason of their own inconveniences) the breaking up of that Army, whereon
the defense of King Ferdinands States did rely, and which was of so great a
concernment to all Christendom. And it may be also added, that the further the
Imperialists had advanced, whereby they might the better have met with the
Enemy, and have fought him, if they should not afterward have done it, their
fear would have appeared to have been so much the greater, and that they had
repented to have proceeded so far; whereby they should not only no have
increased, but have lessened the reputation of the force and worth of that
Army. But for what concerned their marching forward to encounter the Enemy,
with a resolution of giving him battle at his own home at which the
Considerations made to the contrary do seem chiefly to aim, it is business of
so weighty, and so numerous consequences, as it deserves to be well examined.
It is a general Rule, That it is requisite the Assailant should have greater
Forces then he who is assailed, or at least equal Forces: And is there any one
so blinded with desire, as that he does not see the Imperialists disadvantage
in this behalf? Solomon brought with him an Army consisting of One hundred and
forty thousand fighting men, and almost as many men more for other
Camp-occasions, furnished with Artillery and all other Requisites for War, an
Army verst in Victories, and which was then to fight in the sight of their Lord
and Master, a fortunate and valiant Prince; and who are promised by their Law,
that whosoever dies fighting for his welfare and glory, shall be eternally
rewarded in heaven: An opinion which has much advantaged the Turkish affairs
in point of War. Entire obedience, excellent military discipline, patient
undergoing all wants, and great toil and labor, are things whereunto the
Turkish Armies are accustomed; in virtue whereof it is, and not by chance, that
they have had so many victories: And it was the opinion of all men, that these
things did at this time abound in that Army. Now on the other side, the
Imperial Army was far short of this in numbers, the fighting men not exceeding
the number of Fourscore and ten thousand, whereof there were but Thirty
thousand Horse. It is hard to say what men might promise to themselves from the
Commanders and Soldiers gallantry, since no precedent nor subsequent trial has
been known to be made against this Enemy: Marry, such disorders as are usually
seen in our present Mili^ia, might easily be therein seen; the Spaniards
mutinies before they were come to the Camp, the like of the Italians after
their arrival, great and open hatred amongst the Nations which were in the same
Camp, as if they had been in two Enemies Camps, insomuch as they were like to
^all together by the ears more then once, the Spaniards and Italians being
jointly highly incensed against the Dutch; the Commanders at variance amongst
themselves, envying one another glory, raisers of commotions and disobed^ence
amongst the Soldiery, as was seen by the last of punishments inflicted upon
some of them. Now what the issue in likelihood might prove betwixt two such
Armies as you have here described of the Imperialists and of the Turks, any man
may judge, who is capable of ordinary reason, without any further experience of
War.

But to proceed to the other heads: What situation could there be chosen which
was not disadvantagious for the Imperialists? The parts of Hungary, Wallach^a,
and of the neighboring places where the Armies were to m^et, consisted all of
open Champaigns, where most assuredly the Horse (wherein the Turkish Camp did
so abound) have the better of Foot; and worth is overcome by numbers, where the
lesser Army may be circumvented by a greater multitude, and better use may be
made of Horse, which may either advance where they find advantage, or retreat
without any prejudice where they cannot withstand the Enemy. Therefore the
Imperial Commanders knowing the disadvantage thereof in that situation which
they had taken, though they were secured by the City of Vienna, and by the
River Danubius, yet they stood always with their Squadrons in order for any
assault; their Foot was divided into three great Squadrons, whereof one stood
firm in the midst, and betwixt this and the other two were the Horse quartered,
so as they did enclose the whole body of the Army, which was surrounded and
secured by great store of Artillery. Another reason may be added, which is,
That in case of misfortune, the Imperialists Army might suffer a greater
discomf^ure then that of the Turks; for it would be harder for the former to
keep any of their Foot entire, or Gens d' Arms, then for the Turks to preserve
their Light Horse, which were always ready according as occasion should serve,
either to charge, or sustain a charge, and save themselves. Wherefore it may be
said, that the hazard was not the same, and therefore not to be put to the
trial, as affairs stood. And if it be advantageous to assault an Enemy at his
own door, the affording rest to Soldiers, whereby to be the better able to
withstand and to repel with victory those who come to assault them, and are
wearied by their long march, and the inconveniences thereof, has also
something of good in it.

Nor must we be governed by examples wherein the same accidents meet not; for
general Rules are not to be observed at all times, and especially not in War,
which is subject to so many variations. If Cyrus, and the Romans, when the
first went to fight the Assyrians, and the other the Carthaginians, had been in
that condition as those were of whom we now speak, we may persuade our selves
(such was their known wisdom) that they would have done otherwise: And if the
Romans chose to meet Hannibal first on the other side the Mountains, and
afterward at his first entrance into Italy, it may be said, besides the
diversity of accidents which counseled them so to do, that our Princes have no
such Militia, nor so ready, as the Romans had, nor had they means of recruiting
their Armies so soon as the Romans could do in case of adverse fortune; and
that they were able to maintain so many Armies, not only in Italy, but in
Spain, Africa, and Greece, at the same time when Hannibal was in Italy, shows,
that as they were forward in giving Battle, so they knew how to supply
themselves again: which the Imperialists could not at this time have done, if
they should have lost that Army, which they had taken such pains to assemble
together from so many several parts. It is acknowledged, that to put ones self
upon the hazard of a Battle, is a thing which is done by wise Commanders when
they are backed with another Army, which may afford them means of fighting a
second time, or at least whereby they may easily (...) in case of adverse
fortune; else a whole State is adventured upon one only Battle. As for the
success of the Battle of Lepanto, it was accompanied with some accidents which
are seldom seen to happen: For the Turks gave ou^ m^n battle, which was
willingly entertained by us, because we might make use of the advantage of the
Venetian Gallious, by whose Artil^ery their Fle^t was divided and scat^ered
before they could come to a further conflict. But the next year, the condition
of affairs being altered, they took another course: For the Turks, who were
taught by their former bad success, not being willing to join battle with our
greater Vessels, and our men being wisely welladvised not to divide nor
separate their slighter Galleys from the greater, as finding themselves either
weaker therein, or at least not stronger, there was nothing done, though the
Fleets were several times very near. In this point likewise, the Land-Militia,
and that of the Sea does differ; for as for Sea Fights, the Christian Forces
are in number equal in Shipping to the Turks, but sufficiently beyond them for
matter of worth and discipline: Marry, in Land-Armies the Turks do far exceed
the Christians in numbers; and as for valor and good discipline, they cannot as
yet be accounted inferior, unless we will, to detract from the Enemy, and to
our own shame, as having been so oftentimes beaten by so base and unexpert men.
But howsoever it be, we cannot but have a great esteem of the Turkish power,
which their continued prosperity has made so. What reason was there then that
a new Army, made up of so many several Nations, wherein the Soldiers did hardly
know their Captains, and were much less known by them, who had not as yet done
any military act jointly, nor well learnt how to know, nor follow their
colors, not acquainted with the Country, and wanting all those things through
which, by the true Art of War victories are gotten, should advance, and give
Battle to an Enemy so formidable both for same and forces? nor can the event of
a set Battle be truly judged by what befell those of the Turkish Camp, who
disbanding from the rest, went, though in great parties, to pillage the Enem^es
Country, the business not being any thing alike; the Turks had the disadvantage
of the Countries situation, of being loaded with prey, of being in disorder (as
commonly befalls those who go to plunder, not to fight) and of other accidents.
But besides all this, he who relates this business, mentions not any baseness
in the Turks, but says, That notwithstanding these disadvantages, they
defended themselves generously to the utmost of their power.

But what did the same Solomon (who cannot be denied to have been very valiant,
and greatly experienced in matter of War) though he had all the advantages that
have been mentioned? he did not advance with his Army as near as, as he might
have done, nor did endeavor to enforce others, nor to be enforced himself to
fight, but rather went out of his direct way, which he had taken to come to
Vienna, and kept for the most part in strong and commodious seats, as between
the two Rivers of Sava and Drava; and i^ a powerful and van glorious Prince,
who professed that he had undertaken that War merely out of a desire of glory
would make use of haesitatious counsels, where the consequences were so great
and so heavy; how would it have becomed Charles, a Prince no less wise then
valiant, and who was necessituted by many other important affairs of some other
States of his, to leave Germany suddenly, as he did, to have put himself upon
the dubious events of Battle, whereby to endanger almost his whole Fortune?
When Marius was sent against the Cymbrians, who were fallen down into Italy
(which was thought to be as considerable a War as any that the Romans had made)
the same circumstances concurring thereunto, whereby to infuse terror, as do
now to make the Turkish Forces so formidable; as cruelty, barbarism, the great
number of the Enemy, and the fame of the victories which they had won; the wise
Commander would not (though many occasions had offered themselves, and that he
was taxed by the unexperienced, of timerousness) come to a pitched field with
such an Enemy till for many months space he had kept the Army accustomed to
the performance of duties, and to Military actions, and chiefly till he had
acquainted them with the aspect of the Enemy, and how to have the bett^r of
them in light skirmishes, which were not notwithstanding attempted but upon
great advantage.

And if Caear used to prevent the Enemy, and to be the first that should
assault; it is to be considered that he commanded a veteran Army, of whom he
had by long Wars had much experience. So as the same example is not to be made
use of in a new and tumultuous Army, and of so different conditions. But let us
likewise consider what were the reasons which made these two Princes take up
Arms; for by the first rise of Wars the reason of their administration, and the
good means whereby to conduce them to a good end, is best known. The War was
offensive on the Turks behalf, undertaken with great surquedrie, and with great
hopes of victory and glory; Solomon having propounded unto himself to revenge
the injuries done by Ferdinand, then King of Bohemia, to John King of Hungary,
who reigned under his Guardianship and protection. But whether this was his
true intention or no, or but pretended, that he might possess himself of the
Kingdom of Hungary (as afterward he did) it was most certain, that he could
not compass his end of beating the Forces of these two Austrian Brothers,
Charles, and Ferdinand. Caesar on the other side, being usually distracted and
busied, as now in particular, in other Wars, had betaken himself to this, to
defend the assaults which were threatened his Brothers Territories, as also the
honor of his family, or rather that of all Germany; or, to confine ones self to
narrower bounds, it may be said, that this contention of War did pa^ticularly
concern the oppugning, and the defense of the City of Vienna. So^yman, who had
formerly little to his honor, been driven from before the walls of that City,
professed to return thither with greater Forces, being firmly resolved to
reduce it to his power, and to challenge the Emperor to a pitched Battle.
Charles on the contrary, having brought his Forces about that City, had
propounded unto himself the keeping of it, and to frustrate this so great fury
and boasting of Solymans. Now then, whilst Vienna was preserved, and that she
was kept free from all dangers, and that Solomon was so curbed and frightened by
the Imperialists Forces, as that he du^st not advance, or make good his word
which he had publicly professed, did not the Imperialists effect the business
they had taken in hand, without the effusion of blood? Did they not preserve
their own honor, and do service to all Christendom? If this Army (as the
success of Bittel is more uncertain and dubious, then any whatsoever other
humane action) had received any no^able defeat, when would this wound have ever
been cured? The afflicted body of Christendom must have its wounds long kept
open, and have still ul^^cerated more and more. How would Caesar's particular
Enemies have been encouraged to fall upon his Territories, and to have
endangered and molested his own particular affairs, whilst he should have
showed courage enough, but little good counsel in defending another man's right,
which did not immediately concern himself? Had the T^rks in former times been
made retreat to their own Confines, as now they were, without having made any
acqu^sition, they had not been masters of so many Christian Kingdoms, as now
they are. And had their Forces proved still vain, their Militia would have been
imbased, and they would have been discouraged from troubling others without any
good to themselves; which peradventure would have been the safest and securest
way of weakening so great a power as that, by temporizing, affording them
thereby occasion of growing idle, and of falling into domestic disorders, so
as they might the more easily have received a blow, and have been overcome both
by cuning and force. Nor will it avail to affirm the contrary, as if the future
dangers and troubles had been certainly to have happened, or that they might
have been made greater by a new commotion of War; for it was more answerable to
reason, that when Solomon should have done his utmost with his whole Forces,
assisted by his own presence, he would have suffered the Estates of Austria,
and of Germany to have remained quiet, if King Ferdinand had rested content
with his own Patrimony, and with the Kingdom of Bohemia, together with the
hopes of succeeding in the Empire, without intricating himself in new troubles,
by obstinately maintaining his pretenses to the Kingdom of Hungary, drawing
thereby the fury of the Turkish Forces upon him, as he often did. So as King
Ferdinando and his Counselors are more to be blamed for those many mischiefs
which ensued afterward, and for those which we are still threatened with by the
so near neighborhood of the Turkish Forces then Charles the Emperor and his
Commanders. For they seeing King John taken into so powerful a protection as
that of the Ottoman Empire, so as it was impossible to put the Dutch in
possession thereof by driving of him out; all anger and ambition ought to have
been laid aside, contenting themselves rather with the neighborhood of so weak
a Prince as the King of Hungary, then with that of so powerful and formidable a
Potentate, to whom four Empires and eighteen Kingdoms do yield obedience.

These things may be on all sides variously considered, as various Judgments
may be given on those actions which are not of a settled, ordinary, and natural
condition, but which through various accidents do flote up and down, as it
happens in counsels concerning War. The truth is, that the Forces, hope; fears,
and almost all other consequences of these two Empires were (as it were)
equally balanced in this behalf: So as it was a work not discernible by humane
wisdom, or by any true grounds, whether to have come to a pitched field, or to
abstain from doing so, would have been the better advice. In either of the
Armies, the Flower of the Mil^tia of the warlike Nations both of East and West
was assembled, a vast number of Soldiers, excellent Commanders, most valiant
Princes, and of as great renown as any of whatsoever former Age, and who had
both of them won famous Victories. Great were the rewards, great the
inconveniences, which were proposed on all sides according to the various
success of such a days fight; immortal glory, shame not to be rased out, high
hopes, greatest fears. So as it is no wonder if in this parity of objects which
presented themselves before the eyes both of the Imperialists and Turks, a
Battle, for which both parties were prepared and disposed, did not ensue. In
which case he who will detract any thing from the Imperialists in not daring to
fight, must praise their wisdom as much, and their mature advice; it being a
Rule generally approved of by the universal consent of all men, That where the
business is doubtful and difficult, we must rather adhere to that which holds
us from doing any thing, then to what eggs us on: For, Had I wist, comes too
late, and is always to no purpose; whereas whilst things are whole and entire,
place is left for new Counsels.

PAULA PERUTA A Gentleman of VENICE HIS SOLILOQUIE; Wherein he makes and takes
a brief examination of the whole course of his Life.
WHAT do I do? What think I? What do I look for? My Age hastens already apace
to the end of my life, and I mind not that end of Glory to which I am ordained.
Those good things which I must shortly for go, stand always fixed before my
bodily eyes, and I turn not the eyes of my mind toward those things which are
prepared for me to enjoy eternally; it is high time to know my error, and then
to amend it. Old Age which uses to dead the affections of the flesh, ought now
to quicken the zeal of the Spirit? O my soul summon thy thoughts about thee,
which have straid so long in the affairs of this world; know thy noble
condition, and the true end for which thou were created; Let all things that
proceed from thee be worthy of thee. Throw from thee that vail, which as if
thou had been blind, has made thee go groping and grovelling through the
ways of worldly desires, in danger of falling into the ditch of some habitual
sin; wh^reby it would have been the harder for thee to rise again, and reassume
the right way. Great are the acknowledgments which thou owe to thy Creator,
who has made thee out of nothing; made thee so much more noble then the souls
of all his other creatures, he made thee partaker of so many excellent gifts,
chiefly of liberty, whereby thou may increase the merit of thy good works, as
he never suffers his grace to forsake thee, which thou may very often be
aware of, finding remorse of conscience as often as thou fallest into any sin,
and so many incitations to excite thee to the despisal of earthly things, and
to the love of such as are celestial, as certainly thou art very much unworthy
so great a benefit, if thou do resist it any longer, or else a very bad
friend unto thy self, if knowing the trust good, thou chusest to deprive thy
self thereof.

Assuredly, if I shall take a true scrutinie of my life, I shall find that I
have made my self a receptacle of all vanity; Thou who ought to have been a
temple of perpetual prayer, of immaculate goodness, of pure love to divine
things. I do not consider my first and tender Age, wherein the use of Reason
being but weak, that which arises from thence is not much considerable; yet
the tears and crying to which those very years are subject, might afford me
occasion when I was greater of contemplating the mystery, and of knowing that
the condition of this worldly life. whereinto I was marching was but a valley
of tears, a fountain of misery; Wherefore I should have taken the greater heed
not to have suffered my self to be ensnared in the love of those things, where
Wormwood lies hidden under Honey, and where weeping attends always nigh upon
laughter. In the Pueritia, which succeeded mine In^^ncie, I did not accustom my
self (as I ought to have done) to labor and sufferings, to humble and devo^t
thoughts, whereby the power of the flesh might have been weakened, and the soul
exalted; but I was detained by pleasures and effeminacie; I betook my self so
to follow and love vanity, as I began to suck in what corrupt customs taught
me, more then what was learnt me by my Tutors. I thought Riches, Honors, and
all worldly Greatness, to be the garnishings wh^rewith men, and chiefly such as
are nobly born, ought to adorn themselves; I called the lives of such as lived
better, and more retired from the world, mere madness.

These conceptions grew more firmly fixed in me afterward, when passing
through the other Ages, I saw them praised and practiced by men's common
consent, and chiefly by those who were esteemed the wisest, and most happy; so
as it was harder for me to pluck out those thoughts from out my heart, which
had in process of time taken so deep rooting. But if I reflect upon the years
of my youth, which are as it were the Sp^ing of our Age, on which every thing
seems to smile, and does, as it were grow green, what can I remember which may
make me satisfied with my self, or from whence I may affirm, that I have
gathered such fruit, as I would now in my old age be fed withal? As I first
(...) into my youth, I was, as it were challenged and defied to a gallant
wrestling by the se^ces, and worldly delights, and parted from them very many
times overcome, seldom with the victory. I betook my self to my study, and
chiefly to that of Rherorick, and of Philosophy; wherein having the luck to
light upon excellent Masters, I made some advancement; I will not say, that now
I am sor^ie for it, for the fear least the time that I employed therein might
have been spent worse: but surely, I cannot deny but that I did thereby foment
that affection which does sometimes preva^c^^e better; to wit, to the desire of
praise, and of self-estimation. Knowledge does oft-times puff up him that is
master of it, so as he forg^^s to glory in the Lord: I dare not say I possessed
it, for hardly could I taste the waters of the overflowing fountains of
learning, through the shallowness of wit, and other affairs that I was busied
in; yet man does easily flatter himself, and attributes unto himself more then
falls to his share. Which is the cause why ambition is seen to get into all
places, yea even into their most secret retirements who forsake the world,
being a vice which is the harder to be cured, for that it keeps close and
hidden. But what shall I say more? What could I answer, if I should be asked
what fruit I reaped by these my studies? I might peradventure say, that the
little of Philosophy which I learnt has more awakened my understanding in
knowing the truth of things.

But say I pray, what need has he to have recourse to the candle light of
humane knowledge, who has the bright Sunshine of Grace in him, and to whom
infallible truth is revealed? I did for a while give my self to study Moral^ie,
wherein I took such delight, as I wrote a book thereof, which I was afterward
persuaded to print, and so to impart it unto others: I learned how to become
morally good; it is true I did; but is not the first precept in this knowledge,
that the doctrine of manners, is it of self very vain? For it consists in
doing, in action, not in knowing; it had been much better, that setting his
commandments before mine eyes, who is the true and real Master of that
Christian life which I live, and have yet to live, I should have employed my
time in observing the precepts of the divine Law, rather then in collecting the
Documents of Philosophers; who wanting the taste of that truest, chiefest, and
most excellent virtue, which divine love does so much the more afford, as it is
the more ardently inflamed, applied themselves to a certain mediocritie, which
is better discerned or known in their Idea, or in their writings, then in the
affections or actions which they go about to moderate. Afterward, when I was
come to man's Estate, being commanded so to do by him whom I ought to obey, and
it being a thing also which I my self did much desire, I betook my self to
write the History of my Country; a good and gallant work. But what proportion
can the good reward which I hoped for thereby, bear with the pains I took,
which was truly very great? Had I spent part of the time and study which I
employed therein, in the reading of divine Books, I cannot doubt but that I
should have been inflamed with the love of spiritual things, which for so long
a time I did so little relish. And to pass by other things, I cannot deny, as
best knowing mine own intrincecal affections, but that whilst I labored so much
to celebrate the fame and glory of others by these my Writings. I often felt
within my self a certain tickling and delight out of the hope which I flattered
my self withal, and wherewith I nourished my thoughts, that by these my labors
I my self might likewise reap some honor; and (as the Poets say) live in my
fame after my death. Oh gross vanity! and when this affection (with which I
must confess I was sometimes drunk) gives place to reason, I acknowledge, that
amongst all vanities none is greater then wordly glory; which is vain, because
man glories of that which is none of his, for he has received every good
thing, especially the endowments of the soul, from God: Vain, because it is
nothing of it self; it has no true existenc^e, it is made up of various
opinions of men, and of theirs most, who know least; Vain, because it reflects
upon that which is not in us, upon that which is a trivial and common accident,
to wit our Fame, the memory whereof we do with so much vanity desire to
propagate. Tell me thou humane soul, which are so much ^^amored of this bare
shadow of good, which does not at all belong unto thee, if after thou art
departed out of this world, thou could have any thing to do with humane
affections, what good would this folse glory do thee, which thou do so much
do^e upon, as thou do sometimes lose the way which leads to true heavenly
glory: If thou shall be damned, and in the eternal torments of Hell, think
thou that the satisfaction of this thy glory shall be able any ways to ease
those immense and unconceivable Torments? and in thou shall be fixed in heavenly
bliss, what need in that abode has he of worldly glory, who is glorified with
eternal glory? who is satisfied, who is content, who is for ever blessed? But
since I examine mine own ways, I return to consider my life.

Some few years since I gave myself to the government of my Country; wherein I
found the way so plain and easy, and the savor and grace of my Country so far
above my merits, as I soon got into great Honors, and into the chiefest
Employments, which I still contain in, and do employ my time. But my Talent is
so small, as though I spend it all, I know it is but little. And if I spend
all, how can I, according to humane respect, be blamed? Or what reason have
others to complain more of me, then I have of my self? Since so little a part
of my life remains, or almost none at all, wherein I may recollect my thoughts,
what time have I to think of my end? to repent me of my sins? to endeavor
amendment* and yet I see I am not diligent in doing any thing. The most
troublesome, yea, and the most contented thoughts wherewith my mind is now
encumbered, will vanish as a shadow, or as smoke before the wind, and shall be
withered as flowers by the Suns beams; and yet whilst this mind of mine is
continually involved in these afficuous cares, it is so filled with the
fantasms of those things wherein I employ my self all the day long, as I most
meditate only upon them, and though unwillingly, have them always before mine
ties, at all times, in every place, and upon all occasions: So as all
contemplation of nobler and better things which I sometimes turn my self unto,
is always mixed with these base affections, and troubled with these clouds of
worldly thoughts.

Alas, how hard is it to serve two Masters, God and the World? The world
measures its actions by its worldly respects; he who makes that his stay, who
lives acco^d^ng to that, can make no new laws to himself, but must govern
himself by those which are commended, and practiced by those who walk in the
ways of the world. But how far different from these are Gods ways? Patience,
Humility, Poverty, Obedience, Self-denial, and the giving over of all worldly
care, are things which are abhorred by the worldly wise, but otherwise to God.
How badly do the fallacious rules of worldly wisdom agree with the instructions
of true Christianity, especially those of this corrupt Age, wherein heavenly
and divine things are often troubled and confounded with a certain vain name of
Reason of State. Crowns, Empires, Kingdoms, and all power is given by God; and
though the weakness of our reason be such as it cannot penetrate into the
infinite abyss of his wisdom, yet does he dispose and order all things with
certain and infallible ends, though unknown to us. Therefore unless that great,
and omnipotent Lord God, by whom Kings do not only reign upon earth, but the
earth it self is sustained and held up with a miraculous equality of weight, do
not keep the City, how vain is all this your learning, O ye wise men of the
world? and you Princes, how vain are all your Forces to maintain your Lordships
and States? Thou, whosoever thou art, who do manage the weightiest affairs of
Principalities, put thy heart into the hands of thy God, and he will infuse
worthy and becoming thoughts into thee; He will give thee true Wisdom and
true Fortitude. The World builds nothing but Towers of Babell; nor is it aware
thereof, till its desig^s, and many years labors, being overthrown by its own
confusion, it sees its rashness laid low; and those thoughts which aimed at
Heaven thrown, down to Hell.

But I return again unto my self. I see that these many years past wherein I
approach to old age, I employ my time in studies, thoughts, and employments, of
differing natures in themselves, but all conformable to what tends to my
prejudice. For they robbed me of my rest, have still oprest me with many cares,
and led me astray from more holy desires, to which, if I had bent my mind in
time, I might hope now to sit and feed at the Table of those true good things
which now I want. What do I then do? What do I think? What do I expect? Why do
I not change my thoughts and exercises, if I know that those wherein I have
hitherto spent my time do me no good; nor for all the labor I have taken, have
made me ere a whit more happy then I was at first? Nay, I may say, they have
made me more wretched, since I have consumed the greatest part of my life
woefully, and without any profit. Do I peradventure hope, that whilst I my self
do not change, the nature of those things wherein I am verst should alter? That
trouble should turn to delight? That the Affairs of the world, so full of
anxious cares, should turn to the peace and solace of the soul? That worldly
good shall assume a new virtue of making their possessors well apaid and
satisfied? That these brackish waters of the pleasures of the Age, of which the
more we drink, the more we are athirst, should become sweet and savory, and
afford any true delight or content? Men who are blind in what concerns their
own good, are wont to pervert the nature of things; to make them their Masters
who are given to them to be servants. Such are the goods of Fortune, as the
common people call them, because they know not how to raise themselves up to
the knowledge of that mystery whereby their supreme Author and free Donor does
dispense them. But what greater misery is there then this humane felicity? The
true Lord and God is made known unto us, and yet we continue to adore the Idols
of Avarice, Ambition, and Vain glory: Look but upon those huge ^eaps of ^uine
which thou may every day see in the City of Rome, who was once the Queen of
the World: where are now her immense treasures? Where the majesty of her
Empire? Where the pomp of so many Triumphs? the memory of so many victories?
all these, being made the prey of time and death, (...) buried in these ruins.
But thou who live by other precepts, and who have a truer knowledge of thy
eternal life, and eternal death, consider better what the nature of these goods
are, to which thou have been sometimes ^ar^ed, with a less moderate affection,
by the torrent of continual custom. If they be not of great worth, as truly
they are not, why do thou so much love them? Why endeavorst thou so much to
be master of them? Why do thou dread the loss of them so much? And if they
have any thing of good in them, why do thou not call to mind how soon thou
art to forgo them? How comes it to pass this our happy worldly man is not
aware, that if the increase of these goods could make him happy, he makes
himself miserable, whilst through overmuch loving them, he is more intent upon
purchasing the little which he lacks, then in injoy^ng the very much which he
possesses, whilst the fear of loosing it does continually molest his mind? a
greater vexation then which the so^l has none, because it has no bounds. We
look upon their outside only, and are enamored of a certain handsome, but vain
appearance which is in them, taking them for the guids of our life. But if we
would consider their infide, and discover the deceit and cousenage which is
woven therein, we would shun them, as some holy men have done, least we be by
them, and with them hurried down into Hell and damnation. We have our happiness
within us, and seek for it elsewhere. He who will search his own house well,
what wealth shall he find there whereby to enrich himself with precious
treasure, which is hidden from us because the darkness of our affections lead
us astray. If thy heart be fraught with pure ^houghts, if thy soul be purged of
all earthly passions, so as the rai^s of that true and lively Sun which is
always re^dy to illuminate thee, may pen^trate thereinto, thou shall soon
discover there j^w^ls of such virtue, price, and worth, as thou may thereby
purchase the worlds peace and heavens glory. Thou shall find those affections
which now rage tumu^tuously within thee, become quiet and obedient to reason;
and those dissonant sounds which do so perturb thy mind, will agree with so
just proportion, as they will make a sweet harmony in thy soul, and will prove
a refreshing to the troubles of the world, a figure of heavenly m^lodie, and of
the glory of Paradise. O you Fathers, you good and holy Fathers, who being
within your Closter live in peace and quiet, f^r from the World, and the cares
thereof, not only in your person, but in your very thoughts; if there may be
any affection found without affection, and envy without sin, I do assuredly
envy in you those your leisure times, wherein you giv^ your selves wholly to
prayer and meditation; an idleness, which is true business tru^ entertainment,
and the true nutriment of the soul. What are Crowns, Scepters, and to be
clothed in purple, but bo^ds whereby to keep those miserable ones, whom the
world terms happy, fastened to perpetual vexation, and troublesome ^ar^s? With
you, O Fathers! it is that peace does inhabit; peace which k^eps you at unity
within your selves, keeps your Affections obedient to Reason, and your Reason a
devout handmaid to God. How can he who lives in the worlds Militia, taste of
these fruits of true peace? So full of cares, and destracted with so many
thoughts? Who is continually to combat with those Enemies who wage within him,
to wit the affections of worldly things, to the which we our selves, do as it
were furnish Forces against our selves, by finding out new objects, and new
materials whereby to increase them. We worldly men will feed the soul with meat
which belongs not to her, wherefore it is no wonder if we be never satisfied,
and if one appetite beget another even in infinitum; You, you are they who
teach us by your lives and examples, that nature is satisfied with a little;
and that man can never be said to be rich by abundance, nor poor by want; other
goods, other endowments, other ornaments are requisite then those the world
seeks after; the further a man advances therein, the further he finds himself
entered into an intricate and confused Labyrinth, and after having made a long
voyage, he finds himself further from his journies end then when he first set
forth. But I perceive that I praise Mary, and follow Martha; I know which is
the right and safe way, and I take an intricate and dangerous way to lead me to
my desired end. I am busied, solicited, and troubled with many things, and yet
I know that one thing is only necessary, that there is but one thing which
can so become the companion of my life, as it will never forsake me. I serve
the world, and being given over to cares I entertain them more and more; love
of Children, Household government, administration of goods, the Commonwealths
business, are things which I would fain free my self of; but I neither know
how, nor when to do so. I endeavor to be less affectionate in having to do with
worldly things; to taste them for nutriment, not to be drunk with them; but how
hard is it to fix the slippery appetite so, as it fall not from the use to the
abuse of those things, whereunto it is continually excited by the provocation
of its perpetual companion, Sin? He who stands always near the fire, though he
thrust not himself into it, so as he be burnt and consumed, yet he must feel a
troublesome heat; and which is worse, the soul which is outwardly warmed with
these earthly affections, freezes inwardly for what concerns divine things:
Prayers grow lukewarm, a^ms-deeds scarce, fastings not usual; and in brief,
the thoughts of the soul are choked by the cogitations of the body. Yet I am
much comforted, that I find in my self continually a desire of becoming better;
which is a sign that I have not lost the princi^les of well doing, and that I
am not given over by the immen^e grace of my Creator. Though I sail through the
troublesome Sea of this world; though my actions and thoughts flote up and down,
not knowing where to find a Haven to put into; yet (thanks be given to God)
this ship of my soul which contains many precious wares in her which were
assigned over unto her, has not made shipwreck. The integrity of
communication, purity of conscience the knowledge of the truest good, things
which I have not used according to their worth, are yet preserved at their true
price and value; so as they may one day enrich my soul. Thou my Lord, thou my
Creator, thou my Redeemer, to whom my thoughts are better known then to my
self, let this my reverent affection be acceptable to thy charity; through thy
great goodness pardon my imperfections, and supply my defaults by thy infinite
merit, so as I may totally despise these earthly things; free me from these
fetters; keep not mine eyes fixed upon the earth, but turn them unto thee that
art the summum bonum, and my souls sole felicity; ^ince thou know far
better then my self what way I had best walk in to purchase salvation. If I be
called to take pains in this State, and to use my talent in this Civil life, do
thou, O Lord, so assist my weakness by thy great grace and goodness, as that
acknowledgments may only be made to thee, the Author of all my goodness for
all my happy succes^es; thine be all honor and praise; and suffer me not to
lose that reward of my worldly labors, which thou thy self have bin pleased
that I should purchase by undergoing them in thy name, and by pi^ecting all my
Actions to thee. Grant, O Lord, that I may so think upon my mortal Children, as
that I may not forget thee my eternal Father; govern thou all my Faculties so,
as I may know thou gave me them, that thou preservest them to me, and that it
is my duty to make use of thy Graces; that I may love my earthly Country, yet
not so, as to make less esteem of my heavenly Country; that I may serve and
obey my Commonwealth with integrity of conscience, with an intention to serve
her, and not my self, and for thy glory, not for mine own. This is a miraculous
work of thy hand, and which is only to be acknowledged from thee. She is the
only example, in having for so long a series of years, preserved her self in
Liberty, in Power, and in the true Religion: therefore if I cannot with fervor
of spirit serve thee immediately, grant yet that I may serve thee not
unworthily nor unusefully in this most excellent creature of thy making. And
since it now falls to my share to serve my Country in this holy City of Rome,
as her Ambassador to Pope Clement the Eighth; Grant that by serving this thy
Vicar upon earth, I may serve thee the better, who art the true and supreme
Lord of Heaven. Of thy great goodness give me that which I do not deserve;
accept of my good will, for the good works which I ought to do; and infuse thy
Spirit into this thy Vicar, the common Father of thy People, and Shepherd of
thy Sheep, who is so full of zeal and charity; so as that he may be able to
draw this weathe^beaten ship of Christianity out of the storming Sea of these
troublesome times and that she be being gotten into the Haven of peace and
safety, may with hands lifted up to Heaven say, This is the day which the Lord
^ath made, let us rejoice therein, and let us always bless his most holy Name.

FINIS.

