Blood for Blood, OR, JUSTICE EXECUTED FOR Innocent Bloodshed. Being a true
Narrative of that late horrid Murder, committed by Mary Cook, upon her own and
only beloved Child, with several remarkable passages, preceding the fact, as
also what was most worthy observation, during her Imprisonment, and at her
Execution, faithfully communicated for Public Satisfaction.

By N. Partridge, and J. Sharp. With a Sermon upon the same occasion. With
other Spectaters and Visiters whilst in Prison, and at her Execution.

LONDON, Printed for F. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar;
and D. Newman, at the Chyrurgions-Arms in Little-Brittain. 1670.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
HEre is at length now exposed to public view this brief, but true Narrative
(of that ever to be abhorred cruelty of M. C. in murdering her innocent Babe)
which we humbly submit to thy favorable censure and charitable interpretation.

Two reasons especially have drawn it forth,

First, to fulfill the will of the poor creature which was executed, who had an
earnest desire at the place and time of her execution, to have given glory to
God, by confessing her sins, accepting her punishment, and giving warning to
all the numerous spectators of the evil of sin, and the danger of eternal
wrath; but natural strength failing her, wished some of us in the Cart with
her, to have manifested the same then; but the noise of the multitude was such,
that it could not be done conveniently; some days passed after before any
thoughts were stirred up in us to publish any thing of this nature, during
which time some of us could have little rest, apprehending some neglect might
be imputed unto us, in a business, which for ought we knew might be for general
good.

As we would not cover over with gilt or paint, rotten Wood or Copper, neither
would we bury under dirt the least grain of pure Gold; therefore we have not
taken upon us to pass any judgment upon the dying state of M. C. but leave it
unto him who sees and looks into the hidden man of the heart, and weighs
both sins and repentance in the balance of the Sanctuary; and to the judicious
Reader, who we hope will measure what is spoken by her, and of her, by the rule
of Christian charity, and as we apprehended in her whilst living, great fear,
and yet greater hopes; so we leave her now dead, looping that her application
to the blood of Christ was sincere (as discovered more at large in the
following Narrative) the which blood speaks better things than the blood of
Abel; his precious blood crying to God for mercy, may outcry the loud cry of
the innocent blood, shed by her for vengeance.

The second reason was, That this (through the blessing of God) might be a word
in season, both to Professors and profane persons, in this day of Satan's
violent temptations; to Professors, because we find by daily and sad
experience, the Devil setting upon those richly laden with choice treasures,
with furious assaults; to them therefore speak we (or rather the Lord) look
well to your foundation; secure your principles, live in the daily exercise of
those rooting graces, humility, self-denial, and repentance, and then grow up
in the nutritive graces, faith, hope and love, and to crown all, let integrity
and uprightness preserve thee, and so persevere unto the end, the Lord helping
thee to set up his watch tower in thy heart, continually natural reason and
common providence may prompt thee, to secure and watch thy outward estate, but
grace alone instructs thee how to keep thy heart, were thy heart danger-free,
from enmity without, and treachery within; thou had then a Plea for the
abatement of thy souls intention herein: but whilst a danger of surprise by
both remit no diligence, show me that man or woman whom the impudence of sin
and Satan does not sometimes charge and assault; but if such a one cannot be
found, be convinced of thy need of the Divine breast plate, which will not only
put temptations back, but force the tempter to surcease his assaults; or if so
impudent, notwithstanding, will yet enable thee to shake them of (as St. Paul
did the Viper from his hand) unburt.

And to the profane, that they by reading this sad relation, as the
consequences of sin, [and the awakening Sermon thereunto annexed] may come to
know themselves, and their unsafe condition, whilst in their unregenerate
state, and the Spirit of God working with it, they may be thereby provoked to
consider their ways, and amend them, before the day come wherein sinners shall
cry out, Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? Who shall abide with
everlasting burnings? For the day of the Lord will burn as an Oven, and sinners
shall be as stubble: Oh! therefore it is to warn them to flee from the wrath to
come, and in the bowels of our Lord Jesus, to beseech thee to look their faces
in the glass of Gods Law, and to continue therein, and be a doer of the work.

And now Reader, because the cry of blood reaches unto the Heavens, and
calls for a narrow search and inquiry from thence, that justice may take
place, and vengeance from God may be executed, to answer the nature of the
crime committed, the sin of blood being of that deep die in the eyes of God,
that he has left in his written Word no City of refuge to fly unto for the
outward part of the offender, though sought, if possible, with tears of blood;
yet is his Law unalterable, Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed, Genesis 9.6. Weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth will not here
prevail, nor can create a door of hope; witness the case of poor Butler and
Savage, who wrung their hands for sorrow, smote upon their breasts, and with
thousands of bitter sighs cried, Oh, that I had not done this wicked Act; what
to murder my inno- friend? It makes me so far from desiring life or refuge
here, that I am not meet nor worthy to tread any longer upon Gods earth, nor
yet to live in the society of men, or to be seen above ground, or die a natural
death upon my body, but must call for justice, justice, justice, and that in a
violent way it may be executed upon me, to send me as speedily as is possible
from off the earth I have so defiled, by so dreadful a sin as this my Murder
was: And no marvel but the offender, if touched with a thorough sense of this
dreadful crime, must and will thus cry out for speedy and public justice to be
done upon him in the sight of the Sun, while the Law of God is so far from
giving respect in this case to the Judges of the earth, that he will punish not
only particular persons, but Families, yea Cities and Kingdoms too, where
justice for this bloody crime is omitted or remitted; and when the Magistrate
has done his Office, so dreadful in Gods eye is this foul Crime, that after
sentence and execution has removed the Offender from the society of men,
except deep sorrow and unfeigned repentance, bitter sighs, lamentable cries,
and above all, the blood of a Savior does mediate to the appeasing wrath, the
same Offender must be given up into the hands of Devils, to be tormented with
fire and brimstone; whereas St. Mark says, their worm shall never dye, and
their fire shall never be quenched.

Therefore Reader, if Murder speaks thus loud with God and man, no doubt but
City and Country will ring of it; and Oh, that the cry of this, even of this
(that a Mother should so forget her tender Babe, as not only to neglect it, but
the worst of evils to murder it; yea, to bath as it were her hands in her
child's blood: We again pray and say, Oh, that it might, if possible, reach to
the ends, not only of England, but the earth, to beget a reverence to God, a
dread to sin, and a continual praying and watching over our hearts and lives,
and to bespeak warning to all, that none henceforward upon themselves, their
child or neighbor, shall entertain a thought to do this abominable thing that
God so hates.

In a word, there is nothing in the world, the flesh, or the devil can suggest
(how taking soever with thy sensual affections, or however backed with
arguments of pleasure, or profit, or secrecy) but this Narrative and Sermon,
may teach thee to retort upon the suggester, How can I do this wickedness and
sin against God, or hearken to this lying vanity, and forsake my own mercy: Oh,
that when you find your hearts at any time, sordid a cogitare, a vain sinful
thought arise, or lust conceive in thee, thou would dash it in pieces against
the spiritual rock Christ, and oppose enticements unto the secretest evils,
with that (...), that the eye of God sees thy most retired thoughts and actions
whilst yet unhatched, and in the shell, are open and manifest to him; fearing
that the porch is too large already, to conclude, in order to the spiritual and
eternal advantage of your soul, we leave this short warning, and small
expedient in your hands; and if it may further that end, we have our aim, and
let God have the sole praise.

A more full account of the life and death of Mary Cook, taken by several Eye
and Ear Witnesses, most conversant with her, from the hour she did commit that
horrid Murder upon her Child, till she was laid in the Grave.
THe subject of our present Narrative being a horrid Murder: Before we come to
the sad and Tragical matter of Fact, give us leave in a few lines, to open the
hainousness of this sin, the dangerous consequences of it, and what means ought
to be used for the preventing of it.

No Sin committed against the Commandments of the second Table, cries louder
to God for vengeance, and unto Man for Justice than the shedding of innocent
blood: And the Lord said unto Cain, What have thou done? the voice of thy
Brothers blood cries unto me from the ground, Genesis 4.10. Rev. 6.10.

1. God will not stop his ears from the cry thereof, nay he seems to speak,
as if he could have no rest until he be avenged on the Murderer.

1. Because it is a sin against his express Commandment; Thou shall not kill,
Exodus 20.13.

2. Because it is the defacing of Gods Image in which man is Created, Whosoever
sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed; Why? For in the Image of
God made he Man: Genesis 9.6. Now to raze the Kings Picture or great Seal, is High
Treason.

2. Man ought not to stop his Ears from the cry of innocent blood, because
there is no way to purify the Land from the guilt of innocent blood, but by
executing Justice upon the Blood-shedder.

You shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer, So you shall not
pollute the Land wherein you are; for blood defiles the Land, and the Land
cannot be cleansed of the blood shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it, Numb. 35.33.

Now as above said, Gods Command is expressly, Thou shall do no Murder.

1. Murder lies either in the Omission of Duty, in doing good to my self or my
Neighbor, with respect unto Soul or Body, whereby I may procure his welfare.

2. In practicing evil against my self, or Neighbor, whom I am commanded to
love as my self, and to avoid all cruelty and unmercifulness against him.

A word or two of Soul-Murder.

Soul-Murder is dreadful, though minded but by a few in the World, the greater
pity.

1. When a people perish for want of plain and faithful preaching; If thou warn
not the wicked, and he dye in his sin, his blood will I require at thy hand,
Ezekiel. 33.8.

2. When Parents and Masters of Families neglect their Duties to the souls of
those that are committed to their charge, mind not to teach Children and
Servants to know God, and to train them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord; to stir them up to read and hear Gods holy Word, and to hallow Gods Holy
day to sanctify it, and themselves to the Worship and Service of their God,
whereby they might come to know God, and Jesus Christ, which is Life Eternal,
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.

May not we take up a lamentation for the excessive Remisseness in this Duty;
Youth for the most part, suffered upon the Lords day to take their pleasure, as
if it were a day only for play: Sad will the charge be of such Masters and
Parents at the last day?

And those Children and Servants that are Sons of Belial, will be under no
Yoke, but refuse to receive instruction, and turn away from, or stiffen the
neck against reproof, shall dye without remedy, and his Souls blood required at
his own hand, Prove. 1.29. But so much shall suffice to be spoken of
Soul-Murder, or Omission of Duty to the Soul. So I may murder my self or
Neighbor by wilful neglect of doing good to my self: when I shall refuse
either Food or Physic which God has ordained for the preservation of natural
Life or Health.

The principal thing is to open Murder, as it lies under the practice of Evil
against my self or Neighbor, which is done, sometimes secretly, sometimes
openly.

1. Secretly, When I am angry with another without cause, or that it exceeds
the cause, either for time or measure: When passion sinks deep in the heart it
becomes devilish; So that there should never be anger in our breasts where sin
against God is not the cause, otherwise, you sin in being angry, and give place
to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. If you be angry only for some injury done to
your self, you may easily find pride at the Root, and if not timely prevented
revenge will be the Fruit.

Qu. But how shall I prevent it?

1. Lay those manifold offenses done by thee against God into the Balance
against those offenses or injuries men do against thee, and that may be one way
to abate hate, Tit. 3.2.

2. No provocation can be given to thee but by Gods permission, for the trial
and exercise of thy Graces and Virtues; Therefore David said, Let Shimei Curse.

3. Avoid all kindling or blowing up the flame of passion in thy own breast,
put, and keep at a distance all that combustable stuff that would take fire;
Be not a Companion of the Gamester, the Drunkard, or the froward in Spirit.

4. Consider, that anger rests in the bosom of Fools: So much fury, so much
folly. Eccles. 7.11.

2. When it causes envy to rise in my breast against my Neighbor; Herein the
Devil was a Murderer, for that he envied our first Parents happiness, the
melioriety of their estate, he being fallen himself: And Cain being of that
Seed, he envies Abel, because accepted of God before him.

Now this springs from the want of true Love, and from overmuch Self-love,
for love envies not, 1 Cor. 13.4. And he that hates his Brother for that good
which is in him, for which he should love him is a Murderer, 1 John 3.5.

Now Satan takes the advantage to kindle the Fire and Fuel, and make it bouse
over, and break forth in action, either against others or our selves in
Revenge, and injuring our neighbor, in desires or purposes of Revenge, as Esau
said in his heart, The days of mourning for my Father are at hand, then will I
slay my Brother Jacob for the Blessing, not considering whose propriety it is
to Revenge Wrong, Romans 12.19.

And hence proceeds actual Murders against our Neighbor or our selves,
sometimes secret, by giving or taking poison or giving way to Temptations of
tha^ kind.

Sometimes open, by laying violent hands upon our selves or others.

1. Upon our selves, A Sin so heinous in the sight of God, that he Commands if
a Beast slay a Man, the Beast was to be stoned to death, although he had
neither Law nor Reason to restrain him, how much more Man whom God has endowed
with a Reasonable Soul, and bounded with a Righteous Law, Exodus 21.28.

Now this is so much the more evil, by how much the nearer and stronger the
bonds are, by which God and Nature binds us to preservation, whether the Bonds
of Consanguinity or Affinity, but most Monstrous and Unnatural of all, is to
lay violent hands upon our selves, to whom I am bound by all Bonds to love and
preserve; Therefore for one to rend in sunder his own Soul and Body, is very
dreadful, breaking all Bonds of God and Nature, and for ought man can judge,
plunging themselves into Hell without Remedy, there being no space betwixt Sin
and Death for Repentance, and certainly no Murderer has Eternal Life in him,
1 John 3.15.

Now, what is the cause? Find out that, and you have half the cure.

1. No one lays violent hands upon themselves, but pride is the root of it,
discontented with Gods wise providential disposal, when persons choose and
resolve not to be at all, because they may not be what they would be
themselves, not submitting themselves to what God will have them to be.

2. Unbelief and impatiency, want of faith in God to keep him in a quiet
waiting upon the wise Governor of all things, to work a good issue for us out
of troubles.

2. None lay violent hands upon others but for want of retaining the knowledge
and awe of the all-seeing and sin-revenging God in their hearts; as you may
read at large, Romans 1.28, 31.

Now to prevent both,

1. Beg earnestly of God to write his Law in thy heart, and to put his fear in
thee, and keep thee in a meek and quiet frame of spirit.

2. If at any time differences do arise that may by Satan or thy own heart be
blown up to passionate revenge, do these few things.

1. If two constructions can be made of a word, or gesture, or action, be sure
to make the best. It is a note of a wicked person to invent evil, if he may
construe it unto good.

2. Be as ready to forgive as you would be forgiven your self, either of God or
man.

3. Seek, yea pursue peace until you overtake it, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9, 11. If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men; avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath, Romans 12.18, 19.

4. Carefully maintain a noble spirit of sympathy with any when under
temptation or oppression: Could we obey that blessed rule to do as we would be
done unto, Gal. 6.1, 2. it would abate anger, prevent revenge and murder; which
is to the matter of fact. Now we shall proceed to give you the relation, with
the aggravating circumstances which accompanied this heinous, and we think almost
unparalleld murder.

The person which committed this murder, was one Mary Cook, the wife of T. C.
living since the late dreadful fire in Cloth-fair, near Smithfield in London,
who was about the age of 37 years, and had been married to her said Husband
near 12 years, by whom she had eight children; and by the relation of many
creditable persons who have known her of a child, have given this character of
her, That she was of a very civil and sober life and conversation, living in
the neighborhood very inoffensively; but also, that she was of a very
melancholy temper, which is the Anvil that the Devil delights to forge upon;
for now Satan makes use of all advantages against her, to increase her
melancholy, blowing up in her mind great discontent with her present condition;
so that as her affection unto it decreased, so her affliction in it increased;
insomuch, that common business became a burden, and fears arose in her as to
wants, that in fine, she fancied death less bitter than life; and now the Devil
having thus far prevailed, is not wanting to put her upon such temptations as
might speed her ruin.

1. Then the Devil stirs her up to revenge, and this as she has related since,
did give her a kind of secret content, and this temptation prevailed much with
her; for being asked that morning she committed the fact, what might be the
reason of it? one answer was, That she had been a fortnight sick and weak, and
no one took care what she wanted; thus through temptation she prefers revenge
before temporal safety and eternal peace.

2. The Devil prevailed with her to keep his secrets and counsel, for she
discovered her affliction to ^one that might pray with or for her, or could
give suitable counsel to her, and help to bear her burden; by which means she
struggling in her own strength, until at last she concluded there was no hope
of amendment of her condition, or ease to her troubled mind, but by death.

3. Temptation by which the Devil prevailed upon her, was to grow mindless of
hearing Gods holy Word preached, or read the Scriptures, or to perform public
or private prayers; this had prevailed so high, that the morning she gave that
fatal blow, she confessed for months together she had not been at Church to hear
God's Word taught, neither had been much (if at all) troubled for her
backwardness or neglect therein. Thus did she at once provoke the Devil to bend
his bow against her, and left her self distitute of those special remedies to
avoid his keen and dreadful arrows.

4. Temptation was her self-murder; and this she did with great liking embrace,
being more concerned how to bring it about with speed and secrecy, than either
to discover it or prevent it.

And first, she resolves of drowning her self; to promote which design she goes
into a solitary place in the fields, walking to and fro like a distracted
Woman, but could not find where to pitch the best convenience for her purpose,
still wandering about until God in his good providence at last met her with some
suitable acquaintance, which prevented the Devils temptation from having
success at this time.

Some time after this, now above a year and quarter agone, she is put upon
another device to her own destruction, namely, to hang her self, for which
purpose she had gotton two long skenes of silk, and in her own celler was
preparing to act this sad tragedy; but a kinswoman going into the celler, and
seeing her stand in the corner, told her Uncle, the Woman's Husband, who ran
down and found the skenes of silk in her hand, demanding what she was doing?
She then told him her intentions if he had not prevented her; he got her up,
and went and fetched her father unto her, and they together endeavored to
persuade her: Then her Husband knocked down all the nails and hooks in the
celler, to prevent her for the future.

But it is here worthy of consideration, to all that shall read this sad story,
whether upon giving up themselves under this assault to fasting and prayer,
with deep humiliation before God, might not have proved an effectual means to
have cast out this kind of Devil.

For the Devil sets upon her again to be her own Executioner, and to cut her
own throat; for which purpose she gets a knife and whets it sharp, and sets it
to the hollow of her throat and makes a small scar, causes some blood to
issue; but whether from the bluntness of the point of the knife, or the failing
of her spirits, it would not enter, whereupon she put the knife into her skirt,
hoping to take another opportunity to accomplish her design upon her self,
still keeping the Devils counsel, and consulting with him and her own evil
heart, who never left hurrying her with temptations, until he had prevailed
upon her.

Now at last the habit of wicked devices had so taken root in her, that she
thirsted, and as it were was impatient, till some way or other her own life was
brought to an end; for on the 5th. of February last past, her Husband being for
some hours absent, (and as she apprehended, neglected his business at home, she
grew full of discontent,) who coming in, and saying, Mary, I must go out again;
she answered, if you do, I will cast the child into the fire, but his
compliance and stay prevented this; yet still the Devil pursues her like a
roaring Lion, seeking to devour her; for that night a great pressure of
melancholy discontent overwhelmed her, to a restlessness of body and spirit,
much like them in Deuteronomy. 28. who in the evening wished that it were morning, and
in the morning, Oh, that it were evening: so that in the night, when her
Husband was in bed and asleep, she took the child out of the cradle down into
the Kitchen, which when her Husband awaked and missed, he knocked, whereupon she
brought up the child, and laid it into the cradle, and came to bed, but he
could get no satisfactory answer why she took down the child, but she lay until
the morning, which when it approached, being February 6th. the Lords day,
whether any discomposure happened betwixt her Husband and her, because his
better days garments were not laid out ready for him, or what it was God
knows, but the sequel was dreadful, for all contributing together, fills her
brim-full with resolution to some horrid and speedy execution; for soon after
she arose, and had made her fi^e one story lower, she takes her knife and whets
it sharper, and makes the offer to her own threat as before is hinted; but the
Husband having knocked twice to have her come up to give him his better clothes,
and she not coming, he arose, put on his every days clothes, and came upon
her, and very probably prevented her execution of her self; he asking her why
she came not up when he knocked, she gave him no answer, but slips up the stairs
into the chamber where the Babe lay in the cradle, and now the Devil puts her
upon a fresh consultation what should become of that child, which she so dearly
loved, after she was dead; upon this she concludes, she had better rid that of
life first, and then all her fears and cares for it would be at an end, and so
she should put an end unto her own miserable life, which was so burdensome unto
her; the which temptation for want of having the fear of God in her heart, she
gave way unto, and sitting down by the cradle, asked the innocent Babe about
two years and one quarter old, Betty, Wilt have thy breakfast? unto which the
Babe answered, Ey, crying, Aha, aha, as it used to do when it was pleased, and
put forth her hand to stroke her Mother; but she laying aside all Motherly
Bowels, took the Babe out of the cradle, set her on her lap, took the knife out
of her skirt, laid her left hand upon its face and chin, and with the other
hand cut her throat at one stroke, in a ghastly manner to behold, then threw it
from her upon the hearth.

This relation she gave her self but the da^ before her execution, with this
doleful reply That when she did that barbarous act, the child gave one skreek,
and fetched three o^ four dreadful sighs, and so became the Mothers sinful
sacrifice; which sighs she mentioned with much dejection of spirit, saying
nothing like that gave her fresh grief an^ trouble, for she was followed with
the imagination that she heard its doleful sigh^ still.

Thus having given the fatal blow, she stamped with her foot for her Husband,
and as an amazed Woman, half dead, cast he^ self down upon a low seat, with her
bloody hands on each side covered with part of he^ upper garment, and her head
leaned against a Chest of Drawers, did thus with an affrighted countenance
repose her self; and it i^ worthy of note, that with the violence of the act,
when she cut her Babes throat, both he hands was so colored with blood, that
she could not endure the sight of them; the terror of this fatal stroke made
such a seizure upon her conscience, with the reflection of that doleful sight,
her child lying before her eyes, with its heart-blood running out; immediately
upon this, her Husband approaching at the Chamber Door, saying, Wife, what is
the matter you so hastily knock with your feet? dolefully replied, she had
given the child its breakfast. No sooner had she spoke, but he beheld with an
afflicted spirit his Babe lie bleeding on the ground, at which amazement broke
out into such lamentations as occasioned both Lodgers and Neighbors to
approach; the Chyrurgion being mentioned to be sent for, to which she replied,
you may save that labor, for I am sure I have killed it. Now the doleful
report of this dreadful act did soon spread it self, upon which both neighbors
and strangers press in; amongst others, some of the relaters of this bitter
story providentially going that way, was invited up stairs, where they found
the bleeding Babe but newly dead, the Father wringing his hands, and shedding
multitude of tears, like a man so amazed, as half distracted (God forbid but we
should give him his due) his behavior to appearance did express, that with a
lamentable resentment he received this sad news.

The Mother when she had done this act was exceeding stupid, though much was
said to her, and prayers performed with her, and such Scriptures laid before
her of the dreadfulness of the sin, and punishment due for i^ both in this
life, (and without repentance in the life to come; yet she could not she^ one
tear, and being demanded why she ha^ done this, and spoken to to behold her
dea^ Babe, how it lay murdered upon the groun^ before her eyes, being murdered
by thos^ hands; she then appeared not relenting a^ all, but said, it was done
because she wa^ weary of her life, her Relations slighting he^ and lest that
child being most in her affection, should come to want when she was gone she
killed it first, knowing that way would also bring her to her desired end. This
wit^ many other passages, not here so convenien^ to mention (because of the
survivors) of the like nature was also uttered. But now appears Constables and
other Parish Officers who caused her narrowly to be searched, for fear of knife
or any cord being found about her, lest she might therewith take the like
advantage to destroy her self the next opportunity; her garters being then
given up, bu^ nothing else of danger found about her; being told it was feared
she would also kill her self answers no, she should not do so; and being
demanded whether she was sorry for wha^ she had done? replies, she could wish
she had not done it, but now it was too late; then being demanded whether she
was willing to be prayed for? said yes, for she could not pray for her self; so
being desired to go down to her knees, and hold up her eyes and hands, readily
did, but could neither weep nor sigh at that time; when her hour was come to be
carried before the Justice, she did without any appearing remorse, either in
carriage or countenance, make ready her self, took her rings from her fingers,
caused a pair of silver clasps to be cut from her Scarf, gave her Husband the
several keys of Trunks, Chests or Boxes, telling him which particular key was
for such and such a use, in so unconcerned a manner, to all appearance, as if
going only to take some long journey, which verily in charity leads us to
believe she was so overwhelmed with melancholy, as one bereft of senses; being
now carried before Sir William Turner, and being demanded whether she had
killed her child? replied, yes; then being asked why? replied, she was
discontented, and thought her Husband and Relations did not love her; being
again demanded why she thought so, assigned no cause, but that she did believe
so; upon this her bloody knife, and both her bloody hands was exposed to view,
and her full examination taken, in which she lays the actual guilt wholly upon
her self, clearing all others as to fact and privacy thereunto; and indeed with
such dejection of countenance, and temper of carriage did demean her self, that
she became the pity of all or most spectators. After the Justice had told her
of the greatness of the crime, and what from men she must expect, as punishment
for the same, with serious and compassionate advice to the blood of Jesus
Christ for remedy, did thus conclude; and the God of heaven have mercy on your
soul. After which her examination was read to her, which she owned as her act,
and deed; being asked whether she could write her name? answered no; then sign
it with your mark, said the Justice, which she did, by making a cross instead
of her name; the application of which gave thoughts to some standers by, that
sure providence guided that bloody hand to sign her temporal death with a
cross, that her eternal life might as assuredly be saved by the Cross; then was
she conveyed to Newgate; but going along, suddenly turned back, and looking at
her Relation, used these words, with a doleful countenance: O, if you had been
more careful to look after me, you might have hindered me from doing this; the
application we commend to whom soever concerned, and thought it very meet to be
inserted, that such a word from a dying woman might not die with her. Then
being told by one afflicted for her, that now you are going to Prison, and from
thence must be conveyed to the Judgment Seat of men, and there receive
Sentence of death, and from thence be sent to the Judgment Seat of God; what
think you of it? I pray for your souls sake consider it; there is now but a
little step between you and eternity; to which she replied, O, I wish I had not
done this, but I am willing to die, only afraid of my soul; well, replied the
par^y, there is virtue enough in Christ's blood to wash your scarlet sins
white; I, says she, but I cannot yet repent my heart is so hard; if you cannot
repent, do what you can in order ^o repentance, be lifting up your heart, your
eyes and your hands continually to God; for you say you believe there is a God,
and if you can but speak few words, employ them that way to beg him to give you
repentance, and to soften your hard heart; remember the poor Publican, who
smote upon his ^reast, saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Will you do
what you can? Yes, I will. You say you wish you had not done this Murde^ and
that is one step to repentance, therefore labor to groan more after this, and
to tha^ end shall I put up Bills this day, as your desire, that Gods people may
pray for you Yes, very willingly I desire that, etc. Now did she arrive at the
Prison, and so with h^ Mittimus was delivered into the hands o^ the Keeper, who
with great expressions (...) pity received his Prisoner, and desired Go^ would
have mercy on her soul.

Of her behavior in the time of her Imprisonment, and other Passages very
useful for every Christian that desires to be kept from being guilty of the
like Fact.
SHe no sooner comes to Newgate, but the noise of this cruel Murder spreads
abroad, and several reports went as to her self, and what should be the causes
of that barbarous Act.

1. That the Devil appeared in a personal shape unto her, and told her she must
either destroy her self, or her Child.

2. That the day before she went to see one of her other Children at Nurse, and
would have sent the Nurse forth, that so she might have killed that Babe.

3. That she was under trouble of mind about Religion, with many other things.

Which for satisfaction to our selves and others, and clearing the truth of
Gospel-profession, (as being inconsistant for any true work of the Spirit of
God in the conviction of a sinner to leave the soul, having begun in the Spirit
to end in the flesh.) Some of those Ministers which went to visit her in the
Prison, made more than ordinary diligent search into these things. And as to
the first report she said, there was no appearance unto her but the violent
Temptation of the Devil, and her own wretched and sinful heart giving way to
the Temptation.

And as to the second, she confessed she went to see her Child at Nurse upon the
Saturday before, but it never entered into her heart to conceive a thought of
doing that Child any hurt.

And as to the third, her answer was, That there was nothing of any Religious
Concernment in it; but it was that great Discontent which she had conceived in
her mind, grounded upon her apprehension of exceeding unkindnesses of her
Relations unto her, although she had never been undutiful unto them; but very
sparing she was in accusing any but her self: And it is not the design of this
Narrative to accuse them, only to desire they may call to mind, and lay to
heart, and repent of their neglect of duty toward her, wherein they shall any
of them be conscious unto themselves of remisness; and that all others who
shall read this sad Relation, may take warning thereby, so to discharge their
relative duties, that they may not expose their Relations unto Temptations, and
so when a separation comes, either violent or natural, they have cause to
mourn all their days for their own and their other men's sins.

But as to her self, the sense of her great sin and guilt lay with such weight
upon her conscience, that Satan used his utmost endeavor to drive her into
despair of ever obtaining mercy; it being his usual method to present God all
mercy, to allure men to commit sin, and afterward to present God altogether
severity, to drive the sinner into despair of God's mercy in the pardon of
their sin.

A great wound lay upon her with respect unto her dear Babe whom she had so
inhumanly destroyed, Whether her Fact might not hinder the Child's Salvation?
Much care and pains was taken so to speak as might not in the least extenuate
the sense of her guilt, and yet to open a door of hope unto her, that the
eternal state of the Child might be safe (notwithstanding her great wickedness)
through the riches of God's grace, which shows mercy unto whom he will show
mercy, that 18th of Ezekiel, ver. 24, being read unto her.

But still she sadly bewailed the horridness of her sin, wishing often, Oh that
she had had more Grace! for, if it were to do again, she would submit to a
thousand deaths, rather than to commit that sin: And her sore trouble now was,
that her heart was so obdurate that she could not mourn as she should, and
desired to do; and begged that all good people would pray for her: And being
asked, What she desired us to pray unto God for, for her? her answer was, that
God would give her a broken and penitent heart.

She also sadly lamented her distraction by reason of her evil company in the
Room with her, that hindered both her meditations and addresses to God. O it is
sad dwelling in the Tents of Kedar, and a sore evil to leave our great work to
do until the last, not knowing what hindrance we may meet with: It is
inconvenient to cast up our Accounts in a crowd and hurry of business.

Ever and anon she would sadly bewail her want of the light of God's
countenance; and it was not to be wondered at that she was so much in the dark,
having committed such a gross sin against the light of Nature. Iniquity
separates betwixt us and our God, and causes him to hide his face, that it is
rarely if ever they recover it; though he may in mercy pardon the sin, yet he
may justly cause the sinner to go mourning and with broken bones to the grave.

The Sessions now came on, and upon the 21th of February she was arraigned and
endicted at the Old Bailey, and cast for her life.

Upon the Petition of her Husband, she had a weeks time granted her, to prepare
for her death, and being sentenced on Wednesday the second of March to die in
Smithfield, over against Clothfair-Gate, where she formerly lived when she
committed that horrid Murder.

During this time, much pains was taken with her continually, by skilful and
faithful Physicians, for her Souls recovery out of the snare of the Devil, who
had carried her captive at his will; and several Books of Mr. Baxters, and
other Books suitable to her present condition, were brought her to read, which
she seemed diligently to improve her time in, together with the holy Scriptures.

March 1. being the day before her Execution, one Mris. R. H. had an earnest
desire to see her, and to watch with her that night, and through God's mercy it
was of great use unto her, for her comfort who had now but a little time to
live.

That day being asked, If a pardon for life, or a pardon for her sin were
equally presented to choose one, which would she choose? she answered, If her
heart did not deceive her, it would be the pardon of her sin. O her sin, her
sin! her blood-guiltiness, lay with weight upon her! but still she cried out,
she could not find her heart in that broken and believing frame which she
desired it should be in.

On the same day great pains were taken with her to help her understanding and
apprehension, both as to the nature of true Repentance, and saving Faith: to
which she with more than former freedom answered, That as to Repentance opened
unto her, she hoped God had given her a sight of her sin, and a desire to be
truly humbled for it; it was her wound she was no more wounded, and that she
did desire to forsake sin with abhorrence, and to loath her self for her sin,
to lay her mouth in the dust, and yet to look up unto the Lord Jesus, if so be
she might find mercy.

And as to her Faith, she said, God had convinced her that her own
righteousness was but unrighteousness, even as a filthy menstruous cloth, and
therefore desired out of the sense of her own nothingness, and utter emptiness,
to go out of her self, and to rely upon Jesus Christ alone for Righteousness
and Salvation.

Then several Scriptures were read unto her, and pressed with earnestness upon
her, amongst many others, that in Mark 5.25. and forward, concerning that Woman
which had a bloody issue, who said in her self, If I may but touch the hem of
his garment, I shall be whole. Much was spoken unto her from this, wherewith
she was observed to be very much affected, tears trickling down more than
usually, and with earnestness said, O that I could believe!

That evening before she suffered, her Husband's long absence from her, gave
her occasion to suppose that endeavors were using for a Reprieve, or a Pardon
for her, at which she did rather express dislike, than to be well pleased,
saying, she had rather choose to die, than to continue in that place with that
wicked company, it being a Hell upon Earth, if any such were; and that she was
not at all concerned about a Pardon from Man, could she but obtain a Pardon
from Christ, it was that she most desired; nevertheless, for her better
preparation for death, she could have wished a little longer time; but she was
willing to die, if that could not be obtained.

That night she took a little rest for the supporting of nature, but it was
judged she slept not above half an hour; but some time was spent by her self,
her Husband, and Mris. R.H. in prayer and reading, she her self taking her
Bible, read the fourth chapter of Matthew, and wept much in the reading of it,
saying, The Lord Jesus was tempted, but he was God-man, and the Evil-one found
nothing in him, and so could not prevail against him: but I, a vile wretch!
Temptation no sooner came and assaulted me, but I was overcome by it; a wicked
woman that I am to give way to that roaring Lion!

Then reading Isa. 44.22. [I have blotted out as a cloud thy transgressions,
and as a thick cloud thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee] brake
out again with tears, saying, Oh! what grace is this! What, my sins! what, a
Redeemer to such a great sinner as I have been! Then turning further unto Isa.
54.7, 8. [I will have mercy upon thee, says thy Redeemer.] See, says she,
here is Redeemer again!

Her Husband, a little before morning, asked her how it was with her? she
answered, Not so well as to boast, nor so bad as to be altogether dejected.

When morning came, she dressed her self that she might be in readiness when
called, but seemed a little impatient to lose so much time in dressing her
body, when she had so little to improve for her soul which lay at stake.
Several both Ministers and other Christian friends waiting to go up unto her
when she was ready; one of them desiring to know how it was with her this
morning? she answered, that she was now entering upon the borders of Eternity,
but Oh, what should she do, she wanted the light of God's countenance!
Whereupon both awakening and comforting words were spoken unto her; and then a
little time was spent in prayer to God, that he would please graciously to
direct us so to speak unto her, as might advance his Glory, and effectually
administer comfort unto her Soul. In prayer she was seen to melt very much. And
having ended that duty, as God did direct, the words of God were spoken unto
her, and she was desired to speak what was upon her heart, for our comfort who
had been laboring for the Lord with her.

But she being silent for a little space, but observed to have some conflict in
her soul, by the tears which fell, and sighs which broke forth, It was again
propounded unto her, Whether she found not a secret persuasion, that God was
able to pardon her great and manifold sins, but also very great fears whether
he were willing yea or no?

Whereupon she broke forth into a fuller passion of tears, saying, O Sir, you
speak the very thoughts of my heart, God has convinced me of the Alsufficiency
of his Grace, that though my sins be as Scarlet, as Crimson, he can make them
white as Snow, as Woel; but O to know whether he will or no, that lies as my
great fear. -- Whereupon endeavors were used to encourage her to hope in God's
mercy, who had testified his unwillingness that any sold should perish; and
that he took no pleasure in the death of sinners, but rather desired their
return that they might live; Also the Lord Jesus graciously invited sinners,
yea the greatest of sinners, under the heaviest load and burden of their guilt
and filth, being weary of their load, to come to him that they might be saved
and find rest: and had promised, that who ever came unto him, though at last
(if in truth) he would not cast them out; and that he had sent his Ministers to
beseech sinners to be reconciled unto God; and that we came in his Name and
Authority to deliver that his Message unto her:

Therefore the Question was put unto her, Whether she was willing to accept of
mercy from Christ, and to take Him upon his own terms? Unto which she answered,
with a seemingly altered countenance as to cheerfulness, Yea, she was willing,
and desired with her whole soul, to be sanctified throughout by Jesus Christ,
and washed in his Blood, as ever she desired to be justified by his
Righteousness, or saved by his Death.

Then it was judged expedient to leave her a little retired, that she might
improve a few minutes in secret betwixt God and her own soul, desiring all the
company to withdraw, saving her Husband and Mris R.H. And after a little space
of time she desired we would come up again, and apprehending her in a pretty
good frame, willing to resign up her self now unto the Lord, what time the
Officers could spare (for now the time drew near) was spent in fervent prayers
and tears unto God with and for her: In the close, being desired to tell us
what returns God had graciously given to all our endeavors with her? she said,
that the Lord had brought her to that resolution, that although she might not
sensibly lie in his bosom, yet she would penitently lie and die at his feet;
and if she perished, she would perish there.

When she came to the place of Execution, she seemed to have a mixture of fear
and hope in her, wringing one by the hand, said, O what shall become of me now,
if my heart have deceived me hitherto! Some words being spoken unto her, she
encouraged her self again in the freeness of God's grace, and the fullness of
mercy that was in Christ for poor penitent sinners.

After earnest Prayers put up unto God for her, and seasonable Counsels given
her by Mr. Ordinary and some others, she went upon the Ladder, having before
expressed an earnest desire to have spoken to the people, but wanting strength,
she entreated us to declare to the Spectators and to all the World, That she
desired to justify the Lord in all his righteous proceedings against her, and
that she died justly for her great sin; and earnestly begged that all that saw
or heard of her untimely end, would take warning by her deplorable fall, to
take heed how they gave way to Satan's Temptations.

Being upon the Ladder, a convenient time was left her to commend her soul unto
God; and that she might not be surprised before she was ready, was desired to
give a sign when she had done; and she with the same foot wherewith she stamped
for her husband to tell him of her horrid fact which she had unnaturally done,
stamped upon the round of the Ladder, to give notice she was now willing and
ready to dye for the same: whereupon the Executioner did his office.

Many other passages might have been inserted, but because we are not willing
to make this Narrative swell too large, we shall omit them.

O that this sad Execution may cause all that hear, to fear, and do no more so
presumptuously. Deuteronomy. 17.13.

How apparent is it that the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
continually whom he may devour! And how much the more need have all the
children of men to be upon their diligent watch, and to be earnest and fervent
in prayer to God, that they may not be overcome with his temptations.

Yea, let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Let it be your care to check every temptation at the entrance of it. Consult
not with flesh and blood; give no place to slavish fears; admit of no
consultations with the Devil, lest he prove too hard for you. Give not way to
sinful anger, for therein thou give place to the Devil: And let all sinners
know, that if they do evil, sin lies at their door; if they resolve to
continue in their sin, then their sin will assuredly find them out; but if they
break off their sins by works of righteousness, repent, and return to the Lord,
iniquity shall not be their ruin.

Some passages omitted in the former Narrative.
ABout ten of the clock the morning she suffered, the Officer told her, Now
they were ready to go with her to Execution. At this many strangers that were
with her, did both with prayers and tears commend her condition to God, she
desiring they might continue the same to her end. It Is worthy of note to all
that shall read her manner of deportment at this time: She went down the stairs
in so unconcerned a manner, as though she had not been the person to suffer,
but rather a spectator; for while many that know the bitter cup she was to
drink, could not cease from deep discomposure, she seemed as a person free from
such fear or torment, as commonly attends those that have such an hour of trial
to undergo. At the foot of the stairs she had some half an hours repose, by
reason a Cart was not ready. In this intermission did many hearts yern toward
her Eternal condition, telling her now there was but one step more between her
and that. Then she asked, how she might know Jesus Christ dyed for her? It was
replied, He dyed for sinners, yea the greatest of sinners; and she knew she was
one, and a chief one; and that in the 5th of Romans, ver. 6, 8. it is said, he
dyed for the ungodly, even the worst of people, and the Scriptures did nowhere
exclude her by name from benefit in Christ's blood: and in 1 Timothy 2.3. it is
charged, that prayers and supplications be made for all; and in ver. 4. the
reason is rendered, for God would have all to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of his Truth

About this time came the Officer with a Rope, and it is worthy of note how she
then did behave her self; he makes a noose before her eyes, (enough to daunt
any beholder, much more the person for whom it was making) then he takes her
right arm and puts the Rope over that, then over her left, and so ties it with
a knot at the middle of her back; she all this while attentive to what was
spoken by the persons who came in love to visit her, appearing without change
of countenance or terror of spirit; and indeed, excepting the guilt of Murder
that lay on her conscience, her constant carriage was more like a Lamb going to
the slaughter, than a Murderer going to the Gallows. By this time the Cart was
ready, which she ascending, then told us, Nothing troubled her like that she
should bring such dishonor to God by this sin, wishing with all her heart that
all that did behold her, might take warning by her miserable estate, how they
lived in this World.

Now she is come within sight of the Gibber, on which she must in a very short
time suffer death; and then the Executioner came and undid the Rope from where
it was tied about her in the Prison, and taking off her Handkerchief, bares her
neck, ties the Rope about it, fitting the knot to her right ear, at which (to
the admiration of some present) she was not in the least terrified, nor changed
in her countenance. Mr. Ordinary now comes to pray with her, and gave her many
useful exhortations. Then did Mr. P. also pray with her in a most earnest
manner, as the last vocal prayer that was ever like to be put up unto God for
her: Then did we all present take our farewell of her, beseeching God in this
needful moment not to reject her in this miserable and low estate, which
without his mercy and pardon, must perish to all eternity. Then did Mr. P. as a
close of all, beseech her look up to a gracious God, as her last and only
refuge, and carry with her these words to Execution, Into thy hands, O Lord
God, do I commit my Spirit. Then did we lead her by the hands to the Ladder,
where she was placed a convenient distance from the ground, and the Rope
fastened to the Gibbet, while thousands of Spectators beholding her with a
general compassion, to whom we signified her desire was to have the benefit of
all their prayers: upon which, with one consent they uncovered their heads, and
lift up their hands, using this expression, The Lord have mercy upon her Soul.
Then she had near a quarter of an hours repose to her self upon the Ladder, and
though her hands were tied together, yet she was observed often to move them
upwards in her private prayer.

Then we begged her to remember to the last that God was a very gracious God,
and to give us some sign of his goodness to her at her departure, if she found
it so: Upon which she replied with such a comfortable answer as gave us
occasion to give thanks to his Name. And now to the glory of Gods mercy be it
spoken, and to the deterring all from Evil by her fall, and to the
encouragement of sinners to repentance, that they may find mercy, as we trust
she has done; for now has she to our joy (much exceeding our sorrow) ended
her life in Smithfield, near Cloth-Fair Gate, upon the 2d of this instant March
1669. with her hands lifted up to God in a most fervent manner while sense
remained, which was about half a quarter of an hour; and she continued upon the
Gibbet about three quarters more: Then was her Body taken down, and conveyed to
the same Room her dear Child was by her killed in; and on the next day after in
the evening she was buried in Great St. Bartholomew's Churchyard, being
acbompanied by a great many Neighbors and Strangers, to perform their last
office of love for the dead, that had given them no other cause while living,
but in this great transgression.

FINIS.

