LIVING WORDS THROUGH A DYING MAN; BEING A Melodious Song of the Mercies and
Judgments of the Lord, sung by a Disciple of Christ on his dying bed, when the
Pangs of Death were upon his outward man. With an Arrow shot against Babylon,
being a direct Prophecy of the Downfall of her Merchants, the Hirelings and
False Prophets. With sweet Exhortations and Prophecies also of the spreading of
the Glorious Truth of God, until it shall have covered the Face of the whole
Earth.

By one who dyed a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, FRANCIS PATCHET.

Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of these things that thou shall suffer: Behold the Devil
shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have
Tribulation Ten Days; but be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life.

Cor. 4. 16. Though our Outward man perish, yet the Inward man is renewed Day
by Day.

Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction, which is but for a Moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory.

Several Testimonies concerning the faithful Servant of God Francis Patchet of
Scotforth, in the County of Lancaster, who dyed a Sufferer for the Testimony of
Jesus; which he held against the Antichristian Oppression of Tithes inflicted
upon him by one -- Garthwaite the Priest of Lancaster: And because for Good
Conscience sake he could not satisfy the Unlawful and Unreasonable Dem^nds of
the said Priest, in giving, or paying him Tithes, he cast him into prison in
Lancaster; But this not being sufficient to satisfy his Envy and Cruelty (as
afterward will further appear) would not let him be so near home, but removed
him to London, about 180 Miles from his abode, where he was committed to the
Fleet Prison until the time of Sickness, which was unto death; and dyed a
Prisoner the 2d. of the 10th Moreth, 1677.

The Testimony of Christopher and Elizabeth Cheesman concerning him.
I Have a Living Testimony to bear concerning Francis Patchet that faithful
Sufferer in the Cause of God, who held forth his Testimony unto the end of his
days against the Oppression of Tithes, for which he dyed a Prisoner at London,
about one hundred and eighty Miles from his Habitation, being sent thither by a
persecuting hireling Priest, because for good Conscience sake he could not
satsfie his greedy Appetite, in paying or giving him Tithes; which being in
direct Opposition to the Government of our Lord Jesus Christ our High Priest,
who was sent by the Father, and offered up himself once for all, to put an end
to the first Priesthood, with Tithes and Offerings appertaining to the first
Covenant: And therefore does every one that believes in Christ Jesus the
second Covenant, and in Faithfulness obey him, deny to pay Tithes, and to
maintain such Ministers, who abide not in Christ's Doctrine, who said, Freely
ye have received freely give; which command, the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ, in days past, did keep, as do his Ministers in this our Age, Glory to
the Lord God forever.

Christ and his Apostles and Ministers took no Tithes, nor persecuted any,
either for Maintenance, or because they differed from them in Worship or
Religion. And those Ministers who obey Christ, and abide in his Doctrine, and
follow his Example, and the Example of his Holy Apostles; those are true
Ministers, and profit the People: But those who Preach for filthy Lucre; and
persecute those (who are taught of God) For Wages, for whom they do no Work;
such are they the Prophet speaks of, That run and God never sent them, and
therefore they Profit not the People at all.

And this faithful Sufferer loved not his Life unto death, but laid it down in
Testimony for the Truth of God, and a Witness against the persecuting Hireling
Priest; and is now crowned with Glory Immortal among the Redeemed of the Lord
for ever and evermore.

And I (being a frequent Visiter of him for diverse days before his Death, yea,
many times in a Day, and in that Night also; when Pangs of Death took hold onf
his outward man, under which he lay with much Patience, even as a Lamb with out
complaint, and as one not alrighted or disturbed at the appearance of Death)
can give a further and ciearer Testimony of his Faithfulness to the pure Truth
of God, which he spoke and declared of, some few hours before his departure,
being very weak, insomuch that according to outward appearance his sudden
departure was much expected; and all about him did conclude, that his Breath
was almost gone; but after he had lain still a little while, being a little
after the 12. hour of the night, at which time he began to speak and continued
speaking till about the 3. hour, in Praising and magnifying the name of the
Lord; but his Voice at first was so weak; that we could not clearly hear what
he said, only we understood that he prayed and said O Lord God of mercy,
preserve thy People, and immediately his speech was strengthened, and he spoke
with an audible voice; so that he was heard over all the Chamber where he lay,
and he began to sing forth of the mercy and goodness of the Lord, and said, O
Lord God Everlasting praises everlasting, Glory and Honor for ever be given to
thy Name; thou have made way for thy Redeemed as in ancient days, when thou
made the Sea dry land for thy People Israel to go through; Oh Glory and
Honor for ever be unto thy Name, who art Unchangeable in all thy ways; thou
made man in thy own Image, in thy Likeness made thou him; but he lost it
through Disobedience: But O Lord, in thy Unexpressible Love thou sent thy only
Son Jesus Christ the New man (not Old Adam) to redeem again; Oh everlasting
Praises to thy name for ever says my soul; Oh the Seed; the little Seed must
spring and grow, till it comes to reign, whose right it is, and all that stands
in Opposition against it must be brought under; all that is contrary to it,
must bow to its Appearance: Oh our God! there is no God like to our God: He
has given his Son a Light into the world and his Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, Glory and Honor to the Lord for ever: O this blessed day! wherein Truth
has appeared: Oh England's Glory! Truth, Truth, against all Untruth. Oh
Friends, obey the Truth, love the Truth, Buy the Truth and Sell it not. Ah
Christ Jesus The Way, the Truth and the Life! Oh my dear Friends, Brethren and
Sisters, that are here with me, I know you not (that is, after the flesh) love
the Truth, obey the Truth; Truth, Truth, Truth; God's Truth is pure, it is
holy, it admits of no Impurity, of no mixture; it leads out of the Fall, out of
the Old Adam: Oh the little Seed that grows in God's Garden! Ah dear friends,
work in the Garden of God, mind the little Penny, work in the Garden of God: Oh
how Love springs up in my Heart! Oh Praises, Praises, Thanksgiving and
Halelujah's unto our God for ever, says my soul. Oh the Unutterableness, the
Unspeakable Love to my soul this Night! Oh Praises, Praises unto the Lord, and
all that is within me give thanks and magnify his Name for ever, and ever more.

And speaking of the House of the Lord and Temple of the Lord, he said,

Glorious is the House of God; Oh! a House of Holiness, a pure House, a House
of love, and her gates praise: Oh our God is a consuming God; he consumes all
that is bad, all Impurity, all Uncleanness: our God consumes all that is
Unholy, all that is Wrong: And our God is light, and in him is no darkness at
all. Oh dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, dwell in the light; he that
dwells in the light, dwells in God; but he that dwells not in the light
dwells not in God, but in darkness, and so in Wickedness, in Sin and
Transgression, in the pride of life, and the vanities of the world. So my dear
Friends, Brethren and Sisters, love the Truth, believe in the Truth, and the
Truth will make you free: And so all that abide in the Truth they spring forth
and grow like as the Willows by the Water Courses, and shall never be Barren or
Unfruitful. Oh Friends, the Day, the promised Seed is come? Oh the Glory of
England! A blessed Day is broken forth that shall never end; he is come to
reign whose Right it is. Oh the Lamb shall have the Victory against all
Opposition whatsoever: Christ Jesus is come the promised Seed, which shall grow
and prosper till it has covered the Face of the whole Earth. And in Prayer he
said, O Lord preserve all Friends, my dear Brethren and Sisters, in the Truth
to the end and for ever.

This is part of what this faithful Sufferer did declare, when Pangs of Death
were upon his outward man, witnessed by Christopher and Elizabeth Cheesman.

And so he went forward, Praising and magnifying the Lord, declaring of his
great and wondrous works from the Creation to this day; and of the great Love
of God in sending his Son for the Redemption of man, and bringing of man back
out of the Fall: And he spoke much of the Lord's making way for his People in
this Nation of England, as in ancient days he made way through the Red Sea for
his chosen Israel to pass forth of Egypt on dry land: And he declared very much
concerning the Temple of God, and House of God, and Garden of God, beyond what
we have retained in memory, or can commit to Writing; And that God is Light,
and in him is no Darkness at all; and they that love God are in the Light, and
they that love not God, are in Darkness, and they that hate the Light walk in
Darkness, and in the Vanities and Delights, and the Abominations of the World:
And further magnifying the Name of the Lord said, Oh the Light and Everlasting
day that is now broken forth, it is the Glory of England; and the Work of the
Lord shall prosper against all Opposition whatsoever.And he often repeated it
over, -- Oh the Appearance of Truth, the Glory of England;And concerning the
House of God, The House of God (said he) is a House of Holiness, a House of
Purity, a House built without Hands, of living Stones, precious and chosen,
that need no Hammer, nor fitting with Tool. And further he declared concerning
the Word of God, and the Power of God, and that his Word and Power is one; and
that his Power is an unlimited Power, and his Mercies unspeakable toward man,
and that man's Destruction is of himself, and not of God; Not of God (said he)
and said, that The World's Breaden Christ, and Water will stand them in no
stead.

Christopher Cheesman.

SOmething is in my Heart to signify to concerning the Innocent, Lamblike life
of our dear Friend, and patient Sufferer for the Truth of our God, Francis
Patchet.

The Lord our God has pronounced Woe against all that are covered, and not with
the Spirit of the Lord; But I am satisfied and well assured, that that Dovelike
Spirit descended upon him, and was his Covering, which made him to abide in the
Doctrine, and follow the Example of his Captain Christ Jesus, whom he followed,
whose faithful Soldier he was, against Sin, the Flesh and the Devil,
triumphing in the Lord over them all, I am a living witness for him, being
constantly with him in the time of his Sickness; I asked him if he had a Wife?
he answered, Yes, a very honest loving Woman; saying at another time, He came
as freely from her as he was to go to her: He being so freely given up to
suffer for Truths sake, that he had nothing laid to his Charge. After he had
lain still some Hours, he said, My strength fails me; and I said, I hope the
Lord does not fail thee, to which he answered, Through Mercy he never did fail
me: He continuing weak, and lay speechless for some time; the Spirit of the
Lord wherewith he was coverd, revived him; whereby he had a new Strength given
to him, to magnify the pure, powerful Name of God in Prayer and Praises
saying, The Lord has laid the Foundation in Zion; the Lord is building up Zion
with chosen Stones, with precious Stones that need no Hammer nor Tool to come
upon them; the Lord is building a glorious House; and the Works of the Lord are
glorious; Oh Praises to the powerful pure Name of God! which is above every
Name; his Name has done valantly; he has stretched forth his Shepherds Crook,
he has drawna little Remnant to himself, and has led them through the Red
Sea, he has put a new Song in their Mouths, he has caused them to sing
praises upon the Banks of Salvation; pure praises unto his Pure, Holy, Powerful
Name.And in Exhortation said, Oh love the Truth, buy the Truth and sell it not?
Oh the Truth, Truth, Truth its more then all, Truth is stronger then all; the
Truth shall prosper notwithstanding all Opposition that shall rise up against
it; The Truth (said he) will make you free.And further he said, Resist the
Devil that subtle Serpent, and he willl flee from you. My Soul rejoices (said
he) to see this glorious day of the Lord.

Here follows something of the Expressions of Dear Francis Patchet given
forth upon his deathbed, in Testimony for God, his Truth and People; who
departed this Life the 22d day of the tenth Month, 1677. about the nineth Hour
of the Day.
AFter he had lain sometime in great Weakness; insomuch that his Speech was
sometime taken from him, and sometimes he could speak a few broken words, by
which we could understand that he told us, That his Strength Failed him, and
that he was almost spent; and after this he lay about an hour silent, in great
Weakness, insomuch that we looked every Moment when he should depart this Life;
but it pleased the Lord (whose servant he was and is) inwardly to renew his
Strength, and raised him up in his power, insomuch that a little after the
twelfth Hour of the Night, he began to break forth into Praying and Praising
the Lord in a most sweet and precious manner, and declared much of the goodness
of the Lord; and how bountiful he had been unto his Soul; and so he lay a
pretty while admiring the precious love of God, which he said, did plentifully
flow unto his soul through Jesus Christ: And he often said unto the Lord,
Praised; Praised be thy pure holy Name: And then he earnestly exhorted Friends
to be faithful in their places unto the Truth, saying in an overcoming Sense
thereof, Oh! precious, precious Truth which first brake forth in this Nation:
Its the Glory of England. And this Expression he servently and frequently used,
That the despised Truth of God was Englands Glory: And he spoke much of God's
Israel, saying, The Lord who divided the Red Sea of old, to make way for his
Redeemed, would surely once more appear for Zion sake. Then he spoke unto the
Lord saying, Oh thy precious Light! in which I see thy Glory; Lord, what will
become of them that despise thy Light? And though these are but some of the
many sweet and heavenly Expressions, yet they are what the Lord brought fresh
into my Remembrance, of which, I am a living Witness,

Moses West.

Here are some of the Words spoken by our dear Feiend Francis Patchet a little
before his Death,
OH the love of the Lord! How good has the Lord been unto my soul this day and
this Evening? Oh the Unexpressible love of God! how has it flowed forth unto
my soul this day? Praises, pure holy Praises, my Heart and Soul and all that is
within me praises the Lord: Oh the wonderful love of the Lord! And then in
Exhortation he said, Friends, be faithful to the Lord, press forward, be
faithful to the Lord to the end of your days; never look back, but press
forward; it matters not what Trials or Reproaches you meet withal here, it is
nothing, be you Faithful to the Lord; He will carry you through all; He has a
little Remnant which he has regard unto. Press forward Friends, in the Truth;
for it is the Truth, the Blessed Truth which is declared of. The Lord has
raised up many able Ministers of the Gospel, of the Gospel here in England, The
Lord is come to teach his People himself in Spirit and in Truth; the False
Prophet and the Hireling Priest the Lord will cut down, and all that resist his
Blessed, powerful Work, which he has begun in this Nation of England: For he
has begun a good Work, and he will carry it on against all Opposition of Evil
Spirits that resist it. Oh how is the Spirit of the Lord upon me at this time!
pure, Holy praises be given unto his pure Holy powerful Name, which has opened
my Mouth at this time to speak of his wonderful Works, How the Lord appeared
for Israel of old, by a Mighty and Out stretched Arm of power, when their
Enemies were behind them, ready to overtake them, and the Red Sea before them;
that in Appearance there was no way to escape, yet how did the Lord appear
wonderfully for their Deliverance, and brought them through. Speaking much more
of what the Lord would do for his Faithful Israel in this day, Blessing and
praising the Lord for all his Mercies and Loving-kindnesses, which he was made
largely a Partaker of, to the Praise of the great Name of the Lord.

Ann Edmundson.

Postscript.
Reader,
HAving come much short of what was spoken and declared at large by this
Faithful man, concerning the things of God, and his Kingdom, as they were
plentifully opened unto him, upon his dying bed; and because we could not omit
to mention what we certainly retained in Memory, we have here collected a short
Account of the the Heads of those things he declared of, with some Words
expressly, as he spoke them.

As First, He spoke much concerning The living Bread that came down from
Heaven, the Heavenly Manna, the Souls Food, Saying, Buy it without Money, and
without Price, eat and live for ever, drink and live for ever, Exhorting to
know this Bread In our own Houses, etc.

If you know the Truth (said he) the Truth shall set you free; Truth, Truth,
Truth, Oh the precious Truth, it is all, and more then all.

And at another time said, Oh! thy Pure Everlasting Light, which is so much
despised amongst men; thy precious light by which I see thy Glory.

And at another time, two Friends standing by his Bed side, he turned his Face
to them and said, I know you both, pray for me. And some time after another
Friend R. T. came in, and asking him how he did? His Answer was, I have had a
great Skirmish, but through Mercy I have overcome; and said also, Avoid Satan;
I defy thee, get thee behind me Satan. I have got the Victory: And then in
Exhortation said, Resist the Devil and he will flee from you, that subtle
Serpent, that goes about like a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And
spoke much that the Devil would have Christ To fall down and worship him, and
how the Devil carried Christ up to show him the Glory of the World, saying, All
this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

And again exhorted Friends saying, Press forward to the End of your Days, my
dear Brethren and Sisters that are here present with me, I know ye not (that
is, after the outward man) but be ye all Faithful.

He also spoke very much concerning David (as well he might) being made a large
Partaker of David's Experiences of the Goodness and Mercies of the Lord unto
his Soul, as David did. Oh David, said he, A man after God's own heart; and how
David praised the Lord, and to show the Goodness of God to David, he spoke very
much.

And often times in great Admiration of the Truth, and its Glorious Appearance,
he uttered these and the like Words, Oh the Glory of England, the Appearance of
Truth England 's Glory. And that The Lord has begun a Good Work in England,
and he will carry it on notwithstanding all Opposition.

He exhorted much to Faithfulness, and to obey the Truth, and walk in the
Truth, The Truth of God, said he, is precious. He did often express an
Indignation against Idolatry, False Prophets, and Hirelings, and said, The
False Prophet, and Hireling Priest the Lord will cut down, and he will teach
his People himself. And he declared much concerning Israel of old, and of their
being brought into the good Land; the promised Land; And after God had
delivered Israel, said he, Then Israel sang Praises unto the Lord; out of
Egypts Bondage they were delivered, and brought into the Good Land, the same it
is this day, where none can make afraid, which he often said; and spoke how the
Lord brought all his through Trials, Reproaches, and Troubles, saying, It is no
matter what Trials, Reproaches, Troubles and Afflictions we meet withal here;
the Lord will bring and carry us through them all. And likewise about the
New-man, Not the Old Man, said he, but the New-man Christ Jesus that is
revealed, does bring back again out of the Fall.

Thomas Farnbury (the man of the house where he died) who not counted one of
the People called Quakers, yet a friendly and honest man, gave this Testimony
concerning him, That it was the Divine Nature and Power of God that spoke in
him, more then at other times.

This is the Substance of what we kept in Memory, being but a small part of
those sweet and living Expressions given forth by this patient Sufferer, and
Servant of the Lord, who by the Power of the Lord (after looked upon as a dead,
or dying man) was raised up to declare of the wondrous works of God in a most
sweet and heavenly manner, who began to speak, a little after the twelfth hour
of the Night, and spoke till about the the third Hour, and afterward continued
(making sweet Melody in his Heart to God) till between the ninth and tenth Hour
in the Morning, and then departed out of this earthly House, like a patient
Lamb: 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle
were disolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal
in the Heavens.

Henry Toul^son and Andrew Lund (...) Countrymen and Fellow prisoners for the
same Testimony) Thomas and Marabella Farnbury, Christopher Cheesman and
Elizabeth his Wife, Moses West, Ann Edmundson, Rebecca Veal, and Marabella
Farnbury the younger, who were Eye and Ear-witnesses.

THE END.

