THE Magistrates Authority ASSERTED In A SERMON, Preached at the Cathedral in
NORWICH.

By JAMES PASTON, M.A. Rector of Tinningham in Suffolk.

1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordnance of man for the Lords sake.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. and are to be sold by Richard Chiswell, at the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

To the Right Worshipful Robert Bendish Esquire Mayor of the City of NORWICH.
SIR,
NOthing but your Importunity could have been sufficiently prevalent to make
this Discourse appear in public: for I am so conscious of my own Inabilities,
that I should have thought your Candor and Zeal for the good of the Church and
Nation had imposed too much upon your Judgment, when you moved me to let you
print it; but that all men give so full Encomiums of your worth, that I must
have no small stock of Infidelity to doubt it. Such as it is, I here humbly
present you with, and desire it may have its designed end; that it may promote
Unity and Peace, and persuade men not to put that asunder in Practice, which
God has joined in Precept, namely Fear to Himself, and Honor to his
Vicegerents; into the number of which your Merits have worthily promoted you,
and made you Representative in that great and noble City, unto him who is
Representative to the great King of Heaven. And therefore although the World
may blame my Presumption in this Action, yet it cannot accuse my Obedience,
since it is to your Commands; and especially since those Commands descended so
low as to become Requests, and thereby rendered themselves the more obliging:
which since they have given me the boldness to venture these following pages
abroad, I beg that of you, which your native Generosity will prompt you to
vouchsafe, namely your Patronage of them, and hereby you will honor

Your Servant in Christ JAMES PASTON.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Beg no more at your hands, than commmon Charity will oblige you to grant,
namely to believe me (who never gave you cause to do otherwise) in telling you
that this following Discourse had not been committed to the Press, but upon the
importunity of the Right Worshipful the Mayor of Norwich, and some other
Friends, whose Judgment I have cause to esteem above mine own. If you will
accuse me for my Concession: (although unwillingly obtained) I confess I have
only this to plead in my excuse; that my intentions were honest. I am ready
also to concur with any Man, whose opinion it is, that the Subject might have
been much better handled, by some more able and judicious Advocate; and for
this reason have I been so long struggling (since I preached it) against the
Arguments used by my Friends, before I would yield, being very loath to appear
in public so early. Therefore, as I hope you will not doubt of my veracity, so
neither will I question your goodnature, till I have just cause; but will
believe you will pardon a fault committed with so much reluctance. As for the
Discourse it self, the Composure of it is too mean for any man's envy, and the
design of it too good for any Man's scorn, and therefore I promise my
self-security.

ROMANS XIII. V. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for Conscience sake.


ORDER is a thing so necessary to the preservation of the Universe, that should
this be dissolved, all things would soon relapse, and degenerate into that
Chaos out of which the great Creator at first raised them. The Earth was
without form, and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep; and
confusion, like a cloud overspread and concealed the greatest glories, till the
God of Order divided things from things, and ranked every being into its
fitting place; giving to the Sun, Moon and Stars their proper spheres; the
Earth that situation from whence it shall never be moved; and setting bars and
bounds to the fluctuations of the Sea, and prescribing limits to its boisterous
and insulting waves, and then did the (...) speak the Wisdom and Glory of its
Maker.

And as the most wise Creator saw this necessary in the greater World, so
likewise in the Microcosm, Man, the Epitome thereof. Ordering therefore a
Superiority and Inferiority between the Soul and the Body; making the one
capable of ruling, the other of being ruled; nay, giving to every member its
due place and office, and uniting them by that need they have of each others
help and support.

And accordingly has Nature taught the most barbarous Nations to order their
Bodies Politic: and in the Sacred Writ, we no sooner read of Man, but we read
of Dominion and Subjection: nay, the grand Council of Heaven had them in design
together: for at the same time that God said, Let us make Man in our Image, and
after our likeness, he also said, and let him have Dominion: and therefore, so
soon as that Blessing (Increase and Multiply) began to be effectual, every man
was King and Priest in his own Family, and many Families combined into Nations,
and were ordered into ranks and degrees.

And this was taught not only by the Documents of Nature, but also by the God
of Nature himself: who when he chose a peculiar People, he instituted a
Government of King and Priest, and led them by the hand of Moses and Aaron. A
King to rule, and a Priest whose lips should preserve knowledge: his divine
Wisdom knowing that all could not be equal, but that every man must keep that
order, and observe that station, wherein Providence has placed him: Wherefore
ye must needs be subject.

Nor did Christianity lay level the goodly Symetry of this glorious Fabric, or
reduce the beauty of Order into the ruinous heap of its pristine Confusion: and
therefore the Apostle uses the same kind of Arguing, to persuade us to
Subjection and Obedience in the going Chap. v. 4. and so on, telling us, that
as we have many members in one Body, and all members have not the same Office;
so we being many, are one body in Christ: but yet not equal, but every one
members one of another. Having then (said he) gifts differing according to the
Grace that is given us, whether Prophecy, let us prophesy according to the
proportion of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or, he that
teaches on teaching: or he that exhorts, on exhortation: he that gives, let
him do it (...) with liberality: he that rules, with diligence. By these and
some other Duties which he presses in the following verses, he sufficiently
intimates that we should endeavor to live peaceably with all men, by keeping
every one in his due order; this is the way and means to it. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject, not only for wrath but also for Conscience sake.

Which words of the Apostle are a Conclusion, and inference from what had been
premised in the foregoing part of the Chapter; in the beginning whereof he
lays down this injunction, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, and
he gives a sufficient Reason why Subjection must be yielded to such: For (says
he) there is no power but of God; whether it be that power which Christ has
left in his Church, or that of Heathen Emperors under whom ye live; The Powers
that be, are ordained of God. The Sin of resisting therefore is not small; For
whosoever resists the Power, though he may deceive himself, and think he only
resists man, yet his resistance reaches further: He resists the ordinance
of God: this is the nature of the sin, and therefore, He that does resist,
shall receive to himself Damnation; this is the punishment. For further, (as he
tells them, verse 3.) The end and design of Gods settling Rulers over them, is
not to terrify them from good, but from evil; and therefore they ought to be
afraid to resist that power, which is given of God for so good an end: which,
since it is so good, they must needs be subject, not only for wrath, not only
for fear of the sword which the Magistrate bears; but although he should lay by
his sword, though he should suspend his punishment, yet merely For Conscience
sake they must be subject.

Now this is plaint to common sense, that the Apostle injoynes subjection, not
only in civil, but also in spiritual concerns: but in what particulars this
Subjection is to be yielded, he has not declared either here or in any other
place. The Church of the Jews was strictly limited and prescribed in many
particular circumstances, and whosoever should dare to trangress these, or make
any alteration in these punctilio's, was sure to run inevitably upon a Curse.
But Christ has given us an enlargement, and has granted liberty to the
Christian Church, to institute and appoint what indifferent Ceremonies should
be used: and therefore we find only general Rules laid down, as 1 Cor. 16.16.
the Apostle speaking concerning Timotheus and Apollos, fellow-workers together
with him in the Lord; I beseech you brethren (says he) submit your selves unto
such, and to every one that helps with us, and labors. And so again, Hebr.
13.17. Obey those that have the rule over you, for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give an account: and the Apostle St. Peter, 1. Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, or unto Governors that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. And the Apostle
St Paul, writing to Titus Bishop of Crete, tells him, Tit. 1.5. that For this
cause he left him there, that he might set things in order that were wanting:
so that to make our Christian freedom, a ground of Disobedience, is to use our
liberty (...) as a cover or cloak for our maliciousness. For obedience to
Governors both Civil and Ecclesiastical, is as plainly commanded in the
writings of the New Testament, as love to God and our Neighbor: and
disobedience is so evidently forbidden, that unless we be blinded either with
Pride or Ignorance, we may as easily discern the prohibition, as Thou shall not
kill, and Thou shall not steal.

Nay, not only the Gospel, but Nature it self has writ it in such Characters,
and so universally legible, that all Nations have read and obeyed it: and no
people though never so barbarous, were scarce ever yet found, that had not a
Government in Spiritual and Civil concerns. So that Subjection and Government
have been semper and ubique, at all times and in all places. So that he that
disputes against Authority, at the same time argues against the Sacred
Scripture, and Reason, and the practice of all Ages and Nations. For
Subjection, we see, is commanded to be yielded to Superiors, whether in Church
or State, to Ecclesiastical or Civil Power, or if it be both united in one; but
in what particulars is not here specified; therefore observing the method of
the Text, we will enquire, I. In what things we must be subject. II. Wherein
lies the necessity of such Subjection. III. The Reasons laid down by the
Apostle. 1. For Wrath. 2. For Conscience sake.



I. In what things we must be subject to the higher Powers: and that is, First,
In all things God has commanded. Secondly, In all things which he has not
plainly and evidently forbidden: and that not only in Civil, but also in
Spiritual matters: and for proof of this last, I chiefly design my following
Discourse.

I. In all things God has commanded, we must be subject to our Superiors: and
to use Arguments to prove this, would be needless and superfluous: for I
suppose if our Superiors commanded Love, and Peace and Unity, we ought to
obey, because God and Nature have commanded the same things; but in regard that
every thing is not set down, nor every particular circumstance specified which
may serve in order to the preservation of them, Therefore,

II. If our Superiors prescribe this or that way for the attaining to, and
preservation of them; if this or that way be not forbidden by God, we must in
this also be subject. For although it be true that Christ has made us free, yet
nevertheless St. Peter exhorts us, 1 Pet. 2.13. even for His sake, to submit to
every ordinance of man: and not to use this liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness, as a pretense for Rebellion and Disobedience; for that freedom
which Christ purchased for us, is, Freedom from sin, Freedom from the curse of
the Law; Freedom from the Ceremonial Law, from Circumcision and Sacrifices: and
it is certain, that when Christ abrogated those Circumstances which belonged to
the Jewish, he did not institute others as appendages to the Christian Worship:
but yet he gave power to those whom he left in his stead to do it. If he had
instituted any himself, they had been indispensably necessary whether our
Superiors had commanded them or not: But now they are not so indispensably
necessary, till such time, and no longer than the Commands of our lawful
Superiors make them so.

For not the least drop of Christ's blood was so vainly spent as to purchase
freedom for us in things absolutely indifferent, that is, in such things as
were in their own nature indifferent, concerning which there was no command:
For these were free before, and therefore free to be performed before and after
they are commanded, and the Command is necessarily to be obeyed.

It is true, if the Supreme King of Heaven evidently forbids what his
Substitutes upon Earth enjoin; we know which to obey, God rather than Man. But
if it be not evidently forbidden, nay if it be doubtful, whether God has
forbidden or not, we are bound to obey, at least till we see some manifest and
very plausible ground for our hesitation. For herein we carry along with us the
virtue of obedience, and God's Precept by his Apostle (Submit your selves) will
be our plea; whereas if we err the other way, there is scarce any thing will
render our delinqency excusable.

And therefore if we examine the sufferings of Saints and Martyrs, we shall
scarce find that any (who were truly called so) ever suffered for disobedience
in things indifferent; and made necessary by lawful Authority. Shadrach,
Mesech, and Abednego, Dan. 3. were thrown into the fiery furnace, rather than
they would obey the Kings command: But the Command was not in a thing
indifferent, but quite contrary to the Command of God, namely to worship an
Image, Daniel, Chapter 6. was thrown into the Lions Den, not because of standing or
kneeling in his Devotions, but merely because he prayed unto God. And the Woman
and her seven sons, 2 Macc. 7. embraced Death rather than they would eat Swines
flesh: But this God had expressly forbidden, and had not left it indifferent.
Saint John Baptist was beheaded for reproving Herod's incest, St. Stephen for
reproving the Jews infidelity. And the Apostles underwent Bonds, and
Imprisonments, and Death, rather than they would forbear preaching Christ to
the unbelieving Jews and Heathens; for he had immediately commanded them so to
do. And that Theban Legion under Mauritius, consisting of 6666 Christians,
suffered death in the days of Dioclesian, not for disobedience in an
indifferent thing, but for refusing to offer Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods:
None of these suffered for disobedience in things indifferent. Nor do we read
of any that refused obedience to those indifferent things which the Apostles
enjoined; as to abstain from things strangled, and from blood, which after
Christ abolished the Ceremonial Law became absolutely of an indifferent nature;
but did any cry out of intrenchment of their Christian Liberty for this?

We have therefore neither Precept nor Example for disobedience in such things.
The Scripture in general commands obedience to God and Man, and he has expressed
greater displeasure to those who have disobeyed his Substitutes, than to those
who have more immediately rebelled against himself: And therefore we never read
that the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed up any, but such as would not be
subject to Earthly Superiors. A cup of cold water given to Christ's Disciples,
he takes as given to himself, and the reward shall be accordingly; and so
disobedience to his Substitutes, he takes as to himself. For, Luke 10.6.
He that despises you, despises me: Luke 10.10. and he that (...) obeys his
Superiors, at the same time pays his homage to Christ, and this is the Sphere
of their Dominion, and our Obedience, namely things indifferent.

And this is no new thing; for notwithstanding the Church of the Jews had the
peculiar Circumstances of God's worship so precisely appointed them; yet we
find that their Governors did introduce some things of an indifferent nature;
and therefore we read, 1 Chronicles. 25.1 that David and the Captains of the Host
separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and the rest, who should
Prophecy with Harps, and with Psalteries, and Cymbals, which things were never
appointed in the Law. They also instituted Feasts and Fasts, as the Feast of
Dedication, and the Feast of Purim, which were so far from being blamed by our
Savior, that he graced the first of them with his presence, as we read Joh.
10.22. And the third, and sixth, and ninth hours of Prayer had no Injunction to
enforce them but Custom, or at most a Law of the Jews own making; and yet were
observed by the Apostles themselves, as we may read in these several places of
the Acts chapter 2.15. -- 3.1. -- 10.9. nor were any of the Customs of the Jews
reprehended by our Savior, but such as were contrary to the Law of God
delivered in his Word, or by the Dictates of Nature.

Nor will it at all excuse our disobedience, if we plead that we see no reason
why such and such things should be enjoined: Eor as the virtues of Humility,
Charity, and Meekness are expressed in our obedience to such things: So, much
Pride and Uncharitableness is betrayed by our disobedience; for the humble man
will consider, that although he himself sees no necessity, why such things
should be commanded, yet that his Superiors may, to whom God and Nature has
made him a Subject, and therefore he submits. But the proud and self-conceited
person scorns to be imposed upon, thinks himself at least as wise, if not wiser
than his Teachers, and is ready to cry out with Corah to the Rulers of the
people, Numb. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon you: Whereas if we see no absolute necessity of our
disobedience, we must needs be subject.

And if obedience is to be yielded to no injunction but such as we can see a
reason for, God himself would have been disobeyed upon this score, for he
himself has commanded such things as no natural necessity appears to be the
Parent: For what piece of excellency, or what natural necessity was there for
Abraham's slaying his innocent son, who was Heir of the Promise? yet this God
commanded, and this he would have done, had not a counter command stayed his
Sacrificing-knife: And so what natural intrinsic necessity was there of the
cutting off a Child's foreskin, or of washing the hands and garments in order
to purification from sin? yet these things God commanded; and although there
appeared no manifest necessity of the Command, yet so necessary was obedience,
that it was performed to them: and as God, so likewise his servants, even under
the Gospel have laid upon Men Commands of this nature; as the Apostles enjoined
abstinence from things stranled, and from blood. Such Commands as these have
been given by the Supreme King of Heaven, and by those whom he has appointed
Rulers upon Earth, and were obeyed, and the obedience was crowned with rewards,
and the disobedience punished with revenge. Subjection therefore may be
necessary, when for ought we know the Command is not, and the obedience
virtuous and acceptable.

And where has the great God of Heaven and Earth forbidden the Dij minorum
gentium? where has he prohibited those of whom he said, they are Gods, to
institute such Ceremonies, and appoint such Orders as they shall think are
decent? or where has he commanded, saying, Obey not those that Rule over you?
or, Submit not to such Ordinances of Man? Let them who call for Scripture to
attest every Ceremony, show where God has therein forbidden Superiors to
command, or us to obey such things? and then there may be some tinkling of
reason, among the the huge Vox and praeterea nihil, the mighty noise, which
only serves to amaze the ignorant, and to drown the whispers of Seditious
Intimations, and to deter well-meaning souls from that subjection, which
Scripture, Reason, and Experience teaches to be due to Superiors.

We our selves of our own accord do many things for which God has given us no
particular Command: Is it unlawful in it self for a Man to stand or kneel at
his Prayers? certainly no: for if it be, it is because it is against some Law
of Nature, or against some Precept in Gods Word: But it is against none of
these; and therefore it is not unlawful in it self to do them. If therefore it
be lawful to do them before they are commanded, certainly it is lawful after;
for since God has made it our duties to obey the Commands of our Superiors,
their Commands cannot make that unlawful, which was lawful before: but if
nothing is to be done, but what is commanded in Scripture expressly in every
particular circumstance, we shall never find the true Worship of God, either
in Geneva or Scotland or Amsterdam it self.

Therefore the sum is this, the Saints and Martyrs of old never suffered for
disobedience in things indifferent.

God has no where prohibited our obedience in such things, though we see no
reason why they should be commanded: for himself has been pleased to appoint
such things as do not appear to be naturally necessary, and likewise his
servants, even under the Gospel, and he has rewarded such obedience. He has
also commanded obedience to every ordinance of man. Those things before they
were ordinances, were in themselves lawful, and therefore are so after, because
the Command cannot make them otherwise: for he that commands them is appointed
by God to this very end, that he might command, therefore it plainly appears
that there is a necessity of Subjection in things indifferent. We must needs be
subject. But wherein lies the necessity? this is the

Second thing which I come now to treat of; how it is necessary that we be
subject in things indifferent. And before we weigh those Arguments that prove
this, we must consider that it is impossible to perform the worship of God
without such things as (before they are commanded) are indifferent.

The whole World, both Christians, Jews, and Heathens agree upon this, that God
is to be worshipped; but at what time, in what place, with what circumstances
is not generally agreed upon. Whether on the last, or first day of the week,
whether in a private house, or in a public place set apart for that purpose;
whether sitting, or standing, or kneeling, is indifferent, till the Law of God
or man has determined. But at some of these times, in some of these places,
with some of these Ceremonies, the Worship of God must be performed; and there
is no man that exclaims against a Ceremony, but is his own accuser, if he ever
says his Prayers: for he must either use the Ceremony of standing, or sitting,
Luke 18.11. Acts 9.40.20.36.21.5. Mark 14.35.
or (if he can stoop so low) of kneeling, or lying prostrate; and one of these
is as much a Ceremony as another: he that stands as stiff as the Pharisee, is
as ceremonious, as he that kneels with the Apostle, lies prostrate like our
Savior: and in some of these Ceremonies the Worship of God must be performed:
And since any of them is as lawful as the other, the Superior may appoint
which he in Reason and Conscience thinks fitting; and in so doing he commands
nothing unlawful: and therefore we must be subject to either, which he shall
appoint; and that

First, because God has so commanded; which questionless were of it self a
sufficient obligation, though alone. And he that will deny that God has so
commanded, must first erase many places of Scripture. For God has as plainly
therein commanded honor your Father and Mother, and obey those that have the
rule over you, as he has said, Thou shall have none other Gods before me.
Therein also is recorded that as dreadful vengeance has been inflicted, upon
the disobedient to earthly Governors, as upon the rebellious to the King of
Heaven. Therein also he has plainly told us, Mal. 2.7. that The Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, and that the people should seek the Law at his
mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts: and were not men plainly
obstinate, as well as prejudiced; they could not but be convinced that the
Gospel gives no liberty, nor makes so wide a gap for licentiousness, as to give
them power to do what they list, either in matters of spiritual or civil
concern: Mar. 12.17. 1 Pet. 2.17.
but manifestly injoynes us to give Caesar his due, and not only to Fear God;
but also to Honor the King. And questionless Christ gave not that great power
to his Church, but with an intent they should be obeyed: when he said that
whatsoever they should bind on earth should be bound in Heaven: Mat. 18.18.
and whatsoever they should loose on earth should be loosed in Heaven. Matthew.
23.3.
Nay though Scribes and Pharisees which are Hypocrites, sit in Moses his Chair,
though their lives were not fit for imitation; Luke 10.16.
yet he tells his disciples their Precepts must be obeyed; and whatsoever they
say unto them they must do. And if this be the Word of God: He that despises
you despises me. Romans 13 1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher power. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man: and the like. I say, if this be the Word of God, and this
Word of God has any power over us, We must be subject.

Secondly, God has not only enjoined this in his written Word, but also in
those Precepts of Reason which he has imprinted by the hand of Nature. For
Unity in the external Worship of him who is one God, is necessary for the
well-being of the Church. For commonly, Unity and Peace, like Hippocrates his
Twins, are born and dye together: for we know there are no greater Hatred and
Animosities in the World, than what have risen from Difference in Religion. And
as the holy Psalmist, Ps. 113.1.
and Reason will inform us, that it is a Pleasant thing for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity: so sad experience will tell us, that Division tends to the
dissolution of Concord: and carries men into war and bloodshed, cruelty and
oppression, and no combustions have been more furious and dreadful, than those
that have been kindled from Altar set up against Altar: for what will not men
do, for that Religion that they think is true? and for that Cause which they
think is Gods? and such an Opinion has every man of his own particular cause,
and therefore will he hazard Life and Estate for promoting it; and all that are
not of his way, are as zealous in procuring advantages for theirs. What better
expedient therefore can there be to surcease these differences among the
Subjects of the Prince of Peace, and to unite them in Christian Love and
Charity, than to prescribe one mode of Worship for all to embrace, which is not
contrary to the Will of that one God whom we all worship? that since there is
one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
one Baptism, we who profess this one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, should be
also of one mind: 2 Cor. 13.11. 1 Cor. 1.10.
should be perfectly joined together according to the Apostles injunction, in
the same mind, and in the same judgment.

And the grand necessity of this will further appear, if we consider how often
the Apostle inculcates this very thing: it is this he begins with, 1 Cor. 1.10.
which he presses with Entreaty, and conjures them by that blessed Name to which
all should bow and yield. Now, I beseech you brethren by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye speak the same thing: and that there be no Divisions
among you. And it is this he ends with 2 Cor. 13.11. and endears the Command
with the Promise of a Blessing, which will sufficiently crown our Obedience, Be
of one mind, live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you: and
wherefore is this Exhortation so frequently repeated? but to show how highly
necessary Unity is, since without it, there will be little of that Peace and
Charity which should be among Christans, which makes Kingdoms and Societies
happy.

Therefore since Unity is the Bond of Peace: Since, unless some particular way
be prescribed, Men will have several Modes of Religious worship; since
Governors prescribe this or that way, for all to embrace, to the end
differences and mischief might be prevented, We must needs be subject.

Thirdly, Without subjection there can be no order, but a strange confusion. If
there be no obedience from the Child to the Parent: If there be no subjection
from the Servant to the Master: No submission from the Subject to the Ruler, it
would be safer living among the Beasts of the Wilderness, than among men. We
are not all born Parents, or Masters, or Governors; and questionless we ought
not to usurp these places. For God has commanded Children to obey their
Parents, Servants their Masters, and also Subjects their Governors. And if a
Parent, or Master should command his Child, or Servant, in the public duties
of his Family, to use this or that Prayer with him, at this or that time, in
this or that place, in this or that posture: What place of Scripture, or what
Precept of nature forbids their obedience, so it be not contrary to the Word of
God? and if a Parent, or Master has this power over a Child, Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor.
14.40.
or Servant; why may not our Superiors appoint the like things to those whom
God had committed to their charge, for whom they must give an account? why may
they not provide that all things be done in decency and in order? since, if
there be any undecencies, any disorders, they must be as liable to punishment
at the great day, as any Parent, or Master, for the disorders, and undecencies
of his Child or Servant. And that Man that disobeyes his Superiors, at the
same time teaches, and pleads that his Child or Servant may refuse obedience to
himself. For he has no other Charter for his liberty. And there is no more
ground for the levelling of Kingdoms, than for making all equal in Families:
And God has given us no warrant for either, 1 Cor. 14 33.
for he is the God of Order, not the Author of Confusion. If therefore we break
from those stations which his most wise Providence has set us, if with the
Accomplices of Corah we take too much upon us, though with Uzzah to support that
Ark, which Faction and Profaneness has put into a tottering condition, we
provoke the God of Order, and have cause to fear his vengeance. Wherefore we
must needs be subject.

Fourthly, We must needs be subject, because our Superiors must needs command.
Men commonly are apt to run into error; and the pride or ignorance of some Men,
makes them as apt to deceive, and to be deceived: To mislead, and to be misled
into Factions and Divisions, and those Divisions breed a dislike between this
or that party; and that dislike produces uncharitableness; and this
uncharitableness proceeds to hatred, and this hatred brings forth cruelty,
blood, and ruin, to the scandal and undoing of Religion, and Justice. Now
those whom God sets over a Nation, are bound in Conscience to prevent these
miseries; and to institute some ways to reduce Men to that Unity, Love, and
Charity, which should be among Christians. If therefore they be bound in
Conscience to command, we no less to obey: For without our Obedience, their
Commands can be no Remedy. If the Governors of a Church or Nation, do not
endeavor to prevent by some injunctions, those miseries which fall upon a
people, for whose Souls they watch; they questionless must give an account at
the great Audit. And so likewise they who are the people of such a Church or
Nation, if they obey not those that rule over them, in those Injunctions which
for so good an end are laid upon them, they will find a dreadful doom at the
last day, when they shall appear before his Tribunal, who is the God of Love
and Unity. Wherefore we must needs be subject.

And thus we see in what things we must be subject.

And also wherein lies the necessity.

And I presume this necessity is not taken away, by the suspension of the penal
Laws. And my presumption is so far from being groundless, that it is founded
upon the words of the Apostle, in that part of my Text which I am now going to
treat of. Which tells us; we must be subject not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience sake; not only for fear of the Punishment, but also for the love of
the Duty.

First, For Wrath; to avoid this we must be subject: For self-preservation is a
duty which cannot be dispensed with; and therefore that Man that shall suffer,
rather than perform this or that thing which is indifferent, his blood is upon
his own head. He that will sacrifice his Life, or Health, or Estate, to an
obstinate groundless humor, although he scruples a Ceremony, is so far
Superstitious, that he is a great Idolater, for he offers up all to his own
vain imagination. For what should make kneeling at our Prayers less lawful than
standing? or a form of Prayer, than a Directory? since no Scripture commands
the latter, rather than the former. One is commanded at least by those whom God
has set over us: The other neither by God or Man. And what can better merit
the name of Will Worship, than that which is set up by every particular Man's
will?

But here is the Grand inducement to disobedience in such things. Men call that
persecution, which is but being buffeted for their faults; and glory in
suffering for the Cause of God, when alas there is no such thing. For God never
required this at their hands: Therefore when we exclude our selves from the
privilege of the Church or Nation wherein we live, rather than obey in such
things as are no where proved to be unlawful. When Men have suffered their
bodies to be imprisoned, their Estates to be wasted, and by this means their
Families to be unprovided for, to suffer Hunger, and Thirst, and all other kind
of Wants: Who has exacted such severe things from them? that they should endure
these just effects of the Superiors wrath, rather than be subject? Has God? if
he has, let us know where; Is it not rather the secret whisper of fancy? or the
Itch of vainglory, to be counted sufferers for the sake of Christ? Or, do we
pretend it is the Spirit of God within us, that stirs us up to this
disobedience, and makes us undergo such hardships? If we do, it is but merely a
pretense: For the Spirit of God never contradicts it self. And the Apostle St.
Paul, and other holy Men, spoke as they were moved by the same Holy Ghost, that
these Men pretend to be led by; and they never told us that we should refuse
subjection to such Commands, to bring wrath upon our selves: But contrariwise
the Apostle tells us, that for this reason we must be subject, that we might
avoid the wrath. But this is removed, at least the effects of it, till the
great King of Heaven shall render vengeance to all the Children of
disobedience. But yet there remains a

Second Reason of our subjection to Earthly Governors, which shall never be
removed, till the Earth shall be dissolved, and the Heavens themselves shall
pass away. And this also is set down in my Text, and that is for Conscience
sake; out of Conscience we must be subject.

And that this may appear, we must again review those Arguments which prove
obedience necessary. For if God has commanded subjection; if Reason tells us
that without it there cannot be Unity, and those blessed effects of it, to
which we are so frequently exhorted: That without Subjecton there will be no
Order, but Confusion; that Men are apt to run into Errors: And that our
Superiors must needs restrain these inclinations. If things be thus, and thus,
as by the premised Reasons has been proved; then questionless, we are bound in
Conscience to be subject. Nay, if not only the Penalties were suspended, but
even the Commands themselves were so relaxed, that every Man might worship God
as he pleased; nay, might choose whether he would worship him or no: Yet
Justice obliges him to worship him, and Reason requires that this Worship be
performed in Unity. And it cannot but appear evident to any that have not
wholly disclaimed Reason, that should there be such a liberty granted, that
every Man might worship God as he pleased, Men would see such monstrous issues
from thence, or divisions and distractions, such a confusion and disorder, and
from thence such debate, and envy, and hatred, that all sober good men of what
persuasion soever, would desire to have some bounds prescribed them, to keep
the Christian World in peace, and to limit the extravagancies of Men. So
plainly would they see that We must needs be subject, even for Conscience Sake.
But the God of Peace and Unity, grant us Wisdom at a cheaper rate, and that we
may never learn it again by so sad experience.

And if we would see what manner of posture things would be in, if there were
no Order appointed in the Worship of God, we need not travel far for
information: we may read enough of it in the sad acts of our late Tragical
times, to cause Horror and Consternation in the minds all good Men. Something
may be seen in the ruins of the Houses of God in the Land, whose rubbish are
sad Monuments of unbridled Zeal. Sacrilege, and Cruelty, and Rapine may be
glutted, if they look back into those days, when there was no King, or at least
no King obeyed in our Israel, and every man did that which right in his own
Eyes. When there were almost as many Modes of Religion as Men, and these as
variable as the Moon; nay, as the inconstant hours of Autumn. Yet every one at
all times pretending to be in the right, and all the rest in the wrong. So that
no Man knew who to trust to, or what to hold to. That all this tended to the
destruction of Peace, to the ruin of Humane Society, and to the unsetling of
all things. He that was of one Religion to day, to morrow would be of another,
and the next of a third, and at last of none at all. As we have seen some, who
have forsaken the Center, and got into the Round; and turned from Presbytery,
to Independency, from this to Anabaptism, from this to Brownism, and from this
to Quakerism, and so tossed about with every wind of Doctrine, till at last, by
the just Judgment of God, they have been thrown quite besides all Religion to
God or Honesty to man; one day denying the dues of the Church, the next all
other whatsoever: for they who at first denied the Revenues of the Ministry, at
last proceeded to Opinions, that all things should be common; and sometimes
even to the very practice of Levelling; teaching that only the Righteous
should inherit the Earth, and all other to be rooted out from the land of the
living: and themselves (though parties chiefly concerned) were Judges and
Executioners in the case. But I desire that no other use might be made of these
sad Memoires, than to move us to pity, and to pray for those that have been
guilty of the sins of Disobedience and Schism, that they may repent of them,
and we may discover what Desolation these Sins have wrought in the Earth; that
seeing what mischiefs and fatal miseries have proceeded thence, we may be
convinced that we are bound in Conscience to be subject, to prevent such ruin,
as we may otherwise bring upon our selves and others.

And thus we see in what things we must be subject. In those things which God
has commanded; and in those things which he has not forbidden: for we have
neither precept nor example to the contrary. No place in the whole Scripture
forbids us to obey our Governors, neither did ever any of the Martyrs suffer
for disobedience in such things.

Secondly, we have also seen the Necessity of our Obedience in such things. 1.
Because God has so commanded. 2. Because Reason also requires it: because peace
is necessary, and this cannot be had without Unity: nor will there be Unity
without Obedience to those that appoint us the ways we should observe. 3.
Because without it there will be no order. 4. Because there is a necessity that
the Superior must command.

Thirdly, We have also seen the Apostles reasons why we must be subject. 1. For
wrath; rather submit in such things as God has not forbidden than incurr the
punishment. 2. Though no punishment be threatened for Disobedience, yet, even
for Conscience sake we ought to be subject, rather than bring such miseries
upon our selves and others, as are the sad consequence of Disobedience.

But to conclude all; The Providence of the Almighty has placed us, where there
is nothing commanded us contrary to his Will: there is not a Circumstance in
our Worship, not an expression in our LITURGY that God has any where forbidden:
and therefore questionless we ought to be subject, for God has commanded us so
to be: and if his Word had been silent herein, yet Nature, and the practice of
all Nations has spoken loud enough in the Case: because No Worship can be
without some Ceremonies; No Peace, Order or Decency, without Unity in those
Ceremonies.

Therefore, although it has pleased our Superiors to suspend the Punishment
due to Disobedience, yet the taking away the Penalty, takes away neither the
Justice nor convenience of the Command, nor the necessity of our Obedience to
it, if we think we must be subject for Conscience sake.

If, therefore, we have any regard to the express Commands of God's Vicegerent,
who still injoynes Obedience, though not upon any penalty; if we have any
respect to the Will of God himself, who has commanded us also for Conscience
sake to submit; if we have any love to Order, to Unity, and Peace, we must
needs be subject; if we would not have the most pure Church in the World rent
in pieces; if we would not have that Religion destroyed, which so strictly
injoynes Obedience to God, Justice, and Love, and Charity to Man, we must be
subject.

There is one thing (though not the only thing) which has given occasion to
some undiscerning or uncharitable persons to refuse Subjection: and that is the
wicked lives of some, who pretend to belong to our Church: But let us endeavor
to have our Conversations as unblamable as her Constitutions, that the malice
of the Adversary may yet have less cause to object, and the unwary may not have
this for an Argument, Your lives are bad, therefore your Religion is naught.
And let such as make this an occasion of their Separation, be entreated to
consider, That they ought not to persecute that Religion with Schism, which
others have smitten with profaneness: for the Religion may be good, though the
Professors of it be bad: and that Christ's Religion was never the worse, because
one of his Apostles had a Devil.

And let us be entreated by the words of Saint Paul, Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, to fulfill the joy of all, good men, that we be like minded, having the
same love being of one accord and of one mind. And that we may be so, the same
Apostle gives a very fit expedient, and entreats us to use it, Romans 16.17. Now
I beseech you brethren, mark those that cause division, and offenses, contrary
to the doctrine you have received, and avoid them: not out of curiosity
frequenting the Assemblies of those that divide from us; lest God punish our
Curiosity, by giving us up to be ensnared by their Errors.

And let us submit to the supreme King of Heaven, and to the great Bishop of
our Souls, and to the Powers upon Earth for his sake: that at the last day,
when he shall summon us all to appear before his dreadful Tribunal, we may be
received, where we shall enjoy eternal Peace and Unity, and Uniformity,
together with Angels, and Saints, who have obeyed him in this, and all other
his Commands, and have been subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake. To which blessed Society, may he in his good time conduct us, who is the
God of peace, to whom, together with the Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as
is most due, all Praise, Honor, and Adoration, hence forth and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

