An Abstract of a LETTER FROM Thomas Paskell OF PENNSILVANIA To his Friend J.
J. of Chippenham.
MY kind love remembered unto Thee, and thy wife, and to all the rest of thy
Family, hoping that you are all in good health, as through the goodness of God
we all are at this present writing; Excepting one of my servants, who was a
Carpenter, and a stout young man, he died on board the Ship, on our Voyage. I
thank God I, and my Wife, have not been sick at all, but continued rather
better than in England; and I do not find but the Country is healthful, for
there was a Ship that came the same day with us into the river, that lost but
one Passenger in the Voyage, and that was their Doctor, who was ill when he
came on board? and those people that came in since continue well. William Penn
and those of the Society are arrived. W. P. is well approved of, he has been
since at New York. and was extraordinarily entertained, and he behaved himself
as Noble. Here is a place called Philadelphia, where is a Market kept, as also
at Vpland. I was at Bridlington-fair, where I saw most sorts of goods to be
sold, and a great resort of people; Where I saw English goods sold at very
reasonable rates; The Country is full of goods, Brass and Pewter lies upon
hand, That which sells best, is Linen cloth, trading Cloth for the Indians;
I bought Kersey and it does not sell, Broad Cloth is wanting, and Perniston,
and Iron-potts: and as for the Swedes, they use but little Iron in Building,
for they will build, and hardly use any other tool but an Ax; They will cut
down a Tree, and cut him off when down, sooner then two men can saw him, and
rend him into planks or what they please; only with the Ax and Wooden wedges,
they use no Iron; They are generaly very ingenous people, lives well, they have
lived here 40 Years, and have lived much at ease, having great plenty of all
sorts of provisions, but then they weer but ordinarily Cloathd; but since the
English came, they have gotten fine Clothes, and are going proud. Let all
people know that have any mind to come hither, that they provide Comfortable
things for their passage, and also some provisions to serve them here, for
although things are to be had at reasonable rates here, yet it is in far to
fetch, that it spends much time, so that it is better to come provided for half
a Year then to want one day, I thank God we have not wanted, but have fared
well beyond what we did in England.

The River is taken up all along, by the Sweads, and Finns, and some Dutch,
before the English came, near eight score miles, and the Englishmen some of
them, buy their Plantations, and get room by the great Riverside, and the
rest get into Creeks, and small rivers that run into it, and some go into the
Woods seven or eight Miles; Thomas Colborne is three miles in the Woods, he is
well to pass, and has about fourteen Acres of Corn now growing, and has
gotten between 30 and 40 li. by his Trade, in this short time. I have hired a
House for my Family for the Winter, and I have gotten a little House in my Land
for my servants, and have cleared Land about six Acres; and this I can say, I
never wished my self at Bristol again since my departure. I live in the Se^^^ll
Creek, near Philadelphia, about 100 Miles up the River. Here have been 22 Ships
with Passengers within this Year, so that provisions are some what hard to come
by in some places, though at no dear rate, there is yet enough in the River,
but it is far to fetch, and suddenly there will be an Order taken for
continual supply. Now I shall give you an impartial account of the Country as
I find it, as follows When we came into Delawarebay, we saw an infinite
number of small fish in sholes, also large fi^^^ leaping in the Water: The
River is a brave pleasant River as can be desired, affording diverse sorts of
fish in great plenty, it is planted all along the Shore, and in some Creeks,
especialy in Pensilvania side, mostly by Sweads, Finns, and Dutch, and now at
last, English throng in among them, and have filed all the Rivers and Creeks a
great way in the Woods, and have settled about 160 Miles up the great River;
some English that are above the falls, have sowed this Year 30 or 40 bushels of
Wheat, and have great stocks of Cattle; Most of the Sweads, and Finns are
ingeneous people, they speak English, Swead, Finn, Dutch and the Indian; They
plant but little Indian corn, not Tobacco; their Women make most of the Linen
cloth they wear, they Spinn and Weave it and make fine Linen, and are many of
them curious housewives: The people generally eat Rye bread, being approved of
best by them; not but that here is good Wheat, for I have eaten as good bread
and drank as good drink as ever I did in England, as also very good butter and
cheese, as most in England. Here is 3 sorts of Wheat, as Winter, Summer, and
Buck Wheat; the Winter Wheat they sow at the fall, the Summer Wheat (...)
March, these two sorts are ripe in June; then having taken in this, they plow
the same land, and sow Buck Wheat, which (...) ripe in September: I have not
given above 2 s 6 d. per skipple, (which is 3 English pecks) for the best Wheat
and that in goods which cost little more then half so much in England; here is
very good Rye at 2 s per skipple, also Barley of 2 sorts, as Winter, and Summer,
at 4 Guilders per skipple; also Oats, and 3 sorts of Indian Corn, (two of
which sorts they can Malt and make good bear of as of Barley,) at four Guilders
per Skiple, a Guilder is four pence half penney. I have bought good Beef,
Porke, and Mutton at two pence per pound and some cheaper, also Turkeys and
Wild-geese at the value of two or three Pound of Shot^ apeice, and Ducks at one
Pound of Shot, or the like value, and in great plenty: here is great store of
poultry, but for Curlews, Pidgons, and Phesants, they w^ll hardly bestow a shot
upon them. I have Venison of the Indians very cheap, although they formerly
sold it as cheap again to the Sweads; I have four Dear for two yards of trading
cloth, which cost five shillings, and most times I purchase it cheaper: We had
Bears flesh this fall for little or nothing, it is good food, tasting much like
Beef; There have been many Horses sold of late to Barbados, and here is plenty
of Rum, Sugar, Ginger, and Molasses. I was lately at In New- Jersey.
Bridlington-fair, where were a great resort of people, with Cattle and all
sorts of Goods, sold at very reasonable rates.

Here are Gardens with all sorts of Herbs, and some more then in England, also
Goose-beries and Roasetrees, but what other Flowers I know not yet: Turnips,
Parsnips, and Cabbages, beyond Compare. Here are Peaches in abundance of three
sorts I have seen rott on the Ground, and the Hogs eat them, they make good
Spirits from them, also from Corn and Cheries, and a sort of wild Plums and
Grapes, and most people have Stills of Copper for that use. Here are Apples,
and Pears, of several sorts, Cheries both Black and Red, and Plums, and
Quinces; in some places Peach Stones grow up to bear in three Years: the Woods
are full of Oaks, many very high and straight, many of them about two foot
through, and some bigger, but very many less; A Swead will tell twelve of the
bigger in a day; Here are brave Poplar, Beach, Ash, Lyme-trees, Gum-trees,
Hickary-trees, Sasafras, Wallnuts, and Chestnuts, Hazel, and Mullberies. Here
grows in the Woods abundance of Wortle-beries, or Whorts, Strawberies and
Blackberies, better then in England, as also three sorts of Grape; and Plums;
Here is but few Pine-trees, and Ceder; Here is good Firestone plenty enough in
most places: and the Woods are full of runs of water. I have lately seen some
Salt, very good to salt meat with, brought by an Indian out of the Woods: they
say there is enough of it: but for Minnerals or Metals, I have not seen any,
except it be Marcasite, such as they make Vitriol or Copperis with in England.
Here are Beavers, Rackoons, Woolves, Bears, a sort of Lions, Polecatts,
Mushratts, Elks, Mincks, Squirills of several sorts and other small Creatures,
but none of these hurt unless surprised: also Rattle Snakes and black Snakes,
but the Rattle Snaks I have not seen, though I have rambled the Woods much
these three Months, since the beginning of September. The Indians are very
quiet and peaceable, having their understandings, and qualifications, and when
abused will seek revenge, they live much better since the English came; getting
necessarys as cheap again as formerly, and many of them begin to speak
English, I have heard one say, Swead no good, Dutch man no good, but Englishman
good. William Penn is settling people in Towns. There are Markets kept in two
Towns viz. Philadelphia, being Chiefest, Chester, formrely called Vpland. To
write of the Seasons of the Year I cannot, bun since I came it has been very
pleasant weather. The Land is generally good and yet there is some but ordinary
and barren ground. Here are Swamps which the Sweads prize much, and many people
will want: And one thing more I shall tell you, I know a man together with two
or three more, that have happened upon a piece of Land of some Hundred Acres,
that is all clear, without Trees, Bushes, stumps, that may be Plowed without
let, the farther a man goes in the Country the more such Land they find. There
is also good Land, full of Large and small Trees, and some good Land, but few
Trees on it. The Winter is sharp and the Cattle are hard to keep. The people
that come must work and know Country affairs; They must be provided with some
provisions for some time in the Country, and also some to help along on Board
the Ship. I have more to write, but am shortened in time. Vale.

Thomas Paskell.
Pensilvania, the last of January, 1682/3
London, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street. 1683.


