portrait of Charles Patin M. Vander Gucht scu*

Effigies CAROLI PATIN. Med: Doct: Parisiens.


The TRAVELLS of C. PATIN. M.D.


TRAVELS THROUGH Germany, Bohemia, Swisserland, Holland;
And other Parts of EUROPE:

Describing the most Considerable CITYS, AND THE Palaces of Princes: TOGETHER,
With Historical Relations, and Critical Observations upon Ancient Medals and
Inscriptions.

By CHARLES PATIN, M.D. of the Faculty of Paris.

Made English, and Illustrated with Copper Cuts and a Map.

LONDON, Printed for A. Swall and T. Child at the Unicorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696.

TABLE of the Cities and Provinces, Passed through in these Travels.
ALtorf Described, Page 239 Amsterdam, 20^ Anspach 228 Avanches, 323 Augsbourg,
69 Augst, 134 Austria, 34^
BAccharac, 185 Baden, 308 Basil, 133 Bareith, 24^ Bavaria, 113 Berlin, 243
Berne, 315 Bohemia, 40, 27^ The Briel, 21^ Brisac, 16^
CAstle of Amras, 7^ Castle of Bipp, 31^ Constance, 29^
DElft, 20^ Durlach, 17^ Dresden, 26^
EMmerick, 18^
GEneva, 33^
HArlem, 20^ The Hague, 20^ Heidelberg, 17^ Horchst, 18^ Hoentwiel, 3^^
Hongary, 3^
JEna, 2^^ Inspruck, 79, 2^^
KOnigsfelden, 306
LEyden, 207 Leipzyck, 246 Leopolstadt,
Maeslandsluys, 209 Manheim, 174 Mentz, 181 Morat, 321 Munick, 97
NIeustat, 226 Nimeguen, 189 Nuremberg, 228
PAssaw, 42 Payern, 328 Phillipsbourg, 170 Prague, 273
SAltzbourg, 282 Scaffhausen, 299 Schencken Schans, 188 Soloturn, 316
Stutgarde, 225 Swaben, 220
TYrol, 76 Tubingen, 223
VIenna, 3 Vlme, 65 Vytrecht, 193
WEimar, 244 Windisch, 307 Wittemburg, 221 Wiitemberg, 249
ZVrich, 319
THE FIRST RELATION, OF THE TRAVELS of the Sieur Patin, To His Highness
Friderick Augustus, Duke of Wirtemburg, etc.
YOUR Highness has often conferred many signal Favors upon me, but n^^^ing can
be more obliging er^n the manner doing it. For in requiring an Ac^^unt of my
last Travels, you have not ^^ly declined to make use of the abso^^te Authority
your Highness has over ^^y Person, but have even condescended so far as to lay
a pleasing Violence upon me, in these most pathetical and affectionate Terms: I
was taking a review of a Troop of Horse, when your Letter was delivered to me,
but having perceived your Hand, which I very much esteem, I could not forbear
opening it, etc. Are not these so many secret Charms that supersede my
Temerity, and which inspire me with Zeal to yield a ready Obedience to all your
Injunctions? I am unwilling to call to mind; that there is nothing more
difficult than to give Satisfaction to so discerning a Judgment as that of your
Highness, that is to say, the Judgment of so noble and sagacious a Person,
which has already penetrated into the inmost Recesses of Humane Literature, and
has been formed under the Tuition of the Learned Monsieu^ ^offel. What a
copious Theme lies before me! What a natural Propensity I have in directing my
Discourse to you (my Lord) to speak of nothing but your Highness! But I have a
greater Veneration for so noble a Subject, which requires Talents and
Expressions commensurate to its Grandeur, than to attempt such an Undertaking
at all adventures. I must of necessity forget your Highness for a Moment, to
call to mind that it is my Duty to obey your Orders.

From Niewstadt, where your Highness was pleased to load me with all manner of
Favors, I set forward to Vienna, the distance to which is great; the course of
the Danube making ninety German Leagues within the space of five days. It is
very delightful to imbark on this River, where a Man may sail a great way
without seeming to stir; and may change Countries and Provinces without any
apparent change of Places; in short, he may there find means to perform as he
Travels, whatsoever can be done by him at home.

VIENNA,
Is the Capital City of Germany, or rather of the whole Western Continent, for
there at present is to be seen the Majesty of the Empire, as formerly at Rome,
which can be no longer said to be the Metropolis of the World, since the other
is now become the usual place of Residence of the Emperors. It may be esteemed
strong, not only by reason that it is defended with Bastions and regular
Outworks; but also because Solomon sirnam'd the Magnificent once besieged, but
was not able to take it. For this Grand Seignior was not accustomed to be
foiled, neither indeed was he ever overcome; the same Ottoman Emperor, among
his Titles, assumed the Style, of doing whatsoever he thought fit, and of doing
nothing that he disliked. Your Highness has in your Repository some notable
Monuments of this famous Siege in certain Gold and Silver Medals, with this
Inscription, TVRK BLEGERT WIEN, 1529.

This City is large within its small compass. May your Highness not be
surprised at this manner of Expression, I mean, that within the small extent of
Ground in which it is enclosed upon account of its Fortifications, it is
extremely Populous, extremely Rich, and very well supplied with all things
necessary for the convenience of Humane Life: I might also add, that this City
has little wast Ground in it, and is not irregularly built; that the largest
Cities of Europe have a greater quantity of wast Ground, or are more irregular
than this.

The two Musaeum's or Repositories which I saw there, are none of its least
Ornaments; one of these was brought from Brussels, and owes its original to the
Archduke Leopold, who furnished it with a vast number of Curiosities at an
incredible Expense: The other is a Patrimony of the Imperial Family, and a
Collection made (as they say) by four Emperors: In the former are contained
fifteen hundred Paintings drawn by the most able Masters of that Art; among
which I have observed some of Raphael, D' Vrbin, Titian, Caraccio, Paul
Veronese, Corregio, Palma, Holbein, Georgeon, Schiavone, Bassano, Albert Durer,
Rubens, Van Dyck, etc. There are also engraved Prints of the best Pieces of
this Inestimable Collection; indeed the Project was well contrived, and the
Reputation of Tenieres, who is the Graver, would have been much more
considerable, if he had taken care to put his design in Execution with greater
success: But these sorry Copies serve only to disguise the Originals, and to
disfigure the finest Draughts in the World; so that the defects of the Artist,
and not the excellency of those admirable Masterpieces are apparent. There are
in the same Repository almost three hundred ancient Statues of Marble and
Brass, besides a Collection of eight hundred Golden Medals, all different, and
more remarkable for their Rarity, and the design of the History, than for the
value of the Matter of which they are made. This vast Collection of Greek
Consular and Imperial Medals, and others of large and middle-siz'd Copper,
could not be gathered together, but by the hand of a Prince as Potent and
Judicious as he that left it. I have an exact Catalogue of 'em, and your
Highness will be surprised to observe so many Rarities therein. I must not omit
by any means one Article, of which a Person as curious as your Highness, ought
to be informed: It is one of the finest Discoveries that has been hitherto made
to give light to these first obscure passages of the History of France, and
powerfully to establish the Antiquity of that Monarchy, of which perhaps your
Highness is not so well persuaded, as of its Strength and Riches. About fifteen
years ago in digging the Earth near Tournay, a Tomb was found, or rather the
Remains of a Monument. It was that of Childeric King of France, and Father of
Clouis the Great; The Bones of an Horse with pieces of Harness lay by him; and
it is well known that in those times Princes were wont to allow a place in their
Burial to that of their Horses, on which they rode upon extraordinary
Occasions. There was nothing wanting of all that the Pagan Religion consecrated
to the Honor and Memory of deceased Persons, viz. the Sword, the Baganet, the
Mass of Arms, and a small Instrument to write according to the Custom of that
Age, with a great number of Gold Medals of the Emperors Leo and Zeno: But that
which I take to be the greatest Rarity, was a certain number of Golden Bees
longer than one's Thumb, and the Ring which this Prince was wont to use as a
Seal or Signet. This is to meet with Truth in its Sanctuary, where it is
inviolable, and thus the Dead themselves afford a much better Illustration of
their History to the Living: But it was requisite that this Treasure should be
discovered under the most accomplished Prince, that ever could Reign, I mean,
the same Archduke Leopold, who then governed the Low Countries for the King of
Spain. His most Christian Majesty, who was not ignorant of its Importance,
expressed his desire of getting it in his own Possession: I have been told at
Vienna, that the Elector of Mentz, was very sollicitous to obtain it for the
King, and that the Emperor chose rather to make the Present himself, before
this Elector had taken measures to sue for it: Thus the value of a Present is
much augmented, when it is so frankly made. The Keeper of the Repository gave
me a sight thereof, and was desirous to know my Sentiments concerning it. I met
with no great difficulty in discovering the Truth, and soon told him, that that
which he showed me, was only a Copy of the Original, which was kept in France
in the Royal Repository; all the Pieces of which I had formerly examined. The
Inscription seemed to me to be well composed, and ends (as I take it) with
these words; Discas Lector, vel sepultam Majestatem nusquam interire. Some time
after, his Imperial Majesty did me the honor to demand my opinion on the same
Subject.

The other Repository is so full and so rich, that it would be difficult to add
any thing that is new, either in respect to the quantity or rarity of the
Commodities contained therein: It may be soon perceived that it is the
Storehouse of many Emperors, and that it was not possible for any, but these
Masters of the World, who may be said to be in a manner Omnipotent, to make so
noble a Collection of the most precious Things of the whole Universe; so that
one may well affirm with respect to this Treasure, what Josephus wrote in his
Jewish Antiquities concerning the Triumph of Titus after the Conquest of
Judaea, viz. That even those Eyes that were accustomed to Miracles were dazzled
with it. It would be a Trespass upon your Highness's Patience, to give a
particular account of every one of these Curiosities in an endless Discourse;
and you may vouchsafe to remember, that my present design is only to furnish
matter for a simple Conference, in which I am unwilling to tire the Reader with
a Volume; therefore I shall only just mention that which has had the greatest
Influence upon my Imagination.

Two thousand two hundred Silver Medals of the Empress Sabina, with the same
Reverse, VENERI GENETRICI, all ancient, made by able Artists, and very well
preserved, are magnificent proofs of the Riches of this Musaeum. There is also
a portion of the Cross, a Thorn of the Crown, and one of the four Nails which
fastened our Savior J.C. to the Cross, which, in my opinion, deserve the
Veneration of all Christians; besides a great number of other Relics richly
enchas'd. The Gold, Ivory, and Precious-Stones, dazzle the Eyes even of those
that are accustomed to behold 'em: Among these is to be more especially
admired, an Emerald-Cup of the bigness of an ordinary Bowl or Beaker, and the
pieces that have been cut out in making it hollow, serve as a complete
Furniture for the Empress. Whence (my Lord) can we suppose this Precious-Stone
to have taken its rise? Those of this Sublunary World, are not of so prodigious
a Thickness; indeed, there seems to be somewhat above the effort of Nature in
its inestimable Mass; as to its color and quality it is an Emerald, but in
reality, with respect to its extent and thickness it is a perfect Miracle. The
next thing remarkable, is, a large Plate of Oriental Agate about t^o Foot in
Diameter, on which is engraved in the Substance of the Stone the word XPICTOC,
with a B. set before it, which may be interpreted (...), according to the
manner of writing observed in the Medals of the ancient Emperors of
Constantinople. Here it cannot be determined what ought to be most admired,
whether the Matter or Forms, the prodigality or the design of Nature. There are
such huge Vessels of Rock Crystal, that so large ones of common Crystal are
not to be found elsewhere. There is also a Press full of Pieces of wrought
Amber. Of the infinite number of Agates, I shall only mention the large ancient
one; it is an almost square Stone, broader than high, on which are engraved
twelve or fifteen Figures, representing the Triumph of the Roman Emperors over
the Germans, a little after the Nativity of Jesus Christ: It has been very
learnedly explained by the Emperor's Library Keeper, and I am apt to believe
that it was engraved by the same hand; the Heads of Princes only are drawn in
the Original, and those of Slaves appear in the Graving; perhaps some other
Persons may engrave it better, but it is indeed one of the best Pieces of
Antiquity that are now extant.

In another Chamber is to be seen the Image of Philip II. King of Spain, with
his Arms of Massive Gold laden with Diamonds: This stately Effigies answers
well the Character of so great a Prince, who dispersed his Riches throughout
the World, and transported Peru into Europe. There is kept the Buff-Coat of
Mail, which Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden wore at the Battle of Lutzen,
where he perished with the Fortune of his Party. I know not well how to come to
a Conclusion, since all the Pieces are still represented fresh to my Eyes, so
that I shall always retain the Idea of 'em during my whole Life, and will
without doubt continue very lively, till I have communicated it to your
Highness. Mr. Vander Barren first showed me these Repositories, to whose
Custody they are both committed: Although I should declare that his Merit is
extraordinary, that he is a good Clergyman, and a profound Scholar, and a most
accomplished Person; and that he enjoys all those excellent Qualities with the
Favor of his Master, which are things very incompatible; I should not be
judged guilty of Flattery, since every one gives the same Character of him. His
Imperial Majesty commanded that the other should be shown to me, and I was not
capable of receiving a greater Honor, nor of bringing a more agreeable
Disposition to the sight of so many rare Curiosities. The Imperial Library may
be reckoned as the third Treasure; it is full of the finest Books in the World,
and among others there are ten or twelve thousand Manuscripts of all sorts of
Subjects, and in all Languages; as also the famous Libraries of Busbequius and
Cuspinian, and the rare Collection of the Fuggers of Augsburg. I saw certain
admirable Miniatures, which sometime belonged to the Dukes of Burgundy. I saw
also Octavius Strada's fine Collection of Medals, with a vast number of the
Designs of Raphael D'Vrbin, Albert Durer, and other excellent Masters of the
Art of Painting. A particular Account of these Curiosities will be suddenly
published, and ^he complete History of 'em is expe^ted from Monsieur Lambecius,
to whose custody they are committed, and who is constantly employed in the
Work, as being perhaps the only Person in the World that is capable of taking
exact Copies from those incomparable Originals, where your Highness may find
these first rude Draughts that I have made, in their full Luster and Perfection.

Would it not be too hard a Task (my Lord) to discourse to you concerning his
Imperial Majesty, with such mean Conceptions as mine? Could they form any
tolerable Idea, or represent a Character in any wise suitable to so great an
Hero? I had indeed the Honor to be in his Majesty's Presence in his Gallery of
Paintings, when he was visiting his Treasure of ancient Medals: There I had an
opportunity to see during three hours and a half, a Roman Emperor conversing
with his Predecessors, which could not be observed elsewhere: There, a more
discerning and sublime Judgment than mine might have made a Comparison between
'em on the very spot: In my opinion, the Luster of the deceased Princes did not
seem to eclipse that of the living Emperor, in whose Person I saw concentered
all that I knew, and every thing that I had read concerning others: His
profound Judgment, his exemplary Piety, Justice and Clemency, are conspicuous
in so high a degree of Perfection, that a faint Idea of 'em is only to be seen
in the World. Your Highness is sensible that extraordinary Virtues are often
incompatible, and that that Soul which is so happy as to possess 'em all, does
not always find an equal supply for all, during its Intercourse with the Body,
from whence it cannot pass. Thus we rarely observe Magnanimity and Fortitude,
intermixed with that Gentleness and Moderation, which are requisite for the
complete Formation of Piety and Clemency in the Heart of a Prince: But in his
Imperial Majesty, all these Heroic Qualities which are so much admired,
proceed from a more noble Principle, that enforces Nature, and administers
Relief to the Weaknesses of the Body. This is that Divine Character which
Heaven imprints on the Minds of all those of this August Family: This is that
second Soul which the Philosophers have attributed to Hero's, which is the
cause that he who is at present advanced to the highest degree of Dignity on
Earth, is at the same time a potent Emperor, a virtuous Prince, an accomplished
Politician, and a good Christian, and has all sociable Virtues united in his
Person in a perfect Agreement, which will constitute the Happiness of the
Empire, as soon as it shall be in a condition to answer thereto, and shall have
merited of Heaven so many Blessings, which it may receive from his Hands, and
under the Government of so excellent a Sovereign, and so prudent an Emperor.

It is true (my Lord) that he is even adored by his own Subjects, for indeed
the Respect and Affection that they bear to his Person is altogether boundless.
The Court of Vienna is very Magnificent and Splendid, but that which in my
opinion adds to its Luster, is, that the Prince is every where imitated, that
is to say, in his Piety, Generosity, Courteousness and Affability: I know not
by what means his Imperial Majesty is more especially become a public Blessing
to so many Illustrious Lords that depend on him, whether by the Riches or
Preferments he bestows on 'em, or by the singular Example he shows 'em. However
I shall give an account to your Highness of some of their Persons and
Qualities, such as most readily occur to my Memory. The Prince of Lobkowitz,
who is Comptroller of the Household, Der Oberste Hoffmeister, has the first
Station in the Court; his Father being High Chancellor of Bohemia, was created
a Prince by Ferdinand II. A.D. 1626, but he could not enjoy the Privileges of
this Dignity in the Diet of Ratisbone, and his Son was admitted thereto, by the
Interest he had with the Emperor, and by the Exigency of Affairs.

Count John Maximilian of Lamberg is High Chamberlain, and the principal
Confident of his Imperial Majesty: He has a share in the transacting of all
Public Affairs, and he is acknowledged by the common Consent of the People to
be a Person that perfectly answers so great a Character; for he is endu'd with
a sagacious Judgment, and a vigorous Disposition, joined with Learning and
Experience: Indeed his Embassies in Spain, and to the Assembly of Munster, have
made him known throughout the whole Continent of Europe: In short, he is
beloved and esteemed by the Emperor even to the highest degree, and all Men are
so well persuaded of his Merit, that none envies him the happiness of his
Station.

Henry William Count of Staremberg is the Great Marshal; your Highness is
sensible of the extraordinary Power that belongs to this Office, in all the
Courts of Germany: He has an absolute Authority over the Jews, and it may not
be improper here to relate some particular Circumstances concerning this sort
of People: There are in Vienna about three thousand of 'em, lodged in very
convenient Appartments in a Burgh that bears their Name, distant about two or
three hundred Paces from the City, which they may enter whenever they think
fit, except on Saturdays and Sundays, being prohibited on those days by virtue
of their Superstition, and the Christian Religion; but if they should act
otherwise than according to this Order, they would run the hazard of being cut
in pieces. Limnaeus propounds whether it be expedient for a Prince to tolerate
'em in his Dominions, and produces the affirmative and negative Arguments, but
I shall not at present engage in the Debate. They have three Synagogues in
Vienna, though at Francfurt they are allowed but one, and are there more
numerous. I was told one day a Story in the same place which seemed to me very
pleasant: A certain German disputed in Latin with a Jewish Physician, and
pressed him to acknowledge the coming of the Messiah, citing some Passages
which he showed in Hebrew, in the Prophecies and other Places of the Old
Testament; insomuch that the Doctor, who could not find sufficient Proofs to
maintain his Argument, told him at last; Will not you grant, that our Religion
was given us by the true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and that he made a
Covenant with us? The German readily acknowledged it; then replied the Jew,
When you can demonstrate to me that your Religion proceeds from God, by as good
Testimonies as we prove ours, all will be well. The German upon this occasion,
was endu'd with more Zeal than Discretion: For (my Lord) what answer would the
Jew have made, if any Man had replied to him? This Religion was given you as a
Preparative for the accomplishment of the Promises, and this Covenant as a Type
or Figure of the true one, to be afterward made by the Messiah: Now if the
Promises are apparently accomplished, and if the Messiah be already come, your
Religion and your Covenant or Dispensation are terminated. Therefore according
to the Rules of an equitable Argumentation, it is not sufficient for you to
prove the Continuation of your Religion and your Covenant, by the Settlement
which God made with your Ancestors; but it lies upon you to prove it by a
Negative; that is to say, by showing in the Holy Scriptures which are common to
us, that the Messiah, who ought to consummate all things, is not as yet come.
Indeed their Misfortune is very great in regard that it is grounded upon the
Word of God. The Jews are extremely obstinate in their Opinions, and very
Superstitious, yet they are miserable, and every where laden with the Public
Hatred. I have had some concern with 'em, but none relating either to Religion
or State Affairs; and have purchased of 'em diverse extraordinary ancient
Medals; they are easily wrought upon, because Ignorant, otherwise they are well
skill d in Arithmetic.

The Counts of Dietrichstein and Zinzendorf, are also principal Officers in the
Emperor's Court; the former is the Gentleman of the Horse, and the other the
Great Huntsman, both most worthy of their Master's Favor.

The Count of Trauthson is one of the most considerable Lords of this Court: He
is a very ingenious Person, and has in his Repository all manner of
Curiosities, viz. Books, ancient and modern Medals, Paintings, Agates,
Marchasites, Indian Rarities, and in short, every thing that can be imagined.
Notwithstanding the little time I spent in viewing all the particular things
contained in this Musaeum, the Description of 'em would afford too much matter
for a Letter. Here was to be seen that famous Painting of Corregio, which was
the most precious Spoil of the Sacking of Mantua. His most Christian Majesty,
who well knew its beauty, thought fit to afford it a place in the Louvre, and I
was also desirous to see it there. Another very remarkable Curiosity, is a
Cherry-stone on which are engraved above an hundred Portraitures, with
different Ornaments of the Head, viz. Crowns, Diadems, Mitres, Cowls, Hats,
Hoods, and Commodes for Women of various sorts. This is to bring Art to its
heighest pitch of Perfection, to comprehend such variety of Works within so
small a space, and even in a manner to proceed as far as Nature it self, which
animates Atoms, and gives 'em organical Parts. I shall also make mention to
your Highness of an Amethyste Cup that I saw there, it seems to be as fine as
those fabulous Cups with which the Gods were wont to Carowse; and indeed, if
the Fable could impose on our Eyes as well as Mind, one would be apt to believe
it. This Lord has the stateliest Palace, and the most spacious Garden in all
Austria, which is altogether extended in length, or at least very near from the
very City Gates of Vienna to the Danube. His Grandfather was the Favorite of
Rodolph II.; and I am of opinion, that the Curiosity of this great Emperor
excited that of his Confident.

If your Highness required an Account of the other illustrious and ingenious
Persons of Vienna, you would engage me to make mention of too many, neither do
I know all: But I cannot forget Monsieur Schrimpf, who is Resident to the
Elector of Saxony, the Duke of Wirtemberg, and many other Princes and States of
the Empire. Cato and Brutus might be endu'd with as much Virtue, and as
generous a Disposition as he, but (according to my Judgment) not with more. His
Liberality was so great as to offer me whatsoever Rarity I could find in his
House, which obliged me to take a Resolution to commend nothing any longer in
his presence; nevertheless I did not refuse all the Presents which he thought
fit to make me, and I hope e're long to show some of 'em to your Highness.

In the mean while I must entertain you with two or three Divertisements, which
I saw taken by his Imperial Majesty, who delights very much in Hunting, and
sometimes by that means recreates his Spirits, wearied with the Fatigues that
are inseparable from the Management of the Public Affairs of the Empire. I had
a sight of the Emperor in a Forest about three Leagues from Vienna to the
North, where his Grand Huntsman had caused a Tent to be prepared for him, under
which he was with the Empress and those Courtiers whom he had sent for thither:
I was there in the Retinue of the Marquess of Baden Durlach, a Prince whom you
know (my Lord) to be Learned, Judicious, and as well versed in Civil as
Military Affairs. The Hunters started a great number of Stags and Hinds, which
were constrained to run round the Tent by reason of the Gins that were laid on
all sides. The Empress first fired at 'em with a Harquebuss, and the Emperor
shot nine or ten several times within the space of an Hour. About five or six
days before, their Imperial Majesty's had discharged Twenty three shot at
Prater, which is the usual Walking-place of the Emperor and the Gentry of
Vienna: It is a Forest of high Trees situated along the sides of the Danube,
convenient spaces being left for all sorts of Walks; indeed this Place is very
pleasant, where, Ogni di infonti o in boschi
Scherzar si vedon' colle belle i vaghi.


I saw one day three Tents, which the Emperor had ordered to be fixed for the
abovementioned Hunting; they were those that the Grand Signior had presented
to him by his last Ambassadors, and which were valued at sixty thousand Crowns.
His Imperial Majesty in like manner takes much delight in residing at
Laxemburg, which is a small Palace situated in a Champion Country at the
distance of three Hours Journey from Vienna, where he passes every Year four or
five Weeks in the Season of Heron-Fowling.

The Emperor also very much diverts himself with Music, and is perfectly well
skilled in the Science, as I have been told. He maintains in his Court a great
number of Musicians, the most part of whom are Italians, and the others are
either Germans or Spaniards: The former have by much the clearest Voices, but
the later, are not willing to purchase that advantage at so dear a rate, and I
have observe d that the Successors of the ancient Graecians and Romans are only
of the contrary opinion, and willing to unman themselves so far as to become
Musicians, and to give away part of themselves to divert others; neither do we
hear that in the rest of Europe any Persons are gelt for that purpose, as in
Turkey and in Italy. I saw the Comedy of Andromeda acted with Machines, which
his Imperial Majesty caused to be represented in Italian to celebrate the
Birthday of the Empress. Some days after, a very magnificent Ball was made by
his order in the entrance of the Palace, where one hundred and fifty Players on
Violins gave attendance, who were all dressed in the habit of Comaedians, and
contributed much to the Divertisement.

The Empress takes very great delight in such kinds of Sports, perhaps because
they resemble those of Spain: She is honored in all those Countries as much as
the Emperor himself, which is done both by Reflection, and out of a due
Consideration of her particular Endowments. The highest Veneration is likewise
paid to the Empress Dowager, who usually resides in the Favorites, which is a
pleasant Seat about a quarter of an Hours Journey from Vienna, and has nothing
extraordinary with respect to the Regularity of its Architecture, but is
convenient and spacious, its Gardens being every where adorned with Fountains
and Statues. This Princess does not often appear at Court, though she is always
most honorably entertained there; neither does she almost at all intermeddle
with any Affairs of State: She delights in Painting, and diverts her self with
that Art. I have seen the Picture of a Virgin drawn by her hand, which is kept
in one of the Emperor's Treasuries: But her chief Employment is the Education
of her two Princesses; who are both very beautiful, and have well proportioned
Bodies; Facies habent dignas Imperio.

At the distance of two Hours Journey from Vienna, is to be seen a Garden,
which was formerly a great Theater of War, where Solomon the Ottoman Emperor
encamped when he besieged Vienna. God preserve Christendom, and more especially
this Country from such furious Attacks: The very remembrance of past Histories,
is sufficient to make those tremble that have the least concern in the present.
On the Top of the Steeple of the great Church is fixed a Star in the middle of a
Crescent, which are the Arms of old Constantinople, as your Highness may
observe in the ancient Medals of Augustus's Time. It was set up in Memory of
this famous Siege, and to excite the People incessantly to pray to God to
divert this Scourge, that so often threatens their Destruction. For indeed (my
Lord) the Great Turk is a bad Neighbor, whose Power and Impiety render him
equally formidable to Christendom. This Garden has changed its form, and is at
present only a Place of Divertisements. His Imperial Majesty causes wild
Beasts, and extraordinary Animals to be bred and nourished there, among these
are Lions, Lionesses, and young Lion-whelps, that are engendered in this place,
and sufficiently prove the Heat and Fruitfulness of the Climate. I was about to
buy two young Eagles on the Graben, which is the finest Marketplace of the
City, and was heretofore the Ditch, and designed to present 'em to your
Highness, but the want of the convenience of Carriage deprived me of this
Honor: They were taken out of their Nests in the Rocks of the Danube, where
they are often found, being very common in Germany. These sorts of Birds have
been always admitted into the Coat Armor of the Empire, as the most
illustrious Symbol of strength; and that which Constantine added a new, was
only to show the Dominion which he had established in the East, and that he had
united it to that of the West.

Will your Highness suffer me to make a diversion with reference to
Constantine, or rather are you willing that it should be continued? For this
Letter seems to me to have no particular Subject, nor any matter peculiar to
it. I have been often told that the Labarum was an invention of the Christans,
who were wont to make use thereof in their Armies; as the Pagans of
Sooth-sayings and Divinations to re-animate the courage of the Soldiers, and to
elevate their drooping Spirits, and that the Monks enhanc'd the Reputation of
this Story: Do not give credit to such Reports, (my Lord) for the Christian.
Religion which is truth it self, does not stand in need of falsehood to
maintain it. I have in my possession the ancient Medal of Constantius, the Son
of Constantine the Great, on the Reverse of which a Victory Crowns the Emperor,
who holds a Standard or Military Ensign, on which the Word Christ is
abbreviated, and round about are read these words, IN HOC SIGNO VICTOR ERIS.

AUSTRIA.
Upon the whole, is so fertile that it has no occasion to envy the plenty of
the Neighboring Provinces: The Fruits and particularly the Melons, are almost
as good there as in Italy, and the Wines as agreeable to the Palate, but a
great deal stronger: The heat of the Climate and the richness of the Soil are
undoubtedly the cause of this quality. Although the heat of the Sun is not more
intense there, than in the Parallel Regions; yet the Air is quite otherwise
heated, for the Sulphur which is predominant in all those Countries, augments
their Heat and Fruitfulness; nay, I have reason to fear the excess of this
Sulphurous heat; which is apparently accompanied with Nitre, and some other
Minerals that might cause a corrosive quality in their Wines, though it were in
never so small a quantity. Their Cattle are large and fat, insomuch that the
Oxen of Austria and Hungary are talked of every where throughout the World. As
for this last Country, I hope your Highness will give me leave to entertain you
for a while with its Description.

HUNGARY.
Is an admirable Country; where perhaps there is greater store of Grain and
Fruit, than in any other part of the World: there are Wines that have the
strength and delicious taste of those of Spain, and that even excel 'em in
both, as that of Tokay; there are also some others as strong as Brandy. I have
heard this saying given out long ago, Mirabilis Deus in Aquis Hungariae i. e.
The wonderful effects of the Divine Omnipotence are apparent in the Waters of
Hungary. And indeed, there are various kinds of all sorts of tast's and
qualities; but a Scoffer might reply, except those that are good to drink; for
it is certain that all the Waters in Hungary are somewhat Mineral, neither are
they commonly drunk. A vast quantity of Fowl, Lobsters and Tortesses are
frequently Transported from those Countries to Vienna. Your Highness cannot be
ignorant of what has been wrote concerning the extraordinary fertility and
verdeur of the Lake Zerniczee, where a man may every year Sow, Reap, Hunt and
Fish. If the soil were every where so luxuriant, the Country (in my Opinion)
would be three quartets larger than it is. Your Highness likewise knows what is
reported with respect to the Mines, which are supposed to be the richest in the
World. Indeed I have seen in the Imperial Treasury diverse pieces of Bullion of
above fifty pounds weight, that had been taken thence, and were almost pure
Silver The Inhabitants find very rich Marchasites, and sometimes even pieces of
Silver at the foot of their Vines; which gave occasion to some Persons to
affirm that Silver-Grapes grow there, which is a fable as well as the Golden
Tooth of the Silesian Infant. The consideration of this abundance of Wealth,
makes me resent the great loss that Christendom has sustained of a considerable
part of this fine Country. Every thing go's to wrack with the Turks; even what
relates to to the Art of. War, although they seem to take somewhat more care of
these than of other matters, and it is well known that they have no farther
regard either to Architecture or Agriculture than necessity requires,
committing the charge of 'em to Slaves: Insomuch that either through
slothfulness or Ignorance, they leave many Mines as unprofitable, which were
already opened near Buda and Belgrade. I am afraid lest they should one day
take a resolution to secure their past Conquests, by those of the Neighboring
Provinces; but perhaps the Divine Providence will never suffer it, the Piety
and Power of the Princes of Austria, and the Zeal and bravery of their People
induce me to believe so; besides nature it self seems to have set bounds on
that side, to the aspiring ambition of those Enemies of Christianity. The River
Danube does not transport the hundredth part of the Commodities to this Country
that it conveys into Germany; for its Streams are too rapid in many places, and
in others too shallow; the Rocks are also very numerous, and are often the
occasion of Ship-wracks. Lastly, (my Lord) the Inhabitants are not able to
mount their Cannon, and this is without doubt one of the most considerable
inconveniences that hinders 'em from carrying their Arms toward the West. His
Imperial Majesty is alone a very potent Prince, but if the Forces of the rest
of the Empire were joined to his, he would have no longer cause to fear any
thing. What may we not expect from the other Christian Potentates, when they
shall think fit to unite against the common Enemy?

To return to Hungary, it is a very rich Kingdom: Your Highness knows the Power
of its ancient Monarchs, and although at present it be divided between the
Emperor and the Turk; yet the Christian Part still continues extremly opulent
and very considerable. The Estates of the Realm endeavor to maintain their
liberty as much as lies in their Power, and claim a right to Elect their Kings;
but forasmuch as they alone are not sufficiently strong to make head against
the Turks; they lie under a necessity for the preservation of their
Commonwealth, to have recourse to a potent Monarch elsewhere, and one that is
their Neighbor, which has always obliged 'em to make choice of a Prince of the
August House of Austria.

BOHEMIA
Is a great deal weaker, although of a larger extent, and much may be said on the
Subject of its Wealth and Power: But this Country has been horribly laid waste
by the Wars since the Year 1618 and notwithstanding the Indulgence it recieves
from his Imperial Majesty, it has much a do to recover its former state. It is
rich in Mines, and here are found a greater quantity of Agates and Topazes than
in any other part of the World, as also Emeralds, contrary to the common
opinion: It is true indeed, that all these precious Stones are not so hard nor
altogether of so full a luster as the Oriental. This Country is more especially
famous for its Mines of Copper, Iron, Silver and Gold; but where are not these
to be found? I know not so much as one Province in Germany that does not afford
such discoveries; although Tacitus seemed to be ignorant thereof, when he wrote
Argentum and Aurum propitii an irati Dii negaverint dubito, nec tamen
affirmaverim, nullam Germaniae venam, aurum argentumve gignere, quis enim
scrutatus est? I doubt whether the Gods have denied these People Silver and
Gold as a special favor to 'em, or as a Curse; nevertheless I durst not
affirm that no Mines in Germany produce either of these noble Metals; for who
has made an exact search into those Parts? The Silver-mines of Saxony and the
Duchy of Lunenburg are noted throughout the World, and I know where there is
one of Amethyst, almost of as good a quality as those in the Levant. Many
different sorts of 'em are found along the Banks of the Rhine, and there are
some Places where the Peasants gather Gold in certain little Baskets, which
they leave in the Water for that purpose. Henry IV Sirnam'd the Great, King of
France, caused diverse Medals to be stamped with this Inscription, EX AURO
FRANCIGENA AD RHENUM EFFOSSO. I know not how to make an end of writing on this
subject, but I have already talked too much, and am afraid of trespassing any
longer on your Highness's Patience.

AT PASSAW,
I met with a very rare Curiosity: Your Highness is sensible that this City was
formerly one of the most considerable in Germany, that it is situated in
Bavaria, and that it is under the Protection of its own Lord, who is always the
Bishop of that Diocese: It was accidentally or rather by misfortune burnt,
about five Years ago, insomuch that scarce one fourth part of it remained
entire, but at present it begins to recover its former Grandeur: It is watered
by the Danube, that receives two other Rivers, one of which runs from Inspruck,
and is as large even as the Danube it self; but the other flows from the North
being much less, and this last is the River of which I would mention somewhat
in particular to your Highness: I was much surpised at the sight of its
color; for it is almost as black as Ink, and is intermixed with other Waters
without losing its quality. I have been told that the Inhabitants often Fish
therein for Pearls, which are very large and round, but not of so bright a
luster as the Oriental; yet some of 'em have been sold for 200 Francs. (15 l.
Sterling.) The Elector of Bavaria, to whom this Fishery belongs, takes great
care of it, as I have been also informed. As for these kinds of black Waters,
they are very common in Germany, and I have even tasted some that have an
intolerable smell and savor occasioned by Sulphur and other Minerals, with
which they are impregnated.

It is also requisite to give your Highness some account of what has been
observed by me with respect to the manners of the Germans. I take 'em to be as
Devout as any other People, and though their Religion be different, yet the
practice of a virtuous Life and Conversation and the hopes of attaining to a
future happy state, are equal in both Parties: Your Highness would be
transported with admiration in observing the Zeal of the Austrians in every
thing relating to the Divine service; the Churches are always full; Solemn
Processions are made almost every day; and Sermons are frequently preached
among 'em: They also take care to educate their Children in this Love of Holy
Duties, so that it may be affirmed that they are devout both by Custom and
Inclination, and this is the greatest obligation they have to their Prince:
Their Piety has been no less Conspicious abroad than at home, and the very
Stones themselves seem to declare the same thing in the streets of Vienna; that
is to say, the Churches, Monasteries and Hospitals which have been founded by
'em. The Lutherans do not enjoy the public exercise of their Religion in this
City, but in Strasburg, Francfurt, Ratisbone, Augsburg, Vlm, Stugart, and other
places where it is predominant, they appear very intent and exact in their
devotions: They observe the Sabbath with a great deal of Circumspection, and
Religiously meet in their Churches at the times appointed for Prayer and the
Exposition of the word of God: They that follow Calvin's Reformation, are more
averse to Ceremonies, and retrench as many of 'em as they can. I have known
some among these People that were of an upright Heart, and of most sound
Principles: But thus much may be sufficient for a Physician to talk of Divinity.

As for the rest, the distinction of Religions is here no impediment to Trade
and Commerce, neither does it produce any heats or animosities among the
People, who do not intermix any thing of this difference in their ordinary
Affairs; which brings to my remembrance the History of those Countries of
Barbary, where the Negro's live promiscuously with the White People; who are so
far accustomed to this diversity of Color, that they do not so much as take
the least notice of it. But the Germans are more cautious in matters relating
to the public Interest; for in that point every one is mindful of his Party,
adhereing to one and abandoning another without exception. However it must be
acknowledged (my Lord) that the different Sects have driven Germany as near its
ruin, as its Vigor and strong Constitution have supported and still continue
to support it; neither is the Disease as yet cured, though it appears less
malignant, because the State is accustomed thereto, and by reason that the
Tranquillity which it enjoys, renders it incapable of making an experiment it
self. May Heaven continue to preserve it both for its own safety and the
advantage of the rest of Europe.

Among all the Countries in which I have Traveled, I never saw any, where
there is less talk of these Divisions than at Vienna, so quiet a temper is to
be observed there, as if all Men believed the seven Sacraments and the Mass:
Not that there is any prohibition to dispute about matters of Religion as in
Turkey; it proceeds from their love of Peace and Tranquillity, all Persons
finding it to be their Interest to be silent; and perhaps the Emperor himself
may find means to augment his Authority, by maintaining the Privileges of each
Party, and by discountenancing Partiality. The domestic Broils of private
Families may tend to the Disturbance of the State, whereas a profound silence
as to these Matters preserves its Union, and makes its settlement more durable.

The Germans take much delight in good cheer, as it is generally reported and
believed; their Voluptuousness in this kind consists rather in the
divertisement of the Feast, then the rarity and magnificence of the Provisions:
In these Entertainments they chiefly seek for Mirth, and those charming
transports to which they are excited by Wine: There for a while they insensibly
lose that dullness, which is as it were natural to 'em, and their Wits being
refined by the subtle and hot Vapors, introduce various sorts of Humors,
which during the whole continuance of the Debauch afford as many Pastimes that
are usually terminated in fervent Protestations, extraordinary flights and
Passionate expressions of Friendship: Others grow furious when an Inflammation
succeeds the Heat, and hence arise the German Quarrels. But I would be
understood here to speak only of the ordinary sort of People, that are born and
animated with the Genius of the Country; and by no means of those generous
Souls, who are the pure Workmanship of Heaven, from whence they derive their
Original, much rather than from the gross Earth. Durst I presume to cite your
Highness as a Witness to this Truth? Can it be declared to what Nation you
belong, since you have the defects of none? Or rather, of what Nation may your
Highness not be said to be a Member, in regard that you are endowed with all
the good qualities and all the advantages that are natural to every particular
one?

Upon the whole, the Entertainments of the Table among the Germans, are not
confined as every where else, to a certain Place, and to certain Oppertunities,
but they are used upon all occasions, they always begin and end with 'em; and
it may be avouch'd that in the whole course of their Life and Conversation,
they are the first Matter, of which the rest of their Actions and Affairs is
the Form. I know not how to desist, (my Lord) this faculty of the Mouth is the
vicious part of their natural Inclination. But what Nation is there in the
World that is free from all manner of Faults? A German Ambassador made a smart
Repartee to a certain French Man, who let loose the reins of his Ralilery
somewhat to far; It is true (said he) the Germans are only Fools in there Cups,
but the French are always so: It must also be granted that this depraved
disposition has less Advantage than all others: For it shortens Life,
over-loads the Stomach and Waste, makes Giants in breadth and thickness, and
finally its most malignant Quality is, that it can scarce be judged whether it
be a sort of Folly that has its lucid Intervals; or whether it be a kind of
Discretion, subject to Weaknesses and Periodical transports, or to speak more
politely to your Highness, whether it be an intermitting Folly or Prudence.
However, it does not otherwise corrupt the manners of the Germans; for
certainly they are the best natured People in the World, provided some of 'em
be excepted that are not so: They are endu'd with Probity, Generosity,
Courteousness and a temper entirely addicted to Equity. These excellent
endowments, are as it were natural to 'em, and to be found even among those
that have no advantage of Education: Perhaps this is the Reason why they are
beloved of all Nations, although they do not take any considerable Measures to
Court 'em at home, and they have no regard to 'em, but proportionably as they
conform themselves to their manner of Living. They have a greater stock of
Discretion than of quickness of apprehension, and more Judgment than Politeness
of Wit: Their Gravity though somewhat Terrestrial is of Singular use to 'em as
well in the management of important Negociations as in their ordinary Commerce:
It also disposes 'em to make great progress in the study of all manner of
Humane Literature; insomuch that there are many profound Scholars among 'em,
and none that has not some tincture of Learning. The ancient Roman Language is
as commonly spoken by 'em as their Vulgar Tongue; it is true indeed, that as
Titus Livius was censured for his Paduan Dialect, so it may be objected by the
way, to the Germans, that their Latin has a small Relish of the High Dutch.
Their Polity is none of the most refined as being such as is not proper for the
constituting of Hero's and Conquerors; but it is solid and constant, and able to
procure the tranquillity of the State, and the Felicity of the People. The
distribution of Justice in this Country has no circular motion, nor all those
Chimerical Explications, that serve to eternize the bad Fortune of the
miserable. The Judges there are Men and not Demigods as among us.

The Art of Physic is practiced in those Parts quite otherwise than at Paris,
and if you except a small number of its Professors, the latter are more
Learned, and the others talk of nothing but extraordinary Secrets and Miracles.
One Grain of their black, yellow or white Powder is sufficient (as they say) to
cure all sorts of Diseases, but the event does not answer their Promise. They
that have studied most have not the greatest employment in that Country no more
than elsewhere: The happiness of a Physician is there owing to a certain blind
Fortune, that I know not how to explain to you, but which usually depends upon
the vogue of the common People, I mean those that unstand nothing at all of the
Art. A sick Person is easily persuaded to resign himself into the hands of an
Empyrick, that promises him a Cure within Twenty four Hours, but he is often
not in a condition to return thanks to his Doctor. Therefore I make a great
difference between a Doctor of Physic and a true Physician.

The Germans are not so magnificent as some other Nations, but I take 'em to be
at least as rational, and they ought rather to be called good Husbands than
Niggardly Misers. But I am speaking here only of the common People, and not in
the least of the Princes, nor of those great Personnages, whom the Divine
Providence has ordained to exercise authority over others, who only seek for an
occasion of doing good, and (as Tacitus has it) make no other account of Riches
than to distribute 'em. I have even had sometimes experience of their Generous
Bounty, for his Imperial Majesty in particular, has thought fit to honor me
with a Golden Chain, which I shall keep during my whole Life as a mark of my
good Fortune.

The Germans count it Honorable to protect the oppressed, and to do all manner
of Offices of kindness to 'em, yet the Maxim is not general; but I speak of the
most part. These People are also Wealthy, and although they have not so great
store of Gold as others, nevertheless they have in their own Country all sorts
of necessary Provisions, without being beholden to Foreigners, and are much
more content; is not this then to be richer? I should not know where to
conclude, if I should continue to enumerate all their good Qualities, but they
are much better known to your Highness than to me, and therefore I am well
assured that you will take 'em into farther Consideration.

I Remember, and perhaps too late, that I have tired your Highness's Patience
with a Relation of many Impertinent things that are not worthy of your notice:
Therefore to leave off where I began, I must reiterate my Protestations that I
was only willing to obey, because you were pleased to lay your Commands upon
me. If I have not found means to give satisfaction to your Highness; I doubt
not but that your Justice and Generosity will be so great, as to impute the
defect, to my incapacity, and nevertheless to be fully persuaded of my
unfeigned Zeal for your service, and of that profound Respect with which I
shall always endeavor to approve my Self,

My Lord, Your Highness's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, C. PATIN.

It is very difficult to supply the date of this Letter, because it was writ at
several times; for I digested the matter of it, as I was returning from Vienna
on Horseback, in a Barge and in a Chariot, and I committed it to writing at my
leisure in different days of the Month of Aug. 1669.

O Meliboee! Deus nobis haec otia fecit,
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus.
This quiet Shepherd, from a God we found,
For he shall be my God: -- Ogilb. Virg.
THE SECOND RELATION, TO His most Serene Highness Eberhard, Duke of Wirtemberg
and Teck, Count of Montbeliard, Lord of Heidenhaim, etc.
My Lord,
IT is a sufficient encouragement for me to speak, to know that your most
Serene Highness is willing to condescend so far as to hear me: It Is also so
very honorable an employment to entertain so Noble a Prince, that there can be
no difficulty in resolving to set about the Undertaking. Any Man may easily
imagine himself to be capable of affording some Satisfaction to your Highness,
because every one cannot but be transported with the greatest Zeal to do it,
and as being persuaded that although very common Effects are only produced every
where else by ordinary means, yet even Miracles might be wrought upon so
extraordinary an Occasion. Can this Assertion be esteemed as too peremptory
with respect to your Highness, whose most sagacious Judgment can scarce relish
what is even admired by others? But I have reason to hope that you will not
require such Performances of me, who am at most but an inquisitive Person, or a
lover of Curiosities; neither have I brought any thing for your Divertisement,
except some particular Rarities of Bavaria and Tirol.

Curiosity (my Lord) is extremely delightful, notwithstanding the contrary
Sentiments of those that have no Inclination to it: For it sublimates the Mind,
refines the Judgment, and enriches the Memory, without overloading it: Indeed
it is attended with Pains, or rather with those agreeable Disturbances that
arise in the search after the delight of Novelty; but of such a Novelty as is
wonderful, precious and solid, that never grows old with Time, because it
neither tires the Eyes nor Palate. Those noble Souls only are capable of being
affected with Curiosity, that have a very little mixture of ordinary Matter;
who make a Collection of Ages, and discover the most secret Recesses of Nature
to get Satisfaction, and for their more noble Employment; who seek for Truth in
its very Origin, and are addicted to those sorts of Charms and Beauties, which
proceed from a more skilful Hand than that of Art; who by their choice of the
best Things that are in the World, do as it were create a new one for
themselves; who know how to unite the Mind and the Senses in the harmonious
Enjoyment of the same Pleasures, and to bring 'em to a perfect Association, by
giving Eyes to the Understanding, and Understanding to the Eyes: This is the
Nature of Curiosity, which is neither that Inclination for Trifles and Things
of very little moment, and serve only to amuse our Minds; nor that impetuous
Torrent of Luxury that swallows up Riches: It has a greater Elevation than the
former, and less vehemence than the other, with a Perspicuity and discerning
Faculty that belongs to neither. Upon the whole, this Passion is altogether
Divine; which has inspired the Arts and Sciences, which has adorned the Earth;
which has opened the Roads of the Ocean; and lastly, which has so conveniently
lodged us in this sublunary World. In Republics and Empires, Curiosity has
been observed to increase with Power, as if the Ambition of Heroes had labored
only for the Enjoyment of Her, as the chief Prize. Victory (my Lord) never had
a greater share in Triumphs than Curiosity, which was usually there set off to
the best advantage as the sweetest Fruit of Glory: Then the most renowned
Personages, after the Fatigues of War, were wont to employ themselves during
the leisure of Peace in the performance of Enterprises, to the undertaking of
which they were excited by Curiosity. Finally, those Temples, those Pyramids,
those Amphitheatres, those Columns that will never fall to ruin but with the
Universe; those Triumphal Arches consecrated to Eternity; those Aqueducts, that
Causey 300 Leagues long, which makes the Road from the Alps to Calabria; those
Banks that force the Sea even at this day, the firmness and prodigious Mass of
which might appear to our sight, as the Work of the Almighty Power, were we not
otherwise informed in History, are all the magnificent Productions of
Curiosity. But if I ever had any Veneration for this Virtue, it ought to be
more especially conspicuous in this most happy Conjuncture, in which she has
set me before your Highness, and supplied me with Matter proper for the
composing of a Letter, to be presented to so noble and so judicious a Personage.

The very diversity of Judgments and Opinions has its usefulness among Men: For
it animates and stirs up the Mind to a search after Truth, and clears it from
heaviness by keeping it in action; It introduces all those different manners of
Living that appear so admirable in the World. This pleasing Variety, which is
every where conspicuous in the Political Government, Manners and Commerce of
diverse People, is the most agreeable object of Meditation to a curious or
inquisitive Person, who without putting himself upon the Wrack, as those
unfortunate Philosophers were heretofore wont to do, admires, contemplates,
enjoys and makes use of Argumentations according to the measure of his own
Strength and personal Abilities. How pleasant it is! (my Lord) to see two
reputed Wisemen taking different Roads to arrive at at the same Goal; ever
contending for the Truth, and yet always continuing in Error; in short,
endeavoring during the whole course of their Life to get a right
Understanding, and nevertheless dying without having obtained it. How great
delight there is in observing that nothing is less like a Man than a Man, and
that if Almighty God had not drawn the Lineaments of his Face with his own
Hand, he would have found means to disfigure himself, and to pass into another
Form; but his fantastical Humor cannot proceed so far: He may indeed put off
his Humanity, but cannot alter his Shape. If I were permitted (my Lord) to take
a flight where my Imagination leads me; might it not be affirmed, that Man is
born with a certain universal Disposition to all the Natures of Animals; that
Reason makes him a Man, and that by his exorbitant Passions he becomes a brute
Beast of one kind or other, according to the inclination with which he is
carried away? Thus nothing else is to be seen but these sorts of Beasts in
Masquerade, viz. Lions, Eagles, Tigres, Foxes, Horses, Asses, Swine, and even
Insects under the mask of a Man. Your Highness, who is so perspicacious, cannot
but take cognizance of these Humaniz'd Animals, and of these fashionable
Monsters: I am apt to believe that you may sometimes make proper Reflections on
this Subject; but I return to my first Notions, which are to consider how very
different one sort of People is from another, or one Nation from another.

For we every where meet with new Customs, new Religions, new manners of
Apparelling, Eating, Living and even Dying. Thus without expatiating too far,
we may observe that the Sages and chief Judges among the Chinese are clothed
as our Buffoons, and their Highpriests as our Comaedians; they consecrate to
their Religion what we detest in ours; for Example, these lewd Debauches of
both Sexes, which excite horror in us, are charming delights to those People,
and had in great veneration among 'em. The Indians are accustomed to burn their
dead Bodies, the Americans to devour 'em, and we to interr 'em; but the
Egyptians expose 'em to the Air, by a kind of Superstition that does not cease
to comprehend a subtle Notion even under its Absurdity; for they believed that
it was a piece of Jnjustice to bury the Corpse in the bosom of the Earth, that
Heaven and the other Elements had a share in these dead Bodies, and that the
restitution of it was due, which could not be better done, than by depositing
'em in this great Vacuum, which is common to 'em with all. Neither did they
erect those stately Pyramids, but only to serve 'em as Tombs. It is well known
to your Highness how far the magnificence of these Works proceeded, in which
are still to be observed the boldness of Art, and the first Beauties of
Architecture; as also the Mysteries of their Re^igion, and the secrets of their
History and Politics; nay, they may be esteemed as a Monument of the Country
of Egypt, as well as of the Egyptians. How wonderfully did this learned Nation
find out Expedients against the accidents of Death! they in a manner eternized
their dead Bodies, lodging 'em in Edifices of an everlasting durableness, and
by a certain rare Secret unknown to the rest of the World, they freed 'em from
that mixture of Elements, which tends to Corruption, to leave 'em only the
whole pure part of their Substance, under a kind of first Matter. We still see
even at this day some of these natural Effigies, or precious Phantoms, in which
are admired at the same time both the violent impression of Time, and the
invincible force of the Mummy: One of these is kept at

VLM,
In the Musaeum or Repository of M. Weicthman, which seems to me so much the
more admirable, in regard that it is entire, and has been preserved without the
use of any Balsam or Medicinal Composition. It was found the last age in the
Sands of Arabia, where the excessive Heat of the Sun has apparently dispersed
all the Moisture of this Body, which is (as your Highness knows very well) the
next disposition to Corruption, and has Communicated to it in process of Time,
that preservative Heat, which resists extraneous Impressions, which is
observable in its dryness, Color and Lightness. I have read in Herodotus that
an Army was overwhelmed with a Mountain of Sand, which the Winds had
Transported, and that many years after, a contrary Wind having removed this
heap of Sand to its former Place, discovered to the Inhabitants of the Country
the dead Bodies of those Soldiers, as entire as if they had expired the very
same day. In the same Repository is to be seen a Prodigious quantity of choice
Rarities, more especially natural Curiosities.

M. Schermeier showed me a great stock of Medals, from whence he endeavors to
extract a Collection for an entire Universal History, and for want of the
Original Coins which are not to be found for all times, he makes use of a Book
called PROMPTUAIRE DES MEDAILLES, and of every thing that may contribute to the
completing of his Design. He also used the greater part of the Prints and
Devices that belong to another Book, which bears the Title of FRANCE
METALLIQUE. However, I took the liberty to acquaint him, that these two Books
were of no reputation, and that the Learned more especially, the inquisitive
Antiquaries had dis-approv'd the Fictions with which they are filled, since
that which is useful in this matter ought always to be grounded upon Truth, and
on Original Pieces. He seemed to be extremely surpised to hear so bad News of
two Books, which were very much esteemed by him. However his Preparatives for
this Work are curious, and contain diverse very considerable Draughts.

What is there to be declared to your Highness concerning the City of Vlm, that
is not already known to you? Certainly there is nothing concealed from your
knowledge, that relates either to its Interest, condition or strength. I need
not tell you that it is situated upon the Danube, which there begins to
expatiate, and to assume that Swiftness, which is proper for the principal
River of Europe. Eleven Bastions that encompass this Town have rescued it from
the Desolation which the last Wars carried throughout the whole Continent of
Germany; but the Honor it has had to make Alliances with your Highness, is in
my opinion the most illustrious Pledge of its safety. Minerva's Bird incurred
the hatred of all the others, but because it was protected by this Goddess,
none durst offer it any violence. Your Highness is well versed in the Art of
making your self beloved, but perhaps you may be ignorant how far the profound
Respect that the World bears toward you may be extended: I perceived the number
of my Friends to increase even as soon as I declared my self to be one of your
Servants, and when upon any occasion, I thought fit to show your Picture, and
the Chain of Gold, with which you were pleased to honor me, I was much
surpised at the extraordinary esteem that they had for me. A great Veneration
was heretofore paid in Egypt to those Animals which carried the Image of the
Goddess Isis, without having any regard to their meanness; I have also
perceived in many Rencounters that Honor was done to me, only upon account
that the People were desirous of doing it to your Highness. But these
considerations ought to be referred to another Opportunity, when I may have
leisure to insist on 'em more at large. From Vlm I passed to.

AVGSBVRG,
There are not any Cities in Germany more Beautiful, nor more Rich than this,
The agreement which the Emperor Charles V. made there with the Protestants,
relating to Luther's Reformation, and the establishment of their Liberty, which
was authorized in the Terms of the Confession of Faith, well known to the World
under the title of the Augustan, or that of Augsburg, will also undoubtedly
render this place famous in all Ages. The Avenues, the Fountains, the public
Places, the Townhouse, and all the other Edifices are magnificent: But the
Emperor, who has a most exact knowledge of all things once told the Magistrates
in admiring the Product of such vast Expenses, that the Inhabitants of Vlm had
disposed of the public Treasure to better purpose, when they laid it out in
Fortifications, by reason that the Beauty of a Town does not secure its
Tranquillity nor liberty, as the thickness of its Walls and the number of its
Bastions. There can be nothing more stately than the Palace of the Fuggers, nor
more excellent than the Paintings with which it is adorned on the outside. It is
true, that after having admired the Beauties of Art, a Man would scarce meet
with any thing that might answer his expectation in taking a particular view of
certain Copies of Roman Medals, which are there found in some places. It is
evident that they have no Originals, and that it is difficult to observe in 'em
the least footstep of Antiquity: Upon the Sight of the word Tullius engraved on
an ancient Piece, it has been thought a sufficient ground to hang underneath
it, the Picture of Cicero, although the Head in the Medal represents only the
Genius of the City of Rome: Men were not so inquisitive in those times, as they
are now, because they were less learned.

Augsburg has had its share in the Commotions of the last Wars, its Ramparts
which were battered by the Swedish Cannon, are not so well repaired, but that
some marks of those terrible Assaults as yet appear in 'em; there is also to be
seen the Place where the great Gustavus Adolphus caused his Army to encamp. It
may be reckoned among the most glorious Advantages of this Place, that it was
overcome by this Hero of our Age; and if Germany which employed his Valor, has
not been absolutely conquered by him; it has done in this point somewhat more
than all the World together, for the subduing of which there was only requisite
one Alexander, or one Caesar. I know not whether the Demigods that are so much
Celebrated in History, would be now Gustavus's, but I am assured that this
potent King of Sweden, might well have been the Alexander of the Graecians, and
the Caesar of the Romans. These Contemplations are too serious and too remote
from my present design.

Curiosity it self seems to be altogether confined to the House of M. Thoman,
who spends what time can well be spared from the management of the Affairs of
the Republic in making a Collection of all manner of Rarities. The ancient and
modern Medals are placed in the first rank in his Repository, and afterward
the Books, Paintings, Prints, and Jewels: I have also observed there a Picture
drawn by the hand of Albert Durer as genuine as I have seen elsewhere.

M. Verner is not only a lover of Curiosity, but even the very source thereof,
from whose incomparable Genius it daily flows, and is distributed to diverse
Parts: For he is the Author of an infinite number of Draughts that delight the
Eyes, and ravish the Imagination. This young Painter has already attained to
the highest perfection of Art, and excites Jealousy and admiration even in the
most able Masters. The King has a great esteem for his Person, and has chosen
some of his Miniatures for his own Repository; that is to say, to afford 'em a
place among the finest Curiosities in the World. Now what can be added to this
Commendation?

In the Church of St. Vlric are to be read these Roman Inscriptions, enclosed
in the Wall.

VITALIUS VIGOR SIBI ET VITALIO VIRILI FRATRI VIVOS FECIT. CURIONI AL. III. L.
ET.... COS. ET FL. DECORATO..... LEG. III. ITAL.... DIUS.... VIV........... In
departing from Augsburg I turned toward the South; where I beheld the Sun
shining with greater luster than ordinary; it seemed to me not to be that Sun
which appears every day; its vigourous heat animated whatever remained in the
Verdant Plains, and seemed suddenly to ripen the Corn even in my sight; I
perceived that its Splendor served less to disperse the light, than to
beautify every thing that I saw. the Air was altogether pure and gentle, and I
drew in by respiration a quickening Essence that gave me as it were a new Life,
and a fresh supply of Strength. Then I was thoroughly convinced that Italy was
the Enchanted part of the World, and the land of Delights and Pleasu^es. I no
longer admired that it had been the Seat of Glory, and the Inheritance of
Conquerors, and that so many Nations resorted thither to seek for felicity
since it is its very native Country. At the same time I called to mind that
memorable Passage of Hannibal, which has not been hitherto sufficiently
Illustrated, Et montes rupit aceto. i. e. He broke the Rocks with Vinegar. I
passed as he did, through the Alps, without wasting so much Vinegar; but our
designs were altogether different; for he marched on purpose to carry Fire and
Sword to Rome, to destroy the marks of its Grandeur, and I made it my business
to preserve, reestablish and publish 'em to the World. The reason (my Lord) is
evident, in regard that I altogether applied my self to the search of
Antiquity, which was not his Employment.

Italy is enclosed on all sides with Mountains of an extraordinary height;
which if they are no longer so many Ramparts for its defense; serve at least as
an Amphitheatre to take a view at leisure of that delicate Country From thence
I had a fair Prospect of the adjacent Plains of

TIROL.
The River Inn, which waters those Plains along an admirable diversity of
Landskips, affords the finest Object of Perspective in the World: There I saw
the Energy and Vivacity of Nature, as it were in the delightful Representation
of a Picture, with all the charming Embellishments of Miniature; certainly
Moses had not greater Transports of Joy when he discovered the Land of Canaan;
indeed there are not any Rivers of Milk and Honey in those Parts, but all the
Comforts of this Life are there to be found in so great abundance, that
considering the present state of Affairs, the Holy Land, which otherwise
deserves so much Veneration, might well be esteemed as a Desert in comparison
of this Country. For the Turks, who are now Masters of Palaestine, get only
Milk from their Flocks, and Honey out of their Bee-hives; neither did I ever
hear it reported, that they at any time employed two Slaves in carrying a
Cluster of Grapes, as was done heretofore: It so happens, because it is no
longer the Land of that well beloved People, who lived amidst Miracles, and by
reason that the Infidelity which is there predominant has removed the Blessings.

The Inhabitants of Tirol have every where very fine Crops and spacious
Vineyards. Their Wines are excellent; for their Strength and delicious Taste,
which are generally apt to be spoiled in all other Places, are here most
exquisite, and give 'em an agreeable Tartness, that pleases and penetrates the
Palate both together. Their Cattle are of an admirable Kind; and they have such
extraordinary Birds, that even the Hunters do not know their several Species:
Some of these have been shown to me, that live only upon the Rosin of Firtrees;
neither have they any other Taste: They are called Artagenes, and I remember to
have read their Name in Pliny. These Birds are without doubt very
dainty-mouth'd to live upon nothing but Extracts and Quintessences. The
Copper-Mines are there so numerous, that they supply almost the whole Country
of Germany; but the Workmen of Noremberg make more use of 'em than the others,
because the Metal which is taken from thence is softer and malleable. Silver is
also common in those Parts, and Gold less scarce than elsewhere. A certain
private Person who knew not its use desired a Permission of the Archduke to
cover part of his House with it, and the Answer was suitable to so impertinent
a Request, I give you leave, (replied the Prince) but I will not be obliged to
secure it for you from Thieves. That famous Gallery, which is covered with two
or three thousand Gold Tiles, is at present in the Emperor's Possession, and I
have been told, that a certain Jew had offered one hundred thousand Florins for
every one of 'em; but a Christian would have bid more, for the Jews are wont to
buy Merchandises only after their manner. However, this Pent-house might
shelter a great many People from Poverty, who could easily purchase one to
defend 'em from the Injuries of the Weather at a much cheaper rate.

All this may perhaps afford but little Satisfaction to your Highness, since an
account of much finer Curiosities ought only to be presented to you, and I am
very sensible that you have reason to complain of my extravagant Diversions.
Therefore (my Lord) I will instantly retrench 'em to give you a Description of
the chiefest Rarities and Curiosities which I observed at

INSPRVCK.
This City has not been ruined by the Wars; for the Prudence of its Princes has
preserved its Civil Tranquillity, and the situation of the Country has defended
it from Foreign Assaults; Your Highness well knows it to be inaccessible except
in two places, where four hundred Men may repulse forty thousand. This is that
rich Plain, in which the Archdukes of Austria have fixed the center of their
Treasures. Ferdinand cause d the Castle of Amras to be built at the distance of
half a League from Inspruck, and there (my Lord) I saw those Rarities, a
particular Account of which will (as I presume) be acceptable to your Highness.
M. Roland, who is the Governor of the said Castle, gave me entire Satisfaction
in this Matter; his Merit is extraordinary, and his manner of Deportment the
most obliging in the World. I had Commendatory Letters from his Imperial
Majesty, which gave me admission into all the Appartments, but I perceiv d in
the Governor's being so extremely officious to me, that he was not only ready
to obey the Orders, but that he had also a particular Respect for the Bearer of
'em, and that I could not come off, without acknowledging that I owed the sight
of so many rare Curiosities purely to the Emperor's favor, being also obliged
to him, for part of the delight I had taken in the viewing of 'em.

After having observed the Outworks of the Castle, its Situation, the order of
the Buildings and the Fortifications, I entered and applied my self entirely to
the Enjoyment of those incomparable Treasures. The first things that offered
themselves to my view, were some of those sorts of Stones, of which the old
Romans were wont to make use to mark the distances of Places, which were
counted in those times by tertio aut quarto ab Vrbe Lapide, i. e. The third or
fourth Stone from the City: Some of 'em had no Inscriptions, and those that had
any, were conformable to what I have read in ancient History.

From thence I passed into two Galleries full of all sorts of different Armor,
which are now in use, and were so in former Ages: They induced me to make this
Reflection, that Men notwithstanding that they might wear Skins of Iron and
Steel, or at least, Clothes made of those Materials, were nevertheless neither
invulnerable nor immortal. I there saw the Arms of the two Maximilians, of
Charles V. and of some other Emperors, as also those of Francis I. King of
France, with the Garment which he wore at the Battle of Pavia, which makes me
call to mind, that I had already seen one in the Repository of Brussels, so
that he either put on two Suits of Clothes on that day, or they were divided on
purpose to spread abroad the fame of the Victory, at Brussels and Inspruck.
There are also to be seen those of Charles IX. King of France; of Ferdinand and
Philip Kings of Spain; of Don John of Austria, and of many other Princes. I was
told that these last were the very same that he wore at the famous Battle of
Lepanto. But I spent some time in viewing those of Alexander. Farnese Duke of
Parma Governor of the Low Countries, recollecting what I had read in Strada
concerning the notable Exploits of this Prince: I know not whether any thing
were wanting to his Merit; but I am persuaded that his History cannot be better
writ, and that even the actions of Achilles and Alexander the great are not set
off to more advantage by Historiographers than his. I admired the Arms of
Solomon the Great, which as yet strike Terror into the Minds of Beholders, and
I remember with some Consternation, that this Ottoman Emperor once caused the
whole World to tremble. The Arms of the most part of the renowned Generals of
these later Times, are in like manner kept in the same Repository. The
Archduke Ferdinand made this Conquest; could any Man proceed farther (my Lord)
than to disarm so many Heroes? But this was only an amicable Conquest, this
Prince who was the most excellent Antiquary of all that governed in his Age
knew well what value ought to be set upon those precious Spoils; He was
desirous to obtain 'em every where, and was even sometimes prevented: I am apt
to believe that they were offered to him, lest not being sought for, they
should not have the good Fortune to be so gloriously consecrated.

At the end of one of the Galleries, I saw the representation of a Giant and a
Dwarf, the living Originals of which had sometime resided at Vienna. Indeed
this exorbitant inequality of Stature between two Men, is a very strange thing;
the Elder of these was not able to reach with his Hand to the Navel of the
other, yet a Ballad was made concerning a Box on the Ear, which was given by
this Dwarf to the Giant: It is true, that the later stoopt to take up the
Emperor's Glove, who had let it fall on purpose to facilitate the giving of the
Box of the Ear. These sports of Nature are still much esteemed at Vienna,
either because her Ability in forming Men of quite different sorts and sizes is
there admired; or her Error in sometimes making much more, or else much less
than she ought. Their Imperial Majesty's likewise maintain some of these Giants
and Dwarfs in their Court, whom I could never behold without a kind of Horror,
in regard that they are so far from the ordinary proportion and size of other
Men.

In a spacious Hall are to be seen all the several sorts of Garments which the
Turks are wont to wear both in their Houses and in the Camp. There are many
rich Vests in which the price, quality, quantity and color of the Stuff of
which they are made, show the natural Disposition of this Nation to Luxury and
Magnificence. This manner of attiring surpasses all ours, that are introduced
purely by a fantastical Humor, and the continual change of which denotes but
too much Levity. If we could be once persuaded to imitate this August manner of
Apparelling, and to appear in these magnificent pieces of Drapery, perhaps we
should continue the use of 'em, and our Fashion might turn to a settled Custom
as among the Levantines. And indeed, these Infidels have got the advantage in
this respect, insomuch that one of their Visiers, one day told the Venetian
Ambassador, that the Christians were apt to deride, but were not well clad: The
Venetian might have replied elsewhere than at the Port; it is true, but it is
pity to see such Swine as you attired with the Ornaments of Sovereign Princes.
I also observed there, Turbans of a hundred various Fashions, and one would not
imagine, that they had all the same use: The finest of 'em have a kind of
stately Air, and notwithstanding whatever our nice Fashion-mongers may affirm
to the contrary, these Mountains of Linnen-Cloath that serve so well to adorn
the Heads of these Barbarians, would not disguise our Hero's; for they really
implant Grandeur and Severity in the Countenance, which would even set off
Majesty it self. Afterward I took a view of diverse Cimeters or Hangers of great
value for the rich Ornaments with which they are covered, and also upon account
of their rare Temper, so that Fury it self might well go to work with these
Weapons. Lastly, all manner of choice Rarities of this Country are to be found
Here.

In the same Hall are two Figures that represent two Turkish Lords on
Horseback, and I observed in 'em as great an Air of Grandeur, Gravity and
Stateliness, as is possible for Art to express in Copies, but it is probable
that the Originals were quite another thing. One of these Personages was Aga of
the Janissaries, and the other Beglerbeg or Bassa of Offen or Buda. They were
taken Prisoners upon different occasions, and gave as a part of their Ransom
their most sumptuous Equipage; which is very carefully preserved, and well
deserves to be so: For not only the Garments, but the Horse-cloath, Saddles and
Bridles were all beset with Rubies, Emeralds, Grenats, Topaz-stones and Pearls,
being so many profuse Treasures.

I entered another Gallery full of Paintings of the best Masters, although it
must be acknowledged that they are not all choice ones as those at Vienna. I
applied my self more particularly to the viewing of the Portraiture of a
certain Hungarian Nobleman, which is not so much to be admired for the
excellency of the Draught, as for the Prodigy which it represents, viz. a Wound
made with a Lance in the Eye, which penetrated into the Substance of the Brain,
even to the hinder part of the Head, and yet did not prove Mortal. This is a
Secret of Nature, that is altogether hid from us, and which confounds all our
Argumentations.

I did not allow my self time sufficient to examine these Paintings in
particular, because I was diverted by the variety of other things that were not
so common. Amidst a great quantity of Stags Horns, which are there very
extraordinary, I observed one as it were mortis'd in a Trunk of Oak, so neatly
that the Artifice cannot be perceived; it was cut on purpose to be placed among
the other Rarities. Upon this occasion I remember that pair of Stags Horns
which I saw (my Lord) amidst so many others, in your Guard-Chamber at Stugart,
which are so intangl'd one with another, that they seem still to express the
Fury of the two Animals, which would never cease but with their Life.

The same Gallery seems to be divived into two by twenty Presses, twelve Foot
high and six broad, where all the richest and choicest Rarities are deposited:
In the first are contained diverse pieces of Alabaster and Marble, whose Colors
and various Figures dazzle the Eyes of the Beholders: In the second is a vast
quantity of Glass vessels, and every thing that can be imagined ingenious in
the Art of Glass-work: In the third is Coral of all kinds and of all sorts of
Colors, viz. white, red, black, gray and violet-colour'd: There are some
pieces of it in the form of Plants, Shrubs and Branches, and others are wrought
in the shape of a Man's Head, of a Rock, of a pair of Beads, and an infinite
number of other Figures: in the fourth are found wrought Precious-stones both
ancient and modern, the most part of which are Agats, Jaspars and Cornelians:
There are also Rocks beset with Pearls and rich Stones; and in short, the
Jewels of this nature are so numerous, that this Press alone is an inestimable
Treasure. In the fifth are preserved Urns of red Earth, and others of Porcelane
of China and Japan, among which are observed some counterfeit; they are the
common ones that come from Holland, which have been put in vogue on purpose to
save a greater expense: But do not imagine (my Lord) that they are placed there
to make up the number, there is a quite different design and meaning as to this
matter: For super fine things ever appear more illustrious, when accompanied
with ordinary ones, and the Comparison made between 'em serves to enhance their
Value. Thus an Ethiopian is sometimes painted standing near a beautiful Woman,
and it tends to her advantage; for the Deformity that appears at her side,
serves as a foil to set off her Beauty with more charming Luster: Thus the
light of a Torch that grows pale in the Sun, shines bright and sparkles in the
dark.

In the other Presses are contained Curiosities of all sorts, but a larger
Description of 'em would tire your Highness's Patience: Therefore I shall leave
it to speak only of those kinds of Matters, of which you seem to require a more
exact Account. There is a Collection of ancient Gold Medals from Julius Caesar
to Heraclius; being the most perfect of all that ever I saw, both with respect
to the number of the Coins and their Beauty: It would be very difficult, if not
impossible, to find elsewhere any Medals that are more rare, or have been
better preserved. There is also another Collection of those of the Consuls and
Emperors, and a prodigious quantity of Silver-Medals, but those of Copper are
infinitely more precious than all the others. None but a Prince so much
addicted to Curiosity and so Learned, could be capable of making so good a
Choice, or of defraying the charge of so expensive an Undertaking. When his
Imperial Majesty shall have joined these incomparable Pieces to as many others
that are in his Possession at Vienna, I am persuaded that his Repository, and
that of the King, will be the largest and most considerable. Is it not
reasonable that the choicest Rarities should be shared between the two greatest
Princes in the World, and that those venerable Monuments of Antiquity should
find such secure Sanctuaries, against the injuries of Time, and the accidents
of bad Fortune.

It is now time to declare somewhat to your Highness concerning that
incomparable Archduke, who in endeavoring to gratify his Curiosity and to
divert himself, found means to advance his Glory; neither did those curious
Enquiries, exhaust his Spirits, but only afforded some Relaxation to his noble
Soul, which was by that means better disposed to the practice of Virtue. His
Life was as glorious as profitable to the Age in which he lived. The Siege of
Sigeth in Hungary, which he forced the Turk to raise, is an everlasting
Monument of his Valor, and the Treasures of the Roman History, which he has
re-collected and reestablished in their primitive Luster, will be so many
Heralds to proclaim the great Obligations which he has laid upon all his
Posterity, and more especially upon the Republic of Learning. If so great
Veneration is usually paid to the Memory of Historians, only because they have
transmitted some Copies of Antiquity, with what transports of Zeal ought we to
express our Gratitude to a Prince who has furnished us with the very Originals,
and given us the Enjoyment even of Antiquity it self? A Roman Senator who was
advanced to the Imperial Dignity, esteemed it an honor to his Family, to
reckon Tacitus the Historian among his Ancestors: Who then can doubt but that
the Princes of the House of Austria do still call to mind with great delight,
that an Archduke of their Noble Stock, has been the Restorer of Truth, and of
so many Rarities of which we had been almost entirely deprived by Ignorance and
the injury of Time? This one Consideration of his Merit is alone sufficient to
supply us with Matter for a Panegyric.

It may not be improper to add a Word or two concerning the Library, since it
ows its original to this Prince: There are not any Books contained therein, but
such as are more correct and of the best Editions. I have observed a
considerable number of 'em, that more especially treat of the Mysteries of the
Curious, as also many that I did not know, and perhaps such as are not to be
met with elsewhere. The Portraiture of the greater part of those Authors whose
Learning has made 'em famous throughout the World serve as the peculiar
Ornaments of this Library. This indeed, is properly to associate the Fathers
with the Children, to place the Learned amidst their Books.

I know not how to leave Inspruck, without mentioning to your Highness certain
brazen Figures or Statues, which I saw in the principal Church. They are Twenty
eight in number, about nine or ten Foot high, and although the Materials of which
every one of 'em is made, amount to the value of two or three thousand Crowns;
nevertheless the Workmanship is infinitely more precious. I there discovered
many Emperors and Archdukes; and took particular notice of the four Dukes of
Burgundy, and their Heiress Mary, whose Wealth and Power have rendered the
House of Austria formidable to all Europe. There was no need of reading the
Names that are engraved over these Statues, I knew the very Air of their
Countenance, which I had before observe d in so many Medals and Prints, and the
Proportion is so exact, that I easily distinguished 'em, even at the first
sight. These Images are also represented upon Brass Cuts and illustrated, with
an Historical Description, so that they may well deserve a place in a Prince's
Repository: If your Highness be of this opinion, I shall take it as an Honor
to be permitted to augment your Library with a Set of 'em, which I have in my
Possession.

It is very difficult to give a good description of the Genius or natural
Disposition of the Tirolians; who are neither Italians nor Germans, but both
together. There may be some variety of Matter, with which to entertain your
Highness, concerning the Judgment that ought to be made with respect to these
People, who equally partake of the Qualities of two very different Nations that
border upon 'em. For a Question has been propounded long ago, whether contrary
Temperaments are brought to Perfection, or spoiled in the Mixture: Some Persons
affirm that the Quickness and Subtilty of Italy is meliorated by being somewhat
allay d with the Phlegmatic Temper of Germany, and that this Phlegm likewise
stands in need of Vivacity to animate it: Others are of opinion, that this
subtle Spirit beyond the Mountains, has its tincture of Melancholy, which
serves to set it off, that a mixture of a grosser sort of Blood would diminish
its luster, and that the slowness of the Germans has a Solidity, which cannot
be refined without weakening it. Your Highness is a much more competent Judge
than I, what Party it is requisite to follow, but if you should enjoin me to
declare my opinion as to this matter, I would entreat you to permit me to do it
only to your self in private.

To take breath again a little, will your Highness vouchsafe to give me leave
to speak a Word or two to you concerning my Host at Inspruck. Upon account of
the uncertainty of my abode in this Town, which might perhaps continue for some
days, I ordered my Servant to treat with him about my Expenses, and they agreed
for two Florins and a half a day, nevertheless when he was ready to pay
according to this Price, the Landlord would not be satisfied, and alleged for
an Excuse, that the Entertainment indeed did not exceed the Price agreed upon,
but that he was obliged to act conformably thereto only with the ordinary sort
of People; that for a Person of Quality as I was, the Price ought to be
proportionably enhanc'd; that he was ashamed not to have a greater regard to me
than to others; and that he knew too well the Honor and Respect that was due
to me, to stand to his first bargain. This was not altogether to pay for
Quality, but 'twas a Device to put me upon purchasing Respect at a very dear
rate.

I left Tirol, and repassed the Alps in the same place, to get into the Road
that leads to

MVNICK.
So many great Idea's of those things that I saw there, still present
themselves to my Mind, as may be sufficient to justify my detaining of your
Highness for a Moment: This City is moderately large, well built, extremely
populous and very rich. All its Outworks and Avenues lie open and waste, and
the nearest Villages are situated at a great distance, so that a Man enters a
Plain convenient for Hunting, even as soon as he has set a foot out of the
Gates. I happened to arrive there at a very seasonable time, for the whole Town
was taken up with a pompous Solemnity celebrated in memory of the famous Battle
of Prague: Your most Serene Highness is not ignorant how much this Victory
contributed to the good Fortune of its Prince, for it secured the tranquillity
of his Dominions, caused the Electoral Dignity to pass into his Family, and
made him Master of the upper Palatinate; all which advantages cannot but
wonderfully augment his Power and Authority. The State and even private Persons
spared no cost to honor the Festival, and Joy appeared on all sides in the
sumptuous Apparel and Feastings, as also in the Fireworks, Illuminations, the
discharging of Artillery, etc. Their Electoral Highnesses invited the People by
their Example to return thanks to God for the gaining of this Battle, and thus
Piety and Religion were no less engaged in the Solemnity than Magnificence and
Divertisements.

This Festival was followed by another appointed for the Birthday of the
Elect'ress. The whole Court shone as it were with a new luster, there was no
other talk than of Pleasure, and Germany seemed to endeavor to surpass it
self, by the profuse Expenses that were laid out upon this occasion, and the
utmost extent of Gallantry. The Sumptuousness of the Feasts appeared in the
good Cheer, in the Treasures of Silver-Plate that were set forth; and in the
Consorts of Music, which served to quicken the Delights. The Principal Ladies
of the Court waited upon their Electoral Highnesses, and nothing could be more
rich and splendid than their Attire; insomuch that I fancied that I saw Apollo
and Minerva attended by the Muses and their Nymphs. The Comedy, the acting of
which had been deferred for some days by reason of the Indisposition of the
Elect'ress, was then represented with greater advantage: It was taken out of an
Italian History, and called Adelaide, in Honor of the noble Personage for whom
it was composed.

Nothing appeared to me more stately than the Carrousel, which was performed in
a covered Manege or kind of Theater, separated from the Palace only by a small
Canal. The Elect'ress was conducted to her Balcony by the Elector himself, and
two Galleries situated one over another, that take up the whole compass of the
Building, were filled with Spectators, who were at first surprised by the
Consorts of Music that appeared in Pageants made in the form of Ships, every
one of which was drawn by six Horses; when these Machines were brought under
the Balcony of her Electoral Highness, the Musicians began to play and Sing
their Parts; neither was there any need of Divination to conjecture that they
were Sonnets of Praise, composed on purpose for the Solemnity. This Delight
continued above two hours, neither could I perceive any one to be tired with it
during the whole time; but it was followed by a greater and more magnificent
Diversion. For four small Bands of Horse, each of 'em consisting of four
Horsemen, rode about and showed their Bravery and Dexterity, in the swiftness
of their Horses, in the exactness of their Course, in the Agility of their
Bodies, and in that admirable Facility, with which they were observed so
fortunately to arrive at the Goal: His Electoral Highness and Prince Maximilian
his Brother, appeared at the Head of the two first Bands, and it was observed,
that these two Princes, who had won the first Prizes, abated somewhat of their
speed, on purpose to leave the Honor altogether entire to their Officers, and
to give 'em the Recompense of Glory, and the whole Victory which were due to
their Merits: This manner of acting has certainly a great Character, and really
there is need of a superfluity of Glory to be so prodigal of it. His Electoral
Highness is endowed with all the other excellent Qualities that are requisite
in an accomplished Prince: It may be perceived by his Conduct, that the
Heroical Virtues are set on work by Piety, Gentleness and Moderation, which
inspire him with a perfect tranquillity of Mind: When there are no occasions of
carrying on a necessary War, he is unwilling to undertake an unjust one; thus
he generously regulates his aspiring Thoughts, endeavoring to bound their
exorbitant Motions, and to distribute the sweet Fruits of Peace and Prosperity
throughout his Dominions; If his Renown does not make so great a noise in the
World, it is so much the more solid; thus the Stars of the Firmament which dart
so little light, are of a value quite different from that of blazing Comets,
that cause so much admiration in the ignorant Multitude. He takes much delight
in Hunting and Fishing; which puts me in mind of those of that excellent
Emperor Antoninus, Piscando and venando oblectatus est. By the means of these
innocent Diversions, he gets rid of all other less lawful Pleasures, and his
solid Delights are no detriment to his Health, Religion, or Secular Affairs.

I shall always remember, even during my whole Life, with the highest sense of
Gratitude, the signal Favors which he has conferred upon me; neither can I
declare 'em more gloriously than to your most Serene Highness. His Electoral
Highness condescended so far as to send an Officer to my House, on purpose to
show me the Place of his Residence; that is to say, the Palace which the
Elector Maximilian caused to be built at so vast an expense, that all Germany
was surprised at it, and could not comprehend, whence he raised a sufficient
Fond for the carrying on of so prodigious a Work. Nevertheless this Magnificent
Prince declared, that if he could be assured of living ten years longer, he
would have it demolished, in order to rebuild another more stately. However,
this noble Pile of Building has so many different Appartments, that besides
those which are already possessed, there would be room enough in the others to
entertain the Emperor, the King and the Electors, as conveniently as in their
own Palaces. Your most Serene Highness would be altogether tired with so long a
Discourse, if I should proceed to give a more particular Account of its
Architecture; than which there can be nothing finer; but it is affirmed by some
Persons, that there is no such Architecture to be found, whose Orders take up
so vast a space of Ground. There is so great a quantity of Marble, that one
would believe it to be the natural Product of that Country, and the ordinary
Stones of those beyond the Mountains, because they are more scarce in those
Parts. There is no Corner, Nich, Gate, nor Chimney, that has not its Statues or
Ornaments in Relief; but all this disappears at the sight of the Hall of
ancient Monuments: There one may reckon up 354 Busts or Statues drawn half way,
of Jaspar, Porphyry, Brass and Marble, of all Colors, which represent either
Grecian Generals or Roman Emperors, and Personages whom either their high
Birth, or notable Exploits have as it were immortalized. Among other Statues I
saw that of Alexander of Macedon, larger than the Life. It has all that
ravishing design of Antiquity, which inspirits the Marble, and gives it so
lively an Air, that less Art is discerned in it, than a kind of Magical Energy;
insomuch that one may observe at the same time, Valor, Ambition, and that
charming Civility, which had so great a share in the Conquests of Asia; In
short, Alexander the Great is much better represented here than in the History
of his Achievements. The other Statues are likewise admirable in their several
kinds, and a much greater quantity of Paper than that which is sufficient for a
Letter, would be requisite to make particular Reflections on every one of these
Curiosities. There are also to be seen a great number of Idols, and Vessels
that served for the Sacrifices of the Ancients.

There are two Galleries, one of which is adorned with a hundred Portraitures
of Illustrious Personages, especially those that were famous for their
extraordinary Learning, who were not unknown to me: Upon the Cieling of the
other, are represented the principal Towns of Bavaria, as also the Rivers,
Castles, and whatever is most remarkable within the compass of this Electorate.
I saw a Hall of that sort of Work, which the Italians call Stucador, where the
Figures are excellent. The King of Sweden, who made himself Master of Munick,
met with nothing in this Palace more beautiful than a Chimney-piece made of
Stuc, with the Work-manship of which he was exceedingly pleased, to that degree
that he seemed to be much discontented that it could not be made a Spoil: But
when a certain Lord among his Attendants endeavored to persuade him to cause
these stately Buildings to be demolished, he replied, That he had no mind to
deprive the World of so great a Rarity. Thus Magnanimity appears every where
magnificent and it is to be endu'd with the true principles of Generosity, to
spare the Goods and Estate of an Enemy.

The Appartment of the Elect'ress is admirable, and her Highness was so
Gracious as to permit that it should be shown to me. There is nothing to be
seen but Gold and Azure, but that is what I least considered: The Furniture and
Movables are so sumptuous, and the Attire so splendid, that if I had not known
that she was descended of the Royal Stock of Savoy, I might easily have guessed
that this Neatness came from beyond the Alps. Indeed Italy is the very Source
of it; so that the rest of the World in this particular Circumstance, is only
the Copy of which that Country is the true Original.

I have also this farther Obligation to his Electoral Highness's Favors, that
he has thought fit to give me a Sight of his Repository of Curiosities and
Medals: For his Highness sent me word that he was to go a Hunting betimes in
the Morning, and that he would leave Orders to show me all things: And indeed,
I received notice from an Officer of the Household of the Day and Hour.

I was at first introduced into the Appartment of the Elector himself, and into
a Gallery of Paintings, which were all of exquisite Beauty: In the spaces by
which they are separated, diverse Presses are fixed along the thickness of the
Wall; where I saw as rich Jewels as any that are extant in the World. There is
abundance of Precious-stones, and some Oriental Pearls, besides others of the
Country, which were taken out of that little River which unloads it self at
Passaw into the Danube. In these last, the different progresses of Nature in
the bringing 'em to Perfection is more especially remarkable: For some are
black, which is the Color of that first Matter that assumes its Solidity:
Others are gray, in which it may be perceived that this Matter begins to grow
clear. Others again are whitish, and others perfectly white. I plainly
discovered upon these little Creatures the immediate Workmanship of Heaven,
which communicated to 'em by degrees that Whiteness and that Astral Luster.
Then was shown to me the Garter which the King of Bohemia lost in the Defeat of
Prague, where the Devise of the Order is set in Characters of Diamonds. I there
took a view of the Works of Raphael Vrbin, Albert Durer, and Lucas Leidensis,
and particularly admired the Draughts of a certain Painter of Augsburg, who
served the Emperor Rodolph; but I was much surprised at the Tediousness of his
Work, there being nothing that comes near it; so that it may be affirmed that
none but Germans can be capable of so great Patience. I also took delight in
viewing the Gold-smith's Ware of Sigismund King of Poland, and the Elector
Maximilian, and an Ivory-Vessel, which his Electoral Highness turned with his
own Hand. The most part of the Princes and Noblemen of Germany have some
in-sight in the Mechanics, and perhaps from their Example, the Grand Signior's
Children are instructed therein. The same Practice has prevailed likewise among
the Hungarian Gentry, even upon a very Politic account; for they pretend by
this means to have an opportunity of concealing their Quality, when they are
made Prisoners of War, and to avoid a Ransom, which would be their ruin.

But I have insisted too long upon these Particulars, when there is occasion to
say somewhat concerning the Medals, among which (my Lord) I have seen Wonders.
A Cabinet of Cedar three Foot high, serves only as a covering to another, which
is much more precious; it is made of Ivory wrought with Figures, the Order,
Design and Work-manship of which exceed every thing that I have seen elsewhere
in this kind. There are 1400 Gold Medals contained in twenty Shelves: Their
Beauty consists in the continued Series of Roman Emperors; for as for the
Grecian and Consular, of which there may be three or four hundred, though they
are exactly counterfeited, yet Truth and Antiquity is altogether wanting to
'em. I was informed that a Jesuit, to whose management they were committed,
could not satisfy the Elector's Curiosity, by any means than by causing those
that were wanting and could be recovered, to be copied in Gold, at any expense
whatever. I confess, that these Copies are so accurate, that I was even
surprised at the sight of 'em, and that I was obliged to spend some time in the
discovering of 'em. There are two or three hundred admirable Pieces among the
Imperial, which are capable of charming the Eyes even of the most inquisitive
Beholders. I expected to have seen those of Silver and Copper, but they were
not shown to me. The Officer whom I entreated with all possible Civility, to
give me entire Satisfaction, replied, that he had a Charge to do so, but that
he knew of no other Medals than those that I had already seen. I was also
informed afterward, that they had incurred the same Fate with great store of
other Riches, that were transported out of Germany beyond the Baltic Sea.

To conclude, nothing was wanting to complete the Delights that I took in the
City of Munick. But of all the Favors which I received from the Prince both
publicly and in private, that of having enjoyed his Treasures as I thought
fit, to the sight of which very few Persons are admitted, engages me to an
acknowledgment; which so noble and magnificent Idea's of 'em that are still
imprinted upon my Mind will render everlasting.

Prince Herman ought to have the greatest share in this Discourse: He is his
Electoral Highness's Favorite, and (as I have reason to believe) his
extraordinary Merit has procured him this Happiness. The Illustrious Name of
Furstemberg is also very auspicious; for the Goods of Fortune, and the most
sublime Endowments of the Mind are inseparably annexed thereto; but so many
Ages that have honored it, have done less for its Glory than the three Princes
to whom it now belongs. One single Place of Europe would not be a Theater large
enough for the exercising of their Princely Virtues; therefore Heaven has
separated them, and without explaining my self any farther (for so ample a
Subject is not properly that of a Letter) their Genius is every where the
Source of the Political Function, and their admirable Qualities the Ornament of
the Court.

BAVARIA.
Is a Country of a large extent, and its Climate would render it incomparable,
were it not that the neighborhood of the Alps, shelters it too much from the
South: The Plenty which it enjoys of all things requisite for the Sustenance of
Humane Life, does not hinder but that a Traveller may take notice of the
necessity there is of sometimes having recourse to other Countries: For he
cannot sit down at Table without being put in mind that there is no Wine;
neither does the Beer, which in those Parts perhaps is better than in any other
in the World, sufficiently supply this defect. For this sort of Drink is only
at most a liquid Paste, which serves to nourish the Belly and Stomach, but does
not affect the upper Region of the Brain, to which the Animal Spirits resort to
partake of the Aliments. It is not impregnated with those Divine Atoms that
inflame the Imagination, and drive away Melancholy, and even Sorrow it self.
Indeed the use of Reason may be taken away by drinking this Liquor to excess,
but without any Delight, and the Soul languishes under a heavy Oppression. Upon
this account it is (my Lord) that your Territories are so much talked of; and
that the People have so great an Esteem for the Wines of the Necker, which
noble River conveys 'em a great deal higher than Stugart; as also that they
make so good a Return for the Pains that are taken in Transporting 'em so far.

The Riches of this Country are not divided; neither are they to be found any
where but at Court and among the Clergy, all those that are below this Quality
having no share in 'em. The same Custom is not observed there as in other
Places, where the Coin circulates through all the parts of the State, and
enriches the People of all Conditions: The Gentry, Priests, and Monks are
wealthy, but the Peasants languish under a sordid Poverty; so that this
Dispensation may be said to be the perfect Idea of that Statue of the Prophet,
which had the Head of Gold, the Body of Silver, and the Feet of Clay. But the
Case is quite different (my Lord) in your Dominions; for the Peasants of
Wirtemberg do not stand in need of any thing, as enjoying not only whatever is
necessary, but also that which is convenient, even to all those comforts and
delights that this World can afford. I observed nothing like it in Bavaria,
perhaps because I only saw the worst part of the Country, or happened to be
there in a bad Season.

The Bavarians appeared to me to be very stupid and clownish, but I do not
speak of the Persons of Quality, whom their Birth distinguishes, and their
Education renders polite; for the Common People, and the rest of the Scum of
the Nation, only deserve this Character. It is almost every where known what
course of Life those Women lead, who are met with along the Banks of the
Danube, and how lightly they are esteemed; neither have the Men a greater stock
of Merit. It was an apposite saying of Homer, that Jupiter had taken away
Common Sense from Slaves, and Beggars for the most part are altogether Sots. It
seems as if Poverty debased their Mind, and that their bad Fortune which has
left 'em destitute of all things, only allowed 'em so much time as to think of
Living. Thus their Soul becomes the most unprofitable part of themselves, and
notwithstanding their Rational Faculty, they have no more Discretion than brute
Beasts. But a more subtle Notion comes in my Mind upon this occasion; is it not
(my Lord) that the Divine Providence has proportioned Men's Understanding to
their Fortune, to accustom 'em to that great inequality, which would
incessantly disturb the order of things in the World, if those who are so ill
provided for, had so much sense as to know how to resent their Misery? We
observe that all Men endeavor to find delight in their respective Conditions,
and that this Inclination of every State, is the secret Foundation upon which
Civil Society is grounded. And when by an extraordinary Revolution, of which
there are frequent Examples, we see the Advancement of those of low degree, and
the fall of great ones, it so happens (my Lord) because the Understanding of
the former is enlightened, and that the others have lost their discerning
Faculty, and the knowledge of Good and Evil.

There is a great deal of Religion among the Bavarians, and their Zeal is more
especially extended to matters of Controversy: But their Neighbors accuse 'em
of neglecting the main Points of it, to adhere to Triffles; they believe that
their Religious Worship is vagrant, and that Christianity has made a farther
Progress among 'em than it ought. A certain Puritan who bore no great Affection
toward 'em, accosted me after this manner: Are you French- Men more
enlightened, notwithstanding your recourse to the Springhead? All these
foreign Means, all these pretended Intercessions do not confound you; you are
of our Humor, you are of no Religion, and yet cry out for a pure one: If you
have broken all measures with Rome, which no longer holds you but by a small
Thread, we shall be soon agreed. I confess, (my Lord) that he showed me more
kindness than I desired; but without troubling your Highness with the Answer I
made him, which was very large, I shall only insist briefly on the two last
Points: I told him then, That there were in France as many true Christians as
in any other Place; and that we knew the Distinction which ought to be made
between Rome and the Holy See; between the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the
Temporal Prince; between the Successor of St. Peter, and the Donatary of
Charlemagn; between the Pope and the Politician; that we readily acknowledged
his Spiritual Supremacy; and that we adhered thereto, not by the means of a
String; but by a cordial and voluntary Submission, by Faith and Grace; and that
as for our Estates, Goods, Interests, and every thing else that does not relate
to matters of Religion; they were independent of His Holiness's Dominion, who
had no other Subjects in the Church than those that belong to his own
Territories and Patrimony. Perhaps this Discourse may be too tedious upon such
an occasion, and I shall add no more at present, but that it is requisite to
take an opportunity to make mention to your Highness of a notable
Divertisement, which I saw in your Neighborhood.

It is not known in France, what is meant by a Sledge, nor what the Wirtschaft
is; neither are the Ladies there accustomed to run at the Ring. I was
pleasantly surprised to see a Winter A-la-mode, or a Winter Travesty; as also
Frost and Snow applied to the use of Gallantry, and so many exquisite Beauties
displayed in a Plain: The Sumptuousness of their Apparel, and the the
Stateliness of their Deportment, represented to my sight as it were so many
Deities and Amazons: They were most magnificently mounted on Triumphal
Chariots, and pass d before my Eyes as swift as Lightning: I know not whether
those flying Machines were so many Ships sailing upon dry Land, or Chariots
running upon a solid Water: They seemed to me sometimes to be a crowd of
Goddesses in Clouds of Gold and Azure, that had lately cut the Air and lighted
upon the Ground, on purpose to enjoy those Delights that the Winter alone
(which they have not in Heaven) is capable of affording 'em. The Sports were
different; some were terminated in the swiftness of the Course; and in others,
there was Honor to be acquired, because there were Victories to be gained. It
was a very extraordinary Object to behold a Lady with a Lance in her Hand,
endu'd with the sprightliness and and fiery Temper of an Hero; as also to
observe Vigor and Fortitude appearing amidst the Charms of Beauty, and a
Female Warrior running her self into danger wherever there was any prospect of
Glory, with a precipitate Forwardness that showed nothing of that Weakness and
Timorousness, which is so natural to her Sex. Lastly, (my Lord) the Pomp was so
great, that it was less a Career than a spacious Theater, which reached even
out of sight, having the Divertisements of the Gods for its Scene, and the
lively Representation of Winter for its Decoration. I know not whether the
ancient Romans would have laid out so much expenses in the management of their
Naumachiae, or Sea Fights represented upon Land, if they had known the secret
of Sailing upon the Snow as the Germans.

I have no Expressions sublime enough to declare to your Highness, what I then
thought of the two Princesses of Baden-Durlach. They are always extremely
beautiful, but their Attire on that day, their graceful Mien, and their
Dexterity in performing all the Exploits of the Career transformed 'em into
Heroines. The Princess Catharine Barba, who was dressed in the habit of an
Egyptian, did me the Honor to ask me how I liked her: I answered bluntly,
That she appeared to me more charming than Cleopatra; I ought to have added,
and worthy of somewhat more than Caesar or Antony; but I had so much the less
presence of Mind, as my Eyes were more employed in viewing these delectable
Objects. The Princess her Sister appeared likewise in the Garb of a Peasant;
and the Lot which divided these sorts of Characters fell very appositely: For
the natural plainness and simplicity which she communicated to her Disguise,
completed the lively Representation of a Country-Woman in the Person of the
most beautiful Princess in the World. Insomuch that a certain Stranger, who
believed what he saw in good earnest, accosted her after a familiar manner,
seemed to be well pleased with her Company, and after having informed himself
of part of what he was desirous to know, asked her where the Princess Elizabeth
was; She replied seriously, without any change of Countenance, that he should
see her immediately, and that she would not fail to be present at the Ball.
Thus the whole Intrigue was pleasantly carried on, and the good Man made much
sport during the Festival, without knowing any thing of the matter.

At my return, I took particular notice of a kind of Foppery, which afforded me
an agreeable Diversion, by reason of the relation it had to the manner of the
Ancients. In Vlm and its Neighborhood, the Women and young Maidens usually
wear their Hair platted up backward, as it were a Mat, which is afterward tied
with a Riband. The very same Fashion prevailed among 'em two thousand Years
ago, at least according to the Report of Tacitus, Insigne Gentis Suevorum
obliquare crinem, nodoque substringere. It is the peculiar Custom of the Suevi,
or Inhabitants of Schwaben, to wear their Hair curled into Tufts, and to tie it
with a Knot. This illustrious Historian makes some other notable Remarks
concerning these People, which may not be improperly applied to those of
Wirtemberg. It is not known (says he) in those Parts what is meant by Usury, by
which means the People are more free from it, than if* were prohibited by a
Law: They do not spare drinking there, and they sometimes spend a whole Day and
Night, without giving any occasion of reproaching 'em upon that account: They
are very courteous in entertaining Strangers, and no Nation can boast of being
more addicted to Hospitality: The Customs of the Inhabitants are so equitable,
that they even surpass the wholesome Laws of other People: They are less
corrupted than in any other Part of the World: Nothing is exacted among 'em by
Authority; so that the most gentle means as that of Persuasion, are sufficient
for the obtaining of whatever one desires. They Adore the Goddess Isis, and
offer up to her the greatest number of Sacrifices. These last Words
sufficiently explain the Original of so many Altars and Inscriptions, which
your Highness has done me the Honor to cause to be shown to me at Stugart.
Tacitus, who never received any Benefit from the People of Schwaben, has
frequently afforded diverse little Testimonials in their praise, which he could
not deny to the Truth of his Descriptions. Indeed I lie under an Obligation of
making many more, as being better acquainted with the Country than he, and
loaded with a multitude of Favors by its Sovereign Prince: But it is requisite
to be Tacitus, to be capable of doing it effectually, and I am sensible that my
Abilities are not sufficient for such an Undertaking.

I shall leave Your Highness to contemplate upon these noble Idea's, wishing
that they may inspire you with so much Gayety of Humor, as may serve to
disperse that melancholy, which I fear my unpolished and impertinent Discourse
has caused in your Mind. But Sovereign Princes act in a Sphere so far above
other Men; that they ought not to expect any thing of 'em that is worth their
Acceptance, or in any wise commensurate to their Grandeur: Neither are they
wont to despise the smallest Presents that are made to 'em; since their
Generosity is such as to acknowledge even the first motions of Zeal with which
their Subjects are incited either to serve or to divert 'em. Upon account of
these Considerations, it is (my Lord) that in doing nothing for your Service, I
hope to get some Advantage for my self, and that I presume with so much
boldness to assure you that I am, and shall be during my whole Life, with all
manner of profound Respect;

My Lord, Your most Serene Highness's Most humble and most obedient Servant, C.
PATIN.
Vivendum moribus antiquis, loquendum verbis recentioribus.

It is requisite to live according to the ancient Manners, and to speak with
modern Words.



THE THIRD RELATION, TO His most Serene Highness Frederick, Marquess of
Baden-Durlach, etc.
My Lord,
FOrasmuch as your most Serene Highness is not tired with giving ear to my
Discourses, and you have graciously condescended so far as to tell me so; I am
so much the more emboldened to present to you some others upon Subjects that
are altogether new: However, I have not so much Presumption as to expect that
these should be as acceptable to you as the former; neither can I pretend to
ground 'em upon any thing else, but the respectful Obedience which I owe to
your Commands.

Not but that (my Lord) I might flatter my self with an Assurance of being
capable even to offer such Things as would afford some kind of Diversion to
your most Serene Highness, either upon account of their Novelty or Variety. But
(my Lord) how extremely difficult it is! for a Person endu'd with so mean
Abilities as mine are, to entertain a Potent Prince as knowing and judicious as
your Highness, and to hope for a good issue of such an Entertainment: However
(my Lord) you are desirous of it, you are pleased to command it, and I am also
sensible that this kind of Prologue is offensive to you. Therefore I shall put
an end to my Apology, and yield a ready Obedience without any farther delays.

Nothing affords so much delight and satisfaction as Traveling; (my Lord) your
most Serene Highness has thought fit to tell me so sometimes, and I have ever
found it true. Indeed the Epitaph of the great Trivulcio might well be objected
to me, beforehand, Hic quiescit qui nunquam quievit. Here rests he that never
rested. It seems as if the Air which I draw in by Respiration in different
Provinces, inspired me with new Knowledge, at least it supplies me with Matter
for new Meditations; neither do I take any notice of such sorts of Varieties as
surprise the most part of those that never had a sight of 'em; yet I often find
an opportunity to spend my time to better purpose. I do not insist on the
difference of Habits in every Nation, although there are some so odd, that they
even appear ridiculous. I have sometimes sought for the Reason or Original of
'em, but could never discover it; neither did I expect to find it any where but
in Usefulness and Decency, which in my mind, are the two Rules to be observed
in Clothing. However, I was obliged to be content with the ordinary Fashions,
that is to say, the Custom of those People who make use of 'em: Besides, this
Custom which Herodotus treats with the style of Royal, is a kind of Supreme
Law, more especially in Germany, where Novelty is not so easily admitted as in
other Places: Thus a House is usually rebuilt after the very same Model that
'twas built in the preceding Age, and if a Man should go about to persuade a
Proprietary never so little to make the Structure more regular, to give it more
light, to diminish the thickness of its Walls, and to deviate somewhat from the
ancient manner of Building, on purpose to take the advantage of so many
Conveniences that arise from the more refined modern Architecture; he would
immediately answer, that he derided the new Mode; that his deceased Father or
his Grandfather were very prudent Persons; and that they had caused the exact
Dimensions of this House to be taken, such as they now appear to be, if perhaps
even they had not received the Model from their Predecessors; but in a Word,
that he was resolved to make no alteration.

The same Temper is also observable with some sort of rigor in the exercise of
the most part of other Arts, which are practiced even at this day in those
Parts after the same manner as under Charlemaigne, although a thousand
considerable Inventions have been found out since his Reign, and very many more
Works are brought to Perfection, with a much less expense both of Money and
Time. I was surprised to see Meat dressed in many Places, as Tacitus makes it
to be done by those Germans, whom he knew only to be Barbarians: It is true
indeed, that in others particularly within your Territories (my Lord) this
ancient manner has been long since laid aside, and no other is followed but
that which is wholesome, neat and magnificent. As for the Art of Physic, I have
a somewhat greater knowledge of it, and have observed that almost every where
they make use of a great quantity of Drugs, and of that Method of Practice
which prevailed two thousand years ago, as if we were Socrates's or
Epaminondas's, without making any Reflection, that the diversity of Climates,
Aliments and Customs, which alter the Bodies of Men and their Constitutions;
produce new Symptoms and Circumstances in Diseases; and require new Remedies;
or at least a different Application of the old ones. There was scarce a Woman
that did not censure me, for not prescribing a Dose of Hellebore according to
Hippocrates's Form. Therefore without alleging any other Reason, although I
might have done it; I replied, that People were in this Age much more senseless
and silly than heretofore, and that upon that account quite different Remedies
were to be applied.

The Argumentation which might be made upon these Customs would be without
doubt very tedious at least too prolix for your Approbation (my Lord) and for
my own Inclination; so that I shall confine my Discourse to those Matters that
have the nearest relation to both; and to those that have not been as yet so
copiously treated of as Pieces of Morality; on which Subject I meet with Books
almost every where, as I am traveling.

BASIL.
Is the first City that presents it self to my Mind, perhaps because 'twas the
first that I saw among those, of which I have some account to give to your most
Serene Highness: Its Political Government, Strength, Alliances and State of
Religion, are well known to all Europe, and to your Highness more than any
other Person, and so much the rather, in regard that you are Master of some
Territories which are distant only a quarter of an hours Journey from thence;
as also that you always honor this Republic with your Friendship, and often
with your Presence. I might perhaps have taken there some singular Observations
which would have afforded some Satisfaction to your Highness. Some of my
Friends, who are almost always to be supposed Men of Learning, and ever of good
Reputation, conducted me within two Leagues of the City; here you may be
pleased to take notice by the way, that my Leagues are equivalent only to the
German half Leagues, commonly called Hours, by reason of the time that a Man
may spend in passing it on foot with his ordinary Pace. There we viewed the
Ruins of that ancient City, which gave to Basil the Title of Augusta
Rauracorum, the name of the Village that remains having very much relation
thereto; For

AVGST,
Undoubtedly derives its Etymology from Augusta. The adjacent Country is
altogether full of these old Ruins; so that we took much delight in going on
foot about the distance of half an hours Journey from the principal Castle,
where we perceived in a Forest an Opening, which discovered to us a vaulted
Canal, with some considerable remnant of Architecture. It is reported that it
served as an Aqueduct; for the Place which is situated on very high Ground
seems to demonstrate it; but others affirm that 'twas a secret Passage for
Forces in case of Necessity; for 'twas as it were the Lodgment of the Germans,
who Marching from the Black Forest, called Sylva Hercynia in the ancient Maps,
endeavored to pass the Rhine there, to make their Incursions against the
Romans. The principal Castle, which is now known to the Inhabitants of the
Country by the name of Das Scolfs, might also have been a part of the Town, and
was one of those three with which the Passage of the Rhine was fortified, which
being lower in those Parts than elsewhere, may be so much the more easily
traversed. Ariovistus escaped thither after having been defeated by Caesar, and
some time after, Drusus caused to be built in the Neighborhood the Burgh of
Guards, which still even at this day bears the name of Bartemburg. The
Salt-Tower which remains at Basil near the Bridge is built after the same
manner, insomuch that it may well be presumed that those three sorts of
Castles, were erected on purpose to discover the Enemies with greater facility,
and vigorously to oppose their Passage, on whatever side they should attempt
it. However, the Place deserves all the pains that we took in the viewing of
it; and it appears by the name of Augusta, that the Romans were settled there,
as in a Canton convenient for making head against the Germans; as also that
they built this Fort of which appear such stately Ruins: Nay it is very probable
that they founded a great City there, as well in regard that this name of
Augusta was attributed by 'em only to Capital Cities, as Augusta Trinobantum,
Augusta Trevirorum, Augusta Vindelicorum, as by reason of the vast number of
Stones and other Materials which are found in the neighboring Fields, none of
'em being to be seen in those that are supposed to have been situated without
the compass of the Walls. The Ditches and Walls are in many Places such as they
were a thousand Years ago, and the manner of cementing the Stones is altogether
inimitable, at least according to the Judgment of the most skilful Masons of
the present Age, who acknowledge that they know nothing of the matter, and that
they are not able to comprehend it. But that which chiefly excited our
Curiosity was, that the last Towers, of which we reckoned up nine within the
whole Circumference are all flanked on the inside, contrary to the Rules of
modern Architecture, which is infinitely more regular than the ancient: It Is
true indeed, that this method was more adventageous in the Defense of those
Times; for the battering Rams which were the strongest Machines, were apt to
fly in pieces when run against the Concave of a Tower, whereas they might break
it down down if it were Unequal. One of our Company affirmed, that as in the
Amphitheaters, and other Roman Buildings, there were Niches on the inside, in
which wild Beasts were usually shut up for the magnificence of their public
Shows, or the Punishment of Malefactors, so these perhaps might have had the
like use: However, it is difficult to make a right Conjecture, although I had an
opportunity to confer with those of the Country that seem to be most expert in
these matters, and took delight in turning over the Draughts of 'em made by the
Ingenious Amerbachius.

This Learned Man was of opinion that there was a Theater composed of four
Towers, every one of 'em being separated by a Staircase; so that the
Spectators might resort thither at all times through these easy Passages, and
place themselves conveniently at their leisure. It Is probable that the Thought
is true, at least it seemed to me to be very fine. Therefore I have caused two
Prospects of this Theater to be engraved according to his Project and Memoires,
with three ancient Inscriptions. The two Former were found in his time, and the
third is to be seen in the Musaeum of M. Fesch, to whom a Peasant of Augst
brought it a little while ago.

engraving of theater p. 138. b.

D.M LAS ERIAL TRENE VA XI DIXDUS XXVII VEIURIOS HELIX ET LABERIA SYNTICHE
FILIAE FILETIS SIMAE TECERUNT.

M. IULI.



engraving of theater p. 138. a.

TIOQU ELLO ^ TLA VIRO ^ CO ATRON



I cannot forbear to put your most Serene Highness in mind, how serviceable the
curious Searchers of Antiquity have been to the Republic of Learning. Was it
not in a deplorable Condition even in the time of Constantine, and has it not
languish'd for about Twelve Hundred Years? Rome it self was full of Barbarians
as well as Barbarity. What Judgment could be made of the State of the
Provinces, which had no Learning nor Politeness, but what was transmitted to
'em from Rome? Humane Literature, has indeed at last recovered some Vigor
since about an Age or two, but it is entirely owing to the Industry of curious
Inquirers, who have as it were dug up Learning and Truth that lay buried in
Oblivion. I could willingly erect a public Monument to the Memory of so many
Illustrious Personages, who have employed themselves in this Work to very good
purpose, were it not that I remember that I am writing a Letter and not a
Panegyric. Give me leave nevertheless (my Lord) to set a part three out of
this Honorable Company, whose Merit was extraordinary; since this Encomium is
due to their Labors, Travels, Expenses, and to the design they had of doing
Service to the Commonwealth. All these three Heroes were furnished with very
large Libraries, rare Manuscripts, and most curious ancient Medals. It may be
justly avouch'd that Augerius Busbequius that Noble Ambassador, whose two
admirable Relations of his Embassies are as yet extant, has enriched the World,
and particularly the August House of Austria whom he served, with an infinite
number of Manuscripts and Medals, that were in danger of being utterly lost,
without his Assistance. Monsieur de Peiresc, Counselor to the Parliament of
Ais, was much honored by all the Learned Men of the Age in which he lived; but
Posterity ought to have a greater Veneration for his Memory, although 'twere
only upon account of that excellent Treasure of Medals, which he heaped up: I
have had above a Thousand Grecian Coins that were taken from thence; this very
Word (my Lord) is precious, and though it be a kind of Riddle to the most part
of Mankind, yet it is not so to your Highness. This same Monsieur de Peiresc was
the only Person of his time, that could read the Greek upon the Medals, and was
capable of explaining it. Amerbachius, for whose sake I have made this
Digression, is the third Hero: I have read many of his Letters all full of
Learning and Elegancy; He held Correspondence with the most part of Men of his
Temper, who then flourished, that is to say, with the Learned, and the
ingenious Lovers of Curiosity; but he maintained a very strict one with Occo,
that illustrious Antiquary and Physician of Augsburg. This very Name alone
deserves Commendation; and if future Ages should forget Amerbachius, the
University of Basil which still possesses his Library and Repository, would
have sufficient proofs to convict 'em of Ingratitude. But to return to the
Discovery which he has made of this Theater of Augst; without his Description,
it could not now be known what it is, at least it would be very difficult to
make a Conjecture. Therefore to illustrate the Idea of it, I have taken care
for the Engraving of certain Combats with Beasts, after the same manner as they
were ordered among the Ancients, and as they are represented to us in their
Medals.

I have also caused to be engraved separately, the Figure of diverse Curiosities
that were found in those Parts. Of the two Silver-rings there expressed, one
represents the first of the Caesar's, with the mark of his Sacerdotal Authority.
Was not Religion (my Lord) well governed at that time? No Man ever spilt so
much Blood as this High Priest; neither has it been so much as reported of any
other, that he served as a Man to silver ring

crescent silver jewel

silver ring

ornamental foot of a Tripod

Cupid with torch

clasp or buckle

clasp or buckle

clasp or buckle

p. 142

so many Women, and as a Woman to so many Men. The other Ring shows upon an
Agate the figure of a Man leaning on a Column, and holding a kind of Sith with
one hand and an Almond with the other. These two particular Circumstances
induce me to suspect, that it may be that Atys, concerning whom the Fable makes
so many little Mysteries, with respect to Cybele the Mother of the Gods.
Between these two Rings there is a small Silver-Jewel in form of a Crescent;
which was the most essential mark of the Nobility of those old Romans, who
caused themselves to be styled (...), pretending even to be more ancient than
the Moon, of which they wore this Representation upon their Shoes and
Stockings, whence these Marks also were called Lunulae. However, Zonaras
assures us that this Figure was only esteemed by 'em, because it expressed
after their manner the number 100. in Honor of the Hundred Patricians whom
Romulus chose to constitute his Nobility. The Figure of that winged Cupid with
a burning Torch in his Hand is very rare among the Monuments of Antiquity;
nevertheless I remember to have seen in your Highness's Repository, a Medal
relating thereto; it seems as if the Cupid, there represented was about to
extinguish his Torch, for grief that he had lost his beloved Master. The
Inhabitants of Tomis, among whom Ovid was banished, imagined that they should
give some satisfaction to the Emperor Caracalla, by putting him in mind of this
pretty Device. Besides this Cupid is carved to serve as an Ornament to some
Enclosure, which I do not sufficiently apprehend, no more than that which I
have set over against it, and which is apparently the foot of a Tripod. As for
the three Instruments that lie at the bottom, they were without doubt some of
those famous Clasps or Buckles, that were applied to so many uses among the
ancient Romans; and of which a learned Man of our Time, [Rhodius,] has writ a
very large Volume.

Perhaps I might give occasion to Your most Serene Highness to smile at the
Simplicity of some Peasants, who seeing us in the Field at Noontide with Fire
and Candle, took us for Sorcerers; for they are more inclined in that Country
to those sorts of Notions than elsewhere, and that which absolutely confirmed
'em in their persuasion, was the sight of one of our Companions, as he was
coming back out of a kind of Hole, through which it seemed impossible for any Man
to pass. It was the opening of a Cavern, through which that Ingenious Gentleman
M. Platerus made no difficulty to get out, with a Lanthorn in his Hand, after
he had taken a view of all those secret Recesses. It may not be improper here
to say somewhat to Your Highness concerning this M. Platerus, whom they took
for a Devil, or at least for an Inchanter. He is a Professor of Physic, and a
Man of extraordinary Parts, and of a most Genteel Carriage, being the Son,
Grandson, and as I take it, the Great Grandson Son of a Physician, which
answers to what was heretofore called (...). The fine Musoeum or Repository of
Rarities, which is carefully kept in the possession of his Family, and the
Epigram which Theodore Beza wrote in its commendation are sufficient
Testimonials of the Learning and Ingenuity, of the Proprietaries: There is
neither Plant, Metal, Mineral, Figure, nor any extraordinary Curiosity which is
not contained in this rich Treasury. There are also some of those kinds of
Rarities, for which the Roman Catholics have a greater Veneration than those
of the Reformed Religion, and among others a precious Relick of our Blessed
Savior's Crown of Thorns. There are also diverse Medals, but let us not leave
Augst without acquainting Your Highness that some of 'em are often met with in
tilling the ground. I have heard as much of many Persons, and have even seen
some of 'em of all sorts of Metals. I went myself to the Cottages of diverse
honest Countrymen thereabouts, who showed me some that they had found a few
days ago, and among others I procured one of Delmatius, the Nephew of
Constantine, with the Labarum or Imperial Standard, and the mark of JESUS
CHRIST. I can assure you, that in the payment which I made 'em, they twice
looked earnestly upon my Money; nay these ignorant People were so simple as to
fear, lest sometime after, it should turn into Oak leaves.

But at Basil they were much otherwise undeceived, and in that City I have seen
many Persons of better sense, without doing any injury to the others. There
they delight much in Learning and Integrity; which is a Union that is very
seldom to be met with, and which affords me extreme satisfaction. The Oriental
Languages have been always most carefully cultivated there, and the Learned
Buxtorfius, who is Professor of 'em, perfectly answers the Character which his
Father had acquired, of being the most Skilful Master of the Hebrew Tongue in
the World. If M. Wetstein were as well versed in Divinity, as in all the other
Parts of Human Literature, it might be avouch'd that he has attained to the
highest degree of perfection in that Science; but forasmuch as I have but
little knowledge of Divinity, and less of that sort which is there Taught, I
shall leave his Commendation to others, who are capable of doing it to better
advantage: But I must add that he is the most obliging Person in the World; and
that he has a Son who is no less so than himself; whose Youth is adorned with
as many Sciences and singular Endowments, as are requisite for an able Divine.
The Famous Professor Bauhinus has sufficiently signalized himself by his Works,
without standing in need of my assistance, neither will I undertake to compose
an Encomiastick in his favor; but only declare him to be one of the most
Accomplished and Polite Men in the World, that he has a great affection both
for me and my Father, and is beloved by all Persons of Honor. To conclude,
this Country is altogether full of such Illustrious Personages, and among
others we must not forget M. Battier, who perhaps has attained to the knowledge
of as many curious Sciences as ever were known in Switzerland, and has made
very good use of the time which he spent at Paris, in conversing with Learned
Men, and particularly with Mr. Justel: He has also a Cousin, whose Name is
known to Your Highness. Besides that, the Family of the Fesch's is one of the
most considerable in the City, give me leave (My Lord) to tell you, that it is
also one of the most Numerous, as it will appear from this single Example.
Rodolph Fesch Burgomaster, and the Son of a Burgomaster; after sixty years of
marriage with Ann Gebveiler, saw one hundred sixty and five Children, begotten
by himself, his Children, and Grandchildren: One of these is named Sebastian,
and has in his possession one of the finest Repositories in Germany. His House
is a Palace, and Your most Serene Highness is very sensible, that these
Republicans are not only content but well pleased with their manner of living;
neither could I have ever imagined that they were endu'd with so much
Politeness. But let us leave the Outworks and enter the Repository it self,
where nothing is wanting; for there are Paintings, Sculptures, Books, and other
Curiosities of all sorts: As for the Medals (My Lord) since Your Highness does
not refuse to honor me so far as to give credit to my Assertions without an
Oath, I hope you will take my word in this particular. There are some so
singular, that they are surprising; neither have they any relation to the
Memoires which I have of other Repositories, or to the Descriptions of Authors,
or to those that I have seen elsewhere. The Possessor of 'em bears not only the
same sincere affection toward me, as all other Honorable Persons of my
Acquaintance, but also shows that sweetness of Conversation which the Graecians
call (...), which is not conformable to what is commonly reported concerning
the Switzers, who are reputed to be a dull and rustical sort of People: I have
sometimes conversed with, and have held correspondence with 'em in different
Countries, and never perceived any such quality inherent in 'em: I have
observed 'em generally speaking, to be Industrious, Faithful, Accurate,
Sincere, Candid, and for the most part very Learned; nay I have been surpised
to meet with some, who have attained to the highest degree of Politeness. I
shall not insist upon their Religion nor Civil Government. These People (as
they say) are well versed in matters relating to the former, and I am thoroughly
persuaded that they are perfectly well skilled in the other. I shall only beg
leave of your Most Serene Highness to add a word or two, concerning the extreme
kindness that M. Fesch showed me, and in which (My Lord) you have a greater
Interest than perhaps you are aware of: He permitted me to take a Draught with
a Pen of all those Rare Medals that I have already mentioned to Your Highness:
This was to procure me a small Treasure without diminishing his own, and to lay
an everlasting obligation upon me, by so great a favor.

Again (My Lord) the Curiosities to be seen in the City of Basil are extended
yet farther; for I am unwilling to let slip an opportunity of entertaining Your
Highness with the Description of another Repository, which is very much talked
of, upon account of its Famous Founders, Erasmus and Amerbachius, whose Memory
is highly honored in that Country, which acknowledges them as the Restorers
of good Literature. The first of these is Painted half way, by Holbein, and
upon that Picture this very Ingenious Epigram was Composed: Ingens ingentem
quem personat Orbis Erasmum,
Hic tibi dimidium picta Tabella refert.
At cur non totum? mirari desine Lector,
Integra nam totum Terra nec ipsa capit.


This Repository belongs to the University of Basil, by virtue of a Donation,
made by the Magistrates of the City, who had purchased it with the sum of a
thousand Crowns, of the Heirs of Amerbachius, the Legatee of Erasmus, whose
last Will and Testament is as yet preserved, written with his own Hand. There
is also in the great Church a Sumptuous piece of Marble, wrought according to
the Rules of Architecture, which confirms this Account by its Inscription. The
Medal of Erasmus, to be seen there, seems to have taken its Type from the God
Terminus, who is represented on the front of that Inscription, which was made
on purpose to honor the Memory of this Great Man.

That, which alone would be sufficient to procure the highest esteem for this
Repository, is a score of Holbein's Originals, and among others that Picture of
Christ Crucified, for which a thousand Ducats have been proffered. Those that
are ignorant of the admirable Skill of this Painter, need only take a journey
to Basil to be well assured of it. There the Citizens would show 'em in the
Townhouse a large Painting drawn by his Hand, or rather eight several
Paintings of one Piece, which represent so many different Acts of the Passion.
It Is in my mind, one of the finest Pieces in the World: And I do not admire
that the Deceased Elector of Bavaria thought fit to offer to the City a
quantity of Salt, amounting to the value of twenty thousand Crowns, for so
choice a Rarity.

Give me leave (My Lord) to acquaint you with somewhat concerning this Holbein:
He was a Gallant Man, but so extremely necessitous, that sometimes he had not
wherewith to pay for his Dinner. In another Painting of the same Repository,
are drawn the Portraitures of his Wife and Children, whose Apparel argues that
they were very little better supplied with Necessaries. In a word, this
Painting is a Treasure in Rags. All Travelers usually stop with delight at
the corner of a narrow street in Basil, where is to be seen a House, Painted on
the outside from the top to the bottom by Holbein's incomparable Hand: Indeed
even great Princes might take it as an Honor to have so Curious a piece of
Workmanship in their possession; nevertheless 'twas only the payment which this
poor Painter made for some Meals, which he had there taken: for it was a
Victualing-House; the situation of which as well as its meanness sufficiently
shows that 'twas none of the most noted. Our Holbein was at last delivered out
of this miserable condition, by the Generosity of an Earl of Arundel, from whom
was descended that Illustrious English Nobleman, whom Curiosity has as it were
rendered immortal, as well as the vast number of ancient Inscriptions and
Marbles, as yet to be seen in the Theater at Oxford, which he had sent for from
the Levant and which were so Learnedly and fortunately explained by Mr. Seldom.
This Book, by the way, is very scarce, but if it be not in Your Highness's
Library, you need not be concerned, for it is about to be Reprinted, and I have
been told that the new Edition will be much finer and larger than the former.
This Earl of Arundel, as he was returning (if I mistake not) from an Embassy to
Vienna, brought over along with him Holbein and his whole Family, and advanced
his Fortune so far, that Holbein himself cried out; Is it possible, that ever I
shoud have been so indigent as to be forced to Paint to get a sorry livelihood?
These are the effects of the discerning Judgment and generous Disposition of a
Noble Lord, without whose Favor perhaps Holbein might have spent his whole
life in misery, and always lain hid in Obscurity. Others affirm that he did
not pass into England till a long while after, with a Design to get some
Preferment; that he at first presented himself to Sir Thomas More with the
Commendatory Letters of Erasmus, and that he was entertained by him with all
possible demonstrations of Kindness. I have seen in the Emperor's Repository,
the Portraiture which he then made of this Famous Minister of State. It Is
reported, that not being able to call to mind the Name of the Ambassador, who
had promised him his Protection, he hastily made a Draught according to the
Idea which he had of his Lineaments, and luckily hit upon the whole Air of his
Countenance; so that Sir Thomas immediately knew the Earl of Arundel; thus he
found at his fingers ends, that which had escaped his Memory. Afterward these
two Illustrious Patrons made known his Merit to the World, more especially at
Court, insomuch that King Henry VIII. Honored him with his Esteem and
Friendship, and expressed himself in the most obliging Terms in his Favor to a
certain Earl, who had made a complaint of him: I can at my pleasure (said the
King) Create six Earls in in an Hour, but I cannot make one Holbein. I could
insist on many other particular circumstances, but I shall only mention one
here, which will oblige us to resume the Discourse concerning Erasmus.

When Holbein saw his Book, that bears the Title of Encomium Moriae, or a
Panegyric upon Folly, Printed by Frobenius, in Quarto A. D. 1514. He drew in
the Margin certain small Figures, which are all hatched with a Pen and make
eighty three Pictures; they serve as it were for so many Illustrations of the
Text, and are so curiously designed, that Holbein's Energy might be discovered,
even by this single piece of Work. Upon the Margin of the Title of this Book he
wrote these words: Hanc MORIAM pictam december diebus ut oblectaretur in ea
Erasmus, habuit. This Moria was Painted in ten days, to the end that Erasmus
might be delighted with it. Erasmus had a great affection for Holbein, neither
could he forbear putting himself in a good humor, at the sight of his Book,
which he found so well embellished, and to add very pleasant Devices to some of
these small Draughts. I took particular notice of three, which perhaps may
afford some Diversion to Your most Serene Highness.

In page 53. The Text has it, Ne videar Erasmi mei Commentaria suppilasse. Lest
I shoud seem to play the Plagiary with the Works of my Erasmus. Holbein places
in the Margin Erasmus sitting and writing in a Book upon a Desk, after the same
manner as he was wont to paint him, and even as he was represented by Albert
Durer. Erasmus seeing himself drawn, in somewhat too good case, wrote upon the
Book, which was adorned with the Figures ADAGIA ERAS: and underneath, Quum ad
hunc locum perveniebat Erasmus, se pictum sic videns exclamavit Ohe, Ohe, si
Erasmus talis esset, duceret profecto Vxorem. When Erasmus came to this Place,
and saw himself Painted after such a manner, he cried out, Heigh ho! if Erasmus
were so lusty a Fellow, he would certainly marry a Wife.

In page 54. on the right side of these words; Sed multo candidius pinguis ille
ac nitidus Epicuri de grege porcus: But that fat and slick Swine of Epicurus 's
Heard would appear much more beautiful. Holbein Painted a jolly young Gallant,
sitting at a well furnished Table; drinking a Bottle of Wine, which he held in
his left hand; and with his right embracing a Lady of Pleasure, that sat by
his side. But Erasmus wrote underneath, HOLBEIN, imagining, that his meaning
would be very well understood, even by this single word.

In the following Page, over against these words, Scoti Anima, Scotus 's Soul;
the same Painter drew an Infant, shaved after the Monastic fashion, to
represent the Soul of that Famous Author of Scholastic Divinity, with the
marks of his Order, which I cannot describe more decently. Erasmus pleasantly
subjoined, Scoti anima cacat stulta Logicalia: Scotus 's Soul cacks Logical
Toys.

But this Repository contains many other things, that is to say, all the
Curiosities that were gathered together by Erasmus and Amerbachius; among these
the Seal, Library and the greater part of the Movables of the former, are
preserved with the highest esteem: There are also some Manuscripts of
Amerbachius, which are no less precious, and there I observed those Curious
Draughts of the City of Augst, that were delineated by him, and of which I have
already made mention; besides four considerable Sets of ancient Medals, viz.
Greek, Consular, Imperial of Silver, and Imperial of Copper; neither do I
remember to have elsewhere seen the Golden Medal of the Empress Plotina. Although
Erasmus app^rently was not in a condition in the beginning of his Life to lay
out so great expenses, nevertheless the liberality of Princes, by whom he was
very much esteemed, enabled him to do it: For he received from 'em many
Presents, which he celebrates in his Epistles; and it is even reported that if
the Pope's untimely Death had not happened, he would have been advanced to the
highest dignities in the Church.

However, this is not the first time that he has been decry'd by all Parties:
Those of the Reformed Religion are also sensible that he did not approve their
Innovations, and that he was desirous of Reformation, of a different nature
from theirs. The Lutherans could never forgive him for writing in his Books:
Poteram in Lutherana factione esse Coryphaeus, malui totius Germaniae in me
odia concitare, quam a Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae consortio discedere. I might have
been the Head of the Lutheran Party, but I chose rather to incurr the hatred of
all Germany, than to depart from the Communion of the most Holy Church. The
Monks of his time, who were for the most part Ignorant and given to Debauchery,
treated him as a Libertine and impious Wretch, although it appears in his
Letters, that he never undertook a Journey without hearing Mass, and even
approaching the Altar: Nevertheless it may well be affirmed, that among all
Parties he has met with some Persons that have a great respect for him, and
acknowledge that his Renown will be immortal. Indeed his Memory is almost every
where honored, and the House where he died is still to be seen at Basil. But I
have no mind to fill this Letter altogether with an Account of the Life of
Erasmus.

I have somewhat to communicate to Your most Serene Highness, concerning the
Public Library, in which are contained a vast number of Manuscripts, besides
Printed Books, and it may not be improper here to mention some of 'em that
occurr to my Memory: The Greek Edition of Thucydides, in Quarto, published by
Camerarius. The Gospels in Greek, with square Letters, Accents, Spirits,
Points, and at the bottom of the Pages the Concordance, with the other Gospels.
The Acts of the Apostles, which are kept at Oxford, are almost of the same
Character, but have no Points nor Accents. The Manuscript of the Epistles of
St. Paul, which is preserved at Paris in the Abbey of St. Germain des Prez, is
conformable to that of Basil, both with respect to the Accents and Spirits,
which are there to be seen, as also in regard of the disposition of the
Characters, where the Alpha has this same figure a, the Epsylon this e;
nevertheless there is no separation between the Words as in the Manuscript of
Basil, which is apparently above a thousand years old. There is likewise
preserved with the highest esteem a Parchment Manuscript, in Quarto, containing
certain Reasons, which Calecas prepared for the Grecian Bishops, who were to
be present at Basil; in that General Council, which Pope Eugenius transferred to
Florence, upon particular Considerations. Besides these, there is to be seen
the Code of the Canons of all the Councils, and of the Fathers, with Photius's
Nomocanon, and the double Commentary of Zonaras and Theodorus Balsamon, much
larger than in the Paris Edition; for there are also comprised many Responses
and considerable Pieces of the Patriarchs and Bishops, which are not to be
found elsewhere. All these will be published in a short time in the Edition,
which is now preparing at Oxford. The Works of St. Gregory Nazianzen, writ in
red Characters, and the Commentaries of Elias Cretensis, in black, which were
never as yet Printed but in Latin. This Greek Manuscript is extremely neat, and
its Chapters are enriched with very fine Miniatures, in which St. Gregory is
often represented in the Pulpit, Preaching and seeming to Dispute against the
Heretics, which are placed below on his left Hand, as the Orthodox are on his
right; more especially in his Sermon (...). I likewise saw an Alcoran, very
fairly writ on a kind of Oriental Paper, which we know only by Curiosity, and
an admirable Manuscript Virgil: Lastly there are four Presses full of
Manuscripts, the Description of which would rather require a large Volume than
a single Letter. I shall only add to 'em a Curious Book, Printed in Folio, a
Joh. Fust, Cive Moguntino, per Petrum de Gernsheim, Anno 1459. It is the
Officiale Durandi, which may serve to decide the Controversy between the
Nations that lay claim to the Invention of PRINTING. At Oxford are to be seen
the OFFICES OF CICERO, Printed in 1465. but in regard that it bears date six
years after, the Printed Copy of Basil is more valuable.

It is also requisite here to take notice of a rare piece of Painting, which is
to be seen in the Preachers Cloister, in which is represented that curious
Dance of Death, where Persons of all sorts of Conditions may find the true
Character of Humane Frailty. Emperors, Kings, Princes, Clergymen and the Rich,
may there see themselves lying under an unavoidable necessity of dying, as well
as the Poor, and those whom we commonly call the most miserable. It is one of
the most mortifying Spectacles that I know of in Christendom, and though it be
adorned with all the Embellishments of Painting, I could never look upon it,
without making very pathetical Reflections upon our Mortality. It is exposed to
public view, and to make it (as it seems) yet more public, the whole Design
was engraved on Copper-prints in the preceding Age, by a very able Master: And
indeed this little Book is not unworthy of a Place in a fine Library.

If I were obliged to stay till I had taken a full view of all the Rarities in
this City, I should never leave it; yet there is one notable Circumstance, of
which I cannot but take some notice: In the Arsenal are to be seen the Spoils
of Charles Duke of Burgundy, I mean that great Prince (My Lord) whose memorable
Exploits fill up the whole History of that Age; but the Switzers made it appear
that he was not invincible, and that it is very dangerous at the same time to
make an attempt upon Justice and Liberty; of which Truth Morat and Nancy will
be everlasting Proofs.

In the Neighborhood of Basil one may observe a thousand Remarkable Things
that depend on the Situation and Nature of the Place: The natural Landscape of
the Country thereabouts is a most delightful object, and even the Prospect of
Basil along the River, which runs through the two Towns is admirable. Is not that
part of the Rhine, where the Salmons go up again from the Sea to propagate
their kind, in like manner very considerable? The Season of their arrival is
precisely known, as also the time of their abode and that of their departure:
The Fishermen are ready to take an advantage from this opportunity and are
never deceived. The Golden Sands which are found in some parts of the adjacent
Country, sufficiently show that there are some Mines of Gold, and I could wish
that they were already discovered by such Persons as deserve to be fortunate.

At my return from Basil I saw

BRISACH,
One of the Strongest Holds in the World; none can be ignorant of the Conquest
of those Parts, made by Bernard Duke of Weimar, who delivered up the Town to
the French, which was also granted to 'em in the Treaty of Munster. I saw the
little Village where he died, between Basil and Brisach.

This would be a proper place to make mention of Strasburg, but I shall referr
the matter to another opportunity; since this Famous City deserves a more
particular Description.

In passing down the Rhine we come to

PHILIPSBVRG:
Philippopolis and Vdenheim are the Names by which it is known in the Latin and
German Writings. It has been noted for its Sieges during the last Wars of
Germany, but now, thanks be to God, all those commotions are allayed. The
General Treaty of Peace has left this Place to its old Master the Bishop of
Spier, under the Garrison of the King of France, that is to say, the Town
belongs to that Prelate, and the Fort to his Most Christian Majesty; or rather
the Bishop is the Lord of it and the King the Master.

About four hours Journey from thence to the right stands

HEIDELBERG.
This City, notwithstanding its meanness, is beautified with all manner of
Ornaments: The Necker which washes its Walls, supplies it with very wholesome
Water, abundance of Fish, and the most pleasant Walks in the World: But that
which renders it most delectable, and enhances its Reputation, is the generous
Wine that bears its Name, and which is drunk in all the parts of Europe, where
there are any noble Entertainments.

The University was heretofore one of the most Famous in Christendom, and still
retains its whole Merit, but is somewhat depopulated through the malignity of the
Times. For that Country has been oppressed with War above 30 years and stood in
need for its restoration of a Government as prudent and as exact as that of a
Prince, who now constitutes the sole happiness of his Subjects. The differences
between him and the Duke of Lorrain have for a while interrupted his Design of
restoring this Place to its ancient splendor, but it is probable that Heaven
will prosper his Undertakings and good Intentions. The Alliance which is at
present negotiating between his Noble Stock and the Royal Family of France, is
a sufficient Testimony of the Esteem that he has gained in that Court. England,
Sweden and Denmark maintain a very considerable Correspondence with him, and
even a greater than with the other Princes of the Empire. The Marriage of the
Electoral Prince with the Princess of Denmark, is an Illustrious proof of what
I have just now declared; but his Highness's presence is capable of affording
more Noble Idea's: Indeed every thing that is sublime serves only to consummate
his Character; that is to say, Magnificence, Generosity, Magnanimity, Solidity
of Judgment, and that profound Wisdom, which appears in all the particulars of
his Conduct. As for the Electoral Prince His Son, none of these excellent
Endowments are wanting in him, which promise to represent to us one day in His
Person all those rare Qualities, which we so much admire in that of the Elector
His Father.

Perhaps I might have left Heidelberg without making any mention to Your
Highness of the Great-Tun, if the ingenious M. Polier had not admonished me
that it ought not to be forgot. I confess that Advice seems to tend somewhat to
debauchery; yet it proceeds from a very sober Person, whose moderation is every
where well known; but he is sensible that Prodigies deserve to have a place
among Curiosities. This huge Tun (My Lord) is as Famous as the Rhodian Colossus
was heretofore, which had no greater a quantity of Water between its Legs,
than this contains of Wine within its Cavity. I am apt to believe, that the
product of a whole Vintage might be stowed in it; and its compass and thickness
is so great, that it is requisite to undertake a Journey to View it all over:
For it is twenty one Foot high, thirty one long; and sufficiently capacious to
hold two hundred and twenty ordinary Tuns of Wine. Thus this prodigious Vessel
bears its own Ocean, and such a one as has its ebbing and flowing Tides; it is
also very dangerous to sail upon it; and a Navigator is no sooner come near it,
but he immediately loses his Compass; Storms frequently arise there without any
boistrous Winds or foul Weather, and the Understanding suffers Shipwreck even
in the very Harbor: In a word, this is that Pacifick Sea which involves the
whole World in a Hurricane, without disturbing its own Tranquillity.

In following the course of the Necker one may arrive at MANHEIM: It would be
difficult for me to forget its Situation, for besides that I have often taken
particular notice of it, it is also represented upon that Medal with which his
Electoral Highness Palatine has thought fit to honor me; where it appears that
this Fort serves as a Defense to the Rhine and Necker, both which Rivers are
covered and secured by it. At my return, I saw the residue of that Magnificent
Entertainment, which the People had prepared for the Solemn Entrance of the
Electoral Princess. This small Territory is very happy upon account of its
Plenty, but more especially in regard of the Prince's Indulgence, who has eased
the Inhatants by taking off the ordinary Taxes and Impositions.

I must now beg leave of Your most Serene Highness to be admitted into Your
Palace to discover to you certain Pieces of Antiquity, which appear after such
a manner, as is not unknown to me: They are those two ancient Columns which
Your Highness has caused to be transported into Your Garden. Indeed they have
suffered much detriment by the injury of Time, as all other things of the same
Antiquity; yet the Characters are sufficiently conspicuous to be perceived by a
discerning Eye, and I have taken from thence the following Explication.

It is certain that these Columns were carved in the time of the Emperor
Alexander Severus, who was slain near Mentz, by the order of Maximinus. I read
this Inscription upon one of 'em which is almost conformable in every thing to
the other: IMPERATORI CAESARI, DIVI SEVERI PIINE POTI, DIVI ANTONINI MAGNI PII
FILIO, MARCO AVRELIO SEVERO ALEXANDRO, PIO, FELICI, AVGVSTO, PONTIFICI MAXIMO,
TRIBVNICIAE POTESTATIS, CONSVLI, PATRI PATRIAE. GA. AO. AB. AO. L. IIII. We
have many other ancient Inscriptions that relate to these, and which precisely
determine the time. The fourth Roman Legion that possessed the Country caused
'em to be erected, and the Characters of the last Line but one, might be the
first Letters of the Names of the principal Officers of that Legion, which
remain in obscurity. It is probable that they were made to adorn their Tombs.

But let us return to the Place where they were found, the very Name of which
will certainly augment the proof of our Conjecture. At the distance of about a
thousand paces from Your Castle (My Lord) there is a Hill or Burrow separated
from all the others, Remus and Romulus suckled by the she-wolf on top of a
column p. 176.

IMP CAES D^^^ S^VERIPIINEPOTI (...) ANTONINI MAGP^ MAV^EL SEVERO AL^ PI^^ELICI
AUG PONTI^^^ MAXIMO TRIBUNA^ POTESIATIS COSPAT^^^

GA AO AB A^

L IIII

which seems to command its Horizon; the Romans built there a Tower after their
manner of Architecture, and at that time it served as a kind of Fort. The like
circumstances are to be observed in Trajan's Column, which is undoubtedly the
finest and most perfect of all the Pieces of Antiquity. They named this Tower
Turrim ad Lacum, because it was erected in a marshy ground, which was afterward
dried up by length of time, and by laying out great expenses. The Germans, who
called it Thurn an der lachen, have thence derived the Word

DVRLACH,
As it appears to me by the Abbreviation, which is so peculiar to their manner
of speaking, and by the Character T. which by them is almost always turned
into D. There is also another circumstance to be observed; viz. that this Tower
commonly is called Ho^e Graetzinguen, by reason of a Village at the foot of the
Hill, which retains its ancient name of Graetzinguen, from the Graecians, who
served the Emperor Severus in that Country. This is confirmed by the
Inscription of the abovementioned Columns, which were made at that time, and
even by the Testimony of Lampridius. This Emperor (says he) at his return from
the Levant, caused diverse Arabians, Parthians and others to be transported into
the Western Countries, for the service of the War, which he designed to
undertake in Germany. It is probable that there were also some Graecians among
'em, who settled in those Parts as it were a kind of Colony. These Forces
(according to the report of the same Historian) passed into the Army of
Maximinus, who caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor, after the Assassination
of Alexander Severus. Now the Time, Place and Name as yet remaining, (as I take
it) sufficiently explain these Monuments. The Figure somewhat defaced, on the
top of the Column, contributes very much to the illustrating of our
Explication; whether there were some other Figure of a considerable Officer,
with whom might be joined that She-Wolf and those Children hanging upon her
Teats, as the Symbol of his Country; or whether it were simply a mark of the
Original of the Romans. It is well known after what manner Ambition inspired
those Famous People, who had as great a Veneration for the Image of their Wolf,
as the other Nations had for their Deities; and therefore they interpreted the
Mystery of it by a Miracle, which was wrought for the preservation of the
Founders of their State.

It is now (My Lord) time for me to return to my Subject, for I am sensible
that remote Reflections are not delightful to Your Highness: But I cannot leave
Durlach without making some mention to You of the Learned M. Keck. There are
few excellent Endowments that may not be justly attributed to him, but his
profound Learning is most transcendantly conspicuous: For he has attained to a
perfect knowledge of Politics, Antiquity and History, has penetrated into the
most abstruse Notions, relating to the different Interests of Princes and the
Law of Nations, is well versed in all the liberal Sciences, and speaks ten or
twelve several Languages. Your most Serene Highness knows that I am not
accustomed to intermeddle in Matters of Religion, but I am very sensible that
M. Keck has made a most exact search into the nicest Points, relating to the
Controversies of Christians and the various Sects of Infidels. These are
Qualities very rarely to be met with, yet such as are necessary for the
President of Your Highness's Ecclesiastical Council. If I should declare to the
World that he is an excellent Poet, I should affirm nothing but the truth: In
short, he is an admirable Personage, and were it not that I call to mind that
he is one of my best Friends, I should add much more in his commendation.

I also saw near the Rhine that Pillar, which the King of Sweden erected as a
Monument of his Victories: And at

HAECHST,
Which is Situated on the right side upon the Main, the deplorable Remains of
the War. This so beautiful a Town with its Stately Castle, is now nothing but a
kind of Village, which is maintained only for the convenience of the Road that
lies between Mentz and Francfort; so that it may well be said of it; Nunc seges
ubi Troja fuit.

MENTZ
Is a quite different sort of a Place, and the Residence of the Elector
contributes not a little to its Reputation: Besides that it is large,
Magnificent and very Populous; it is also considerable upon account of some
Footsteps of Antiquity which are there to be seen.

Within the compass of the Citadel, which has been lately built, there is a
rising Ground, supposed to have been the Tomb of Drusus: This Noble Roman had
put the Germans so hard to it, that his name became detestable even to a
Proverb, Das dich der Drus hole; nevertheless we read in Suetonius that his
Funeral obsequies were solemnized in the Campus Martius, and that his dead Body
was carried even to Rome, upon the Shoulders of the most eminent Inhabitants of
the Places through which it was conveyed. However, we may get some farther light
without departing from the Text of this Historian; in which it is observed that
the Legions paid the highest Honors to the Memory of that great General; that
they abhorred even the very Camp where he died, leaving it the infamous name of
Scelerata Castra; that they consecrated to him the representation of a Tomb,
and certain Festivals, which were to be celebrated every year in the same
Place, with combats of Gladiators and Horse-races; and that they engaged the
ancient Gauls to compose certain Annual Prayers upon that solemn occasion.
Hence it may be easily concluded that this piece of Antiquity, which has
acquired so much reputation, is only that Honorarius Tumulus or Honorary Tomb
of which Suetonius makes mention.

I had also the satisfaction (My Lord) to converse there with a Person in whom
I saw so many rare Qualities, that I soon perceived that the public Fame,
which had talked so much of him, had not given me a full narrative of all his
Accomplishments. His extraordinary Merit and solid Virtue, which have been
equally conspicuous, both in Prosperity and Adversity, are not the only
Ornaments of his Life and Conversation. The World has been sufficiently
informed of the share he has in the management of the principal Affairs of the
Empire, and how much his Counsels are esteemed in the Imperial Court. But it is
requisite to take a nearer View of him to observe the singular Endowments of
his Mind, which render him most amiable, for a great deal of Generosity and
Courtesy, and every thing that can be imagined to be honorable appears in his
Conduct and Deportment. It would not be necessary to declare that I mean the
Baron of Boineburg, since this Character is no less peculiar to him than his
very Name. His two Daughters have passed into the Noble Families of the
Electors of Mentz and Triers, and there is nothing so Great, but what may be
expected from his Son.

In traveling farther, the Countries afford a most delightful Prospect, and
the Towns upon the Rhine are admirable, as Coblentz, Colen, Andernach, Nuys,
Wesel, Reez, Emmerick, etc. which perhaps I remember more particularly, because
I had a sight of diverse curious pieces of Antiquity in those Places, and have
even had the good Fortune to recover some of 'em. Your Most Serene Highness
will be surpised to hear, that the People of all conditions have their
Repositories of Rarities: viz. Princes, Noblemen, Divines, Lawyers,
Physicians, Historians, Students, Merchants, and even Artificers. I have in my
possession diverse Copies of admirable Designs, which I had caused to be taken
in those Parts from very Curious Medals, which may afford Your Highness some
Diversion at a convenient Opportunity.

But I must by no means forget that Famous Vineyard, which produces those most
delicious Wines, which are so highly esteemed by Foreigners; neither is it
without Reason that

BACCARACH
Is reputed the principal Town of that Territory, since the High Dutch Word
being mollify'd, clearly imports Bacchi Ara, i. e. Bacchus's Altar; and indeed,
there are now extant no Altars more Remarkable, which are dedicated to any
ancient Deity. The Revenue of the Country consists chiefly in these Wines; it is
also a very considerable Revenue, which constitutes the most liquid staple of
the Palatinate. This is that blessed spot of Ground, which God preserves as it
were the Apple of his Eye; at least, (My Lord) I only make use of the
Expression of one of their most Famous Preachers. This small Province luckily
appertains to the Jurisdiction of the Elector Palatine, who, although he be one
of the most temperate Princes in Europe, causes a high value to be set upon
these Noble Wines: His Disposition is also so Generous and so Magnificent, that
it is in every particular conformable to that of the other Princes, who delight
in Feasting and sumptuous Entertainments.

Some few Leagues from thence the Moselle empties it self into the Rhine,
accompanied with those excellent Vines that grow along its Banks, and
distributes its Streams to the Northern Countries, where these sorts of Wines
serve to furnish the best Tables: Indeed they are not so strong as the Rhenish
Wines, but they surpass 'em in the deliciousness of their Taste. I presume to
discourse to You (My Lord) about Matters in which You cannot but be much better
Skilled than myself; for although Your Highness makes only a very good use of the
best Wines, yet I have very often observed You to take delight in hearing a
true Estimate and Judgment made of 'em by others. If this may pass for a
Repetition, it is so much the more tolerable, because it is a very short one.

I should have taken greater Delight in the course of this Journey, if I had
not found Holland making great Preparations for War; for Arms were there taken
up on all sides, upon the apprehension of a Rupture with France. There were
then lodged ten thousand Men in Maestricht, for the Defense of the whole
Frontier of that Country, and I was present at a Review of five thousand Horse,
that was made at Wesel: Emmerick was likewise in a very good Condition. These
two Places, the Garrisons of which consist in Dutch Troops, belong (as Your
Highness well knows) to the Elector of Brandenburg. These Commotions deprived
me of the Opportunities which I waited for to get a farther light in the
knowledge of diverse Medals, nevertheless I found means to make some new
Discoveries in that Affair, and perhaps another Journey may give me entire
satisfaction: But this will not happen till the King shall have given
encouragement to the Hollanders, by removing their Fears, or to express my self
more clearly, till his Intentions shall be better known. However the Conduct of
this great Prince is conformable to the Rules of Equity and Prudence, and the
League which he has made with those States is founded upon so considerable
Interests, that one cannot but hope for its continuation, at least I wish with
all my heart that it may be effected.

SCHENKENSCHANS,
Or as we pronounce it in French, Le Fort de Skens, is Situated on the very
Point of that Island, where the Rhine divides its Streams. It is a Place of
great importance, and serves as a Bulwark to the whole Country, being defended
by its Bastions and Outworks: But that which makes it of difficult Access is
the Marsh that lies round about, and across which, 'twas absolutely necessary
to raise a Causey leading to the only Gate of the Place. This Fort is the Chief
Magazin and strong hold of the Neighborhood. The Toll which is there very
moderate, affords no small profit to the States, but the Customs for the
Importation and Exportation of Merchandises amount to a vast Revenue.

The lesser of these Branches of the Rhine retains its name, and the other
which assumes that of Vahal or the French Rhine, runs to the Foot of

NIMEGVEN,
The Capital Town of Guelderland, which is very rich, and although its name in
the Vulgar Language of the Country, denotes Novelty, nevertheless it is certain
that the Place is of very great Antiquity. Indeed it sufficiently appears even
from its Situation that it is the Oppidum Batavorum, of which Tacitus and some
other Historians make mention, with respect to the Wars of Civilis and
Cerealis. M. Smetius not long since deceased, made this Discovery in a Treatise
which he has published upon that Subject. His Son is also a Learned Man, and
among all his good Qualities, that of being addicted to Curiosity affects me
most. He has in his Repository some of those Pieces of Antiquity that are found
in the Country, which are Monuments of many Ages, left by the Romans: For there
are to be seen Altars, Urns, Fragments of Sepulchers, Inscriptions, Rings, and
every thing that the Magnificence of their Religion had introduced: But the
Medals constitute the finest part of this Repository. I have caused Draughts to
be made of the most Curious, and I owe to my good Fortune the opportunity I had
of procuring some of 'em.

The Castle of Nimeguen is a very stately Pile of Building, but that which
renders it most Famous is, that 'twas built by Caesar, and that Tradition has
preserved its name even to this very day. The neighboring Plains heretofore
served as the usual Theater of War to the Romans; so that they who are well
versed in History may call to mind, that Civilis was there defeated, and that
he could not have avoided falling into the Hands of his Enemies, if he had not
provided for his safety in the abovementioned Island, in which the place where
he made his escape is still to be observed. However the Liberty of the Country
would have been ruined, if the Roman Fleet had appeared timely enough to gain
and cover the Passages, where the scattered Forces were posted in order to
rally. Debellatum eo die foret, si Romana Classis sequi maturasset.

As to what relates to this Liberty, it is an Advantage which these People have
always entirely preserved; insomuch that the Power of the Romans could never
prevail so far, as to force 'em to submit to that Yoke of Servitude, which they
had laid upon the other Nations; nay their very Victories were not sufficient
to constrain 'em to admit any Conditions, that were never so little derogatory
from that Right, which so is natural to 'em. Thus in the Treaties of Peace, we
always find their Liberty secured with these honorable Titles of Friends,
Allies and Neighbors, and if they were obliged to enter into any Engagements,
'twas never done but under a show of Friendship and Respect. This is the very
Expression of Tacitus, mansit honos and antiquae Societatis insigne; and this
is that Society mentioned by Titus Livius, which leaves an entire Equality
between the Parties; Societas aequalis juris est. Thus they have incessantly
secured themselves by the Concessions and Privileges which the Emperors have
thought fit to grant 'em from time to time; and the last Attempts that Spain
made against this Liberty, served only to establish it with greater Honor and
Reputation. It must also be acknowledged that they have set no bad Example to
their Neighbors, who do not enjoy such Privileges: The Roman Catholic
Religion, which their Civil Government cannot tolerate is there prohibited; yet
the Professors are not prosecuted upon that account, and notwithstanding all
these precautions, the Exercise of it cannot be altogether restrained.

Afterward I continued for some days at

VTRECHT;
There is nothing wanting to the Beauty of this City, and it may be affirmed
that it is the Residence of the Nobility; because a greater number of Noblemen
is to be seen there, than in any other part of the Seventeen United Provinces.
The Situation of the Town is very delightful, and it stands upon a higher
Ground than the rest of the Low Countries; upon which account the Waters are
admirable, insomuch that they are often transported to very remote Parts. Here
are two notable Canals, one of which still bears the name of the great Drusus;
but in both the Magnificence and Wealth of the Inhabitants may be discovered as
well by the vast multitude of Barks, with which these Canals are incessantly
covered as by that double Row of Houses that stands on each side; one of which
serves as a Parapet and Platform to the other. Thus all manner of Commodities
are brought up to their very Doors, and that which is esteemed extremely rare
in all cold Countries is here very common, and sold at a very cheap rate;
neither does it appear that the Oranges, Lemons and other delicious Fruits come
from Parts so far distant, by reason of their Freshness and Plenty. Among the
Persons of Quality, one M. Christian Vtembogart is more especially conspicious;
He is (My Lord) an illustrious Personage for whom I have the highest
Veneration; He is endu'd with much Learning, Generosity, Affability and
somewhat more, that is to say, a kind of Courteous Demeanor, which is
predominant in his Temper, and wins the Heart of those that converse with him
without any Reservation.

There is also the most ingenious Doctor Kerckringius, who is much more than a
very Learned Physician, and has brought the Art of Anatomy to its highest pitch
of perfection. In his House I clearly discerned every thing that is transacted
in those Obscure Recesses, in which the Foetus is formed; for he has some of
all sorts of ages and sizes (if the expression may be tolerated) and one may
there observe with the Order and Proportion, the Progress which is daily made
from the Ovum or Egg to the complete formation; that is to say, from that
minute Matter, which is at first gathered together by the Hand of Nature to the
absolute perfection of an organical and animated Body. One cannot sufficiently
admire those little Skeletons of Flesh, those almost liquid Bones, and those
first Draughts of a Humane Body: They are so many Mysteries unvailed, which
leave great light in the Mind, and so many subjects for the finest Reflection's
in the World. He caused me to observe three Ventricles in one Heart; and a
Stone in another; as also the Vena Cava and Vena Portae with their several
Branches separated from the other Parts with exquisite neatness and an
unconceivable Curiosity of Work-manship; besides an infinite number of Rarities
of the like nature, which may be termed small Originals that copy themselves,
or lively Demonstrations, that charm, instruct and persuade the Beholders at
the same time: The Possessor of these Treasures by his polite and most obliging
Conversation compleats the Delight that a curious Inquirer takes in seeing
himself amidst so many surprising Objects. But that which this Learned Doctor
brought for his part at a Conference which we held concerning Superfoetation,
was a kind of Curiosity, that affected me more than all the others: That
admirable Treatise which he has published under the Title of SPICILEGIUM
ANATOMICUM shall be my Voucher for the truth of every thing I have even now
declared, concerning his extraordinary Abilities.

The Country round about Vtrecht is full of these enchanted Places and delicate
Solitudes, where Wisdom has made so great a Progress. There are to be found
those happy Retirements that afford a Shelter to satiated Ambition, and where
great Heroes surfeited with Glory, and tired with the weight of the Government
of the World are wont to resort to enjoy the sweet fruits of Repose and
Tranquillity.

I ought here to communicate to Your Most Serene Highness two Remarks that were
made by me in the Garden of M. Graevius, that Famous Professor, both which in
some manner illustrate Antiquity; one of 'em shows the meaning of a Word on the
Medal of Commodus. I. O. M. EXSUP. which I always saw explained EXSUPERIS: but
the whole Sentence ought to be read JOV^ OPTIMO MAXIMO EXSUPERANTISSIMO, as
it is engraved all at length upon the Stone, which apparently served as a
Monument. There is also another Stone which without doubt deserves greater
application. It appears to me from the two first Letters, and the four last of
its Inscription that it was a Monument, although the Names of those Persons for
whom it was made are unknown: For D. M. certainly signifies DIIS MANIBUS, and
the last Letters plainly show its use by forming these common Words, Monumentum
Hoc Fieri Curavit. In the same place I met with an Ornament worthy to be
imparted to Your Highness, and therefore I have caused an exact Copy of it to
be taken from the Original. It takes up one half of a Stone, about four Foot
high, on which is represented a Man lying upon his Bed, copy of an ornament D^
M^ VALENTI BITITRALI VET^ EX^ N^ ALAEI ACHV^ M^ H^ F^ C^

p. 198.

or if you please, upon his Triclinium, with a Table set before him, furnished
with variety of Fruits, and two Servants waiting upon him; one of these holds a
Pot, whence the word Pocillator is derived, and the other, who might be called
a Cyatho (as in this old Epitaph D. M. DORYPHORO CAESARIS A CYATHO, etc.)
presents a kind of Flagon, in which some precious Liquor was apparently
contained. Perhaps the former had already poured out Water, as his Pot half
turned downward induces me to believe, and the other brings fresh Wine. Perhaps
also this Master of the Feast that holds a Cup in his hand pronounces these
Words according to the ancient Custom; BEEN MIHI, BEEN VOBIS, BEEN AMIGAE MEAE,
BEEN OMNIBUS NOBIS, BEEN EI QUI NON INVIDET MIHI, ET EI QUI NOSTRO GAUDIO
GAUDET. i. e. A good Health to my self, A good Health to you; A good Health to
the Mistress of my Affections: A good Health to us all; A good Health to him
that does not envy my Happiness, and to him that rejoices with our Joy. This
might be explained to drink a Health to the good Company after the German
fashion. What diverting Commentaries (My Lord) might be made upon the
Inscription of this Stone; but they may be composed at Durlach more
conveniently than here: In the mean while I shall send you the Draught of it
delineated within a small compass.

AMSTERDAM.
So great Idea's of this City have been every where formed, that whatever can
be said of it, is always too little. Your Most Serene Highness well knows that
it is the Seat of Opulency and the Rendezvous of Riches: that with respect to
its situation; its extent; its more than stately Buildings; its Canal which
divides it on all sides; and that loftiness, which cannot be expressed and
which is its true Character, it shows more Grandeur and Magnificence even than
the most beautiful City of Rome; neither do I admire (My Lord) at such an
occurrence; since it has extended its Commerce, much farther than the other
ever did its Conquests. Again, Amsterdam has discovered two Worlds to enrich it
self, whereas Rome was content with the spoils of one. It is a very pompous
Spectacle, to behold in its Ports and Canals those numerous Fleets that come to
People the Town. Sometimes they are seen there to the number of ten thousand
Vessels, that is to say, another Amsterdam upon the Water; or rather a floating
Province, of which Amsterdam is the Capital City. To see the Arrival of so vast
a multitude of Ships and so prodigious a Resort of People, a man would fancy
himself to be present at the General Fair of the Universe. This Imagination (I
confess) is somewhat odd; But what can one say of a City, in which there is a
Concourse of so many different Nations; where so great Wealth is exposed to
view; where is to be seen at once every thing that the Fruitfulness of the
Indies has produced in a course of many years; and to speak more clearly, where
a view may be taken of the Storehouses of all the rich Harvests of the Levant?

The Townhouse is a Noble Pile of Building; its Architecture being the most
magnificent and the most regular in the World. It was erected by Art, within a
little space of time, at the expense of thirty millions, and the particular
Dimensions and form of it are represented in Prints, which are very much
esteemed. Private Persons in this City are very Rich, and there are some who
would be judged to be so, even in the opinion of Crassus: I also know one who
sent so powerful a supply to the King of Denmark, as was sufficient to rescue
him from the violent Attacks of Sweden. Their manner of counting is
extraordinary, and somewhat more stately than that of reckoning by Talents in
the first Empires; so that to hear 'em talk of dividing Gold by Tuns, would put
Your Highness in mind of the Triumvirs who made only three parts of the World.
At Amsterdam every one chooses a Creed at his pleasure, and Religion is as free
as the State; nay even the Roman Catholic does not offend their Consciences,
but because it interferrs with their Civil Government, the public Exercise of
that alone is prohibited.

I had a sight of all their Curiosities and those of all sorts, and among
others diverse Paintings that we know, and others which are unknown to us; as
also Indian and Chinese Pieces of an inestimable value. In these last, a
curious Eye may discover all the secret particulars of the History; the manner
of living; Customs and Religion of those Countries, and there are represented
certain Martyrs, who sacrifice their Blood to the transport of their Zeal, if
it may be allowed to make so bad an application of that sacred name, which
belongs only to the Heroes of the true Religion. For the Effusion of Blood and
even Death it self are only the exterior Decorations of Martyrdom, the proper
place of its Sacrifice is the Heart and the Will, where it has Faith for its
Object.

As for the other Curiosities, they are so numerous, that they may even be
reckoned by Tuns as well as their Gold. Among others there are four Remarkable
Repositories, in which are contained as many Rarities as I ever saw elsewhere.
M. de Witzen Recorder of the City, is Master of the first of these, and it
seems as if his House were built less for an Habitation, than to delight the
Eyes; nothing being to be found in any part of it but Magnificence and
Symmetry; neither can it be distinguished whether the Repository serves as an
Ornament to the House, or the House to the Repository. For there are choice
Collections of Paintings, Books, Images and the finest pieces of Antiquity;
insomuch that it may be affirmed, that that which is scarce every where else,
is here found abundance. M. Vander Hem and M. Occo Advocates, have in like
manner each of 'em their particular Musoeum, and a Comparison cannot be made
between 'em, because their value cannot be known. A Man may imagine that he has
taken a view of every thing when he has seen but one, and yet in the other he
meets with a Multitude of new Rarities; so that it does not seem as if he
passed out of one Repository into another, but out of one World into another.
The fourth Repository is in the possession of M. Gril, and I have caused
Draughts to be taken from the best of the Medals which are there preserved: But
those sorts of Rarities are unknown to many Persons, and I shall keep 'em
entire for the use of Your Most Serene Highness.

In another Place I saw certain Charts of an extraordinary importance, which
discover all the secrets of Navigation: They are the lively Images of the Sea,
and the bottom of its Channel is likewise as exactly represented, as if it were
from the dry Land. The Shelves, Quicksands, Rocks, Streights and Channels are
all expressed upon these Draughts; insomuch that without having attained to the
skill of an able Pilote, one might by the help of those Instructions trace out
the Roads from one Pole to the other. But the public Interest takes no notice
of these Oracles which Experience has uttered from time to time, but even
suffers 'em to be buried in Oblivion.

Let us now leave Amsterdam and set forward in our Journey to England. The Town
of

HAERLEM
Is the first on the Road, and we cannot behold it without calling to mind,
that it supplies the place of another, which fell as a Victim to the Cruelty
and detestable outrages of the Spaniards: The Sea which bears its name is
properly only a Plain of Water, but more dangerous than the main Ocean it self:
For the Head of the Palatine Family was very near perishing there, and could
not escape but with the loss of one of his Children. The great Church is one of
the most beautiful Structures in Holland, and in it is to be seen the stately
Tomb of Admiral Opdam. Afterward we passed to

LEYDEN
A Place so Famous for its University: The History of the last Wars will
eternize its Fame to the perpetual Disgrace of the Spaniards, who were forced
to raise the Siege, and to abandon a Victory which they had gained the day
before. I am now bringing a Medal to Your Most Serene Highness, which shows the
same thing in better Terms, to this effect; SICUT SENNACHERIB a JERUSALEM, SIC
HISPANI a LEYDA NOCTU FUGATI 1574. As Sennacherib from Jerusalem, so the
Spaniards were driven away from Leyden in the Night. There innumerable
Curiosities are to be seen in the Anatomical Amphitheatre, as well as in the
Physick-Garden, which well deserve the view of inquisitive Travelers, more
especially the Skeletons of all sorts of Animals, and many natural Rarities,
which the Bounds of a simple Relation will not permit to be described in
particular.

It is indeed too little barely to make mention of

THE HAGVE
By the way. I have been informed that the Merit of the Prince of Orange is
there entirely acknowledged, and that at the same time a kind of secret
Distrust is also predominant. Hence it appears (My Lord) that this Prince is
worthy to derive his Original from the illustrious Stock of so many Heroes, and
that those People are no bad Politicians.

A Man cannot choose but admire

DELFT.
Although it were not situated in the Country of beautiful Towns. It has also
this advantage above the others, that it is the Depositary of the Ashes of the
Great William Prince of Orange. I have viewed the Tomb in which they are kept,
and indeed, it by its stateliness and variety of Embellishments and
Inscriptions, one is forced to do Justice to his Memory. That of Admiral Tromp
is likewise erected in the same Place.

MAESLAND-SLVYS
Is Remarkable for its situation at the Mouth of the Rhine: It is a very
delightful Object to see this Noble River flowing thither with such a mass of
Water; so that one might avouch that being tired with its Course, it came on
purpose to expatiate, and to take rest in this Plain, where it loses its form
to make a kind of little Sea, which assumes the name of the Maes, by reason
that the adjacent Territory belongs to the District of that River.

We embarkt at the

BRIEL,
Which stands a little beyond, to make our Passage from thence. This was one of
the Cautionary Towns which were formerly consigned to Queen Elizabeth, when She
sent her Forces to the assistance of the Hollanders against Spain. We had an
opportunity of beholding at our Leisure one of the finest shows in the World:
For the Dutch Fleet drawn up in the Line of Battle possessed the whole Passage,
and although we could discern no other Object round about us than that of War,
yet nothing was so peaceful as our Road. Thus we enjoyed in safety what can
scarce be seen elsewhere without Danger, and it seemed as if good Fortune had
peopled this spacious Desert on purpose to divert us, and to take off the
tediousness of our Voyage. This vast Element lying in profound tranquillity
seemed as it were to humble it self at the formidable appearance of that Naval
Army. But it is not always so gentle (My Lord) it sometimes resumes its Rage,
and sports it self with that arrogant Fury, driving those huge Machines before
it, as the Wind does the Dust. We were informed that this Fleet was fitted out
to prevent the Designs that were feared on the side of France; and without
troubling ourselves any farther with State Affairs we continued our course
through the Thames.

But I ought to remember that I am directing my Discourse to Your Most Serene
Highness, who is better versed in the Knowledge of the Affairs of Europe, and
has received a clearer Information from History alone, of the Particulars
contained in my Letter, than myself who have examined 'em with the strictest
Inquiry that could be made. Therefore this Present which I make Your Highness
is much less mine than a Recapitulation of Your own Lights, which I bring to
Your Memory. And indeed, this is all that can be offered to a Prince who is
ignorant of nothing, and that I durst attempt to produce as a public
Demonstration that I am,

MY LORD, Your Most Serene Higness's Most humble and Most obedient Servant,
CHARLES PATIN.

THE FOURTH RELATION To His Most Serene Highness, Antony Vlrick, Duke of
BRUNSWICK and LUNENBURG.
MY LORD,
IT is a very great Honor to me that Your Most Serene Highness condescends so
far as to be mindful of me, and that too with signal marks of Magnificence;
that my Desires are prevented; that I am loaded with Favors; and that Your
Highness has thought fit to attribute to the single Opinion you have conceived
of me, what might well serve as a Recompense for an extraordinary Merit and for
much more considerable Services. I cannot but be surpised at it, I confess,
and not daring to penetrate into the depth of Your Judgment, am constrained to
set a greater value upon myself, notwithstanding the vanity of such Thoughts.
Indeed (My Lord) it is to partake of somewhat of that exquisit discerning
Faculty, to know how to esteem You, as I do: The Luster of Grandeur is apt to
dazzle common Eyes, but does not always cause admiration in those that have
been well enlightened: For neither that Highness of Birth, nor that Illustrious
Rank which Your Most Serene Highness holds in the Empire, is capable of
commanding my Attention; so many rare Endowments, so many Divine Characters
imprinted on Your Noble Mind, are the only Charms that attract my Eyes: And
this Prospect (My Lord) being always fixed upon the most Heroic Points of
Antiquity, does not cease to have a particular regard to to Your admirable
Perfections. I could even presume to avouch, that I have discerned in Your
Person more excellent Qualities than I have ever read of; but I shall not
enlarge any farther upon this copious Theme.

Your Highness is a Lover of Curiosity: How fortunate is the Destiny! how happy
is the Inclination! that a Prince should be induced to recreate himself so
pleasantly, and that that interval of Leisure which happens after the
Transaction of the most important Affairs of State, should refine his Mind and
augment its Vigor: For these sorts of Studies serve to divert without amusing,
and to employ without confining; always retaining the Animal Spirits in a
convenient Elevation without Disturbance, and in Activity without any Fatigues.
Curiosity is the second Employment of Heroes, but more especially that of
Medals: These everlasting Monuments, these little Sanctuaries of the Memory of
illustrious Personages; these sacred Pledges of Virtue and Glory, show us the
most beautiful Idea's of Antiquity, and discover 'em in their innate
simplicity; insomuch that they may be seen as they really are in their entire,
Luster and Perfection. They are properly so many Pieces of Metal, animated as
it were with a secret Life that does not take its rise from the Workman; but
proceeds from I know not what Energy communicated from the incomparable
Originals to their Images. This is not the Thing it self but the Quintessence
of it, neither is it a representation of the Man but of the Demi-God. What
delight is there (My Lord) in taking an Estimate of Your Qualities from those
great Examples which seem as yet to have an influence over their Copies; to
judge of them by You, and to observe in them that which You find in Yourself?
To discover at first sight that all Ages have had their Heroes; and if some
have been more renowned than others, it is because the Occasions were more
opportune, and not in regard that their Endowments were not equally conspicuous.

History supplies us with a Relation of past Occurrences and produces the
particular circumstances of Time, but the exact Truth and the nicest Points are
often wanting; or the manner of Expression does not furnish us with a true Idea
of the nature of the Things, as they appear in the Medal. This is not a proper
Place to discourse of every Particular that we know on this Subject; but give
me leave (My Lord) to declare, that I have not met with so many Ingenious
Lovers of Curiosity elsewhere as in Germany. This part of Europe, which has
peopled all the others, has reserved the best Treasures to it self; so that it
may well be affirmed that the rest is only the Refuse, and in the comparison we
shall always find a very great inequality. It is true indeed that there are
some more fashionable People, whose Manners are more polite, and that would
have the advantage if they were seen only once or twice, so that it seems as if
their studied Regularity served only to cover their Deformities, and perhaps
Your Most Serene Highness may have already made this Reflection that even where
no solid Judgment is to be found, there appears a kind of modish Air or
affected Gallantry, which dazzles the Eyes; at least I have often observed it
in France. Again, where no sense of Honor nor real Generosity is to be met
with, there is a studious affectation of Civil Carriage, and a certain number
of Cadences which seem to supply the defect, and to afford some satisfaction
but are really nothing less than Virtue. The Germans (My Lord) are more Grave
and naturally endu'd with a great deal of Solidity: They are what they appear
to be, but in regard that they do not appear at first sight altogether as they
are, much Skill or at least Application is requisite, to discover their Merit.
Among them more especially, good Nature and Courtesy are in their natural
Purity, and their Integrity of manners is altogether plain without any
adulterate mixture or disguise; which is every where the Character of a
generous and free Temper, that cannot endure Affectation. These People are
ready to perform whatever they undertake in good earnest, without putting
themselves to any trouble to find out agreeable and specious manners of setting
about the Work; so that a Man may soon know when they bear good will toward him
and when not: In short, to make use of the Terms of one of our Ministers of
State: The Heart never appears there in Mascarade, but Sincerity and Candor
are the distinguishing Marks of the Country. Tacitus had declared as much
sixteen hundred years ago, Nullos mortalium armis aut fide ante Germanos esse.
i. e. None ever surpassed the Germans in Valor and Fidelity.

It is of no great importance to know, whether the Love of Curiosity be common
among 'em, upon account of that natural Inclination they have for Truth, which
is discovered in it as it were in its source; or by reason of that severity of
Temper, which of all the Divertisements of the Mind, induces 'em to make choice
of the noblest and most profitable. However, it is certain that Curiosity is
most honored and sought for by the best means in those Parts, and I have every
where found this Disposition predominant. I shall here subjoyn some Discoveries
which have been made by me in my last Journey, which Gratitude obliges me to
consecrate to Your Most Serene Highness, not being able at present to do any of
greater moment for Your Service.

I shall begin then with Kniebis in Schwaben. What a prodigious Mountain is
this (My Lord)! Its vast height, which leaves the Clouds far below it, and set
my Feet almost in Heaven, surpised me less than the two Seasons, which I saw
there at the same time, and at the distance only of four Paces one from
another, that is to say, Heat and Cold met together, which every where else
make so great a noise over our Heads; the Reason (as they say) is, because they
cannot agree in a Neutral Country, but although they be neighbors, yet if each
be detained in its respective Region, nothing is more quiet and calm. If this
Observation in Natural Philosophy be true, I am content to referr myself to it;
however, I very well remember that I was frozen and broiled within a Moment
without hearing any such Noise.

I left the Prodigy soon after, in order to pass to Wirtemberg. The Hills
thereabouts appeared to me the finest and most delightful in the World, being
altogether beset with Vineyard Plots and Cornfieldsd. These plentiful Crops by
I know not what Disposition caused by the situation of the Country, form a most
pleasant Land-skip on all sides, and a kind of Regularity which is extremely
surprising. The Inhabitants are very sociable; perhaps, because they are
supplied with all manner of Conveniences. Thus a good accommodation at home
naturally inspires us with sentiments of Civility toward Strangers, but these
People owe part of this Domestic happiness to the Generosity of their Prince,
so that one cannot cast an Eye upon 'em, without every were perceiving the
marks of the Gentleness of his Government. Power and Authority are only exerted
in Protection and Discipline, and this is the only use that is there made of
Sovereignty; so that I am apt to believe, nothing more is needful for the
eternizing of his Memory. How difficult it is to use absolute Power with so
much moderation; and what a degree of Constancy and Magnanimity (My Lord) is
requisite to attempt nothing when one is in capacity of doing every thing, and
to maintain the exercise of so many Virtues amidst all the bad Examples of the
degenerate Age! I shall stop here without extending my Reflection any farther,
which would be too hard a Task. The Rarities of the College of

TVBINGVEN
Are more agreeable to my Inclination, and I am desirous of mentioning 'em to
Your most Serene Highness, as being one of the principal Ornaments of
Wirtemberg. Every thing is there conformable to the illustrious name which it
bears: The Building with its outer-Courts and Embellishments is Magnificent; it
is also very spacious, and its Appartments well ordered for the convenience of
all those sorts of Schools and public Exercises which are there performed.
There are diverse Masters, not only endu'd with singular Abilities, but also
with all manner of Politeness and Courtesy, so that the Scholars under 'em
soon make a considerable progress in all the parts of Humane Literature. Their
Tables are not only plenfully furnished with all sorts of necessary Provisions,
but even with Dainties: The Division of Time is so well managed, that that
exact distribution of Hours for every particular Employment, forms a settled
Custom, which becomes very agreeable to the Disposition of the Students;
insomuch that it appears less to be a regular Discipline than a well ordered
Liberty. But in regard that every thing is established upon a Noble Foundation,
none but Persons of the highest Quality can be admitted into that College;
neither is there any Mixture allowed. For it is alleged that in that tender Age
a mean Air would prove contagious, and those marks of Distinction which inspire
'em with a sense of their good Fortune, afterward induces 'em to assume that
Majestic Air, which ought to be the Character of their high Station. Thus (My
Lord) without running into the common Road amidst the Crowd of ignoble and
vulgar People, they attain to the most absolute Accomplishments, and pass over
with the same steps to the Court, and to the most Honorable Employments either
in Church or State; neither do they stand in need of any other Medium or of
being educated in any other Schools or Academies. M. de Merlay, who is de Chief
Governor, as also M. May and M. Cramer Professors, are Persons of
extraordinary Merit, and no small Ornaments to the College. I shall always lie
under an Obligation even during my whole Life to His Most Serene Highness the
Duke of Wirtemberg, for permitting me to reside there for sometime, and to take
notice at my leisure of this curious manner of Institution.

After my departure from Tubinguen I set forward to

STVGART.
There to pay those Respects which were due from me to His Most Serene
Highness, and to assure him that whatever I might be capable of doing for his
Service, I should never have reason to be satisfied with my performances:
However, that though this Inability were the effect of my Misfortune, yet it
should never proceed from my Ingratitude: His Highness was pleased to give me
leave to augment his Treasure with some Medals that I had brought. The fine
Place where they are deposited and the good company that they enjoy is
sufficient to take away any regret they might have for the loss of their first
Master: And indeed, I am much better pleased to see 'em in so Illustrious Hands
than in my own. His Highness often visits 'em, and I doubt not, but that his
Inclination attracts (as I may so say) the greater part of His Most Serene
Family. The Princes his Sons are all well proportioned in their Bodies and have
singular Endowments of the Mind; so that Time, that is to say Age is only
wanting to cause 'em to be admired by all Europe. I saw at

NIEVSTADT
Another Repository, but it would be improper for me to commend it, because
it is almost entirely the Work of my own hands, or at least the Product of my
Invention. His most Serene Highness Duke Frederick takes as much delight in it
as it deserves, and often diverts himself there with much satisfaction. I have
been told that the Duchess has a favorable regard to those that afford her
these pleasant Entertainments, and that She was not offended at my Visits.
Perhaps also She may be somewhat addicted to Curiosity, and that being Sister
to Your Most Serene Highness, Her Inclination may lead her to such kind of
Divertisements; however, if She be not curious in Medals, She is so at least in
Jewels. I have seen in Her Appartment a precious Chest, that weighs more than
myself, in which is contained nothing but Diamonds, Emeralds and Pearls. This
is a very rare sort of Curiosity, but it is not exposed to the view of all
manner of Persons. For although it is capable of affording an Universal Delight,
and is admired as well by the Ignorant as by the Learned and Ingenious; yet
it is esteemed as a very great Privilege to get a sight of it. To conclude,
nothing is here wanting, either with respect to Nobility, Ingenuity, Curiosity,
Riches or even Happiness it self. I should have seen at

ANSPACH.
Some very considerable Rarities; but it fell out unluckily for me that the
Prince was gone to pay a Visit to that beautiful Marchioness of Durlach, whom
he afterward took to Wife. But I arrived so much the sooner at

NOREMBERG or NVRNBERG,
A City that has acquired so great Reputation, and deserves as much. Which of
these two (My Lord) would Your Highness think fit to prefer Noremberg or
Augsburg? Indeed they both bear away the Bell from the other Cities of Germany,
in regard of their Beauty, Extent, Neatness, Concourse of People, and the
Magnificence of their Buildings. The Marquess of Durlach, to whom they are both
well known, finds Augsburg more stately in some Places, but declares at the
same time that Noremberg is all over Beautiful. I observed it to be well
situated and full of civilized People, but that which afforded me greater
satisfaction is, that Curiosity is there very much in vogue, that it supplies
the place of Neatness and Elegancy, being not only sufficiently known, but also
highly esteemed among the Inhabitants. I saw in the House of M. de Viatis an
infinite number of Rarities, and every thing that is proper to be admitted into
the Musoeum or Repository of an Ingenious Antiquary, viz. Books, Paintings,
Medals, etc. But his Eagerness, transport of Passion, Frenzy or whatever else
you please to call it, is much to be admired in one particular, that is to say,
in heaping up a prodigious Mass of Arms, which are more especially remarkable,
either upon account of the Work-manship or for some notable Historical
Circumstance. He showed me the Sword that put Olden-Barnveldt to silence, and
in that point did more than even the whole Power of the House of Austria was
able to effect. And indeed, the very sight of it would be sufficient to
affright the boldest Orator. He also presented to my view that which was
employed in cutting off so many Heads at Prague during the Rebellion, and the
Partizan which pierced the Body of Walstein at Agria. This last Weapon
attracted my Eyes, and obliged me to make some Reflections upon the Destiny of
this formidable Favorite; who could have imagined that so firm a settlement of
Grandeur, so great Authority and Power could be so suddenly quashed with so
very little difficulty! The whole World was in expectation of the event of his
Enterprises; the Empire trembled at his Proceedings, and Foreigners were ready
to ground upon his Designs the establishment of all their Affairs: In a word,
preparations were making even to change the very frame of the Universe, when a
blow given by a pitiful Fellow cast him to the Ground, and there was no longer
any talk of this great Man.

There are also to be seen the Arms of the most Potent Princes of the last Age:
I know not whether it were a turn of my Imagination; but it seemed to me (My
Lord) as if that sparkling Luster which darted forth on all sides, was less the
brightness of the Metal than the Reflection of so many fierce Blows and
Heroical Atchievments. Indeed there is nothing that imprints a more lively Idea
on the Mind than these sorts of Objects; but perhaps the Difficulty that there
is in gathering together such precious spoils, hinders the Curiosity from being
so common.

As for the Medals, there are not very many of the first rank, but others are
to be met with almost every where, and in the Hands of all sorts of Persons;
whether the Love of Curiosity has made the Collection; or whether Wealth which
always brings along with it whatever is most precious, has conveyed 'em
thither. However, M. Wolkamer enjoys a better share of 'em than others, and
Your Highness may Judge of it by this Pattern, being a Golden Julio with the
reverse of Augustus, which I have obtained by his Liberality. He is a very able
Physician, and endowed with all those excellent Qualities that procure Esteem
and Reputation. I might also associate with him M. Noberlein an Apothecary of
more than ordinary Parts, who has a Library and a Repository, and whose
personal Endowments set him above all those whom I know of his Profession: I
received from him that curious Golden Medal of Constantine, which has this
Inscription: VICTOR OMNIUM GENTIUM.

There are many Learned Men in this City; Antiquity, History, Politics,
Eloquence, and the Mechanical Arts are there in a flourishing State. Much time
might be spent in entertaining Your Most Serene Highness, if I should go about
to call to mind every thing that might be said upon this Subject. I shall only
add one word concerning M. Grundler, a Monk, who (as he says) had lately
embraced the Reformed Religion, according to the Doctrine of Luther: But to
justify to me the change of his opinion it would be requisite for him to have
as much command over Men's Reason, as he has over their Eyes, to which he
represents whatever he thinks fit, and in any manner whatever at his pleasure;
for he is absolutely Master of the most abstruse Secrets in Optics. This is
that Art (My Lord) which is capable of fixing half the World in a Point, and
which has found out means to extract visual Repercussions out of Crystal, and
to draw near the most remote Objects by certain Re-productions of Species and
Correspondences of Prospects, which are extended in the most limited spaces
from the Distances as far as the Eye can reach. In short, it is that fallicious
Art that deceives our Sight, and which with the Rule and Compass disorders all
our Senses. But our Artist proceeds yet farther; for he can even remove Ghosts
from their Stations at his pleasure, without any assistance from the Infernal
Regions. Some mention has been already made to Your Most Serene Highness of
that Sphoerical Looking-glass, which receives the several Species of remote
Objects through a small Thread of light, and which rolling about in the dark,
imprints 'em on it, and causes 'em to follow its Motion; so that real Phantoms
and Ghosts are now no longer sensible of the other World. I know diverse Persons
of great courage who have changed pale at the sight of these Sports and of
these Magical Artifices.

And with M. Grundler's good leave, all the Esteem that I had of his profound
Learning, was not able to free me from that Dread which seized upon my Spirits
on that occasion; insomuch that I was apt to believe that there never was in
the World a greater Magitian than he: For it seemed to me as if I had a sight
of Paradise, of Hell and of wandering Spirits and Phantoms, so that although I
know myself to be endu'd with some measure of Resoluteness, yet at that time I
would willingly have given one half to save the other: All these Apparitions
suddenly disappeared and gave place to Shows of another Nature: For in a
moment, I saw the Air filled with all sorts of Birds, almost after the same
manner as they are usually painted round about Orpheus, and in the twinkling of
an Eye, a Country-Wedding appeared to my view, with so ^atural and lively a
representation that I imagined myself to be one of the Guests at the Solemnity.
Afterward ^he Horizon of my sight was taken up with a Palace so stately, that
nothing ^ike it can be produced, but in the Imagination; before which there
were di^^rs Personages running at the Ring: These Heroes seemed to be the Gods
^h^t were adored by Antiquity, and among them 'twas pleasant to observe ^^mus
mounted upon a Barbary-Horse, and making Satirical Reflections upon Jupiter,
who had made a false step amidst so jolly a company. But let us put an end to
these Visions and endeavor to divert Your Most Serene Highness with somewhat
that is more solid.

Although private Persons are very rich at Noremberg; yet it may be affirmed that
the State is infinitely more magnificent. This is what I have observe d in the
Republics which I have seen, and is a Quality essential for their
Preservation. The Arsenal of this City is very well furnished, and capable of
affording Arms to nine or ten thousand Men at an instant: The Court is a most
noble Pile of Building, adorned with a vast quantity of valuable Paintings,
among which that of this great Duke deservedly holds the first Rank; and the
Castle, which is supposed to have been built in the time of Drusus, answers
well the reputation of its Antiquity. From the best Quarter, which serves upon
occasion as an Appartment for the Emperors, the whole City may be discovered,
and (if one may be allowed to say so) an entirely perfect Horizon: For there is
nothing in the adjacent Plains to bound the sight, and the weakness of the Eye
only hinders it from taking a farther Prospect. One may judge of the Height of
this Place by the Detpth of its Well; which is so great that a very long Story
may be told during the time that a Stone is thrown into it e're the noise of
its fall be heard: Insomuch that this Interval is surprising, and I doubt
whether that Well of Joseph so much celebrated in ancient Histories, and Modern
Narratives, deserves more Consideration; at least I have no mind to go thither
to take the Dimensions of it, on purpose to make the Comparison. I saw in the
House of a private Cityzen those curious Brazen Figures which the Magistrates
had caused to be cast, to adorn the Fountain of the great Marketplace:
certainly this must needs have been the Work-manship of the Gods and not of
Men, or at least these Statues were made by Giants: For that of Neptune
weighing three thousand and three hundred Pounds, is alone sufficient to brain
more people than all the Giants of the Fable, and it is in my opinion one of the
finest Masterpieces of the Age:

The public Library after those of the Emperor and the King is the finest
that I have seen; for the Manuscripts and Miniatures very much surpass others,
and its small Embellishments render it more delightful and profitable: They are
the Portraitures of Learned Men, diverse Skeletons of many different Animals,
and some of those Natural Curiosities, which elevate the Mind at the same time
as they instruct it. The Ingenious M. Wolkamer has furnished this Library with
part of these Rarities, and left an Example worthy to be imitated by others. I
received Information here of the Honor that the Senate had done me in making a
Present to me of certain Medals, which they had sent to Paris for my use;
whereupon I was overjoyed and ready to make all manner of Acknowledgments for
so great a favor, although I had not as yet those Treasures in my own possession.

It was requisite that the Plenty of Noremberg should be divided, and therefore
the University is settled at

ALTORF,
Where the Liberal Arts and Sciences flourish with all manner of splendor; the
curious Public Library being the foundation of these Studies and the
Professors the Instruments. M. Hofman there teaches the Art of Physic with
great success; but M. Wagenseil more particularly applies himself to the study
of the Hebrew Tongue and of the Divinity of the Jews. How great delight would
the great Scaliger have taken in conferring with him about so many Difficulties
relating to their Law and the Talmud, with which his Noble Mind was so much
taken up! None ever attained to so profound skill in these matters since the
Nativity of Jesus Christ, and since Scaliger's time (as I am apt to believe)
none has advanced the knowledge of 'em so far. This most Ingenious Person takes
much delight in the viewing of Medals, and is well versed in the method of
distinguishing 'em: I am also indebted to his Courtesy for a Greek one of
Gordianus, coined at Byzantium, which I shall publish at a convenient
opportunity.

At the distance of about three days Journey from Noremberg stands

BAREIT.
It is a small Town which with its adjacent Territory serves as an Inheritance
to a Prince of the House of Brandenburg. He who is at present Master of it, at
first took to Wife the Daughter of the Elector of Saxony, and afterward
married that of the Duke of Wirtemberg, namely Sophia, that prudent, judicious
and magnificent Princess: She is highly honor d by all those who know her,
because her Merit requires it, and even in regard that she is much addicted to
Curiosity. Her Repository is as it were a Sore-house of Golconda; I saw there,
all those choice precious Stones, which are usually taken out of the Mines of
that Country, and among others one longer and broader than my Eye, very thick
and perfectly clear; It is a Diamond of great value by reason of its
extraordinary beauty and weight. If the Town of Bareit be so rich in its
Repository it is no less so in its Wine-Cellar: I have been there (My Lord) and
should not have been able to return from thence, if I had followed the Advice
of those that conducted me thither. Perhaps Ulysses would not have been so
sober at his departure from this Place, as when he left Circe's enchanted
Island; for here he would have met with the Liquors of his own native soil,
accompanied with all the Delicates of the Western Countries: Indeed these kinds
of Rencounters sometimes put a stop to the carrying on of the most generous
Designs. I have been informed that the Prince spares no costs in making those
agreeable Provisions, as neither does the Princess in adorning her Cabinet of
Jewels.

This delectable store of Rarities and Riches did no longer retard my Journey
than during so much time as was requisite to take a view of 'em. Afterward I
set forward to Saxony and arrived at

JENA,
Where I saw that so flourishing University, to which all the Students of the
North usually resort to pay their first Hommages. There are above 3000. of 'em,
and it is probable that their number would be augmented if the profound Peace
which they now enjoy should drive away all suspicion of a future War. Otherwise
a small Commotion would be sufficient to terrify the Muses, and I am afraid
that at the very first discharge of a Cannon they would all quit their claim to
their Mount Parnassus. However, the Prince who is of the House of Saxony causes
this University to be enlarged, and leaves no means unessay'd that may tend to
increase its ancient Splendor. I was there acquainted with two very eminent
Professors, viz. M. Rolfinus and M. Bosius, the former is very Famous for his
skill in the Art of Physic, and the other for that of History: But I have
reason to fear that they will not long possess those honorable Stations, one
of 'em being very old, and extremely indisposed; neither does the other enjoy a
much greater degree of Health, although he be much younger. This M. Bosius has
diverse considerable Medals and is well versed in the knowledge of 'em; He
permitted me to draw with a Pen some Copies, which may one day be of use to the
Republic of Learning, and in the mean while serve to adorn my Manuscripts.

Give me leave (My Lord) to represent to You a Character of this Prince in a
few Words, who notwithstanding his Youth is endu'd with as much Judgment as the
most accomplished; so that nothing seems to be wanting to him but an occasion
of making known his excellent Endowments to the World. He has a particular
respect for France and its Natives, and speaks their Language as politely as
the Persons of Quality at Paris and in the French Court: The Duchess his Wife
was born Duchess of Trimouille, and apparently promotes this Inclination. What
shall I say in commendation of her Virtue and generous Temper, which were not
sufficiently known either in France or Germany? The Ermine which I gave for her
Device may discover somewhat of it in these Words CANDOR MIHI SUFFICIT UNUS.

WEIMAR,
Which is situated in the Neighborhood communicates its name to a Branch of
the House of Saxony to distinguish it from the Electoral. It is a Town of a
moderate largeness, whose Palace nevertheless is extremely spacious and
Magnificent. That Hall in which are painted the memorable Actions of Duke
Bernard is the stateliest that I have seen in Germany. If nothing can be made
finer to delight the Eye than this piece of Work-manship; it may be justly
affirmed that another Chamber is contrived on purpose to divert the Mind, where
those Persons who stand in the middle, cannot hear so much as one Word that is
spoken by those that are placed at the ends. One would suspect it to be a
Magical Artifice, and indeed, it is very surprising, yet it is only a Device of
Architecture, which conveys the sound of the Voice along the concave Line of
the arched Roof to the other end, without dispersing it through the great Vacuum
of the spacious Chamber. But my Mind was taken up with much more melancholy
Thoughts, as I was traveling from Jena to Leipsick through those vast Plains,
which seem as yet to reek with that prodigious quantity of Blood which was
spilt there about forty years ago. What strange Idea's then presented
themselves to my Imagination! There was slain (as they told me) the great
Gustavus; there Papenheim was wounded; there he died in bringing him back to
Leipsick; there was planted the Artillery of the Imperialists, and there that
of the Swedes; there was the main Battle, and the greatest slaughter, and there
were interred the nine or ten thousand Men that remained in the Field. All the
Towns round about will for a long time bear the lamentable Marks of this
furious War. It seemed as if I there saw 'em all together; so that Lutzen,
Namburg and Weissenfeld in particular possess d my Mind much longer than my
Eyes.

It is known to all Merchants, that there are great Fairs kept at

LEIPSICK.
Although Learned Men are sufficiently informed of the Constitutions of its
University, yet they have not so good an Account of its Curiosities. I there
viewed the Repository of Burgomaster Laurents full of all sorts of Rarities:
But his House is a Palace, which is more valuable than the Repository: His
Daughter is esteemed as a very virtuous Gentlewoman, who is well skilled in
various Sciences and knows how to express 'em in several Languages; which rare
Qualities may be sufficient to set a higher value upon her Person than upon the
House and Repository. I had also a fight of diverse Medals in some other Places,
and among others in the renowned Musoeum of M. Meyer, which is to be exposed to
sale; but if every thing that I have been told concerning this Repository be
true, I had as many Ducates about me as would be sufficient to pay for the
Purchase. One of those Persons who showed me these Rarities, and is in part
Heir to 'em, was very angry at me, when he heard me say, that his Copper-Medals
of Otho were not Genuine: But he was so firmly persuaded to the contrary, that
I was very near receiving an Affront as the Reward of my too ingenuous
Sincerity, besides the disappointment of being deprived of the sight of the
rest. This unlucky Accident made me take a Resolution not to speak so much as
one word for the future when I met with people of such a peevish Humor, and
not to declare the Truth upon the like occasions, till I were ready to depart
from the Place. However, there is to be seen a large sized Copper-Medal of
Julia the Wife of Augustus, which in my mind, would be the most precious of
this Repository, if I had no grounds to suspect it to be counterfeit: Its
Consecration is apparent from the Figure of a Peacock and the Inscription.
Besides these there are some other good Gold and Silver Medals of which I took
a Memorandum, but eight hundred Crowns were demanded for 'em, which is a
greater sum of Money than I was willing to lay out upon such an Account.

WITTEMBERG
Is a fair City well fortified both by Nature and Art, and adorned with an
University: But the Students in Divinity are not there endu'd with so much
Moderation as in the other Places where the same Religion is predominant: They
are more rude and (as I durst avouch it) more outrageous than elsewhere. In the
Church of the Castle they take delight in showing to Strangers the Sancta
Sanctorum of the High Altar despoiled of every thing that it contained. Ossa
Sanctorum debent quiescere: i. e. The Bones of the Saints ought to lie at rest:
(say they) We have buried under that Stone hard by, all the Relics which the
Papists were wont to adore there, and this was one of the first effects of our
Reformation. I likewise saw diverse Paintings rather scandalous than edifying,
and one among others in which the Painter has introduced Doctor Martin Luther
and D. Philip Melancthon administering the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; on
their left hand is a Representation of Hell through the wide mouth of a Fiend, in
the inside of which appears a Pope attended with Cardinals, Prelates and Monks,
I could not forbear asking the Person that conducted me, whether that were a
Place dediceted to Divine Service, and whether these Pictures inspired those
People with Devotion? In the same Church are erected two very stately Brazen
Statues of the two Dukes and Electors of Saxony, Frederick III. and John: The
former founded the University of Wittemberg, changing the Religion of his
Country, but the other completed the Work, and presented his Confession of
Faith to the Emperor Charles V. at Augsburg. I stayed in this Place so much
the more willingly to take a view of two admirable Paintings of Albert Durer,
and of two Portraitures of Luther and Melancthon, as large as the Life, drawn
by Lucas Cranis, which are placed over against 'em and above their Tombs. There
are also some other Pieces of the same Painter, but none so odd as that which I
saw in the principal Church of the City, which is as it were the Parochial. It
is drawn by an excellent Artist and represents our Savior Jesus Christ
followed by St. Peter and some other Apostles who fell into the Hands of Judas
and the Jews: Your Highness could never imagine what manner of Ornaments are
appropriated to 'em: For our Savior's Person appears wearing a Triple Crown
upon his Head, exactly as the Pope is painted at Rome, and those that accompany
him are clothed in the Habit of Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, etc. Is this a
true representation of the Jews who betrayed and delivered up Jesus Christ?
nevertheless this is their meaning. I have seen many Lutherans elsewhere, and
have always found 'em more moderate. Indeed Reproaches serve only to
exasperate the Minds of People and to excite Hatred and Animosities, and what
can be expected in the end, but all sorts of Calamities? I am much rather
inclined to pronounce with a low voice, Doce nos Deus vias tuas, etc. O Lord
teach us thy Statutes. Upon the whole, the Memory of Dr. Luther is extremely
honored in that Country; so that the Inhabitants have a great Veneration for
the Places through which he passed; the Chambers where he slept; the Books that
he read, and the Gardens where he walked: They have likewise given his name to a
certain Spring, which is distant about a mile from the City, because he was
often wont to repair thither to study and to hold Conferences with his Friends
concerning the Reformation which he was about to introduce.

We continued our Journey very speedily to

BERLIN.
Although the extent of the Country be very large, yet Travelers are wont to
ride post upon this Road in Chariots that run incessantly day and night;
neither is there any rest to be taken but only to change the Horses. I was
delivered from this Fatigue as soon as I saw Berlin, and every thing there
appeared so beautiful to me, that I fancied there was a kind of opening in the
Firmament, through which the Sun dispensed its most benign Influences to this
Territory; neither are those dismal Solitudes to be seen any longer, through
which I had lately traveled. The City is composed as it were of three others,
whose Buildings are very regular, and for the most part after the Italian
method of Architecture. The Forest which is situated at the distance only of
half a mile from thence, affords much delight to the Prince, who maintains in
it numerous Herds of Deer and all sorts of Game; where he often diverts
himself with Hunting, after such an extraordinary and pleasant manner, as very
few Persons are capable of apprehending it: I have even heard it reported, that
he knows so precisely the very moment when the wild Bore is ready to pass by,
that he leaps upon his back as it were that of a Horse, and sitting astride
stabbs the Beast under him. This circumstance alone is sufficient to strike
terror into my Mind, and none can bear such Affection toward this Prince as I
do, without fearing at least the Misfortunes that may happen to his Noble
Person, by exposing it to so desperate an Adventure; Therefore I would
willingly give him the same Advice that Venus once did to her beloved Adonis:
-- In audaces non est audacia tuta,
Neve feras quibus arma dedit natura, lacesse;
Fulmen habent acres in aduncis dentibus apri.
The Gardens are there full of Orange and Lemmon Trees, Jasmin and all kinds of
Flowers, and in a word, afford all those charming Delights which have procured
Italy, the Royal style of Queen of Countries, by reason of the advantage of its
Climate and the fruitfulness of its Soil.

The Castle in which his Electoral Highness resides, is a very ancient Fabric,
and its Architecture shows a kind of Majestic Air; but the modern Buildings
joined to it are most commodious. The Library is there placed in so magnificent
an Appartment, that I know none that surpasses it in Beauty. Indeed it well
deserves so advantageous a situation, for it is one of the finest and most
complete in the World, both as to the number and choice of the Books of which
it consists: The Cabinet of Medals that accompanies it, in like manner may well
be thought worthy to be viewed by all ingenious Lovers of Curiosity. His
Electoral Highness, who is entirely addicted to the administration of the
Government does not cease nevertheless to allow some time for the completing
of this Collection. One would scarce imagine how great a progress he has made
in the Work, only within his own Territories about Wesel, Santen and Cleves,
where a great quantity of these Medals has been found, and (what is most
important) even of those that are very rare: That of Cornuficius is of this
number, than which I never saw a finer, but I shall not here produce a
particular Description of any of 'em: I have Memorandum's of those that are
most valuable, and these Notes are as good luck would have it, very
considerable; nay I have even delineated with a Pen those that I judged to be
singular: But they were so numerous, that I was obliged another day to desire
leave to employ myself in the same Work: I remember that I spent the second
time five or six hours in the enjoyment of this agreeable Diversion, and that I
very much enriched my Manuscripts with those Rarities; But although I had
observed only the tenth part of 'em, yet I should have thought my Journey
undertaken to very good purpose. The custody of these choice Treasures is
committed to M. Heimhach, who is a very great Admirer of 'em, and I doubt not
but that he contributes, as far as his utmost Abilities will admit, to the
satisfaction of which the Elector his Master is desirous in these Matters.
Indeed this Prince is as exact in his scrutiny as is possible, which is
apparently the effect of the skill that he has acquired in such Curiosities,
and of the sagacity of his Judgment. He did me the Honor once to tell me, that
he took great delight in this Employment, and that he would spend more time in
it, as soon as the more important Affairs of State could allow him so much
leisure. However, (My Lord) the Season was very improper for the carrying on of
our Studies; in regard that then there was no talk in Berlin, nor even in the
whole Marquisate, but of the Passage and Levies of Soldiers. In this
Conjuncture all Europe had regard to his Electoral Highness's Conduct; it was
also well known that the Hollanders did not hope for a more potent nor more
ready Protector, and that the Assistance he afforded 'em; was sufficient to
prevent, or at least to deferr their Ruin. His memorable Actions performed not
long since, have gained him so great renown in Poland and Sweden, that his very
name alone is capable of supporting the Interest of that Party which he shall
think fit to favor. In a word, he is a Prince of an admirable Genius, insomuch
that I never saw any Man that had not a respect for his Person, and as for my
own part, I must acknowledge that my Affections toward him are most cordial and
sincere: But I ought also to acquaint Your Most Serene Highness that I am more
particularly obliged to the same Prince for the kind Entertainment he afforded
me at Berlin; for the Offers with which he was pleased to honor me, and for
his Generosity in condescending so far as to tell me that he was desirous to
hold a Correspondence with me. I hope this Word may not be offensive to You (My
Lord) His Electoral Highness only thought fit to lay his commands upon me* in
Matters relating to Curiosity, ancient History and Medals, and I have reason to
take it very ill, if my Enemies should seek an occasion from thence to create
me new Troubles: As to those that are past, I doubt not but God, the King and
Time, will do me Justice, and indeed, it might have been already done; but it is
my Duty to wait with Patience.

In the Elector of Brandenburg's Court at Berlin there is another illustrious
Personage, as well versed in Curiosity as any that I know, I mean in the
knowledge of Medals, which we call by way of Excellency the most delicate
Curiosity: He is a Privy Counselor to his Electoral Highness, who has as
great a quantity of Medals in his possession as is possible for a private
Person to procure: Some of 'em are so well preserved that it sufficiently
appears that they belong to a choice Collection which is of a very old
standing. I was acquainted with him in France above twenty years ago, and
notwithstanding his youth I easily foresaw his future Merit; neither were my
expectations deceived in this particular, for his Learning has increased with
his Age, and I doubt whether there be any one besides myself, that takes a
greater delight in Medals than he: This Nobleman has spent some years in Italy
and has traveled through the whole Continent of Germany, and his profound skill
induces me to believe, that he has observed every thing that is necessary to be
taken notice of, in order to constitute an Ingenious, Learned, Judicious and
absolutely accomplished Person. I can also assure Your Highness that he is one
of the most courteous Gentlemen in the World, and I was persuaded that I
should have done an injury to the Honorable M. Seidel, not to have made this
Parenthesis in his favor. I know that he is a Lutheran and a zealous
Professor of the Reformed Religion, but that most inviolable Friendship which
has been always between us, and the Conformity of our Inclinations would never
suffer us to differ though never so little, about the Diversity of our Opinions.

The two young Princes (My Lord) will be one day great Patrons of Curiosity.
Their tender Age receives its form from that of the Heroes with whom they daily
converse, and His Electoral Highness himself is a domestic Model, from whence
they cannot but take very noble Idea's. They have already attained to the
knowledge of diverse Languages, and are very expert in all sorts of Martial
Exercises, neither are they less instructed in those Sciences which are capable
of cultivating their generous Minds. For their several Appartments are rather
loaded than adorned with Books, Geographical Maps, Chronological Tables,
Globes, Sphaeres and Medals. In short, these are the Instruments that work
Miracles by innocently maintaining Magnanimity during Prosperity, and by
supporting it even in Adversity. It is a general Maxim among the Prudent to be
always prepared for all manner of Events, as we learn from the Example of
Hannibal. It is very probable that these Princes may always see Fortune
smiling and incapable of doing 'em any injury; but it is a much more Royal
Praerogative to have Virtue for their familiar Friend and Confident. The Baron
de Swerin principal Minister of State, and a great Patron of the Muses has
inspired 'em with these generous Sentiments, and has done a very signal piece
of Service to His Electoral Highness in so well managing the Dispositions of
these two young Princes, and in so happily following the Advice of Aurelius
Victor; who writes to this effect; Compertum est eruditionem, elegantiam
comitatem, praesertim Principibus necessaria esse; cum sine his naturae bona
quasi incompta aut etiam horrida despectui sint. i. e. It is certain that
Learning, Curiosity and Courteousness are more especially necessary in Princes,
in regard that without these Qualities the Endowments of Nature would appear as
it were unpolished, if not altogether rude and deformed.

Having left the Marquisate of Brandenburg, I entered Saxony, where the Climate
is undoubtedly more temperate, and consequently the Soil more fruitful. I never
saw a finer Garden than that which His Electoral Highness has caused to be
cultivated in the Suburbs of

DRESDEN.
I there saw the Royal Princess of Denmark, married to the Electoral Prince,
who (as they say) takes greater Delight in these Walks than in any other
Divertisements. The Wines of the neighboring Country are most delicious, and
the Beer there brewd is as good as in any part of Germany. There is also more
variety of Game than in any Place in the World, which every where causes good
cheer and plentiful Entertainments. I am very much obliged to Doctor Schubart,
in whose House I lodged, upon this very account, as also for giving me a sight
of the most remarkable Curiosities in the City of Dresden. I would willingly
make no mention of 'em at all, because I am sensible that the most part of what
I have to say as to these Matters is already known, and that I am not capable
of expressing my self sufficiently in their commendation. This City is very
Beautiful, Strong and Rich, not to add, that it is adorned, fortified and
enriched more and more every day, and I have lately perused an advantageous
Description of it in a Book that bears the Title of L'Europe Vivante, but I am
not inclined to make Repetitions. The Palace contains a World of Wonders, a
List of which has been printed, but they are not all comprehended therein.
Seven spacious Chambers are filled with the richest Jewels that Your Highness
can possibly imagine, with a prodigious quantity of Vessels of Rock-Chrystal,
Coral and precious Stones, besides curious Paintings drawn by Albert Durer,
Titian, Lucas Leydensis, Lucas Cranis, Rubens and many other excellent Masters.
I saw there the Life of the Virgin Mary represented by the first of those
Hands, which was carved in Wood, and a large piece of the real Cross upon which
our Savior was crucified.

One may there also observe with much delight the Mechanical Works of diverse
Princes, and it is admirable (My Lord) to behold what Art can produce when
exercised by so noble Hands. Therc is perhaps a greater number of Automata than
in any other place in the World, and those too very large, rich and surprising.
I should have spent much longer time in the Examination of 'em, were it not
that my Mind was taken up with the curious Medals which presented themselves to
my View. M. Beurel, to whose care they are committed, will e're long apply
himself to these kinds of Studies, so that I doubt not but that he will find
sufficient Employment in delineating a considerable number of rare ones which
are there preserved, and in placing 'em in a more regular Order. I could not
get a sight of a little Chest of old Gold, because it is kept in the private
Closet of His Electoral Highness, who was then absent from Dresden, and came
not thither during the whole time of my abode in the Town, but only to lie
there one Night. This rich Treasure is very highly valued and it is probable,
that I should have esteemed it no less if I had had the good fortune of seeing
it. Indeed 'twas no fault of the Barons de Frizen who have there the most
honorable Employments as well as the chiefest Merit; but as I have already
declared, the Prince's Absence alone deprived me of that satisfaction, which I
might have otherwise had. However, I determine to return thither once more on
purpose, and the Delight that I always take in the viewing of Medals is so
great, as to oblige me to resolve upon this Journey; neither have I any regard
to the loss of time or Expenses, whenever I find an opportunity to enrich my
Mind with new Discoveries: I shall then have seen the Repositories of five
Secular Electoral Princes, and perhaps none has so great an insight as myself
into the admirable Curiosities of this Nature.

I know not whether it would be any Divertisement to You (My Lord) to entertain
You with the Rarities contained in a Repository of Druggs. In this case that of
Dresden may well deserve a particular Description: Your Most Serene Highness
may take an Estimate from the number of four thousand-Silver Boxes, of the
prodigious variety of Medicaments with which they are filled: And indeed,
almost as many means are there found out for the reviving of a Man as elsewhere
for his Destruction. There are some Medicinal Compositions of very great
repute; among these I had a taste of that Aqua Vitae which is no less Famous
for its excellency, than splendid by reason of its gilt Papers: In a word, to
say that His Electoral Highness sometimes honors this Repository with his
presence is a sufficient commendation of it. In the same Place are kept diverse
artifact from tomb

artifact from tomb

artifact from tomb

sarcophagus

artifact from tomb

artifact from tomb

artifact from tomb

p. 269.

Mummies of all sorts, and as these kinds of Curiosities are not very useful;
so neither are they destitute of their peculiar Beauty: Of these some are White
and others Black, but the later are generally embalmed, wrapped up in
Swathing-bands, and beset with Idols or the Images of small Animals and other
superstitious Embellishments. I was elsewhere presented with some Rarities of
this kind which were lately dugg out of the Ground under a Pyramid in Egypt:
Perhaps the Representation of 'em may afford some satisfaction to Your Most
Serene Highness, and therefore I have caused a Draught of 'em to be made in a
small compass; but if the Originals be more delightful to You, I shall take it
as a very great Honor that Your Highness will condescend so far as to accept
'em from my Hands.

It is a very singular Object to behold the Repository of Skeletons; for the
Founders of it have taken much pains in causing 'em to be made of all sorts of
Animals, and they are preserved with no less care and circumspection, which is
to procure 'em a kind of Immortality. To these are joined many other sorts of
Rarities, and among others I remember that I have seen a Prodigy. It is a real
Elephant about a Foot long which is avouch'd to be the Foetus of a Woman: Let
the Inquisitive seek for the cause of so strange a product in the effects of a
depray'd Imagination, or in a Crime, which it is much more expedient to conceal
than to suspect; yet it always seems to be supernatural: Pliny produces the
like Example in these Terms. Alcippe Elephantum peperit, quod inter ostenta
est. Alcippe was delivered of an Elephant, which ought to be reckoned among the
Prodigies of Nature.

As for the different kinds of living Creatures, I never saw so great a
multitude before, and can scarce believe that there are so many elsewhere;
neither perhaps does Africa produce so great a number of Monsters. The Elector
who delights in this Curiosity, caused 'em to be transported thither, both from
the Eastern and Western Countries, but the most part of 'em come out of his own
Territories. There is not finer Hunting in the World than hereabouts, so that
sometimes above a thousand wild Bores are destroyed in one Day. Indeed his
Electoral Highness takes very great delight in these sports, and lays out
greater expenses about 'em than any other Prince in Germany: I could not
forbear admiring the Keeper of these Beasts, who uses 'em at his pleasure. You
would be apt to affirm that Wolves, Lions, Bears, Linxes, Tigres, Leopards,
etc. lose their whole fury at the very sight of him, at least they are no
longer wild whilst they continue in his presence. One of the greatest Noblemen
of Carthage was heretofore expelled that City, only because he had tamed a
Lion; so jealous were those ancient Republicans, lest their Liberty should one
day be invaded by so ingenious a Person, who having found out the knack of
doing whatever he listed with savage Beasts, might be induced with much greater
reason to turn the Hearts of his Fellow-Cityzens, so as to make 'em comply with
his desires.

I cannot leave Misnia, Saxony and Lusatia, without declaring that I was very
much surpised there, and that for want of good Memoires. I did not stay so
long as I might have done in so delicate a Country; neither do I any longer
admire that Charlemagne met with so many difficulties in carrying on his
Conquests in those Parts.

BOHEMIA.
Formerly constituted a particular Kingdom, but at present is subject to the
Emperor. It is a very fine Country, but its intestine and foreign Wars have
extremely weakened and depopu^ated it: Insomuch that it may not be unfitly
compared to a valiant Soldier who has destroyed his Enemies, but ^till
languishes under the Wounds he ^eceiv'd in the Battle. I have heard ^ay, that
the Emperor's Presence would ^n a little time restore that vigor which is now
no longer to be seen ^here; and this puts me in mind of ^ome sick Persons, who
recover their Health at the very sight of their Phy^^cian. I met with nothing
there^bouts that I sought for, and indeed, Curiosities are seldom to be found
in ^he small Towns; But

PRAGVE
To make amends for that fault, fur^^sh'd me with very many. The Jews ^ought
Medals to me every day, ^^t such as were of very little value; so ^^at I was
even ashamed of their Igno^^nce and despicable Poverty. They also showed me a
considerable quantity of Stones which may be called precious; but in those
kinds of Rarities I have regard to nothing but what is extremely beautiful;
neither did I there meet with any of this Nature. I found so much employment in
this City, that I was daily tired with traversing it although new objects
appeared to my sight in its several Quarters. I was told that I ought not to be
surpised at its vast extent, in regard that it consisted in seven different
Towns, but this served only to increase the Wonder, for I should have judged
that it contained above a hundred. It is altogether as broad as the City of
London is long, and the number of the Inhabitants is proportionable to its
compass. If the thirteen hundred Apothecaries of London are a sufficient
Evidence of its Populousness, the two thousand Jesuits of Prague may be cited
to the like purpose: The other Religious Societies are also as numerous as in
any part of the World whatever, and there are some Monasteries that resemble
the Palaces of Princes rather than the retiring Places of Persons who profess
to renounce all the Vanities of the World. The Spaniards have a Church in this
City and consequently a Habitation with the Title of Pilgrims of Emaus, but I
never heard any mention made of that name any where else. The People are very
devout; yet I do not think myself obliged to believe every thing that their
mistaken zeal suggests to 'em. They showed me in a Church the three Stones of a
Pillar, which the Devil (as they say) had brought from Rome to deceive a
certain Priest as he was celebrating Mass, with whom he had made a Compact:
They added that St. Peter threw this Fiend and his Pillar three several times
into the Sea, and that this Balk having spoiled all his Measures, he was so
much enraged, that he broke his Pillar for vexation, and nevertheless too
fortunately found means to escape, etc. My silence was not well interpreted by
those that related the Story to me, and I was obliged at last to declare
whether I believed it or not. I thought to have got off by saying, that I had
never read nor so much as heard of it before, although I had been tolerably well
informed of St. Peter's Miracles; but that perhaps the circumstance of Time
might afford me some light into the matter: Therefore I demanded of 'em when
this happened; they answered many thousand years ago: I replied that the
Christian Religion was established only sixteen hundred years ago that is to
say, since the Nativity of Jesus Christ: It is true (said they) but the Miracle
which we have mentioned to you is a great deal older than that: Thus my
Chronology being entirely subverted, I was almost forced to believe that the
Catholic Church, St. Peter and the Mass were much more ancient than they were
supposed to be.

In the same Place I saw a large Stone Tomb, which was found in Moldavia, with
the Body of St. Anthony. It is a considerable Monument, the Carving and
Ornaments of which have a very great Conformity with the Sepulchers of the
Primitive Christians that are discovered in Italy; and of which there are so
many Draughts in that curious Book, known by the Title of Roma subterranea:
These Characters XP. which denote the Name of Christ with A and O, are there
expressed as upon our ancient Medals of Magnentius and Decentius. In the same
Church is shown the Portraiture of the Virgin Mary, painted by St. Luke; and I
am only displeased to meet with these Pieces so often; for it is certain that
People are mistaken as to the most part of 'em, it not being probable that St.
Luke ever drew so many Portraitures of the Virgin; besides that, some modern
Marks are apparent in this Piece: Nevertheless I have a pious Veneration for
all these sorts of Relics. They also showed me thereabouts a kind of Temple or
Mosque, supposed to have been built by the Turks when they carried on their
Incursions even to those Parts: It is altogether different from ours, and
receives light only through the Roof, almost after the same manner as the
Pantheon of Agrippa.

That part of the City, which is situated beyond the River, and commonly called
the lesser side, is much more delightful, and scarce any thing else is to be
seen there but sumptuous Palaces, which amount to the number of above Three
hundred; so that this Quarter may well be styled the Magazine of the Riches of
Bohemia, and of his Imperial Majesty's Hereditary Countries. The King's Palace
is at present that of the Emperor, and, in regard of its advantageous
Situation, Architecture, and Ornaments, justly deserves the Title of a Royal
Pile of Building. M. Misseroni, to whose Custody the Treasury is committed,
gave me a sight there (without any manner of exaggeration be it spoken) of the
finest Paintings in the World: There were above fifty of Titian, as also a
little Room crowded with the Works of Raphael Angelo, and four or five spacious
Chambers full of Paintings of the highest Value. I cannot call to mind the
sight of some empty Rooms without Tears in my Eyes, by reason that all the
Books and Medals were kept in 'em. It is the Property of War to spare nothing;
and that which none durst attempt by open Force, was at last effected by the
Treachery of a private Person, who enriched Count Konismarck with these
Treasures. I have been informed that this General made a Present of Part of 'em
to Queen Christina; and that he caused the rest to be conveyed into a Castle
which he has in his possession near Bremen. Indeed it will not be my fault if I
have not a sight of 'em; and I am as likely as any Man to undertake a Journey
on purpose. If Curiosity has obliged me to endure so many Toils and Fatigues,
it must also be acknowledged that I have thence received a great deal of
delight and satisfaction as a Recompense for my labor. I have there observed
some Medals, which are supposed to be ancient, but I durst not give Credit to
such an Asseveration: I have also seen some at Paris that were sent thither
from Italy, and which seemed to me to be of the same stamp; so that it is
apparent that there are Counterfeits every where. The abovementioned M.
Misseroni communicated to me many other choice Rarities, with the highest
degree of Civility, upon the Recommendation of the Count de Lambers his
Imperial Majesty's principal Minister of State; to whom I shall be obliged for
this Favor, even during my whole Life.

It was requisite once more to visit Vienna; but before my Arrival there, it
may not be improper (my Lord) to give you an account of a strange show that
entirely possessed my Imagination. As we were passing between the River Elbe,
and a small Wood or Copse, we were surpised to behold at one end of the
Meadows, as it were, an Epitome of the Resurrection, and of the last Judgment:
For three or four hundred Persons suddenly rose up from the Ground on which
they had lain: They took no care to dress themselves for want of Clothes; not
but that some sew were meanly furnished with 'em, yet none had any sense of
shame. I durst not describe what I saw, and much less what they proffered to
show me, in case I would have bestowed some small Benevolence upon 'em. This
was a Company, or if you please, a Regiment of Bohemians, not of the Natives of
Bohemia, but of those Bohemians by Profession, that have no Trade, no Wealth,
no Friends, and no Industry, and yet live, and that too with a sort of liberty,
that you shall not meet with in the most free Republic in the World.

I was then traveling, accompanied with a Polander, and a very learned Student
of Stralsund, named M. Leve: They were no less surpised than I, at this
Apparition, and our Conference was not discontinu'd but by a little Quarrel
that arose between 'em upon account of Religion. The Polander, who was a most
zealous Roman Catholic, recited by way of Devotion, a Te Deum, in honor of
St. Anthony, made in imitation of the Hymn which St. Ambrose and St. Augustine
composed for the Divine Service. The Lutheran could not endure to hear it;
neither could he forbear telling him, that his Prayer was superstitious and
impious; and, that, by presuming to attribute to Men such Praises as were
peculiar to the supreme Deity, Almighty God was entirely deprived of those that
were due to him alone. I had much ado to put an end to this Altercation, and
effected it only by opposing that Article of the general Treaty of Peace, which
Prohibits all sorts of Persons to disturb the Public Tranquillity under any
pretense of Religion whatsoever.

At Vienna I had once more the Honor to do Reverence to His Imperial Majesty,
and those Moments, during which he was graciously pleased to admit me into his
Presence, finally determined my Persuasion, that he is the most accomplished
Prince that ever was, and even ever shall be in the World: He was standing upon
a kind of Alcove: when he condescended so far as to call me to him, where what
he thought fit to tell me, and the manner of expressing himself, affected my
Heart more than my Ears. Indeed I had hitherto only offered it to God, but then
I judged it not to be unreasonable to make a Present of it also to him, who
represents the Divine Majesty upon Earth. The Poets have not given so sublime a
Character of their Jupiter, as that which I observed in the Person of this most
August Emperor: Insomuch that the most Heroical Eloquence would fail, if it
should undertake to express my Thoughts concerning him; and much more my mean
Epistolary Style. However, I cannot forbear declaring, that if Fortune should
one day favor my moderate Abilities, I shall leave no means unattempted to
demonstrate my grateful acknowledgment of that kind Reception, and of those
many signal Bounties with which his Imperial Majesty has thought fit to Honor
me. I took another opportunity to visit his admirable Treasures, but more
especially those of the Books and Medals. I there saw that infinite number of
choice Manuscripts in all Languages, and upon all sorts of Subjects, as well
Ancient as Modern, without which (as I take it) it is impossible to attain to an
exact Style; and at the same time I turned over those incomparable Draughts of
J. Strada, which a Man cannot peruse without becoming both more Judicious and
more Learned. M. Lambecius, who has 'em in his Custody, in quality of
Library Keeper, showed me all possible demonstrations of Kindness: His Name is
well known, and highly honored by all those that are addicted to the Study of
the most sublime Sciences; but the Five Volumes which he has lately published,
seem to add a new luster to his Reputation. His admirable Book which bears the
Title of Bibliotheca Caesarea, contains an Account of every thing that is
exquisite, curious, and rare in the Emperor's Library. I have perused those
Five Volumes at Vienna; and although I had but a small space of time to spend in
that Employment, yet they appeared to me to be too short, which is undoubtedly
a good sign (my Lord) as it is a very bad one, when a Man is tired with reading
a little Book. Indeed I never set Foot in this Library without discovering some
new Lights and improving my Knowledge to a higher degree; so easy a Matter it
is to become Learned, by having recourse to so inexhaustible a Storehouse of
good Literature. The most part of Matters are there to be found already
digested, and with never so little Judgment one may easily discern what is
certainly true from what has only some appearance of Truth, and by consequence
argue rationally upon any Subject whatsoever. I resided there about three
Months, and could even have spent my whole Life in these Studies, without the
least fatigue or weariness.

There were no longer any Jews to be seen at Vienna, which was the cause that I
wanted many Medals: They had been expelled thence about a Year before, and out
of the whole Country of Austria. Indeed Complaints are every where made of 'em;
and the Tributes which they pay to Princes for their Protection are not very
efficacious to mollify the Hatred which they have deservedly incurred: They
are the most cruel Enemies of the Christians, as if they were authorized by the
Old Testament to commit those Robberies, Massacres, and Poysonings of which
they are so often Convicted against those that believe the New. A Physician may
well compare 'em to the Spleen, whose use is of no great Importance; in regard
that it is often separated from the Body, without any diminution of the Animal
Functions: It impairs the Soundness of the other Parts, by appropriating to it
self the Humors which ought to serve for their Nourishment; and in a word,
causes 'em to pine away, and to perish through emptiness, if it be not timely
prevented from growing too big. The Jews would do the like to the Christians,
if it were in their Power; for they subsist only by Artifice and Fraud. I have
observed, that the common People are not so miserably Poor in any Countries as
in those where the Jews are tolerated; so that it may be avouch'd, that they
consume their Substance. Besides, they are good for nothing; they are not so
Judicious as they were in times past, neither can they endure to apply
themselves to any sort of Work or Labor; so that Sloth and Ignorance will at
last involve them in all manner of Calamities. The little Town which they
formerly Inhabited, at present bears the Name of Leopolstadt, and serves as it
were a Suburbs to Vienna, which is separated from it only by a small Arm of the
Danube. It is very neatly built, and the Churches are purified, after having
defaced even the least Marks of their Superstition; a Monument of which will be
seen for a long time in the Painting of the high Altar, where the Emperor and
Empress seem to offer up all their Regalities to God, imploring his Protection
for the safety of their little Imperial Princess and of their People. In
another Painting of the same Church is represented a Young Christian Infant
stabbed to Death with Pen-knives by the Jewish Rabbis, who under Color of
Religion receive the Blood in a Basin to be afterward used in their abominable
Mysteries. It is not without reason that the Religion of the Turks is called
that of Swine: and it may be also justly affirmed, that the Religion of the
Jews is that of superstitious Bigots; nevertheless, without profaning that
Word, which is in a manner Sacred, and ought only to be applied to signify the
Worship which we owe to the true God.

The Turks put me in mind of a flight Embassy which I saw at Vienna, where they
resided about two Months. After having had a Public Audience of the
Vice President of the Council of War, they demanded one also of the Emperor
himself, and had much ado to obtain it, by reason of the little importance of
the Affairs about which they came to treat; yet the good Correspondence which
is held between the two Empires at last caused it to be granted. It was joyful
News to me to be informed that the Turks avoided even the least occasions that
might give any offense to his Imperial Majesty, and that by that means the
Rebels in Hungary could expect no Supplies, but would be soon constrained to
submit to his Clemency. These Ambassadors were lodged without the City, and
guarded after the same manner with which those Christian Noblemen are usually
treated who are sent on an Embassy to Constantinople. I often repaired to their
Appartment, and yet could never get an opportunity to see 'em at their Meals,
although I was very desirous of the Sight; I was only permitted to enter their
Stables, where I saw very fine Horses, which they had transported on purpose to
Trade with 'em: For these Turks (my Lord) notwithstanding their Babarity, are
very Covetous, and leave no Stone unturned to get Money. I brought along with
me out of that Country a rich Horse-Cloath Embroidered in Mesopotamia, where
(as they say) is the finest Workmanship of this kind: Indeed it is extremely
beautiful without comprehending the Gold and Silver which are wrought in it,
even to the thickness of two Fingers. I could wish that it were sufficiently
curious to give content to your Highness, and that it were worth your
acceptance.

It is well known that the Turks have an aversion to all manner of Games and
Sports; or to express it better, they know not what it is to Game or Play;
insomuch that Tennis-Play and Bowling seem altogether ridiculous in their
Apprehension. These sottish Christians (say they) throw a Ball into the Air,
run after it, pursue it, and run back again: If they are so enamored with it,
why do they not take it? Why do they not keep it? Why do they take so much
pains for a Ball that cannot stir of it self? They abhor all sorts of Games at
Cards and Dice, but they have another kind of Sport. I have often seen 'em
hurling Faggot-sticks and small Billets at one another Heads; the chief
Dexterity of the Thrower is to strike his Antagonist as hard as he can; whilst
the other not only endeavors to avoid the Blow (as I should be apt to do in
the like case) but also goes to meet it and catches it with his Hand, as if it
were neither heavy nor hard, in order to throw it back immediately, with the
like design of offending the former. You may easily imagine, that they do not
often leave off without spilling of Blood, yet they are as much good Friends as
ever, and he that does the most mischief passes among 'em for the most gallant
Man.

I saw some other Sports or rather Exercises at Vienna, in which the Germans
(in my Opinion) take delight, as it were to keep up their ancient Customs. Much
Agility of Body and dexterity are absolutely necessary for the performing of
this Exercise; but both these Qualities would not produce any considerable
effect, unless accompanied with a great deal of strength. The two-handed Sword,
the Spear, the Halberd, and the Toseck are their principal Instruments. Although
these People seem still to retain somewhat of that ancient fierceness, with
which their Ancestors were taxed, nevertheless they are far from being so
cruel, as the Cudgel-Players whom I saw in the public places of the City of
London, where a Man's Head is unavoidably broken by way of Divertisement: The
Inhabitants of Vienna are wont to do it only in the presence of an Officer, who
takes care to regulate the Fight, and interposes his Authority to separate the
Cambatants, whenever he suspects that they may be transported with Animosity,
Jealousy, or overmuch Passion; not but that I have often seen the effusion of
Blood in those Rencounters.

Although these Sights were irksome to me, yet they had not that effect upon my
Mind as the fury of the brute Beasts, especially when the Mastive Dogs were let
loose upon a Bull, and new ones were set on to relieve the others that were
Wounded, or tired with the Fight. I also saw others engaged with Bears, Wolves,
and Dogs. The outrageous fierceness of these Animals puts me in mind of the
delight they afforded to the ancient Romans, who were wont to conferr the
Consular and Sacerdotal Dignities upon those Persons from whose Liberality they
expected the most magnificent public Shows, and the most extraordinary
Divertisements of this Nature. Julius Caesar was very sensible of it; and
although he was endu'd with undaunted Courage, Magnanimity, Prudence, and all
those excellent Qualities which are necessary for the keeping of so potent a
State in subjection; nevertheless he did not forbear to make use of these
little Artifices; nay, it has been observed, that he brought his Family to very
great Exigencies; or to speak more properly, ruined himself to get the
Good Will of the People, by the multitude and grandeur of the Shows with which
he dazzl'd their Eyes. Upon the whole Matter it is evident, that Vienna is a
delightful City, if there be any in the World; and as I make no difficulty to
affirm, that unless a Man were born in France, it were to be wished, that he
were a Native of Germany, so I may also averr, That if one cannot find means to
spend his Life at Paris, it is most expedient to do it at Vienna. From Vienna I
passed to

SALTZBVRG.
One would imagine, that no remarkable Object were to be seen at the Foot of
the Alps, and on that side which is exposed only to the North; nevertheless
every thing appears wonderful fine, that is to say, the Fields, Pastures,
Rivers, Walks, Gardens, Buildings, etc. so that nothing can be more delectable
nor more stately. But that which (in my Mind) augments the Beauty of the Place
is that vast mass of Rocks, which is as it were cut perpendicularly, and seems
to threaten the City with Destruction. Indeed we there beheld the miserable
Ruins of a Monastery, and some Houses which were, as it were, buried some
Months before under a heap of Rocks. Certain Workmen who were employed on the
top in cutting the Rock perfectly steep, seemed to us to be no bigger than
Ants; and to say thus much may be sufficient (as I take it) to express its
height. The finest Churchyard or Burying-place that ever I saw, is that of St.
Sebastian, which is rather a Repository of curious Paintings to delight the
Eyes and Mind than the dismal Pomp of a Funeral Show. The Inhabitants of this
Country are ambitious to cause their Memory to be honored after their Death,
or rather (as I am apt to believe) these Honors are paid to the Deceased, for
the Consolation of the Living. The stately Chapel which stands in the middle
of four Galleries, was built to serve as a Tomb to an Archbishop. Indeed all
these People from the highest Station to the lowest seem to take delight in
this kind of Magnificence; much after the same manner as it happened in Egypt
three or four Thousand Years ago, where the Indigent had their Pyramids as well
as the Kings, neither were the several conditions of Men otherwise
distinguished than by the difference of the Expenses: Such is the Vanity of
degenerate Mankind, which nevertheless will be at last as it were annihilated,
and lie hid under a few Foot of Earth, where will be no longer any distinction
between the Rich and the Poor; nor will Alexander the Great take up more space
than the Beggar Irus.

Sarcophago contentus erit; mors sola fatetur,
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.
CONDITUR HIC PHILIPPUS THEOPHRASTUS INSIGNIS MEDICINAE DOCTOR, QUI DIRA ILLA
WLNERA, LEPRAM, PODAGRAM, HYDROPISIM, ALIAQUE INSANABILIA CORPORIS CONTAGIA
MIRIFICA ART SUSTULIT AC BONA SUA IN PAUPERES DISTRIBUENDA COLLOCANDAQUE
HONORAVIT: ANNO M.D.XLI. DIE XXIIII. SEPTEMBER. VITAM CUM MORTE MUTAVIT. Here
lies the Body of Philippus Theophrastus, a famous Doctor of Physic, whose
wonderful Art removed those direful Maladies, the Leprosy, Gout, Dropsy, and
other incurable Diseases incident to Humane Bodies. He honorably gave Orders,
that his Estate and Goods should be Sold and distributed to the Poor, and
changed this Life for a better on the 24th day of September. A. D. 1541.

This is very little comformable to the Information which I received concerning
him in France, where he passes only for a Quack-salver, who endeavored to
blind the World with the extraordinary advantages to which he pretended. How
many Minters of false Coin has he caused to be Hanged, who dreamt of nothing
less but that by reading Paracelsus's Works they might soon learn the Art of
making Gold? This Impostor promised to reveal the Secret to the whole World,
yet died a Beggar, and in the same Hospital of Saltzburg, where the Estate
which he gave to the Poor, can serve only as two Lines of Amplification to his
Epitaph. Besides, he was wont to boast, that he could bring the Pope, Luther,
and the Turk to an agreement, and indeed, he was a very ill Man that he did not
do it accordingly; but the only facility of performing this Exploit (in my
Opinion) is, that he was not zealous for the Interest of any Party. Lastly, He
gave it out that he knew the Secret of enabling a Man to live to the Age of a
hundred and fifty Years; and nevertheless died himself Aged only thirty seven,
worn out with exquisite Pains. Insomuch that I cannot be persuaded by any of
these Occurrences, either of his Integrity or Learning. It is true indeed, in
regard that he had acquired some (Reputation, diverse Learned Physicians in
Germany prefixed his Name before their Writings: Thus Paracelsus gained
unexpected renown, even after his Death, but thanks be to God the World is now
undeceived. It is well known, that our modern Physicians studiously avoid that
commendation with which they were so much charmed in the preceding Age, in
treating 'em as excellent Chemists. This would now be esteemed the Character of
a very unfortunate Physician; not that I would by any means go about to condemn
the Art of Chemistry. I am not ignorant of its wonderful effects; but I am also
sensible, that it is a kind of Stumbling Block, which causes the most part of
those that come near it to fall, even to their utter disappointment. My Father,
whose Memory is most precious to me, was wont to say, that it was the Ape of
the Galenical Art, and the adulterated Coin of our Profession.

The Castle of Salizburg is a somewhat surprising Structure, and is justly
esteemed (as it ought to be) one of the Bulwarks of Christendom, as being
capable of putting a stop to the Incursions of the Turks, in case by misfortune
they should ever penetrate so far. The Archbishop was so obliging to me and my
Company, as to give Orders that it should be shown to us; and I saw the place
of his Residence, the stateliness of which is conformable to the Account of it
I had before received; as to its Ornaments, Beauty, number of Appartments, etc.
it is not inferior to any Palace in the World. However, I shall leave the
description of it to others, in regard I am accustomed only to behold such
sorts of Objects with admiration and complacency,; my chief delight being
conversant about Historical Rarities, but except some few Statues that were set
there for State and Magnificence rather than out of Curiosity, I could not find
any thing of that nature. Moreover, that which increased my admiration is that
the Prince, the present Archbishop is a very Learned and Eloquent Person,
endu'd also with a profound Judgment; as I plainly perceived in the Conference
with which he was pleased to Honor me. In acquainting me that he had no
ancient Medals, he expressed the esteem that he had for 'em, and showed me at
the same time, several Books that were writ by me on that Subject, and which he
had sent for out of his Library. It would be a kind of good Fortune to
Curiosity, if so sublime a Genius, and so Noble a Lord as this Archbishop
would vouchsafe to set apart some time for these Studies; nay, I durst even
presume to affirm, that His Highness would reap no small advantage from such a
disposition of Mind. How great are the Cares of Government, and with how many
wearisome Hours is it attended! You are not ignorant of it (my Lord) Alexander
the Great endured these fatigues; and Julius Caesar was not exempted from 'em;
so that Your most serene Highness and the Archbishop of Saltzburg are only
free from such anxious Distractions: A Cabinet of Medals; a little application
to the viewing of so many Hero's which they represent; a word of Commendation
for the Virtuous Princes; a grain of Salt let fall upon the Tyrants; and
admiration for all, might serve (in my Opinion) as a Restorative for a sublime
Mind, too much taken up and tired with the administration of secular Affairs.
This would be the most delectable Nepenthes, and (...), at least to my Palate.
Shall I take the liberty to declare to Your Highness what is a farther cause of
my admiration in this respect? It is upon account that those Persons who seem
to be best able to bear the charge that is necessary for the making of such
Collections, are least of all inclined to do it. The Ecclesiastical Princes
with whom I conversed in Germany, are not much addicted to Curiosity, at least
to that of Medals. I met with nothing remarkable at Mentz, although the Elector
lately Deceased, was endu'd with all the excellent Qualities that can be
imagined; but perhaps he was not acquainted with these kinds of Delights. The
Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, at present Viceroy of Hungary, is
Magnificent in every thing; for it is apparent from the vast Expenses which he
lays out in furnishing his Table, in Hunting, and other noble Divertisements,
that it is not the effect of Frugality that he has no Medals, and yet he is not
supplied with any. He told me himself at Mergentheim, where I went on purpose
to wait upon His Highness, that if those Princes could be persuaded to set
apart a hundred or two hundred Pistoles for that use (which is a very
inconsiderable Sum with respect to their Revenues) besides the benefit which
they themselves might reap from thence, it would turn very much to the
advantage of Posterity, and the Republic of Learning. By this means their
Cabinets would be daily enriched with new Supplies, and many rare Pieces would
be easily preserved, which are often melted down by the Goldsmiths for want of
Buyers, witness that half of a Golden Medal which remains in our Possession
with the Portraiture of Pescennius Niger. Those Princes that delight in such
Curiosities would take a very good course (in my Mind) to enjoin the Goldsmiths
in their respective Dominions, to give notice to the Magistrates of every Town
of all the occasions they shall have both of buying and selling Medals of Gold,
Silver, and Copper. Besides, that by that means all opportunities of stealing
'em might be taken away, it would tend very much to the Princes advantage,
without doing Injury to any Person whatever. The Goldsmiths usually buy 'em by
weighr, according to the value of the Metal, and for a small profit that might
be allowed to these Artificers, they would be engaged to melt none down. It is
true indeed, that for a greater precaution it would be requisite to impose a
Fine upon those that should presume to act contrary to the Royal Mandate, in
melting down any without a License, or that should neglect to give timely
notice of it to the Magistrate, or some other Person authorized by the Prince
to exercise that Employment in every City or Town. This Order (in my Opinion)
would take great effect in the principal Towns, especially those that are
situated upon a Road or public Highway. Therefore it were to be wished, that
the Archbishop of Saltzburg were informed of this Project, and that he would
vouchsafe to put it in execution; neither do I doubt but that in process of
time it would evidently appear, that I have no less zeal for his Service than
affection and respect for his Person.

After having spent eight Days at Saltzburg, I determined to set forward from
thence to Tirol, but in the middle of the Alps two Soldiers showed me an Order
they had received to prohibit all manner of Passengers from entering that
Country, without obtaining a Pass from the Emperor. However, my Equipage gave
'em no occasion of suspicion, in regard that I rode Post in a Chariot,
accompanied only with a Friend on Horseback; but perhaps the Character of my
Nation made 'em stand it out more obstinately, and the respect that I owed to
their Master obliged me to return. I had a fair Plea, that I was just now come
from Vienna, where His Imperial Majesty treated me with all manner of
demonstrations of his Princely Favor, yet nothing was able to divert 'em from
their Resolution. Polybius would never have imagined a Frenchman to be endu'd
with so much moderation; and indeed, he was sometimes mistaken, when he
declared, Galli non dicam in plerisque, sed prorsus in omnibus actionibus suis;
ira atque impetu, non consilio reguntur. The French- men, I will not say for
the most part, but even altogether in all their Actions are transported with
Heat and Passion, and never observe the Rules of Moderation. Thus I was
constrained to return to Saltzburg, where the Archbishop did not think fit to
grant me a Pass through the Emperor's Territories; insomuch that I was much
troubled how to get back to Vienna to procure one; but I chose rather to go to
Munick, where having obtained a License, I entered the most delightful Plains
of Tirol.

Inspruck seemed to me as it were a rich Diamond set within its Ring; nothing
but Luster appearing every where, and that transcendent Splendour which affects
the Mind rather than the Eyes; although I happened to be there at the Festival of
Christmas, during which the fervent heat of Devotion is a very necessary
defensative against the coldness of the Season: There I saw that Arch-Dutchess,
who (as they say) was designed to be given in Marriage to His Royal Highness of
England. Indeed so great a degree of Beauty, Gracefulness, and Majesty, cannot
well be imagined; insomuch that Zeuxis's Venus, which was the Masterpiece of
the most famous Painter in the World, was not set off to greater advantage;
nevertheless, that Painting was the Epitome, or rather exact Copy of the most
exquisite Beauties among the Grecian Dames, who were reputed (as Your Highness
is sensible) to be the fairest in the World. What I have been told concerning
the rare Endowments of her Mind, surpasses every thing that I have seen; but I
shall not detain your Patience so long as to express the Idea which ought to be
formed of it. Whilst I was writing these particulars, News was brought me of
the Death of the Empress; so that if it were not too audacious a presumption to
propose a Match for the Emperor, I should be induced to nominate this
Princess: All their Qualities (in my Mind) are conformable, and who knows
whether this may not actually come to pass, since it is not the first time that
Imagination has been seconded with a suitable event; Imaginatio generat casum,
according to the common Saying of Physicians; as for my part, I should be
extremely delighted if it should so happen, as well with respect to the
Consolation of His Imperial Majesty, as for the benefit of the Empire. I hope
your most Serene Highness will not take it ill that I presume so far as to add
a Word or two in commendation of the deceased Empress; I have had the Honor to
see her both in the Church and at the Court, and have every where observed her
to be a most virtuous Princess; so that Malice it self would grow pale for want
of sufficient Matter to raise a Calumny against her Person. The Emperor had
the greatest Affection and Respect for her imaginable: But I have been told,
that the ill Treatment of the Protestants in Hungary was the effect of the Zeal
of this Princess, and of the Advice of the Spaniards, to which His Imperial
Majesty had much deference upon her Account. The state of her Health was never
very vigorous; the tenderness, or (to speak more like a Physician) the weakness
of her Constitution being no less than that of her Body: Indeed the later was
capable of being strengthened by proper Remedies, and a good Diet, which were
not wanting; but I durst even affirm, that she sometimes used too much with
respect to her natural Temperament and Strength, which was not able to digest
so great a quantity. For it is necessary in this case to observe a kind of
Geometrical proportion, and ad vires, (as it is expressed in our Physical
Treatises) and the most part of the World is deceived upon this very Account.

In Traveling from Tirol I spent five or six Days on the Alps in the midst of
Winter, and yet without feeling any Cold; for every thing was covered with Snow
except the Road, which was as dear and verdant as in the Spring-season* There I
saw the Passage which the Swedes endeavored to make during the last Wars, but
were not able to bring it to effect: However, King Gust^vus Adolphus declared,
that he knew very well how to enter it, and that it was requisite only to find
means to get out again. At Lindaw I Embarked on the Lake, and afterward arrived
at

CONSTANTZ.
A City so famous for its Council, and for the Execution of John Huss. There I
was informed, that the Authority of its Bishop, who is a Prince of the Empire,
is very considerable, although his Revenues are as small as those of any other
Bishop in Germany, as the Archbishop of Saltzburg enjoys the largest.

SCHAFFHAVSEN.
Through which I passed, is a very large Town, and the Capital of its Canton;
where some Curiosities, and diverse Cabinets of ancient Medals are to be found,
as also about half an Hours Journey from thence those famous Cataracts of the
Rhine, which make almost as much noise in the World as in their Neighborhood:
This River leaving its Bed, where it seemed calmly to rest, falls as it were
perpendicularly from a considerable height on the top of the Rocks, which
Nature (as one would say) has cut steep down, on purpose for this Prodigy. The
same thing is reported of the Nile in some part of Aethiopia, but I never heard
that the like Object is to be seen elsewhere, which so extremely amuses the
Senses both of Seeing and Hearing at the same time. On the other side stands
the Fort of

HOHENTWIEL.
Which is the most important, that is to say, the strongest Place in the Duchy
of Wirtemberg: The last Wars are a sufficient evidence of this Truth; and here
I cannot but call to Mind a Circumstance which I never read of but in our Old
Romances; as I take it it is that of Valentine and Orson, where two Brothers
engaged in different Parties are introduced ready to Fight without any
knowledge one of another; both being Valiant Hero's, and renowned for their
notable Exploits. These were the two Dukes of Wirtemberg, Frederick and Vlrick.
I saw the latter die in his Bed at Stugart, after having magnanimously run
through innumerable Dangers, with his Sword in Hand, and performed many noble
Enterprises; but the other is still living, and will continue to live for a
long time, if my Wishes and Prayers prove by any means effectual; for I must
here take the liberty to declare, that I have a very great Respect, and yet
more Cordial Affection for his Right Honorable Person.

Thus my Journey is at last terminated at Basil, where I took a Resolution to
allow my self some Refreshment, and to commit to Writing those Remarks that
were made by me during this Journey, and of which I had as yet only some short
Memorandums. At present I am employed in looking over again with much delight
the rare Medals which I procured about a Year ago, and in causing those to be
curiously Engraved that I had only drawn with Crayons; in order to communicate
'em to the Public (if the Divine Providence shall favor my Undertaking) and
to those Princes who have an absolute Authority over my Person and Affairs. My
design is also to get Suetonius Printed here, together with the Figures of the
Ancient Medals that serve to explain and illustrate the Text; to which purpose
I have already caused above four hundred of 'em to be delineated by a very
skilful Artist; but I am still at a stand to know whether this Book ought to be
writ in Latin or French; nevertheless, since these two Languages are in a
manner universal; perhaps I may publish it in both. In the mean time I thought
my self obliged to present this succinct Relation to Your Highness, as well to
give you a particular Account of my Actions as to testify my Gratitude, and
the Respect that I bear to Your most Honorable Person. I am,

My Lord, Your most Serene Highness's Most humble and most obedient Servant,
CHARLES PATIN.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Know not (my Lord) whether you shall think fit any longer to give Ear to my
impertinent Discourses, and whether I may be allowed to add a Postscript to
this Letter, without trespassing too long upon your Patience: However, the
manner of Writing in this Country seems to authorize me to that purpose, and
the small Journey that I have lately made has informed me of some particular
Matters, which perhaps may not be altogether unacceptable to Your most Serene
Highness, by reason of the Relation they have to those Studies in which You
chiefly delight, I mean Antiquity, History, and other parts of good Literature.

Every one talks of the Strength and Valor of the Switzers, but they are not
sufficiently known to the World; neither is it possible for any Man to get a
clear insight into their Constitutions, if without making any Reflections on
their past History, he applies himself only to the consideration of their
present State. The Art of War and those Sciences which are termed Liberal
flourish in those Parts at the same time; but since their luster has been
eclipsed during many Ages, it would be requisite to search out their Original
even before the time that the barbarous Nations overran, as it were an
universal Deluge, the fairest Provinces of Europe, particularly Germany,
France, and Italy. For Switzerland being contiguous to the others was soon
involved in these common Calamities, and it may be justly affirmed, that it has
sound means to free it self from 'em only by virtue of its own Strength and
Energy. Indeed this Country has always wrought Wonders for the preservation of
its Liberty; and when it was forced to submit to the Power of Caesar and the
Romans, it wanted only time to shake off that Yoke of Servitude. The Love that
the Switzers retain for their Liberty is still even at this day the principal
part of their Character, and serves to maintain the Tranquillity which
constitutes the happiness of these Territories; nay, even when it strikes
Terror into the Mind of those that endeavor to procure its ruin, it renders it
self amiable in the sight of all the States of Europe. I shall not now make it
my business so much to describe the particulars of the present Occurrences and
Transactions as to illustrate the general History of this Nation with some
Historical Proofs that have fallen within the compass of my Knowledge.

I have seen more footsteps of Antiquity in Switzerland, than in any other part
of Europe; insomuch that it is probable that the Romans had there settled very
considerable Colonies as well upon account of the pleasantness of the Country,
as to secure themselves against the Germans who often made Incursions on that
side. I passed through that Plain which lies near

KOENIGSFELDEN.
Where Constantius being as yet only General of Dioclesian's Army overcame the
Germans in a pitched Battle. Many Bones are daily found thereabouts, and none
can doubt that they are the remains of this Defeat. In

MARTIGNT or MARTINACH,
Which was heretofore called Octodurum, this Inscription concerning his
Grandson is to be read upon a Column,

IMP. CAESARI VAL. CONSTANTIO PIO FELL. INVICTO AVG. DIVI CONSTANTII PII AVG.
FILIO FOR. CL. VAL. BONO REIPVBLICAE NATO.

These last words (my Lord) are notable and very stately; nay, the Romans, in
order to transmit 'em to Posterity, were not only content that they should be
Carved on Stone, but also caused 'em to be stamped upon their Gold Coins, some
of which are still extant, and I have a fair Original in my Possession.

The Cloister of Koenigsfelden was Founded A. D. 1309. by Elizabeth the Widow
of the Emperor Albert, who was there Slain by his Nephew, John of Austria,
Duke of Schwaben, and I have seen the place at the passage of the River R^ss.
At the distance of one League from thence appear the Ruins of the Castle of
Hapsburg, of which the Emperor Rodolph bore the Name.

The City of Vindonissa, which is mentioned by Tacitus in the Fourth Book of
his Histories, was situated in the Neighborhood: It was burnt by the Switzers,
who attempted to enter the Territories of the ancient Gauls, in the time of
Julius Caesar, and was Rebuilt a little after by the Romans. They retained it
in their Possession till the Reign of Valentinian the Third, when it was
utterly ruined by the Huns and Germans; so that there how remains only a small
Village which bears the Name of Vindisch, and its Episcopal See was translated
to Constantz by King Dagobert. The truth of all these matters of Fact is
evident from diverse ancient Inscriptions.

BADEN,
Which is not far distant, is the Place where the General Diets or Assemblies
of the Cantons are held for the transacting of the Public Affairs of the
State, and where Foreign Ambassadors are usually entertained. The Romans
imposed the Name of Aquae Helveticae upon this Town, and in succeeding Ages it
was likewise called Castellum Thermarum, by reason of the hot Baths which have
there acquired much reputation. I have sometimes bathed my self in 'em with
delight, and dare avouch upon my own Experience, that they really deserve the
whole Esteem in which they now are; insomuch that very great Advantages may be
reaped from these Baths conducing to the preservation of Health; although perhaps,
I should require somewhat more Circumspection than is observed in the ordinary
use of 'em: But to return to my Historical Observations, we are informed by
Tacitus, in the first Book of his History, that Caocina Captain of Vitellius's
Party defeated there an Army of Switzers, who adhered to that of Otho, and he
seems in a manner to describe the very place, Direptus longa pace in modum
municipii extructus locus, amaeno salubrium aquarum usu frequens: Then also was
pillaged a place that by a long continuance of Peace had grown up as it were to
a Town-Corporate, and which was much resorted to upon account of the delectable
use of wholesome Waters. An Inscription of Trajan has been lately found, and
Medals are daily picked up in the Neighborhood, some of which I have purchased.
But that which surprises me most, is that a vast quantity of Dice, such as are
used at Games are also met with thereabouts, without being able to discover
their Original. At the distance of four Hours Journey from thence stands the
beautiful Town of

ZVRICH.
At one end of the Lake on both sides the River Limat. It is supposed to have
been built by one Thuricus, 1900 Years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ,
which is to advance its Antiquity even above that of Rome; but this last City
as it were revenged the Affront by the Hand of Marius, at the defeat of the
Cimbrians, to whom the Inhabitants of Zurich were united. The Statue of
Charlemagne, who was the Founder of the great Church, is still to be seen on
one of its Towers, with a Crown upon his Head, and a Sword in his Hand; and I
take this Monument to be very remarkable. The Canton of Zurich, (as you well
know my Lord) holds the first Rank among those of Switzerland; being very
potent upon account of its Populousness, Riches, and Extent: But I shall leave
the particular description of it to Historians, in regard that my present
Design is only to take notice of Matters relating to Antiquity or Curiosity.

Will your most Serene Highness vouchsafe to give me leave to relate two
pleasant Stories, which may serve to give some Indication of the Manners of
these People? Two Burgundians went on a certain time to buy Horses at Zurich,
where in discoursing with their Landlord they gave it out that as the French
had already made themselves Masters of the Franche Comte, they might perhaps
arrive very suddenly in Switzerland; and that they would at least oblige the
Inhabitants to tie and untie their Shoes: In the mean while, a Neighbor being
informed by the Innkeeper of the Discourse that happened between these
Foreigners, went to meet 'em with a Sword by his side, and demanded of 'em
whether that which was reported to him were true: Whereupon these poor Wretches
were extremely affrighted, yet could not deny what they had so openly declared:
Come hither (said the Switzer to one of 'em) and untie this Shoe for me which
was accordingly done: Then (continued he) go forward and bring thy Companion
before me: As soon as the other drew near, he was in like manner obliged to
submit, and to tie the same Shoe again. Learn then (replied the Switzer to
both) that our Countrymen are only induced to serve by Friendship, and that
they will cause themselves to be obeyed whenever they are threatened. The other
Story is much of the same Nature. A German passing through a Village of the
Canton of Zurich, demanded which was the Road, of a young Peasant, whom he
called according to his usual manner of drolling Kyemelker; the latter set him
in the right way, and immediately ran to his Father to acquaint him with the
Nickname which had been imposed on him by the Traveller. The good Old Man had
no sooner heard it, but he engages two of his Friends to accompany him,
overtakes the German, and having enjoined him to alight from his Horse,
compelled him to Milk a Cow for a considerable time in spite of his Teeth. Get
thee gone then (said he afterward) and boast if thou shall think fit, that thou
have been in the Country of Keyemelkers, and that thou have been no less a
partaker of the same Employment than they.

This may be sufficient (my Lord) to show the Genius or natural Disposition of
the Nation, and I have even found an ancient Inscription, GENIO PAGE TIGOR. If
I durst describe it by any other Character than that of Liberty, I should
undoubtedly mention the Zeal that they have for their Religion. The Divines
have great Power and Authority among 'em, and even sometimes oblige the
Magistrates to a more than ordinary severity.

Notwithstanding the continual noise of the Drums, yet the Muses do not cease
to have their Parnassus in this Country; insomuch that I have there known some
very Learned Persons, and among others M. Suicerus, who alone understands more
Greek than all the Natives of Greece, and for whom I have a greater Esteem upon
account of his Integrity, than for his Learning. I have been shown the place in
the River where the Ingenious M. Hottinger was unfortunately drowned with part
of his Family: He was that famous Professor of the Hebrew Tongue whom the
States of Holland sent for to adorn their University of Leyden. I am also
obliged to the Courtesy of his Sons for the sight of some Oriental Medals that
remain in their possession. The public Library is as it were a Nursery for
Arts and Sciences, as containing all sorts of Books, and very considerable
Manuscripts. There are likewise diverse Medals, and some very rare ones: They
have been much esteemed as soon as their use was known, and it is probable that
their number will be increased from time to time, till at last a very fine
Cabinet be made of 'em. As for my part; I viewed 'em with great delight, and
was even surpised at the satisfaction which they afforded me. I shall not here
make mention of any Caresses or Complements which are every where Customary,
but the Senate was pleased to show their good Will toward me with much more
solid Marks, which I shall always keep in Mind, even during my whole Life.

One cannot Travel very far in that Country without discovering some rare
Monuments of Antiquity; and indeed, I find many of 'em mentioned by Historians,
but I could wish they had been described after another manner; for Books are
now subject to a much more critical Censure than formerly. Therefore perhaps I
may give encouragement to one of my Friends to undertake the Work, whose
Abilities (I can assure you) are sufficient for the performing it with good
Success. However, I shall here observe beforehand, some of those Curiosities
that have affected my Mind more than the others. I took delight in viewing the
Castle of Bipp, which (as it is reported) was built by the Order of King Pepin
for the convenience of Hunting. There are Bears in those Parts, my Lord, and at
that time the use of Muskets and Fowling-pieces was altogether unknown. The
People were then apparently more resolute and desperate in their Enterprises
than at present, at least they were much more Courageous than I am.

SOLOTVRN,
Is one of the most pleasant Countries in Switzerland: The Mountains seem to
stoop as it were on purpose to give passage to the Waters, and to afford a most
delightful prospect with all manner of necessary Conveniences. I had there a
sight of diverse very curious Inscriptions, and I copied out those that appeared
to me to be the finest. But that which is proper for Memoires or Commentaries
may be too tedious to be inserted in a Postscript.

Thus I left Soloturn, meditating upon this Epigram.

In Celtis nihil est Soloduro antiquius; unis
Exceptis Treviris, quorum ego dicta soror.
Near the Cloister of Frawbrunnen is to be read upon a Cross a notable
Historical Memorandum: It was erected in a Field where the Inhabitants of Bern
defeated a numerous Army of English men, A. D. 1375. A certain Lord of (...) in
the right of Catharine of Austria his Mother, laid claim to diverse Territories
of Switzerland, which had appertained to that Illustrious Family: But this
defeat (it seems) has quite ruined his Pretentions, at least there has been no
Talk about the Affair since that time.

I shall here take an occasion to mention to your most Serene Highness a
remarkable Circumstance concerning Medals, for some were found in the same
place, A. D. 1628. when two young Boys pursued a Serpent even into its hole,
and as they were poking in the Ground with their Sticks, discovered an Earthen
Pot filled with fifteen hundred Silver-Medals, which were for the most part
those of Severus, Julia and Caracalla. Can you imagine (my Lord) that this
Serpent was metamorphos'd into Medals, or that the little Animal showed his
Persecutors this means of enriching themselves? As for my part, I can believe
neither; but I know that the Serpent is generally esteemed as a good Omen: The
Nicomedians luckily met with 'em in laying the Foundation of their City. The
Romans were indebted to one for the cure of their Plague: The Israelites were
in like manner healed by looking upon a Brazen Serpent; and perhaps one may put
an end to my Mis-adventures Feliciter.

To return to the Medals, they are found almost in all parts of that Country,
and some Years ago a great quantity of 'em was discovered, together with diverse
Sepulchers, Lamps, and Urns. The Inhabitants are also now inclined to set a
Value upon 'em; among whom M. Morel in particular has already procured a
considerable Cabinet; and although his Curiosity began at first only with a small
Medal of Maximinus which he had accidentally obtained, yet I can assure your
Highness, that he has since made a great progress therein, and has some very
rare Pieces in his possession: He has likewise made a Collection of the finest
Prints of Italy, France, and Germany; insomuch that I have met with very few
Persons who are addicted more to Curiosity than he, neither is his Judgment and
Skill in these Matters less profound; and as a recompense for his Pains and
Trouble, I am certain that this kind of Study affords to him, as well as to me,
a great deal of Delight and Satisfaction. A Man need only take a prospect of

BERN.
To form in his Mind a suitable Idea of its Power and Wealth. It was Founded by
a Duke of Zeringhen, A. D. 1191. to oppose certain petty Lords of the Country,
whose Territories are now escheated to this Canton; neither would the Town any
longer acknowledge the Authority of their Duke Berthold. It is entirely built
with Freestone, and every where adorned with Portico's, Arches, and Pillars,
so that a Passenger may walk through all the Streets at any time under shelter,
secure both from the Storms of Wind and Rain, and the excessive heat of the
Sun. Thus the Houses seem to be only the Appartments of so many Kings; and
indeed, every Burgher is actually a Prince in his own Family. The Church,
Arsenal, and Public Library are stately Edifices, and deserve well to be
viewed by Ingenious Travelers. Some of the Inhabitants caused me to take
particular notice of a place in the highest Wall that ever I saw, being that
which supports the Platform of the Church, from whence a certain Student fell
down headlong on Horseback, without receiving any manner of hurt. Curtius
himself never fell from so steep a Precipice, although his Fall procured him
immortal Fame; but who would be willing to purchase it at so dear a rate? for
my part I know none. The Student of whom I now make mention is still living (my
Lord) and is not this a strange Prodigy? Except in the Libraries of the
Emperor and the King, I never saw a greater number of Manuscripts than those
which are kept in that of Bern; all those of M. Bongars, are likewise preserved
there, and I have been so fortunate as to get a Catalogue of 'em. I am
altogether unwilling to let slip any opportunity that may in the least tend to
the advantage of the Republic of Learning.

MORAT
Is situated at the distance only of five Hours Journey from Bern* being a very
noted though small Town, which has imparted everlasting Renown to the Inhabitants
of the Country, who have caused a Chapel to be erected on the side of the Lake
which serves as a Sepulcher to twenty Thousand Burgundians that had made an
attempt upon their Liberty. This Charnel-House is adorned with the following
Inscription,

INVICTISSIMI ATQUE FORTISSIMI CAROLI DUCIS BURGUNDIAE EXERCITUS MURATUM
OBSIDENS CONTRA HELVETIOS PUGNANS HIC SUI MONIMENTUM RELIQUIT ANNO M.CCCC.LXXVI.

The Army of the most Invincible and most Valiant Charles Duke of Burgundy,
that Besieged Morat, and fought against the Switzers, has here left its
Monument.

It is scarce possible to pass by that Place without making some notable
Reflections. The Switzers there call to Mind the greatest danger to which their
Liberty was ever exposed; and even those who have no interest in either Party
cannot forbear taking some delight, were it merely out of the veneration they
have for History. There are to be seen at one prospect the Town which was
Besieged, the Ground-plot of the three Camps that were pitched before it; the
place through which the Switzers passed to force the Burgundians; the Field of
Battle, and the passage of the Flight* How many Valiant Hero's perished in that
Engagement! What a prodigious Mass of Riches was transmitted from the Camp of
the Vanquished Forces to that of the Victorious! This in my Mind is an ample
Theme for Meditation, but too copious to be described here.

AVENCHES or WIFLISPURG,
Situated at the distance of two Hours Journey from thence is the remainder of
that noted Roman Colony of which so great a number of Inscriptions are as yet
extant: It is generally believed that Vespasian's Father lived there for some
time, and Suetonius declares that, Faenus apud Helvetios exercuerat. He
followed the Trade of Usury in Switzerland; but he does not name the Town. I
find it expressed upon a Medal of Domitian, cited by Goltzius, COLOnia JULIA
AVENTICORum; neither is the modern Name of this Town in French any thing else
but a Translation of the ancient, for Avenches apparently proceeds from
Aventicum. Its Episcopal See was removed to Lausanna, A. C. 600. In the
Churches, in the Town-Walls, and in the Fields round about are to be seen so
many rare Monuments of Antiquity, that it would be too tedious to make a
particular description of 'em. In the middle of the Highway lie such huge
pieces of Stone, that their excessive thickness and weight hinders 'em from
being fixed in any other place: There I observed the admirable remains of
Sculpture and Architecture; yet they did not seem to me to have been wrought in
the best Times, as that of Augustus (...) Adrian: The Frize, Architrave,
Wreaths, Mouldings, Cornices, Acroteria, and Gable-ends are all beset with
Ornaments, and among these is a very large one of Dolphins, leaning their backs
one against another. I suppose they may be the Ruins of some Triumphal-Arch;
but I cannot forbear here to represent to your view some of those Inscriptions,
which appeared to me to be very fine: The following is to be seen in the great
Church.

-- LEGATO IMP. CAES. NERV AE AUG. GERM. LEG. XVI. FLAVIAE FIRMAE ET LEGATO
IMP. NERVAE TRAIANI CAESARIS AVG. GERMANICI DACICI LEG. VI. FIRMAE SODALI
FLAVIALI PRAETORI AERARI MILITARIS LEGATO IMP. NERVAE TRAIANI CAESARIS AVG.
GERMANICI DACICI POVINCIAE LVGDVNENSIS CONSVLI LEGATO IMP. NERVAE TRAIANI
CAESAR. AVG. GERMANICI DACICI AD CENSVS ACCIPIENDOS. COLONIA PIA FLAVIA
CONSTANS EMERITA AVENTICVM HELVETIORVM FOEDERATA PATRONO. In the Chapel of St.
Mary Magdalen this Inscription is to be read.

NVMINIBVS AVG. ET GENIO COL. HELL. APOLLINI SACR. Q. POSTVM. HYGINVS ET POSTVM.
HERMES LIB. MEDICIS ET PROFESSORIB. D. S. D. These three others are extant at
Villars, sirnam'd Monk, by reason of a beautiful Convent which was erected in
that Place.

I. DEAE AVENTIAE ET GENI. INCOLAR. T. IANVARIVS FLORIANVS ET P. DOMITIVS
DIDYMVS CURATORES COL. EX STIPE ANNVA.

II. DEAE AVENT. T. TERTIVS SEVERUS. CVR. COLON. IDEMQVE AL. CVI INCOLAE
AVENTICENS. PRIM. OMNIVM OB EJUS ERGA SE MERITA. TABVLAM ARG. P. L. POSVER.
DONVM D. S. P. EX H-S V C E D. D. D.

III. DONATO CAES AVG. -- SALVIANO EXACTOR -- TRIBVTORVM IN HELL -- COMMVNIS
VICARIVS --

At Wiflispurg one may observe a kind of Tower in a Wall flanked on the inside
as all the others are that I have seen of the Roman Building. There are also
daily found Medals from the first Times to that of Constantius, which induces
us to believe, that it was demolished under his Reign. However, it is certain,
that the Goths, Huns, and other barbarous Nations completed its ruin by the
Irruption which they made under Valentinian. It is supposed that

PAYERNE.
Paterniacum derives its Name from Graccius Paternus, who was Commander in
Chief there for the Romans. Many Inscriptions still remain there, of which I
have only transcribed this: JOVI OM. GENIO LOCI FORTUNAE REDUCI APPIUS AUGUSTUS
DEDICA.

There I saw the Church which a Queen of France caused to be built, I mean that
Berthe concerning whom the Proverb is so common, Du temps que Berthe filoit: At
the time when Berthe was employed in Spinning. Very few Strangers pass by that
way without taking notice of a Saddle which (as they say) was used by Julius
Caesar. Indeed it is so highly esteemed by the Inhabitants that they have hung
it up before the Townhouse, to be exposed to public View, and to save
Passengers the labor of going any farther to seek after it. I observed the
Stirrups that belong to it; but were any worn at that time, my Lord? I am
persuaded that your Highness being so judicious, would answer in the Negative;
if you should think fit to make me any reply: Galen seems to intimate, that the
Romans were subject to a certain Disease for want of making a stay for their
Feet when they rode on Horseback; and Stirrups are undoubtedly a modern
Invention; nay, there are some whole Nations that do not as yet make use of
'em. However, I shall have a due deference for Tradition, and shall not condemn
those Persons who are willing to believe, that the Stirrups which are kept at
Payerne, were really serviceable to Julius Caesar.

Although many Monuments of Antiquity are to be met with throughout the whole
Country of Switzerland, yet they do not appear in any part of it more
frequently than at

GENEVA.
For the Church, the College, the public Places, and the private Houses are
all full of 'em; nay, in the very Lake it self there is a kind of Rock which is
called La Pierre de Nijon by the Inhabitants, and which, without doubt, was an
Altar dedicated to Neptune: The Hole that remains above is apparently the place
of the Idol: Diverse Instruments, heretofore used in Sacrifices, are often found
thereabouts; and certain Fishermen who dived in this Lake some Years ago,
brought up from thence a very long Brass Knife, which was a kind of Secespita
of the ancient Priests; so that all these Circumstances taken together may well
serve to illustrate the Matter, and to justify my first Asseveration. What can
I declare concerning Geneva, that is not already known to your most Serene
Highness, who is so well versed in the knowledge of the peculiar Interests of
States, as also of the Original of their various Leagues, Differences, and
public Transactions. This City is better secured at present than in the
preceding Age from the Enterprises of its Enemies, and it has reason more
especially to ground its safety upon the Protection of our Kings; nay, the
Prudence, Equity, and Power of the great Prince who now Reigns will certainly
deliver it from all occasions of Fear. Otherwise, the Inhabitants are not
unmindful of their true Interest; their Arsenal is always maintained in a good
Condition; and there they show with Joy the Spoils of the Savoyards, who twice
failed in their attempt to surprise the Place. These unpleasant Relations (my
Lord) are not agreeable to me, I would much more willingly certify to your
Highness, that there are some very fine Medals in those Parts. M. Turretin
alone showed me two or three hundred of Gold, with a large one of the Emperor
Valens made of the same Metal; neither is the Rarity of 'em sufficiently known
to any Persons, but those that are accustomed to apply themselves to this kind
of Study. The Library is filled with variety of useful and curious Books. M.
Sertori who has the charge of it, caused me to observe in the great Manuscript
Bible of St. Jerome's Translation, the Title of the First Epistle of St. John,
Incipit Epistola ad Spartos: It is presumed, that the Transcriber was mistaken,
and that instead of Spartos he ought to have put Sparsos, i. e. Dispersed, as
St. Peter directs his first Epistle, Electis Advenis dispersionis. To the Elect
Strangers scattered, etc. or Parthos, in reregard that St. Augustine (l. 2.
Quaest. Evangel. 39.) makes mention of an Epistle of St. John, ad Parthos, to
the Parthians, which is the same of which we now treat; and he cites 1. Joan.
3. Dilectissimi nunc Filli Dei sumus; We are now the well-beloved Sons of God,
etc.

The Bible is highly esteemed at Geneva, and I cannot better put an end to my
Discourse than with this Observation. I shall likewise at the same time bring
both my Postscript and whole Letter to a Conclusion, entreating your most
Serene Highness with all manner of humble Submission, not to be displeased at
their length, in regard that some considerable time would be requisite to make
an Abstract of 'em: Therefore if your Highness shall vouchsafe to excuse the
other Defects, I shall be more emboldened for the future, to present to You the
product of my Studies: In the mean while I shall only beg leave to subscribe my
self with all due Respect,

My Lord, Your most Serene Highness's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant,
Charles Patin.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for Abel Swall, and Tim. Child, at the Unicorn in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE English Historical Library; or a short View and Character of most of the
Writers now extant, either in Print of Manuscript, which may be serviceable to
the Undertakers of a General History. Written by W. Nicolson, Archdeacon of
Carlisle. 8 vo. The Essays or Councils, Civil and Moral, of Sir Fran. Bacon,
Lord Verulam and Viscount St. Alban. With a Table of the Colors of Good and
Evil; and a Discourse of the Wisdom of the Ancients: To which is added in this
new Edition the Character of Queen Elizabeth; never before Printed in English.
8 vo. The History of the Revolutions in Sweden, occasioned by the Change of
Religion and Alteration of Government in that Kingdom. Written in French by the
Abbot Vertat, Printed the last Year at Paris. And now Englished by J. Mitchel,
M. D. 8 vo, The Evangelical History, or the Life of our Savior Jesus Christ,
comprehensively and plainly Related, with practical Inferences and Discourses
thereupon. Adorned with Copper Cutts. 8 vo. The Evangelical History, Part
Second: being the Lives and Acts of the Holy Apostles, comprehensively Related
according to the Holy Scriptures, and the Writings of the Primitive Fathers.
Illustrated with the Effigies of the Apostles, and a Map of their Travels,
fairly Engraven in Copper. 8 vo. Romae Antiquae Notitia: Or the Antiquities of
Rome, containing a Short History of the Rise, Progress, and Decay of the
Commonwealth, a Description of the City, and an Account of their Religion,
Government and Customs, with Copper Cutts of the principal Buildings, etc.
Written by Basil Kennet of Oxon. Dedicateed to the Duke of Gloucester. 8 vo.
CAMDEN's Brittannia, newly Translated into English. With large Additions, and
Maps of every County, Engraved anew. Folio. Thesaurus Geographicus, a new Body
of GEOGRAPHY, or Complete Description of the Earth. Containing the general
Doctrine of Geography, and a particular account Geographical, Topographical and
Political of all known Countries. With accurate Maps of each Country. Engraven
in Copper. Folio. The Gentleman's Journal for the War, a Description of the
principal Fortifications in Europe, with Draughts Engraven in Copper of each
Place. Four Parts. Quarto, whereof the last containing the Descriptions and
Plans of Dinant; Winoxberg, Calais, Tournay, and Cambray, may be had alone.
Terence's Comedies, made English: With his Life, and some Remarks at the end.
By several Hands. Octavo. Plautus's Comedies, Amphrytrion, Rudens, and
Epidicus, Englished with Critical Remarks. Octavo. De Quatuor summis Imperiis;
An Historical Account of the Four Monarchies, viz. Assyrian, Persian, Grecian,
and Roman; continued to the Time of the Emperor Charles V. Being a Relation of
the most considerable Occurrences that have happened from Noah's Flood to the
Year 1620. Written in Latin by J. Sleyden. Newly Englished. Octavo. The Memoirs
of the Count De -- Written in French by Monsieur De St. Euvremont. Made
English. Octavo.
map of Germany and Netherlands A Map of that part of GERMANY, The NETHERLANDS
etc. through which the Seur Patin traveled.



