THE Doctrine of Baptism, And the Distinction of the COVENANTS OR A Plain
Treatise, wherein the four Essentials of BAPTISM, Viz. 1. Who is a Lawful
Minister thereof; 2. What is the true Form thereof; 3. Into whose name it is to
be administered; 4. Who is a fit Subject thereof,


Are diligently handled.

As also the business of the two Covenants, wherein is proved that the Covenant
of life, is not made to the seed of Believers, as coming out of their Loins,
and therefore that the baptism of Infants is drawn from thence by a false
Consequence.

By THOMAS PATIENT, a Laborer in the Church of Christ at DUBLIN.

Acts 22 16. And now why tarriest thou, Arise and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling one the name of the Lord. Ephesians. 2.12. Being aliens from the
Common wealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenants of promise. John 3.5.6.
Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water,
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; For that which is
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit.
London, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at his house at Sir John Old
Castles in Py-corner 1654.

The Epistle to the Christian Reader, to whom the Author wishes all grace and
peace from God the Father through our Lord Jesus Christ.
THere being but a small moment of time from the Lord allotted to men in this
life, to run that Christian race set before them; And considering what Christ
says, That whilst it is day we ought to work, for the night comes when no
man can work; And further considering, that Christ Jesus, is gone to fetch a
Kingdom, and to return, having left his Servants several Talents to be
accounted for at his coming, when every man's reward, or punishment, shall be
according to his works, which ought to provoke and stir up every Christian to a
conscientious and careful improvement of his strength, for Gods glory and the
service of his generation in this pilgrimage.

These, among many other motives, prevailed with me to present this Treatise to
thy view, being also pressed thereunto by many of Gods People, formerly in
England, and of late in Ireland, who have heard me upon the same Subject
deliver the substance of what is herein contained, both in England, and in
Ireland.

Beloved Reader, I know the World is filled with many Books stuffed with very
much of man's wisdom, which, though the Apostle says is enmity against God;
yet we find such discourses most pleasing to the carnal hearts of men in our
age. Therefore if that be the thing that thy itching ears do thirst after, thou
may spare thy self that labor, for thou will find that with as much
simplicity and plainness as possibly I could, I have herein given out by clear
Scripture-evidence, what the Lord has made known to me.

For the clearing of this weighty point which God by his mighty power has
subjected my heart to believe, the which formerly by reason of my ignorance and
error I was much averse unto.

For after it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, and to work a change in my
heart, the great and weighty thing that God presented to me was, to make my
calling and election sure; which I found to be a work filled with many
difficulties, considering how far Hypocrites might attain in the profession of
godliness, and that they might come to have the counterfeit of all the Grace in
the Child of God. And this the rather appeared more difficult, because I found
my own heart so desperately wicked and full of deceit, as Jerem. 17.9. and also
found the wiles, and subtilties of the Devil, to be various, and I constantly
under several temptations, and deep desertions when God (though for a little
season) withdrew himself, and the light of his countenance from me. At which
time, I judged it my only thing necessary to prove whether CHRIST were in me,
and my faith right, as also my sincerity to the Lord. At which time I found but
little settled rest or peace, till the Lord had put that great question out of
doubt, in giving me a sure and well grounded confidence of my interest in him,
till which time, I found little disposition to search narrowly into other
truths, which I then thought to be too remote for me to exercise my self in,
having received so much spiritual benefit, in communing with God and mine own
heart, and searching out the difference betwixt the speaking of Gods Spirit, my
own spirit, and the spitit of Satan.

But when I came to some good measure of settlement in my confident and well
grounded hopes, that I was the Lords, then presently was I tempted, touching
the main and material fundamental points in Religion; Which temptations, as
they were a great cause of trouble and restlesness in my soul, so they
occasioned me with great eagerness, night and day, in use of the best means God
presented to me, to seek satisfaction in the same, at which time the Lord did
carry on my soul with much vehemence after him, so with much unweariedness.

For usually as one case and weighty question was answered to my satisfaction
and comfort, another was stated in my soul too hard for me, in which
experiences I for many years was exercised with all, in which time I was
ignorant of the true way, which Christ would have his people to walk in.

But presently being convinced of the unwarrantableness of the Government of
the Lordly Prelates, and the Liturgy in the Church of England, and the mixed
Communions in the Parish Assemblies, I was resolved, God willing, to examine
all Religion, as well in worship, and the order of Gods house, as I had done in
other points. But I at this time being by the divine power of God, converted
from the Church of England, though with a great deal of difficulty, being well
furnished with arguments from Pulpit and Print, and diverse able Disputants for
the defense of that false way; but God breaking in by the power of his Spirit
with clear Scripture Light subjected my heart to the obedience of the truth, so
that I found my heart closing with those truths in the love thereof.

At this time many godly Christians going to New England, and being come up in
my judgment to the way of New England in Faith and order, went over thither,
being not convinced of my error and great darkness in sprinkling the carnal
seed of Believers. But verily I thought I had good warrant for that practice,
having then in substance the same grounds for the defense thereof, that
generally to this day is urged for the same. Yet having in my heart, so clear a
light, discovering how shamefully in many things I had been deluded, and that
by those which I could not but have charity to think were the Lords own
Servants, and finding the danger of receiving truths by Tradition, was resolved
to examine that point of Baptism. And so I constantly resorted to the meetings
of the people in New England, desiring to have good satisfaction in them, and
their doctrine and practice, before I joined in Communion. In order thereunto I
constantly attended the preaching of the word, where hearing many, often
preaching for baptizing of children of believing parents; I began to examine
the grounds thereof, and the weight of their arguments, and genuine scope and
drift of the Scriptures, alleged by them to prove that point, and finding that
the Scriptures (...) generally (...) contrary to (...) and proper dri^^^^^
^cope: Also finding (...) th^s^ ^^^tion Argument by (...), ^o exceeding
contrary to several (...) of R^^igio^ which both the^ and I did believ^*

These things being hinted into (...) soul, I w^^ resolved to examine the (...)
I (...) formerly (...) great profit (...) several other ^^nts of Reli^^^ B^^
(...) this Resolution, temptations came in (...) my (...), that I was but weak
^^nd (...) ca^^ it were not a (...) did I think (...) ^any ^^^nent (...) for
Religion, Piety, Gifts and (...) should not discover (...) sooner (...) I;
therefore it (...) purpose (...) ^^me to trou^^^ my self; (...) whi^^ I had
this answer in (...) soul, that I had been too ^^ng mislead already o^ (...)
grou^^ (...) and (...)

(...) ^n the (...) cam^ (...) peop^^ (...) Not ^it (...) the (...) choice
(...) ^^ching their flocks by Night.

In the first place, this eminent truth was delivered and revealed to them,
when all the learned and eminent men in Israel had no knowledge thereof.

And finding the poor Thief on the Cross to have a sounder Judgment than the
General Synod, or Council of Learned Men at Jerusalem, and also the Speech of
Christ to this purpose in Matthew 11.25. where Christ thanks his Father for
hiding these things from the wise and prudent, and revealing them to Babes and
sucklings, out of his good pleasure, the spirit being like the wind, which
blows when and where it lists.

And also finding some of Christ's Disciples, bearing testimony of Christ, in
Luke 19.38, 39, 40. The Pharisees desired Christ to rebuke them; But Christ
answered and said, I tell you if these should hold their peace, the stones
would immediately ^^y out. Where, I observed Christ to desc^^^ and not to
ascend, he does not say, ^f his simple and weak discip^^ should neglect ^^eir
testimony; the (...) Pharisees would cry out; but if his disciples neglect, the
stones should, which manifests that God loves to choose the most simple and
foolish things, to reveal his will by.

And then again I found God had not so much engaged by promise to reveal
himself to men, considered of such outward and excellent parts, but in Psalm
25.14. The Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant. And Christ says in John 15.15. You are my Friends, if you
do whatsoever I command you; henceforth I call you not Servants, for the
Servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you Friends, for all
things that I have heard of the Father I have made kno^^ you. And David says,
Thou have made me wiser than my teachers, because I have kept thy Commandments.
Where the Lord promises t^aching principally to such as fear him and
conscienciously keep his Commandments, guiding them in Judgment, and in the
way that he should choose.

Notwithstanding, I found further Objections in my heart, that though it was
not men of parts, and outward Learning; but bab^ and suc^^ings, having their
hearts bowed to obedi^^^; and to the holy fear of God, That God would teach,
yet I was sensible of so much evil in my heart, that I questioned whether I
might not be mislead; upon which I was put upon humble and fervent prayers to
the Lord to guide and teach me, and to reveal his mind to me, having again
resolutions to seek the mind of God in this truth, and great encouragements to
believe that God would satisfy me, and the rather from my former experience of
his goodness having satisfied me in many weighty points that I was every way as
much unsettled in.

Upon which this Temptation came in afresh upon me, what need I trouble my self
in a point so Disputable, for if by my search and trial in that matter, I
should come to see grounds swaying in conscience against childrens baptism,
that then I should be generally despised, and slighted of all the godly in that
Country, and not only be frustrated of Communion and Fellowship with them, but
must exp^^^ to suffer imprisonment, confiscation of goods, it banishment at
least, which would be my ruin, not knowing where to go, but in the woods
amongst Iulians, and wild beasts?

Under this Temptation I had a sore conflict, my evil and treacherous heart
resisting the blessed motions of the Spirit of God, but considering that the
ground of these discouraging arguments did arise from the flesh and the Devil,
as Peter when he said Pity thy self Master, this thing shall not be to thee, My
Resolution was as Christ says, Get thee behind me Satan, thou savourest not
the things of God.

Which put me in no small agony or conflict for some good space together; but
it pleased the Lord to set that Scripture home upon my heart, Buy the truth,
and sell it not, buy the truth at any rate, but sell it at no rate, if truth
cost me my life I must buy it, though I might have all the favor and
friendship in the world I must not sell it; this wrought in m^ a grounded and
settled resolution, that I would seek after the mind of God, as well in
suffering truths, as other, because Christ says, He that keeps the word of my
patience, I will keep him in the hour of Temptation; apprehending that to be
the words of Christ's patience, he embracing and practizing whereof would bring
the cross (that is, contempt and hatred from all sorts of men) I found Christ
said for this cause he was born, and came into the World, to bear witness to
the truth, these things satisfied me, and that from the Lord, that I ought to
make diligent search what his mind was in this point.

Hereupon I found the special presence of God with me, carrying out my heart to
the Lord by Faith and earnest Prayer to be instructed and guided; all which
time I was not acquainted with any that opposed Christening children, and
conversed only with such as were for that practice; Finding my carnal part to
desire satisfaction in Infant Baptism: but the more I conferred with, or heard
any preach for it, the more was I convinced of the folly and ignorance of that
judgment and practice; having heard one man preach fifteen Sermons upon this
subject, urging that in substance which many considerable Authors had wrote.

I also searched many Authors who wrote thereof night and day, with much
attention, weighing and examining the grounds they urged, many times breaking
my sleep by watching in the night season; at the last it pleased the Lord to
reveal his mind to me, so that I was enlightened in my understanding to see
answers to whatsoever I had heard, the Lord breaking in with, not only a clear
light in me, as to the matter in question, but three days one after another,
coming into my soul with sealing manifestations of his Love, and that with such
Scriptures so pertinent and suitable to my condition. There being a Warrant at
this time issued out to apprehend and bring me before the General Court in New
England which was no trouble to me, being filled with unspeakable joy, as I
walked up and down in the Woods in that Wilderness, about my business, and
this discovery from God did much settle me in that truth, which in substance
thou will find in this Treatise; Upon which God wrought in me a true
Repentance, and sorrow of heart, that I had so long both in opinion and
practice, gone in so sinful a way, as I found that to be.

I have not in this Treatise gone about to undertake a confutation of any one
man, but upon my long experience in this Subject matter, have taken up the main
Argument, which is the foundation that all the rest are grounded upon, and have
bent my understanding in answer to that, which being overthrown, all other
Arguments fall with it.

Christian Reader, I judge the clear evidence of Scripture light, which I do
hear give out to confirm the Dipping Believers, will be sufficient to reprove
all that darkness generally asserted in many large Discourses, about this point
of christening of children.

But further, That which I have had much in observation has been a great deal
of malice and contempt discovered from the devil, against this truth.

First, In that the Devil did by his subtilties and fair pretenses in the first
apostasy, sow this error in the minds of people, that this Ordinance was of use
to regenerate and convey grace, and then who should be thought unfit to receive
it, it had been a great unmercifulness to let children or any be without the
same.

Thus that subtle enemy the Devil, destroys Gods Ordinances, and sets up
another of his own in the room thereof, which still remains upon the Papists,
and generally all our carnal Protestants, both Priests and people, concluding
the dangerous estate of that child that dies unbaptized, therefore Midwives on
this ground were tolerated to baptize if a child were like to die, putting such
a value thereon, as if it had conveyed grace.

But many good men have renounced this, though the devil has showed his malice
in blinding them still to practice the same evil, though upon another ground
lately found out, and that is the subject this book opposes. Others see the
darkness and error of Christening carnal children, upon any ground; but the
Devil shows his rage against that Ordinance in them, that rather than they
will embrace it as from the Lord, contradict and oppose the same saying, There
is no Ordinance or Church to be found in the world. His malice also appears in
such as boast of their being above Ordinances, saying, That Christ and
Ordinances are at end, that dispensation being for that time or age, but now
they have Christ in Spirit, the substance being come, the shadows vanish.

Thus the Devil strangely appears like himself; as if he had forgot his
language in the Papist and carnal Protestant, that this Ordinance regenerated
in the very work done, and that the salvation or damnation depended upon it;
when now in others, what is washing or dipping in a little water, but a low or
legal thing? So that if the Devils delusions and inventions are not closed
withal, then Christ's Ordinances are vilified and contemned.

And further, Satan manifests his malice in throwing contempt upon the obedient
and upright practisers of the same, to raise prejudices from a story of what
strange Creatures were of that opinion at Munster in Germany, and stirs up
others to pry into the dark side of the Saints, I mean their personal
frailties, As the Egyptians in the Red Sea, to their own destructions; the
Cloud was darkness to them, but gave light to the Israelites, Exo. 14.20. the
Egyptians eyes were only on the black or dark side of the Cloud, therefore they
stumbled and fell, but the Israelites had the light part thereof for their
safety, which is compared to the conversation of the Saints Heb. 12.1. where
there is a light part, their graces and virtues, but their dark part is their
failings, which malice or prejudice will not suffer many men to see beyond; For
a man that hates his brother walks in darkness, as John says; the tempter
accused Job, That he did not serve God for naught, he was hedged about, God had
preferred him to honor and riches and place of authority in the world, as
appears in Job 29. which malice he now adays manifests against the
prosperity of his Saints, desiring to stain their holy obedience with
improbrious language of self seeking and preferment. When the professors of
this truth have been the persons ordinarily stoned, and suffering the violence
of the multitudes, where they have not been protected by godly Magistrates.

Christian Friend, do not read this book with a heart prejudiced against the
same for the sake of the Instrument, or plainess of the style; it was not
intended to please men, but in faithfulness to discharge a duty to God from
whom I received what I have laid before thee; And to answer the call of many
Christians, which have been for some years past neglected, through my
indisposedness to this work: However, if thou shall by this my weak endeavor
reap any satisfaction or edification in the truth, let God the Author of every
good and perfect gift have the praise, which is only due to him, and not to his

Unworthy Servant, THOMAS PATIENT.

A Table of the principal things contained in this Book.
THe occasion of the words in the text Act. 2.37, 38. laid open, page 1. The
reasons why the holy Ghost descended in an extraordinary manner upon the
Apostles, p. 3. The contents of Peter's Sermon to the Jews upon the descent of
the Holy Ghost, ib. The benefit of preaching the Gospel, p. 4. What is the
beginning of true Conversion, ib. How they that begin to receive the saving
light, are affected, both toward it, and them that hold it forth, ib.
Obedience accompanies true conversion, ib. All called to repentance by the
Gospel, p. 5. Whoever believes and repents ought to be baptized, ib. The
Ordinance of baptism explained, ib. The four essentials of baptism, p. 6. Who a
lawful Minister of baptism, ib. The true form of baptism, p. 8. Into whose name
baptism is administered, page 14. The subject of baptism, p. 17. Faith and
Repentance go before baptism, ib. Believers should offer themselves to be
baptized, p. 20. Lydia and her Household together converted, p. 21. The Jailer
and his Household together converted, ib. Stephanus and his Household together
converted, ib. The Ordinance of baptism long neglected, and an idol set in its
room, p. 23. The Papists hold that the Ordinance of baptism conveith grace by
the very work done, which is so generally confuted by all Protestant Authors
that it is not worth the speaking of, p. 25. The Covenant of life not made to
the seed of believers as coming out of their loins; and therefore the baptism
of infants drawn thence by a false consequence, ib. Two Covenants, the one of
Works, the other of Grace, or the one Old, the other the New, p. 29. Why though
the Covenant of Grace be absolute, yet the promises are held forth under a
condition, p. 35. Faith the gift of God, p. 36. Repentance the gift of God, ib.
The Covenant of grace obscurely delivered to our first Parents, p. 37. The New
Covenant not entailed upon any fleshly line, p. 38. What is meant by the
blessedness promised to Abraham and to his seed, page 39. Circumcision proved
to be no covenant of eternal life, but a typical and carnal Covenant, p. 42.
How the word Everlasting is taken in the Law, ib. First argument to prove
Circumcision a covenant of works, page 44. Second argument to prove
Circumcision a covenant of works, p. 48. The sealing use of Circumcision proved
to be peculiar unto Abraham, p. 53. An Appendix to the second argument to prove
circumcision a covenant of works, p. 55. Third argument to prove circumcision a
covenant of works, p. 57. Fourth argument to prove circumcision a covenant of
works, p. 60. Fifth argument to prove circumcision a covenant of works, p. 61.
Sixth argument to prove circumcision a covenant of works, p. 65. Seventh
argument to prove circumcision a covenant of works, p. 70. To say that the
covenant of grace is entailed on the flesh, overthrows the main fundamental
points of our religion, p. 71. The third General Head p. 84. Somewhat offered
to prove that God presently upon the Fall made an outward carnal covenant,
entailed upon the flesh, ib. Why the covenant of circumcision made to Abraham
and his seed, and not to others, p. 88. To defend a covenant of life entailed
on the flesh, is virtually to deny that Christ is come in the flesh, p. 93.
None have right to the Covenant of grace, but such a^ are united to Christ by
faith, p. 94. Answers to such Scriptures as are alleged to prove the Baptism of
Infants, p. 101. An answer to that text Acts 2.39. p. 101. An answer to that
text, 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 105. An answer to that text Romans 11.16, 17. p. 110. An
answer to that text, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. p. 119. Faith made not Israelites
capable of performing the Ceremonies of the Law, p. 130. An answer to that Text
Mat. 19.13. p. 132. An Exposition of that Text Gal. 4.21. p. 140. Why the
Ordinance of Baptism is administered but once, the Ordinance of the Lords Supper
often, p. 168. What things are essential to a particular visible Church p. 169.
Unbaptized persons not to be admitted into Church fellowship, p. 172. The
Commands of Christ must not be disputed, p. 177.
THE Doctrine of Baptism, AND THE Distinction of the COVENANTS; OR A Plain
Christian Treatise, explaining the Doctrine of Baptism, and the two Covenants
made with Abraham, and his twofold Seed.
ACTS 2.37, 38. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts,
and said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall
we do?

Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of Sins, and you shall receive the Gift
of the Holy Ghost.


THese words of my Text have a special dependence upon the words foregoing in
the Chapter; The occasion of the words in the Text laid open.
for in the beginning of the Chapter you shall find that the Apostles and the
Church were all with one accord in one place, when the Day of Pentecost was
fully come; And according to the promise that Jesus Christ commanded them, to
wait for, and that John had foretold of, That one should come after him, that
should baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, the which was at this time
fulfilled, for as the Author of the Acts here relates, Suddenly there came a
sound from Heaven as of a Rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the House
where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them Cloven Tongues, like as
of fire, and it sat upon each of them, And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Now this I understand to be the Baptism which John speaks of viz. that of the
Holy Ghost, and of fire, which Christ should dispense, as you may see was
extraordinary, and upon special occasion communicated to the Apostles, they
being now to give testimony of Christ's Death, Resurrection, and Ascension. The
Lord in order to this work communicates to them the extraordinary Gifts of the
holy Ghost, and that in an extraordinary manner; For here was outward signs,
which were cloven Tongues of fire resting on them; and here was also the Holy
Ghost with the extraordinary Effects of it, as the inward things signified by
the outward sign, all which was (I understand) extraordinary, for the fitting
of these Apostles to that extraordinary work which God had to do by them.

First, They were to be eyewitnesses of Christ's Majesty in the flesh.

Secondly, The Reasons why the Holy Ghost descended in an extraordinary manner
upon the Apostles.
They were to be Master Builders to lay a Foundation, which all after
Ministers, to the end of the World, were to build on, they being Penmen of
Scripture.

Thirdly, They were now to overthrow all the Jewish Worship, and all the
Mosaical Administrations, put to an end by Christ's Death; and to furnish them
to this extraordinary work, which Christ, as an effect of his Session at the
right hand of God, pours down these gifts upon them, as beforementioned; this
being noised abroad, how they spoke with other Tongues, the multitude came
together, wondering at them, and some thought they had been drunk, but Peter
standing up with the eleven, began to lift up his voice to teach them.

And first, The Contents of Peter's Sermon to the Jews upon the descent of the
Holy Ghost.
He proves by Scripture that these gifts of the Holy Ghost were formerly
promised by the Lord, and, as an effect of his Ascension* now given to them;
and he endeavors in this Sermon preached to prove,

First, That Jesus was the Christ, a man approved of God by Miracles and Signs,
that God did work by him, amongst them.

Secondly, He endeavors to prove by Scripture, that he did suffer and die
according to the Counsel and Will of God.

Thirdly, That he did rise again from the Dead, which he from Scripture does
justify.

And that in the fourth place, God had exalted him by his right hand to be both
Lord and Christ, and he proves that, by the visible gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which they did see and hear; and lest they should not understand who he meant,
he tells them in the verse before my Text, That it was that same Jesus which
they had crucified, that God had made Lord and Christ.

Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?

The benefit of preaching the Gospel.
Whence observe from the text, That preaching, and hearing the Gospel preached,
is a special means to convert Souls, as appears when Peter preached and clearly
held forth, that he whom they had crucified and slain was now to be Lord and
Judge, and exalted to that Dignity by God the Father; When they heard this they
were pricked in their Hearts.

What is the beginning of true Conversion.
In the second place, We may observe from hence, that true conversion begins
with a prick in the heart.

Thirdly, They, when wrought upon and pricked in their hearts, said to Peter,
and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do? How they
that begin to receive the saving light, are affected both toward it, and them
that hold it forth.


Whence in the third place observe, That it is the disposition of such that
have the beginning of saving light, to desire more, and that from them whom God
has spoken to their Souls by.

Obedience accompanies true conversion.
Fourthly, That which they do earnestly enquire after is, what shall we do?
which respects obedience; they believing Christ to be a Lord as well as a
Savior, know that he must be submitted to, therefore said they, What shall we
do?

Whence we observe, That a true converted soul is an obedient Soul.

In verse 38. the answer of Peter to them is in these words, Repent, and be
baptized every one of you, from whence we do observe further, All called to
Repentance by the Gospel.
that where the Gospel is preached, all men are called to repent.

Lastly, Whosoever believes and repents ought to be baptized.
That it is the duty of every man that believes and repents, to be baptized.

Now this last observation of the text is that which I shall at present speak
to for the satisfaction of such Souls that may at present be doubtful of this
truth; and for the confirming such souls as do already believe it.

Now for the better and more clear speaking to this point in hand I shall
explain what this Ordinance of Baptism is; And that in four things, The
Ordinance of Baptism explained.
which will more clearly appear if we examine the Commission that Christ gives
his Disciples in Mat. 28.19, 20. where we find v. 16. that the eleven Disciples
were sent by Christ, who has all power in heaven and earth given to him, v.
18. and v. 19. Christ says, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
whatsoever I have commanded you, From whence you may observe four things
contained in this Commission, essential to this Ordinance of Baptism; Here is
first the Ministry, The four Essentials of Baptism.
secondly the Form, thirdly the Name into which, and fourthly the Subjects.

First, The Ministers that must dispense this Ordinance, and that is preaching
Disciples, and so in the 16. verse are the eleven denominated, then the eleven
disciples went away into Galilee, and Jesus (in verse 18.) came and spoke unto
them, saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth; Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations baptizing them.

Who a lawful Minister of Baptism.
Whence you may observe, that the persons bid to go are Disciples enabled to
teach the doctrine of the Gospel for the conversion of souls to faith, and
repentance; for it is clear, That they that are bid to teach; are bid to
baptize also; so that from this Commission I gather, that a disciple enabled to
bring down God to a soul, and to bring a soul again up to God, is a lawful
Minister of Baptism; for that is the tenor of the New Covenant, Heb. 8.10. I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people; and I am my beloveds,
and my beloved is mine, Canticles c. 3. so that as God in Christ is to be
opened, and that in all the fundamental Doctrines of faith for man's salvation,
so is the souls conformity to God to be preached, as the souls duty to God
again; so that where God has furnished a Minister with abilities from himself
to declare the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance, to conversion, and having
converted that soul, is furnished with the knowledge of God to teach to this
soul all the fundamental Ordinances, according to the Commission which says,
Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you; It is without doubt
that this is a justifiable Minister sent from the Lord according to the
Commission. But though a man should be able to preach the doctrine of Faith,
and that ably for the conversion of souls unto that faith, yet being destitute
of the true knowledge of the doctrine of Baptism, and how it ought to be
dispensed, to be sure, this man is not a justifiable Minister according to the
Commission, because he is ignorant of his Commission, that when he has
converted souls to the faith, neither knows how to discover to these men the
fundamental Ordinances of God, neither can discover to them the evil of those
superstitious practices, which they have been nursed up in by the Traditions of
their Fathers.

Yet notwithstanding I dare not say, but so far as they have a gift they are
warranted to administer the same from the first of Peter 4 10. who says, Let
every one as he has received the gift Minister, and so it was lawful for any
Christian man in that sense to administer such gifts which God has bestowed on
them.

But sure it is, That these that are utterly unacquainted how to dispense the
Ordinance of Baptism, were never sent of God to dispense it, That instead of
dipping do sprinkle, and instead of the true subject A Believer, dispense it
upon a carnal ignorant child; and instead of doing it into the Name of Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, do sprinkle them at the naming of so many words only.

The true form of Baptism.
In the second place, the true form of Baptism is commanded of the Lord Jesus by
way of dipping, and, as it were, by drowning, overwhelming, or burying in
Water, and not by sprinkling with water, as appears many ways.

First, In that although there be frequent mention made of that appointment of
Christ, in his last Will and Testament, yet it is never expressed in the word,
that may be rendered Rantism or Sprinkling, but by the word that is rendered
Baptism or Dipping.

Secondly, In that the word by which it is so frequently expressed, does in
proper English signify to Dip, to plunge under water, and as it were to drown
them, so as with safety the party (as to the manner) may be drowned again and
again.

See the instance of Naaman, who dipped himself seven times in Jordan, 2 Kings
5.14. To this sense of the word (at least in this place) both the Greek,
Latin, and English Churches agree, as is affirmed by able Authors.

Thirdly, In that the phrase in which there is mention made of such an
appointment of Christ is affirmed, does necessarily import such a thing; and
therefore when mention is made of baptizing, which is commonly translated in,
or into, suits with Dipping, and not that Preposition, which signifies with,
and so suits with Sprinkling.

And therefore it may be as well rendered, I baptize you in Water, and he shall
baptize you in the Holy Spirit, Mark 1.8. So it is rendered, John did baptize in
the Wilderness, and in the River of Jordan, ver. 4, 5. or that John was in the
Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. And they were baptized in the Cloud, and in
the Sea, 1 Corinthians. 10. and ^. It may as well be rendered, I baptize you, or dip
you into Water, as it is rendered, they were casting a Net into the Sea, Mark
1.16. for which the words are affirmed to be the same, and it would be too
improper a Speech to say, John did baptize with the Wilderness, and they were
casting a net with the Sea.

Fourthly, That this appointment of Christ, is by way of Dipping, and not
sprinkling, appears.

In that for the resemblance and likeness hereunto the Israelites, passing
under the Cloud, and in the Sea, where the Egyptians, that were their Lords and
Commanders, their Pursuers and Enemies, that sought their destruction, were
drowned, left behind, and seen no more, is by the Holy Spirit, called a
Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were baptized in the Cloud.

Where observe, It is not here rendered with the Cloud, and with the Sea, as in
the other place; Mark 1.8. with Water, because it suits with sprinkling,
although the word be the same; But in the Cloud, and in the Sea, which suits
with Dipping or Overwhelming, and so with the appointment of Christ; they
passing through the midst of the Red, or bloody Sea, on dry land, which stood
on both sides as a Wall, and being under the Cloud as men (in a carnal eye)
overwhelmed and drowned, and yet truly saved, and safe from their Enemies.

Fifthly, That this appointment of Christ, was not by sprinkling, but by
dipping or putting the person into, or under Water, appears by Philips
baptizing the Eunuch, It is said, They went both down into the Water; both
Philip the baptizer, and the Eunuch, that was the person, to be baptized; and
being there in the water, Philip baptized or dipped him in that water, as John
did Jesus in the River of Jordan.

And it is said, They descended, or went down into the water, so they ascended
or went straight way up, or out of the water, see for this Acts 8.38, 39. Mat.
3.16. Mark the expression, And Jesus when he was baptized went up straightway
out of the Water, therefore he had been down in the water.

Sixthly, That this appointment of Christ, was not by sprinkling, but by
dipping, or as it were a drowning, appears, in that John the Baptizer (his work
being to baptize) remains in the Wilderness by the River of Jordan, and
afterward in Enon, near Salem, and the reason that is rendered, by the Spirit
of the Lord, why he abode there, was, because there was much water, which need
not have been, if that appointment could have been performed by sprinkling and
not by dipping, See Luke 3.2, 3. John 3. and 23.

Seventhly, That this appointment of Christ was not to be performed by
sprinkling, but by dipping, appears from the nature of the Ordinance it self;
for it is such an Ordinance as whereby the person that submits thereto, does
visibly put on Christ Jesus the Lord, and is hereby visibly planted into his
Death, holding forth therein a lively similitude and likeness unto his Death,
whereby only through faith, he now professes he has escaped death, and is in
hopes to obtain life everlasting, and so to have fellowship with him in his
Death, and to reckon himself dead with him to sin, Satan, the Law, and the
Curse, See Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.2, 3, 5, 7. and 9. 1 Cor. 15.29.

But the planting of a person into the likeness of death, is no way resembled
by sprinkling; but by dipping, it is lively set forth and demonstrated.

Eighthly, This appointment of Christ's baptism, is an Ordinance whereby the
person that submits thereto, does hereby visibly and clearly resemble the
burial of Christ, and his being buried, in respect of the old man, the former
Lusts and Corruptions (like the Egyptians) to be taken away and seen no more,
See Romans 6.4, 6. Col. 2.12. But sprinkling does no way lively resemble the
Burial of Christ, or the person being buried with him, as Dipping does.

Ninthly, This appointment of Christ's baptism is an Ordinance, whereby the
person that submits thereto, does visibly and lively hold forth herein the
Resurrection of Christ, declares him, whose life was taken away from the earth,
to be alive again, who although he dyed and was buried, yet was not left in the
grave to see corruption, but was raised again, and behold he lives for
evermore.

And as hereby he holds forth the Resurrection of Christ, so does he also his
own, being planted in the likeness thereof, so as to reckon himself to be in
Soul and Spirit, quickened and risen with Christ, from henceforth to live unto
God the Fountain of Life, and Christ Jesus the Lord, who dyed for him, and rose
again, and so to walk in newness of life in this present world, being also
begot into a lively hope, that in the world to come, he shall be raised and
quickened both in soul and body, to a life everlasting, See Romans 6.4, 5, 8, 11.
Acts 8.33, 35, 36. Col. 2.12. 1 Cor. 15.29. 1 Pet. 1.3.

But sprinkling does no way lively resemble the resurrection of Christ, or the
Soul or bodies rising, or being raised by him, as the way of dipping does.

Therefore this appointment of Christ, was and still is to be performed by way
of dipping or putting the person into, or under the water, and not by
sprinkling.

Tenthly, Dipping does hold forth a conformity to Christ in his sufferings and
afflictions, as Christ says, I have a Baptism; and how am I straightened until
it be accomplished, meaning his sufferings.

Now one end of Baptism is, to represent Christ's Sufferings, and our Sufferings
with him, which is in a lively manner set out by dipping into water, and
therefore when the Saints do express their afflictions, they do set them forth
by being in the depths, or in the deep waters, as David in Psalm 130. Out of
the depths have I cried unto the Lord, meaning deep afflictions, and God says
in Isaiah 43.2. When thou passest through the Waters, they shall not overflow
thee, meaning affliction, and therefore a believer, is to be dipped and
plunged, all over into the River or water, to hold forth, That now he must
resolve to take up the Cross of Christ and suffer; and not only so, but this
being raised and delivered out of the water again by the hands of the Minister,
does hold forth, that so shall such believing souls be saved, and delivered
from all their afflictions, as in Psalm. 34.17. Many are the Afflictions of the
righteous, but God shall deliver them out of all.

And that this does sign or signify our salvation, appears, in 1 Pet. 3.21 the
like figure whereunto Baptism does now save us and Mark 16.16. He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved; So that Baptism is to sign, and confirm
signally our Sufferings and Afflictions with Christ, so Salvation or
Deliverance from them all, the one in dipping and plunging him in Water, the
other in Raising him out again.

Into whose name Baptism is administered
The third thing that is essential in this Ordinance of Baptism, which I shall
speak to, will be what is meant by name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The
Command is, That the Mininister must dip them into the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, the which the Lord Jesus commanding must be therefore essential
to this Ordinance, I shall therefore endeavor to show you what is meant by
name here.

That by which Father, Son, and Spirit are made known, as a man is by his Name,
that is hereto be understood, by the name Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we know
the Gospel does hold forth one God, yet distinquished into Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, the name here is to be understood, that Gospel that does so set
forth God and describe him as the Subject Matter of our Faith, Acts 9.15. But
the Lord said unto Ananias, Go thy way, for he is a chosen Vessel unto me, to
bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and Children of Israel, for I will
show him how great things he must suffer for my names sake.

Now Name in this place, and in the Commission is to be understood, that
heavenly mystery of the Gospel, in which God is discovered and made known, as a
man by his name.

One part of the Gospel mystery consists of a Discovery of the name of the
Father, by which he is distinquishably made known from the Son and Spirit, and
that in these particulars.

First, In ordaining the Son, 1 Pet. 1.18. in choosing and electing the Son,
Isaiah 28.16. with 1 Pet. 2.5. in sending the Son, Gal. 4.4. John 3.16, 17, in
sealing the Son, John 6.27. in promising the Son, Isaiah 9.6. in bruising the
Son and putting him to grief, Isaiah 53. and laying all our iniquities upon the
Son, and to justify and freely accept such as believe in the Son. This I
understand is the Name of the Father.

And by the Sons Name is to be understood, that by which he makes known himself
to the Sons and Daughters of men, as to take Flesh, Heb. 2.14. Romans 9.5. and
1.3. He kept the Law in order to die, As that just one, or as a Lamb without
spot, and his making his Soul an offering for sin, as a perfect offering for
the sins and transgressions of his people, Heb. 10.12, 14. Isa. 53. and that he
did not only die for our Sins, but rose again for our Justification, Romans 4.25.
and ascended into Heaven, and makes intercession for us, Heb. 2.25. And pours
down the Spirit and gives gifts unto men, Zach. 12.10. Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12. all
this the Son makes himself known by as by a name, distinguishably from the
Father, and the Spirit.

And in the last place, the Spirit is made known in the Gospel, as that which
in the first place convinces the world of sin, John 16.8. and pricks men in
their hearts with a sense of sin, and the wrath of God due for sin, Acts 2.37.
and 29. And the work of the Spirit, by which that is made known, Is the
revealing of the Father, and the Son, and those great Mysteries unto the soul
of a poor convicted Sinner, for as Christ says, the Spirit of God shall lead
you into all truth, it shall take of mine, and show it to you, John 16. and so
no man does understand, the things of a man, but the Spirit of a man, that is
within him; So none shall or can understand the things of God, but by the
Spirit of God; for the Spirit of God searches out all things, even the deep
things of God 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. The Spirit does not only discover man's misery,
and his lost estate by reason of sin, but discovers a remedy which lies in the
great love of God in Christ (as before mentioned) and works in the heart,
true faith and repentance, disposing the heart to obedience, This is the proper
work or office of the Spirit, by which he is distinguishably known from the
Father and the Son.

And now, when the Soul shall come to the Preacher, and make known to him, that
the Spirit has experimentally made known unto him his lost and damnable estate
by sin, and that he same Spirit has discovered unto him, the great love of God
the Father, in the gift of Christ, to be a propitiation for sin, as one dying
for the chief of Sinners, and that the Spirit of God has made known all this
to him, and has wrought faith in his heart to believe it, and has changed his
heart from a Course of sin, to renewed obedience; for no soul can declare to a
Minister the true work of Conversion, but he must in so doing discover his
knowledge of the work of the Father, Son and Spirit, and into this does the
Minister baptize him, as in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And
thus much for these three particulars.

In the fourth place, The subject of Baptism.
we shall now come to the Subject that must be baptized, and that (as you have
heard) is one that is taught, Teach all Nations, baptizing them; and as my Text
says, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, which does hold forth the
person baptized to be a taught and repentant person.

But seeing the main thing in question has always seemed to be the Subject of
Baptism, who it is that is to be baptized; this I shall therefore most insist
upon, wherein I shall endeavor to make plain to you, first (as I say) that he
is to be a believer, a penitent person, as appears Mark 16.16. Go preach the
Gospel to every Creature, he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,
where observe,

That believing the Gospel is to go before baptizing, and Matthew 28.19. Teach
all Nations, Faith and Repentance go before baptism.
baptizing or dipping them? What them? them that are taught or made Disciples
by teaching, and in my Text you find, that Peter after Christ had poured down
the Spirit upon them does, (by that authority received from heaven) when he had
converted those Jews, command every one of them, to be baptized or dipped;
Repent and be baptized every one of you into the name of the Lord Jesus for the
remission of sins, and so in like manner you shall find Cornelius his family,
by Peter commanded to be baptized, Acts ^0.48. for says he to the six brethren
that were with him, How shall we forbid water that these should not be
baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we?

And he by the great authority which (as an extraordinary Apostle) he had from
Heaven, commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. So we find
Ananias in a special manner sent to the Apostle Paul at his first conversion to
the faith, as Acts 22.16. where he also by the authority received from Christ
in verse the 16. says, And now Paul why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized,
for the washing away of thy sins in calling upon the name of the Lord: where
you see the express command of God, enjoining him (upon his Conversion) to be
baptized.

And in the next place, As God has commanded his Ministers to baptize or dip
Believers only, and as his Ministers (by virtue of that authority from him)
have left standing Laws, and commands upon Disciples only to be baptized, so we
find, that they did practice that way and that only; of baptizing such as
believed and repented, Acts 2.40, 41, 42. So many as gladly received the word,
were baptized, and the same day there were added to the Church, three thousand
souls, And they continued in the Apostles Doctrine, Fellowship, Breaking of
Bread, and Prayer.

Whence you may observe the practice of the Apostles that were guided by the
infallible gifts of the Spirit, that first they converted before they baptized.

In like manner you shlla find in Acts 8.12, 13. where Philip was preaching to
the people in Samaria, But when they believed (he preaching the things
concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized
both Men and Women, Then Simon himself believed also; and when he was baptized,
he continued with Philip and wondered. So that you see this was the continued
course of Christ's Messengers sent by him.

First, They converted men by preaching, and then baptized them, In the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or in the name of the Lord Jesus, wherein the
name of the Father and Spirit are included, when his name is only mentioned. In
like manner you shall find in the same Chap. that Philip (by the Spirit of the
Lord, being directed to the Eunuch that did belong to Candace the Queen of the
Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her Treasure, and had been at Jerusalem
for to worship, was returning, and reading Isaiah the Prophet, then Philip
joined himself to his Chariot, and upon some discourse together, he from the
aforesaid Scripture, preached unto him Jesus, in Acts 8.32, etc. And as they
went on their way they came to a certain Water, and the Eunuch said, See, here
is Water, what hinders me to be baptized? Philip said, If thou believe with
all thy heart it is lawful, (implying it was unlawful for a man (not believing)
to be baptized, And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and he commanded the Chariot o stand still, and they went both down
into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him, and when they
were come out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip that the
Eunuch saw him no more, and he went on his way rejoicing.

From all these words you may observe, That Philip is said to preach Christ
unto this man, and upon his coming to the water he said, What lets? Believers
should offer themselves to be baptized.
where you see, It is the duty of such as believe to offer themselves to be
baptized, and that there is no let or hinderance to the Ordinance of Baptism
but unbelief, and therefore says he, If thou believe with all thy heart thou
may, (or it is lawful, as the word more properly may be read) plainly
holding forth, that all both young and old, that did not believe, it was
unlawful for them to be baptized.

And you shall find several families also baptized upon their being converted,
which many (through ignorance and want of taking notice of what the Scripture
speaks) say, it is probable, they had some Infants in them.

But to prevent mistakes in the minds of any that so think, I shall prove, That
these families were all converted Disciples so as to believe the Gospel; as for
instance, First the Family of Lydia, Acts 16.14, 15. And a certain women named
Lydia, a Seller of Purple, of the City Thiatyra (which worshipped God) heard
us, whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended to the things which were
spoken of Paul, and when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us,
saying, If ye judge me faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide, and
she constrained us.

Now here in this Text, Lydia and her household together converted.
Lydia is only mentioned as to have been converted, no mention made, what her
household was, only that they were baptized, but in the last verse, viz. the 40.
of that Chapter, It is said, That when Paul and Sylas were put out of the
Gaolers house, they went and entered into the house of Lydia, and when they had
seen the Brethren they comforted them and departed, where you may clearly see,
That Lydia's house consisted of Brethren, capable of being visited and
comforted by Paul and Sylas, as well as Lydia whose household they were.

And also in the same Chapter you have mention made of the Jailer and his
Household, The Jailer and his household together converted.
all which were baptized in the 31, 32, 33, and 34. Verses, In which place you
shall upon reading find, this to be true, that they spoke unto him the word of
the Lord, and to all that were in his house, and verse 34. He set meat before
them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.

Where it is plain, That the whole household of the Jailer heard the word of
God, and rejoiced, and believed as well as the Jailer, and were all baptized,
Which is a clear proof, that such hearing the word of God, and believing ought,
and they only, to be baptized.

And this will appear further by the house of Stephanus, comparing the 1 Cor.
11*6. Stephanus and his household together converted.
with the 16. chap. and the 15. verse of the same Epistle, where in the one
place it is said, that Paul baptized the household of Stephanus, in the last
place he speaks thus, I beseech you Brethren, Ye know the House of Stephanus,
that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves
to the Ministry of the Saints, That you submit your selves unto such, and to
every one that helps with us and labors.

Where you see in one and the same Epistle (as he says) he baptizeth this
household, so he affirms they were the first fruits of Achaia, and that they
were Ministers, and addicted themselves to the Ministering unto Saints, they did
as the Text notes, labor, and he would have the Church submit themselves unto
such, therefore they were not babes, or little infants, but all true Converts,
believing and penitent persons.

And in Acts 18.8. for the further clearing of this Matter in hand, And Crispus
the Chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house, and
many of the Corinthians believed, and were baptized: So that you see what a
Catalogue of clear examples you have to confirm unto us, which way those
infallible Apostles, both taught and practiced, according to the great
Commission given them, by the Authority of Christ from Heaven, To preach first
the Gospel to every Creature, and he that believes and is baptized, should be
saved, and that they should make disciples through teaching, dipping them into
the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; And withal you see both Commands
as you have heard, and plentiful examples for baptizing believers. But not the
least color or show of any ground for sprinkling of Infants.

Now by the way, let me say, what a sad thing therefore is this, that such a
world of People (from Custom and Tradition) run headlong after this Idol of
man's invention?

But this Solemn Ordinance which you have heard, lies clearly as a Duty under
the express Law of Christ to every one that believes, this they slight and
contemn, as enemies to the same, therefore let such souls know, That as Christ
is a King, So this is one of his great Laws, and a fundamental ordinance of the
Gospel unto which he calls all believing and penitent persons, that are
professed subjects to him to be obedient to.

Now therefore let such tender souls who have the fear of God in them, lay this
to heart.

First, The Ordinance of baptism long neglected, and an Idol set in its room.
That this Solemn Ordinance for many hundred years, has been neither preached,
nor practiced, by abundance of such which (in Charity) we cannot but judge,
might have many good things found in them.

But here lies that which makes the case sad and lamentable, that in the room
of this precious Ordinance of God (which Christ confirmed by his blood) should
be set up, that Idol of sprinkling of Carnal poor Infants, for doubtless, if
there be an Idol now practiced in the world, or set up amongst men, this must
needs be one, For I have learned, with others of the Saints of God, this to be
an Idol, either the worshipping of a false God, or the true God in a false
manner, which I might largely insist upon to prove from Scripture.

Now though this be not an Idol of the first kind, it is without doubt an Idol
of the second. It is setting up man's Invention, instead of Gods solemn
Ordinance, which is a sin, for which God plagued the people in Levit 10. and 1,
2. It is an Image of true Baptism set up in the room of it, but not the same,
and that in all the before mentioned essentials, A false Administrator,
ignorant of the true nature of the Ordinance, instead of a true Minister;
Sprinkling instead of dipping; A carnal infant instead of a true believing man
or woman; And all this done at the naming of so many words only; Whereas the
Commission injoins, that they should dip them, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. So that there is in this christening of Children, nothing of
Gods appointment or of what he commanded, viz. The Minister wrong, the Subject
wrong. the Form wrong, and also the naming of so many w^rds only instead of
dipping into the name of the Father. Son and Holy Ghost, Whereas the
Commission injoins, the true Minister should dip a Disciple into the name of
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Now let any Soul seriously judge? whether God can own that which has nothing
of his own appointment or Commands, but in every particular contrary thereunto.

But seeing the main thing usually controverted is about the Subject (whether
Infant or Believer) I shall leave what I have said, The Papists do hold that
the Ordinance of baptism does convey grace by the very work done, which is so
generally confuted by all Protestant Authors, that I think it not worth my time
to speak to that gross Error.
concluding the Administration upon Children corrupt in all the three foresaid
heads as well as in the last, and shall speak of the last only, viz. That
carnal children are not lawful Subjects of baptism, and shall begin to speak to
the main Argument or ground, usually pleaded by all except Papists, for
Childrens baptism, and that is,

Though there be no command nor example, yet there is a consequence, viz. the
Covenant of life being made to Believers, and their seed coming out of their
loins, Baptism, being an Ordinance of that Covenant, does also belong to them.

Now I shall endeavor to prove the falseness and erroneousness of this
Consequence. The Covenant of life not made to the seed of Believers as coming
out of their loins, and therefore the baptism of infants drawn thence by a
false consequence.
That it cannot be of God, my first ground is, because it does oppose it self
to the express Laws, and Commands of the New Testament; and whatsoever
consequence men do draw from Scripture, that crosses the plain Commands of God
(to be sure) cannot be of God, but such consequence must needs be (according to
Scripture light) of Satan, or at the best, from the vision of a man's own heart.

Now this I would have you seriously to take notice of, That baptism of
Believers, is a Solemn Ordinance of the new Testament, enjoined by diverse
special commands, and encouraged with promises of remission of sins and
salvation on the right performance of the same.

Now for any man to force a Consequence that shall oppose it self against so
solemn an ordinance cannot be of God, because God cannot speak that which is
contrary to himself or to his own commands, As for instance:

When Christ began to teach to his Disciples, that the Son of man must suffer
many things and be rejected of the Elders, and chief Priests and Scribes, and
be killed, and the third day rise, He spoke that saying openly, and Peter took
him and began to rebuke him, but he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me
Satan. From whence we may observe,

That whatsoever consequence or Argument any man shall seem to enforce (though
pretending Scripture for the same) that oppose themselves against duty, or do
hinder the servants of God therein I may say of such Consequences, and such
Arguments, G^t thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unro me: Its clear,
That Christ concludes those Arguments and persuasions, whatsoever they be that
do tend to the hinderance of any solemn duty or Ordinance of God, they are of
the Devil, Get thee behind me Satan.

Therefore all those Books and Arguments set out for the maintenance of
Childrens Baptism grounded upon this Consequence, opposing themselves against
duty, as you have heard, which is,

That every penitent or believing person ought to be baptized.

Now the whole tendency of those Books being to oppose the practic^ of the
same, and to hinder it; I may say of them as Christ said before, etc For upon
this ground we may conclude all those Discourses not to be of God, I shall
therefore leave what is said to you, seriously to weigh, whether or no this is
not an erroneous consequence.

But in the next place, let us come nearer to examine this consequence, both in
its self, and the grounds from whence it is drawn.

The grounds of this Consequence is, That the Covenant of Grace, belongs to
believers Children, the consequence is therefore Baptism, being an Ordinance of
that Covenant must needs belong to believers children, in which two lies our
whole business, for the grounds of this consequence, is brought the Covenant of
Circumcision, that belonging to Abraham and his seed after him in their
generation, Genesis 17.7. and 10. to 14.

From hence it is gathered, That the Covenant of Grace, viz. of eternal life,
belongs to believers and their seed born of their body, For the Covenant God
made to Abraham and his offspring, viz. the Covenant of Circumcision belonging
to Abraham and his seed in their Generation, therefore Circumcision the sign of
the Covenant belonged to them, so the New Covenant now belongs to believing
Gentiles and their seed.

Baptism being an Ordinance of that Covenant, belongs also to believing
Gentiles, and their seed, this being the only and alone foundation ground of
all those (except Papists) for their Rantizing or Sprinkling of Children.

We shall endeavor to prove this ground (from whence this consequence flows)
to be so far from being the truth, that it is an error, and yea such an error,
that if it were maintained with all those errors, that naturally must needs be
defended as consequences of this opinion, it would shake the foundations of the
Gospel, But that I may with as much clear satisfaction inform others as God had
clearly convinced my own soul of the truth of this; I shall propound this
method to be handled.

First, then I shall make it appear to you, That there is two Covenants held
forth in Scripture, the one a Covenant of Grace, and the other a Covenant of
Works, or an absolute Covenant, and a Conditional Covenant.

Secondly, I shall prove, that the Covenant of Circumcision was no Covenant of
eternal life, but a Conditional Covenant, a Covenant of Works.

Thirdly, I shall prove, that none but believers ever had; or shall have right
to the Covenant of Grace.

Fourthly, I shall endeavor to answer such Scriptures (especially those in the
New Testament) that are usually alleged for defense of a Covenant of life in
the flesh.

To the first, That there is two Covenants mentioned in Scripture, is very
plain, The one a Covenant of eternal life, the other a Covenant of works, Two
Covenants, the one of Works, the other of Grace or the one the Old, the other
the New.
in which eternal life was not conveyed or given, as appears in Jeremiah 31.32,
33, 34. But behold the day comes, says the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according
to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day that I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake,
although I was to them an husband says the Lord.

But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts and will be their God, and they shall be my people,
and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their
Iniquities and remember their sins no more.

You have here set forth two Covenants, the one Old, the other New, and as here
we find a New and Old Covenant, so there is likewise, mention of two Covenants
in the eighth to the Hebrews, where you have upon the matter the very same
words, only it is clear, that Jesus Christ is the Minister of the New Covenant,
in the 6. and 7. verses of that chap. But now has he obtained a more excellent
Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was
established upon better promises, for if that first Covenant had been
faultless, there would no place have been sought for the second.

In which place we may understand two Covenants, a new Covenant and an old
Covenant, and Jesus Christ holding himself to be the peculiar Minister of the
New Covenant, (unto the Church then gathered) all those that are in Christ,
being Gods Israel, Abraham's seed.

If you be in Christ then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise,
Gal. 3. the latter end. So that those that are Christ's, have this Covenant now
made to them, and it appears at the 3. verse, that the other Covenant was a
mere Covenant of works, in that he says, he has made the first old.

And now that which waxes old, is ready to vanish away, where by old Covenant
he means, that typical Covenant of works, which run upon the fleshly line of
Abraham, till Christ came out of the flesh of Abraham, and so put an end to
that Covenant in the flesh, and this you have further proved in Heb. 9.15, 16.
There is again mention made of two Covenants or Testaments, the first and
second, the first was confirmed by the blood of Goats and Calves, the second by
the blood of Christ: Now if any please but to search these Scriptures it will
appear that there is two real distinct Covenants or Testaments, the one of
Grace, and the other of works, the one conditional, the other absolute. Now an
absolute Covenant, is a Covenant without all Condition required in the
Creature, but what God himself performs, as Jerem. 32.40. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from
me; Where you see, God undertakes both; first, that he will not leave or
forsake his people, but do them good; and secondly, undertakes that he will
plant his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him.

And as in that eighth of Heb. he engaged that he will write his Law in their
hearts, and that he will be their God, and they shall be his people, and that
he will teach them to know him, and will pardon their iniquities, and their
sins he will remember no more.

Now here is nothing but what God has undertaken to perform, and to work in
the Creature, as further appears in Ezekiel 16. latter end. For thus says the
Lord God, I will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised the
oath in breaking the Covenant, Notwithstanding I will remember my covenant with
thee in the day of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting
covenant, and as he says afterward, not by thy covenant, but by my covenant,
so that which he calls thy covenant, was that which they broke, and therein
despised the Oath as he says plainly; holding forth that it was a covenant of
works answerable to that in Nehemiah 10.29. They clave to their Brethren the
Nobles, and entered into a curse and an oath to walk in Gods Law, which was
given by Moses the servant of God.

In which case you may discern here was two covenants, the one, that God calls
his covenant, and another, that was their covenant, a covenant of works which
they broke. And likewise you have further the covenant of eternal life, opened
in Ezekiel 36.25, 26, 27. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you
shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from your Idols will I cleanse
you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the Stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you a
heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my Statutes, and you shall keep my Judgments and do them.

Where you have, as I said before, this New covenant wholly lying on Gods part,
that he would first cleanse them from all their Idols and iniquities, that he
undertakes to give a new heart, to take away the heart of Stone, and to give
them hearts of flesh. And that he will give the soul his own Spirit, and
thereby came these to walk in his ways whom he calls to the obedience of his
truth.

If they sin, he binds himself to pardon their sins, and to remember their sins
and transgressions no more, so that it is impossible that this covenant should
be broke, or that a soul shall ever miscarry, that is once in this covenant, as
in respect of his everlasting estate.

And to this purpose, David very eminently speaks in 2 Samuel 23. and 5. verse,
Although my house he not so with God, yet he has made with me an Everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my salvation, and all
my desire, although he make it not to grow. Where you have David setting out
the Covenant of Grace, and the mercies in it to be in all points perfect and
sure.

And to this purpose the Prophet in the 55. of Isaiah, and the third verse,
inviting souls, and persuading them to come to Christ, says, Incline your ear,
and come unto me; Hear and and your souls shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, that is, he will
give a Soul those New Covenant mercies, which are most sure, no way depending
upon any condition to be performed in the Creature, but wholly upon the Lord,
as appears in Psalm 89.28. to the 37. ver. My mercy will I keep for him for
evermore, and my Covenant shall stand fast with him; his seed also will I make
to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of Heaven. If his children
forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments. If they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with the Rod,
and their iniquities with Stripes, Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing which is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn
by my Holiness, that I will not ly unto David. His seed shall endure for ever,
His Throne as the ^un before me, It shall be established for ever, as the Moon,
and as a faithful Witness in Heaven, Selah.

Now in these words you have the Covenant of eternal life made with Christ and
his spiritual seed which David and his seed were types of, which Covenant is a
sure Covenant, to all those to whom it is once made, and to this does the
Author to the Hebrews allude, when he says in chap. 6.17, 18. Wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of
his Counsel confirmed by an oath. That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to ly, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Now in this Covenant before
spoken to, you have both the promise and oath here spoken of, and here in this
Covenant must needs be discovered, the immutability of his Counsel, because
this is as David says, a covenant that is in all points perfect and sure; and
James, in his Epistle alluding to these New covenant blessings or gifts, says,
Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
lights, with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning: and that he
does here speak of the New covenant gifts, does appear in the next words he
says. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of first fruits of his Creatures.

Now consider well, that in this covenant there is nothing that he requires,
but he ingageth himself to enable us to accomplish. If he command to pray, he
promises to give his Spirit to help our infirmities. If he command to walk in
all his ways, as you have heard, he promises that he will put his Spirit in
them to cause them to walk in his ways.

But some may object and say, That we find the Gospel is held out upon
Condition of Faith and Repentance.

Answer, It is true, Why though the Covenant of Grace be absolute, yet the
promises are held forth under a condition.
the promise of salvation and remission of Sin, is held out with a condition to
the world; because it is Gods free mercy to work that condition in the hearts
of his Elect, by means of preaching and tendering of the Gospel, and in them
only.

But we are not to think, that this grace of Faith and Repentance, are any
Qualifications that persons are to attain by their own abilities unto which the
Gospel is tendered.

But in the new covenant, the Lord undertakes to work the condition, and to
give the salvation tendered upon that condition also, for says he, I will be
unto you a God, and you shall be unto me a people; and in particular, he says,
He will put his Law in their hearts, and in their minds will he write them, and
he will teach them to know him.

Now doubtless, the Law of Faith and Repentance are here included, according to
those Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace are you saved through Faith, and
that not of your selves, It is the gift of God.

Where he holds forth, that though Faith be an Instrumental means of our
salvation, yet it is Gods free gift wrought in us, Faith the gift of God.
and therefore surely a covenant gift. Paul upon this ground in Phil. 1.28.
says, It is not only given us to believe, but to suffer for his names sake
where to believe, it is given of God, and so in Acts 18.27. speaking of Apollo,
says, that when he came, he helped them much who had believed through grace,
as in Hebr. 12.2. where Jesus is said to be as well the Author as the finisher
of our faith.

All which passages do show, that Faith is as well given in the new covenant,
as the Salvation tendered upon that condition.

Repentance the gift of God.
And so is also repentance, a New covenant gift, as well as remission of sins
tendered upon that condition, as you find in Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted
with his own right hand to be a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance to
Israel, and Remission of sins: and in Acts 11.18. When they heard those things
they held their peace and glorified God, saying, then has God also to the
Gentiles granted Repentance unto life.

Where observe, to Gods Israel, both of Jews and Gentiles, God does grant and
freely give Repentance as well as salvation and remission of sins, promised
upon the condition of Repentance, as likewise appears in the 2 Timothy 2.25. where
the Ministers of God are commanded in meekness to instruct those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will at any time, give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth, which does plainly prove, that though Repentance
and Faith be the condition that the Gospel is tendered on, yet you see, the Lord
does in the New covenant, give faith and repentance as well as Remission of
sins, and eternal life.

And further I shall make it appear, The Covenant of Grace obscurely delivered
to our first parents.
That this covenant of grace to eternal life, was first more obscurely and
darkly revealed to our first parents, God directing his speech to the Devil in
Genesis 3.16. for the greater terror of the Devil and the greater comfort of his
Elect God says, I will put enmity between thy seed and the seed of the woman,
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

This speech contains in substance, the covenant of grace, Christ the true
spiritual seed being here promised, who in Scripture is held forth to be the
very substance and marrow of the New covenant, therefore the Lord says in
Isaiah 4^.6 speaking of Christ, I will give thee a Covenant of the people, a
light to the Gentiles: where the very gift of Christ is called a covenant,
because where he is promised, all heavenly and spiritual blessings in him are
there given, all the promises being in Christ, Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Corin.
1.20. And all spiritual and heavenly blessings are in him, Ephesians. 1.3. He
says, he will put enmity between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the
woman, which must needs have thus much in it.

That God would put or infuse in the seed of the woman his created gifts of
holiness and purity, and that precious love of God, whereupon it must needs be,
that this new nature would be hated by the Devil as being opposite to him, and
also must needs hate the Devil, with his evil nature, as the Psalmist says, Ye
that love God hate evil, Christ tells us in Mat. 10.34. Think not that I come
to send peace on earth, I came not to send peace, but a sword; for I am come to
set a man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother,
and the Daughter-in-law against the Mother-in-law, and a man's foes shall be
they of his own household. And Luke says, five in one house shall be divided,
three against two, and two against three, chap. 12.52. And what should occasion
this division, but that new nature which the Lord infuseth into his own seed or
children, which cannot comply with the seed of the Serpent; So Peter says,
they spoke evil of us, because we run not with them to the same excess of Riot,
1 Pet. 4.4.

So that I understand that here in this third of Genesis is the whole New
covenant included.

The New Covenant not intailed upon any fleshly line.
This new covenant was never intailed upon any fleshly line or generation, as
the covenant of circumcision was, but was still confirmed of God in Christ, and
to such souls only in Christ, as you find in the promise to Abraham, Genesis 12.3.
In thee shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed.

Where you may observe, That here is no respect of persons in the matter of
these blessings to everlasting life; But all Nations in Christ, as well one
Nation as another, if in Christ, have those blessings promised to them, and
thus much is employed in that promise, that all nations out of him are accursed.

But God here directs his speech to Abraham (some may say) it is true, What Is
meant by the blessedness promised to Abraham and his seed.
but with respect to Christ now, who as touching the flesh, was in his loins;
and this blessedness or justification of life, which was confirmed in Abraham
as a Father of all Nations, is by the Apostle Paul, called the Gospel, Gal.
3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith,
preached the Gospel to Abraham, as it is written, In thee shall all the Nations
of the Earth be blessed: so this blessedness spoken of in Genesis 12.3. is
expounded by Paul, to be justification by faith in Christ, and in Acts 3. this
blessedness is there expounded to be a turning of every one of them from their
iniquities, Acts 3.26.

And also this Gospel promise or covenant is spoken to in Genesis 15.5. where he
bids Abraham look up to the Heavens, and if he could number the Stars of
Heaven, and the Sands upon the Seashore, so shall thy seed be; and Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness, This promise is
quoted by the Apostle Paul as the Gospel covenant in Romans 4.3. in opposition to
the covenant of Circumcision, intailed upon the flesh or fleshly line of
Abraham. For Circumcision was a Covenant in the flesh as the Apostle calls it,
which he also expounds in the 1. and 2. v. to be a Covenant of works; but more
of that hereafter, only that which I would observe at present is, that the
Apostle confirms that Gospel promise in Genesis 12. and verse 3. and Genesis
15. and ver. 5. to be the new covenant, wherein was given, through faith, the
Justification of Life, excluding in this point the covenant of Circumcision,
called Works, Romans 4.1, 2. and both these covenants are made with Abraham in
Genesis 17. there you find the new covenant made with him, to verse the 6. and
from the 7. verse to the 14. the covenant of Circumcision in the flesh; the new
covenant is expressed in the third verse, where he says, As for me my covenant
shall be with thee, and thou shall be a Father of many nations, or of a
multitude of nations, and thy name shall be no more called Abram but Abraham,
for a Father of a multitude of nations have I made thee, this is by the Apostle
Paul in Romans 4.17, 18. held out to be the Covenant of life, which he does
clearly hold distinct and different from the covenant of Circumcision in that
place, denying that Abraham or his spiritual seed, had their justification in
the covenant of Circumcision, but bringing in this, that Abraham should be a
Father of many nations, and so shall thy seed be, as that in which Abraham and
his spiritual seed, whether of Jews or Gentiles were and should be justified.

And this promise or covenant, is made with Abraham in Genesis 18.18. In thee
shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; So long as Christ was according
to the flesh in Abraham's loins, the promise runs thus, In thee, meaning that
through Christ, which then was in him, should all nations of the earth be
blessed.

But as soon as Isaac was come out of Abraham's loins, as in Genesis 22.18. then
says he, In thy seed shall all the nations of the Earth be blessed: whereby
seed, most strictly is to be understood Christ, as the Apostle Paul intimates
in Gal. 3.16. where he expounds this word seed, to be not seeds, as of many,
but seed as of one, which is Christ. So this blessedness in the seed Christ, is
here expounded to be, Gods confirming his Covenant in Christ, and note that
this blessedness which David holds out to be the Covenant confirmed of God in
Christ, it was not entailed upon the flesh of Abraham and his fleshly seed, but
made in Abraham as a Father of all the spiritual seed in all nations, and
confirmed in the seed Christ, to all nations

Here the Jews after the flesh have no more interest than any other nation,
except it be by faith, for faith only unites to this seed, and gives an
in-being in the same.

This blessedness is expounded by David in Psalm 32. last ver. To ly in
remission of sins, and purgation of the heart from guile, and expounded by the
Apostle in Acts 3. last ver. To be a turning every one from his iniquities; for
so there Peter expounds this blessedness, confirmed in Abraham and his seed.
And though Christ did fulfill this covenant to the Elect of the Jews, yet the
rest were hardened, and were never in this sense blessed, either in the point of
Justification or purgation from sin, because they were never in Christ the true
seed by faith, nor never were thereby the spiritual seed of Abraham, walking in
the steps of his faith, as all his spiritual seed did, Romans 4.12. and Gal.
3.29. If you be in Christ, then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise.

Thus I have given you from clear light of Scripture, that there were two
covenants, a covenant of Grace, and a covenant of Works; the covenant of Grace
belonging to Abraham and his spiritual seed in Christ, and all along from Adam,
to all the spiritual seed of the Woman, that were born of promise, as the
Apostle describes the spiritual seed, in Romans 9.8. for he says, such are
accounted the seed, that are so born of promise. And so at this day, all
nations both Jews and Gentiles that are born again they are the seed and
children, that only have an Interest in the promise of salvation. And so much
for this first head.

Circumcision proved to be no covenant of eternal Life, but a typical and
carnal covenant.
Now I come in the next place to prove, that the covenant of Circumcision is no
covenant of eternal life, but a typical covenant, yea a covenant of works,
which is also called by the Lord a Covenant in the flesh, Genesis 17.13. and
therefore to be sure no covenant of eternal life.

But for the better clearing of the truth of this I shall first expound some
words in the covenant, How the word Eve lasting is taken in the Law.
and that is the word Everlasting Covenant, that word seems to some to hold it
forth, a covenant of life, because it is said to be everlasting, whereas the
word everlasting used in this Covenant, is to be understood only, for the Ever
of the Law for the time of the Jewish State, as always the word is to be
understood, when applied to the Jews in their generation. As for example, In
the 16. of Leviticus it is said, the Priest should make an atonement for the
holy Sanctuary, an atonement for the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and for
the Altar, and he shall make an atonement for the Priests, and for all the
people of the Congregation, and this shall be an everlasting Statute to you to
make an atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins, once a year:
which everlasting here must needs be understood but till Christ came, and so in
Numb. 25.13. He shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the Children of Israel, speaking here only of a Ceremonial
Priesthood, typing out Jesus Christ, the substance that was to put an end to it.

And so this covenant of Circumcision is to be understood, as everlasting as
Canaan, and the possession thereof, which was until Christ's coming, who was
the substance thereof; this being a Maxim, That wheresoever the word
Everlasting or Ever has this joined with it, to you, or to your seed in their
generations; that then it is to be understood only, for the Ever of the Law;
and the time and period of that Ministration, till Christ come, and no longer,
Exodus 40.15. Thou shall anoint them, as thou did anoint their Fathers, that
they may minister unto me in the Priests office; for their anointing shall
surely be an everlasting Priesthood throughout their generations. And so you
have it in Exodus 30.20, 21. Moses saying, When they go into the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; and when they
come near the altar to minister, to burn offerings made by fire unto the Lord,
so they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not; and it shall
be a Statute for ever to them, even to him, and to his seed throughout their
generations.

The next word that I would speak to, is I will be to thee a God, and to thy
seed after thee, which to some seems to hold forth a covenant of grace, in that
he gives himself as a God in this covenant.

To which I answer, That God either gives and makes himself over in a covenant
of works, which is upon a condition of works done in the creature; or else he
gives himself in an absolute covenant of grace in Christ Jesus the Mediator
without all condition of works to be fulfilled in the creature.

I shall make it clear, That God no otherwise gives himself in the covenant of
Circumcision but conditionally, 1. Argument to prove Circumcision a covenant of
Works.
which is the first argument that I shall use to prove the covenant of
Circumcision to be a covenant of works and not a covenant of eternal life,
because it is conditional, what God promises to be or to give to Abraham and
his fleshly seed in their generations; it was upon a condition; that Abraham
and his seed should keep his covenant on their parties as clearly appears, Genesis
17.7, 8, to verse 14. where you find the Lord engages himself to Abrahamn, and
his fleshly seed to be their God and to give them the whole Land of Canaan, In
that sense he would be their God, to possess them of that good land, and all
the blessings of the same, upon condition, that they should keep his covenant
on their part, both he and his generation after him.

And the subject matter of the covenant that they should keep, is, That he
should be circumcised, and circumcise all born in his house and bought with
money. But though Circumcision only be here mentioned, yet all the works of the
Law, at that time made known to Abraham, are there included; as the Apostle
expounds it, who best understood that Scripture, Romans 2.25. For Circumcision
verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if thou be a breaker of the Law,
thy circumcision, shall be made uncircumcision, and so you have it, Gal. 5.1,
2, 3. Stand fast, says the Apostle, in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made
you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, which in Acts
15. it is said, Neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear; but verse 2.
Behold I Paul say unto you, That if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing, for I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
Debtor to do the whole Law. And so much is clearly held forth in Gal. 6.12, 13.
Where says the Apostle, As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh,
they constrain you to be circumcised, only least they should suffer persecution
for the Cross of Christ; for neither they themselves who are circumcised, keep
the Law, but desire you to be circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.

Where you may observe, That for men to be circumcised themselves, and not to
keep the Law, or otherwise to press it upon others; the Apostle holds it to be
absurd, if withal they did not keep the Law that were thus circumcised.

And in the Text before quoted, it is clear, That Circumcision (in the nature
of it) binds them over to keep the Law; And to this purpose you find in Acts
15. There were certain Teachers that taught the Brethren, That except they were
circumcised they could not be saved; Upon which the Apostles come together, and
in the 10. verse Peter says, Why tempt you God to lay a yoke upon the
Disciples necks, which neither our Fathers, nor we are able to bear? And what
was this yoke, but that they were to be circumcised and to keep the Law?

So that Circumcision was that which did comprehend under it the covenant of
works; or the yoke of bondage that Paul in Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. bids Christians
stand fast in their liberty or freedom from that covenant or yoke of bondage
which Jesus Christ had freed them from.

So that you may see that all the observation of the Law, which we are set at
liberty from by Christ Jesus his death, was included in the Law of
Circumcision. So that in effect, here you have the covenant; Abraham (as if God
should say) I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee in their
generations, to protect, defend, and deliver thee, to bless thee and thy seed
with the blessing of Canaan, to bless thee, and the fruit of thy womb, in the
Basket, and in their store, in all their outward blessings; upon condition that
thou and they will be circumcised and keep the Law. Thus God makes a covenant
upon condition, So that if they fail on their part, then he is left at liberty
to fail on his part, as that notable expression in Jer. 11.2 3, 4, 5. Hear the
word of this Covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and say thou unto them, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Cursed be
the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant, which I commanded unto
your Fathers, when I brought them from the Land of Egypt, from the Iron
Furnace, saying, Obey my voice and do according to all these things which I
command you, so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God, that I might
confirm the Oath that I have sworn unto your Fathers, to give them a Land which
flows with Milk and Honey, as appears this day.

Whence you may clearly observe, That God gives himself to be their God, and
the blessing of Canaan, upon condition that they would keep the Law, So shall
ye be my people, and I will be your God.

Now you must mind, that Abraham had a new covenant of life made with him when
he was 75. years old, Genesis 12.4. which was 24. years before this time, that he
had the covenant of Circumcision, and his happiness with all his spiritual
seed, was and is in that absolute covenant, confirmed of God in Christ, which
stands in force still to believers in all Nations. But this covenant of
Circumcision was conditional, and not absolute, therefore no covenant of life,
but a covenant of works.

2. Argument to prove Circumcision a Covenant of works.
The second ground why the covenant of Circumcision must needs be a covenant of
Works, a Typical covenant, is, because it was a National covenant, a covenant
in the flesh, as in Genesis 17.13. He that is born in thy house, and he that is
bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised, so my covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting Covenant. To be sure such is not the covenant of
grace, to eternal life, for that was confirmed of God in Christ, as you hear,
to all Nations; In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis
12.3. and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis
22.18. as I have formerly spoken to.

But the Lord says of this Covenant of Circumcision, that it shall be in their
flesh for an everlasting covenant. It is manifest by the Apostle Paul, that
this is therefore a covenant of Works, Romans 4.1, 2 says he, What shall we say
then, that Abraham our Father as appertaining to the flesh has found? for if
Abraham was justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God.

These words are inserted by the Apostle Paul for the prevention of an
objection that might justly be in the mind of the Romans occasioned by the
Apostles former answer. For though the Apostle had granted in the beginning of
the third chapter, that the circumcised Jews, were in some respect privileged
above other Nations, and that chiefly, in those eminent tenders and offers that
the Gospel held out amongst them; which though it proved not effectual to all,
yet he minds to some it was effectual; But yet after in verse 9. The Apostle
begins to manifest his understanding, that to be a Jew after the flesh, and to
be in the covenant of Circumcision, did not free men from the guilt of
damnation, no more than other men that were Heathens, that were not Jews after
the flesh, neither circumcised.

To this purpose he states a question, What then? Are we better than they? No
in no wise. For we have before proved, that both Jew and Gentile, are all under
sin, as it is written, there is none righteous, no not one; where the Apostle
goes on to prove, That the Jews after the flesh (in the covenant of
Circumcision) were equally in a damnable and sinful condition with the poor
Heathenish Infidels, all equally guilty before God, verse 19. and his inference
is in verse 20. that therefore by the works of the Law, no flesh should be
justified in his sight, clearly holding forth, That to be a Jew, and
circumcised, and to be under the Law, is the self-same thing, and when the
Apostle had concluded that being a Jew in the Covenant of Circumcision, did in
no way difference him from the Heathen, as to life, He now shows what way both
Jews and Gentiles come to the Justification of life, and that is freely by Gods
grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, and therefore he excludes the
Law of Works, wholly in the matter of Justification, and brings in the Law of
faith; showing clearly that he has but one way to justify both Jew and
Gentile, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, the true promised seed in the new
covenant.

Upon these words the Romans seemed thus to argue, chap. 4. ver. 1. Is it so?
that a man may be a Jew, and have interest in the covenant of Circumcision
entailed upon the fleshly line, and seed of Abraham, and yet be not better than
Pagans or Heathens, as to the matter of life? What shall we then say, that
Abraham our Father, as appertaining to the flesh, has found? As if they should
say; if a man may be a Jew of the seed of Abraham, and so of the covenant of
Circumcision, and as to the matter of Justification and eternal life, be no
nearer than a profane Gentile, that is not Abraham's seed, nor has any Interest
in the Covenant? what privilege does Abraham find in the covenant appertaining
to, or intailed on the flesh?

Unto which the Apostle answers, in the second and third verses, and so along
in the chap. 4. of the Romans, clearly distinguishing two covenants the one of
Circumcision a covenant of works; the other a promise of Jesus Christ, made to
the faith of such as believe. Therefore says the Apostle in the 2. ver. and so
forward; If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not
before God; plainly interpreting that the covenant that our Father Abraham had
interest in, as appertaining to the flesh of him and his seed after him in
their generations, was a covenant of works; in which Abraham had nothing to
glory in before God, the reason is given because he was justified before God in
another Covenant or promise Genesis 15.5, 6 For what says the Scripture? Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.

And thus the Apostle goes along, showing that Justification was not to be had
in the Covenant of works intailed on the flesh of Abraham. But by faith in the
Covenant of grace the promised seed, which he proves by David's Testimony in
Psalm 32.1, 2. set down in the 6, 7, 8, verses of this chapter.

Now ^hus much being said, he states the question, Whether this grace of
Justification came upon the Circumcision only, or the uncircumcision also, for
we say, that faith was reckoned unto Abraham for righteousness.

Now here is the question, seeing that Abraham had two covenants made with him,
one the Gospel of Faith, and the other a Covenant in the Flesh? In which of
these had he his justification to eternal life?

The answer is plain, for says the Apostle, not in circumcision, he was not
justified in or by the Covenant of Circumcision, but in the promise of the
promised seed, which God is said to give a covenant for his people by faith in
that seed, even in uncircumcision was Abraham justified, and that (as I said
before) 24. years before the covenant of Circumcision was made with him, he was
justified, believing in the promise of the Messiah, that was to come out of his
loins, according to the flesh, In whom all Nations of the Earth should be
blessed.

Now God promising that the Messiah according to the flesh, should come out of
Abraham, viz. out of his Loins or his flesh, and this was then a great article
of his faith, that he was to believe to righteousness: not only that
Justification was to be had, and blessedness to be had? But it must be had in
that seed, that was to come out of Abraham according to the flesh.

And as a confirmation and seal of this public righteousness, confirmed in
Abraham as a Father of all Nations, God elects that flesh and blood to himself,
I mean the family of Abraham in an external Covenant, to point out to all the
world, that as verily as God did take this nation (according to the flesh) to
himself by this external covenant, so would God be incarnate in this flesh.

And as the flesh of the foreskin of the member of Generation must be cut or
bruised, and the blood shed, by which the Jew according to the flesh, was bound
to keep the Law, this I understand did figure out, how Christ the true seed of
Abraham, descending out of his loins by Generation, should (considered as male
and not female) by breaking his flesh, and shedding his blood, fulfill and
satisfy the Law.

So that this Covenant of Circumcision, was of sealing use to Abraham, to
confirm this other covenant, and a Schoolmaster to lead to Christ, as all
other Branches of that old covenant were: Therefore says Paul in Romans 4.11.
Moreover he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the Righteousness of
faith, which he had, being uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all
those that believe.

Where observe, the Apostle calls not circumcision a seal, but a sign, He
received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith which
he had being uncircumcised. There are these reasons in the Text that restrain
the sealing use of Circumcision only to Abraham. The sealing use of
Circumcision proved to be peculiar unto Abraham.


First, Because this righteousness of faith, the Text says, he had before he
was circumcised. Therefore good reason it might be sealed or confirmed, having
it before he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
faith which he had being uncircumcised. But his posterity after him, at eight
days old cannot be said that they had this righteousness of faith to seal,
having it not preceding their Circumcision.

The second reason the text affords us, is, that he might be the Father of all
that believe, this is the main reason the Apostle insists upon, He received the
sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, that he might be
the Father of all that believe.

This reason cannot be applyable to any of Abraham's posterity, besides himself,
for they were not the Fathers of all that believe, That was proper to Abraham
to be a high Father, or a Father of all nations; therefore (as I said before)
God promising in Abraham that public righteousness, as a father of all
Nations in the the covenant of grace, adds to that covenant an external
covenant, to be intailed in his line, and in his flesh, as a confirmation of
the same.

A third reason is this, Here is the Spirit of God affirming the sealing use of
Circumcision to Abraham only, and not to any one of his fleshly seed, and as
before, upon a reason special to Abraham; Now where the Scripture has not a
Mouth to speak, we must not have an Ear to hear. But the Scripture here only
affirms Circumcision, to be a Seal of the righteousness of faith to Abraham,
and affords no such thing as to his seed.

A fourth reason lies in verse 13. That the promise of Abraham to be the heir
of the world, was not to him, nor his seed through the Law, that is, through
the covenant of Circumcision, but through the righteousness of faith.

For if they which are of the Law, be heirs, then faith is made void, and the
promise of none effect, because the Law works wrath, therefore it is of
faith, that it might be by Grace to the end the promises might be sure to all
the seed. Not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of
the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all, as it is written, I have
made thee a father of many Nations, before him who believed, even God, who
quickneth the dead.

So that there is not in all the Scripture, a place more clearly proves the
covenant of Circumcision intailed on the fleshly line of Abraham, to be a
covenant of works than this 4. of the Romans, clearing and setting the covenant
of Circumcision and Faith in opposition, holding forth that Abraham and all his
spiritual seed, had their Justification in another covenant, and not in the
covenant of Circumcision; clearly holding forth the covenant of Circumcision to
be works and not Grace, which does sufficiently prove, that the covenant of
Circumcision, had no promise of Justification or eternal life in it.

But further, An Appendix to the second Argument to prove Circumcision a
Covenant of works.
That the covenant intailed on the flesh, must needs be understood to be a
Covenant of works, viz. that of Circumcision appears in Philip. 3.2, 3, 4. and
so forward, where says the Apostle, Beware of Dogs, beware of evil Workers,
beware of the Concision; for we are the Circumcision, that worship God in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Jesus Christ, and put no confidence in the flesh. By
flesh he means the covenant entailed upon the flesh, the covenant of
Circumcision, it is plain by his answer, for he says, If any man thinks he
has whereof to trust in the flesh, I more, circumcised the eighth day, of the
stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamen, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as
touching the Law, a Pharisee, concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, touching
the righteousness of the Law, blameless.

And this he sets by no more, than dung or dross, in comparison of the other
Covenant or Promise of Christ, righteousness and salvation by him, which he
received by faith, and he suffered the loss of all things for the sake of him,
and did account all the whole privilege of Circumcision, and the covenant of
works, to be but as dung, that he might win Christ, which if the promise of
Christ, and salvation and justification by him, had been given in the Covenant
of the flesh, and line of Abraham, then it had been very improper for Paul, to
account this as dung, and to cast contempt upon it, as that which was wholly
void of Christ. It would be very sinful for any man in such a case, to cast
such contempt upon the covenant of grace it self and the privileges thereof
peculiarly relating to the same.

But you see, Paul does here clearly distinguish two covenants, The one of
says, the other of Circumcision. This will further appear in Gal. 3.3. Are ye
so foolish, that having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in the
flesh? Where he again distinguishes two covenants, the one Spiritual, the
other a fleshly covenant. The Gallatians having at the first hearing of him,
begun to embrace the Gospel or the Spirit or Spiritual word of the New
Covenant, and now they would join the covenant of works in the flesh, with the
Gospel, which, it is evident, he means the covenant of circumcision, which here
they would seek to be perfected by:

Therefore in Gal. 4. l^tter end, he clearly distinguishes between two
Covenants, under the figure of Sarah and Hagar, and two seeds; holding forth
the covenant of Circumcision to be the covenant of works, and to be that
bondwoman (as it were) in chap. 5.1, 2, 3. Chap. 6.12, 13. So that if you will
seriously mind these Scriptures, they do most evidently prove, that the
covenant of Circumcision made in the flesh or fleshly line of Abraham, is a
covenant of works, and that which the Gospel or Covenant of grace, is set in
opposition to; and as this covenant of Circumcision is set in opposition to the
covenant of eternal life: as having all the works of the Law included in it. So
consider the new covenant speaks thus, I will put my Law in your hearts, and in
your minds will I write them. But Circumcision is a covenant, not in the heart,
but in the flesh only as you have heard; This is the second ground, why the
covenant of Circumcision cannot be a covenant of eternal life, but a covenant
of works only.

The third reason to prove Circumcision to be a Covenant of works, an not of
eternal life, 3. Argument to prove Circumcision a Covenant of Works.
is,

Because that there is no promise of eternal life in it, but of temporal
blessings in the Land of Canaan, and that God promising himself to be a God, is
only in that respect, as to outward Protection and Provision in the Land of
Canaan, and other like privileges. And that is noted by the Apostle in Heb.
8.6. But now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry; by how much also he
is a Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises:

Herein he clearly does show, that the covenant waxing old and vanishing away,
was grounded upon worse promises, which must needs be understood temporal
promises, as in Jerem. 11.2, 3, 4, 5. Hear ye the words of this Covenant, and
speak unto the men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and say unto them,
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Cursed be the man that obeys not the words
of this Covenant, which I commanded your Fathers in the day that I brought them
out of the land of Egypt, from the Iron Furnace, saying, Obey my voice and do
them, according to all which I command you. So shall ye be my people, and I
will be your God, that I may perform the Oath that I have sworn unto your
Fathers, to give them a Land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day;
then answered I and said, So be it O Lord.

Where you have this Covenant of Gods being his peoples God, and giving them
Canaan, annexed to the works of the Law as being all one covenant.

Observe the words in the Text, So shall ye be my people, and I will be your
God, that I may perform the Covenant which I have sworn to your Fathers to give
them a Land flowing with Milk and Honey.

You shall see that the promises of Canaan and the blessings thereof, are
annexed to the Law of works, Deuteronomy. 30.15. See, I have set before thee life and
good, and death and evil, In that I command thee this day, to love the Lord thy
God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and Statutes, and his
Judgments, that thou may live and multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless
thee in the Land whither thou go to possess it.

And so in the last verse, where he presses the people to obey his voice, that
they might dwell in the Land, that the Lord swear unto their Fathers, to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to give them. And so in Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. Wherefore it
shall come to pass, that if you hearken to those Judgments to keep and do
them, that then the Lord shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy that
he swear to thy Fathers; and he will love thee and bless thee, and multiply
thee, he will also bless thee in the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy
Land, thy Corn, and thy Wine, and thine Oil, the increase of thy Kine, and the
flock of thy Sheep in the Land which he swear unto thy Fathers to give thee.

So that you see, the covenant of God, giving himself a God, to the National
people of the Jews in relation to the blessing of Canaan, was still upon
obedience to the works of the Law; that this covenant which God elected to
himself the body of Israel, in, and by which he separated them to himself from
all the Nations of the Earth, it is clear, was a covenant of works; wherein the
people were bound to outward observance, and worship, and service to God. Upon
this Condition would God be their God, and give them Canaan. For there is a
vast difference, in Gods making over himself to be a God to a People, in a
conditional covenant of Works out of Christ, and in an absolute covenant
established of God in Christ. For in such a covenant he was never the God of
the whole family of Abraham, or Church of Israel; the elect obtained that, the
rest were hardened, as in Romans 11.17.

4. Argument to prove Circumcision a Covenant of Works.
The fourth ground is this, That a man by laying out a little money, might have
brought a Person into this Covenant, and interessed him thereby into all the
Privileges of the same; which if this were a covenant of life, wherein the
Spirit and Spiritual gifts of the Lord had been given, a man might say as Peter
did say to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee.

But for that reason, most certain it is, That this covenant of Circumcision is
no spiritual covenant, which will appear from the words of the Covenant in Genesis
17.12, 13. And he that is eight days old, shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your Generations, he that is born in the house, or bought
with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs
be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your flesh, for an everlasting
covenant.

Where observe, That all bought with money must be circumcised, so that if an
Israelite should buy a black Moor, or the most savage Heathen in the World; he
was bound to see him circumcised, and being circumcised he was now in that
covenant. The truth is, Circumcision was one of those carnal Ordinances, that
the Author to the Hebrews in Heb. 9.9. does speak of that was appointed till
the time of Reformation.

Now the person which the Lord would have circumcised, must be of the family of
Abraham, and that is all the qualifications required: For God does not require
a person, so and so spiritually qualified, as he does now under the Gospel; the
Lord gives in general a Law and Commandment unto Abraham, That all his Family
must be circumcised, and that he must see it performed.

It is not in the institution enjoined, that the person that does circumcise
must be a believer, neither is it enjoined that the person upon whom it is
done, must have Disciple-ship, or the work of grace, but this only, He must be
one of the Family of Abraham, either born in his house, or bought with his
money; and so the slave bought with money, was as truly interessed into the
covenant of God, and the right of eating the Passover, as one born in the
house of the seed of Abraham.

A fifth ground is this, 5. Argument to prove Circumcision a Covenant of Works.
That men (out of this Covenant) might be saved, and such as were really
interessed in it, might be damned.

As for Example, Lot dwelling in the City of Sodom, and all the Godly that day
in the whole world, excepting Abraham and his house, or family, were no way
interessed in the Covenant of Circumcision, yet were saved. And Israel, who,
for the multitude of them, were as the Sand on the Seashore, and interessed in
this Covenant, yet but a Remnant of them were saved, as Isai. 10.23. Lot is
commended to be a just and righteous man, and yet this covenant was never made
to him, nor his seed and posterity, the Ammonites and Moabites, which were as
truly the seed and children of a believer as the seed of Abraham were, So you
find Job in the Land of Vz, in the Book of Job, and his four friends, and
besides those of Jobs friends one of his friends does intimate several other
ancient and godly persons in those times, as Job 8.8, 10. Joh 15.10. For says
he, Ask the Ancients and they will tell thee, for we have those with us, much
more elder than thy Father: which does argue, that there were very ancient
godly men fit to be inquired of, as touching those heavenly mysteries; that
were much older than Jobs Father in that East Country. And it is plain that
neither they, nor any of their children or families, had right to Circumcision,
and the blessing of Canaan; but most sure it is, they had interest in the
Covenant of life, which plainly shows that Circumcision was but an earthly
typical covenant, such as good and godly men might nor have interest in, and
such as wicked men had an interest in.

Do not we find, That all David's sons were in this covenant? but how many
except Solomon, had any right to the covenant of life, yea Abraham himself had
eight Sons, and each of them a Generation, but there was none of the other had
the covenant of Circumcision made with them, but only Isaac, though the rest
were as truly the Sons of believing Abraham as Isaac was; for Ishmael, and the
six Sons that he had by Keturah with their generations, were all the children
of the same believing Abraham as Isaac was, and yet this covenant, ran not upon
either of their Posterity, but in Isaac, says the Text, shall thy seed be
called; though we may not be so uncharitable but to think that many of the seed
of those that went into the East Country, might be the elect of God, and in a
covenant of Grace, yet be sure, they had not an Interest in this covenant of
Circumcision, and the Inheritance of Canaan.

And Isaiah tells us, in Isaiah chapter 1. verse 9. That if God had not left
him a very small Remnant, Is^el had been as Sodom and Gomorah.

So that there was in the whole Nation of Israel (that were in the covenant of
Circumcision) but a very small Remnant selected out from the rest, into the
covenant of life, as in Romans 9. the Apostle so makes use of the words, and in
the Romans chap. 11. ver. 5, 7. the Apostle says, the election in and amongst
Israel have obtained it, and the rest were hardened or blinded*

The rest (may some say) what rest? the rest of Israel in the covenant of
Circumcision. But it is plain, that all Israel were elected, one as much as
another in the Covenant of Circumcision, by which they were, as I have said,
separated to God from all other nations.

But it is plain, That there was a Gospel Testament confirmed of God in Christ,
held out and tendered to the Jews by the Holy Prophets and Penmen of God, the
election obtained that, and the rest were hardened, remaining still in the
literal and old Covenant of Circumcision which they had only right to by
generation.

But this none could have right to, but by the regeneration and new birth, and
therefore says Isaiah 8.28. I and the children that thou have given me, are as
signs and wonders in Israel, implying clearly, that a little handful of Israel
are given to Christ, in the Covenant of grace, out from amongst the body of
Israel, the rest of the multitude of Israel remained without being given to
Christ, making signs and wonders at such as were given to him, by being
admitted into a covenant of eternal life through faith, which it appears, the
whole body of Israel, were not admitted into, but some few only. So that you
see Souls may be in this covenant of Circumcision, and be damned; and out of
it, and saved; therefore this cannot be a covenant of eternal life, but only a
Typical covenant of Works:

The sixth ground to prove that the Covenant of Circumcision, was but a
covenant of Works, 6. Argument to prove Circumcision a Covenant of Works.
an outward Typical Covenant, was this.

That this Covenant of Circumcision might be broken, as the Lord says in Genesis
17.14. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from my people, he has broken my
covenant.

Where observe, though he were born of the Family, and of the seed of Abraham,
and so had an interest in the Covenant; yet he might forfeit his right, and
break this covenant, so as to be cast off from Gods people.

This is therefore that old Covenant spoke of by Jeremy chap. 31. ver. 31. I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, not like that Covenant which
I made with their Fathers, which they broke, and my soul had no pleasure in
them. For as I have showed before, it is impossible that the New covenant can
be broken, because it is an absolute covenant, made on no condition to be
fulfilled by the creature, but the Lord works both to will and to do of his
good pleasure, in this covenant, therefore it is not in him that wills, nor
in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Therefore the Lord speaking
of the new covenant in Jer. 33.15. and so forward, says, In those days and at
that time, I will cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto David, he
shall execute Judgment and Righteousness in the Land; in those days shall
Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the name
wherewith he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness; for thus says the
Lord, David shall never want a man to sit upon the Throne of the house of
Israel.

Neither shall the Priest the Levite, want a man before me to offer burnt
offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually. And
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying, Thus says the Lord, If you can
break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, that there should
not be day and night in their seasons, then may also my covenant be broken with
David my Servant, that he should not have a Son to reign upon his Throne. Where
you see the spiritual covenant cannot be broken, as Psalm 89.34. My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth.

Therefore it must needs be a covenant of works, that is, conditional, he made
such a covenant with the Priest, mentioned in the first of Sam. 2.30. where the
Lord says to this purpose, Wherefore the God of Israel said, I said indeed
that thy house and the house of thy Fathers, should walk before me for ever.
But now says the Lord, be it far from me, for them that honor me, I will
honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

You must still mind those promises the Lord makes upon condition, the creature
not walking in the performance of the condition on his part, God is set free,
or at liberty, whether he will perform such conditional promises, yea, or no.

But it is not so in absolute promises confirmed of God in Christ, Gal. 3.17.
those promises are all Yea, and Amen, as you see in 2 Cor. 1.20. But the
covenant of Circumcision being a covenant of works, a poor creature truly
interessed in that covenant, might break it, forfeit his interest, and be cast
out and rejected out of that covenant from amongst his people, as is clearly
confirmed in Isaiah 50.1. Thus says the Lord? where is the Bill of your
Mothers Divorcement, which I have put away? or to which of my Creditors, have I
sold you? behold, for your iniquities have you sold your selves, and for your
transgressions is your Mother put away.

Now (beloved) a divorce argues a breach and forfeiting the covenant, which the
body of all Israel was in; and we know all along, the National covenant was
that of Circumcision, and they that know in the least measure, the nature of
the covenant of Grace, cannot but know it to be such a covenant, out of which a
soul cannot be divorced from the Lord.

But some may say, There are many that are visibly in a covenant of Grace now
under the Gospel, and yet may be cast out from Gods people: yet it follows
not, but that it is a covenant of Grace, and so then, they might be visibly in
a covenant of Grace and yet be rejected.

Answ. Persons may now profess to be in Christ, and so in a covenant of Grace,
by an outward profession, but this being barely a profession, and not in truth
in them that profess the same; they profess they were in that, which in truth
they never were: For under the Gospel, we have no infallible rule to know who
is in the covenant of Grace, and who not; because we have only the confession
of themselves, who may deceive themselves and us.

But we have an infallible Rule to judge, That Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
the seed forward in their Loins, or their generations, were in this covenant of
Circumcision; and therefore it is a great mistake for any to evade what has
been said upon such a groundless objection.

Now consider, That it is that great and faithful God that says and
professes, Abrabam, his seed and family after him, from Jacob forward, were in
this covenant with him; But now it is only poor unfaithful Man, hypocritical,
dissembling, proud man, that says he is in the Covenant of life, when it
proves not so, or when it visibly proves the contrary, for Saints have a Rule
to disown such. But this is a most certain truth, that God did never put a soul
away, and make a divorce between himself and any one Soul, in a covenant of
life; and it is as certain that the whole Church of Israel, were in reality and
truth in the covenant of Circumcision, as appears in Genesis 17.10, 11. where
Abraham, and those born in his house, are to be circumcised. And so Psalm
105.9, 10.11, which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath with Isaac, and
confirmed the same to Jacob by a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting
covenant, saying, Unto thee have I given the Land of Canaan, the Lot of your
inheritance.

Now it would plentifully appear, (if further proof needed) That God his own
self testifyeth his making and entering into covenant, with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and their seed forward, therefore let no man please himself with such a
poor, groundless objection, That the family of Israel were only visibly or in
the judgment of Charity, in the covenant of Circumcision as Hypocrites are now
in the Covenant of Grace,

For there is nothing more clear than this, that Israel were in truth and
reality, in the covenant of Circumcision, expressed by the Mouth of God
himself, and nothing more certain, that Israel were never (all of them) so much
visibly in the covenant of grace.

For if it were necessary, I could multiply places of Scripture, to prove the
most part of Israel visibly unbelievers, living in those manifest fruits of the
flesh, as Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Whoring, Stealing. Covetousness, and
palpable Ignorance, without faith and knowledge, shedding of blood. All these
notorious sins, were constantly in the greatest part of the Church of Israel,
that they neighed (as fed Horses) after their Neighbors wives, and were given
to oppression and horrid Idolatry. All these sins being such manifest fruits
of the flesh, that such as live in them, the Apostle says, cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Christ and of God, but are visibly the children of the Devil.
Therefore to say, the whole body of Israel were visibly godly, and so visibly
in the covenant of Grace, that is a most gross mistake; they were really in the
outward National covenant of Circumcision, but not the generality so much as
visibly in the Gospel covenant of life.

For it could not be denied, but that those Jews in the 8. chapter of John
verse 30. and so forward, were Abraham's children, and interessed in the
covenant of works, yet Christ is far from concluding their right to the
covenant of Sonship, the heavenly adoption, but rather in that respect
concludes, They are of their Father the Devil, whose works they did, they
being Liars as he was from the beginning, and enemies to Christ, as the Devil
was, therefore he excludes them from being the children of God, so that the
main mass of blindness and darkness, lying upon men's minds is this, they mix
and confound the two covenants made to Abraham, the one a spiritual heavenly
covenant, made to him as a Father of the faithful, and to those only who walk
in the steps of faithful Abraham, and the temporal covenant of Circumcision to
the seed according to the flesh, from Jacob forward, and those joining
themselves to that family.

So then in a word, the covenant of Circumcision must needs be a covenant of
works, and not of eternal life, because it might be broken, which the covenant
of eternal life cannot be.

7. Argument to prove Circumcision a Covenant of works.
The seventh ground to prove the covenant of Circumcision not to be a covenant
of Grace, is,

That if we maintain the covenant of Circumcision, to be a covenant of Grace,
to eternal life; therein we overthrow many fundamental points of Religion,
which is a strong ground to prove, it is not of Grace, but an outward typical
covenant. For it is impossible, that such understanding of Scripture which
crosses plain fundamental points of religion, can be true.

Now for to give you some example for this, First you must needs confess, that
the covenant of Circumcision was made to Abraham, and his seed after him in
their generations, Genesis 17.7. from Isaac and Jacob forward. So that being born
in the house or Family of Israel, or being bought with the money of one of the
Israelites, interessed a person in that covenant, he coming forth of that line,
was born heir to that covenant and the privileges of the same.

Now consider, To say that the covenant of Grace is entailed on the flesh,
overthrows the main fundamental points of our Religion.
That the chief and precious privileges of the covenant of grace, are adoption
or Sonship, Justification, and the inward work of sanctification, all which
privileges, that generation must needs be born heirs to, if they were born
heirs of a covenant of grace, which if this should be asserted, as it is by
those who defend childrens baptism.

Then this fundamental point of Religion must needs be denied, that all mankind
are by nature, the children of wrath Ephesians. 2.2. and that all both Jews and
Gentiles are charged under sin, Romans 3.9. And there is none righteous, no not
one; But be it known to you, this is a fundamental doctrine of truth, generally
acknowledged by all the godly, That we are dead in sins and trespasses, wherein
in times past, we walked according to the course of this world according to the
Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience, among whom also we had our conversation in times past, in the
lust of the flesh, and of the mind, and were children of wrath by nature as
well as others.

Now the Apostle Paul affirms this to be equally the state of himself, who
was born in the Church of Israel, as well as the Gentiles; and David does
affirm this of all in general, Psalm 14.2, 3. which the Apostle Paul urges in
Romans 3.9. forwards, speaking of himself and the rest of the National Churches
of the Jews, What are we (says he) better than they? meaning than the Gentiles
No, in no wise, for we have before proved that both Jews and Gentiles are all
under sin, as it written, there is none righteous, no not one; there is none
that understands, there is none that seeks after God, they are all gone out
of the way, they are together become abominable, there is none that does good,
no not one; And in Psalm 51. David says, I was conceived in sin, and brought
forth in iniquity; who was a child of the Church of God, as it is usually
termed.

But beloved this doctrine is clear in Scripture, and clearly experienced by
every Godly Christian, which truth must needs be overthrown, if the whole body
of Israel were born adopted Sons and heirs of a covenant of eternal life, born
heirs of Justification, then they were never heirs of wrath, nor in a state of
damnation, nor never proved nor charged under sin nor never all unrighteous,
because born heirs of a covenant of Grace, aad of righteousness, nor never born
dead in sins and trespasses, for that is inconsistent with being in a covenant
of grace and life.

This opinion of holding the covenant of grace, to be intailed in the flesh,
opposing it self so directly against this forementioned foundation of Religion,
must needs be a gross error so considered.

The second fundamental point of Religion, that this error opposes it self
against, is stability in a covenant of eternal life, it cannot be imagined,
that I should much insist upon proving this Doctrine of stability in grace, to
be a fundamental truth, I shall take that for granted from the nature of the
new covenant, in several Scriptures before recited, as in Psalm 125. They that
trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but as the
Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so shall the Lord be about them, from this
time forth, and for ever. And in Psalm. 89.33. If thy children sin, I will
afflict them, with the rods of men, but my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from them, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; My covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth.

But taking this for granted to be a truth, that all born in the Church of the
Jews, were born heirs of his stable Covenant; and so were really and in truth
in the covenant of grace, then most of the Church of Israel that were in a
covenant of grace, were damned and not saved, as Isaiah 10.22, 23. Though
Israel were as the sand of the Sea, yet a Remnant of them were saved only. And
so Isaiah with Romans 9.27, 28, 31. But Israel which followed after the Law of
righteousness, has not obtained to the Law of righteousness. Paul says, Romans
11.5. There was a Remnant according to the election of grace, and in verse 7.
how they obtained it, but the rest were hardened, all but the remnant, were
blinded, and hardened.

Therefore if such multitudes, as the sand of the Sea, were all really in a
covenant of grace, most of them must be understood to fall out of the covenant,
and so to fall out of the covenant of life.

This is another fundamental truth, that this opinion is fully against,
defending that souls may be truly in a covenant of eternal life, and yet perish
and be damned.

The third foundation that this error overthrows, is, The necessity of
Conversion or Regeneration, which doctrine is eminently confirmed by Christ in
the Gospel as a fundamental truth, John 3.4, 5. where Christ speaking to
Nichodemus, tells him, th except a man be born again of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And likewise in John 8.24.
Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, And John 3. two last
verses, He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, and he shall
not see life.

The before mentioned errors that holds a covenant of life running in the flesh
upon the carnal seed opposes it self against this for might the carnal seed of
Israel say to Christ, why do you preach such a doctrine to us, That except you
be born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? We affirm the
contrary, seeing by the first birth we have an interest in the covenant of
grace, and eternal life already, without believing and being born again, and so
are entered into the Kingdom of God, and the privileges thereof. Whereas you
say, That except you believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins? why does
Christ pronounce death without believing, seeing we are acquainted with another
way to enter into life, than the way of believing, which is to be begotten of
one of the church or a believer?

We find the Holy Ghost in the 1 John 5. says, He that has Christ has life,
he that has not Christ has not life. No, says this error, there were
thousands that were interessed in life, without having Christ, that is to say,
by carnal generation; Says the Apostle, There is no other name under heaven by
which we can be saved but by the name of Jesus, Yea, says this error, There is
another name, by which we may come into a covenant of eternal life, and so to
be saved; so that here lies the case, where Christ in the Gospel powerfully
affirms no other way to life, but by believing, regeneration, and coming to
Jesus Christ; This opinion destroys all these testimonies, opening another door
of entrance into the covenant of life besides this, and that by fleshly
generation, though Christ says to Nicodemus, Joh. 3. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit; as if souls
were infatuated, and had no ears to hear his plain word.

They of this opinion do defend the contrary, to what purpose should any man
seek the conversion of any of Believers children; whether formerly of the
nation of the Jews, or now the nations of the believing Gentiles; seeing they
are born heirs of a covenant of eternal life, and so are in as good a state
without conversion and believing and being born again, as any other soul by
believing, and by new birth can be brought into?

This doctrine tends to justify the Rebellious Jews against John Baptist, and
against Christ; the Sadduces and Pharisees came to John's Baptism, Matthew 3.
Says John, O ye Generation of Vipers, who has forwarned you to fly from the
wrath to come? bring for (...) fruits meet for repentance, and think not to say
within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. John you see, would have
this people to be converted to entitle them to this covenant of Grace, and so
to baptism, which is an Ordinance of the same covenant, and not so much as
think so erroneously, as if being children to Abraham according to the flesh
should entitle them to the same; therefore, says he, think not within your
selves, we have Abraham to our Father, and we are his children according to the
flesh, and therefore we need not a work of conversion, or true Repentance, to
entitle us to the privileges of the covenant, such as was baptism. And also in
John 8.31. and forwards, says Christ unto some Jews, unto whom he spoke, If
you abide in my words, then are you my Disciples indeed, and you shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free, and then you shall be free indeed.
They answered him, We be Abraham's children, and never were in bondage to any,
How say thou then, We shall be made free?

Where you may observe, these wicked obstinate Jews were of the same opinion,
that they were in a state of happiness, good enough by generation by being
Abraham's seed according to the flesh. Jesus answers, Who so commits sin,
is the servant of sin, and the Servant abides not in the house for ever. We
find Christ afterward tells these Sons of Abraham, that they were so far from
being the adopted sons of God, in a covenant of life, that they were of their
Father the Devil, and these same persons Christ speaks to in verse the 24.
telling them, Except they believed Christ was he, they should die in their sins.

Christ was far from this opinion, as to think that covenant of Circumcision to
be a covenant of life, but he does thoroughly reprehend them for this groundless
confidence, which error, was the main obstacle, that hindered the Jews from
faith and repentance, because they thought it entitled them to happiness
enough to be of the stock of Abraham, and to be born heirs of the covenant of
Circumcision; This very rotten opinion was to them one of the Devils sleights
to lull them asleep in a carnal and unconverted condition they thought that
needed not; which thought of theirs had been true enough, provided all the
children of Abraham, had by generation, interest in the covenant of life, which
other men could have no interest in without regeneration; But Christ you see
presses a necessity of conversion to these children of Abraham that at the
present were as fully interessed in the covenant of Circumcision as Abraham
himself, even to Nicodemus which was a Ruler of the Jews, Christ presses a
necessity thereof to him, and also labors by a parable in Luke 16. to convince
those sottish Jews* that one might be the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh, and yet be irrecoverably damned; and therefore he brings in the rich man
in Hell, speaking thus, Father Abraham I pray thee, send Lazarus to dip the tip
of his finger in water to cool my tongue. And Abraham is brought in, owning him
to be his Son, speaking thus, My Son remember, that thou in thy life time,
receivedst thy good things.

Where you may observe, That the man in Hell, irrecoverably damned* owns
Abraham to be his Father, and Abraham also does acknowledge him to be his Son,
My Son, says Abraham, where you clearly see man may be a Son of Abraham, and
yet damned; thou had thy good things in this life, but Lazarus his evil
things. Ezekiel 18.9, 10. where a just man is presupposed to beget a son that
is a Robber, and a Shedder of blood, and that goes out in all manner of
wickedness, and that in Israel.

Wherein observe, Abraham owns no other privilege belonged to the rich man by
virtue of being the Son of Abraham, but what was in this life, or in this
world; Hell was his best portion in the world to come, which if he had been
born heir to the covenant of life, how then could Abraham's affirmation have
been true?

Beloved, Let all ingenuous Spirits that are not willing to walk blindfold,
consider how contrary to the whole tenor of the Gospel this opinion is, and how
destructive to this fundamental principle of the Gospel, the necessity of
Christ, of Regeneration, and destroys all sense of the necessity of conversion,
and helps to harden men to destruction, as it did the blind Jews, who (as it
appears) were fully blinded in the receipt of that opinion, that being Abraham's
seed, according to the flesh, interessed them in happiness and eternal life.

Fourthly, This opinion destroys the doctrine of the new covenant, and the
nature of it, and the manner of Gods making of it with the soul; for to make a
new covenant with the soul, is to write the Law of God in a man's heart, and in
his mind, and to infuse saving knowledge and faith, by which God unites the
soul to himself, and so pardons all his sins, and without any condition
considered in the creature, binds over himself to be their God freely in
Christ, and binds over himself to own them to be his people. And only thus, and
no otherwise, is God said to make his new covenant, with a poor soul. Whereas
this dream would seem to bear you in hand, that a whole nation may be in a new
covenant, and have it made with them, and yet have none of all this work
wrought in their hearts.

Fifthly, This opinion destroys the doctrine of Justification by faith in
Christ, only seeing that it does hold out another way than by faith, to come to
Justification, which is by carnal birth of believing parents; for if a soul be
admitted into a Covenant of life, I hope you are not ignorant, that
Justification is a great privilege in the new covenant, and really the portion
of all that are in that covenant.

Sixthly, This opinion destroys the Doctrine and foundation of all Gospel
Churches where it is held which will appear by two things.

First, It destroys the matter of the Church, you know that this is a
fundamental truth, that the matter of the Church ought (now under the Gospel)
to be Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. Spiritual Worshippers, John 4.23. Lively
Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. Such as are redeemed from their vain conversation, 1 Pet.
1.18. Such brought out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9.

Now this error destroys the truth, or opposes it self against the truth of
God, lying in all these Scriptures, it brings in the nation of believers, all
born of their body, their seeds seed in their generation, if you will be
faithful to this principle, whereon this seems to be grounded. For the covenant
of Circumcision was not only to the next generation immediately flowing from
Abraham, But to thy seed after thee in their generations: And we see in that
generation in Christ's time, they were as well called Abraham's seed, as Isaac
himself was, and they did call Abraham their father.

Therefore if the covenant of Circumcision, shall be man's pattern, we must
necessarily have a Church that is national, consisting of succeeding
generations for many hundred years, coming out of believing persons loins, and
so set up the partition wall again, between the natural branches, and those
that are wild by nature: So that this tenet does of necessity destroy the true
matter of a Church, because it unavoidably admits into the Church all the
unconverted and unregenerate children, born of the bodies of such persons, that
either are or have been accounted believers.

And as it destroys the matter of a Church in admitting such that are not made
Disciples, so it occasions such as do believe, remaining in that opinion, to
live in that sin of neglect of the Lords Baptism; contenting themselves with
that counterfeit of Baptism which they had in their infancy; So that this evil
opinion occasions the constitution of a Church or Congregation of good and bad
promiscuously, and all these unbaptized both the good and the bad; and what
light in the Gospel have you to justify such an Assembly, to be the true
Church of Christ, that does consist of some Religious people, in the Judgment
of Charity, and a world of carnal children admitted and received in among them,
and all both the carnal and the religious never baptized with the Lords baptism?

I do deny such an Assembly can be owned an orderly Church of Christ. Thus you
see, what a great error this is, that opposes it self against so many
fundamental points of the Gospel.

But may some say, though we receive in children by baptism into our Church, we
do not admit them unto the Supper. The Question is, when you will admit them?
See what an untroden path you are run into; Do you own your children to be in a
covenant of Grace, and eternal life, and inrighted into the privileges of the
same? and is Baptism the privilege of the new Covenant, and not the Supper
also? if it be, how dare you keep them from their right and privilege, I pray
you? how long did the Apostles baptize their members, before they admitted them
to the Supper?

If you look in Acts 2.41, 42. you shall find so many as gladly received the
word of God were baptized, and presently they continued in the Apostles
doctrine, Fellowship, breaking of Bread, and prayer, as soon as they were
baptized.

Therefore you have no ground at all upon any pretense, to suspend such members
that you own privileged in all the Ordinances of God from the Supper, which you
have received into your Church by your supposed baptism.

Thus you may see, what horrible Consequences flow naturally, from maintaining
a Covenant of eternal life in the flesh.

Seventhly, This opinion, defends another gross error, That persons may have
right to a covenant of life, without union or in-being in Christ by faith; it
is a sad thing that souls that profess knowledge In the Gospel, and to be
preachers of the same, should be so blinded thus to mislead people in so
weighty a point as this is, and that should endeavor to leaven thousands of
poor people with such a sad error that opposes it self against the very
substance of the Gospel, in holding all the whole Nation of Israel to be in a
covenant of eternal life, and also the carnal children of believing parents,
among the Gentiles, though they had no union by faith in Christ, the greatest
part of them.

I come to the third thing, which is to prove that the covenant of eternal
life, The third general general head.
never was nor shall be made with any, but such as believe, or such as are in
Christ: and for the better clearing of that you must understand that as soon as
the seed of the woman was promised, to wit, Christ Jesus, which was the whole
of the new covenant, all promises being Yea and Amen; Somewhat offered to prove
that God presently upon the Fall made an outward carnal covenant entailed upon
the flesh.
and spiritual and heavenly blessings being given in him, this being one main
point then to be made known to the Sons of men, that he must come out of the
woman; You must, I say, understand that the Lord did presently make an outward
covenant, which was typical intailed, upon the flesh out of which the Messiah
should come.

But I must confess, this is not held forth so clearly till the time of
Abraham, nor then so clear, as it was afterward by the hands of Moses; But it
is clear to me, that in substance the same covenant of Ceremonial obedience,
which was given to Moses when the people came out of Egypt, the same was given
to Adams generation, upon the promise of Christ, which was to go on in the
fleshly line, out of which Christ was to come, and this to continue, till he
did come in the flesh, and then to cease. The reason that induces me thus to
judge is this,

I find Cain and Abel at the end of the year of days bring their sacrifice,
and the one brought the first lings of the flock, and the fat thereof. Thus did
God command the same things to Israel by Moses, Exodus 34.19. and 13.12, 13. And
you see Cain brought the first fruits of the ground, and we find this delivered
by Moses, as part of the covenant to the Jews in Deuteronomy. 18.4. and 26.2. for
says the Lord, Thou shall bring of all the first fruits of the Earth, which
thou shall bring of thy Land, that the Lord thy God gives thee, Micah 7.1.
Levit. 2.12, 14. Pro. ^.19.

Though ye do not here see from what rule Cain and Abel did thus do, yet we
must take for granted, they had it from God, how else could Abel have performed
his worship acceptably, if he had not a ground to do it by faith, and it is
certain he did it in faith, therefore had he rule for the same, as Hebrews
11.4. And we find that in that time, there was a distinction of clean and
unclean Beasts that went into the Ark.

Now what cleanness or uncleanness is here meant is by virtue of a Law; for
certainly that Law which God gave to forbid such beasts and creatures was that
which made one clean, and not another; and this Law was by Moses delivered in
Leviticus 11. spoken of to Peter in Acts 10. Call not thou unclean, what God
has made clean: and likewise the eating blood is forbidden, Genesis 9.4. or flesh
with the life thereof; the same Moses gave Leviticus 17.10, 11. where blood is
forbidden upon the same ground and reason.

We find Genesis 6.5. that God hints at a sin of the old world, for which he
brought the flood, which was, that the Sons of God, married the daughters of
men, seeing they were fair, which must needs be understood, there was a Law
prohibiting Seths posterity to marry with Cains, This Law was also given by
Moses in Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3. We must of necessity understand, these Laws were from
God to Adam, and so to his Sons, and so in substance, the same was given to
Abraham with some additions, and the same by Moses, committed to writing with
further additions, but this is the result, that I would come to, God having
promised the seed of the woman to come out of that flesh, did institute an
external covenant of worship, that the Lord did carry all along upon the flesh,
or line, out of which the Messiah should come; and in which flesh, the Word
would be incarnate, I understand upon the first promise of Christ to Adam and
Eve, God then made this made this Ceremonial covenant of Worship with Adams
family, therefore both his Sons were trained up as Worshippers, and this must
needs be, because Cain was never in a covenant of Grace, nor we have no ground
to judge, that he had ever any appearance of true grace in him, but God having
no intent to bring his promised seed out of Cain or Abel, and also resolved
there should be a world as well as a Church, he suffers Cain to murder Abel,
upon which he rejects Cain with all his posterity, as a Fugitive and a Vagabond
from what did he reject him? but from this Church Covenant of Ceremonial
obedience and worship; but when Seth was born, God (as it appears to me) did
renew a fresh Election upon him, and his seed according to the flesh, and the
whole Race of Seth were Gods Church. God hereby teaching, that the Messiah must
come out of that Family according to the flesh, and not out of Cains or his
posterity, nor any other.

And when God had destroyed the world by the Flood, then there was only Noah's
Family, consisting of eight persons, being all of them, in this Church covenant
of worship for a time, till God pitched a fresh election upon Sem by the mouth
of Noah his Father, Genesis 9.26. where Ham and Japhet with their posterities are
past by, though as truly the seed of believing Noah as Sem was. And this
Ceremonial covenant of Works, goes on upon Sem till the time of Abraham; the
world growing then numerous, God would have his Church in a more narrow
compass, and more especially take unto him that particular family out of which
Christ should come, which was Abraham. So that by the way observe.

The main ground upon which God elects Abraham's family into the outward
Covenant with himself, and not Lots, nor any of the rest of the Godly families
then living in the world. It was not because Abraham was any more a believer or
his family the family of a believer; for if so, then Lot, and his family, and
all the godly men's families then in the world, had been necessarily taken into
the covenant of Circumcision, because they and their families had been
believers as well as Abraham's; for this is a sure Rule, if God give a promise
or a command to any person, considered in such a capacity as a Believer, then
whosoever is a Believer, that command and promise belongs unto them. I might by
manifold instances clear this, as when God says to Joshua, I will not leave
thee nor forsake thee; This being not made to him under any other
consideration, but as a Believer.

The Apostle is bold to say, this promise is made to the whole Church of the
Hebrews, Heb. 13.5. they being all believers as Joshua was, but this covenant
of Circumcision now so termed was made with Abraham his seed and family, Why
the covenant of circumcision made to Abraham and his seed, and not to others.
and not upon this ground, because he was a believer, but because that Christ
must come out of his flesh and line; therefore to confirm and ratify this to
Abraham, that Christ should so come, and to point out to all the world, where
they must look for and expect the Christ; God does as much as say, in Abraham's
loins you must expect him, and no where else; For as Christ says to the woman
of Samaria, The Jews know what they worship, for salvation is of the Jews;
therefore to be sure the Covenant of worship runs in that line.

But now Abraham had eight Sons, the one by Sarah, Genesis 21.2. the other by
Hagar, Genesis 16. and six sons by his wife Keturah, Genesis 25.1, 26. to which he
gave gifts, and sent away to the East Country from his son Isaac, and this
Covenant of Works did belong only to Isaac and his seed. For when God had in
Genesis 11.17, 7. promised that he would be the God of Abraham, and his seed in
their generations; and give them Canaan, in the conclusion of this covenant he
begins to speak to Abraham of a Son he should have by Sarah, and that she
should be the Mother of Nations, as in Hebrews 11. Abraham being affected with
his Son Ishmael which he then enjoied, says, O that Ishmael might live in thy
sight, as if Abraham should say, Lord I understand that thou have made a Church
Covenant with me, and my seed after me, taking my seed in their Generations
into external Covenant with thee, O (as if he should say) that Ishmael might be
the seed upon which this Covenant might run, where God tells Abraham that he
had heard his prayer, that he would bless Ishmael with manifold outward
blessings otherwise, but says he, my covenant shall be with Isaac, meaning
here, that outward covenant of Circumcision, where you have Ishmael, and the
six Sons of Keturah with all their posterity past by, in this fresh Election of
Isaac and his seed, which were only elected in this covenant.

Therefore the bond child, and the six Sons of Keturah, though as truly
believers children, as Isaac was, yet they are all dismissed this covenant and
privileges of the same.

The six Sons by Keturah, as you have heard before, Abraham gave them gifts,
and sent them into the East Country. And when Isaac had two Sons in Rebeccus
womb, God again made a fresh election of Jacob, and his seed in their
Generations, passing by Esau, and his seed; for says God, There are two
Nations in thee, and two peoples; So he chose Jacob, considered as a Nation,
and past by Esau, considered as another Nation; for it is plain from those
words, there are two Nations, and two peoples, that the Election was a National
Election, and a National rejection; and he says, The Elder shall serve the
younger; this saying the Elder shall serve the younger, is interpreted by Mal.
1. to be a loving of Jacob, and a hating of Esau, laying his Mountain wast,
that is, his Church Power or privilege, that he seemingly had expected to have
been heir of, and the loving of Jacob, is meant the external electing Love,
into the covenant of Circumcision, according to that in Deuteronomy. 7.7. Speaking
thereof the whole Nation, The Lord did not set his love upon you, not choose
you, because you were more in number than any people, for you were the fewest
of all people, but because the Lord loved you.

This Election, and this love, is equal alike to the whole nation of Israel,
therefore so considered you must mind, this is, as I said before, only an
external election of Jacob, and these in his lines, into the National covenant
of Circumcision, as before in Genesis 18. he says, In Isaac shall thy seed be
called; the meaning as the 17. Chapter expounds, is this; that the seed in
their Generations, that God would continue the Covenant of Circumcision upon,
was that seed which was to come out of Isaac, and not that which came out of
Ishmael, and the six Sons of Keturah, none of them or their seed, were to be of
that great Nation which God promised to make of Abraham, for the Lord says to
Abraham, Genesis 18.18. I will make a mighty nation of thee.

Now by this Nation you must understand, is meant the National Church, taken
into the Covenant of Circumcision, whereas in the spiritual covenant, all the
Nations were to be blessed in him, and he is to be the Father of multitudes of
Nations, Genesis 12.3. and 17.4, 5. but this Covenant of Circumcision, must not
relate to any but to those that came out of Isaac, with his family, and then
those that came out of the Loins of Jacob, with his Family, though this be a
true literal interpretation of these Texts and really the proper mind of God,
yet there is a mystical and spiritual sense pointed and driven at, which Paul,
that infallible Apostle, did clearly give out from those Texts in Romans 9.
That as Isaac typed out Christ so this temporal seed elected in Isaac, typed
out this spiritual election in Christ; the temporal seed in a temporal covenant
elected in Jacob, points out the choice of Christ and all his seed into a
spiritual covenant.

So a spiritual election in these Texts, was typed and figured out, as the
Apostle does clearly maintain. The Apostles not being the Ministers of the
Letter, but the Spirit 2 Cor. 3. but most true it is, That Jacob, and the whole
Nation in him, were elected into an outward Covenant, and Esau, and his seed
were not, but were refused and past by. And consider now in the womb, was Jacob
and his posterity any more the seed of a Believer, than Esau and his seed were?
Sure it is, he was not: Therefore away with that error taken for granted, that
the covenant of Circumcision was made to believers and their seed.

This covenant of Circumcision you may clearly see, was not made to Abraham,
nor to his seed considered as a Believers, but upon this ground or reason, that
the Messiah was to come of Abraham, not of Lot; the Messiah, was to come out of
Isaac, and not of Ishmael; nor of the six Sons of Keturah, and Christ was to
come out of Jacob and his posterity, and not out of Esau. Here you may nakedly
see, how greatly they mistake, that think the covenant was made to Abraham and
his seed considered as believers and believers seed.

If a National covenant was made with Abraham and his seed according to the
flesh, out of which flesh, the Messiah was to come, and that upon this reason
then you cannot conclude, that the covenant can belong to any Gentile and his
seed but upon the same ground. Therefore if you would tell where to find a
Gentile now among many others that were to have Christ to come out of his loins
according to the flesh, then you would have the same ground to say, that in
like manner a Church covenant should run upon him and his seed, until Christ
were come out of that flesh or line.

But when Christ was come and fully exhibited in the flesh, then the ground
upon which this Covenant was given, being ceased, To defend a Covenant of life,
entailed on the flesh, is vertually to deny that Christ is come in the flesh.
the covenant also cease. Therefore for any man to go about to defend a
covenant in the flesh, it is a doctrine virtually denying, that Christ is come
and fully manifested in the flesh.

Therefore you may from all that has been spoken, draw this Conclusion, That
there was never a Covenant of eternal life, made with any but with such as did
and do believe, all along till Christ, not since.

Therefore see that objection answered, that the spiritual privileges, are not
less under the Gospel, than under the Law, though we deny all the carnal
Generation, to have any right to the covenant of Grace or privileges thereof;
both then as well as now, the offers and tenders of the Gospel we must confess,
were to that Nation; and in that sense, they were called the children of the
Prophets, and of the covenant Acts 3. and latter end, and in that respect now
the privileges are larger, because all nations are in the same sense, the
children of the Prophets, and of the covenant, now since Christ came, the
Prophet and Minister of God, having Commission now to publish the Gospel or new
Covenant to all Nations.

None have right to the Covenant of Grace, but such as are united to Christ by
faith.
But further, to prove that none have right to a covenant of Grace or life, but
such as had and have union with Christ by faith, is most plain.

First, Because as you have heard, the new Covenant was confirmed of God in
Christ only: Gal. 3.17. And all the promises are in Christ Yea and Amen.

Therefore this Covenant cannot belong to any soul out of Christ, because they
are Yea and Amen in him, 1 Cor. 11.25. This Cup is the New Testament in my
blood says Christ, If the New Testament be in Christ's blood, then what has
any carnal or unbelieving wretch to do with this Testament, that have not faith
in his blood.

And further we do find in Matthew. 3.17. the Lord says, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased; mark the words, in whom; then to be sure out of him,
he is not well pleased; that is, in respect to this especial well pleasedness,
or electing love in the covenant of life, according to that in Ephesians 1.6.
He has made us accepted in the Beloved; out of the beloved there can be no
acceptance, Therefore it is said, God accepted Abel and his offering, Genesis 4.4.
The Author to the Hebrewe chapter 11.4. tells you, Abel by Faith offered a more
acceptable or excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness, that
he was righteous; So by Faith in the promised seed he came to be righteous and
accepted of God, as you have heard in Ephesians 1.3. God has blessed us with all
spiritual, and heavenly blessings in Heavenly things in Christ Jesus; Therefore
no heavenly or spiritual blessing can belong to any out of Christ; for as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive; There is none made alive,
but those that are in Christ, for the wicked men's resurrection is not said to
be to life, but to damnation, 1 Cor. 15.^1. with John 5.28, 29. And therefore
in thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 18.18. must imply
thus much, that out of Christ the true seed, all the Nations should be
accursed, Genesis 12.3. with 22.18. Gal. 3.8. I must confess it is a sad thing,
that at such a time of the world as this, where the means of grace and
knowledge of the Gospel has been so plentifully held forth, that we must be
forced to bestow such pains to prove, that men cannot be in a State of
salvation and acceptance before God in a covenant of grace, without union in
Christ by Faith. But howsoever, considering that the Apostle says, There is no
other name under heaven by which we can be saved, but by the name of Jesus, and
a particular faith in him, Acts 4.12. and therefore Peter says in John 6.69.
Whether shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life, he is the way, the
truth, and the life, John 14.6. There is none can come into the Fathers love
and mercy, nor into the covenant of life, or any spiritual privilege, but by
him, he is the narrow way that leads to life, and few there be that find it, as
Matthew. 7.14: therefore says the Apostle, He that has Christ has life, but he
that has not Christ, has not life; but all the carnal unbelieving children,
from the foundation of the world unto this day, have not Christ, therefore not
life, that is to say, nor the covenant of life nor the justification of life,
which every man must needs have, that is in that covenant of life. We find that
all the Patriarchs and holy men of God, by faith and patience, inherited the
promises, and not by generation, Heb. 6.12. and 11.12. therefore sprang there,
even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the Stars in the sky for
multitude, and as the Sand which is by the Sea shore, innumerable, these all
dyed in Faith.

This text speaks of that spiritual and believing seed of Abraham, which he
considered as believing and faithful, Abraham was the Father of, according to
Genesis 15.5, 6. so shall thy seed be.

Secondly, It further appears, that the covenant of eternal life, was never
made with any but such as believe, because all unbelievers both of Jews and
Gentiles are charged under sin, Romans 3.9. and have the wrath of God abiding
on them, John 3. last. Yea though of the seed of Israel and children of that
covenant of Circumcision, to them Christ says, Except ye believe that I am he,
you shall die in your sins, John 8.24. And the Gospel tells the national Church
of the Jews, John 3.18. That those of them that believed not, were condemned
already because they believed not in the only begotten Son of God.

Which clearly proves, that none of them were in a covenant of life by
Generation, for if they had, then the want of conversion, would not have damned
them, nor left them in a state of damnation.

Further, does not Christ himself, call and account the unbelieving Jews the
world? when he says to his disciples, If you were of the world, the world
would love his own, but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you. And this world that Christ
chooses his disciples out of, and that hated his disciples as they had formerly
hated him, are but the Nation of the Jews, that were in that covenant of
Circumcision, which plainly proves, that all unbelievers in that nation were
the world, and therefore not in a covenant of Grace.

And again, it must needs be so, because the Apostle says in Romans 4.16.
therefore is it of Faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end that the
promise might be sure to all the seed.

Observe from the Text, if the promise, or covenant, or any spiritual
privilege, should be intailed upon the flesh, or conveyed any way then by
Faith, it could not be by Grace.

And again, Faith is the first differencing Grace, to difference Gods peopl
from all other, Acts 15.9. and put no difference between us and them, purifying
their hearts by faith, therefore it is impossible the covenant of grace, can be
made to any other but such as have faith. And again, I find none counted the
Spiritual seed of Abraham, unto whom the covenant of life belongs, but them
that are in Christ by faith, as Gallat. 3.28, 29. There is neither Jew nor
Gentile, there is neither Bond nor Free, neither Male nor Female, for you are
all one in Christ Jesus, and if you be in Christ, then are you Abraham's seed,
and heirs according to the promise, and so Romans 4.14. If they which were of the
Law be heirs, Faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect, meaning
thereby the Covenant of Circumcision, as appears in ver. 10. and 11. and so in
Romans 9.7, 8. Not because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children,
but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, they which are the children of
the flesh, they are not the children of God, but the children of the promise,
are counted for the seed.

Where you see, that the Apostle does deny that seed of Abraham, that were only
his children according to the flesh, to be the spiritual seed; but such as are
born of promise, or begotten by promise, they are accounted for the seed chosen
in him, and united to him by Faith.

These were pointed and figured out by the National and Temporal seed, that
came out of the Loins of Isaac, those Souls there born in the house, and bought
with money, were in the outward covenant and privileges, but these regeneate
and born again by promise, are the Heavenly seed: So the heavenly generation
are such only born from above; and this is that the Psalmist speaks of in Psalm
22.30. A seed shall serve him, and it shall be accounted to him for a
generation.

For the Temporal Israel, and the typical Election of them into the temporal
covenant, did point out this Spiritual Election in a Spiritual Covenant,
confirmed of God in Christ Jesus.

Further it appears, that none but such as believe, are in a covenant of Grace,
because without faith, it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11:6. therefore
Abel by faith, had his person and his offering accepted, Genesis 4.4. but Cain and
his offering being not in faith, God accepted not, for all the thoughts of such
a man are only evil, and that continually till they believe, as Genesis ^.5. and
8.21. All the imaginations of all believers till converted are evil, and only
evil continually.

Secondly, their words are evil, Matthew. 12.34. O Generation of Vipers, how can
you being evil speak good word, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, an evil man out of the evil Treasure of his heart brings forth evil
things, and as their thoughts and words are evil, so in like manner, their
actions are all evil, natural actions, as eating, Job 20.23. When he is eating
to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him and shall rain
it upon him while he is eating; thus you see natural actions are evil, such as
eating and drinking for satisfying his hunger, and also civil actions are evil,
as Prove. 21.4. an high look, and a proud heart, and the ploughing of the wicked
is sin; if plowing, then all his civil actions, and also his best duties of
worship, as his sacrifice is an abomination to God, Prove. ^8.9. and 15.8.
Isaiah 1. with 66.4. Upon this ground it must needs be, that the Covenant of
Grace and eternal life cannot belong to any such persons that do not believe,
for it is impossible to be in a covenant of Grace, and yet not to have persons
nor any of their best actions accepted.

Yea further, all mankind are compared to beasts, till they believe, Job 11.11.
Vain man would fain be wise, but man is born like a wild Asses Colt, with
Jeremy 2.23, 24. Yea the Lord says in Revel. 21.8. That the fearful, and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their portion in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Beloved, therefore if any have been so deluded as to believe such a notorious
error as this is, to think that any ever has been in the Covenant of life, but
such as are in Christ by faith, I desire God may give you repentance for
maintaining such a fundamental error as this is.

And now in the fourth place, Answers to such Scriptures as are alleged to
prove the baptism of infants.
I shall endeavor to answer such Scripture allegations, and those especially
brought* in from the New Testament to countenance this error; wherein I shall
endeavor to take off those false and corrupt Glosses that are usually put upon
them, wherein men pretend to prove the covenant of grace among the Gentiles, to
run in the flesh and line of believing parents under the Gospel; which I am
sure was never yet since the world began nor never shall be with any neither
parents nor children, but such individual persons, that particularly believed
in Christ with their own hearts. And first let me speak to that in Acts 2.39.
An answer to that text Act. 2 39.
which is usually pretended to be a proof of the covenant in the flesh, the
words are these, The promise is to you and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Now I pray you take
notice how evident this Text makes against this error. For this Text affirms
only the promises to belong to so many even as God shall call, and that is a
fundamental truth, if by promise you understand the gift of the Holy Ghost, or
remission of sins, or both, to be promised in this text.

It is most true, that so many as God shall call, have an interest, both to
Christ and all the promises in him, and only they, for says the Text, Repent
and be baptized every one of you for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the Holy Ghost. So that remission of sins and the gift of the Holy
Ghost, it is safe to understand here to be meant that promise that is said to
belong to them, to their children, and to those afar off, even so many of them,
and their children, and of those afar off, as the Lord our God should call;
agreeable to the words thus understood is Romans 8.30. moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called, whom he called, them he also justified, and
whom he justified, them he also glorified; So that justification or remission
of sins, is here given only to called persons; with these agrees that of Heb.
9.15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
death, for the redemption of the transgression that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of the eternal
Inheritance. So here you see, that those that are predestined to have a
covenant of life, and the blessing given in that covenant, are first called, as
1 Pet. 2.9. He has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light. Now
this text is plain, to prove that those Jews and Proselytes that then heard
him, and their children, and also the ten Tribes new afar off, and also the
Gentiles, the promises did belong to so many of all these as God should call,
and except Souls be given up to a Spirit of Delusion, will any dare to affirm,
that the promises of the Spirit, remission of sins, and eternal life, do belong
to any other? Will any be so ignorant as to judge, that those promises did
belong to the Generation of the Jews whether they were called or not, though
they continued in unbelief and hardness of heart and impenitency? Is not such a
corrupt interpretation against Christ's words to that very people? John 8.24.
Except you believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins, speaking to these
very Jews: and does not John the Baptist say to these, John 3. last, He that
believes not the Son* shall not see life but the wrath of God abides on him?
directing this speech indeffinitely to the generation of the Jews, the seed of
Abraham, such as were in the covenant of Circumcision.

But if by the children you understand, so many of them as God should call,
whether then at that time, or afterward to the end of the world, it is most
true, that to such of their children the promise of grace did belong.

But Beloved, the Scripture is in nothing more full than in this, that the
promise of grace belonged not to any of those Jews seed, but such as were
called; for God shuts them under unbelief, and because of unbelief they were
broken off. Romans 11. if unbelief excluded them from that external relation,
which before Christ's death they then had in the Covenant intailed on the flesh,
and Christ coming in the flesh, and fully exhibiting and putting an end to that
covenant, no other covenant standing in force in the Church of God, but what
Christ was the Mediator of, these unbelieving Jews of necessity were broken
off. The promise of remission of sins was so far from running upon the
unbelieving Jews, the true fleshly seed of Abraham, that the Apostle Paul
affirms the contrary, Acts 19.9. But when diverse were hardened, and believed
not, but spoke evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them;
and Acts 13.45, 46. But when the Jews saw the multitude, they were filled with
envy, and spoke against those things that were spoken by Paul, contradicting
and blaspheming, then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, it was necessary
that the word of God should first have been spoken to you, but seeing ye put it
from you and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life? Lo, we turn to the
Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded us, and v 50. the Jews stirred up the
devout and honorable women, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas,
but they shook off the dust of their feet against them; and therefore Paul is
plain in Romans 11. saying, That God had a certain number that were of the
eternal election, among the Jews, those obtained right to the remission of
sins, and the rest were blinded and hardened, but it should seem to be the
general understanding of those that urge this Text for a covenant in the flesh,
That if they were the seed of the Jews, though they were not called, nor did
not believe, but were hardened in their continuance in unbelief, yet this
promise of remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, belongs to them;
and this interpretation, that this Text must have to defend a covenant in the
flesh, which I leave to any intelligent man to consider, how greatly erroneous
it is to affirm that the promise of the remission of sins belongs to the
unbelieving and hardened children of the Jews, that God has nor, nor does
call. So that you may clearly see, that the truth lies in this text, that the
promise is to no more of Fathers nor children, nor those afar off but such as
God by his especial grace does call to be the Sons of of God by faith. An
answer to that text 1 Cor. 7.14.


Another Scripture made use of or rather abused and wrested to defend this
error, is 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband, else
were your children unclean, but now are they holy, whence is gathered by those
of that opinion, that this holiness is (as they call it) a federal holiness, of
a covenant holiness, that is to say, God having taken the believing parent with
the child into covenant with himself, the child is in this sense holy, that is
covenant-holy.

Now for the better understanding this Text, I pray consider how, and in what
sense, God takes persons into Covenant with himself; and that as you have heard
is two ways, either he takes souls to himself in a typical covenant, so he
took Israel to himself in that covenant, and in that sense they may be said to
be separated from the rest of the World, which separation of them from the rest
of the World to himself is a holiness that the carnal Jew was only partaker of,
such a typical and legal holiness, that people being separated from all other
nations in the world to God in this covenant: now the word holy signifies so
much as separating or setting apart, and in this sense the Vessels of the
Temple were holy, as also the Priests, being by Law set apart from the rest of
Israel to offer the bread of their God.

Now in the 2d. place, there is also a new covenant or a covenant of life, that
God takes a people to himself, which is to write his Law in their hearts, and
in their minds, to sanctify the^, to justify them. Now this internal holiness
which God as an effect of that Covenant infuseth into the heart, is only this
new Covenant-holiness, for there is no other holiness that relates to the new
Covenant; when the heart and the inward man shall be purified through faith.
And when the whole heart and affections, are by the powerful work of Gods
grace, separated from sin, and those vanities below to heaven and heavenly
things, this is the only holiness that the covenant of eternal life conveys to
souls. The Hypocrite may have this in appearance, but the elect and chosen have
this only in truth; he puts no difference between us and them, purifying their
hearts by faith, and he has by one offering for ever perfected them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. this sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth
goes always together, 2 These. 2.13. Therefore it is impossible that this
should be the meaning of the Text, that all believers carnal seed, are in a
covenant of eternal life, and so have their hearts purified and sanctified
through the work of the Spirit and faith, before they are born, and in this
sense, are born holy.

I know no other sanctification the Scripture speaks of belonging to a covenant
of grace and eternal life; and for that external or typical holiness in an
outward covenant it cannot be, because that was abolished through Christ's
death, as appears in Heb. 8.9. chapters, therefore far be it from the Apostle
to intend here, the countenancing of any such erroneous opinion, as that every
believers Child was by virtue of his first birth, internally holy with that
holiness of truth, as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 4.24.

If you please therefore, hearken to the true meaning of this text, which is to
this effect: The Corinthians having sent several doubts and questions to the
Apostle to resolve and answer, as appears in the first verse of this chapter;
he answers them particularly, and it seems among the rest, they had a Jewish
question started, grounded (as we suppose) upon Ezra 9. Deuteronomy. 7.2. where you
find it was unlawful for a Jew to marry with a stranger; therefore Ezra caused
all those men that had taken them strange wives, to put them away, as not
lawfully married, because contrary and against the Law given to them, therefore
they were to put them away, and the children born of them as illegitimate and
unclean in an unlawful fellowship.

These Corinthians it seems, did propound in writing to the Apostle this
question, whether such of them as had unbelieving husbands and wives yet
reimaining in idolatry might lawfully abide with them in that fellowship in the
marriage bed, and whether that fellowship were not unclean and unlawful, as in
Ezra's time?

Unto this question the Apostle answers verse 12. To the rest speak I, not the
Lord. If any Brother has a Wife that believes not, and she be pleased to
dwell with thim, let him not put her away, and the woman which has a husband
which believes not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave
him; But also might they say; why is not our marriage fellowship unclean?
Therefore in ver. 14. says he, The unbelieving wife is sanctified (as the
Geneva Translation has it) to the believing Husband, or else were your
children unclean, but now are they holy. As if Paul should say, the reason why
I would have the believing husband to abide with the unbelieving wife, is this,
because the unbeliever (now since the partition wall is down between Jew and
Gentile) may justifiably be a wife to a believing Husband, there being now no
Law in the New Testament against such marriages, especially considering their
marriage was transacted, when they were both Idolatrous Heathen.

Now it being taken for granted their marriage was lawful in these words, The
unbelieving wife is sanctified to the believing Husband, and that it be
understood, that the unbelieving husband is by the Law of Marriage sanctified
to, or set apart or separated to, or made holy to the believing wife, the Law
of marriage having separated him from all other women in the world to be to
her, and her only, else were your children unclean, Mark, says the Apostle,
Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy, that is, if the Law of
God did not set the unbeliever apart to the believer, and so justify their
fellowship in the marriage bed, then would the children begotten in that
fellowship, be unclean and base born, but now they are holy, that is, now they
are begotten in holy wedlock according to the holy law of marriage, not as
those children were in Ezraes time which were unclean: So that from the
unbelievers lawful and sanctified abode with the believer, does the Apostle
conclude the children to b^ clean or holy. And thus all children of Heathen are
in the same sense holy, that are begotten in holy wedlock, for as the
fellowship of man and woman in the bed being not according to the Law, is
called fornication, uncleanness and unholiness, so the fellowship of any two
persons even of Heathen, being according to that Law of marriage, it is then
clean or holy, and so the children begotten in that fellowship, are said to be
clean or holy begotten. But there was none doubted of the holiness of the
Heathen, they never having any law to prohibit their marriage together, but now
the Jews having an express Law against marying with any other nation, it was
legally unclean or unholy, to match with any such, or to bed with any such that
were not Jews or Proselytes.

Now that Law you must mind, was part of the partition wall between Jew and
Gentile, which is abolished since Christ's full exhibition, so then take the
sense of the text thus:

That first the Apostle bids the Believers continue with the unbelievers or
Idolaters.

Secondly, adding this reason, because their fellowship is holy.

Thirdly, From an absurdity, which would else follow, and that is, Else were
your children unclean, but now are they holy.

An answer to that text Romans 11.16, 17.
In the next place let us speak to that in the 11. of the Romans 16, 17. made
use of by some to prove a covenant of eternal life in the flesh, the words are
these, For if the first fruits are holy, then the Lump is also holy; and if the
Root be holy, so are the Branches; and if some of the Branches are broken off,
and thou being a wild Olive Tree art grafted in among them, and with them
partakest of the Root and fatness of the Olive, etc.

The usual exposition is, That this root is Abraham, and these first fruits,
are Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and these Branches are to be understood, the
body of Israel that came of their Loins, as the root and the branches. And so
the Jews (through unbelief) with their generation were broken off, and so also
the Gentiles with their Generation and seed are brought in. This last Clause
which mainly serves for their purpose, they bring in by head and shoulders,
that the Gentile and his seed is brought in. What is there in that text which
will countenance that clause, if it be truly examined?

But let us consider this Text, and see what it will afford to prove a covenant
of eternal life, to life, to run in the flesh of believing Gentiles, for that
is it the Text must prove, without the which in vain it is alleged. And for the
better examining of the same, we will take for granted, that by root, is meant
Abraham, and by First Fruits is meant Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which are
spoken of: If so, then you must of necessity distinguish Abraham, as the
Apostle does, as begetting and working Abraham, and as believing and faithful
Abraham, and so thus you must understand, Abraham in a twofold Covenant, as
has been before cleared. Wherein he was in a double sense holy, as he was in
that absolute covenant of grace, so considered, he was spiritually holy, and
considered as in the covenant of works, that conditional covenant made with
him, he was legally holy.

Now all the Nation of the Jews being separated by God from all other Nations
in and by the same Covenant, are in this sense holy, as Abraham was, and as he
was holy in a Covenant of life with a spiritual holiness, so only those of the
spiritual and believing seed as his branches in that sense can be said to be
holy.

And the like may be said of these Patriarchs who as the first fruits, consider
them in the spiritual covenant, so they as the first fruits may be said to be
spiritually holy. So by the Lump you must understand that seed in that
covenant, to be only spiritually holy, as the first fruits were. But if you
consider them in the covenant of works, the external National covenant as the
first fruit in that covenant were legally holy: so were the whole lump, that is
the whole Nation of the Jews thus holy, till that covenant was abolished and
put an end to; and then this covenant intailed on the flesh of Abraham, being
put an end to or abolished, it must needs be that the branches must be broken
off, viz. such as only by nature or birth had an Interest to that covenant, or
joining only to the family.

And the distinctions of the Covenants and seeds being here observed, it will
inlighten the soul to understand this place We find this distinction carried
on, in the beginning of the chapter. viz. two covenants, and two seeds, and
both in the Church of Israel, such as some would call the covenanting seed.
There were two seeds amongst the external covenanting seed, there was the
covenant of works, and the covenant of grace, as for example, The Apostle
speaks of the whole body of Israel, then of a select number out of Israel,
which God foreknew, and therefore brings in the case of Elias, 1 Kings 19.
where God had in Israel 7000. selected from the rest of the same body of Israel
in the outward covenant with him; And also in the Apostles time he says, That
there were a select number, according to the election of grace, which God had
chose out of Israel: Then says he, If by grace, then not by works? if by
works, then not by grace? Where you hear the Apostle clearly distinguishes two
seeds in Israel, as two covenants; the one a conditional covenant of works, the
other of grace, an absolute covenant, as in the 4, 5, 6, 7. verses of that 11.
of the Romans; and so the main drift here of the Apostle, is to hold forth,
that though God did now cast off from being his Church, the carnal seed, that
were only in the covenant of works, this covenant standing no longer in force,
but growing old and vanishing away, as in Heb. 8.13. in which covenant he chose
this nation to himself; yet nevertheless, the Apostle does affirm, that God had
a remnant that were elect, that should be called of that natural seed of
Israel, even to the end, though for the present, the greatest part were
hardened in unbelief. So that when he says the branches were broken off, we
are not to understand, that such of them as related to Abraham as a Father or
Root of Believers in a Covenant of grace, were broken off; For then we should
hold falling away from and out of a Covenant of life; which would be a gross
error: but the branches were broke off from the Root, considered in that
national covenant of Circumcision which was a Covenant of works, that carnal
people might really be in, as you heard before. This National Covenant now
ceasing, (as I have showed) and being put an end to by Christ, he becoming the
substance of the same covenant, and that being the partition wall at that time,
between Jews and Gentiles.

But the Apostle now affirms in Gal. 5.6. and 6.16. That Circumcision avails
not any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature and Faith that works by
Love; therefore all of the Jews that believed not, ceased to be members of Gods
Church. Because now Abraham is no way considered as a Father and a Root in the
Gospel Church; but as faithful and believing Abraham in a Covenant of eternal
life, therefore unbelief now cuts off the nation of the Jews.

Why had not unbelief cut them off many hundred years before? The answer is
plain, for so long as the typical covenant of works stood in force, Israel by
being of that family or that generation, whether they had faith or no, or any
appearance of grace or no, were interessed in that covenant and in the
privileges thereof.

But now when Christ was fully exhibited in the flesh, and that covenant
ceasing and the covenant of life (now) only remaining, it becomes so that only
those branches and that lump of believers, the spiritual lump only remain in
the Church whether Jews or Gentiles.

So that if you will seriously mind the scope and drift of the Apostle, you
shall see, that the Lump and the Branches, here intended, must needs be holy,
because the First Fruits and Root are holy, which is meant those of Gods
spiritual elect of the Jews that he would call, to the end of the world, which
since is confirmed in the 28. verse, For says the Apostle, As concerning the
Gospel they are enemies for your sakes, meaning the Gentiles, but as touching
the election they are beloved for the Fathers sake. Not as if God hated these
rejected Jews for the sakes of these Gentiles properly, or loved a certain
number of the Jews for their fathers sake properly.

But thus for the Gospels sake they became enemies, that is, the Gospel promise
or Covenant, having (as you have heard before) respect to all Nations, Genesis
12.3. Genesis 22.18. with Gal. 3.8.

Now this Gospel Covenant being not capable to be divulged to all Nations so
long as this external electing love to the Nation of the Jews was kept on foot
in that Covenant of Circumcision, being a partition wall, therefore this bond
of favor and friendship, being broken in this external covenant, they came to
be enemies, because of the accomplishment of the promises of the Gospel to the
Gentiles, that those beloved elected of the Jews, and ten Tribes even are
beloved for their Fathers sake, meaning for the promise sake, made to their
fathers concerning their calling, which must needs be accomplished, Isaiah
65.23. for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring
with them, meaning all such elected offspring, as this 11 of the Romans speaks
of the calling, For says the Text, As touching the election they were beloved
for the Fathers sake, so that for the promise sake made to their Fathers, they
shall in time be actually elected with an eternal electing love.

But to mind this Scripture further, it makes exceedingly against any fleshly
covenant running in the fleshly line of the Gentiles, because that these words
in verse the 20. to the 24. do declare that the Gentiles came to be Abraham's
spiritual seed, and so a branch of that stock, only by faith in Christ that fat
Olive; For if you are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according
to promise, Gal. 3. last. And as it is said the Gentiles are graffed into this
stock or root of Abraham contrary to nature, it must needs cut off such a
conclusion as, That all believing Gentiles seed shall come by nature into this
Stock. It being not only against the whole scope and drift of this place, but
against the express words which says, the Gentiles are graffed in contrary to
nature, and stand by faith, and further that unbelief broke off the Jews.

Now this would be a strange riddle (in my judgment) first to conclude, that
the whole nation of the Jews were in a Covenant of eternal life, and yet never
had faith, no not so much as visibly for the greatest part of them.

Secondly, That they were broken off, from a Covenant of eternal life, and why?
because of unbelief. And yet nevertheless, believing Gentiles their unbelieving
seed, in the midst of his unbelief is grafted in.

This in substance is what is drawn from this text for proving a covenant in
the flesh. But let any impartially judge, how much a shame it would be, to
wrest Scripture so contrary to the Scope and meaning. For this chapter shows,
that there were two seeds, two covenants, one of Grace, or the Gospel, the
other of works, and that men could not obtain aright to this Gospel Covenant,
but by virtue of election, and that merely of grace, the other covenant of
works, and the fleshly seed in this Covenant, were broke off; that is, from any
privilege coming from Abraham according to the flesh, that fleshly covenant
being put an end to, by Christ's being come in the flesh: All unbelieving Jews
upon that ground cease to be Gods Church, much more unbelieving Gentiles; for
if unbelief broke off the Jew, be sure it will as effectually keep out the
Gentile, as it is clear it does, because they stand by faith only, and are
graffed in contrary to nature, and it is said, the Jew, if he abide not in
unbelief, shall be graffed in again.

From all which it is plain, that there is no other way now under the Gospel to
come into, or stand in the house or Church of God but by faith, neither for Jew
nor Gentile: and so far is the Apostle free from concluding, that the Gentiles
come in by nature, that he affirms the contrary, that he is graffed in contrary
to nature. Plainly holding forth, that all both Jews and Gentiles, in a state
of unbelief, were excluded from those privileges.

For (as before has been proved) the ground upon which the covenant of
Circumcision was made unto Abraham, and his seed according to the flesh, was
not because he was a believer; but because Christ was to come of that line
according to the flesh.

If you could find out any Gentile under the Gospel, out of which the Messiah
should come, according to the flesh, then there were the same reason and
ground, that an external typical covenant should run in his line or flesh, till
the Messiah were fully exhibited.

But I hope none will be such an Antichrist so highly to deny Christ come in
the flesh, seeing Paul says, Henceforth we know no man after the flesh, for
says he, We have known Christ after the flesh, but henceforth we know him so
no more.

That men were known, that is, approved as privileged persons in Gods Church by
being in that covenant intailed in the flesh of Abraham, viz. that covenant of
Circumcision; But from henceforth we know no man, no not Christ himself should
be minded, as standing interessed in that covenants he being now known, to be
one receiving a more excellent ministry, than the Ministry of Circumcision, a
better covenant grounded upon better promises Heb. 8.6, 7. the following words
confirm this Exposition, Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature,
old things pass away and all things become new, compared with Gal. 6.15. It is
not Circumcision avails any thing, etc. therefore we are not now to know men
according t the flesh.

No not Christ as come in the the flesh circumcised and by virtue of that
privileged in the Church. But we are now to know him as fully exhibited, and
(as before) a Minister of a better covenant grounded upon better promises.

So that this 11. chapter of the Romans does so little serve to countenance the
covenant of eternal life to run in the flesh, that it exceedingly makes against
it, cuts it up by the Roots, affirming no other of the Gentiles or their seed
to be graffed into this stock or root, but contrary to nature, which he
expounds to be by faith.

Therefore take the whole drift and scope of that place, and you shall have two
seeds, two covenants, a certain select number out of those that were in the old
Covenant, elected into the new covenant, the rest of all the body of Israel in
that old Covenant were blinded and hardened, and never obtained an interest
into the new Covenant.

And when Jesus Christ the Substance of the old Covenant was come, then that
ceasing, and now but one covenant remaining, the covenant of Gods Church its of
necessity only believers and spiritual seed now can remain in the Church.
Hereupon, all the unbelieving seed of Jews and Gentiles, are utterly excluded
out from the Church, and Church-privileges which never was so long, as an old
external covenant stood in force.

The next Scripture Text, An answer to that text, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
brought in for defense of the Covenant in the flesh is, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
verses, Moreover Brethreen, I would not have you ignorant, how that all our
Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea, and did all eat of that
spiritual meat, and drink of that spiritual drink, for they drank of that
spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.

This is another Scripture which is made use of to prove a Covenant of
Salvation to run in the flesh.

But beloved, the drift of the Apostle here is (as it is throughout the
Scripture) to give out the mystery and substance, that shadows typed out to
come, according to that in 2 Cor. 3. We are not Ministers of the Letter, but of
the Spirit; meaning, that the main thing which the Apostles did hold forth in
their Ministry, when they had to do with types and shadows was, to set forth
the substance or Spirit, or heavenly things that was pointed at, and so here.

Beloved know this, that these were all types and ceremonies here spoke of,
belonging to the carnal Jew, therefore says the Apostle, They were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea; He does not say they were all
baptized into Christ, but unto Moses, which is a main passage I would present
to you.

You must understand Moses was a solemn type, he was a Savior to save them out
of the Land of Egypt, their present bondage, into Canaan: He was a Mediator of
that temporal covenant, Gal. 3.19. and in this did Moses type out Christ; the
temporal Covenant, did type out the spiritual and heavenly covenant, and the
temporal Israel did type out the spiritual Israel.

This temporal redemption of Israel out of Egypt into Canaan, typed out the
spiritual redemption from sin, Bondage, the World and Devil into that heavenly
Canaan.

The Covenant that Moses was the Mediator of (you have heard) was the covenant
of Circumcision, which is before cleared to be a Covenant of works, delivered
in substance to Abraham, but after committed by writing to Moses, as Act. 15.1.
where the Teachers did command them to be circumcised and keep the Law after
the manner of Moses, compared with John 7.22. Moses therefore gave unto you
Circumcision, not because it is of Moses, but of the Father: In Acts 15.1. It
is said by the false Teachers, That except they were circumcised after the
manner of Moses they could not be saved; Those Teachers were of the same
opinion with these in our days, who hold that the Covenant of Circumcision,
was a Covenant of life, and therefore concluded, such persons out of it could
not be saved; their conclusion was (doubtless) answerable to the premises, For
if that Circumcision had been as they judged it, a Covenant of eternal life,
then (...) of it none could have been saved. Therefore it is said in the 5.
verse, Certain of the Sects of the Pharisees that believed, did say, it was
needful to Circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses; And
in the tenth verse it is said, Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the necks of
the Disciples, which neither our fathers nor we are able to bear; which was the
Covenant of Circumcision, which on Gods part, was the promise of the Land of
Canaan, with all the good things thereof, and the external privileges, as
protection and preservation. And on their parts, they were bound to keep the
Law, therefore you shall find that Ezra and Nehemiah, entered into an oath and
a curse with the people then to keep this covenant on their part, as that
Nation were bound to do.

And this was that Covenant which the false Teachers persuaded the Gallatians
to be a Covenant of life, and that they could not be saved without it, which
covenant the Apostle Paul called the flesh, in Gal. 3.3. meaning that Covenant
which God had established in their flesh for an everlasting Covenant, as he so
calls it, Genesis 17.13. This shall be my Covenant in your flesh, says the Lord,
for an everlasting Covenant; Therefore says Paul in Romans 4.1. What shall we
say that Abraham our Father as appertaining to the flesh has found; if Abraham
were justified by works? Mark his Exposition of that Covenant, appertaining to
the flesh to be a Covenant of works, which in ^^e 10. verse he clears to be
Circumcision, in opposition to that Gospel promise, which Abraham had before he
was circumcised, and so he does all along in that Chapter. Herein the 3. of
Gal. he does set the Covenant of grace and that of works in opposition, the one
he calls the Spirit, the other flesh, which he most evidently explains in Chap.
5.1, 2, 3. where says he, Stand fast in that liberty which Christ has made
you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Here observe again, that he calls it as Peter does Acts 15.10. a yoke of
bondage, which is evident that they were set at freedom and liberty from as
that which was abolished, and they freed from as a yoke, which neither they,
nor their Fathers were able to hear, as appears in Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. Behold I
Paul say to you, if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing: Nay in
v. 3. For I testify to every one that is circumcised, that he is a Debtor to do
the whole Law, and in ver. 4. He sets it in opposition to the covenant of
grace, and this is explained more in Gallatians chap. 6.12, 13. verses.

Now all this considered, you may clearly see the Covenant of Circumcision made
to Abraham and his seed in their Generation, that he would give them Canaan
with the blessings thereof, and in that sense, be their God, to protect
preserve and externally to privilege them with the means of grace, and tenders
of the Gospel, and the external blessings of Canaan, upon condition they would
be circumcised and keep the Law.

All these things are typical, this deliverance out of Egypt, typing out the
deliverance out of Hell. That temporal Israel after the flesh, that were
redeemed out of Egypt, typed out the spiritual Israel that were redeemed out of
the spiritual bondage, and (as before has been said) Moses then a temporal
Redeemer, Mediator or Savior, typed out Christ the spiritual Mediator and
Savior, therefore in the 1 Cor. 10.6. The Apostle tells us, these were our
figures or types.

So this being premised, we have the sense of the Text here plain, that as the
spiritual disciple or Israelite when he believes and confesses his faith,
thereby showing his interest in Jesus Christ, is baptized into Christ Jesus the
Mediator of that Covenant, which he is in by faith.

So the temporal Israel by birth, or being bought with money, or cohabitation
in that family of Israel, coming to have a right to the Covenant of
Circumcision, whereof Moses was the Mediator, they were likewise baptized unto
Moses, in the Cloud and in the Sea, that being as real a confirmation to them
of the temporal deliverance from Egypt into Canaan by the hand of Moses, as our
baptism is a confirmation to the spiritual Israel of their spiritual
deliverance by Jesus their Mediator from death and condemnation to eternal life.

And whereas the Apostle calls that meat spiritual meat, and that drink,
spiritual drink, he here speaks figuratively, as before affirmed; Not that the
Manna eaten by the whole Nation of Israel, was in it self spiritual, but it was
a figure of the spiritual bread, therefore Christ says to the Jews in John
6.32, 33. Verily, verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from
heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. Observe that word
Gives, not did give, but gives for the bread of God is that which comes down
from heaven, and gives life to the world.

And therefore says he, My Father gives you the true bread from heaven, that
is, the substance of that shadow; and so that rock was Christ, meaning a figure
or type of Christ.

What is all this, Beloved, to the proving of a Covenant of life, running in
the flesh, either then or now, to the Gentiles under the Gospel? seeing it is
clear, that all these Ordinances (as the Apostle calls them Heb. 9. Carnal
Ordinances) did type out, or figure out, spiritual and substantial things. For
their sacrifices for sin, typed out Christ, but they were not Christ, and their
typical remissions, which they had by their sacrifice, That remission I say,
which the whole body of Israel had by offering up their sin-offering can be
understood to be no other but typical.

A man might be under that typical Remission, and yet ne under the wrath of God
and be damned, and a poor Gentile, at the utmost part of the Earth* believing
as Rahab did in Canaan, as truly justified, though he had none of this typical
remission, and none of these before mentioned figures, so that we conclude the
whole Nation of the Jews had not a covenant of eternal life in the flesh made
unto them, though they had a temporal typical covenant, as I have all along
called it, that is, consisting of such Laws and privileges that had not Christ
in them, but did point at him to come; therefore they are called in Heb. 9.
Patterns of Heavenly things, but not the very things themselves. They are
called by the Apostle, Beggarly Elements or Rudiments of the World, or a
Schoolmaster to lead to Christ. The Jews literal obedience to the Law, typing
out the obedience to faith, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. with Romans 10. from v. 6. to
the 10. ver.

Now, beloved, the literal obedience in it self performed by the carnal Jew,
though it figured out the substantial obedience, viz. faith in Christ, and
though the Rest in Canaan, typed out the spiritual Rest in Christ, yet I hope
no man will be so absurd, but he will confess, that this litteral obedience, it
was not the spiritual obedience, and that this rest in Canaan it was but a
shadow of that rest in Christ, not the very rest it self.

But some may say so of baptism, and the Supper, that these are the signs of
inward and spiritual things, but it does not follow, that these are the
spiritual things.

Beloved, Observe warily, for here lies the ground of this great mistake, the
want of distinguishing between these figures that type out Christ to come, and
these Sacramental signs, that do confirm and ratify his being already come.

Those typical signs and figures then, which typed out Christ to come, did
properly belong to that typical seed the body of Israel, that typed out the
spiritual seed to come.

But now these signs, I say, these Sacramental signs that are instituted since
Christ came, for the confirming he is come, these belong only to the spiritual
seed, in whom Christ is come already dwelling in their hearts by faith.

Therefore as Christ is a spiritual and substantial Mediator of a Substantial
and spiritual covenant, so these spiritual Administrations of the spiritual
covenant, belong only to such as are in Christ, and this new Covenant by faith,
and that have Christ dwelling in them, as has been before in the former part
of my discourse, manifested.

In the new Testament, Faith and Repentance, are required of them that are to
be baptized, Here is Water what lets? If thou believe with all thy heart
it is lawful, Acts 8.38. implying it was unlawful to baptize any, that did not
believe with all their heart, at least in profession. And so when Christ
dispenses the Supper. He commands it to be received by his Disciples, Matthew.
26. He says to his Disciples, take eat, and he said to his Disciples, Drink ye
all of this, and Paul says, Examine your selves and so eat of this bread, and
drink of this Cup.

If you will not shut your eyes against the light; there is nothing more plain
than this, That those administrations, under the old covenant, did not require
such qualifications, as are essentially requisite to be found in the persons,
that must partake of these substantial signs of the new Covenant.

As for Circumcision, it was not necessary for all that were circumcised, to
believe and repent, or to have faith in Christ, or to be converted and made
Disciples by preaching, as necessary Qualifications to partake of the
Ordinances. But the institution in Genesis 17.13. says, All born in thy house, or
bought with thy money; though never so ignorant, carnal, or have never so
wicked parents or parentage, yet such ought to be circumcised, this institution
running upon that family.

But baptism is a confirmation of our Regeneration already wrought in us, and
our new birth, and our union with Jesus Christ by faith, and therefore belongs
only to them, where this Regeneration is, to them that are born again of Water,
and of the Spirit, and so the Passover was to be partaken of by the carnal
Israelite after the flesh, viz. the captive, the slave bought with money,
Heathen, Black Moor, or of the Canaanites; but the Lords Supper only belongs to
Disciples able to discern the Lords body by faith, without the which they bring
Judgment upon themselves, and make themselves guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, except they are able to examine themselves, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cap. So that which
the Apostle drives at in this chapter, is this principally, that as the
temporal Israel who were the Church of God then privileged in that temporal
Covenant upon their falls and sins, were by God visited and corrected, to show
to all the world, that he would not countenance sin in them, without sad
reproof, so he concludes in this also, the Gospel Church professing the
covenant of grace, and enjoying the privileges thereof, they should not escape
if they turn aside from God, and sin against him without checks, reproofs and
sad admonitions from him, and here lies the scope; and the rather might such
caution be given to Gospel churches, because they were in a covenant of Grace
only by a visible profession, and therefore may possibly receive the greater
danger by sin if their profession should not be right and saving.

Object. But some may object, That there were some precious Saints then in the
Old Testament, and do you think that they did not perform the Ordinances with
spiritual hearts?

Answ. No question such did, as it is said of Abel, By faith he offered a more
excellent sacrifice than Cain.

Duties performed from faith with an eye to Christ were then acceptable, when
so performed, though ceremoniously, and such duties relating merely to the
covenant of works.

Only I would have you to observe, that the carnal Israelite was without faith
capable to perform every ceremonial Law, Faith made not Israelite capable of
performing the ceremonies of the Law.
required by the old covenant according to the express tenor thereof, as truly
as the believer.

So in no wise can it be said of the duties relating to the new covenant,
either then or now; as repentance, spiritual prayer, thanksgiving, and diverse
other duties perpetually at all times, and universal to all Saints: I deny
that the carnal Jews were capable of the true performance of these, I mean as
to answer the Rules or Institutions given. For if you look to the Catechism in
the Common Prayer Book, you shall find that it was a maxim, received by all
that own that Liturgy, That no less than a profession of faith and repentance,
was required of them that were baptized.

Whence observe, they thereby confirm the doctrine that I have been all this
while pleading for, that none but such as have Faith and Repentance in their
hearts, and do profess the fame should be baptized.

Object. But may some say, Did not some bring their friends to Christ to be
healed, and Christ seeing the faith of those which brought them healed them?
And if they believed for others, to the healing of their bodies, why not also
then for the saving of their souls?

Answ. This is directly the Papists Argument, with which some do close rather
than part with their Idol. But to speak to this more particularly, There is
nothing more plain, than that God did give gifts of healing to many, as that
the faith of one contributed to the healing of the body of another, as their
Servants and children, as in the case of the Centurion, in Matthew. 8.7, 8, 9.
verses, and Jairus the Ruler over the Synagogue.

But this is no way to prove that one man should come to have union with
Christ, and so to have justification and eternal life by the faith of another.

For in this case the Prophet says, The just shall live by his faith, Hab.
2.4. Romans 1.17. And he that believes not is condemned already, that is, every
individual he that believes not, shall be condemned, and he that believes
shall be saved, but some do bring in that text in the 7. of the Hebrews, that
Levi paid tyths in Abraham, therefore why should not souls believe and repent
in their believing Parents, as well as Levi paid tithes in his believing Father
Abraham.

It seems to me, that this Act of Abraham was performed as a public person,
in his paying Tithes to Melchisedeck, herein representing his Posterity; but
not so in all the rest of his Acts; It does not follow, that he believed and
repented for all his posterity: for this were a notable ground indeed for
Papists implicit Faith.

We know that Adam in his fall, did act sin as a public person, in which all
mankind are said to sin, Romans 5. But it does not follow, that all the future
Acts that Adam committed, he did perform as a public person, for if all the
posterity of a believing person so many generations to come, as Levy from
Abraham; did believe and repent in their believing parents; then there is no
ground to oppose, that all the world at this day are believers, because they
were all in the line of believing Noah, he being the father from whence all the
world did proceed that are now living this day.

And again observe, that if the Covenant of life belongs to all believers seed,
then we need not want for Church Members; because all the world are the
children and offspring of believing Noah, and this argument carries the right
of Covenant to all the world, being the children of a Believer, viz. Noah.

An answer to that text Mat. 19.13.
Further, some bring that in Matthew 19.13. There were brought unto him little
children that he should put his hand upon them and pray, and the disciples
rebuked them, and Jesus said, suffer little children and forbid them not to
come to me, for of such is the kingdom of God; and he laid his hands on them
and departed.

In Mark 10.13. thus, And they brought young Children to him, that he should
touch them, and his Disciples rebuked them that brought them, but when Jesus
saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children
to come unto me and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God; verily
I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little
child, shall not enter therein.

From hence would some maintain a covenant of eternal life in the flesh, for
that end they bring this Text, but let us examine what the meaning of it may be.

First, whose children they were, that were brought to Christ, does not appear,
its probable they were the seed of Abraham, but what their mediate parents,
whether believers or wicked persons does not appear certainly, but by the
former discourse in the chapter, it should seem they might be wicked and
ungodly persons, for there were such mentioned before that tempted Christ, and
asked him questions.

The next thing is, for what did they bring these children unto Christ? most
certain not to baptize them, because Christ it is said, baptized not, but the
Disciples, John 4.2. What then were they brought to Christ for? One Evangelist
says, He took them in his arms and blessed them, another says, He laid his
hands on them and prayed.

All which considered (in my judgment) it does probably appear, they were
brought to him to be healed of some disease, it being usual in those days that
by prayer and laying on of hands, they did heal the sick.

But the main expression in the Text, to be noted, is this, That of such are
the Kingdom of God.

From these words some gather, that all the children of believing parents, do
belong to the kingdom of God, and if to the Kingdom of God, then to all the
privileges of that kingdom.

But (as you have heard) it will be very doubtful, whether these children, had
any believing parents to the fifth or sixth degree, for of such is the Kingdom
of God, says the Text, the which we must understand thus; That all the
children born of the body of Believers, and that when little ones in arms, do
belong to the kingdom of God, if you will make this text to countenance that
error of the covenant in the flesh, the which is erroneous, as appears, in that
the greatest number of believers children, never belonged in that sense to the
kingdom of God, for Adam had a Cain as well as an Abel, Noah had a Ham as well
as a Sem, Abraham had an Ishmael as well as an Isaac, Isaac had an Esau as well
as a Jacob. And so I might mention all the Scriptures, wherein in like manner
God does as well bring forth the generation of the wicked out of the godly, and
the generation of the elect, out of the line of the wicked, indefinitely.

But if by Kingdom of God, be meant that condition or state, that men are
interessed in, by virtue of a Covenant of eternal life, and that believers
children should by birth and generation belong to it, then this fully crosses
that doctrine of Christ to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.5. as was formerly spoken to.

Object. But some may say, Its possible that such a little child may believe,
because in Matthew 18. 3, 4, 5, 6. verses, it is said, We should not offend
such little ones that believe.

If you grant that some children, when little do believe, and therefore belong
to the kingdom of God, to that I assent, let them be whose children they will,
whether of Believers or Infidels.

If they believe they are in Christ, and so interessed in the Kingdom of God.

But what makes this, for the covenant in the flesh of carnal unbelieving seed?

Again, If by Kingdom of God should be understood, the Jewish state or Church,
and children here understood for children of that Jewish nation; then in that
sense it is true, that all the children born in the Jewish Church by virtue of
their birth in that family or nation belonged as members to that National
Church, being interessed in the Covenant of Circumcision, which was the
national covenant, and the privileges of the same, and were by natural birth
interessed therein.

Answ. But the true and proper meaning of the Text appears plain to be here in
Mark 10.13, 14, 15. compared together, for when he had in the 14. verse said,
Of such belongs the Kingdom of God in verse the 15. he presently says,
Verily I say unto you, whosoever receives not the kingdom of God, as a little
child, shall not enter therein, this I say interprets these words before, Of
such as the kingdom of God; that is, of such like in grace, as these be by
nature, such souls that are by Gods grace, subdued and brought into a
child-like frame of spirit, they only are such as are of the kingdom of God, as
for example.

When the Disciples reasoned who should be greatest among them, Christ set a
little child as a pattern of humility, innocence, and harmlesness.

And also says the Apostle, Be you children in malice, and old men in
understanding, 1 Cor. 14. and says Peter, As new born babes desire the sincere
Milk of the word, that ye might grow thereby 1 Pet. 2.^.

And so as there is a parity held forth, between a man and his wife, and Christ
and his Church, so in Scripture there is, between a child in nature, and a
child in grace, as the natural begetting, the spiritual begetting, alluding to
that, there is the natural birth and the spiritual birth held forth, by that
sucking of the Mothers breast, and by sucking of the breast of Gods word.

A little babe we know in nature will trust to his parents, so the new born
babe will trust in Christ; if the natural babe want any thing it will go to its
parents and ask them for it, so must a new born Babe make his request known to
God in all his Wants; If any thing hurt a babe, he will cry, and make his
complaint to his Father; So the child of God, if any straight oppresses him,
he cries to God his Father; The natural child, will imitate his Father and his
Brethren, so the new born babe imitates God the Father and Christ, and the rest
(as it were) of his brethren; the new born babe when young, a little will
content it, so should the new born babe in grace, be in all conditions and
states content.

And this I understand, to be the proper meaning of this place, Of such is the
Kingdom of God, that is, of such souls, that are spiritually qualified by Gods
grace, answerable to little children in nature, Mat. 18.1. to 6. of such godly
new born heavenly babes, is the kingdom of God.

And this Exposition agrees with the right scope of the place, and the true
analogy of Faith.

And therefore I would have you seriously to consider, that this covenant of
grace in the flesh, the whole word of the Lord disclaims it, and will give no
countenance to any such notion, so destructive in its consequence, to the truth
of God (as you have heard before.)

Object. But some may object and say, But this which you call a Covenant of
Works, consisting of Temporal promises, and also Laws and Statutes, you are not
to understand that to be a distinct covenant from the Covenant of eternal life,
but a form of Administration, that the Covenant of Grace was then administered
in. And the carnal children were not then interessed in the main privileges of
the Covenant, as Adoption and Justification, but the outward promises and
privileges only made to their Fathers.

Answ. I know this objection some do bring, which if it be well weighed, is
inconsistent with their own arguments.

For if this objection be true, then was there no covenant made to Abraham's
seed, but only an administration of a Covenant. And therefore ill do they
affirm, that the covenant was made to them, therefore the administration. But
this doubtless is false, and this objection (as I said) is false and
groundless, as appears by several express testimonies in Scripture which does
evidently prove two distinct covenants, as for example.

Says God in Genesis chap. 17. and verse 7. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their Generations, for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee.

Where observe, that the Lord does not say, that he will establish an
administration of the Covenant, with his seed in their generations, but his
covenant, and Abraham and his seed, must keep his covenant; and in verse the
13. this my covenant, shall be in your flesh, for an everlasting Covenant, not
this administration of my Covenant, shall be in your flesh; and so in Hebr. the
8.6, 7, 8, 9, verses. But now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry, by
how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is established
upon better promises.

Mark, (as I have before showed at large) here were two covenants, the one upon
better promises, the other upon worse promises; which must needs be understood
temporal blessings, and deliverances, and privileges; Therefore he says, they
serve unto the Example and shadow of heavenly things; and in verse the seventh,
if that first Testament had been faultless, there should have been no place
sought for the second. And in the nineth verse he says, that the old covenant
they continued not in, therefore God regarded them not; and in verse the 12. in
that he says, a new covenant, he has made the first old. Now that which
decays, and waketh old, is ready to vanish away; which Scriptures do evidence
as clear as the Sun at Noon day, that there was a real covenant made with the
Jews, made before with Abraham, but committed to the Church in writing by
Moses, when he led them out of Egypt, and this Covenant they brake, said Jeremy
chap. 31.32. and here the Apostle says, they continued not in it, and the last
verse says, it was made old, and therefore vanishing away; and in Hebrews 9.
there the Apostle calls this old covenant, that contained in it shadows and
paterns of heavenly things, the first Testament wherein the Apostle in verse
17. and forwards, does show there were two Testaments, the one confirmed by the
blood of Bulls, the other confirmed by the blood of Christ. And if this were
not true, then most falsely do such affirm, the covenant was made with Abraham's
seed, therefore the privileges, if Abraham lineally had no covenant made with
them, but only an external and outward Administration and Privilege, etc.

Upon that ground there was no national Covenant at all made with Israel, but
only an outward administration, and that being granted to be Ceremonial, except
you can prove another Ceremonial administration as carnal, as that
administration was, now in force, there is not the like ground why carnal and
unbelieving children should have any share in it.

But that there were two covenants is most evident, An Exposition of that text,
Gal. 4.21. etc.
as appears in the New Testament, as I have formerly at large endeavored to
make good, only I shall add that in Gallatians 4.21. and forward, where says
the Apostle, Tell me, ye that would be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law,
for it is written, That Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other
by a freewoman, but he who was of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh,
but he of the freewoman was by promise; which things are an allegory, that is,
by these things, other things are meant.

For these are the two Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai which gendereth to
bondage, which is Agar, for this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers
to Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children, but Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all.

Now we Brethren as Isaac was, are children of the promise, but as then, he
that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit;
so it is now, notwithstanding cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the Son
of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman; So then
Brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free. And in the
next chapter he says, Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made you free, and be not entangle again, with the yoke of bondage, which
he afterward explains to be the Covenant of Circumcision Gall. 5.^, 2, 3.

But to speak something to this text, Abraham here by the Apostle, is
understood to represent God by way of type and figure, as it were, his two
women Sarah and Hagar, the two covenants of God; the two sons, Ishmael and
Isaac, represents (as the text hints) the two seeds in these two covenants of
God. Now Sarah the freewoman, represents the covenant of grace, and Hagar the
covenant of Works; both these women continued in Abraham's house together for a
time, the first child he begat by the strength of nature, without faith in a
promise, of a bondwoman: The other he begat by faith, in a promise without
strength of nature, of a freewoman; and the freewoman continued in Abraham's
house with the bondwoman and her son without any Scruple, till Isaac was born
and also weaned. And when the son of the bondwoman persecuted Isaac, the
freewoman testifyes against the bondwoman and her son, and will have them no
longer to abide in the house with her son; Abraham likewise had first the
freewoman, and the last the bondwoman. The freewoman was sometime barren in
Abraham's house, but the bondwoman was fruitful.

Now the mystery that the Apostle hints to be held forth in this History is
clear, from which he speaks in this 4. of the Gallatians which must be this.

That God in like manner first made a covenant of Grace, even as Abraham first
had a freewoman, which covenant (in a great measure) was barren, bringing
forth no seed, or else totally barren as Sarah was, in respect of that
substantial seed Christ Jesus, which Isaac typed forth, as soon as God had made
this covenant, he in the same house or Church has also a Hagar, that is a
Covenant of works, in which God has abundance of seed, becoming his by
strength of nature, without faith in a promise, and the Covenant of grace as
Sarah (in a sense) becomes barren. All which time the covenant of grace and
covenant of works both agree very well to be in Gods house together, but at the
last, as the freewoman brought forth Isaac, so the covenant of Grace brings
forth Christ Jesus without strength of nature, by faith in a promise, as in
Matthew. 1.21. Luke 1.35. and when this substantial seed is come, then the
covenant of grace and works remain in Gods Church together: but afterward when
Christ the true Isaac was (as it were) weaned, that is, come to maturity, so as
to appear, that he was now in the office of the Ministry, the Scribes and
Pharisees with the high Priests, all the sons of Hagar, the old covenant,
persecuted Christ, and those in him.

Whereupon the freewoman, or rather the free Covenant of grace, does testify,
that a covenant of Works with her seed, shall no longger remain with her in the
Church of God.

But now the free covenant and her sons, that is, the Covenant of grace only,
and her children born by faith in a promise, only must for a time forward
remain in the house of God.

So that now rejoice thou barren that barest not, the Covenant of grace becomes
fruitful, having seed in all nations, therefore the Apostle says, the
Jerusalem which is above, which is free, is the Mother of us all, and those us
or we, that were members of the primitive Church, were born from above by faith
in a promise.

Therefore it is plain from hence, that there were no carnal babes in that
Church. But when Christ, the true seed of the Covenant, was persecuted by the
Jews, which were the children of the covenant of Works, the Gospel does
plentifully testify the abolishing the Covenant of Works, and the casting
forth of those bond-children out of Gods Church, Acts 13.45, 46. But when the
Jews saw the multitude they were filled with envy, and spoke against those
things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming. Then Paul and
Barnabas waxed bold and said, It was necessary that the word of God should
first have been spoken to you, but seeing ye put it far from you, and judge
your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles; for so
has the Lord commanded us. And as appears in the 11. chap. of the Romans, and
as that 4. chap. of Gall. in express words says in the 25. verse, this Hagar
is meant Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem that now is, and is
in bondage with her children; this being so clear that the bondwoman, and her
son, that is to say, the covenant af works, and all those related to Abraham
only in a covenant of works, are cast out of the house of God.

How opposite then is their opinion to the truth, that still would have a
fleshly generation to be in the house of God with their children.

But seeing the natural branches that truly were descended of the Line of
faithful Abraham might not have that honor; How much less the unbelieving seed
of the Gentiles that are wild by nature.

Thus you see in brief this objection answered, and that there is no ground for
childrens baptism, but an imagination, through thick darkness, upon the minds
of people, they setting up this idol in their hearts, God has answered them
accordingly as the Prophet speaks in Ezekiel 14.2, 3, 4, 5. verses, And the
word of the Lord came unto me, saying,, Son of man, these men have set up their
idols in their heart, and put their stumbling block of their iniquity before
their face, should I be inquired of at all by them? therefore speak unto them,
thus says the Lord, Every man of the house of Israel, that sets up his
Idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his
face, and comes to the Prophet, I the Lord will answer him that comes,
according to the Multitude of his Idols, that I may take the house of Israel in
their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their Idols.

Where you see, that when souls set up an idol in their heart, God does answer
them according to their idol, as he has in this case suffering blind blindness
and uncertainty of judgment to befall them.

For such as defend childrens baptism, and the ablest I have met with, do grant
they have no command or example in the New Testament for their practice, but
ground the same on a consequence, which you have heard evidently proved, is
drawn from an error; For to affirm or maintain, that the covenant of eternal
life, is made with believers carnal seed, is a dangerous error, and therefore
the consequence must needs be as false and rotten as that error from whence it
is drawn, then judge you what a pitiful consequence that must be.

Take the whole result thus, Childrens baptism, has no ground from the word of
God, either Command or Example for it, but a consequence (as before) so that it
is merely a tradition of men, setting up in the place and room of the Commands
of God, to wit, baptizing of Believers. This groundless tradition, which makes
void the commandment of God, even as the wicked Jews did in Mark 7.7. Howbeit,
in vain says the Lord they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men, and in verse 9. He said unto them, Full well you reject or frustrate
the commandments of God, that you may keep your own Traditions: and in verse
13. Make the word of God of none effect through your traditions which you have
delivered, and many such things do you.

Now beloved, this is the very sin of such as defend this tradition, they
thereby make void and frustrate the Commandment of God; where Christ says,
Repent and be baptized every one of you, that is, every one that repents; and
says Annanias to Paul, Arise now, why tarriest thou, and be baptized for the
washing away of thy sins; and Peter to Cornelius his family, he there commands
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 10.48. Those and many
more standing commands of the New Testament that belong to believers and
penitent persons are frustrate and made void by christening children.

Thus poor souls are nursed up in a habit of disrespect and disobedience to
these commandments, because this invention takes the place and room of the same.

Do but consider how dangerous a sin this practice is, it is setting up a
superstitious invention in the room of Gods command in his worship.

Now God and his Commandments, must not be separated; for a soul that rightly
sets up Gods Commandments sets up and exalts God, and to set up any worship in
the room of what is commanded of God, is in effect to set up a false God.

Do but see what sad Witnesses God has given from heaven against this sin in
Leviticus chap. 10.1, 2. where Nadab and Abihu, offered strange fire to God, as
the text says, which he commanded not, for which God burned them with fire
from heaven; the Lord does not say which he had forbidden, but which he
commanded not. Many souls ask where God has forbid this practice of childrens
baptism, therefore I would prove by these Scriptures that things or persons in
the worship of God in room of what God commands, are abominable to God. Hear
how God does threaten a people for this sin in Jerem. 9.13, 14, 15. And the
Lord said, Because they had forsaken my Law which I had set before them, and
have not obeyed my voice, nor walked therein, but have walked after the
imagination of their own hearts, therefore he says in verse 15. He will give
them to feed on Wormwood, and give them Water of Gall to drink, and will
consume them. Now this is the very case of such as set up this tradition, they
forsake the Law of believers baptism set before them, and have never obeyed his
voice nor walked therein; but have walked in childrens sprinkling, which the
imagination of their own hearts have devised. This Text is very much applicable
to such souls: the like evil wicked Saul is said to do, 1 Samuel 13.12, 13.
verses, for which God rends the Kingdom from him, and in Jeremy 8.9. The
wisemen are dismayed and ashamed, lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord,
and what wisdom is in them? therefore will I give their wives to others, and
their fields to them that shall inherit them: And so in Jeremy 7.31. They have
built the High places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the Son of Hinnom,
to burn their Sons and Daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not,
neither came it in my heart: upon which he threatens destruction upon them.

And you see how God made a breach upon Vzzah for touching the Ark, God not
commanding him, or giving him rule for such practice; God having given a
command to the Priests only to do that work, but not to him: So God has given
a command and example to baptize believers only, and not children, therefore it
is the sin of Vzzah, and likewise the sin of King Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.14, 15.
where you see the sad judgment of God upon Vzziah for doing that in the
worship of God, which God had not commanded, in the room or stead of what he
had commanded, God struct him with Leprosy, and that in his forehead, and the
hand of God prosecuted him, as an admonition to persons that now dare adventure
upon the like sinful practices, to offer any thing to God, as religious
worship, which he has not commanded, instead of what he has commanded; the
Lord in this case sets out himself to be a jealous God, that will visit the
sins of the father upon the children to the third and fourth generation, of
such as make to themselves any graven Image, that is, any form by which we will
worship God; be sure it is of Gods own making, for we must not make it to our
selves; the Lord does call in Scripture such like worship, which men do in the
room of Gods commanded worship. The Worship of Devils; I shall give you one
instance for this in Scripture, as in Psalm 106.35, 36. and they served their
idols which were a snare unto them, yea they sacrificed their sons and their
daughters unto Devils, and the next verse expounding himself, it is said, they
offered them unto the Idols of Canaan.

And in like manner, do not men bring their Sons and their Daughters in this
case, and offer them to this invention of sprinkling.

You have for baptizing of believers the commandment of Christ, and testimony
of the infalible Penmen, and all men in the world owning the Scriptures to be
the word of God, to be of the Lords own institution, but this practice of
childrens sprinkling, God has raised up in all ages some, that have professed
Religion, to witness against it, and a great part of those that have the power
of godlyness do renounce it, as a sinful practice, and that upon substantial
grounds. And me thinks when you consider that your Childrens sprinkling, has
no command or example in the Gospel to confirm it, and only such a consequence,
that flows from an error.

I hope such as fear God will take heed how they harden their hearts, in the
practice of so heinous a sin, and in the neglect of so solemn a duty as the
Ordinance of Dipping Believers, in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
for is there any man able to declare from Scripture, that ever any solemn
Ordinance of standing use in the Church of the New Testament, had for its
institution, any less than a command of God, and a promise of blessing to the
faithful performance of the same; But there is for childrens baptism neither
command to institute, nor any promise to bless, but rather indeed, the
performers of that worship, may expect a curse, and not a blessing in the
performance of the same, as you have it in Psalm 99.8. Thou answerest them O
Lord our God, thou art a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance
of their inventions, with Psalm. 106.29. Thus they provoked him to anger with
their inventions, and the plague broke in upon them, as it did in the 2 Chronicles
26.19, 20, 21. Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a Censor in his hand, to burn
Incense, and while he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy rose up in his
forehead, before the Priests in the house of the Lord; from besides the incense
Altar, and Azariah the chief Priest, and all the rest of the Priests looked
upon him, and behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out
from thence, yea himself hasted to go out, because the Lord had smitten him.
And Uzziah the King, was a Leper to the day of his death, and dwelt in a
several house, for he was out off from the house of the Lord.

Thus you see the sad curse of God, executed against such like inventions in
the service of God that men set up in the room of Gods commands, thereby
justling out his Commands, as the Scripture says.

This is for a man to set up his Posts by Gods Posts, and in a sense, setting
up himself in the place and room of God, and flows from abundance of Pride; as
here it is said of King Vzziah, preceding this his sin, his heart was lifted up
to his own destruction.

Now most certain it is, That man Moses, was faithful in all Gods house as a
servant in giving the Church then, exact and perfect rules, how they should
serve God, unto which they must not ad, and from which they must not detract
nor take away, Diut. 4.2. so Christ is every way as faithful over his house as
a Lord, Heb. 3.4, 5, 6. and rightly to this purpose is applied that in Col.
2.8. with 20, 21, 22.

For men to embrace any worship to their God that they have not a rule for, it
is in that chapter condemned, as will worship, and traditions of men; and
warily consider that it fosters men in a sinful neglect of that holy and
solemn Ordinance of Dipping believers.

Do not all our Protestant Authors in all their Disputations against the
Papists, defend that Faith and Repentance precede Baptism, thereby confuting
the Papists, that Baptism is not to convey grace where it is not, but to
confirm Grace, and strengthen it where it is? and in that Catechism embraced
generally by all Protestants in the Common Liturgy in England, this question
being demanded, What is required of them that are to be baptized? The answer
is, Faith and Repentance; which does plainly manifest, that it was the
judgment of all those that were Protestants, owning that Liturgy, that none
ought to be baptized, but such as repent and believe, not only so, but that do
confess faith and repentance, because in Baptism there is, as Peter says, The
answer of a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.19. compared with Philip and the Eunuch,
Acts 8.38: If thou believe with all thy heart thou may? Says the Eunuch,
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. So in Acts 19. it is said, They
came to the Apostle confessing their deads.

Now consider that this doctrine in all those times was defended, that faith
and repentance, must needs precede baptism, why? because they concluded it a
seal of the new Covenant, and therefore where persons were not in a Covenant by
Faith, did in apposition to the Papists defend, they had no interest in baptism.

Now let any soul that is not blinded with the subtilty of Satan, and by means
of the stumbling block of iniquity, set up in his own heart, as says the Lord
in Ezekiel 14.4. Let such I say judge, how cross to this Doctrine they do
practice, that do baptize, visible graceless and Christless children, so far as
any man is able to judge.

Object. But some will say, I grant this, baptizing of children, is a mere
tradition, and that not to be practiced by Christians, and I do believe in the
primitive time, Believers only had this Ordinance dispenesd upon them: but I do
conceive (says the Soul) I have received the baptism of the Holy Ghost,
therefore I need not that Ordinance of Baptism by Water, and the rather,
because I think that was John's baptism, and the baptism of the Holy Ghost being
come, has put an end to that Baptism of water.

Answer, Then you deny in Judgment any Ordinance of Baptism at all, to stand
in force, which is be sure an upstart opinion, exceeding cross, to the Doctrine
of Christ in his Gospel; but let me as warily as I can, answer this question.

First you do think it was John's baptism, it is true, that John baptized or
dipped into Water, those that came to him confessing their sins, and professing
faith in him, that should come after him.

But though it is true, John's baptism in this respect, pointing out Christ to
come, is done away, yet it is as true, that the Lord has afresh, since his
death and resurrection, entitled this ordinance of dipping believers into
Christ already come and fully exhibited in the flesh, Matthew. 28.19, 20. with
Mar. 16.16. and Peter after, the Holy ghost was in that extraordinary manner
powered down upon him according to John's Prophecy, to wit, with cloven fiery
tongues, he does after this, by the direction of the infallible Spirit, command
all his converts that were pricked in the heart, Acts 2.38. to repent and be
baptized every one of them for the remission of sins, and they should receive
the gift of the Holy ghost.

Where you may see, that this was baptism of Water; that he commanded all that
repent to submit to, because the Holy Ghost, as those extraordinary gifts was
to follow, to wit, those gifts that Joel prophesied of. And so in Acts 10. When
Cornelius and his house had heard the word of God, the Holy Ghost fell upon
them, and as an effect thereof, they spoke with new tongues, and magnified God.
And then says Peter to them of the Circumcision, How should we forbid water
that these should not be baptized which have received the Holy Ghost as well as
we. So that this great Apostle was so far from this opinion, that he urges the
contrary, that because they had received the Holy Ghost, and that in the
extraordinary gifts, thereof, which John foretold, Christ should baptize them
with, says he, How shall we forbid water; plainly holding forth,, that it is
baptism by water that he here is speaking of, and in which verse 48. he
commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, because they
received the Holy Ghost, therefore they must not be denied that Ordinance of
baptism by Water, clearly holding forth, that the enjoying the Holy Ghost, was
so far from being an argument why souls should not be baptized with water, that
it is an argument, that they ought to be baptized more especially; and this
appears in Paul after his conversion, which I understand, was wrought by Christ
immediately.

For says he to Annanias, Behold he is a chosen vessel to me, for he now
prays, therefore say I he was now converted, as to the inward work of faith,
changing his heart; But when Annanias came to him, he laid his hands upon him:
and there were two effects of this, his laying on of his hands He received his
sight, and was filled with the Holy Ghost and he arose forthwith and was
baptized, that is to say, after he was filled with the Holy Ghost he arose and
was baptized in water, Acts 9.17, 18. compared with Acts 22.16. When Paul had
received the holy Ghost, Annanias says, And now Paul why tarriest thou? Arise
and be baptized, for the washing away of thy sins, calling upon the name of the
Lord.

Observe that Annanias had an immediate extraordinary commission from Christ by
vision, to come with the message to Paul, and Christ in a vision bids Paul go
to Annanias and he should tell him what he should do, and Annanias according to
that Commission of Christ upon his being filled with the holy Ghost, commands
him to be baptized. And this agrees with the Covenant of grace in Ezekiel
36.27. where the Lord says, I will put my Spirit in them, and cause them to
walk in my way, and Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one heart, and will put my
Spirit within them, and will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will
give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my Statutes, and keep mine
Ordinances to do them, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

Where you may see, that God is so far from giving his Spirit, to the end that
souls should plead thereby freedom from the practice of those commanded
Ordinances of Christ, that on the contrary, it is the end why God gives his
Spirit to enable, and to cause them to walk in his way, and in his Ordinances,
and in particular baptism.

And observe, the Apostles have not left us a bare example only, that they did
baptize after that Christ powered out the Holy Ghost, and that by the authority
received from heaven, but does command it, as you have heard to all that repent
and believe, and to all that receive the holy Ghost to submit to it.

But again, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and fire, that John foretold of, it
is clear, was extraordinarily given upon an especial ground and reason
fulfilled in Act. 2. The Holy Ghost falling down in fiery Cloven tongues in the
sight and view of the bodily eyes, which was that outward sign; and that clear
light, and fervent zeal, and love they had, in uttering the wonderful things of
God in variety of strange tongues, was the inward thing signified: So that
herein the baptism of the Holy Ghost was an outward sign, and an inward thing
signified; but there is now no man in the world has this baptism, only it is
true that the Spirit, in the saving gifts of faith, repentance, and the like,
is held to be essential to the Ordinance of Baptism of water, and must be
joined together with it, without which it cannot be said to be an Ordinance of
God, there must be the inward grace, as well as the outward sign.

This Baptism that the Apostle according to Christ's Commission has left a
standing Command for, cannot be John's baptism, his holding forth Christ to
come, baptizing them in that doctrine; But in this we baptize persons in Christ
already come and fully exhibited.

And though it may be objected, that the Apostles practiced some things that
were abolished, as the circumcising of Timothy, and the like. We also say, that
as they practiced it among the Jews, so the Apostle Paul to the Gentiles says,
if they be circumcised, Christ should profit them nothing, but they were fallen
from grace: and we never find that circumcision was practiced among the
Gentiles, that were void of all Religion before they taught them.

It is evident in the new Tastament, that Circumcision is abolished as part of
the Mosaical Covenant, and yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. but the case in
baptism is clean otherwise.

Whereas you hear the Apostle did press Cornelius his family to be baptized,
who was a Gentile never acquainted with John's baptism, nor wedded to such a
doctrine as that whereby we should think, that Peter did baptize them to
condescend to that error or weakness in their minds.

Again, he does not only simply baptize them, as a Liberty that might be done
or not done, but commands them to be baptized, and so does, as you heard before
he did, in Acts 2. and it cannot be said, that the Apostles commanded any duty
to be done, with a promise of blessing to the right performance of the same,
after the Holy Ghost came down upon them, but it must needs be a solemn
standing Ordinance of God, that every soul upon pain of the guilt and rebellion
against Christ his head and King ought to be subject unto.

But this of Baptism, has as aforesaid, many standing Laws left in holy
Record, speaking to all that believe and repent, promising remission of sins,
and salvation to the right performance of the same, which proves it to be a
standing Ordinance of the new Testament.

And truly with the same reason Souls may affirm, that Christ cease to be a
Mediator, as to hold the Law of dipping believers cease, so much and no less
is affirmed by the Soul that says, the Ordinance of baptism is an expired
Ordinance, he may as well say, Christ is expired and abolished, as a a fleshly
form, as some have had the confidence to say.

For as in the time of Moses Ministration, till there was a change of the
Priesthood, there could not be a change of the Law, no more now, except there
be another Christ and Savior come, or another Priesthood instead of this
Priest and Minister of the New Testament, assure your selves, there can be no
change of this Law, as in Heb. 7.12, 18. Therefore such as pretend to profess
Christ to be their Savior, that came of the seed of David, and the same
persons deny and slight this fundamental Ordinance of Baptism, they do therein
testify, that they reject Christ in their heart as abolished, and have got some
pretended fancy-Christ instead of him; It is utterly inconsistent with the
Faith of the Gospel, and with true Religion, to hold baptism and the Supper two
solemn Ordinances and Symboles of the new Covenant to be abolished; for in
Ephesians. 4. the Apostle pressing there a visible Church-union lays down the main
things wherein that union consists, called, says he, by one hope of their
calling, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith one Baptism this one Baptism, cannot
be meant the Spirit, because the Spirit is mentioned distinct, but baptism here
must needs be meant that standing solemn Ordinance of God, commanded to every
one that believes.

Now the Apostle pressing here a Church Union, does mention these particulars
that are essential to a visi l^ Church-union, without which they could not walk
together, if not in these things agreed, and where a people in all these
particulars are one, no other thing coming should make a breach of their union.

Object. But some other souls will object and say, That Believers baptism is an
Ordinance of God, and he thinks they do well, that are drawn out to practice
it, by a power from God; But says the soul I want a divine power upon my
heart, drawing me out to the practice of the same, and that is the let and
hinderance in me.

Answ. This objection is grounded upon an error and a mistake, taking for
granted, that a man may be a believer, and in a state of grace, and yet void of
spiritual power to perform obedience to the Commands of God, and that a man
that is a Christian may know such a thing to be a Command of God, and yet left
without ability to perform obedience to the same.

I judge this is a dangerous error and contrary to Scripture; For God does at
the very first conversion, put his Law in the heart of his child, as in Heb.
8.10. and as in Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. God is said to put his Spirit in them to that
end to cause them to walk in his ways, therefore in some measure doubtless God
does give his people power to obey him, as in Ezekiel 11.19, 20. I will give
them one heart, and I will put a new Spirit within them, and I will take the
stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give them an heart of flesh, that
they may walk in my Statutes, and keep my Ordinances, and do them, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God.

Whence you may observe, That Gods main drift in making his Covenant and giving
his Spirit into the hearts of his people, is, that they may keep his
Ordinances, and be able to walk in his ways.

Therefore at the first Conversion of Paul, God puts in him a disposition to
obedience, for says he, Lord what would thou have me to do? in Acts 9. and
so in Acts 2.37. when they (through the belief of Peter's Sermon) were pricked
at the heart, they cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? So you see
there was a disposition of heart in their first Conversion, to be doing what
God should command and teach them to be his will; So we find God gives them
power to submit as soon as his will was revealed, for if not so, we should lay
an aspersion upon God, that he should enter into a covenant with a Soul by way
of engagement, and yet neglect to make good his promise, which is, to put his
Spirit in him, and to cause him to walk in his ways.

And again further, God gives to every believer, the power of believing, by
virtue of which he is enabled to fetch virtue from Christ his head, to
strengthen him to duty, and to resist sin; therefore the Apostle thus reasons
in the 2 Cor. 7.1, ^. Dearly Beloved, seeing you have these promises, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfecting
holiness in the fear of God.

Whence observe, the Apostle takes for granted, the soul having great and
precious promises, and faith to draw virtue from them, should thereby oppose
sin and perfect holiness in the fear of God. For though it is true, God works
to will and to do of his good pleasure, yet it is constantly and unfailingly
his good pleasure, thus to work more or less, in a soul that is in him, thus by
faith. And a believer by faith ought to look at himself in a capacity to draw
Water out of those Wells of salvation; for else what difference between a child
of God and a wicked man; the form of godliness and the power; if a child of God
must be forced to live in a course of disobedience to the solemn worship of God
for want of power to obey. And by the same rule we must take for granted, that
a child of God may be in a state of Grace, and want power to resist sin, and
upon this ground plead excuse for drunkenness, and covetousness, and theft or
uncleanness and say, though he is a believer, yet he wants power to resist and
conquer these sins.

Beloved, thus for any to plead, would be very absurd and contrary to the
truth, and the nature of a Christian in a state of grace. And further observe
the deceit lying in this objection.

Has not God given thy soul power to hear the word of God, and to read, and to
meditate, and to pray, and that some times earnestly and fervently to God, and
is it likely that there wants power, to perform obedience to this Ordinance of
baptism, any more than thou do perform prayer or other duties which require
the same spiritual power, upon due examination? what enabling power is required
in the one, more than in the other?

Again consider, thou do in this, walk by sense, and not by faith (contrary
to the Apostle 2 Cor. 5. who says, We walk by faith, not by sight,) it is a
very childish thing in a Christian to walk by sense only, when he feels
strength and power sensibly, then he thinks himself able to perform duty, and
resist sin; but when he feels not ability and power, then to neglect it:
Whereas contrary to this, Christ says to Paul in the 2 Cor. 12. My power shall
be made perfect in your weakness, my grace shall be sufficient for you, and as
after, Paul expresses himself, When I am weak then am I strong.

When Paul was made most sensible of his own weakness in himself, then was the
time for Paul to be made most strong by Faith, in the strength of another.
Therefore in Isaiah 45.24. In thee Lord have I righteousness and strength In
him shall they boast. And the Psalmist says in Psalm 73 ^4. Though my heart
fail and flesh fail, yet God will never fail, he is the strength of my life,
and my portion for ever; So that when in a man's own sense, his heart fails, his
flesh fails, then is the only time for God strength to appear in his weakness,
this is the way of living by faith, and the way which Gods believing children
have been carried: therefore we find Jonah when (in his own sense) he was cast
out of Gods sight, then he resolved to look toward Gods holy Temple, and cried
to God out of the belly of Hell, as in Jonah 2. therefore surely this objection
has no weight in it.

Object. But some other soul may say, I grant the practice of baptism to be an
Ordinance of God, and the way of such Churches, that walk under the baptism of
believers to be that only justifiable practice in the Gospel, and could
willingly walk with them and be baptized, were it not for their rigidness, in
that they will have no Communion with any (though godly) that are not baptized.

Answ. To this I answer by way of distinction between Church-union and
Communion, and personal Union and Communion. Now if we find a soul not
baptized, nor joined to any Church, and happily ignorant of baptism, yet if I
have ground in my own heart, to judge that soul to be godly, and not an enemy
to the truth, and Gospel of Christ but a soul willing to hear and learn what
truth God shall further reveal unto him, and so having ground to judge such a
soul to have union and personal communion with the Lord, in such a case I ought
to immitate the Lord in owning a Communion with such a Christian, in like
manner, as for Example.

Cornelius and his family, having a personal union with the Lord and communion
with him, before Peter preached to him, and he not being an obstinate professed
enemy against any Law of Christ; but contrariwise saying to Peter, We are here
to hear what soever is commanded thee of God.

Therefore the Spirit of God falling down upon them, they spoke with new
tongues, and glorified God, and Peter and the six baptized Brethren being with
them, no question did join in Spirit, and heart, in that present Spiritual
service, which Cornelius and his family did perform to God, they none of them
at that interim of time, being baptized nor convinced that baptism was an
Ordinance of God: For till Peter had consulted with the Brethren, he did not
press baptism upon them. And therefore we find that he did instruct them, after
a consultation which he had with the Brethren, saying, How should we forbid
water, that these should not be baptized, that have received the Holy Ghost as
well as we.

And Paul in like manner, between the time that Christ had converted him, and
his coming to Annanias prayed; and we find God owns a personal Communion with
him in that prayer; for Christ speaking to Annanias says, That Paul was a
chosen Vessel, for behold he now prays, manifesting that he owned Paul in
that service.

Now he being in a teachable godly frame (though ignorant of baptism) in prayer
God had Communion with him. In like manner I judge from these Scripture
examples, it is lawful for a baptized person to have fellowship in prayer or
speaking with any such soul which he is persuaded of to be godly, and that is
not a professed enemy to any command of God.

But God has not, as we find, ever had any Church-union or Communion with any
Soul, that was unbaptized; and it is clear that the Ordinance of the Supper is
committed to a Church, yea to a Ministerial Assembly, gathered according to
Christ's Commission. Mat. 28.19, 20. where I understand the order there binding
is this: First the Ministers should teach the Nations, or make them disciples
by teaching; and then the command is, Baptizing them, what them? such that are
made disciples by teaching. Thirdly, the Command is to teach them to observe,
whatsoever Christ has commanded, what them is here meant, but such as are made
disciples and baptized, teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded
you? and I will be with you to the end of the world, that is, he will be with a
people, first converted, secondly baptized, thirdly walking in the practical
observation of all other administrations of Gods house, as these eleven did,
and those they converted, I say, this his promise is to be with his people to
the end of the World.

And this order is binding, that as a Minister is commanded to baptize one,
made a Disciple, and not any other, so he is commanded to put them upon the
practical observation of all his Laws, and they only, and till they are
baptized, they are not, nor cannot be admitted into a visible Church, to
partake of the Supper of the Lord.

And that this is the true meaning of Christ in the Commission appears, by his
Apostles Ministry and practice, who by the infallible gifts of the holy Ghost,
were guided unfailingly thus to preach and practice, as in Acts 2.37, 38. with
41, and 42. verses. First he teaches them the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, they
hearing that were pricked at the heart, and inquiring of Peter, and the rest of
the Apostles, what they should do, he says, Repent and be baptized every one
of you. See how he presses the same order here, as Christ does in the
Commission, and afterward in the 41. verse, it is said, So many as gladly
received the word of God, were baptized, and the same day there was added to
the Church about three thousand souls, by Faith and Baptism, and they continued
in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, in breaking of Bread and prayer.

Therefore the way that Christ has ordained, is, That souls should be joined
or added to the Church by Faith and Baptism, according to that word in 1 Cor.
12.13. We are all baptized by one Spirit into one body.

Now though the Spirit (as the inward thing signified) be here spoken of, yet
the outward sign is also included, as might be by other Scriptures cleared.
Thus Cornelius his Family were converted, then baptized, before they were
constituted a Church.

So the Gaolers and Lydia's, and the Church of Samaria in Acts 8. were all
gathered by faith and dipping. And for a Minister to gather a Church any other
way is to go, not only in an untroden path, but cross and point blank contrary
to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles, and thereby slighting the Rules of
Christ in the Commission, by which the Apostles Doctrine and practice was
guided, and which all the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be guided by.

Why the Ordinance of Baptism is administered but once, the Ordinance of the
Lords Supper often.
But yet further, the Ordinance of baptism is to confirm our Regeneration, New
birth, and Union with Christ in his death, burial and resurrection, Romans 6.3, 4
5. with Col. 2.12. Tit. 3.5. and therefore is to be received but once, as a man
is to be regenerated but once, and born but once; and changed from death to
life but once, but that ordinance of God, viz. the Supper is for Christians
growth, and increase of grace, and of constant use, to show forth Christ's death
till he come, and therefore to be received often.

Now it must needs be a prof^nation of this ordinance of God, to divert and
cross the order, and so the special intendment of God in them; and that is, to
admit persons to that Ordinance, which is principally for Christian growth
before you have admitted them to that Ordinance, which is for planting them
into Christ, signifying the confirmation or washing of Regeneration, and the
new birth and Union with Christ the true stock and root from whence all
spiritual growth is to be expected.

Therefore Baptism must be the first Ordinance dispensed or administered after
conversion, before the Supper. So that it would be a profanation of the
Ordinances of God to divert their proper order, end and use, to which our holy
and jealous God has appointed them; and it is a tender point for those that
profess themselves friends to Christ, the Bridegroom, to be venturing to take
his peculiar privilege or prerogative, out of his hands, as to order and
dispose of his own order in his solemn worship, contrary to his Commission.

I do judge such a man that has not a tender conscience in such cases, is in
that much unlike Christ, and shows much carnality, because, as you have heard,
God will have the honor to direct his people, both for the matter and manner of
their worship, and order of his house.

But again as you have heard before, in Ephesians. 4.3, What things are essential
to a Particular visible Church.
4. there is by the Apostle mentioned these things that are essential to a
particular visible Church-union, which are these,

First, to be all called into one hope of our calling; which the poor children
which some admit into their society by sprinkling, are not called to the same
hope that believers are called into.

Again, One Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one Lord, and one Baptism, one God
and Father of us all.

Now it is impossible, that a people should walk together acceptably, that have
not one hope of one and the same glorious Inheritance, and that have not one
and the same Spirit and assistance and guideance in his holy worship, and that
have not one and the same faith, but in the doctrine of faith do mainly differ
one from another, and it is an essential difference, inconsistent with
Communion, that the members of one Church should own two Baptisms, the
sprinkling of Infants, and dipping of Believers; and this Ordinance of baptism
is one of the essentials of a true visible Church.

And lastly, they are to own one God and Father of all; Here you have from this
Text a ground why such as are not enlightened in the Lords baptism cannot be
admitted into Church Fellowship; because in one and the same Fellowship, there
is to be owned as one Hope, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, so one and the
same Baptism.

Again the main end of Church fellowship, is, That they there do practice
whatsoever Christ has commanded, as you have heard before in Mat. 28.20. and
as Cornelius says in Acts 10. We are here (says he) to hear whatsoever it
commanded thee of God; and says Christ, Ye are my friends if you do whatsoever
I have commanded you.

And this is without doubt, that the true and lawful Ministry in Christ's
Church, is to see that all the members practice the observation of whatsoever
he has commanded; and so to see all the Laws of Christ put in execution. For
that cause has Christ given into his Church, not only the key of doctrine, but
also the key of Discipline, that if any soul in a Church shall be known,
wittingly or willingly, to neglect any duty that the Lord has commanded by his
holy word, especially a fundamental Ordinance of the New Testament, as is
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, it is without all question, that such a
soul, standing out in that disobedience, ought to be cast out of the Church
speedily for the same, without which the Church allowing or conniving at, or
tolerating a ^oul in one course of known disobedience, do thereby make the sin
their own, the whole people becoming really guilty of his sin and impiety. And
as the Apostle says, Thus will the whole Lump be leavened, and that Church
unchurched.

Amongst men he that concealeth murder, and is privy and consenting to it, and
will agree to tolerate it, is reckoned a murderer; in like manner in the case
of theft. Now the main end of Church fellowship and Ministerial power is to
destroy sin, and to execute the power of Christ against it, and not to be
fosterers and Countenancers of sin, which you are if you agree to admit any
person into your fellowship that refuses to submit to Baptism, that plain
solemn Ordinance of the New Testament, let his pretense be what it will be;
that person that is not brought over to yield obedience to whatsoever Christ
has commanded, is not (while so disobedient) fit matter for a visible Gospel
Church, especially in those his fundamental Ordinances, as Prayer, Hearing,
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, Thanksgiving, Contribution to the necessity
of the Saints, and maintenance of an official Ministry according to the
ability that God gives them; and by the same rule, and upon the same ground
that you will tolerate some members in the Church to live in the neglect of
baptism, you must tolerate such as neglect to hear the word, and others that
will not, according to ability, contribute to pious charitable uses; and
others that will not pray in half a year or at twelve month together, under
the pretense they are not moved to that duty; and others that will in a gross
manner neglect the duty of particular callings or relations, which the Apostle
in Thessal. 2. does give rule to be withdrawn from, which is as the rest but
the neglect of duty; nay this practice lays a foundation for all disobedience,
and for gathering an Assembly of Rebels, let me alone in my sin, and I will let
thee alone in thine.

But may some say, is a godly man's omitting to be baptized or dipped a sin?
Yes, certainly it is, for 1 John 3.6. the Apostle says, sin is a transgression
of the Law.

Now you have heard several Laws of the New Testament do command that such as
believe and repent should be baptized; therefore to neglect, is a transgression
of those Laws; and sincere obedience, is universal obedience, by this says
David, I know I shall not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy
Commandments.

But further consider, if you receive a person into Communion, Unbaptized
persons not to be admitted into Church fellowship.
that does not submit to the Lords baptism, that soul justifies still a corrupt
baptism that he had in his infancy, and consequently is not ashamed of all he
has done amiss, which Ezekiel speaks of, but still stands in fellowship and
Communion with a Church and Ministry, which by the Bishops power dispensed the
same, and you receiving such a soul into Communion, receive that Church and
Ministry, from which he had his supposed baptism, and must certainly own all
those Churches which that Ministry stood in fellowship with, that so baptized
him; therefore it is a sad and serious matter, who it is that is admitted into
fellowship in the true Church of Christ, and I would admonish souls to be
careful that they do what they do in good order; for God it is said made a
breach upon Vzzah because he did not do what he did in due order.

Object. But some may say, Faith in Christ brings a soul into Sonship, and so
to a right in all the privileges in Gods house.

Answ. Its true, Faith and Repentance does entitle a soul; but repentance
according to the Gospel is a change of the heart, and a resolution to obey God
in all his Commandments, such a Repentance only the Church of Christ ought to
own, in those Members they receive. And therefore though they ought to receive
the weak in faith, yet they have no rule to receive them but by faith and
baptism. So that though faith gives an interest to baptism, yet faith and
baptism, are to prepare and fit a soul for Communion. So many as gladly
received the word, were baptized, and the same day there were added to the
Church about three thousand souls, and they continued in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayer:

So here you see the word of Christ our Lord (unto whom we ought to submit)
that those only who were Baptized were admitted into the fellowship of the
Saints and to breaking of bread, and therefore we upon these grounds, may not
admit any member in communion into the church of Christ but by baptism.

But some may object and say, There are many godly souls that do think they are
baptized already in their infancy. And till they be convinced of that error,
cannot you have Church Communion with them?

To this I answer, I dare not say, but precious souls to God, in these times as
well as formerly, may be (in that point) in darkness; I do not censure the case
of such. But sure I am, that if they judge their own baptism or sprinkling in
their Infancy to be an Ordinance of God, they cannot but judge it a duty still
to practice the same upon their own Infants, being faithful to their principle;
and then how can a church and true Ministry that judges dipping of believers a
duty, and the other to be a grievous and provoking sin, admit such a person
into Communion that resolves to live not only in the neglect of a Solemn duty,
but in a great and heinous sin, in the judgment of that Church and Ministry,
that is to admit him, which the justifying of his Baptism must needs be?

Wherefore has Christ set up in his Gospel church his Ordinance of
Excommunication or casting forth out of the Church, if that persons may be
admitted that are resolved to live in both a sin of omission and commission,
and such as have not repented of that sin of sprinkling children?

So then, that person that lives impenitently in any one known sin (known I
mean to the Church) if that Church have communion with that person in that sin,
the sin becomes the churches sin.

Obj. But he lives in this sin through ignorance.

Answ. That we presuppose, or else the Scripture would ^end us little hopes of
charity, as to his good estate. For to knnow a sin to be a sin, and to live in
it, doubtless it cannot stand with grace; therefore it is generally concluded
that the contempt of any Ordinance of God is damnable, but not the simple
neglect of it, being upon scruples or doubts of conscience unanswered; but the
church knows it to be a sin, and therefore they are not to have communion with
it.

Object. But may some say, I am afraid some persons do rest in Ordinances, and
place that in them which is due to Christ only, which is some offense to me,
and has kept me off from that practice.

Answ. There is no sound ground for this objection from either our profession
or practice; for we do profess salvation, justification and the spiritual
welfare to be merely of the grace of God in Christ, and that by faith only; and
that our obedience to Christ ought to be performed from a principle of
Regeneration and union with Christ by faith; and answerable is our practice* in
that we dare not put any soul on obedience, but from that root. For before we
baptize any soul, we prove whether a true work of conversion be wrought in his
heart or no; and whether he have union with Christ, and dare not admit
children, because that we judge that they have not a principle of Christ in
them, from whence they should submit to baptism.

And further let me say, tha^ it is easy for a soul to forbear resting in
duties, that does not perform them. But that which is worthy in a Christian, is
to walk as strictly in obedience to all the commands of God, as though he would
be saved by his obedience, and to rest as fully upon Christ and his blood, and
the love of God therein revealed, as if he had done nothing at all; accounting
himself an unprofitable servant. And whereas you say you fear they rest in
duties; that fear and jealousy in you (I fear) is your sin, and possibly may
flow from that inbred enmity and prejudice that is apt to be in every man's
heart against the pure ways of God. Or else it proceeds from the malice of the
Devil suggesting such thoughts into thy heart; For thou entrest into the hearts
of such people, and judge their very intents in this thy fear and jealousy,
and therefore beware of this snare.

But further, suppose some souls should be so far left of God, that walk in the
practice of Ordinances, as to rest in them, is that a ground for thee to excuse
thee, to live in a sinful neglect of them? In a word, there can be no objection
come into thy heart, tending to hinder thee from this duty, and to keep thee
from thy obedience to thy Lord and King, but it must needs be from the flesh or
from the Devil, and therefore beware of them. Suppose thy judgment inclined to
such a Latitude, as that thou could have communion with unbaptized persons;
consider with a tender conscience what has been said, and I hope it may much
satisfy thee in that objection.

But suppose thou should not be satisfied with what has been said; but still
judge that thy liberty; thou can not but say its clear in the new Testament,
and out of doubt, that such believing and being baptized ought to have Church
fellowship together with the practice of Ordinances; and is that a justifiable
argument to keep thee off from communion with such, as (out of doubt) thou
may, according to rule, have communion with, and further that thou can not
but say, is thy duty to have communion with? The Commands of Christ must not be
disputed.


Therefore I would in all tenderness admonish and warn all that fear God, to be
more conformable and observe the rules of Christ, and not to harbor such a
gross error in thy mind, as to think thou may at thy pleasure dispute the
commands and Ordinances of Christ.

The Apostle Paul in Gal. 1.16. says, He conferred not with flesh and blood,
but he presently obeyed the heavenly voice. And Christ when God by his Spirit
directed him to go to the Doctors in the Temple, to hear them, and ask them
questions, he without so much as acquainting his Father or Mother, obeyed the
Lord, though to their great grief and trouble in going. And then in Phil. 2.14.
our obedience should be without murmuring, repining or any more ado, and Luke
5.5. Peter had been fishing all night and caught nothing, therefore had little
hopes to catch any fish, yet says he, At thy word I will cast down my net; he
did not dispute the commands of Christ; though his own experience and skill did
utterly testify against what Christ had commanded, as to sense, that there
could be no good effect produced, yet at thy word, says he, I will cast in my
net. As David in Psalm 119. I made have to keep thy righteouss precepts; for
delaying of obedience does harden the heart, and give place to the tempter: and
therefore I would advice all godly souls to drink in this as a Maxim, that if
you find an express Law of Christ given to a believer, that it is utterly
unlawful to dispute or to question the practice of it upon any pretense
whatsoever, or to admit any objection against it; For amongst men both in Civil
and Military Authority, they will not have their Laws disputed, who may err
greatly in making those Laws. But our righteous God (whose Laws be sure are
just) will not have his disputed; and therefore, as before, when Christ bid
Peter cast down his Net into the Sea, says he, I have been all night and
catched nothing, yet notwithstanding at thy word I will cast down my net. Where
observe, though what Christ commanded him, his skill, experience and reason
might have strongly objected against, yet he learned this, that there could not
be any justifyable ground to bear him out in disputing Christ's Laws.

And thus you have an example in Abraham in sacrificing Isaac, who was the
promised seed, And when God called him, he followed God, not knowing whether he
went; And Noah when he built an Ark for the saving of his house; And Jacob upon
the command of God, carrying away his family three days journey before Laban,
and the family knew of it. There might have been much dispute against these
things, but these holy men of God had learned not to give place to the pride
and rebellion of their unmortified reason and understanding which many souls,
for want of more grace and soundness of judgment, give way to, in our days;
but they did obey the word of Gods command without any more a do, as the
Apostles rule is, Phil. ^.12, 13, 14, 15. Wherefore my Beloved, as you have
always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence,
work out your own salvation, with fear and trembling, for it is God that
works in you to will and to do of his own good pleasure; Do all thinks
without murmurings and disputings, that you may be blameless and harmless, the
Sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
amongst whom you shine as Lights in the world.

FINIS.

