A LETTER To Some DIVINES, Concerning the Question, Whether GOD since Christ 's
Ascension, does any more Reveal himself to Mankind by the means of Divine
Apparitions?

With an Exact Account of what God has bestowed upon a Noble Maid, from her
Seventh Year, until Now, MDCXCI.

Written Originally in High Dutch, and now set forth in English by the Editor
of the LAWS of PARADISE, newly Published.

1 Cor. 2.16. Who has known the Mind of the LORD, that he may instruct him?
But we have the Mind of CHRIST. LONDON, Printed, and Sold by John Whitlock, in
Stationers-Court, near Ludgate. 1695.

TO THE English READER.
MAny and Vain have been the Pretensions to Inspiration in all Ages of the
World, even ^o many, as to make one almost doubt of the Reality of Any Thing,
that would be thought to be of that kind. If God has had his Prophets, the
Devil has always had his in much more abundance; and he has learnt so well to
transform himself into an Angel of Light, that it requires, perhaps, something
more than Man to trace out his Windings, and pluck off his Vizard. Hence it is
that some Considering Persons, and those, as there is reason to believe, of
Good Intentions, have at the end, after long Search, and Puzlings of their
Brain on this Head, been tempted to conclude, that whatever goes beyond the
Reach of the Ordinary Light of Reason, or Claims to be derived from an higher
Source, is Uncertain, and altogether Unsatisfactory. Whence they have thought
it sufficient to observe the Laws of Natural and Moral Religion: And for fear
they should be Imposed upon, have cut the Knot at once; and so, without fairly
weighing the Arguments on both sides, have too hastily decided the
Controversy, in favor of Human Reason against Divine Revelation.

Others who are convinced of the Corruption and Degeneracy of our Nature, the
Uncertainty of Human Reasoning, and the Imperfect Knowledge which we have at
best of the Divine Being, or of our own Spirits and Souls have thought it
absolutely impossible without the assistance of a more than Ordinary
Illumination, from Him who is the Fountain of Lights, to arrive at any True
Discerning in the Concerns of Religion. Hence they have determined it
Necessary, and Included in the very Notion of a God, which supposes the Care of
All that has proceeded from Him, that God should send his Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and other Inspired Teachers, to inform us of our Present and
Future State, so far as is needful for us to know; to admonish us of our Duty;
to keep up in us a Sense of his All-directing Providence; and to Foretell, and
Prepare our Minds, for the reception of the various Dispensations of his Love
and Justice; For the Perfecting of the Saints, and for the Building up the Body
of Christ, that by the means of These, we may grow up into Him, who is the
Head. But all this, say many among the Great, the Wise, and the Learned, has
been sufficiently provided for already: God has revealed his Holy Will to us in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, the Canon of which is now Sealed
up: Christ, having abundantly Instructed his Disciples in all that is Necessary
to make Mankind Happy, whilst he Conversed with 'em here Below, is now Ascended
up on High, and speaks no more to us, but in that Book, which He has left
behind for the Ordinary Guidance of his Church, until he shall come again in
like manner as he was seen to go up: He has also forewarned us, that in the
Latter Days many False Prophets, and False Christ's should arise, who would
deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. We have Moses and the Prophets,
yea, we have Christ and the Apostles: Therefore it is just that we should cleave
to these Alone, without looking for any further Revelation or Manifestation
from God; lest we should come to be Deluded by Dreams, and Legends or Tales of
Women, and to be carried about with every Wind, or Spirit, of Doctrine, by the
sleights of Men lying in wait to deceive. Many instances are produced by them,
of such as have Knowingly, or Ignorantly been the Instruments of Seduction, and
have drawn in many into a Belief, not only of the greatest Extravagances, but
also of the highest Blasphemies. And so many things are truly urged concerning
the strength of Imagination, and the Effects of Religious Melancholy, that I
do not much wonder at 'em, for suspecting all that they hear of Extraordinary
Illumination, to be no better.

Notwithstanding which prejudices, I have yet met with some few Persons, both
Abroad and at Home, that are neither Fools, nor Madmen, of whom I do sincerely
profess, after much Doubting, and long Examining, that they seem to me assisted
in a Special Manner by God, for some Great and Glorious Ends which are as yet
hid from the World. These live in great Humility and Simplicity, entire
Resignation, universal Love, and an Heroical Faith, that is without Doubting,
without Fear, and as free from Credulity as from either: In whom I have beheld
the Princely Magnanimity of the Lion, mixed with the Meek Sweetness of the
Lamb. With these they go forth Conquering, and to Conquer, in the Power of God;
being Dedicated to him, and most assuredly Possessed, Enlightened, and Actuated
by Him; not living their own Life, but His; neither speaking their own Words,
nor doing their own Deeds, but letting Him Speak and Act all in them, whose
Right it is to be All in All; of whose Nature they are made Partakers in the
New Birth, having in 'em the Mind of Christ, and being truly the Temples of the
Holy Ghost. They have their Eyes constantly fixed upon the Author and Finisher
of this Warfare; for the sake of whom they not only endure the Cross, but what
is more to a Brave Spirit, despise the Shame. They are especially given to the
Reading of the Holy Scriptures, and they believe the Lives of the Ancient
Worthies that are there Recorded, to be set down for them to Copy, and not to
give 'em barely an Historical Knowledge of some strange Particulars, that are
not Now any longer Practicable. They say, that Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles, have all had respect to, and prophesied of, the Times that
are approaching very swiftly: They expect in these Latter Days to see many
False Prophets, and False Christ's setting up themselves; yea, that the Great
Antichrist shall be revealed in the Deceivableness of Lying Wonders. But they
are not at this at all solicitous or troubled, they know on whom they rely;
they will not mistrust their Heavenly Father, as if he would suffer them to be
misled, who have given up themselves, without reserve, to be led by Him. Let
Him do, say they, with us as he pleases; we are no longer our Own, but His: We
know our own Weakness and Inability to Guide our selves; and that as we cannot
but Err and go Astray, whenever we follow the Devices and Desires of our own
Hearts, let 'em appear never so Plausible and Rational; so we cannot but walk in
the True Path, when having utterly renounced them all, we are Simplify'd to the
state of little Children, and made so perfectly Subject to Our Father, that his
Will may be done no less in us, than it is in Heaven. We know well enough, if
it were possible, there are some Crafty, Serpent-like Spirits, having an
Appearance of Godliness, that would deceive the very Elect: But let 'em do all
that they can, we are satisfied, that it is not possible for 'em ever to Deceive
these, or any, that in the Inward Ground and Center of their Hearts, do stand
in the Faith and Love of Jesus; these being they, who through the pure Unction
of the Spirit of Truth are fully confirmed, and enabled rightly to distinguish
Spirits, according to Section XLII. 3. of This Letter. This is their
Profession, and this they stick to. If you tell 'em of False Lights and
Impostors, of Jannes and Jambres, and the like, they answer you unconcernedly,
that the Rod of Moses will prevail over the Rods of all the Evil Magicians:
That a Simon Magus shall be made to fall down before a Peter, and a Divining
Spirit to fly at the Command of a Paul. And therefore, say they, lest we should
be carried about with every Spirit, and with every change of Doctrine, we
humbly conceive it not at all unbecoming the Goodness, Justice, and Truth of
our Lord, to send forth Now in these Last Days, as in the Times of Old, when
the Gospel of Christ was first Published, some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, instructed by himself; for the
Completing that which is left behind in the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, even that of the Everlasting Gospel, and for the Building up of Sion,
which is the Body of Christ. They say, that if there was need Heretofore, there
is no less need of such Now: And were there no such need, they suppose that no
body can deny, but that the more any one has of the Spirit of Christ, the
fitter such a Person is to declare his Mind. They hold the Whole Counsel of
God, concerning Things Necessary for His own Glory, or Man's Salvation, to be
either expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary Consequence to
be deduced from it; to which nothing Essentially, or in Substance, differing
from it, is at any time to be added, either by New Revelations of the Spirit,
or Traditions of Men: Nevertheless they not only own the Inward Illumination of
the Divine Spirit to be needful, for the Understanding of such Things as are
there Revealed; but do also believe, that as well for a more powerful
Vindication of it from false Glosses and Misunderstandings, as likewise for a
more free Publication of it over the whole World, God, whose Arm is not now
shortened, will for these Ends, send out some Witnesses to all Nations with
great Power, before the End shall come, Mat. 24.4. Rev. 14.6, 7. and Section
XI. of the Letter. Nay, some I have found, who are not afraid to assert, That
All the Reasons that can be brought, why there should be any New Revelation or
Inspiration after Moses, will hold good, why it ought to be Revived in these
Times, before the Destruction of the False Mystical Jerusalem. This, I confess,
appeared to me mighty strange at the first, being an Assertion so opposite to
what I had always entertained: But I, who knew full well the Modesty and
Sobriety of these Persons in other Matters, dare not be Hasty in Condemning
what they profess to see, whom I must own in several things to be much
clearer-sighted than my self. Whether, and How they are able to make it good, I
leave them to consider, and the Event to prove. And since they are ready to
enter the Lists upon this Head, I desire no more from 'em, but a Candid
Hearing, who seek those things only that make for Peace. This is a True, but
Imperfect Account of a sort of Persons, that are Persecuted, Afflicted and
Tormented for that Living Testimony of JESUS, which the World cannot bear, who
are in Derision called PIETISTS: Being in both the Saxonies, Brandenburgh,
Lunenburg, Hanover, and the Countries of the Two Northern Crowns, in which
places they are most dispersed, marked out by That, as Here by other Names. If
any desire to understand their Character better, they may find it in the German
Divinity, a Book placed by Luther, but one degree below the Holy Scriptures,
and in the Translated out of High Dutch, and Printed in the Year 1685. Octavo.
Golden Rule of the Traveling Soul.

Of the Number of These, is the Author of this following Letter, now, after
long Consideration, set forth in the English Tongue. Who is not only of such
Integrity in his Life, (as I have heard it confessed by such as would have said
otherwise, if they could) as that he cannot be supposed to have had any Design
to Impose upon others; but is also of such Intellectual Accomplishments, as
well Natural as Acquired, that it is not very probable he should be deceived
himself, as those who intimately know him, do assure me. Besides the Post which
he in the Lutheran Church Honorably bore, and more Honorably parted with, was
not so Inconsiderable, that any Thinking Person can imagine, that he, whatever
otherwise his Inclinations might be, should be guilty of a Base Action, without
the least prospect of any Advantage to himself by it, but rather of the quite
contrary. This then is the Case, He according to the Duty of his Function,
having with all Accuracy Studied the Holy Scriptures, finds several Great and
Glorious Prophesies, which cannot with any tolerable interpretation be supposed
to be as yet Accomplished, or at best but very imperfectly: At length after
much Pains taken, that he might be able to inform himself and others in these
deep Truths, he becomes known, as is set down Section XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, to
a Young Lady of Admirable Endowments, who professes to have been Visited by GOD
from her very Childhood, in a manner very Extraordinary, which for many Years
she had concealed from the World: He examines into the matter, finds a
surprising Harmony in all, and every part, and many concurring Events, to
establish what he heard from her Mouth. Whereupon after about a Years time, and
having had all Opportunities to try the Truth of what she asserted; he
Communicates the Matter of Fact, plainly and simply, in This Letter directed to
the Clergy, holding the Confession of Ausbourg. What he did in this unbecoming
the Character of his Person, unbeseeming the Episcopal Authority lodged in him,
inconsistent with the Care of his own Diocese, or District of Lunenburg, with
his Universal Love for the whole Church of Christ, and with a generous Concern
for the Good of all Mankind; or lastly, that a Wise and a Good Man would not do
in the same Case, notwithstanding all the loud Cries against Him, I am not able
to find: And I do sincerely assure every Christian Soul that reads this, that
if it were possible to have found any Real or Material Objection in any one
Point, I would certainly have shown it. I am not Ignorant of most, or all, the
Objections, which the most Jealous and Subtle Spirit can here form, yet after
all, am still more and more, through the Grace bestowed on me, confirmed in the
Belief hereof. Some Arguments for which, both External and Internal, I shall
briefly hint, and leave to the Censure of the Judicious and Sober.

Among the External Proofs for the Truth of this Matter, I place first the
Agreement of the Line of Time, or the Prophetical Measure: Which is not
altogether to be despised, notwithstanding it is so very intricate and
perplexed, and that so many have hitherto failed in it. For allowing it to be
true, which is not perhaps yet altogether so clear, that all have yet been out
in it, to say thence that none can ever know it, is no more than to say, That
because Multitudes have been mistaken in a Thing, it is not possible that any
one should be in the Right: Or because we have seen none that have hit the
White, it is not possible that any should come near it; which would be, as if a
Naturalist should deny the possibility of making Salt Water Fresh, because many
have not succeeded in the Attempt.

But not to lay any greater stress upon this than it will bear, it will not be
amiss, that the Inquisitive Christian look a little into the Face of the Times,
and consider the present Tendencies, which he can perceive toward some Grand
Revolution in the Church. Of this not some few, as of the former, but every one
is capable; and this likewise every one is obliged to, that believes the Gospel
of Christ, who for that end, gives us at large the Marks and Signs, which shall
forerun the Coming of the Son of Man, to destroy the Wicked Worldly Jerusalem,
Typify'd under that Bloody City, which was razed by the Romans under Titus
Vespasianus; giving at the same time to those who omit to do so, the terrible
Name of Hypocrites, ranking 'em among those who say, They are Jews, but are not.

Another Consideration that might incline every serious Person, to give a more
than ordinary Attention at this time, and to take the Pains to try the Spirits,
whether they be of God or not, is that Universal Expectation in all Places, of
something New, that is to break forth upon the Stage of this Lower World.
Germany is not the only Place, France, according to all Credible Relations, is
little less Tinctured; the Severity of that Monarch, and of the Governing
Clergy of that Kingdom, is not able to put a stop to the Growth of that
Mustard Seed, which is increasing into a Tree, that is to overshadow the whole
Earth. Neither has God left himself without a Seed in Italy; and what I have
found there, after the most sincere and impartial search that I have been able
to make, is enough to satisfy me, that it is designed by God, to be the Scene
of some very Extraordinary Thing, within a little space of time; and that there
will be such a glorious Manifestation of his Judgment and Mercy, as never has
been yet there. Neither are these great Expectations, accompanied with
extraordinary Motions of the Divine Spirit, in several Persons, only among
Christians, but even among the Turks, and that too among the most Eminently
Dignified, and the Chief Ministers of the Port, several of whom, as I am
informed by such as have nearly Conversed with 'em, and whose Integrity, as
well as Ability, I can confide in, expect only a Door to be opened for 'em,
that they may profess, what they are in their Hearts Convinced of. That there
is also something moving at this Day in the Spirits of the very Jews, beyond
what has hitherto been, and in quite another manner, is well known to several,
who have intimately Discoursed 'em upon Divine Matters, and the Fulfilling of
Scripture Prophesies. Some in Holland, Germany, Italy, and even here in
England, have been found to give some Testimony, to some of the Great Things
contained in this Letter, some one way, some another, some by Interpretation of
the Old Scriptures, others by immediate Illumination, of whom, even those who
have not understood it, have appeared to themselves to have been surrounded
with a Bright Cloud, and to behold the Vail drop from them. But I forbear,
considering that many things relating to them, and to the rest of the Tribes of
Israel are to be kept secret till the Appointed Day. For the same Reason also,
what relates to the Preparation and Disposition which is at this time in the
Heathens themselves, both in the East and West Indies, and how that among these
last, in like manner as before the coming of the Spaniard, there are
Expectations and Predictions of another sort of Revolution to be in those Parts
than the former one was: As also for that I love not to speak of any thing that
is at a distance, without the Authority I have it from be sufficient to make
amends for the same, and to put me even beyond almost the possibility of being
my self deceived, or of deceiving others; I shall not insist on: but leave
this, with many other things of a Particular Nature, that might be said upon
this Head, till the Truth shall Powerfully manifest it self.

Another Consideration to incline us to a serious Weighing, at least, of the
Matter of Fact contained in this Letter, may be the several Miraculous
Appearances that, according to the Belief of many, have lately been, and yet
are amongst us here in England. Now though I would not lay a greater stress upon
these, than they are able to bear, as being sensible, that one False, or
Suspicious Miracle, is of greater disadvantage to Revealed Religion, than all
the Real Ones of our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles, are of advantage to it,
in the Minds of many Gentlemen, who value themselves above others, for what
they call Thinking Freely; notwithstanding this, I am not afraid to assert,
that be they what they will, they are however Alarms to Awaken us to Try the
Spirits. Which is all that I desire, in order to the giving a Verdict upon the
Life of this dear Blessed Lady, as to that part of it which is here Recorded.

Neither is that Great Inundation of Atheism and Deism at this present, a Sign
slightly to be passed over, of the Breaking forth of the Heavenly Powers. For
were not the Spirit of God very Active at this time, in the Spirits of his
Saints, the Spirit of the Prince of this World would never be so busy, either
to Deny him barefacedly, or to Oppose, at least, his Return to Universal
Nature, to restore it to its Primitive and Paradisiacal State. And as there
never was more Sadducism in the World, than when the Son of God was first
Manifested in it, and did so many Miracles; so is it not to be wondered at, if
it be again permitted to Triumph against His Second Appearance, in the Glory of
the Father.

Neither does the Breaking in of Spiritual Delusion, any more than that of
Sadducism, make against what I aim at; but very much for it. Both the one, and
the other have been Foretold, and therefore we cannot look for something
Better, without we look for This too. But the great Variety of Spirits ought no
more, than the Variety of Religious Opinions, or the Difference of Human
Reasonings, to discourage any Lover of Truth, from the Searching into so Great
and Instantaneous a Concern as this. And as one who truly Honors God, will not
be afraid of the Imputation of Atheism, or of being counted to be of no
Religion at all, in that he cannot acknowledge every thing to be His Word,
which the Glosses of Men would make to be so: So neither on the other side will
he be frightened with a Fools Cap, or the Charge of Enthusiasm, so as to be
ashamed to own the Pure Teachings of the Spirit of Christ, which in all Times
entering into Holy Souls, makes them Friends of God, and Prophets. Whereas
indeed as nothing is more opposite to Atheism, than the true Knowledge of
Nature, so is nothing more contrary to Enthusiastic Madness, than the true
Inspiration of the Divine Wisdom; and nothing so widely distant from Fancy,
whatever some Unexperienced Persons may imagine, as that Real and Sensible
Communion with God, which our Spirits and Souls are capable of arriving to,
even in This Life. And let those who justly think, nothing to be more
Derogatory to the Divine Majesty, than to be always crying out, The Word of the
Lord! Or, The Finger of the Lord! Take heed on the other side, lest they be
found among those, who go about to oppose the Revelations he is pleased to give
of himself. In these several ways is our good God, Awakening Men to the
Knowledge of his Glory, and of the Future Times, in the Appearance of Jesus by
his Living Power in their Hearts, while the Adversary, that knows he has but a
little time longer to rage, is using all means to lull 'em Asleep, or to make
'em Frantic. All sorts of People, all Religions and Parties bespeak as much;
wonderful Providence, and strange Revolutions and Alterations of this last
Age, and this Island particularly for Fifty Years past, confirm as much. These
are General Considerations, and there are some others also, which your
Astrological and Cabalistical Heads give some heed to, which I purposely omit.
But there are some more Particular ones.

First, as for the Blessed Instrument of these Revelations, there are all the
Indications of Truth and Sincerity, that can reasonably be required in such a
Case. I reckon it a very good proof of the Truth of the Christian Religion,
that those who first delivered it to the World, were Persons that could not but
be well informed of the Truth of what they declared, and could have no
Temptation to Publish it, but all manner of Temptations to suppress and conceal
it. Whence, it is to me no bad Proof of the Reality of this Matter, if the
Principal Instrument her self, with several others about her, must needs be
supposed to have had all the Moral Assurances of this Fact, whether it be a
True Inspiration, or a False Delusion; and if a True Inspiration, not only
Moral, but also Divine Assurances of the Truth of this intimate Communion with
the Spirit of God: And if besides, there cannot be any one Reason produced, that
should tempt this Person to invent, and send abroad a Falsehood, or Heap of
Falsehoods of this Nature; and if there be many Reasons to the contrary, the
Proof is still stronger. Now thus it is here, at the very first view to any
one, that but considers Her Condition and Quality in the World, the Reputation
of the Family, and the Improbability (if not Impossibility) of her not being
discovered, supposing it a mere contrivance to deceive. Which has been
abundantly confirmed by Experience, both before, and since the First
Publication of This Letter.

I also reckon it a very great Proof of the Truth of a Thing, if it comes
certainly from One, that has little Ability to Contrive it, and less to Promote
it. And indeed, nothing tends more to the Glory of God, than to make use of
Weak Instruments; that so nothing may be attributed to them, but all to Him;
who is a God, that loves out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings to perfect
his Praise, and to begin Meanly, that he may accomplish his Work more
Gloriously, according to Section XIII. This is a mighty Confirmation of the
Gospel of the Blessed Jesus, and I do not see why it should not be also of the
Spirit of the same Jesus, speaking In, and By the Mouth of this Elect Virgin.

It also mightily increases the Credibility of a Matter, if it be confirmed by
Persons, either in different Times or Places; of whom there is no Reason to
suppose, that they have had any Communication together, or Knowledge of, one
another. Wherefore if it appear, that several Things delivered by this Person,
do most exactly concur and agree, even after a very Nice Examination, with what
has been before predicted by a Succession of Prophets, and Inspired Persons in
several Ages, whose Authority is also allowed by us, and if there be no reason
to suppose, that she can have had those Notices from them; it must follow, that
she must either have received, what she has delivered, from the same Hand as
they did, or else that she must have been instructed by One, that was perfectly
skilled in their Writings; to believe which, we have nothing but simple
Conjecture, against many Reasons to the contrary. Therefore if the Authority of
the one be good, the Authority of the other must be so too: And we cannot Deny
one, but we must Deny both. Besides, if there be not only with all the Prophets
of the People of God, but also with several others who were Strangers to his
Written Law, an Harmony as to the Main Things contained in This Book,
concerning the Glorious Days of the Future Golden Period, the Authority is
still stronger: And if the Consent be remarkable in some less heeded
Particulars, it is yet more wonderful, and not to be slighted. And though they
all should have been no more Sanctified or Regenerated than Balaam, and should
have Prophesied no otherwise than He, or Caiaphas, it is so far from weakening,
that it strengthens their Evidence: In as much as the Favorable Testimony of
an Enemy goes beyond that of a Friend. Further still, if in the same Time, at
very distant Places, there has been found to be, as by Letters from
Switzerland, and other remote Parts has been witnessed, such an Agreement as
could not possibly proceed, but either from a Divine or Humane Communication;
and there be all the Marks of the One, and none at all of the Other, it is a
mighty Confirmation, and we cannot, without the highest Affront to that Reason
which we pretend so much to, but give it to that side which has all the real
Characters of Truth and Sincerity, when the other has only Phansies and
Suspicions to support its Credit.

But if besides all this, God himself has been pleased by his Immediate Finger
to set his Seal to the Truth of these Revelations, and to confirm 'em in a
Miraculous Manner, as will in part appear by the Account of some Matters of
Fact nakedly related in This Letter, that are evidently above the Power of
Nature; then one would think there could be no longer any room for standing out
against, or even for not surrendering one self up to, the Belief of their Divine
Original. And if all the Marks of True Inspiration be Applicable to These, and
no Objection has been made to 'em, which has not been made to those of the
Acknowledged Prophets, in the Times wherein they lived; as might be instanced
at large: I know not what more can be desired. This is left to the Spirits of
the Prophets, and to the Consideration of all those, who profess to believe
that sure Word of Prophecy, which is the Testimony of JESUS.

Many Testimonies relating to this Matter might easily be brought, were it
either Needful, or Convenient, under the present Circumstances so to do. Whence
it is thought fit to Publish only One, that has been Communicated by an Eye and
Ear-witness, who made it his Business to be perfectly acquainted with this
Matter. By all which, and by a mighty Cloud, who daily bear Testimony hereto,
and especially by the Two Witnesses of the Old and New Testament, there are
some, who for their own parts dare say, that they are fully Convinced, both as
to the Revelations considered apart, and as to the Blessed Lady, whom God has
chosen to be the Instrument of 'em. Who is not in the decrease at all, but
still gloriously proceeds, as is well known to many, in the Increase of this
Mavelous Illumination. The Sunbeams of the Divine Light and Glory, do every
day more Thoroughly, and more Intimately Enlighten, the Bright Wounds of Jesus
do daily more and more purify Her; and in short, she is in such a manner
prepared, that if She be called out hereafter, of the Solitude in which she is
at present, and be Crowned with Glory, Wisdom and Power, it will be no more
than what we may reasonably expect.

It is not to be doubted, but that the Spirit will bear Witness that this is
Truth, to all that will listen to it in the pure stilness of Holy Silence. And
I am well assured, that here in England, in like manner as it has done in
Germany and Holland, it must work with great Power on the Souls of many; and
that God will do something in a little time, to awaken the Slumbering Nations.

But granting there should be nothing at all Divine in this Matter, I cannot see
any Hurt, that the Publishing of it to this Nation would be. For here is no
Encouragement to any Frantic Zeal, to set up it self in the Name of the Lord;
nothing to promote Seditions, Strifes and Dissentions, but the quite contrary;
nothing for the Establishing a Sect or Party, but frequent and powerful
Incitements to Peace, Unity and Love of every one: Nothing taught, but what is
highly Agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ; and nothing Foretold, which a Good
Man may not wish for, or which, as to the Main, is not publicly Prayed for, in
Most, or All the Congregations of Any that are called Christians: In some of
'em Occasionally, in others Constantly: As the Conversion of the Jews, the
Fullness of the Gentiles, the Destruction of all Idolatry, Superstition, Heresy
and Schism, the Settlement of Peace, Truth and Righteousness, over the whole
Earth; that so all that will may come to be Enlightened, and those that will
not, but obstinately refuse the Light, may be cast out into the outward
Darkness; the Kingdoms of this World being made the Kingdom of our God, and of
his Christ, and there being One Fold, under One Shepherd. If then these things
be in themselves desirable, and to be Prayed for, and have been Prayed for
above these Sixteen Hundred Years; we must needs allow, that there cannot be any
Hurt in the Belief of 'em to be near at hand: And consequently, let this Matter
of Fact be never so contestible, it can have no Bad Influence, either upon the
Lives and Actions of Any, or upon Public Affairs. But if this Matter be indeed
of God, God will go along with it Here, and those that Fight against it, will
be found to Fight against God. So that if it be of Him, it shall stand, and
Triumph; and if it be not of Him, none can more Earnestly desire that it may
come to Nothing, than He who sends it Now abroad to the English Nation, for
this End, that God alone may be Glorified, and that Truth and Righteousness may
Prevail, to the Confusion of Error and Impiety. To which let all the Earth say
Amen. Hallelujah.

Come Holy Ghost, our Souls inspire,
And lighten with Celestial Fire:
Thou the Anointing Spirit, etc.

[Form of Ordering of Priests.]
1 These. v. 19, 20, 21. Quench not the Spirit. Despise not Prophesyings. Prove
all things: hold fast that which is Good.

Acts xxii. 14, 15. The God of our Fathers has chosen Thee, that thou
should know his Will, and see that Just One, and should hear the Voice of
his Mouth: for thou shall be his Witness unto all Men, of what thou have Seen
and Heard.

John xiv. 21. He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest my self to him.

1 Cor. ii. 10, 11, 12, 13. God has Revealed them to us by his Spirit; for the
Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. For who knows the
things of a Man save the Spirit of a Man? even so the things of God knows none
but the Spirit of God. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World [or of
Man,] but the Spirit of God; that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God. Which also we speak, not in the words which Man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches; comparing Spiritual things with
Spiritual.

And afterward v. 14, 15. But the Natural (the Animal, or Soulish) Man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God: For they are foolishness to him; neither
can ye know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is
Spiritual discerns all things, yet he himself is discerned of no Man.

John i. 46. Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? -- Come, and see.

The Testimony which is referred to in the Preface.
EST illa Virgo singularibus and maxim supernaturalibus a Deo ornata donis
Spiritus, ita ut externus ipsius faciei habitus, cum intima animae and Spiritus
qualitate suaviter respondeat. Gaudet mirabili, and sum extraordinaria a Deo
vocatione, ita ut si curriculum Vitae ipsius attente, and cum cura perlegeris,
ad plane singularia ipsam a Deo electam and co-ordinatam esse fateberis. In
externa conversatione adversus omnes tam amicos, quam inimicos praeprimis
eminet blanda ejus cum intima humilitate conjuncta gravitas. Et cum multa tela
a Satana hactenus experta, animus ejus in tam quietum, and tranquillum gaudii
and pacis intimae statum est deductus, ita ut veluti infans nihil magis
anhelet, quam ut incorrupto and continuo nexu in optimi Patris voluntate,
tanquam in tutissimis Spiritus Tabernaculis suaviter acquiescere possit. Quod
si spectes ipsius Revelationes, sunt quasi compendium illarum rerum quae in
Ecclesia Sionitica, and hoc, and futuro tempore sint proditura in publicum
Mundi Theatrum: Alias illae sunt ex font vivo, essentiali petitae, and
profundissimae, nihilominus tamen primitiae tantum eorum quae sua aetate majori
cum abundantia manifestabuntur. Pondus, Majestatem, and cum (...) conjunctam
Divinitatem harum Revelationum in ipsa lectione, si praemeditatis precibus eam
fueris aggressus, senties. Nec est quod cogites ipsam vel ex libro, vel alio
rerum divinarum perito, tantam, tamque profundam hausisse sapientiam, sed ex
Simplici, Majestatico, and plane Prophetico Stylo, imo ex ipsa impletionis
experientia, ipsam a Spiritu Sancto essentialiter fuisse edoctam certo certius
tibi affirmare poteris. Hinc est, quod earundem prima publicatio in Lingua
Germanica, non sine larga benedictionis mess hactenus fuerit: cum alii
honoribus and rebus mundanis impliciti ex harum lectione, si non penitus
mutati, tamen ad magis seriam circa Christianismum sum necessariam
impendendam curam, and solicitudinem quam maxim sunt instigati: Alii correpti
jam tum a Deo, and in dulcissimo Servatore performati, inter legendum ex
laetissimo harum Revelationum nuncio ad dulcissimi Vini Spiritualis
perceptionem, and gaudii, Celestis sensus sunt deducti: Alii Divinitatem harum
Revelationum destruendi and evertendi molitores confusi, and ad silentium
redacti: Alii a contemptu, reprehensione, and refutatione harum Revelationum
divinitus avocati and repressi, ut ita facile pateat, quod Testimoniorum circa
harum Revelationum cumulus, neque hoc, neque futuro Tempore, unquam tibi deesse
poterit. Quare ne quaeso illotis Revelationum harum lectionem aggrediare
manibus, neque praeoccupatis judiciis, and corruptae rationis scrupulis eas
laceres; sed cogita spiritualia spiritualiter esse dijudicanda. Laborandum hinc
tibi praeprimis est, and orandum, ut eo, ex quo haustae sunt Revelationes,
Spiritu; and vero secundum harum Revelationum Mentem tuam conformandi
proposito, polleas. Quo si fueris instructus, and vere correptus a Domino, non
(secundum Spiritus accepti, and illuminationis mensuram) tantum Divinitatem
harum Revelationum recte dijudicaveris, sed and benedictio largissima,
incrementum agnitionis vivificae singular, and gaudium amoris and pacis
Divinae in Te redundabit certissimum and uberrimum. Vale, and prout gloria Dei
requirit utere hisce, salutariter, and feliciter.

S. D. G.

The same in English.
THis Virgin is endowed by God, with Singular and very Supernatural Gifts of
the Spirit, so as even her outward Air and Countenance, do sweetly conspire
with the Inward Qualifications ofher Soul and Spirit. She has obtained a
Wonderful and most Extraordinary Call from God; so that if thou read her Life
with Attention and Care, thou shall confess, that she is by God Chosen and
Ordained for Matters altogether Singular. In her outward Conversation with all,
both Friends and Enemies, but more especially with these, there shines forth in
Her a pleasant Gravity, in Conjunction with the deepest Humility. And though
hitherto she has experienced many of Satan's Darts, her Mind is brought into
such a quiet and still State of Joy and Peace within, that like a little Child,
she breathes after nothing more, than that she may without Mixture, and without
Interruption, sweetly rest in the Will of her most kind Father, as in the
securest Tabernacle for her Spirit to dwell in. Now if you look to Her
Revelations, they are as it were an Abridgment of those Things, which in the
SION-Church are to be brought forth, both in This, and in the Next Age, upon
the Public Theater of the World. Besides they are taken from the very Living
and Essential Fountain, and are most Deep; nevertheless they are but the First
Fruits of those, which shall in greater abundance be published in their proper
Season. The Weight, the Majesty, the Heavenliness, and the Inspiration of these
Revelations, you will feel in the very Reading of them, if with due Preparation
of Prayer, you set about it. And think not, that either from any Book, or from
any Person skilled in Divine Matters, she has fetched this so great, and so
profound a Wisdom that is in them: But from their Plain, Majestic, and
perfectly Prophetical Style; yea, from the very Experience of their Fulfilling,
you may with the greatest Certainty maintain, that she is Essentially taught by
God. Hence it is, that the First Publishing of 'em in the German Tongue, has
not hitherto been without a large Harvest of Blessing; since some involved in
the Honors and Affairs of the World, have been, by the Reading of 'em, if not
wholly changed, yet most mightily stirred up at least, to the exerting a more
serious Care and Watchfulness about the Christian Religion, of the great
Necessity of which they are made sensible: Others being even then Convinced by
God, and perfectly Transformed in their most sweet Savior, have by the most
Joyful Tidings of these Revelations, been Transported, as they were Read, to
taste the most delicious Wine of the Spirit, and to have a Sense of the Joy of
Heaven. Others who have labored to destroy, and overthrow the Divine Authority
of these Revelations, have been Confounded, and put to Silence: Others have
been in a Miraculous Manner recalled, and withheld from the Contempt, Censure
and Refutation of 'em. From all which it may easily appear, that a Cloud of
Witnesses, both in the Present and Future Age, will never be wanting to confirm
their Authority. Wherefore set not about, I beseech you, the Reading of These
Revelations, with unwash'd Hands, neither suffer 'em to be Tortured with
Pre-conceiv'd Notions, or the Scruples of Corrupted Reason, but consider, that
Spiritual Things are to be Spiritually discerned. Hence above all, you are to
Labor, and Pray, that you may be endued with the same Spirit from which They
do proceed, and with a Real Purpose of Conforming your Mind according to the
Practice of 'em. Which when you shall have obtained, and shall be truly
Convinced of the Lord, then you shall, (according to that measure of the Spirit
and Light which you have received) not only be able to judge Rightly concerning
the Divine Original of These Revelations; but there shall also a most large
Blessing, a singular Increase of Living Knowledge, and a most certain, and most
plentiful Enjoyment of the Love, and of the Peace of God, flow down upon you in
abundance. Farewell; and as the Glory of God requires, use Them to your
Salvation and Happiness.

Glory be to God Alone.
A LETTER To Some DIVINES, Whether God does any more reveal himself by the
means of Divine Apparitions, etc?
Grace, Peace, Light and Wisdom, from God the FATHER, through JESUS CHRIST our
Lord.
Right Reverend and Worthy Fathers and Brethren in Christ.
I.
SInce God in these our Times has done great Things on a young Lady, worthy of
admiration to all the World; therefore thought I my self obliged in Conscience
to give you a Relation of this Matter as exact as is possible, requesting you
to impart to me what you shall judge of this Affair, as Christians, and in the
Fear of God. And indeed the Worth and Excellence of the Subject requires that
you refuse me not this Favor.

II.
A Daughter of a very Honorable Family was Born in the Year MDCLXXII. in the
Month of November, who is now Nineteen Years old, the Seventh Child of her
Parents; who from her Infancy has been of a good Humor, having neither
Melancholy, nor Subtilty in her Temper, as all those can witness who have
conversed with her: Who must grant that there is in her something that is
Innocent without any disguise, and that there needs no more but only to look on
her, to perceive something that cannot be expressed of Great and Singular in
her very Face. Notwithstanding these high Qualities she is yet so Humble and
Submissive, as if she had them not: She Sacrifices them all to Him from whom
she has received them, and to whom alone that Honor is due; so that I am bold
to say in the Presence of God, that I have never seen so Humble an Heart
endowed with so rare Perfections, and I believe the Ages which are past can
hardly bring a Parallel.

III.
As she was Seven Years old, without having ever prayed for any such high
Matters, she received from God a most Particular Favor. One day being with her
Mother, who then according to her Custom, made her Family to perform their
common Devotions, she saw in the midst of her Prayer, a Person clad all in
Glory, and of most wonderful Beauty, making up toward her with a great deal of
kindness; who had a Golden Shield before his Breast, and whose Face was full of
Light. This she discovered the very same moment to her Elder Sister, who not
regarding it, let it pass.

IV.
After which this lovely Conversation of her Savior increasing according as
she advanced in Years, it fell out that one day at Dinner, her Sisters telling
one another, in the presence of their Mother, what they had Dreamed the Night
before, she said to them, that she indeed had not any Dreams at all, but that
the Savior of the World, whom she beheld to regard her with a very gracious
look, had in this wise expressly spoken to her: I am JESUS CHRIST, who am
wounded for thee: I will betroth my self to thee for evermore, and will remain
thy Bridegroom: Adding, that after this he had promised to send her his Angel
to gather up her Tears, when she should be Afflicted. Which punctually came to
pass, when weeping one time for the grief which a Fit of a Fever had caused,
she saw an Angel gathering up her Tears in a Golden Vial, with a Conceit of
most Majestic Music, which struck her Ears, being for certain all the while
Awake.

V.
This happened about her Ninth Year, but in the following Years the Lord
manifested himself to her still more Gloriously every day. For one time as she
was according to her Custom before God in Prayer, she perceived an Hand to be
laid upon her Head, and this Voice uttered, Cast thy Burden upon the Lord:
Hope in him, and he shall do thee good. She received these Words in Faith,
which proved to her afterward a Sure Comfort on all Occasions.

VI.
A little while after this, being all alone in her Prayer, she saw again the
same Person that she had seen before, but in greater Majesty and Glory, drawing
near to her as if it were to embrace her. It is true that at the first this
gave her some little Dread, but He the Savior, who is the strength of the
weak, did in such wise strengthen her, that her Spirit being quite filled with
Love, all Fear was driven out.

VII.
When she was now about Twelve Years old, the Lord showed her the whole Course,
or Representation, of his Passion; in like manner as it had been exhibited in
the Year MDCXXV. to Christiern IV. King of Denmark, in the Castle of
Rosenbourg. She had also besides this about the same time many Divine Openings
and Revelations of mighty Importance; which at present cannot be here all
particularized. But this is not to be omitted, that she once appeared to her
self to be clothed in a white Robe, and to become very great: And many Stars
in the Heavens she beheld casting their Rays upon her Body, by which means it
was rendered very Luminous and Glorious. Now asking the Lord what might be the
meaning of all this, she received for an Answer, that these were only Glances
of his Favor to her. At the same time she heard a Voice above the Clouds,
which repeated three several times these words, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: Let all the World fear God,
and keep his Commandments. This being ended, she saw CHRIST surrounded with a
great multitude of Saints, in white Robes, and Crowns of Gold on their Heads,
which they took off, and cast at his Feet, and prostrating themselves sung: To
thee, O Lamb of God, be the honor and the praise for ever and ever.

VIII.
This lovely and sweet Savior presented himself once to her, saying, Be not
afraid, Thou art my Love, my Fair one, my Dearest, my Queen; and I am thy
Friend, thy King, and Shepherd, I will not forsake thee, nor neglect thee: Be
at rest, and fear nothing, I strengthen thee, and uphold thee, I will not take
away that which I have given thee: For hereto I have ordained thee from all
Eternity. HE also at other times witnessed the same to others, whom she was
obliged to write to in these words: I am revealed in the Spirit to a Maid,
whose Mother is a Widow.

IX.
Another time JESUS CHRIST appeared to her in this manner: His Blood sparkling
like Rubies ran down from his most holy Head, the little Wounds in his Face
being laid open glittered very much, from his Hands and Feet streamed forth
bright Blood, and a very shining Chrystalline Water. HE spoke to her these
words, which she noted down at that very time: Come my Dove, and rest in my
Heart; for my Heart is thy Chamber to sleep in, and my Wounds thy Bed to rest
in: My Life is thine, my Glory is thine: I am thine, and will remain thine.
Again HE said, Walk before me and be good: Serve me faithfully, and follow me,
I will inflame thy Heart with a lively burning Devotion, and with the Light of
my Grace. Thy Prayers shall be as perfume before me, and I will answer them.
Thou art my dear Child, my precious Child, my most lovely Child; and I am thy
God, thy Fortress; thy Life, and thy Light.

X.
As this blessed Creature was favored with these, and many other, Refreshments
by CHRIST her Well-beloved, she was at the same time exposed, like S. Paul, to
the pinchings and buffettings of the Devil. For at diverse times she has seen
in ^ll day Satan present himself before her, in the shape of a Black, with
b^^^ng Eyes, and an horrible Face, being attended with other Devils, who
together with him endeavoring to lay word on her, were not able; but after
having a little terrified her, were driven away by the holy Angels, whom God
had sent for her defense and rescue. A^^^ the Devil appeared to her one day
with a Coffin, making a show of casting her into it, when no sooner had she
^^^'d upon God to help her, by saying (...) therefore is the Son of God
revealed (...) destroy the Works of the De^^ (...) at these words became as so
m^^^ flaming Scourges, which were (...) to her Eyes, and forced the (...) ^ave
her.

XI.
In the same Year it pleased the Great GOD, to give her an Opening out of the
holy Revelation, especially out of the xxth and xxist of the said Book: Which I
here subjoin, that you may judge, whether it be possible that this could be
produced by the Phansy, or by any Faculty of the Soul in a Child so young as
this. The Manifestations which the LORD dictated Verbatim, and g^^ (...) her
Pen in setting down, when she was hardly able to Write or Spell, and which she
keeps by her in the Original, are these word for word: I will go forth within a
little while, and will bind the Devil in such a manner, that he shall not be
able to fly any more in the Air, nor to seduce Mankind* and then I will come
upon the (...) God and Man, with the holy C^^ JERUALEM, and will Judge (...) I
will, and my dear Christians (...) appoint Judges, and my Glory (...) ^^nd
them, and in my Br^^ (...) they shine. I will giv^^ (...) Power to Teach and to
Reprove; and I will give them such a Spirit as I have given to those who are
Beheaded for my Name. Such a Spirit shall rest double upon all of them, and
they shall reign with me a Thousand Years, and I will give them great power to
bring in the Ignorant; that so there may be one Shepherd, and one Fold. The
Wicked Dead shall not live again till the Thousand Years be expired, and then
they shall be raised to Judgment. So shall all the Blessed be in the Kingdom,
and I will descend with all the Faithful and Elect Souls, and will keep Heaven
as it were with the Children of Men. I will also preserve Christianity for a
Thousand Years, so as it may during that time ^^^ease, till that the Number be
(...). When therefore these Thousand Years shall be finished, I will be no
longer with Christendom, after the ^^nner; but will go unto the Father into the
wide Eternity, together with the Elect, leaving here the JERVSALEM-Christendom:
And I will (...) Satan to come forth, that he may seduce the People that are
hardened, which shall remain, which are Gog and Magog. And these shall be
gathered together in Battle against the Christians, who are my holy People. But
I will then cause Fire to fall from Heaven, and will destroy them utterly, and
bring them to an End: And I will raise all the Dead, and will make an end of
this World, and the Faithful who shall then be alive, I will transform, and
will sentence the Good and the Wicked.

XII.
As now her Mother saw and read so many Revelations, she became impatient to be
satisfied whence they did proceed, and being of the Opinion that she could not
(...) than to impart the same to (...) ^^^essor, she took this Resolution (...)
discovered to him the whole Affa^ (...) he exhorted her to stand upon (...)
^^ard, considering how the Devil could transform himself into an Angel of
Light; and other like Advices he gave her. As therefore the Mother with her
Daughters were troubled at this, and in great Affliction throwing themselves on
their Knees before Christ, prayed him, that he would reveal to them, whether
that which the Priest had said was true, or whether it was he himself the true
Savior, JESUS CHRIST, the Son of the Living God, who had overcome the Devil,
and bruised the Serpent's Head? And in case it were He who had hitherto
appeared to this Child, that he would continue to speak to her as before: But
if not, that he would put the Devil to silence.

XIII.
Then the Kind Savior accepting their Prayer, made Answer in this wise, I am
the Son of God who have bruised the Head of the Serpent, and not he who seduced
Adam and Eve in the form of an This agrees with Patrick's Annot. Genesis c. 3.
Angel of Light. I do not Counsel what is good against my own Will, as does
Satan. I who speak with you am that God who governs and reigns over the
Cherubim and the Seraphim. But I see your weak Faith, how you waver, and suffer
your selves to be shaken by a little Gust: However I have patience with you,
and will make you mine Elect ones in the Furnace of Tribulation. And what I
have begun thus meanly, I will gloriously accomplish: Whereas Satan begins
always gloriously, and ends pitifully.

XIV.
HE also said, Many Preachers who ought to enlarge the Gates that I the King of
Glory should come in, do stop them up; wherefore these not being worthy, I will
choose my self some who shall do this in the Joy of their Hearts. I tell you
now, I the SON of God, who have chosen you out to be my People, and Heritage,
that I will make you undoubted Heirs in the Kingdom of my FATHER, and will
exalt you very high for evermore. I have now established you fast by means of
my faithful Temptation; for ye may at this time well believe that I am the true
CHRIST, from whom the Devils fly away.

XV.
She after this, saw CHRIST in the Clouds, speaking these Words: Behold, I
march upon the wings of the Wind, the Lord of Hosts is my Name. I am the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; and also your God too, who will make you come
forth to my Honor. Therefore be not faint in the Faith; for I will avenge mine
Honor with a mighty hand, and will not keep silence in my Cause. Moreover she
saw God the Father, in Heaven, seated upon an high Throne, in Raiment white as
Snow, with a goodly Crown on his Head, having in one hand a Scepter, and in the
other a Sword: Who spoke thus: Look on me, I am the Husband of all Widows, and
the Father of all Orphans: I will judge their right, for I know it; for their
misery is come up before me, and nothing is hidden from me. Wherefore
Afflictest thou thy self? Cast thy Confidence upon me: For I will visit the
Daughter of Sion, and the Sackcloth that is upon her, I will take off, and the
Ashes that cover her head I will throw away, and will anoint her head with the
Oil of gladness. I will cure her Wounds, and bind up her Sores. Mine Arm shall
become strong: For I am resolved to help her, and to place her upon Pillars of
Marble. She shall be set upon a Pedestal of Gold, and shall Triumph even in
this Age. Her Countenance shall be bright, and her Heart filled with Mirth, and
her Victory shall last to the Children, and Childrens Children. And think not
that this shall be long before it come to pass. See! behold! thou know not
as I know! The time is not long! The time is not long! Then also an Angel
sounded with his Trumpet these words, The time is not long. After that she had
seen God the FATHER in the Clouds, whose Face she could well distinguish, she
was thereupon wholly carried out of her self, and heard these words: I am your
God, and you are the Sheep of my Pasture: You are my People which I have chosen
before many Thousand; my Glory shall be suddenly Published: For this end remain
steadfast in the Faith.

XVI.
This passed in the Fifteenth year of her Age, and from that time to this
present day, our Savior has been pleased to manifest himself very gloriously
to her and by her, and has confirmed her in her Soul, and fully Assured her,
that this was not from Melancholy, or the Devil; but that it was the Son of God
himself, who spoke with her, as one Friend speaks with another Friend. And she
firmly believes that God has determined some great matter over the World, that
he will show his mercy to his Servants, and his wrath to his Enemies, and will
bring forth his SION to the Astonishment of the whole Earth. I will produce
here some of those Testimonies, or Divine Manifestations, which, amongst
several Hundred, have been given since the Year MDCXXXVIII. to this present
MDCXCI. from the riches of his Mercy to Mankind.

XVII.
1. In that which follows, HE manifests forth his holy Love toward his
Well-beloved ones, by assuring them that he will free them from the burden of
the Cross, and do something great in their behalf.

Dearest Souls, behold, I beseech you, in what manner my Soul longs and pants
after you, that your Souls may be one with me, that we may become one Heart,
one Spirit, one Soul. For I desire to dwell in you, to govern in you, to work
in you, whom I have always loved, whom I have drawn to me, and for whom I have
delivered up my self to the Death, being made for you a sacrifice of
Propitiation. Wherefore should I not then love you, after that you are thus
made righteous by my Blood? And therefore lift up your heads, rejoice, cry
aloud, and Sing with a mighty Noise; for he who has delivered you from
everlasting Death, and shall deliver you from the burden of the Cross, even he
will pass before you in Glory and perform great things for you. For I am the
Lord, and who shall hinder me? Who shall say to me, What do thou? Am I not
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, a Powerful Lord over Sin, Death, the
Devil, and Hell.

2. The Bridegroom assures his Bride, that she being clothed with his
Righteousness, and with the Garments of Salvation, is well pleasing to the
Father for His sake.

My Love, thou fair one, thou lovely and charming Shepherdess, how amiable art
thou in my Heavenly Father's Sight, then when I am united with thee, then when
I put on thee my righteousness as a Robe, and adorn thee with the Gold-work of
Faith, and Gird thee with the Girdle of Truth, and Crown thee with the
Palm-Branches of Praise! O art thou not then indeed a beautiful Shepherdess! O
how lovely, how charming art thou among the Thorns! Thine Eyes have overcome
me, their Rays have wounded my heart; for as the fair Morning Star they
Sparkle, and are more glittering then the goodliest Splendor. For in them
shine forth the works that are the delight of my Soul. Now in all that is
sacred nothing can be loved, but what is without all spot and blame. And now
therefore, my sweet Shepherdess, since thou appearest so comely in the Garments
of Salvatiton, thou art not only well pleasing to my Father, but also to me,
thy Shepherd, thy Companion, thy Bridegroom, thy Brother, and thy most trusty
and fast Friend, who shall love thee, and cherish thee for all Eternity.

3. The King tells the Daughter of Sion, that her Guilt of Blood shall be taken
from her, and that she shall be delivered out of Captivity.

All Hail, Dear Friends, rejoice ye, and be glad; for the happy Day comes,
that is prepared for you: Yea the Hour comes, in which I approach more near to
you, and in which I fill you with Joy. The time is come that I glorify thee the
Daughter of SION, and make thee again, O Virgin, to be Holy. For thou, O
Israel, art hitherto gone astray and art blind: Nevertheless thy Sight shall be
restored to thee, when that Innocent Blood, which thou have pulled down upon
thy self, and upon thy Children, shall be taken off. But now I say unto you: Be
merry O Daughter of SION; for I will bring thee forth out of the Prison of
Tribulation, and thy Wounds I will cleanse, and will dress them with the Oil of
Grace; with the sweet heavenly Unction I will anoint thee, and thou shall know
that I am thy God who have Created thee, redeemed thee, and sanctified thee.

4. HE assures her that the Joyful Visitation of Grace will come, when her
Warfare shall be finished, and the time of her Reprobation passed over.

Thou Ephraim my Elect, fear not; for I am with thee: Quit not the Faith, for I
am thy God. Be Vigilant and Slumber not, for behold there comes the time of
the Visitation, in which I will make Roses to grow upon the dry Thorns of
affliction; and in which I will again moisten the dead Trunk, that it may
sprout forth, and spread it self as the King's Crown, be pleasant to the Eye as
the Lilly, white as the Snow, splendid as Justice in her Pomp. The time of
Desolation is passed over: Upon thee, O Daughter, shall Garments be put as at
the first, and thy Rags shall be taken from thee, thine Head shall be anointed
with Oil, and the Veil of thy Virginity shall be restored again to thee; thou
shall put off Mourning, thou shall be led out of the Path of Affliction, and
upon thy Forehead shall be set Palms of Praise; so that thou shall rejoice, as
a Bird that is escaped from the hands of the Fowler. Thus shall it be done to
thee, O Daughter of Sion.

5. HE also foretells, how the Edomites, for being the Enemies of the Israelits
shall be punished; when at the same time it shall go well with Sion, and she
shall be set off in the finest Gold.

Mine heart is full of Kindness and Love: And that yours may be in like manner
so, join your selves unto me, so shall ye be made Perfect. Be ye Friendly,
showing kindness toward all Men; so shall ye be well pleasing to me. Daughter
of SION, I have now covered thy Face, so that thou art forced to sit as a Blind
beggar by the Way-side, and to be trod upon by all the World, as her at whom
all People are ashamed, and thy Relations are like the Children of Edom. But be
glad, O my Daughter of Sion, it shall be well with thee again. Thy Face which
is covered shall appear fair and bright, and shall shine as transparent Gold.
Thou shall anoint thy head with Oil to refresh thee, thou shall be no more in
the Way-side for an Aversion, but for an Admiration to all; so that all the
World shall say, it is the LORD who has done after this manner; for it is
glorious, and it has not hitherto been ever done so. But ye who have reviled
the Daughter of SION, how will it go with you, when that you shall drink of
this Cup in your turn, and that your Iniquities shall be discovered? With thee,
O SION, it shall go well, and of thy Sins there shall no mention be made. But
with thee, O Daughter of Edom it shall go very bad, say I, the Lord of Sabbath;
for thy Sins shall be brought into remembrance before me.

6. Israel's Future Faith is here represented as Present.

O how lovely art thou my Dearest! How does thy Faith shine! How does thy
goodness sparkle! How noble is thy Manner! How Friendly and Charming are thine
Eyes! Come and take the rest of my Beauty to thee: Come quickly, come, for in
Friendship I will receive thee, thou most lovely amongst the Children of Men.
And after that thou shall have received from me, as much Spiritual Beauty as
thou will, come also and take thy Earthly recompense. Arise! Arise! O Daughter
of Sion, for I will come and visit thee, I will raise thee up that art in the
dust: Make thy self ready in a moment; for I will build thee up, O thou that
art thrown down: I will return again toward thee, and remain with thee until I
lead thee into my Father's House. I will Crown thee with Blessings, and make
thy Face joyful. Wherefore be of good heart, for this shall happen to thee in a
time that thou do not think of. And cast thou upon me all thy Cares, for I
will bear them: Lock thou up thy restless heart in my sweet Love, and verily I
say unto thee, thou shall not miss of my certain help. Amen!

7. HE fortells a Delightful time, which shall preceede, and be as it were an
Image of the Millennial Reign.

Be not troubled, my dear Sheep; neither be ye sad: Hang not down your Heads,
but lift them up in my Strength, and know ye that your Deliverance is nigh; for
the Hour is now come, and the time of Affliction is passed over; the Day of
Grace appointed for all those that are Called breaks forth; for the last
Evening-light shall shine, which imperfect Splendor of the Evening shall
outdo the Sunbeams at noon. She shall be Adorned in Purple, and most fine
Gold; in the Evening of the World there shall breathe a mild Gale; Men upon the
Earth shall be at Unity, (yet not all) and both great and small know me, and
shall pierce deeply into my Wisdom. But notwithstanding, this shall be put as a
Type or Shadow of the Millennial Kingdom. Wherefore be glad, cleave fast to me,
live well, and above all things have Faith.

8. A Prophecy that the Reubenites shall be destroyed in their Posterity.

Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, my dearest Daughter Sion, that the Lord who
has made Heaven and Earth, is purposed and has firmly resolved, that he will
gather together all the fainthearted and bashful, all those that are oppressed
and humbled, in shor, all those that are upright in the service of me. Unto
these will I the Lord be Gracious, and the old Reubenites, who shall seek to
destroy them, I will destroy; those only of them excepted, who shall be found of
an upright heart, whom I will gather to the rest, and they shall dwell together
for evermore, all those whom I shall have brought into one Body; and they shall
have but one Name, that is, that they are Christians. Wherefore rejoice always
in me, give thanks to my Name; be Single-hearted, be Merciful, be Upright. Fare
ye well.

9. How Levi also shall not escape.

Be thou joyful O my dear Sion, and thou Ephraim my beloved, give a great
Shout; for a Gracious Visitation shall now return upon thee, and the Light of
my Holy Gospel I will cause thee to see clearly: But If thou will not receive
it, behold I have whet my Sword, and stretched out my Bow, and made it ready
with a deadly Arrow, that I may strike thee Dead in the twinkling of an Eye.
For as many as receive it, I will also receive, and will be merciful to: but as
many as are self-willed and stiff-necked, I will scatter before my Face, and
chastize with heavy Stripes, both Reuben and Levi, and all that belong to them.
As for those who remain mine. in great mercy will I come unto them Amen!

10. How that a Glimmering to the Kingdom of Glory is appeared, to witness to
the fore-running Daybreak: And how that for this reason, the Dragon in his
Members rages against the Children of Light; upon whom God will pour forth
abundantly the streams of his Spirit.

Be ye joyful, O my dearest Sheep, and hearken ye to my Voice; for my Voice
cries aloud. Hearken ye to the sound of the Trumpet, and come ye here to me.
Skip O ye Lambs upon the little Hills of God, have a good cheer, be merry; for
God's City shall be built in the days of goodness: Laugh, Sing aloud, Clap your
hands; for my Foot is set upon the Bottomless pit, to keep the Dragon down,
that he may not Spit out his deadly Poison, while he beholds the Dawn of the
Glorious Kingdom now beginning, in which his Head shall be Bruised, and his
Power Shaken. But afterward through my Indulgence, he shall Spit forth his
Serpentine Poison amongst my Chosen ones; yet with this difference, that they
shall have reciv'd Power and Strength to resist him. And this shall be a Sign
to them, that they shall cause Fire to fall from Heaven, and Consume the
Ungodly; however they shall be wrongfully treated and persecuted; but shall not
be at all concerned at it, but they will send out others, who must in like
manner be treated. Notwithstanding which there shall many be made manifest, who
love me and keep my Word; and I will pour out upon them the Streams of the
Spirit; and all things I will Praise-worthyly, and Gloriously accomplish: And
no body shall hinder me; for I am the LORD, and will fulfill my Word, which has
this long time been spoken. Amen. It shall come to pass, as surely, as I the
Lord, am the Lord. Amen.

11. Next follows a Glorious Promise, how God's Truth shall break forth like
Light, so that none shall be able to withstand it, and that it shall fall like
Fire into the Eyes of the Fools, whence dread and trouble shall come upon them

Should I not in this time cause my unfathomable Faithfulness, and mine
Everlasting Love to break forth; seeing that the Hour is come? Yea, my Light
shall arise in the Darkness, and my Truth shall Shine like the Sun in his full
strength; for my Statutes I will make to be acknowledged, and my Truth will I
not suffer to lie hid in obscurity. I will do another thing in Israel, yea, a
strange thing will I do, which shall drop from the Spirit of Truth, and like
Fire fall into the Eyes of the Unwise. And if they will not receive it,
Darkness shall seize upon them. O slumber not now ye Wise Virgins, but stand on
your Watch, for the Bridegroom comes: Go ye forth with a new noise, Praise ye,
and Magnify my Name, O ye Nations and Armies. For the New Jerusalem is about
building: Be ye then compacted every one to another in the Love, taking no
thought how it should be; for I am with you.

12. The following one is a precious Testimony of Christ toward a Person of
great Quality, being in the Fear of the Lord, whom He lifts very Graciously up.

I the Substantial Truth, the Everlasting Love, do in the Spirit bear vvitness,
that I am CHRIST, the Lord of Belief, the Vanquisher of unbelief, the Destroyer
of doubt, the Light of Men, the Spring of Life; one that is Holy and Righteous,
who destroys the Kingdom of Darkness, takes away the Power of Hell, and
pulls out the Sting of Sin. I am JESUS CHRIST the Lord, who do reveal my
self, and for the Love which I bear to all Men, do witness in the Spirit; that
though I do more clearly, and more Familiarly reveal my self to some then I do to
others, as may be seen in Paul and Cephas; yet my everlasting Love is the same
unto all Men; for I respect not the Person of any, but whosoever does well, and
keeps my Commandments the same is well-pleasing unto me. Wherefore I JESUS,
the Lord of Life, do bear witness, that I am revealed after an hidden Spiritual
manner in their Spirits; because in singleness and oneness I am delighted to
Work: I am the very same Spirit that bore witness in the Spirit of all the
Apostles, namely the Spirit of Christ, by whose wounds you are healed: I am the
Eternal Love, through whose Glory you stand in the Father's Presence. Therefore
Sing ye merrily, O let Heaven and the Children of God give a shout for joy; for
my Hour is come, in which I gather in my Vintage, even them whom my Father has
given me for an everlasting Heritage, and whom I have purchased to my self
through my Cross and Death: In which blessed Way, as many as are true
believers, do follow me under my easy Yoke. I am the Way of Life, whosoever
believes in me has Life Everlasting; and I will dwell in him, and he in me to
Everlasting Glory. Behold here are the Wounds, and the Marks of the Nails, for
a Testimony in the Spirit of this my so burning Love! I spread forth my Arms to
take in that which is gone astray, to hold up that which is feeble, to
strengthen that which is fearful; for I will take my Flock to my Self, and feed
them, for my Heart melts toward them. Why should I not exalt my self in the
Sanctuary? And why should I not declare my Power in the Hearts of all the
Faithful? Yea, why not in all Speeches and Languages? Am not I your Shepherd?
How then can I any longer see the Confusion of my Flock? Give thy Voice, O Lord
of Heaven, [my Father] and regard the Desolation hereof, and behold how all
things are neglected, and how my true Word which I uttered by my Prophets and
my Apostles is looked on as naught. For what they do is all Hypocrisy, they
forsake the Power of the Word, and dig themselves out here and there their own
Wells, whose being is in the outward Work; but the Powerful Principles of Faith
[whose being is in the Inward Ground] they deny. And therefore is my Wrath
kindled, and for this end am I come to Judge the Earth. But who is there that
has known my meaning? And who has been of my Counsel? Nevertheless the
Spirit, by whom ye are Sealed unto Holiness, searches all things, even the
Spirit so richly poured out on you by the Father, and by whose means you
believe, even by his strength; for it is he himself who works Faith in you.
Be thou then through this Spirit stirred up in Faith, my dear M -- y Dwell thou
in me, and I will dwell in thee, that thou with memaist live everlastingly.
Believe and so art thou helped; for in believing me thou find all things. Be
joyful in Hope, patient in Affliction, take good heed to this I say, and live
up to it; so shall I for ever remain thy faithful Friend and Brother. Wrestle
with me in the Faith, so shall thou know me; for I will come with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, and we will dwell with thee; for the Father loves thee for
my sake, and the Comforter the Holy Ghost is with thee. In singleness and
lowliness of Heart Sing HALLELUJAH. This is a Testimony in the Spirit given
from the Everlasting Christ Jesus, the Conqueror of Death, Devils and Hell.

13. The Grafting in again of the Olive Branches which were broken off and the
breaking off of the Evil Branches, and Transplanting them into a wild place.

Peace be with you, dear Children: Speak ye now concerning the help out of
Sion, and rejoice over the Salvation of Israel: For the hour is come, in which
I bring again the Branches of the Olive, and regraft them into their Places;
for that I am the Lord excercising righteousness, and steadfast in keeping my
Word. But as for the Evil and the Hardened, them do I again lop off, and send
away into a wild Place. Why speak thou so loftily, O thou profligate one? My
Justice I will make thee to see; for thou have nothing of thy self, but all
that thou have is from mere Grace. But be of good Comfort my Ephraim; I will
provide for thee, my dear Daughter, and will deliver thee from the Scorners. I
have said it to thee; be joyful henceforward, and fear not; for I am thy
Refuge, and thy strong Rock: I say Amen!

15. A very lovely Consolation for Judah and Israel; with a Comfortable word to
the Firstborn of Joy in their Posterity.

Hope in the Lord, O Israel, shout for joy, O Judah; for the Lord has looked
upon thee in kindness. He shall make thee to rejoice, O thou Firstborn, in thy
Posterity: I am He that has said it; But to whom is my secret known, and who
is there that understands my meaning? Nevertheless the Deep shall utter forth
the praises of my Righteousness, and the Clouds shall declare my Truth. Dear
Children be not afraid, for I am the Truth: Abide in my Truth, and what is
there that can disturb you? Unto you I am All in All. He that loves me, has
Everlasting Life, and is Justified in me, through the power of Faith. Cry
aloud, lift up your Voices, for I am a wonderful God, one who levelleth the
Mountains, and pulls up Men from the Deep of the Earth. Be at peace my dear
Sion, Waver not my Child: Behold in thine hands I have signed thee: I am a God
of thy Name, a Keeper of Israel, a Friend of Sion, a Benefactor of Ephraim.
Trouble not your selves dear Friends, for no Evil shall be able to reach you;
and as for what you undertake, it shall prosper: for I will set your Feet in a
large place.

XVIII.
All these Testimonies, and many more, were given by God to this Blessed Maid,
before I had any manner of Acquaintance with Her. Upon the Evidence of which
she is so Convinced of the Divinity of this matter, that not withstanding all
the Contradiction and Opposition of Men, she does, without the least mixture of
Doubt or Fear, believe in pure Simplicity and Childlike Confidence, that
whatever the Lord has told, or shall according to the expectation of her Faith
hereafter tell her, shall be punctually fulfilled both in Her and in others. She
knows in whom she Believes, and understands to distinguish between the Spirit
of Truth, and the Spirit of Error, with a clear Eye. She bears with those who
are not as yet able to own in her the Lord's Work; but withal she believes that
if they be of upright Hearts, they will not be swift to pass Sentance upon Her;
as also that as many as are Enlightened by the Divine Light, will be capable to
feel that to be from God, which God has bestowed upon her. But in bearing thus
with the weak, she permits not her self to be made Weak. And so far is she from
being disturbed at the Blasphemous Sentence of the Unbelievers, that she prays
for them, that God would not therefore on a sudden bring them into Judgment, as
might justly be feared, but that he would in mercy delay it; who is a God,
using terribly to punish the Blasphemy of imputing that to the Devil, which
proceeds from the Holy Ghost. She says, and maintains, No body can make me
doubtful of that which I have seen and heard: No body knows the New Name, but
he that receives it: None but the Spirit of Man, which is in him, knows what is
in Man; even so the things of God are not known to any, save to the Spirit of
God: Now we have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit of God,
that we might be able to know what is given us of God. With this one Testimony
of the Holy Spirit, She overthrows all the Objections made against her from
Without; which for the most part, come from those who cleave too much to the
Flesh. Notwithstanding all which she trusts, that in the end God will manifest
His Work, so as all the World may own that it is even He himself, who has
witnessed all these Words by Her.

XIX.
But that you may understand the Method in which these Revelations pass, and
how this B. Maid does not see with her Gross and Corporeal Eyes, or hear with
her Corporeal Ears; but does see and hear the Lord in Spirit, and how she does
from time to time write down from his sweet Mouth the Words which she thus
hears: I will here import a Testimony, which was given her on the Twelfth on
November, in the Year MDCLXXXVIII. The LORD himself dictating the same as she
wrote, to the end that if any were desirous to be informed concerning the
manner of the Revelation, she might be able to answer them in His own Words:
Which are these.

Peace be with you the Friends of Our JESUS, the Saints Blessed and Beloved. I
speak with you, as one Friend Speaks with another: I speak at this time with
the Mouth of Truth, that I may be heard; yet not outwardly by the Bodily, but
inwardly by the Spiritual Ear, which is a Thousand times more delicate then the
Outward one. I speak to you by my self, as true God, and true Man, and cause my
self to be seen, not by the Eyes of the Body, but by the Internal Eyes, the
Eyes of the Spirit, of such a Spirit naturally, as is united and betrothed most
strictly to me- And this manner of Sight is real, though it be hidden and subtle.
This I know will seem strange to you, who do not yet understand my Mysteries
and my Wonders: Yet I tell it you, that you may be able to discourse of it
properly, according to my Inspiration. For so, and by this means, have I spoken
to you all those sweet Words which you have hitherto written. I have this
further in love to speak, and say to you: Rejoice ye for your great Glory and
Honor, since you are rendered so bright through my Righteousness, as to become
white as the Snow, to be cleansed and purged from all Sin, yea to be one Heart
with me, and to be my Temple and Holy Habitation. Keep now the House of your
Heart clean, and let it be mine: neither suffer your corrupt sinful Will, nor
the Love of the Creatures to Lord it therein: So will I sink down very deeply
into you, and then will arise up again in you, and such a purifying will I make
within you, that you shall praise me both with Heart and Mouth. My dear little
Children rejoice ye for my sake, and be of good Courage; for I am with you. Lay
your selves now to rest in my Holy Will, and pursue it, that I may make you the
Instruments of my Graces and Gifts

XX.
But as the Divinity of this Affair has been witnessed particularly to some
Friends, so has it been to my Wife and Me. For after that God had before this,
even while we were yet in Holstein, made known to us (not by such high and
extraordinary Revelatiosn, but) by his Spirit in his Word, the great Promise
made to Israel in Scripture, and the Mystery of his Kingdom, and that we for
the sake of this, had suffered a great deal, it pleased him to let us have for
about a Year since, the knowledge of this Gentle woman, of whom we had not
then heard any thing, by the means of a devout Person, with whom we had then
some Conversations concerning the Conversion of Israel, and the Kingdom of
Christ. For this Person happening afterward to Travel through the Town, in
which dwelt the Widow with her Daughters, was informed by some Friends, how
there was in that Town a Godly Family, in which a young Maiden had by
particular Illumination received very much from God, concerning the Future
Grace and Restoration of the Tribes of Israel. As the said Person writ this to
us, withal adding, that all this Agreed with what we had been discoursing
together; we resolved, in the Name of God, to write to the said young
Gentlevvoman; from whom we received such an Answer as wonderfully heartned us,
and gave us presently to see, that it must be an higher Hand that guided here is
in writing.

XXI.
As therefore we knew not yet any thing of these Heavenly Testimonies, or of
the manner in which the Lord gave and dictated them, he was pleased to comfort
and lift us up, who were wearied, and tired, and despised before the World, for
having believed, and witnessed his Kingdom by a dear Kingdom Testimony, which
was sent us upon October the 20th of the Year MDCXC. by this B. Maid, which
here follows.

I the Spirit of Love, I the Truth of Jesus Christ, do in the Spirit witness
and declare, that ye my dear Friends do stand in the Truth. In which being
firmly grounded, be sure to hold fast the trust of my Love, and I who am the
Hope of Israel will bring you forth safe, notwithstanding all the oppositions
of the Incredulous; for I am a Strong Castle, wherein ye may securely dwell.
And the more simple ye grow, so much the greater delight do I take, that ye may
see deeper and deeper into my Mysteries, which I will reveal to those that are
of a Contrite Heart, and will lay open to the Simple in the Faith. In this
latter time I will declare my Wonders: I say it, who am the Lord of Faith,
Jesus Christ, to you my beloved, having Loved you from the beginning of your
Life: It is I who bind up what is Sore, and heal what is Wounded; for I am
Love, and whosoever remains in Love dwells in God, and the Father dwells in
him. Dear Friends Farewell: I have witnessed this in the Spirit from the
abundance of the Love which I bear toward you: Amen.

Reading then this Divine Exhortation and Encouragement, of which we had no
manner of doubt, we fell upon our Knees, giving thanks for it, and directing
our Vows to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of Sacrificing up to him
our whole Life, of placing our confidence in him preferably to all Men, and of
declaring abroad his holy Truth. Hereupon we resolved to be acquainted with
such dear Friends of God, and accordingly we parted hence on the Third of
November, and arrived there on the Sixth of the same in the Evening; where we
saw in them much more then we could have before believed, and were immediately
convinced of the Divinity of the Matter. And for as much as they had not
hitherto observed in the Holy Scripture that which the Lord had spoken to them,
as God had made it known to us by his Spirit; and also, for as much as there
were also some things contained in those Divine Testimonies which they had
received, which they did not as yet understand; and as we conferred one with
another of the Gift which we had received from God, we were mightily
comforted together: We, my Wife and I, for that we saw how that which we had
Comprehended and found out in the Prophets and in the Apocalypse, concerning
future things, was not according to our own Fancy, but in the Truth according
to the Sense of God: And they, for that by our Instructions they came to know,
how that what the Lord had given them after an Extraordinary manner, had been
before conceived by the Spirit of God, in the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles.

XXII.
We were then also mightily refreshed by our dear Lord and Savior, who
during this Intervievv, was Graciously pleased to give us this follovving
Testimony.

Be ye joyful, be ye joyful, ye who know my Name, and have my Love; for I
will do great things for you: Therefore be ye cheerful. Look, and observe well,
for I am here: I go in to the Work. Be ye affectionate, be filled with Joy, and
with Psalms of Praise. Verily I say unto you, the Hour comes, and is now come,
in which I judge according to Truth and Righteousness: I am Christ the Lord,
who have Compassion over dear Sion, and over Ephraim my Beloved. I have brought
you together with a Blessing, and am in the midst of you: I am the Light, and
the Love, and I delight to abide with you. I have said it unto you, but who is
there that can discover that which is my Intention? Amen! I have said it unto
you.

Now according as the Lord, who both knows all things, and can make all things
subservient to his Will, had said it, so it came to pass: While by his
Mavelous and holy Conduct we have now had with us this dear Family for these
Nine Months past, which we had not at our first Meeting any reason to hope for,
and have according to his Will been by wonderful steps brought to dwell
together. So upon the Tenth day of November we parted thence with Joy, and were
led home in Peace. But as soon we were returned, the Slanders began afresh to
be revived against us; but we took new strength from all the Benefits which we
had received from the Lord, and one day we had this Encouragement given us.

Peace be with you, ye Blessed, here am I, your loving Savior, your dearest
Friend and Brother, whose Everlasting Love and Faithfulness cannot be bounded,
for my Love is flaming, and my Heart is all on fire: But ye do not yet conceive
my Love, it is so very great. O be glad, O cry aloud and sing, O praise ye, and
magnify my Name, for my Right shall get the Victory, and my Truth shall be
made great: It shall arise, and spread like the break of the Morning. Rejoice
ye in my help, ye who are driven out: I run after you, to bring you back, to
lead you home unto me: I who speak it am Christ the Lord. Believe only, and
hold fast to me, and then let not your Hearts be troubled; for I will make my
Name to be great, and my Statutes I will cause to be received. Ye are those
whom I love, confess ye therefore that I am the Lord from Everlasting, who lie
not, that I should be slack to fulfill the Word of my Promise: And I would that
every one should be converted and live. My Hand is not shortened, my Faithful
Mercy has no end, and my Love grows not cold. O Sing with a joyful Melody, for
my Hour is come, and the Day of the Bridegroom is at hand. Love ye one another,
and live happily. To your upright Friends in the Truth, make my Love to be
known, for as much as I have heard them, and my Heart loves them for evermore.
Amen.

But as Slanders increased more and more, we were again stirred up, and
encouraged in this manner.

Peace be with you: Fear not, for my Mercy shall never be removed from you,
neither my Love shall at all cease; for it surpasses every breadth, and every
height, so exceeding great is it; wherefore it is fit that it should make it
self seen and heard in all Corners, and in all Places, for it is therefore
risen very richly upon you, and advances forward in Might. And I say once
more, that when I shall come, and do a new thing, and deliver the Prisoners of
Sion, then this Love shall shine forth, and be revealed with power. Be not then
afraid, O my Zion; nor be thou cast down, O my Ephraim; for thy Towers shall be
built up, and I will beget my self in thee. Be joyful therefore; since all my
Prophetical Words I maintain, and do according to my Everlasting Purpose. For
this cause shout for Joy, O Daughter of Sion: And play thou Ephraim in the
Cymbals and Dances: Shout for Joy ye Heavens, the Work of my Hands, and let all
the Sons of God give a lusty shout, yea all those that call upon my Name, and
all those that are faint and cast down, let them be joyful for the Glorious Day
of my Appearance, in which I will, together with all the Faithful, both those
who live, and those who are fallen asleep, Reign Triumphantly over my Enemies.
This is what I wait for now; be ye therefore joyful for my coming: For Lo! I
come, and rule with Might in that Kingdom, and no Body dare resist me, for it
is the Day of my Marriage, wherein I will drink with you of the new Fruit of
the Kingdom: Wherefore rejoice ye, and sing aloud; for this is my Word of Truth.

XXIII.
1. Our mutual Love increased, and we became one Heart, and one Soul. With this
Brotherly Love these Friends were stirred up to come and speak with us; yet
they could not do it, without they were certain it was God's Will: Which having
waited to know, they received, according to their desire, this gracious Answer.

Make your selves ready to go along in Simplicity and Silence to my Faithful
Servants, whom I love. I will be with you, and my Love shall guide you. Be ye
therefore of one Mind in the Spirit, and go thither in Charity; for as much as
ye now know my holy Will. Live contentedly, and fear not; for I fight for you,
and my Truth is your Defense and Buckler.

2. This brought us Joy and Blessing: Our House too like that heretofore of
Obed-Edom was blessed; in such wise, that being far from wanting any thing, we
were from their Presence laden, as it were, with Divine Blessings succeeding
one another, and especially with many gracious Testimonies, by which the LORD
animated us after this manner.

I the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, declare to thee the Truth, and Hope,
in which the Fathers have hoped: Yea, yea, I witness it, even I the true and
faithful Witness, the Firstborn from the Dead, that thou may bear witness of
the Truth of my Kingdom; for it is a true Kingdom, a Kingdom nigh at hand to
you. Yea, yea, it is certain: I come suddenly. Turn ye neither to the right,
nor to the left, all ye who know my Truth; and rejoice in the Faith. I embrace
you all with my Love, and I say, Be ye happy, and praise my Name.

3. And soon afterward we received also this Holy Revelation from the Riches of
his Goodness.

Dear Friends whom I have brought together, and whom I have sanctified to my
self, Peace be with you. My Countenance is over you, and the Light of it shines
upon you in much Love: Arise therefore, lift up your Voice to me in my Praise:
Be not terrified, for I am in the midst of you, and lead you according to my
Hearts desire. Be ye of one Mind, and hold fast one to another; for I am with
you, and bless you for ever. I greet you all with my Love, and press you to my
Breast, and declare to you that the Light is risen, and the Dawn of the
Glorious Bridal Day begins to spread. The Bride rejoices for the Nuptial Day,
the Turtle Dove lets her self be heard, the Day breaks forth, the Morning Star
gets up, the Children of the Father make merry together, and my Bride is full
of Joy, and to her a Golden Shield is given, to defend her against the
Darkness, which also breaks forth in its Fog. The Dragon Arms himself with
those who belong to him, why should I not then Arm my Bride, and let her see
what she is to enjoy? The Daybreak must go before, and Antichrist must behold,
how the Light rises up against his Darkness. Cry therefore aloud for Joy, ye
blessed, for you shall be gloriously Armed against the Wicked; for I am your
King, who Conquer the Kingdom. I come suddenly: Amen.

XXIV.
1. My Wife in the Humility of her Heart, and in Faith besought the Lord, by
the Elect Maid, that he would reveal in what Church we are at present; since
according to His own Explication, the Seven Churches in the Revelation, do set
forth Seven successive Periodical Communities. To which Prayer the Lord was
pleased to Answer thus.

Peace be with thee -- How should I be displeased with thee, that thou speak
before me? For I am very Charitable toward thee. Hear then my Word, thou little
Dove: Lo! the Church of Laodicea fights powerfully against the Beast; and
that of Philadelphia, in which you are at present, ends gloriously with Spirit
and Power in the Believers. And this Church shall complete, that which I have
chosen; and to it shall be the Gathering together of the Peoples that Believe.
This I witness, that thou may in like manner witness, that it is true.
Farewell --

2. Upon the Thirtieth of March, MDCXCI. there came this following dear
Testimony.

Peace, Happiness, and Salvation be with you, O ye Elect, whom I have taken up
into my Eternal Communion, whom I my self have for my pleasure hallowed in my
Eyes. Give ear then ye beloved and blessed of me. The Bride is for my pleasure
Everlastingly hallowed, and is in each one singly by me purified, and
preserved. Happy are ye, who live in this present day! All that have been
Rebellious must return to their Duty, and all that have gone astray will I
bring home again with Joy. But as for the Virgins they are pure, they are
cleansed, and set apart, they are Redeemed to be my First Fruits, that so they
may be the first to open the Matrix; therefore are they nearest to me, for they
are Redeemed from among Men, they are the Sap and the Balm, which gets
vigorously above the Old, and breaks the Matrix in the New Birth. And these
being made Perfect, who among the Daughters shall be liken'd unto them? She,
the Virgin Bride, shall be a Lioness, and from this moment she shall be dear to
her Father. Jacob is dear to him that begat him, and Benjamin above the rest
beloved by his Father. A Thousand are the most Beloved, and ^hey that are
chosen out before the ^est in the Love, are a Thousand which cannot be numbered.
Be ye but more simple, O my beloved; so shall ye understand me, and learn my
Wisdom. Live but well, I am with my Love in the midst of you, and by my Truth I
knit you fast together. Peace be with you.

3. Concerning this matter, it pleased him in kindness to let us understand
more by speaking to us afterward by the same Instrument in this wise.

Peace be with you all that are set apart, whom I love: Happiness, Salvation,
and Might be with you. Blessed are ye who believe, and who keep me in the
Purity of Truth. Come now my little Lambs, leap ye upon Mount Sion: Come ye
Servants of God, gather your selves together under my Wings; and let every one
that will take strength from me, to overcome the Beast and his Mark. Look ye
inwardly into my Truth, and observe it; for I will do many Signs, to the end
that Men may understand that I am the LORD. The Hundred Forty and Four Thousand
is a great Number, and they are from the beginning Redeemed from among Men,
that they might be the First that are Hallowed unto the Lord; who are
accordingly from the beginning made Holy to Me, and for a Testimony are they
offered up unto Me. Great is the Mystery! Mark it well. These are Virgins, for
they have received the Name of my Virginity, and sing the Song which no Body is
able to learn but themselves: They come therefore to me upon Mount Sion, and
are there Sealed for a Witness over all the Sects, before that they can come
along with me to the Judgment. But who is able to know in what manner they
shall come? They are found True in these last Times; lo, they come in the very
last time: Herewith observe well the manifestation of the Two Witnesses, and
behold how I order all things wisely. I have been, and now I come again in
Glory, to rule over mine Enemies; that I may root them out, and destroy their
Memory. Lo! when I come, and move the Earth, then shall the Mystery break
forth. Be watchful, lift up your Heads, for ye know not yet what ye shall be,
till that I come to the Glory. And then when I shall descend in this Glory with
all the Elect, ye shall all sing a New Song. Live well ye Blessed Ones; I will
give you my Spirit, who shall make the Mystery clear to you, according as I do
mean it.

XXV.
1. Concerning the First Resurrection, which is to be in the Time of the Two
Great Witnesses, shortly after the expiring of the Twelve Hundred and
Threescore Days. Which Resurrection the Lord assures us in this following
Testimony to be Corporeal and Real, and not only Spiritual and Figurative, as
some do imagine.

Dear Friend, I thy Faithful Savior greet thee. Thou understandest my Truth,
how that the Righteous are to stand with me in the Judgment, and that both in
Body and Soul. They come likewise with the Two Witnesses, as an Army that is
well ordered, and that is adorned with my Strength. Then shall they Execute
Justice in my Might, and through it possess the Kingdom. For they are the
Children of the First Resurrection, and they shall lift up my Name, and my
Judgments.

2. Again the Lord said,

The Dead shall Rise again in like manner as I am Risen, and shall Reign with
me in Paradise: But the Jews shall receive their Promise here upon the Earth,
according to my Everlasting Truth; I having prepared it for them, and given it
unto them.

XXVI.
1. Some time after this, we having now received such abundant Conviction of
the Loving Kindness and Graciousness of the Lord, it was deemed not unfit to
propose to Him in the Faith this Question, viz. How that passage, Luke 21.25.
And there shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, ought
to be understood, whether Literally or Mystically? The Answer was what follows.

Amen, I say unto thee, there shall be many Signs in the Heavens: For Nature
shall be moved, and shall be driven into a disorderly heap; till that in the
end there shall be obtained a Rest, through the means of my Almighty Word, even
in Nature it self. And thus those who would appear as the bright Stars in their
own Knowledge, shall with Nature be shaken; for as much as they are under
Nature. And these shall in great disorder drive one another into Wrath,
Cruelty, Murder, and such like: And so shall they tumble down, and be darkened.
And then shall the Peacemakers, and the Meek, the Child-like, and the Simple
be satisfied, and shall enter into Glory.

2. Upon the same Day, which was the Seventh of May, the Lord was also pleased
to Reveal, how by the Beast was to be understood Antichrist, by the Whore the
Popedom, and by the Two-horned Beast the Romish Clergy, and those that are like
to them: And that the great City, or Mystical Babylon, is Rome, as also some
Mysteries concerning the Tribe of DAN.

Dear J -- n, I the Everlasting Truth, the Beginner and Finisher of the
Kingdom, Jesus Christ, do say unto thee, that thou have rightly comprehended
the Whore, the Beast, and the great City; for it is I that have made thee to
comprehend them: And many shall comprehend this matter, and shall find out yet
herein more Wisdom, for I am the Truth, and I will reveal the same even unto
Infants. Wherefore be not afraid ye blessed, for the time comes when it shall
be declared openly, and shall be preached in the House-tops. Yea, Amen, I have
said it: Even the Lord, the Lord.

Now concerning DAN, he is a wicked Serpent, a corrupt Generation, that leads
only unto Darkness, for all wickedness shall meet together in him, and from him
shall the Man of Sin be revealed. Therefore not any out of him are Sealed, for
they are Vipers; and none of the Firstborn are found amongst them; but they
are all hardened and abominable; out of many Nations, Languages and Tongues. My
Spirit shall now lead you into all Truth, and guide you still as little
Children in Simplicity, and I will surround you with my Brightness, in such a
manner as you may see into my very Heart, how it danceth for Joy. As for those
of the Tribe of Dan, who do stand in the Judaism, they shall also be Converted,
but not all of them. For as many as belong to the Beast, will presently turn
back to him, and will receive his Mark.

XXVII.
1. In this manner our Gracious God, and Father in Christ, has frequently
visited us with Testimonies of this kind: And then especially when I was under
great Apprehensions from the Threatenings of Enemies, by reason of a Book that
was Published, concerning the Kingdom of Christ, I was richly Comforted with
these words.

Look here, my Brother, it is I who do it; that I may accomplish it; even so as
I have purposed to do it. And if I be thy Tower and thy Fortress, who is he
that can offend thee? For this reason set up now thy Standard in my Name, for I
will destroy them, when I awake up, but I will be with thee, and with thee will
I fight against the Enemies; yea, yea, it is I who do it, therefore be thou
joyful in my strength, and let nothing hinder thee from doing it, for I am the
Lord thy God who accomplish this thing my self. Amen.

2. As the Calumnies yet more and more increased against me, I received still
further Comfort, of which this word of Testimony that follows is an Instance.

Be not wearied in patience thou blessed One, even as I am not wearied.
However, as for the Implacable, them I will cast out into Darkness: But have
thou a good Courage, and be not faint in the Profession of my Truth, for one
Day thou shall be Victorious, and having obtained a glorious Conquest, shall
then Feed upon the Fruits of thy Labor. Therefore be thou refreshed in my
strength, which shall be given to thee in abundance.

3. In the same Month I received of the Lord another powerful witness,
proceeding from the freeness of his Grace, which pierced me into the Soul and
Spirit, yea, into the Marrow and Bones; as may easily be imagined by any one,
who shall but-weigh the Circumstances which accompanied the same; my Wife, and
I, in Company with the Blessed Maid, and with her Mother and Sisters, whom we
could not leave alone in the House, took a Journey to Lubeck, to set in order
all my Affairs, in which by the Decease of my Father from hence, by reason of
my holy Function: I left my Wife and these good Friends at Lubeck, and returned
Hither by Post. I arrived here upon Sunday, and the very same Evening at Six a
Clock, I was filled with such a Divine Joy that came upon me, as an Armed Man;
as in all my Life I had never felt the like, though my dear Heavenly Father, by
the sweet Call of his Mouth, has oftentimes put into me Life and Gladness: In
this Joy I had a Fore-taste of the Glory of the World to come, and saw in a
Moment that which God has prepared for those that Love him; by the means
whereof my Heart was so Enlarged, that I thought my self strong enough to throw
down Walls and Pillars, but there happening to be some Strangers then at the
Table, I concealed this Joy, as much as ever I could, till that it was
impossible to hide it longer, and then I began with a Voice of Jubilee to Sing.

Sion heard the Watchmen Sing,
Her Heart inflamed with Joy does spring,
She wakes, she rises strait, and hastes away:
Her Friend comes down in Glory Bright,
Rich, full of Grace, of Truth, and Might:
Her Morning dawns, her Star proclaims the Day.
Come now Celestial Crown.
Dear Jesu, God's Eternal Son.
Hosanna.
Into the Joyful Court we follow all,
And Celebrate with Dance and Festival,
The Happy Nuptial Day.
Hallelujah.
[The same a little Paraphrased.]

Hark, hark, from Salem's Towers the Watchmen sing!
The signal of the long-expected King.
And Sion's Courts with loud Hosanna's ring.
See how with eager Joy all Hearts around
Tremble, and dance to the Melodious Sound.
She shakes her from the Dust, she flies all Gay
To meet, or to prevent the Glorious Day.
In solemn Pomp her Joy from Heaven descends,
Him mighty Truth, and every Grace attends.
She sees her beauteous Morning Star arise,
And bright Aurora Purpling round the Skies.
Now come Dear Glorious Crown, Lord Jesu come;
And lead us to our long lost, wished for, Home.
We into the Inmost Court all follow Thee,
The Glorious, Happy, still Eternity.
[Or thus, according to the Letter.]

Sion heard the Watchmen sing; Her Heart springs for Joy. She awaketh, and
rises up presently: Her Joy comes down from Heaven Gloriously: In Grace
strong, in Truth mighty: Her Light breaks out, her Star is risen. Now come
dear Crown, Lord Jesu the Son of God. Hosannah. We all follow into the Joyful
Court, and keep the Supper.

4. My whole Family observed this Joy in me with Astonishment, and my Son's
Tutor said, There must certainly some Great Thing have passed at Lubeck at this
very time, and that we were now in the Communion of Their Joy. This Adventure,
the next Day I sent by the Ordinary Post to my Dear Wife, and the very same
Day, being Monday, she writ also to me, by a good Friend, what had passed with
them at Lubeck, in that very same Hour, when I was seized with so extraordinary
a Joy. Which Letter I broke open in the presence of Two Pious Young Ladies, who
were come thither from Staden, on purpose to Visit this Dear B. Maid. And
having but a Minute before related to them, that which had happened to me upon
the Sunday Evening, I read to them these words of the said Letter.

Child, prithee write to me, how thou did find Thy self upon Sunday at Six a
Clock in the Afternoon, and whether thou did not then feel in thy Heart a
certain Joy: For about that time the Lord spoke to Thee with so much Affection,
and so stirred thee up, as is not by me expressible. Of which thou may best
judge from the Testimony that is here sent thee.

5. Which I afterward read, and is as follows.

Courage! my Elect one: Make haste, and meet me; for I am risen up to come
toward thee, yea, toward thee; and therefore come I so lovingly, that I may
knit my self unto thee. For mine Heart is wounded, therefore am I so enflamed,
and therefore am I so very Zealous for thy sake. Receive then my Living Breath,
and Burn thou so, that the Fire of it may give a loud and crackling noise: And
let thy Zeal be such, that the Flame of it may break violently forth. For I
come leaping upon thee on a sudden, and I throw down the Mountains with the
Voice of my Coming. Yea, yea: Amen! Amen! I am JEHOVAH the Lord.

6. Having read this, I was mightily surpised, and letting the Two Young
Ladies read it themselves, they were much Astonished at it, and Magnified God,
who deals thus wonderfully with his Children. As this now for my own part gave
me perfect Satisfaction, that my dear Savior was resolved, by thus raising my
Heart, in the very same Hour wherein he gave me this Animating Word, at the
distance of Ten [German] Miles from hence, to Convince me (as it accordingly
did) of the Truth of this Divine Testimony, in such a manner, as I might not
hereafter have room for any Doubt of His Words, which should be sent to me at
any other time: So on the other side, my Wife, with the rest of our Friends at
Lubeck, were in like manner hereby strengthened, and by it fully assured, even
to that Degree as it is not possible to be more, that it was the LORD himself,
and no other, who could speak so by this Blessed Lady; as He that is only
Powerful to reveal his Wonders in the Hearts of Men, to His own Praise.

XXVIII.
Neither must we pass over what the Lord with great Faithfulness, and Love
Answered to a certain Godly Doctor, but who was of the Reformed Religion, and a
mighty Defender of Particularism; who having hoped to Convince others of that
Opinion, was himself well satisfied to find the Truth, touching Particular
Grace and Predestination. This then is the Answer that he received from the
Lord.

Peace be with thee: Hear now my Word, with a simple, child-like Heart. Behold!
I the Lord, even the Lord JEHOVAH, who upon the Cherubim and Seraphim am
seated, who am from Everlasting, and who bring you forth in my Everlasting
Love: How should I, whose Compassion is Everlasting and Unconfined, make a
Culling out of some before others? Far be this from my Great and Universal
Mercy. Lo, when my Heart was moved, and my Bowels yearned within me, then broke
forth the Fire of Love, and passed in the same instant over All Men, that were
fallen in Adam: And there was no Preference of Any; for I bear them All in my
Womb, even in my Mercy, as if they were but One, yea, as if they were but One
cold and lifeless Burden. Then did my Love break forth, and I became Flesh, and
gave my self for them, and quickened them all with my Blood throughout, and
loosened them from the cold Darkness: For they were before me but as One, and I
chose not Any, but suffered my Love to go forth over All. Whosoever then
cleaves not to me, turns to the Darkness, and his Destruction is not from
me; I am not guilty of it. Who can sound out the Extent of my Love, and of my
Mercy? Which is infinitely greater than you either know or understand.
Wherefore forget that which is behind, namely, all impertinent Curiosity; for
my Faithfulness and my Love surpass all Understanding. And follow thou me as a
little Child, and so shall thou live: For he that fears me, and does that
which is righteous, is well-pleasing in my sight. Behold thou little Worm of
Jacob, I JESUS CHRIST, the Faithful, and the True, do answer thee in all
Mildness and Love; for I am the Love. Behold, what is it that should cause me
to do more for the Salvation of one, than for that of another? Far be it from
my Faithfulness to do so. For as to Adam the Law was given, that he should not
eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, but at the same
time the will of doing it was not taken from him, so that if he had remained in
Simplicity, and not followed his Appetite in eating of this Tree, he should
have continued before me in Innocence; whereas through disobedience eating
against the Commandment, he fell into Darkness: In like manner all Mankind,
that are fallen in him, are under the same Circumstances: They have Light and
Darkness set before them, and besides this they have my Spirit, the Spirit of
Truth, that unperceivably, and after an hidden manner, inviteth them, and
drives them; for I will not the Death of a Sinner, but that every one be
Converted and Live. It does not yet openly appear, how I am gracious to Call,
and to lead with power the whole World out of the Fall; in as much as my Love
is over all every where, and is alike to all Men. Whosoever therefore will not
be Converted to the Light, but lets himself be surprised by the Serpent, the
same is separated from me, and I watch over that Person for Judgment: And if so
it happen that there remain in such some good thing of mine, that shall be for
a Witness against him. Be thou well assured, that into a Soul which is so
impure I do not enter: For after that I have caused my Grace to take care of
him, and he receives me not, neither hears my Call unto his Soul, to return
from his Fallen Estate, I say unto such, let him that is Wicked be Wicked
still; as unto him that is Righteous, let him be Righteous still. Thus it is in
very truth: As for thy self be thou doing good, and walking in Simplicity, as
becomes a well-instructed Child: For many Errors, and many Divisions shall
yet spring forth from these haughty Spirits of Reason; but the Children of the
Simple shall be preserved, and then shall the Mystery be unvailed, and they
shall be One in Me.

XXIX.
1. Now notwithstanding that we had so many Great Things before us, which God
was pleased to bestow upon us, in much abundance from the Fountain of his Love
and Mercy, we did not communicate them to any one, unless it were to some
intimate Friends, in whose Secrecy we could confide: As being very far from
seeking by this means to gain our selves a Name. And the B. Maid her self, with
her Family, kept this Miracle of God concealed for the space of Twelve Years:
Neither had it to this very day been ever made Public, had not the bringing it
forth been affected by others, and in a wonderful manner. For Persons began to
be inquisitive about what should be the meaning of the Visits, which we
received from so many Persons of Quality: And there ran a Report up and down,
that there was in my House a Maid that had the Falling Sickness, and could
Vanish. The Original of which Report was probably this, That this Elect Maid
had upon Whitmonday received so great an Elevation of the Spirit, that for more
than half an Hour, we beholding her Face all the while as the Face of an Angel,
she continually praised the LORD, and directed us to him, as to him that was
only worthy to receive Praise and Honor. Then we were in Doubt, Whether we
ought to hide all that God had done to us? Or whether we ought, if it were
demanded of us, plainly and roundly to averr the Truth? Which difficulty
pressed us the more, in that it so happened, that about this time my Brethren
of the Clergy, were afresh extremely busied in the Controversy of Christ's
Reign. As we were therefore considering what was best for us to do in this
Case, we received upon the Ninth of August this Answer from the Lord.

Peace be with you, O ye that are troubled: I have turned my Face to you, that
I may be gracious unto you. Be not then afraid, for my Thoughts to you-ward are
peaceable. If you be quiet, and wait in patience, you will come to see into my
Wisdom. Verily I say unto you, a great Mercy is shown you: And when the Hour
shall come, it shall be made all manifest, that you may behold how wisely I
have acted. Yea, nothing that I have spoken to you, shall be in vain: Lo, I
have said nothing to you in vain: Believe this. For it must be, that every
thing yet come to pass, and be accomplished according to my holy Design. O thou
Bashful one, that withdrawest thy self, be not ashamed: For I my self will do
good unto thee, and thou shall be greatly honored in my presence. As I live,
it must needs be, that all that is Paradisiacal be again restored, and all that
I have spoken be fulfilled. Who is there that knows the Glory of my Bride,
then when I shall effectually Espouse her, or rather, when the Espousals shall
be published? And in like manner as I was manifested in the Flesh to Die for
you, so must the Blessed This was the Name of the Mother of this Elect Maid,
who deceased the Fourth of August this very Year 1691. with these Words in her
Mouth, Death is become a Jest.
Gerdrude rereceive her Promise, when that which is Paradisiacal shall come,
when the Lambs shall leap on Mount Lebanon, and shall wait upon the Marriage.
Verily I say unto you, all things must be fulfilled through the Seventh Number:
And that which I say to you at this time, you understand not, but the Hour
comes in which ye shall understand it. Be joyful and courageous; for I am the
LORD, and I will not suffer you to perish. When therefore the Hour shall come
that it shall be required of you, confess and deny not, for I my self will have
it to be declared. Be ye then at rest, looking up to my Goodness.

2. Now, behold! just at this very instant, there comes hither a certain Clergy
man, who spreads it abroad among diverse Persons, that a Prophetess was here.
The Rumor of which coming to the Ears of the Senate, they sent their Secretary
to me, to take my Examinations upon this Head. I answered, That though I did
not pretend to make her pass for a Prophetess, she had received from God great
and extraordinary Gifts, which I would make no difficulty to discover to them,
if it were desired; requesting in the mean time the favor, that they would let
me know the Person who had advised them of these things. Hereupon the matter
was variously discoursed; and the Calumnies being very many, one of which was,
that she had a Spirit of Divination in her; it pleased the most Righteous God
upon the Eleventh of the same Month, to vindicate her in these Words.

Shout for joy, O ye Nations: And be ye joyful, O ye Heavens. For to vindicate
I am risen up, yea, to vindicate my Daughter Sion. I will destroy the Blood of
the Dragon from the Face of the Earth; for my Wrath is kindled, and who is
there that can withhold me? The Foundations upon which he stands shall be
shaken, when I awake up: As for his Boils and his Wounds, behold they shall
find no Cure; there shall not be any hope left of healing them. Wherefore I
say, as I live I will utterly destroy him, and will cast out his Skull to be
devoured by the Dogs. Have Courage then, O Daughter of Sion, in all
Afflictions; for thou shall suffer for my Name sake, and shall be rejected and
despised: But rejoice thou, and be of good Heart, for the Light shall be
divided from the Darkness, and I the LORD will become to thee a sure
Habitation, and a strong Rock. Yea: Amen! My Wonders must be revealed, and it
must be done so. Wherefore lift up your Heads, and be without fear; for I am in
the midst of you: Yea: Amen.

XXX.
As upon the Sixteenth of August, it fell out that One in Preaching out of the
Second Chapter of the Prophet Joel, did not clear him up according to the Sense
and Meaning of the Holy Ghost, but maintained, that God would give no more such
extraordinary Revelations to Mankind; one of our Friends that was then present,
being much troubled at this Explication, was desirous that the Lord our
Savior, who had hitherto witnessed so much favor and condescension toward
us, would be pleased himself to declare the true Intent of that passage, and to
give us his Divine Instruction upon it. And accordingly the next day, He
vouchsafed to open the Prophet's Meaning, and at the same time to let us see
his Wrath against those, who give such Prevaricating Explications to his
Prophesies.

I the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the God of Sion; will bring out of
Mount Sion Deliverance to my Ephraim, who is the Child of my Love. Verily, as I
live, the Fire of my Wrath is kindled, and I am Zealous for the sake of my
Word. They imagine Lies, and their Heart is filled with mere Abomination: But I
come suddenly, O deceitful Generation, that I may spew you out, for you are a
deadly Poison; and that I may make you a Desolation, say I the LORD, even the
LORD. Observe then, dear Sion, that the Total Accomplishment of my Word written
by Joel, is yet to come. For my Spirit comes then upon all Flesh, in a greater
measure than that in which it came upon my Apostles, which was no more than, as
it were, a foretaste of what is yet to be. And then was the fulfilling of it
published, in that manner that it is yet to be done, when even Sucking Children
shall receive the Spirit to such a degree, as not only to see Visions, but also
to interpret them. Then shall such a Faith appear, as by it greater Works shall
be wrought, than those which I have wrought: And when one says to the
Mountain, be thou lifted up, and be thou cast into the Sea; it shall be done
accordingly. And then will I show such Signs as ye have not yet seen, and such
as never yet have been in the former Times before you. What should I speak to
the Winds, or let my Words be without effect? No, far be it from me. But those
who make my Word to lie, and who will not suffer it to abide in its strength,
must come to perdition. Woe to you who Preach but your Imaginations! Let every
one take good heed to that which he does: For I am the LORD, and will maintain
my Word. But whosoever would blacken it, or would apply it to his unclean
Brutish Thoughts, may find it an hard matter to contest with me: For I roar as
a Lion against every Abomination, and I break forth as Smoke out of the Forest,
to dry up the false Cedars, which without are very beautiful, but within are
filled with the Abominations of Dogs. Wherefore I have a loathing unto them,
and will dreadfully come upon them, and will root them out, and will cast them
into the deep of the Bottomless Pit, where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
But thou O my Sion, and Ephraim my Beloved, fear not; for I am thy Friend, and
I am with thee. Amen.

XXXI.
Soon after this, the Elect Maid, that she might set in order her Domestic
Affairs upon the Death of her Mother, parted from me, being accompanied with
her Sister. In the mean while a Report was raised, how it was I my self that
had spoken by this Maid, and had made use of God's Name to give a color to
that which I pretended to establish for a Divine Truth, which had to this time
been so generally spoken against; doing herein as Numa Pompilius with his
Goddess Aegeria, to make the People of Rome receive that which he himself spoke
through her. As this was said to a Person of great Quality, he answered, as I
have been informed, That the Cheat might easily be discovered, by Writing to
this Maid, who was then in a Place which was near Four and Twenty German Miles
remote from me, and proposing to her some Questions in a Letter that should be
Sealed, desiring her to send the same back again Sealed, and together with it
an Answer. This was accordingly done; and there came an Answer in few days to
this Person of Quality, who was at that time not so far distant as I was:
Whence the Conclusion is evident that it could not be me, but that it must be
an higher Hand, that spoke through her. The Answer is this:

Peace be with thee; hear my Word, O my Servant. Behold, I am the Spring of
Life, and no Body comes to me, but whom the Father draws: Therefore give
heed to my Word. I purify and sanctify every one, for they are every one in
the Father. And I finish my Work above all Reason; and I replenish every thing
with Beauty; for I am the Light of the World. I go forth in Sanctification over
all, in all the Depths and Breadths; and have no respect for Persons, but my
Love is spread abroad as a Covering, over Seeds and Seeds, over Births.
Generations to Generations: In all Mysterious Deeps my Love passes forth over
all. For who is he that can sound out my Ways and my Wisdom? Behold I the God
of Heaven and Earth go forth in all my Doings, and no Body can comprehend them.
I see well thy Writings, and even the depths of thine Heart: For before me
every thing is discovered, and laid open. Therefore comprehend thou well my
Word, and acknowledge my Wisdom according to my meaning. Behold! I JEHOVAH have
said it, who am made manifest, and am about to Judge the World. I come upon the
Wings of the Cherubims; no Body can comprehend me, or know me, but he that is
humbled before me. What is it therefore that thou keep in thy Mind, as
though thou did comprehend it? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, even I the
Lord; the Lord, that the time comes, when it shall be said, Thou shall know my
Name according to my Counsel and my Meaning. I will do it my self in thee:
Thou, whom I will form unto me, that thou may be in me, shall be mine
Instrument: And many Spirits I do bind together in one, and do teach by my Arm
the Divine Generation to Fight. I have loved thee from all time my Sion, and
dear Ephraim: Be strong as a Lion of Judah, and come from the North. I know it,
and all things are manifest before me, but thou know not as yet that which I
have now spoken unto thee: And it is a strange saying to thee, and it must be
so till that my Hour is come. Go then in Peace: Thou need not to know any
more at present; stand thou only quiet in my Meekness and Patience, and be
firmly grounded in my Love which endures for ever, and resist me not. For I am
the LORD, who am with thee, and who leave thee not alone: Be then of good
Courage, and live well; yea, Amen.

We also received from the same Place an Encouragement, not to conceal the
Truth which had been entrusted to us, but to publish the same; to the end that
it might be Openly Confessed and Owned.

As I live, says the LORD, even I the LORD do say it: Return again ye Children
of Men: And to the Islands I say, Fly before my presence; and to the Rocks, be
ye Opened. As I sit upon the Cherubim and the Seraphim, and rule over all
Kings, so verily will I make an end of Edom, and will root out the Whore of
Babel. She shall eat her self all her Abomination, and all the Storms of her
Fury shall fall upon her own Head: For she sits and lurketh privily upon all
the Borders, that she may destroy Mode.
my Manner, which I have bestowed upon my Daughter of Sion, to instruct her how
to lift up her Eyes toward me, and to serve me with all Faithfulness. Sit still
a little while with patience: For behold I come unto thee suddenly, whom I
preserve as the Apple of mine Eye, and I anoint thy Head with Precious Oil; for
thou art mine. He that has begun, let him remain with the Truth: And he that
has opened his Mouth, let him finish it, and not be silent; for the
perverseness is grown very great: But mine Arm is made more powerful yet, and
my Truth overcomes. Watch now, and Believe, for the Hour is come: Display the
Banners, give a mighty shout, and magnify my Name; for I am in the midst of
you. Yea. Amen! Be not fearful, but courageous: For I am your Help and Victory.

At the same time she also sent us from the Place whither she was gone, that
which had between Four and Five Years before been dictated to her by the LORD
upon the XXth Chapter of the Revelations, which has been already Inserted in
the XIth Section. And I can say in the presence of God, that before this time I
had never seen it with mine Eyes, or known in what words it was conceived;
although she had made some mention in her Mother's Lifetime, of her having had
for a good while such a Manifestation given her.

XXXII.
Now as this Elect Maid was upon her Journey to return hither, and some Persons
of High Quality in the World, that had been acquainted with her Sister that was
dead, and long heard of the Grace which God had conferred upon her, were very
desirous to see her; we going out some Miles to meet her, were obliged to pass
by that very Place, where these Persons then were. And being by them invited,
we went along with Her, and her Sisters to them, and gave them an account of
what Extraordinary Gifts God had bestowed upon Her, and how wonderfully he is
pleased to reveal himself in this last Age. Although there were here some
Gainsayers, yet God left us not without a Blessing. For as there arose a great
desire to be satisfied, whether God, whose Mercy is so highly extolled in the
Holy Scriptures, did everlastingly, and without distinction reject the Heathen,
and all such, either among the Jews or Christians, as are in a False Religion?
And it being asked, Whether this Question might be proposed to the Lord? it was
done so accordingly. And this was the Answer which came.

As Heaven is prepared by my Might, and by my Will; as I am from Everlasting,
and in me is no Beginning, or End, Besides what I beget, as it were, in my
self, and make a Beginning and an End; so true is this my Word, which in
Meekness and Long-suffering I do speak. It is well-pleasing, and it is my holy
Counsel and Will, that Men should believe righteously of me, even as I have
revealed my self in the Scriptures, when not drawn aside with one's own Reason,
but opened with, and by the Holy Ghost: who is promised to, and rests upon
all those that are upright in my sight. As for those who Fight against my
Truth, with pretense of knowing better, and trust to the darkness of their own
imaginary Reason, they go down into darkness, be they of whatsoever Religion
they will. But as many as love me, and seek seriously to be sanctified by me,
not being content to believe outwardly, which is without Foundation, or to sit
still with outward Worships, but searching after me in the Ground of their
Hearts, in Spirit and Truth; they find Grace before me, and with me, in all
Generations, and in all Religions: If so that they do not wittingly, and after
that they are once convinced, deny me the Everlasting Son of the Father. For
all must go to the Father by me, and all must be purified in me; for out of me
there is nothing of Purity. The Ignorant let no Man presume to condemn: for who
is there to Judge them but I? And my Judgment is Righteous, and for this cause
they are not judged to Everlasting Misery: Otherwise my Judgment would not be
Righteous. Here is the depth of my Secrets: All must praise me, and be subdued
to my Truth, and be hallowed and washed through me: All must be put under me, and
through me be made Righteous in the true acknowledgment, that I am the Lord. But
how this shall be done, and how it shall be accomplished in the very Heathens,
ye are not yet able to comprehend; and therefore I do not explain it to you.
This is my word, and the Testimony of Truth: For I the Lord, even the Lord
JEHOVAH have spoken it, who can do beyond all comparison more than ye are able
to comprehend. Watch, for I come.

XXXIII.
After some days there came to this B. Maid a Principal Officer, who delivered
to her a Sealed Letter, which he said came from a Person of Quality. The Name
of whom he told her, which afterward was found to be a mere Falsehood, and
prayed her to propose the same, as from the said Person, to the Lord. The
Answer was this;

I the Lord of Hosts, who come upon a Cherub, who destroy all Falsehood, and
root out all Deceitfulness; even I it is who speak here. Who is it that
persecuteth me? And who is it that is not discovered before me? I say unto
thee, Repent, Awake; for it is high time, and I am coming to thee; yea, I come
speedily. For my Love and Mercy is great: And to such as have a clean Heart,
free from all filthiness and dead Works, I am gracious, and hear their Cry,
Sighs, and Moans. And Lo! this is my Will, and the Testimony which I give to
every one, that whosoever shall lay hold on me with a pure Heart, and with a
strong Faith, the same shall attain to all that remains, and shall even in
all things be able to find it. Yea: Amen. I the LORD, even the LORD, who speak
with my Voice as the Voice of Thunder, have witnessed this, and spoken this:
And there is none that can withstand me. For I am risen up, and do many Signs
and Wonders: And blessed is that Person who loves me, and keeps my
Commandments; for at the end it shall go well with him. See that thou mistake
me not, so as to do any thing that may mislead thee: Follow that which is right
before me, according as I do in thy Conscience witness to thee in the Truth,
and be godlily-minded; and so shall thou, with me, be well led, and shall dwell
with me in the Light, and not be cast out into the Darkness. This is enough for
thee, and I say no more.

A little while after, the aforesaid Officer sent a Letter Sealed, in his own
Name, which the Blessed Maid received, thinking that he had inquired something
of the Lord, from a remorse of Conscience. And this I thought too, for as much
as he had frequently said to me, that he wished to discourse with me about God,
and in what manner one might advance in Piety: And hence I could not but
conclude, that the Lord would give him a gracious Answer. But we were struck
with a mighty Astonishment, when we read the Lord's fierce Answer: Which behold.

I the LORD have in abhorrence the Blood-guilty, and the False: And he that is
Wicked shall not stand before me. Therefore take away the Evil from before mine
Eyes; that this my Word may not become to thee a Terrible Judgment, in the Day
of my Wrath: For I am a consuming Fire.

The Elect Virgin made a difficulty of sending him presently this dreadful
Testimony: Whereupon she sent him back his Letter Sealed, without having opened
it, and wrote to him at the same time, that she had received a very harsh
Answer, which startled her, the which if he desired to see, he might send for;
which he did the next day. After some few days he came to Visit us, and
speaking about the matter of the Letter, he told us what had been in it, which
was such a Question, as at which he might for ever blush. But he confessed that
he had not well done in it: However he endeavored to excuse himself with this,
that in the first Letter, among other Religions Questions, he had demanded
something concerning the Word Sacrament; which having not been exactly answered
to, he did not think it was the Lord who spoke by her. And this he said was the
Reason, why he had put such sort of Questions into the Second Letter; which
notwithstanding he wished he had never done. He also confessed that the First
Letter was written by himself, and not by a Person of Quality, as he had before
pretended. As we then read over again the First Answer, we saw clearly that it
agreed exactly to him, containing an express mention of Deceit and Falsehood, as
also that one ought not to resist the Lord, to whom all things are discovered,
and from whom nothing is hid. Lastly, That he should take care not to be
mistaken so to mislead himself; nor to do any thing which might not succeed
well with him, or lead him into Evil. So that in the First the Lord would
answer him not to his Questions, but to his Heart: And in the Last he has
given him very sharp menacing words, that so he might not persist to kick
against the prickles. God grant that these Testimonies may pierce into his
Heart, that he may be Converted, and do true Repentance.

XXXIV.
Upon this Encounter the B. Maid became somewhat more reserved, and resolved
not to receive for the future any Letter that should be Sealed, from any Person
whatsoever; since she must do it in doubt, and could not know whether it be
writ from an Heart that is upright and humbled before God, or not. She
therefore neither would, nor could, after this unpleasant Experience, propose
to the Lord the Treachery and Abomination of any one else. And concluded not to
propose to Him any thing, but what should proceed from an humble Heart, wanting
to be satisfied. And in this Resolution she has been Confirmed by the Lord
himself; who spoke to her in this manner.

I am Holy; therefore let every one that comes to Ask of me, examine himself
well whether he be likewise of a clean Heart: And if not, let him not think
that I should visit him in my Word to Answer him. For this end hold thou to Me,
for I will not that thy Righteous Soul should be importuned by the impure
Wretches of this World. Go out from their Abominations, and receive not any
thing at all from them: For I am the LORD. Nay even those who love Me, if they
come not to me in a Child-like and Humble Heart, they shall not be heard by me.
Let every one that dares to lift up his Eyes toward me, come himself to me
with his Heart, and not by Letter; and I will answer him willingly, and will
not shut him out. I go before in Love: For hitherto have I spoken in patience,
but they would make an ill use of it, and would make thee to sin without thy
knowledge. Break then the Cords, and suffer not thy self to be bound, and take
nothing from them, but only from such as are true-hearted and humble: Such will
I hear, when they complain; and will answer, when they enquire not out of
Curiosity.

Now although the Lord will not Answer such Curious Enquirers, and She
Sanctified and Purified in the Blood of Christ, will not admit of such like
Questions; yet nevertheless He was the very same day so Good, as to give us
that which follows.

Courage My SION! thou dear Shulamite shall now go suddenly forth out of
Babylon. I will give to thee the Wings of Righteousness, that thou may fly
away from the Abomination of Babel: Thou shall have no Communion with her, that
so thou may not be polluted. For I will have thee to be clean, and without
Spot: I will cloth thee with the Saphir, and will Crown thee with
Righteousness. For thou have been rudely treated, and thy Wounds have been very
bad; but now it is all over. For the Vine begins to put forth its Branches,
and I take pleasure in my Bride; for she is become lovely in my Eyes: Therefore
will I deck her with Light and Glory, without measure, and she shall find that
I deal kindly with her. Let then the Babylonian Wicked insult over you with all
their might: Be ye not dismayed hereat; I am your Buckler, your Defense, and
your Armor; and with Justice I cover you as with a Garment. I the LORD am
arming my self to fight for you with a Mighty Arm: For now is the time that
Light and Darkness must be separated from each other; that so SION may dwell
before Me. And verily, the Cherubs with Thrones and Principalities are in Array
to Fight for Sion against Babel. But take this in a right Sense: The Battle is
for the sake of Sion's Spirit, that her Cause may be strengthn'd and made
certain, and that there may be a Separation from the Works of Babel. For this
end it is time that ye watch, and stand upon your Guards Night and Day: For I
come, and do sound all the Depths. And therefore I witness thus, and will
witness in all Languages and Tongues, and will pour out my Spirit largely, and
adorn my Bride as to the Marriage Feast, yea, as to the Triumph. She shall cry
aloud for Joy, and magnify my Name aforehand. When all this shall be
transacted before in the Spirit, then shall the Decree, (or Curse) come forth
against Babel: And Sion shall then be as an Armed Man, and I as a Roaring Lion,
against Babel and all her Abominations: And then shall the Jdugment be revealed
and come forth. Woe to you ye Earthly-minded Men when I come. Of whom is that
saying true, That I shall not find Faith upon the Earth. But Blessed are the
Simple and the Children, for unto such does the Kingdom belong. Therefore be
still, rest in humility, and fear not; for I am before you. Again I say,
Blessed are the little Children; for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: Yea,
yea, Amen! say I the Lord of Lords, the God and Savior in the Spirit of these
Children. Wherefore study that you may become like to them; and so shall ye be
made all Light. Rejoice ye, for the Victory is to Sion.

XXXV.
Before I consider the Questions, I shall from some Passages of holy Scripture
succinctly prove, that God never declared it to be his Will that there should
be no more Apparitions or Revelations, after our Saviors Ascension; but that
on the contrary he has given express Promises in his Word, that before the
Dreadful Day of the Lord, he will send forth his Scribes Learned in the Kingdom
of Heaven, his Wisemen and Prophets for a Warning to the World, and for an
Encouragement to his Faithful Servants. Neither have we any room for Doubt, as
to the Divinity of these Visions and Revelations; if once it appear, that the
Lord, according to his holy Purpose, and Will, does really, and according to
the Rules laid down by Mr. Fabricius, Superintendent-General of Pomerania, in
his Discourse De Probatione Visionum.
of the Trial of Visions, give to his Children in all Ages of the Church such
Manifestations as these. Of which the said Author has Collected together a
great number of Examples from Approved Fathers, Doctors, and other Writers.

XXXVI.
That God therefore will (for that he may if he will, I suppose there is no
Divine will deny) grant such like Apparitions, and extraordinary Revelations, I
prove first from the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2. of which take this brief Account.
Now that the Contents of this Chapter have never yet been Accomplished since
the time of Joel, will be put out of all Dispute. The time in which he
Prophesied is not expressed, but however certain it is that it was before the
Captivity of Babylon. Let us then see whether the Prophecy contained in this
Chapter, can have had its fulfulling, either in the Calamity which the City of
Jerusalem, and the People of the Jews suffered by Nebuchadnezzar, or in that
other brought upon them by Titus Vespasian. Now it is certain by these Verses,
viz. 1, 7, 9, and 11. that when this Chapter must have its Accomplishment, then
Mount Sion must be in a good Estate, and the City of Jerusalem, with its
Temple, be standing. Moreover in ver. 2. a Day, which is called the Day of the
Lord, is described as a Day of Darkness, and of Gloominess, of Clouds, and of
thick Darkness: And this shall herein consist, that a mighty and strong People,
of whom there has not been ever the like, neither shall be any more to all
Eternity; shall come upon Jerusalem as the Morning spread upon the Mountains.
Now that this cannot be said of the Babylonish Army, namely, that it was a
People so Mighty, as there has never been the like of them, nor ever shall be
again in all Generations, or to all Eternity; will easily be granted by all the
World. And that this cannot be understood here of the Roman Army, is no less
evident. For those that pretend this Chapter is already fulfilled, must at the
same time own, that if the Holy Ghost, in ver. 28. was poured out in the first
Pentecost, and if the Romans did not Besiege and Destroy Jerusalem, but till
Forty Years afterward, it is impossible that in the Second Verse mention could
be made of this Army. From the Third Verse to the Ninth, the manner in which
this Army shall March is described. In the Tenth it is said, That the Earth
shall quake before it, the Heavens tremble, the Sun and the Moon be dark, and
the Stars withdraw their shining. In the Eleventh, the Lord utters his Voice
before His Army, which shall be very great and strong, and shall execute his
Word, in such wise, that this Day of the Lord shall be a Day so great, and so
terrible, that none shall be able to abide it. That all this should be done by
the Babylonian Army is not probable, either from Scripture, or from any other
Writer; and much less by the Roman, to which the very Order of the Prophet,
will not permit us to apply it, as has been already said. From the Twelfth to
the Sixteenth Verse, the Prophet gives Counsel, how the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem ought to behave themselves, and what they ought to do to be exempted
from the Calamity. Which besides can have no manner of Application to the
Babylonian Expedition, since it was known out of the Prophet, that not only at
that time there would not be any Remedy, but that the Jews were bound according
to God's Will, to surrender themselves up to the Babylonians; which since they
refused to do, the King, together with the Nobles, made hereby the Misery to
fall heavier upon themselves, their City, and their People, and so drew down
upon themselves their own Ruin. In the 17th He prosecutes his Counsel, by
advising the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, to weep between the Porch and
the Altar, and to say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to
reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them: Wherefore will thou let it be
a Byword amongst the Nations, Where is their God? Hereupon follows in the 18th
Verse till the 27th, the Answer of this Prayer, namely, that God would be
Jealous for his Land, and pity his People. Now it is not found that either the
Priests then made such a Prayer betwixt the Porch and the Altar; or that the
Answer, which is here promised to such a Prayer, did follow: The Temple, with
the whole City of Jerusalem, and the Land of Canaan being destroyed and made
desolate. Neither did this at all come to pass in the Destruction from the
Romans, but the Temple was reduced to Ashes some Weeks before the City, and
then there followed not any Relief, but such a Desolation as endures yet to
this very day. Nay, the Order which the Prophet observes, will not at all
permit, as has been said already, that the Destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans should be applied hereto: Since that which now follows in the Text, must
according to the Sentiment of those who believe this Prophecy already
fulfilled, have been Forty Years before the Destruction of Jerusalem, which
nevertheless the Prophet puts after the Calamity, which he describes here, and
which shall come upon Jerusalem. For after that this shall be, after that
Jerusalem shall be Environed, after that it is Walls shall be Scaled, and after
that the Enemies shall be as it were Masters of the City: After that the People
shall be hereby Converted to the Lord, and after that the Priests shall send up
to Him their Groans and Supplications, and that He shall hear these Groans and
these Supplications, shall spare his Land, and his People, shall repel the
Enemies, and lastly, shall cause them to see again, and to enjoy much
Prosperity; then will the Lord, after all this, pour out his Spirit upon all
Flesh, and the Sons, and the Daughters shall Prophecy, etc. Now this having
not come to pass upon the Babylonian Captivity and Destruction, and yet much
less upon the Roman; and since that which after this Promise happened in
Pentecost to the Apostles, preceeded the latter by many Years; it is certain,
that the Prophetical Text has not hitherto had its Total Accomplishment to this
present day, but that necessarily the Time, wherein it must and shall be
accomplished, is yet to come; it being impossible for the Word to Lie. And this
is also Confirmed by the Third Chapter, whose Coherence with the Second is
indissoluble, that in those days, and in that time, when that which is promised
in the Second Chapter shall be fulfilled, he (the Lord) shall bring again the
Captivity of Judah and Jerusalem: In which nevertheless Judah and Jerusalem
have, since the pouring out of the Holy Spirit upon the Day of Pentecost, been
already more than Sixteen Hundred Years, and still are in it. Besides there is
also expressed such a Promise in the 28th and 29th Verses of the Second
Chapter, which could not be Accomplished in the Apostles, seeing that after
this the Spirit ought to be poured out upon all Flesh, in such a manner, as
that their Sons and Daughters should Prophecy, their Old Men should dream
Dreams, and their Boys should see Visions, and that also in those days upon
their Menservants, and upon their Maidservants, should the Spirit be poured
out. Now the Apostles are not all Flesh: And much less can it be said of them
that they are called Sons and Daughters, Boys, Menservants and Maidservants,
and at the very same time likewise Old Men. It is true, that in the First
Pentecost of the New Testament, there came upon the Apostles that which the
Lord has here promised, yet this was very far from fulfilling the Prophecy:
This was only a Beginning, and a Foretaste, of which the Total Accomplishment
is yet to be expected. And this is also sufficiently evident from the very
words of the Apostle Peter, Acts 2.39. that the Promise was to them, and to
their Children, and to all that were afar, whom the Lord our God should call.
Wherefore since the Day here described, even the Terrible Day of the Lord, is
not yet come, nor shall come, but in the time of the Sixth Seal, Rev. 6. And
since the effectual Deliverance of God has not, according to what has been
already proved, been given upon the Prayers of the Priests in the time of the
Captivity of Babylon, or of the Destruction of Jerusalem: Which Deliverance
ought nevertheless to be effected at the same time, with the Fact here
described by Joel, in such a manner, that God will appear Jealous for his
People, and will pity them: And in the third place, since that to this present
day the Captivity of Judah, and of Jerusalem, is not turned away, nor all the
Heathens judged, and much less in the Valley of Jehosaphat, Joel 3.2, 9, 10,
11, 12. which the 14th Chapter of the Revelations, compared with the Third of
this Prophet, ver. 13. lays down as a thing which ought yet to come: And
lastly, since the 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21 Verses, are not hitherto in their
power executed, namely, that Jerusalem shall be Holy, and that no Stranger
shall pass through her any more; but that Judah shall abide for ever, and
Jerusalem from Generations to Generations: It is not to be doubted, upon all
these Considerations, but that God will according to his Promise, After that
time I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, cause such Visions, Prophesies
and Revelations as are here described, effectually to be in this Latter Time;
in like manner, as he has by many Powerful Testimonies witnessed to the same,
by the Elect Virgin, and confirmed us in the expectation of its future
Completion.

XXXVII.
In the Holy Revelation of Jesus Christ, (for this ought to be the Title of
that Holy Book, according to Chap. 1. where it is said, That God gave this
Revelation unto Jesus Christ, to show unto his Servants) there is also found a
clear Argument of God's Will; that he will send his Two Witnesses, Adorned with
very many singular Powers, true Miracles, and consequently many Extraordinary
Gifts; who shall Prophecy Twelve Hundred and Sixty Days, Rev. 11.3, etc. This
is done in the Fifth Seal, in which their Companions, and they both at the
last, when they shall have finished their Testimony, shall be killed, and after
Three Days and an Half, shall truly and bodily rise again, to the Terror of
their Enemies, and ascend up to Heaven in the Clouds, their Enemies beholding
them. Now that this has not been hitherto Accomplished is evident, in that the
Miracles which are here specified, as for instance, That they should go forth
in the Power of Moses and of Elias, and cause Fire to fall from Heaven, and
turn the Waters into Blood, and shut Heaven for the space of Three Years and an
Half (as did Elias, Jam. 4.) to the end it rain not; have not been yet seen.
Besides the Judgment which follows after the Twelve Hundred and Threescore
Days, is not yet come, which shall be at the Second Woe, in the Sixth Trumpet:
After which shall quickly succeed the Third Woe of the Seven Vials of Wrath,
being the Seven last Plagues in the Seventh Trumpet; and shall make an end of
Babylon, and of the Enemies of God, to the glorious bringing forth of a Better
Time; of which it is said, Now are the Kingdoms of the World, become the
Kingdoms of the LORD, and of his CHRIST: And also, We give thee thanks, O Lord
God Almighty, who art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to
thy self great Power and Dominion, Rev. 11.15, 17. Whereas at this time Babylon
is standing in its full Vigor; therefore the Witnesses are still to come. But
about the time that Babylon shall be Judged, the Two Witnesses which are sent
by Christ, shall before give their Testimony by Prophesies and Miracles,
according to God's Promise, in which his Will is contained.

That God should do such Miracles as these in the Last Time, was both foreseen
and believed by that dear Man of God Luther, who in his Commentary upon the
First Book of Moses, thus delivers himself; Postquam Noah and fui diu
clamaverunt, acccusantes malitiam Mundi, ostendit tandem Dominus, se quoque
illam malitiam videre, and ulcisci velle. Hunc secundum gradum nos quoque Hodie
expectamus, nec dubium est, quin erunt ALIQUI HOMINES, quibus revelabitur ista
mundi perditio futura. Nisi forte ea perditio erit dies novissimus and extremum
judicium, quod sane optamus. Et Lat. f. m. 122. a.
When Noah and his Sons had a long while Preached, accusing the Wickedness of
the World, the Lord at last shows, that he also saw the Wickedness, and would
revenge it. This in some Degree we also at this day expect: Nor is it to be
doubted, but that there will be SOME PERSONS, to whom this Future Destruction
of the World shall be revealed. Unless perhaps this Destruction may be the Last
Day, and the Final Judgment, which we indeed do hope. And in his Preface upon
Amos he says; Hic mos est Domino Deo nostro, ut, quoties insignis aliqua rerum
mutatio instat, quoties egregium aliquod malum imminet, mittat Prophetas suos,
aut Ministros verbi, qui verbum nuncient, qui futura mala praedicent; ut saltem
Aliqui convertantur, and ad poenitentiam reducantur. Tom. III. Jen. Lat.
This is the manner with the Lord our God, as often as any Signal Revolution is
at hand, or any notable Evil does impend, to send his Prophets and Ministers of
his Word, who may Preach the Word, and Foretell the Evils that are to come; that
some at least may be Converted, and Called to Repentance. Also in the German
Edition of his Works, he has the Tom. IX. Edit. Wittemberg. Germ. f. m. 268,
269, seq.
Vision concerning the Pope, which happened in Switzerland to Friar Nicolas Van
Felsen, and was before written by Charles de Bouillon; and he has made to it a
Preface, to show in what manner we ought to make Reflection upon such Signs and
Miracles, which Christ has given to the Papacy. And do we not also read in the
Confession of Ausbourg, as in Our Symbolical or Canonical Book, the Apolog.
Aug. Conf. De Votis Monasticis.
Prophecy of John of Hilten, how that in the Year MDXVI. there should come one
that should Preach against the Disorder of the Monks; which was fulfilled
accordingly in Luther? So also the Clergy of Lubeck, Hambourg, and Lunenburg,
in their Apology against the Patron, of the Revelation of Guthman, would not at
all declare that they did Part. 1. p. 84, etc. 269.297.
Simply and Absolutely reject and condemn all Visions and Revelations of these
Times. Baldwinus confirms the same with these Words; Non dubitamus Deum Adhuc
nonnullis interdum revelare Futura, quae ad Ecclesiae and Reipub. statum
pertinent, in usum hominum annuntianda. Comment. sup. Ep. 1. Tim. 4. p. 251.
We do not doubt that God does yet sometimes reveal to Some Future Things
pertaining to Church and State, which are to be Declared for the Good of Men.
There are also other Divines of Authority, who assert the same thing, whom we
omit; as being to be found in the aforesaid Fabricius.

XXXVIII.
For a Conclusion, I shall yet add here one Considerable Testimony, which we
received from the Lord, by this Blessed Lady, this present Year MDCXCI. And it
is this.

Dear Friends, peace be with you: Stir up one another in my Love, and give me
your Heart wholly; to the end I may dwell in it with all my Fullness: And have
no fear then, for I am your Defense, and your Shield, and my Loving Kindness I
will not turn away from you, but will fill you with good things. I will give
you to drink of Pleasure, I will sanctify the bashful, I will take care of the
feeble, I will refresh the weary, and will keep mine Eye upon those that are
unstable; for I am the Everlasting Love and Friendship. From me proceeds the
Light, for I am the Light of the World; and whosoever comes to me must walk in
the Light, and have in himself the Works of the Light, and depart from that
which is unclean. Make ready to divert me, O my Sister, who art to me as a rich
Odor: Drive away every thing that hinders thee; and be cheerful. Pass
mightily on, let nothing stop thee, O Daughter of Sion; for behold, I gird thy
Loins with Truth: Let thy Marching be stately, as the little Hills of God, and
let my Voice be to thee a Melodious Sound, that thou may go leaping with
sure steps, with shouts of Joy, and great Acclamations, to embrace me in the
way, where I wait for thee. Come then, my Dove, O thou Godly one, who art
clean, chaste, and spotless: For thou art escaped from out of the Abominations
of Babylon, and all her Darkness is to thee abominable, and her Deeds loathsome.
Ah! How shall I sufficiently express, how exceedingly I now love thee, when I
am become one Spirit with thee? Now are we made one, now is my Love filled up
in thee, my whole Heart flows into thee, I shine in thee, and my Glory
beholds it self in thee as in a Glass. Such is my Spouse, such is my Fair
One, as the very Angels long to behold her. Behold, how thou have wounded mine
Heart! I am thine, and thou art mine. In this manner do I comprehend in One,
all that are fled out from the accursed Works of Babel, and are of pure Hearts.
This is the Dove, this is the Beloved, as it shall be filled up and glorified.
Wherefore be not at all cast down, ye who have the Heart pure: I will make to
you an Help, which Babel shall not be able to resist: Yea, I will make it, even
I the Lord, the LORD. For I see your Hunger and Thirst, after my Righteousness,
and your loathing of the Works of Babel. Therefore will I be good unto you, and
will strengthen your Courage, that you may have no Communion with the Whore, or
be defiled with her Uncleanness. Labor then, that with Indignation against
her, ye may be freed from the filthiness, which it may be do yet stick to the
Soles of your Feet: and cast her Whorish Works into her Eyes, to the end that
her shame may fall upon her Head, and that I may force her to eat up her own
Abominations. For I will overturn her, say I the Lord, the LORD; yea, I will
overturn her, and will recompense it upon her own Head. Those at whom she now
laugheth, shall recompense her shame, dishonor, derision and contempt, Tenfold
in her Bosom; for I the Lord, the LORD, have spoken it. And against you, ye
Foolish Daughters, I say this: Ye hope in vain, your hope shall vanish, for I
will shut the Door against you. Believe ye that you have still time to rise up?
What mean you to cloth your selves in my Robe, and to do the Lusts of the
Flesh in the Faith, and to have still delight in the secret Pleasures of
Babylon? Why insult ye over me? Think ye that I do not see your Works? How is
it that ye look upon me with one Eye, and turn the other to Babel; and yet
would constrain me, and go in unto me? Verily I say unto you, I will make you
Ashamed, and will shut the Door against you, and turn you away. Observe this
well, and flatter not your selves, then shall it be well with you: This is what
I say and swear to you.

XXXIX.
From hence may arise this Question in the first place: Supposing that to any
one among you it has happened, or should hereafter happen, that which has
happened to me, as that he should receive in his Heart, a powerful and
convincing Resolution from God's Prophetical Word, as it is contained in the
Scripture, concerning the Last Times, and the Thousand Years Reign of Christ,
with all that depends upon it; and that then afterward he should receive from
God, by a most precious Instrument of his, a very clear Testimony in Writing,
with full Conviction of Heart, that he had rightly comprehended from the
Scripture the Truth of this Kingdom, and of the Judgments impending upon the
World, to the leading forth the Children of God; and that he ought to declare
the same before all the World; how is he obliged to behave himself in this
Case, and whether he ought to be suspicious of so Powerful a Testimony, and to
avoid the Contradictions and Slanders of Men, abstain from it, as from a
Diabolical Delusion?

XL.
In the second place, the Question is concerning Divine Revelations in general,
without respect had to this Matter of Fact in Particular. About which
notwithstanding, we shall in the end add some Questions to be Resolved.

Query I. Whether Christ after his Ascension, would not Reveal himself any more
in the Latter Time to any of his Faithful Servants, seeing that since that he
appeared both to Paul and Stephen, and gave his Holy Revelation to the Beloved
John after his Ascension: what Ground is there to think, that Divine
Revelations should be no more after that time?

Q. II. Whether from that passage, Heb. 1.1, 2. that God after having at sundry
Times, and in diverse Manners spoken to the Patriarchs and Prophets, has
lastly spoken to us by his Son; it can be proved that Christ, after having
revealed to us in the Flesh, the Will and Counsel of his Father, will no more
reveal himself for the future? And whether this be not meant only of the Glory
of the Revelation of God in the Last Time, that after the Accomplishment of the
time prepared according to his Purpose, he has been pleased, Lastly to speak to
us by his Son come in the Flesh? And whether in such manner it will not rather
follow from this place, that, since God ^^th Revealed himself more gloriously
in ^^e New, than in the Old Testament, ac^ording as the Number of the Past Days
en^reases, as to this World, and the time of Restitution or Refreshment in the
future World daily draws nearer, the Revelation ^f God will daily increase in
the Prelude ^f the Approaching Glory? For if by Last^, or in these last Times,
be understood, that God after having spoken to us by his ^on, would no more
Reveal himself to Mankind, would it not thence follow, that ^he Apostles
Doctrine might be justly suspected, in as much as they had, after the time of
Christ's being here in the Flesh, many Revelations; and would not St. Paul have
thus written against himself?

Q. III. Whether that passage, Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets,
etc. be an Argument to reject absolutely the Revelations of this Day? And
whether if this be a true Proof, the Apostles themselves ought not to have been
suspicious of their own Divine Revelations, in as much as they were received,
after that Moses and the Prophets were already inserted in the H. Scripture?

Q. IV. Whence could Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Elias, the rest of the Prophets,
the Apostles, and others, whom we read of in the Scripture, to have had Divine
Revelations; know infallibly, and without danger of being deceived, their
Revelations to be Divine? Particularly how could Abraham, who had these
Revelations, before even one written Word, according to which he might examine
them, had been given?

Q. V. Whence is it then that you, who say, that you own for Divine, the Word
which was given to the aforesaid Holy Men, can be assured that you are not
Mistaken in them?

Q. VI. Whether if one receive the Holy Scripture for an Infallible Truth,
there be any reason to reject as Diabolical a Revelation, which is in no part
contrary to the said Scripture, yea, which corroborates it, and gives Testimony
to the same thing with it? And whether it be probable that the Devil, of whose
casting down, Destruction and Binding the Scripture bears Record, should reveal
any thing himself, concerning the Approach of the Destruction of his Kingdom?
Or should do any thing to encourage a Faithful Soul, to arm her self against
him with the Power of God?

Q. VII. Whether it be not dangerous to look on All Revelation, simply as such,
to be Diabolical at this time? And whether this be not an attributing greater
Honor to the Devil, than to God himself? And what one ought to judge
concerning those Preachers, who being called Lutheran, and of the Augustane
Confession, do nevertheless reject publicly in the Pulpit, and even upon
Common Fame, without the least Examination of the Truth, decry as Diabolical,
such as neither Luther, or the Augustane Confession have simply rejected? As
may appear from several Writings of Luther, and from the Apology of the
Augustane Confession, which expressly cites the Visions of one Hiltenius.

Q. VIII. Whether it ought not to be believed, that when a Soul has a true
Divine Revelation, it shall receive also from God an Infallible Token, that
this Revelation comes from him; since St. Paul says, We may know the things
which are given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. And St. John, We know that we are of
God, 1 John 5.19. And likewise, We are of God, and he that knows God, hears
us; but he that is not of God, hears not us: Hereby know we the Spirit of
Truth, and the Spirit of Error, 1 John 4.6.

Q. IX. Whether to say, That God will not give to the Soul, to whom he Reveals
himself, some Certain Token of Trial, whereby the said Person (as some have
written) may be able to distinguish, whether the Inspiration, or the Voice,
which he either in the Spirit, or by the Outward Ear, does hear, be from God,
or from the Devil, be any ways reconcilable with God's Love for Mankind? And
whether he would ever have had any Reason to command us to beware of Seducers,
and False Prophets, when according to this Supposition, we could not be capable
to discern, whether the Apparitions were from God, or the Devil? And how, I
pray you, shall the Two Witnesses, whom God, according to Rev. 11. will send,
come one day to be acknowledged; since the very False Prophets shall do so
great Miracles, and with so near a resemblance of the Truth? Mat. 24.2. These.
2.9. Rev. 13.13, 14, 15, etc.

Q. X. If there be no more any Divine Revelation, it may be demanded, Why does
God therefore say by Amos, That he will do nothing, but he reveals his
Secrets unto his Servants the Prophets? If it be said, That this has been
already done, I desire to know, where are to be found in the Scripture, all the
Particulars of the Great Acts of God in ^he Last Time? Or if they are found, is
it not certain at least, that there are in the same Prophetical Word, which is
acknowledged for Divine, a great many things yet Reserved and Sealed up? See
Dan. 12.4. Rev. 10.4. so as the Prophets themselves sometimes have not
understood what was given to them, Dan. 12.8. Since therefore according to the
Plain Promise of God, Dan. 12.4. Knowledge in the Prophesies shall in the Time
of the End, be opened to many, I desire to know, Whether God shall not,
according as the time of their Accomplishment draws near, give a Revelation to
several, even of this obscure Word of Prophecy, either by a Resolution from
the Word it self, or from other Extraordinary Testimonies? And to this, that
which is said, Rev. 22.10. has an express Relation.

Q. XI. Whether God, who has always chosen that which is Weak before the
World, 1 Cor. 1.27. may not also in these Days bestow his Revelations, even
upon the Weaker Sex? And whether all that comes from a Woman, should on that
account be rejected? Since that God Revealed himself to Hannah, Mary, the
Daughters of Philip, and many others; and since that he has also by Joel,
expressly promised the Particular Gifts of the Spirit, to the Handmaidens, and
to the Daughters; which Prophecy has not hitherto in its full extent been
Accomplished, as was proved, Section XXXVI.

Q. XII. Whether as many as Cavil with these Extraordinary Gifts in the Female
Sex, do not indeed condemn King Josiah, and the High Priest Hilkiah, for having
prayed the Prophetess Huldah, to enquire of the Lord, concerning the Matter
which was then before them? And if on the contrary, these Great and Holy Men
did well, where then is the good of speaking so disadvantageously of them at
this Day, when it is indisputable, that God has to some of this Sex,
communicated such like Extraordinary Gifts? See 2 Chronicles. 34.20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28.

XLI.
In the Third place, the Question is concerning this Matter of Fact in
Particular.

Q. 1. Whether it be possible for the Love and Faithfulness of God, ever to
permit, that a Person so Innocent as this Young Lady, who never, either out of
Spiritual Pride or Curiosity, desired such Graces as these; but to whom,
without desiring, they were freely given by God, from her very Childhood; and
who in the whole Course of her Life demonstrates the Sense which she has of
Christ, hates the Works of the Devil, and every thing that is Wicked, and loves
God with all her Heart; whether, I say, it be possible for him to suffer, that
such a Person should be deluded by the Devil by a false Revelation, for the
space of Twelve Years, and should still continue to be deluded?

Q. II. Since that this Person, by the means of this very Grace bestowed upon
her, is come to receive Christ Jesus according to Truth, and to walk in him;
how can this Revelation be from the Devil, which has destroyed in her the
Devil's Work, and brought her to Christ?

Q. III. Since this Spirit, who reveals himself in her, calls himself the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, and witnesses, that he who speaks by her is the Lord
Jehovah, the Tri-Vn God, who Created Heaven and Earth, the God of Israel; how
should it be possible for Satan, so to disguise himself in the form of an Angel
of Light, as to give himself the Name of Jehovah, at which he cannot but
tremble?

Q. IV. Since that this Person has from her Childhood received some Revelations
of diverse great Mysteries, hidden in the Scripture, which were not before
known to us, and which by reason of their Profoundness, were not understood
even by her self, and which notwithstanding do all show so goodly an Harmony:
Likewise, since that she knows not at all times how to write about such
Matters, but then only when she is called by God, and hears his Voice: And
since also that some Particulars have been foretold by her, which have really
come to pass accordingly: I desire to be Answered, whether such things as these
can ever proceed from a strong Imagination, or from a natural Subtilty of
Spirit, of which yet there is nothing to be found in this dear Person, as all
those who knew her can testify? And whether, though it may be without
difficulty consented to, that the Depths of Fancy, of the Devil, and of his
Deceivableness cannot, be all found out by us; it must (...) be also confessed,
that God will reveal these Depths and Heights of Satan, and of Reason, to his
Children, by the Spirit, which he has given them, which searches the Deep
Things of God; to the end they may be able clearly to discern that which is the
Fault of a strong Impression, from that which is the Effect of God's Spirit?

XLII.
1. Before I conclude, I cannot forbear to inform you, my Dear Fathers and
Brethren in Christ, that such abominable Lies and Slanders have been published
against Us, and Her, by the Father of Lies, and his Instruments, as we could
never have believed it had been possible, if we had not been sufficiently
convinced of the Power of Darkness, which at this present rules in the World,
in the midst of those who Name themselves Christians. We then called to Mind
what the Lord had already, upon the 17th of June, foretold us; which was, that
there should arise great and abominable Mistakes, the which ought not therefore
to appear strange to us, but rather to caution us, that we may profit thereby,
and be satisfied, that the Word and Testimony which have been given are True,
in as much as they are so entirely accomplished: Whereas if we had been of the
World, we had been praised of it; and that every one might have spoken well of
us, we needed to have done no more but to have expressed our Doubt, whether
these Revelations or Testimonies, were so Divine, as that we could be certain
of their being so. This then is that Revelation, which the Lord gave for a
Testimony to us.

Peace be with you, my Elect: Again I speak unto you, O ye that are Blessed, to
the end I may quicken you, and that ye be not wearied in Patience and
Stedfastness. Give ear now unto my kind Word, which in holy Love I communicate
to you: Be ye elevated all ye Children of my Father, who loves you, and become
strong in my Might, to the end ye may cleave steadfastly and immoveably to me,
and depart not from me. For there will come abominable Lies, and gross
Mistakes: Consider it, for I have told it you, to the end ye may remain
steadfast in my Truth, and well-grounded in the Faith, so as to depart neither
to the Right Hand, nor to the Left. Let not any fear now overtake you, neither
be at all disquieted; for I the LORD, who am above the Heaven of all Heavens,
am with you as a mighty Warrior, who go before you, and suffer you not to be
destroyed, if you trust in Me, and remain with me. If so ye are faithful to Me,
I am your strong Defense, and your Castle: And who is he that shall surprise
you, if ye are founded upon Me? As for the Evil-dealers that seek after you,
they shall be broken in pieces, and shall fall heavily: But ye shall be made to
rejoice in my great Help. Amen.

2. Not long after this we were Comforted by the Lord, in like manner as one is
comforted and elevated by one's Mother.

Hear my Word, O Israel, and thou Judah that art blessed of me, give good
attention unto it: Lo, I come suddenly. Mistake not, move thou not thy foot,
that thou may not fall: For mine Arm shall lead Thee, and unto thee shall my
Truth be made manifest. At the Seventh Hour I will sanctify my Virgin, and
will bring forth her Glory, which I give to her for a Refreshment before the
Rising of the Sun. Be but of good Heart, my chosen Ones, without all manner of
fear, for I have made a Covenant with you, that ye shall remain before Me: And
now I Swear to you, yea, I JEHOVAH, the Lord of Hosts, Swear to you, that for
you I will set my Righteousness against all the High Things, which are lifted
up against me, that am in you, and my Loving Kindness shall guide you, and my
powerful Arm likewise shall be with you. This is the Covenant that I make with
the Servants, and the Handmaids of Jacob. So verily as the Heaven is prepared
by my Almighty Word, so keep I my Covenant with my Lambs, who shall leap after
me upon Mount Gilead, and upon Mount Sion my Fortress: Yea, I have said it: For
I am the Lord, the LORD, who rule over the Cherubim and Seraphim, the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, who have bruised the Serpent's Head. Yea: Amen.

Should we not then be Secure, and of a good Heart, since the Lord God of
Israel, our Savior thus Comforted us, and assured us of his Protection? It Is
no matter then how this appears in the sight of the World, as if we were
forsaken by him, and as if to us, who have placed our confidence in Him rather
than in Man, all these sweet and powerful Promises should not have their
Accomplishment: We know notwithstanding, with the utmost and greatest
Certainty, that we shall not perish, but shall Conquer, for that he has loved
us, Hallelujah.

3. Lastly, upon the 30th of November, there came to us the following Word, in
which the Lord explains to us what is the meaning of that passage, Mat. 24.23.
Lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ: And he says, That the false Bastard
Spirit is already come into all States, and will yet come with more abominable
Lying Wonders. The Warning is word for word this.

I the Lord, LORD, Jesus Christ, He that is True, do warn you, that you take
heed to your selves; for there are coming such False Christ's, that are
disguised, and have such an appearance of Godliness, as if it were possible the
very Elect would be deceived by them. For they have Tokens of Perfection,
making to themselves a Glory of true Humility; notwithstanding which there is
nothing in them, but Deceit and Abomination. As I live, I will destroy them,
for they Prophecy by their own Spirit, with which the Starry Spirit is
intermixed, and bring forth many Wise Sayings, and say, I am he, I am he;
believe me, for here is Immanuel; Christ is in me; he speaks by me: But all
this is mere deceit, they are Lies, and Fallen Spirits. Yet be not afraid, ye
Lambs who hear my Voice; for ye shall be preserved against the Hour of
Temptation, for to Babes is the Mystery discovered; and that which is Foolish,
and that which is Simple before the World, is that which I have prepared for my
self: And the Simple tread securely, and that which is Nothing, I have chosen,
and unto little Children is given the Heavenly Wisdom; to the end they may put
to shame that which is lifted up in the Carnal Sense; and that which is little,
may put that which is exalted underneath it. Be not then afraid, ye Lambs, for
unto you is given the true Wisdom, to the end ye may be certain, and able to
discern; for ye have the pure Ointment, and the Spirit of Truth, whereby ye may
know all the secret Pleasures, and become certain. Take heed, for the False
Spirit is now in all States, though not so powerfully, as he shall be.

Judge now, my Fathers and Brethren beloved in Christ, a true Judgment in the
Eyes of God: I earnestly beseech you, for the Universal Love of the Truth, and
to the Public Confession of the Holy Wonders of God, to send me as soon as may
be your Theological Answer. May the Lord JESUS, to whom this Matter appertains,
be powerful with his Spirit in your Spirit: May he defend you with his Mighty
Arm, against all the Gainsayers of his Holy Truth, and Crown you in the Day of
the Resurrection of the Righteous with Everlasting Glory. Amen.

I remain Your, etc. Most Obliged to Love and Prayer, J. W. P.

The Postscript.
IT having pleased our Good God and Savior, by several Testimonies of the same
kind, and Revelations given to Persons in many Places, and of all Sorts and
Ranks, as Rich and Poor, Noble and Plebeian, Learned and Unlearned, Men and
Women, Young and Old, hidden from the World, but known to God; to confirm what
he has Revealed by his Spirit in this Blessed Lady; I beseech you Countrymen
and Brethren, from the Deep Center of Love, to hearken to this one Sealing
Testimony, which some few Years since, flowed from the Unity of the same Spirit
to One in This Nation.

I heard a Voice saying, Great silence in Heaven for half an Hour. Then there
was a great Gathering together of many Saints and Angels before the Throne, and
they seemed in great Consultation. And He that sat on the Throne appeared in
great Glory, with a glorious Crown on his Head. Then I heard a Voice saying,
Arise my Servant that art to go forth with the Everlasting Gospel; for I am
coming forth with Ten Thousands of my Saints to Judge the Earth. Pray and cry
aloud, that Judgment may not break out in the House of the Lord: Say, Spare thy
People, O Lord, and deliver thy Heritage; and let them not be consumed with the
Wicked. Mourn, O my People, betwixt the Porch and the Altar; so may ye prevent
the Judgment that is coming forth. Behold I will put a Key into the Hand of my
Servant, that is to go forth with the Everlasting Gospel; which will unlock the
Heavens, and bring down a Blessing upon my People. Sing, O ye Heavens, and
rejoice, O ye Saints, that live upon the Earth: For I will deliver you from the
Adversaries, by the mighty Hand of my Power. Fast, and Pray, and your Cries
shall be heard, and your Tears shall be shut up into my Bottle, for a Memorial
before me: And such as rise up against you, shall fall before you.

And I saw a Rainbow about the Throne, and the Voice said, This shall be a
Covenant betwixt me and my People. Then I heard a great Voice, saying, I will
come forth with Power, and will scatter such as rise up against the Everlasting
Gospel. Arise, arise my Servant, and put on my Strength, and come forth: For I
am coming to do great things upon the Earth. Howl ye Wicked, for I will pour
out my Spirit on my Servants, and on my Handmaids; and they shall Prophecy,
and their Prophesies shall come to pass. Prepare your Hearts, O ye Saints, to
meet your God, and I will fill your Hearts full of Joy and Rejoicing. For it is
given to you to sing the Song of Praises and Thansgivings. Then shall the
Daughters of Sion, be filled with Praises, and Songs of Deliverance: For behold
the King comes with Triumph and Victory, and the Voice of the LORD shall be
heard through the Earth. Then I beheld Four Cherubims clapping their Hands
together, and crying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath: Heaven and Earth
are full of thy Glory. Then I beheld a Glorious Throne in the midst of Mount
Sion, and Twenty Four Elders round about the Throne, and they threw down their
Crowns, saying, Amen, Amen, so be it.

FINIS.

