ADVICE TO A FRIEND.

DEPRESSA RESVRGO.


ECCLUS. xiv. 13. Do good unto thy Friend before thou dye.

GREG. NYSSEN. (...).

London, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty,
MDCLXXIII.

AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE PVBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have nothing to say either of this Bo^k, or of its Author: But only desire
the Reader, if he like the Counsels which are here given, for the promoting and
better ordering of Devotion, and for the preserving of a pious Soul in peace
and cheerfulness, that he would be so kind and faithful to himself as to
follow them. And the hope I have, that after a perusal, they will invite him so
to do, makes me secure the Author will not be displeased to see that exposed to
public view, which was at first intended only for a private Persons use. For
if the Advice be good, the more common it grows so much the better it is; and
it will not be the less mine, when it is gone into other hands.

Plato, I am told, calls Love, the Ornament of all, both of the Gods and of
Men; the fairest and most excellent Guide, whom every man ought to follow, and
celebrate with Hymns and Praises: And what is there in which we can better
express and declare it to others, than in communicating to them, that which we
hold in highest esteem our selves? It was that which first produced this
Treatise, and from thence it comes abroad.

That which the same Person says is the Father of delights, of mirth, of
whatsoever is graceful and desirable, was the Parent of this Book: And
therefore let it be accepted with the same kindness wherewith it was writ, and
is now Printed. Let all the faults (if you find any) be overlookt with a
friendly eye; and do not discourage so excellent a virtue as Friendship (to
which we owe the best things in the World) by severe and harsh censures of any
thing that it produces.

But I need not, I think, be solicitous about this: the pious design of the
Book being sufficient to give it protection, if it cannot gain it approbation.
It hurts no body, and therefore may pass it self with more safety; and it
offers its service to do every body good; which me thinks should be taken
kindly, even by those who stand in no need of it. As for those who shall make
use of it, and find any benefit by it; they will complain perhaps only of the
Author's thriftiness, and wish he had been more liberal of his Advice. And so,
it is like, he would, if he had not consulted his Friends ease more than his
own; and considered rather what would be useful, than what would make a great
show. You will take a wrong measure of his kindness, if you judge of it by the
bulk of the Book; which was purposely contracted into a little room, that it
might be a constant Companion, and as easy to carry in mind, as it is to carry
in ones hand. And let the defects of it be what they will, they may be supplied
out of one of the Rules, you here meet with, if you please to make use of it;
which is, to choose a good Guide; from whom you may receive further Advice in
any thing that is necessary for your Progress in Piety; or for the settling your
Conscience in peace.

And that we may none of us ever want such a faithful and skilful Person to
conduct us, and that we may receive a benefit by these and all other good
Counsels; let us heartily join in that Prayer to God, which is the Collect for
this Day, and add it often to the ensuing Devotions.

Leave us not, we beseech Thee, destitute of thy manifold Gifts, nor yet of
Grace to use them always to thy Honor and Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
St. Barnabie's Day, 1673.
IMPRIMATUR

Sam. Parker, R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno Gilberto Divina Providentia
Archi. Ep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Maii 14. 1673. Ex Aed. Lambeth.
ADVICE TO A FRIEND.
My Friend,
MAN bears some resemblance, and may not unfitly be compared, to a Diamond or
such like precious stone; whose darker parts confess that it is of the earth,
but the brighter look as if it had borrowed some rays from the Sun or Stars.
He is a substance (I mean) consisting of a terrestrial Body, and celestial
Spirit: with his Feet he touches the earth, but with his Head he touches
Heaven. Though the neighborhood knows whence his Body came, and remembers the
time perhaps when it lay in the dark Cell of his mothers womb; yet his Soul
does absolutely deny that it is of so mean extraction: And, casting its eyes
upward, calls to mind its high descent and parentage; and takes it to be no
presumption to affirm that, we are the offspring of God.

He cannot therefore but find in himself propensions and desires, not only
different from, but contrariant to each other. For since two worlds meet in
him, and he is placed in the confines of heaven and earth, his will must needs
hang between two widely distant goods: the one propounding pleasures to his
body, and the other to his mind. And though once there was a time when these
two preserved such a friendship and gave such due satisfaction to one another
just interests and inclinations, that they did not break out into an open war;
yet this peace lasted not so long, as to let us feel the blessings and
happiness thereof. But that part whose kindred and acquaintance was in this
world, apprehended the first occasion, that offered it self, to quarrel with
the other, whose native country was not so visible through walls of flesh; and
denying to consent unto it, plainly rebelled and entered into a state of
hostility against it. This it might do with the more ease, because two parts of
those three into which the Soul is ordinarily divided, stand very much affected
to the Body, and its concernments. The Desiring part, that is always ready to
run to any thing and embrace it, (...)
which has the appearance of a bodily good: the Angry part, that is no less
forward to shun, and to make defense against, whatsoever seems to be a bodily
evil: to the Rational is committed the direction and government of these; which
that it may manage aright, it is to maintain a constant conversation with an
higher good, to which all the lower desires and passions ought to be
subordinate and subject.

These are handsomely compared by a noble Greek Philosopher to the Three Ranks
or Orders of men, that are in a City: (...), Proclus L. 1. in Timaeum.
The Servants, the Soldiers, and the Magistrates. The first of which are to do
all the work, and make such provisions as are necessary for its support: The
second serve for a guard to protect and defend it from all dangerous assaults:
And the third sits in Counsel, pronounces Judgment, issues out Orders, makes
Rules, and gives direction how both shall be employed. But so it falls out,
that as the Slaves and the Soldiers sometimes prove mutinous and unruly, and
combining their forces together make themselves masters of the Conservators of
the true peace and liberty: so have the violent desires that are in us of
enjoying a sensual good, and of avoiding all outward evils, and
inconveniences, grown to such a headstrong and unbridled humor; that they have
overtopt reason, and refuse to hearken to the authority and to obey the
dictates of our understanding.

Many ways have been tried both by God and Man to reduce them to a good
agreement again: But though all fair satisfaction has been offered, and is
allowed, to the lower part, it would not yield to a surrender of that power and
sovereignty, which it has usurped. As a company of Factious people that strive
for superiority over their Governors, when they have compassed their designs
and possessed themselves of the throne, are with more difficulty suppressed,
than they were before kept in subjection: So it is with the multitude of men's
furious lusts and passions, now that they have dethroned reason, advanced
themselves into the seat of Government. Having tasted very strongly of a
sensual good, and felt the sweetness (as they take it) of being absolute; they
are loath to be denied the license which they have so long enjoyed, and will by
no means grant any obedience to be due to an higher power.

God was pleased therefore to manifest himself in our flesh, to countenance the
claim and assert the title of our Mind and Understanding; and by showing its
undoubted right of Government, to take up this controversy, and put an end to
these sad contests, which have happened to the ruin of mankind. In the Lord Jesus
there appeared such an absolute and constant dominion of the Spirit, as in the
first Adam, after his fall, there did of the Flesh. And he came not only to
give us a glorious Example, to overawe all unruly motions in us by his divine
Authority, and to inspire our feeble Spirits with some courage, by his great
and precious promise of eternal life: but to comfort us (by his Death,
Resurrection, and Exaltation at the right hand of the Majesty on high) with the
hopes of a mighty power from above to aid and assist us in our Christian
conflict with all unreasonable desires. This he actually sends into our souls,
to give them sufficient force and ability, for the doing of their duty,
redeeming themselves from this slavery, and recovering their ancient rights and
liberty.

And in all those who attend unto his holy Counsels, and receive his Divine
grace, and are renewed and led by his good Spirit, there appear many happy
tokens of the Souls victory; and they are daily winning new conquests over the
flesh with all the affections and lusts thereof. The heavenly good seems so
great in their eyes that they cannot (upon any terms) think of submitting their
souls any longer, to attend wholly or chiefly upon the pleasures and
satisfactions of the lower man. The mind is furnished with such right opinons,
the Will is become so tractable, and compliant with their resolutions, the
Affections grow so subject and obedient to the orders and commands of both; in
short, God and his will is so seriously loved, and their Spirit strives so
earnestly after the ardors and fervent Devotion of love; that the ancient
Government is again restored, its lost authority, rights and royalties are
manifestly recovered, and they live in good hope to be more than conquerors,
over all temptations from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; aspiring to an
humble rejoicing, glorying and triumph over all these enemies.

But notwithstanding all this, these men remain still both flesh and spirit.
The Body is not destroyed, the goods wherein it delights have not altered their
nature, its habitation is not removed from their neighborhood; and it retains
the same inclination to them, and they are often remembering it of its forepast
fruitions, and, which is worst of all, the Soul cannot presently recover its
perfect health and soundness; but feels the maimes and the bruises that it got,
when it was formerly beaten down and oppressed by them. Hence it comes to pass
that, for some time at least, there are many motions made for a revolt; and
every thing in the world is tampering with the heart, to corrupt and bring it
over again to their party; and the mind it self, in some fits, almost wearied
with their importunity, may be ready to lend half an ear to these
solicitations. There is not such a perfect peace established, but there will be
some endeavors of the fleshly part to resume its power, and get into its hand
its pretended liberty. Yea, by the violence of many outward accidents, the mind
may sometimes fall into a dream, and be tempted to muse whether there be
sufficient reason to prefer those future and unseen goods, before present
enjoyments: The Will may begin to bend it self to some civil carriage and fair
compliance with the flesh: the Affections, being much wooed and complimented,
may feel themselves in danger to be inveigled; or the heat, at least, and
liveliness of Devotion may, in such a condition, be much abated and impaired.

And indeed it is not to be expected that the Body should go along as nimbly as
the Spirit would have it, toward a good with which it is not acquainted. All
that the Mind can do, is to take a very great care, that it move it self with
as slow a pace toward that good to which the other is most inclined. That we
love these outward things cannot be blamed: but it will require much diligence
to keep our hearts from doting on that, for which we naturally have no small
affection. That we hold some acquaintance with them, can by no means be
avoided: but that we grow not too familiar with them ought to be our prudent
care, and cannot without some difficulty be prevented. There will some
kindnesses pass between us, and we cannot deny the Body these sensible
pleasures: but that our Souls should thereby suffer themselves to be undermined
and their interest betrayed, there is no small danger. For while the Good of
the body is near at hand and the Good of the soul is at some distance, while
that which is near seems great and that which is remote seems small, while the
one is present and the other future, while things present call upon us and we
must earnestly call for things future, while the one is always before us and
the other comes but at certain seasons, while the one is of old and the other
but of a late acquaintance (we having been bred up with the one and being but
brought to the other, the one coming first and the other thereby prejudiced) as
long, I say, as there are these plain advantages on the one side, if we use not
attentive diligence to give the soul just and true information, they will
prevail with it inconsiderately to slight the far greater advantages on the
other. Just as you see sometimes a wild-headed and unthrifty Heir, though there
be no comparison between his future inheritance and a small sum of present
money, yet, for the pleasing of a violent passion, sells the reversion of an
estate, which, after some years, would make him very rich and happy: So do
souls that are not serious and deliberate, heedlesly resign, for mere trifles,
their apparent title to such things as are of most importance to their true and
lasting felicity. Though the possessions of the other world be as far beyond
all our enjoyments here, as this world is above nothing; yet because these
things here are present, and because they are ever soliciting and offering
themselves to us, and because they entertain our desires with pleasure, and
because they put us to little pains to give our selves the fruition of them,
they are wont to prevail with sleepy and careless minds to purchase them,
though they part with all their interest in the other world, as the price of
the bargain.

From hence there grows a necessity of that precept of vigilance and
watchfulness, which our Lord Christ has given his Soldiers; lest through
subtle insinuations, or frequent and violent assaults, this old enemy get up
again, and establish it self in a new and more grievous tyranny. Augustus
deservedly reproved the folly of Alexander, who, as the story goes, was
troubled in his mind for want of employment after the conquest (as he imagined)
of the whole world; for he should have considered (said that great Emperor)
that there is no less pains and wisdom requisite to keep a possession, than
there is to win it. We must not think that we have ended our warfare, when we
have reduced the flesh to some terms of obedience and peace; but the strongest
soul will find it necessary to keep a constant guard: or else that enemy, whose
weakness consists in our watchfulness, will succeed in its endeavors to get
all into its hands once more, and settle it self in that throne from whence it
was so happily deposed. Whenever we grow remiss, the experience of all the
world tells us, our souls lose as much in a week as they have been acquiring by
a whole years labor. To fall down is very easy and we tumble apace: but we
cannot climb the hill without difficulty, and by little steps and slow motions
we advance toward the upper world and the celestial blessedness; which will
cost us much patience and unwearied industry before we approach it.

But what will keep the Mind, may you demand, from this remisness? what
remedies can you prescribe to preserve a feeble spirit, from being stupefied
and lulled asleep sometimes with these gaudy Poppies, these fair and soft
enjoyments which appear every where, and continually surround us? who is able
to keep a perpetual watch and never take a nap? In such a long work who can
choose but be sometimes weary? When I consider my own infirmity and the enemies
strength, my natural love to these worldly things and their restless
importunity, the length of my journey, and my aptness to be tired, and
especially when I see so many seeming Champions that have been overcome, so
many that did run well who have grown slack or retired, I am afraid may your
heart say, that I shall never hold out to the end, and maintain the ground
steadfastly on which I stand.

And indeed it must be confessed, that the spirit is not always alike able to
make a valiant resistance and courageous opposition. But what through the
defect and disorder of the bodily instruments which it uses, and what through
strange occasions and unusual accidents that it meets withal to surprise it,
and what through the strength of some one object either of joy or grief or such
like, that seises mightily upon the imagination, and what through its own
timorousness which makes the enemy grow confident, and what through the want
now and then of those delectable motions of Gods good Spirit, and those
heavenly consolations wherewith it has been transported; it may fall into some
listlesness and dullness, and grow so faint, that it has but little heart to
maintain its Christian warfare.

But yet for all this you ought not to despond nor be quite discouraged at the
thoughts that you may possibly one day find your self in these unhappy
circumstances. You are not left without a Remedy, either for the preventing of
the fall of your soul into this condition; or for the delivery and raising of
it up, should it chance to slide into it; or for its safety and preservation,
that it may receive no harm whilst it lies therein, and can for the present
meet with no means to rid it self of so great a burden. This little Book comes
to bring you some relief, and lend you some support and aid in such a case. It
has no other business, but to give your soul the best assistance that mine can
afford it for its security: that whatsoever assault may be made upon you,
whatsoever weaknesses you may feel in your self, and whatsoever advantage the
enemy may make of them, the flesh notwithstanding may never be able to draw you
back again underits power; but your Spirit may stand fast in its pious
resolution, and come off with victory and triumph at the last.

And let the Divine Spirit of Wisdom and Grace, I humbly beseech the Father
Almighty, so guide my Pen, that your Soul may receive no less benefit by the
reading of these Papers, than mine does contentment in the writing of them, and
that the Good they do you may be proportionable to the Love from whence they
come. Amen.

I.
AND in the first place let me advise you to bring your self into as great an
acquaintance and familiarity as ever you can, with unseen and spiritual things;
and to make your mind so sensible of them, that they may seem the most real and
substantial beings. You easily discern how suitable this Counsel is to the
foregoing discourse; and you can tell your self how much of our listlesness and
want of spiritual appetite proceeds from hence, that these outward things press
continually very hard upon us, and make us feel that they have a being and a
solid subsistence: but the other rarely touch us with any force, and so appear
as if they were only in our fancy. Our soul seems to us, in our careless
thoughts, as if it were but a breath or a thin vapor: But our Body we perceive
to be a massy bulk, of whose concerns we are therefore very apprehensive. The
Divine being, though the cause of all others, seems but like a shadow; on whom
our Soul having no fast hold, it is no wonder that we rather catch at those
things which we can grasp, and feel to have some substance in them. The report
of immortal life and bliss in heaven comes to us like a common story, of which
there is some probability, but no certainty; and that inclines us to close so
greedily with the enjoyments of this life, which make more strong impressions
on our body, than the other on our Spirit. The glass through which we look upon
this lower world makes every thing we desire appear exceeding great; nay
multiplies and increases it to vast dimensions: but when we cast our eyes
upward toward our heavenly country, alas! things appear there (as if we had
turned about the perspective) so little; so remote, so like nothing, that we
can scarce discern them, or retain any remembrance of them. We have a kind of
opinion and half persuasion concerning these inward and intellectual objects,
but we have a sense and full apprehension of our outward enjoyments. Now though
opinion may govern us, and we may follow it while there are no considerable
impediments to oppose it; yet when any difficulty arises, or something crosses
our way to which we stand very much affected, it will soon submit it self and
leave us to our new inclinations, because it is but an opinion. We must confirm
our souls therefore in a full belief of those spiritual things: which thus
differs from a bare opinion of them. The one is grounded only upon probable
reasons, or on good reason but half considered and feebly assented unto: the
other upon clear and manifest evidences, well digested and fully entertained.
So that the one leaves us weak and wavering, because it leaves us half in and
half out of the arms of Truth: but the other makes us firm, constant and
unmovable, because it puts us completely and entirely into its embraces.

All those times then which are so favorable, as to let your mind be free and
unclog'd, spend some of your retired thoughts in the company of immaterial
beings; and approach so near them that you even feel and handle them, and
remain persuaded they are no less real than those which you see and hear and
touch with your outward man. By which means they will infinitely more engage
your affections and tie your heart unto them, than any thing else can do;
because of the vast disproportion which every one acknowledges (supposing their
existence) between them and all that you love in this sensible world.

1. Think first of all, that your Body is but the clothes and garments of your
Soul, and that this indeed is the man. And undress your self in your own
thoughts, strip your self of these robes, and conceive that you are only a
naked Spirit. This you can do; and thereby you will both make your Soul think
more of it self, and you will likewise plainly prove it is quite distinct from
your body: in whose society though it live, yet is not of its lineage, but of
another nature and original: For nothing can think it self not to be, since by
its very thinking so, it proves that it has a being. But we can quite put off
all thoughts that we have this body hanging about us, and the Soul can think it
self to be what now it is, though it look not through these eyes, nor speak
with this tongue, nor write with these hands, nor have any other thing about it
but its own thoughts: And therefore it is not such a thing as this Body, but
some better and more noble substance. It is that which tells you that you have
a Body. If you believe it, you have reason to believe withal that it self is
some other being, of more force and longer continuance: because you can now
think you have castoff your body and conceive it lying in the dust, your soul
still remaining as it is, full of these and other such like thoughts; but you
can never think you have no soul, because even by that conception you prove
that you have, and show your self to be a thoughtful thing.

2. When you have thus therefore discoursed your self into some feeling of your
Soul, think in the next place very seriously, that whatsoever you clearly
apprehend by this, though it be perceived by none of your outward senses, yet
is no less real and certain than what you use with them. Disbelieve your eyes,
and think that your ears bring you a false report, rather than doubt of any
thing which your mind does plainly and distinctly perceive. Though you cannot
but yield an assent to the relation which any of your senses make you, yet
since the mind is the more excellent Principle, and it has a most certain
existence, give the greatest credit to what it affirms, when none of them can
afford you any evidence.

3. And then you will presently find that your mind asserts nothing so
strongly, as the being of a God, without whom it could not be. Persuade your
self therefore as confidently of him, as you do of that which your eyes behold.
Though your eyes see him not as they do the Sun, yet say to your self, my Soul
does; which gives as sound an evidence on his behalf, as my eyes do for the
Sun. That great Light, and all the rest of those Globes of Fire, which I see in
the Skies, declare him as clearly to my mind, as they do themselves to my
outward Sense. I cannot think of them, nor of my self, nor of any thing else in
this great World, but a Divine Being presents it self before me; by whose
incomparable wisdom and Almighty goodness they were at once produced, and set
in this beautiful and useful order, in which I behold them. Exhort your self
therefore to look about you as often for this end, as you are apt to do for
other little purposes, that you may see God in this goodly Temple, which he
has built himself for his own glory. Set your Soul in that Divine Presence,
which fills all things. Open your ears, listen to the wide World, and hear (as
Gregory Nazianzen excellently speaks) that great and admirable Preacher of his
Majesty. (...). Orat. 43.
Is it possible, as Athanasius well reasons to come into a great City,
consisting of a Multitude of Inhabitants of different sorts, great and small,
rich an^ poor, old and young, Men, Women and Children, Slaves, Soldiers an^
Tradesmen, and to see all things ordered so handsomely, that every on^ of
these, though opposite in their inclinations, agree and conspire together for
the common good, the Rich not grieving the Poor, nor the strong oppressing the
weak, nor the young rising up against the aged; Can one possibly, I say, behold
all this, and not conclude that there is a wise and powerful Governor there,
though we see him not, by whose Authority they enjoy this happy concord? Why
then should we not draw the same Conclusion from the sight of this great World,
composed of diverse contrary Beings, moving several ways, and to distant ends;
but making as good harmony altogether, as the various strings of a Lute, whose
sweet Music coming to our ears, proves there is some excellent Artist, Orat.
contra Gentes.
(though hid from our eyes) by whom they are tuned and touched? Confusion is a
sign of anarchy; but order demonstrates a Governor.

4. If then there be a God, and you feel your self a Being that can subsist and
enjoy it self, if he please, without a Body; excite in your Soul a most
passionate desire to be so happy, that when it quits the place of its present
abode, it may approach nearer to his blessed Majesty, and have a clearer sight
of his surpassing glory. Put your self in hope also that his Divine Goodness,
which has planted in you such strong inclinations, and filled you with such
desires, will not let them want the pleasure of satisfaction. Look up above,
and think that when your Spirit shall take its flight from hence, there is some
other Company to entertain it in another World: whose acquaintance is far more
desirable than the society of the dearest Friend we have here, who perhaps as
soon as he has gained our love, takes his leave of us, and goes his way
thither. What comfort have we remaining in this, and other innumerable cases,
but the hope of Immortality? Which is the only thing that can raise our Spirit
above the pleasures and the troubles too of this mortal Body. This is our
chiefest good, on which we should set our heart. This is the inheritance to
which we are born, (as Lactantius speaks) and for which we are formed by virtue
and piety: the only inheritance, of which we can be secure that we shall never
be defeated. For all this World we must leave behind us: we can carry nothing
away with us, but an innocent and well-passed life, and the hopes which
accompany it. He only comes to God rich and plentiful, and abounding in wealth
(as his words are) whom continence, mercy, patience, charity and faith, shall
attend and conveigh into his Presence.

5. To assure your self therefore of this great good, on which our principal
strength and comfort relies, consider in the next place, that your mind plainly
tells you (and its testimony is indubitable) that God must needs be true, and
that whatsoever he says, ought immediately, without any hesitation, to be
firmly believed. For as he can never be deceived himself, so we are sure he
cannot deceive us.

6. Now God has been pleased at last to speak to us by his own dear Son, as a
voice from Heaven, and a World of mighty deeds have testified.

7. And seeing Jesus has not only comprised in his Doctrine all the holy
wisdom, and all the goodness that ever was thought or spoken of since the
beginning of time; but has likewise added a lively discovery of that state of
good things, which the heart of man naturally wishes, and longs for in another
World:

8. And seeing, in the last place, God has confirmed his exceeding great and
precious promises of Eternal Life, by his Resurrection from the Dead, and his
Ascension into Heaven, and the sending of the Holy Ghost: You ought to persuade
your self of the truth of these invisible things, and represent them so often
to your mind, till they seem no less real and certain, than what you see with
your Eyes, and feel with your Hands: Nay, till all the pleasures and delights
which the bounty of Heaven gives you in Friends, or any other good things here,
seem but as shadows and faint Images of the better enjoyments which you expect
hereafter. Those wise Men, who were guided only by the light of their own
mind, made no greater account of them. And yet all the Philosophers of greatest
fame were but little Children compared with Christian People, in the knowledge
of this great Point, L. 1. praepar. Cap. 4.
as Eusebius justly glories. We are not left to gather this truth (as another
of the Ancients speaks) from the weak conjectures and imperfect reasonings of
our own, Lactant. L. 7. Cap. 8.
but we know it from a Divine Tradition. It is delivered to us by the Son of
God, who has put an end to all disputes, by coming from Heaven to us, with the
Words of Eternal Life. Lay up his Words therefore most carefully in your heart,
let them dwell richly and plentifully in you in all wisdom; and possess you at
once with a mighty sense of God, and of the dignity of your Soul, and of
Immortality, and of the Joy of the Invisible World.

The Benefits of this Exercise are so evident, that I may leave you to relate
them, when you have felt them. It will be sufficient for me to suggest to you,
that the Heart must needs become by this means, very cold and dead to those
earthly enjoyments, which were wont to bewitch and inchant it with their
deceitful Pleasures. If the Soul be clothed (as the Platonists fancied) with
as many Garments as there are Elements, through which it passed as it descended
into this Body, and if it be so mufled in them that it does but fumble in its
thoughts, and has much ado to feel it self; hereby it will be able in some
measure to divest it self of those thick Blankets, wherein it is wrapped, and
throw off those heavy coats that dangle about its heels, and incumber its
motions, as it sets its Feet forward to walk toward the Father of its Being. It
is no contemptible discourse which their Master makes concerning Felicity;
Plato in Phaedone.
which he rightly places in the contemplation and love of the Sovereign Good.
How that no Man can attain unto it in this Life, by reason of the lumpish
matter to which the Soul is fast tied, and by reason of the multitude of
Worldly affairs which require our attendance; yea, and of the fancies and toys
that will fill our thoughts, do what we can. Whence he concludes, that either
no Man shall be happy, (which he thinks is very absurdly affirmed) or he must
arrive at his Happiness after he is dead. And if when we are dead (says he)
the Blessed Time is come, wherein we may enjoy, as we would, that greatest
good; then the nearer any Man approaches unto Death, the nearer he comes within
the reach of his Felicity. If a Man therefore will withdraw Himself from the
World, if he will abstract his mind from sensible things, and take his heart
from bodily pleasures, and turn himself into himself (which they judged, as the
Holy Writers do, a kind of Death) he shall be in the beginnings of his
Happiness. There I know, my Friend, you desire to find your self; and for that
cause, I pray you learn thus to steal out of the company of Worldly things,
which by hindering us from beginning our Happiness, would keep us in perpetual
misery. Converse, as often as you can, with your nobler self; and contract an
intimate acquaintance with those divine Inhabitants which are lodged there.
Grow into an high esteem of that unseen Power, which knows God and the Life to
come; which thinks, and guides, and gives orders, desires, and loves, and does
all things else belonging to this Life. And calling to mind continually its
worth and dignity, and considering for what heavenly enjoyments it was
designed; disdain to let it be condemned to so base a slavery, as to serve the
Body only, and make provision for its Lusts and Pleasures. Rescue it from that
thraldom, and assert its liberty: which is no such difficult undertaking;
since rightly to understand it self, is sufficient for its safety and
preservation.

And, to say the truth, the necessity of this Exercise is no less apparent than
the benefit. We had need acquaint our selves thoroughly with those Spiritual
and Heavenly Beings, and make them very familiar to us; because these outward
Objects are so near us, and have gained such an interest in us, that, even when
we are thinking of the other, they will busily interpose themselves, and are
able in an instant to obtrude their Company, though then very troublesome, upon
us. How often do our minds turn aside to speak with them, in the midst of our
Prayers? How will our thoughts be discomposed at the sound of a Bell, the
creaking of a Door, the buzzing of a Fly, or some such weak and contemptible
thing, that affects our Senses? When we are bowed down before God, when our
Hands and Eyes are lifted up to Heaven, how does the Memory of Yesterdays
enjoyments, or the fear of to Morrows troubles, (besides the thoughts of the
present Days business) start up and interrupt us, we know not how, or on what
occasion? The uneasiness of our bended Joints, the biting of a Flea, the prick
of a Pin, some Word which we then speak, any fancy that rises up by the natural
motion of our Spirits, will trouble our minds in our Devotion, and carry us
away from God. It concerns us therefore very highly to work our minds into a
stronger, and more delightful Sense of Him, and of all Spiritual enjoyments,
since our familiarity with the other is so intimate; that the very least of
them is in favor enough with us, to give us an avocation from this better
Company, even when we are engaged in it.

In order to this, and all things else, you know very well how necessary it is
to implore the assistance of Gods grace, and to beseech his Infinite Goodness,
that he will be pleased to represent himself, more clearly than you can do,
unto your mind; and lift it up above toward the Happiness of the other World:
Which you may do in some such words as these.

A PRAYER.
O God, I believe that thou art, and that nothing could have been without Thee:
who fillest all things, and art every where to be seen and felt by observant
minds, who diligently seek Thee. Vouchsafe, I most humbly beseech Thee, to
behold a Soul that seriously aspires toward Thee, and whom thou have already
filled with earnest desires to be united in Eternal love to Thee; but is pulled
down, alas! by this earthly body, and in danger to sink, without thy mighty
aides, into too great a love of these lower goods, which here surround me. Draw
near, O Father of Spirits; present thy self so clearly to me, and touch my mind
with such a powerful sense of Thee, that it may be lifted up above all earthly
things; and my heart may always incline toward Thee, and be possessed with a
constant and most ardent love of Thee.

Awaken in me, on all occasions, a lively remembrance of the worth and dignity,
of that Immortal Spirit, which thou have breathed into me: And raise it up to
as lively a belief, and hope of that Eternal bliss, into which Jesus our Lord
is entered for us. Fix my mind upon that unseen felicity, and keep it in such a
steadfast and delightful contemplation of it, that nothing here on Earth may be
able to tempt me down into an inordinate desire after it, and love unto it. O
what glorious objects appear before me, surpassing all that mine eyes behold,
now that my thoughts are retired a little from this outward World! O what
shadows do all things here seem, in compare with those Heavenly enjoyments
which thou presentest to me! What longings do I feel excited in my heart after
Thee! What desires to be always with thee, and to be filled still with a
stronger sense of Thee! O thou who art the beginner and finisher of all goood,
be pleased to assist my holy endeavors to withdraw my mind more and more from
these sensible things, that it may have a clearer sight of its Heavenly Country
from whence it comes, and whither it desires to return, and there live for
ever. Preserve it thereby from the power of all temptations here; and enable me
to prepare it, to be presented unto Thee by my Savior, adorned with that
Faith, Purity, Patience, Righteousness, Mercy, and such like Heavenly
qualities, as will dispose me for the Company of the Blessed.

I sigh to think, O my God, of the weakness of my mind, which is so easily
distracted and turned aside in these my addresses to Thee. Pity me, good Lord;
and knit my thoughts and affections to a closer attendance on Thee. Help me to
gather my mind into it self, and there to enjoy thy Divine Presence with less
disturbance from this outward World. O that all things here may rather bring
thee to my mind, than carry it away from thee! Dispose me so to observe the
footsteps of thy wise and mighty Goodness in all thy Creatures, that I may
perpetually acknowledge thee; and then especially be born away far above all
other things, in high admiration of Thee, and servent affection to Thee, when I
am thus prostrate in humble adoration of thy Divine Majesty. And when I am so
feeble, as to wander after little things, even while I am presenting my self
before thee, and offering my heart to thee; Help me to long the more earnestly
after that happy state, wherein I shall with more steady thoughts and entire
devotion, give everlasting praises to Thee.

Amen.
II.
NOW that you may the better preserve in your Soul these ardent desires, and
that they may not dye for want of continual fuel to feed and nourish them, let
me advise you, My Friend, in the next place, to represent to your self, as
often, and as sensibly as you can, the incomparable greatness of that invisible
happiness in the World to come. In which that I may assist you, as much as I am
able, I will direct you to such an easy way of managing your thoughts that you
may pursue this counsel with no great pains and labor. Justin Martyr observes
in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, that therefore God laid such restraints
upon that Nation, and forbad them, for instance, the use of certain Meats, the
oftener to put them in mind of himself, even in the most common actions of
humane life; and to make them remember they were under his Government, and
subject to his Supreme Authority, which they were too prone to forget. And will
it not be a great shame, if in these riper Ages of the World, the free use that
God has given us of all things, should not teach us as much as those
restraints and abridgments of their liberty did them, in the infancy of Divine
knowledge? Ill natures are taught most by their wants, but the good are best
instructed by their enjoyments. Ungrateful People think of God, when he takes
away his blessings from them; but ingenuous and thankful minds have a great
regard to him, when his favors are in their hands. Nor do they only think it a
duty, but feel it a pleasure to reflect on the bounty of their great
Benefactor: which endeares the practice of it, and makes it still both more
facile and more frequent. In so much that in the use of all these outward and
carnal things, a pious heart may soon learn to turn its thoughts, and raise up
its affections, to a more spiritual good, and nobler fruitions. Do you not
observe how the Holy Ghost is wont to express the joys of the World to come,
by such pleasures as are most acceptable to us here? What is the reason of it,
if it be not in compassion to the weakness of our apprehensions; and to let us
see that all bodily delights administer occasion for pious thoughts, and holy
desires after diviner enjoyments? God would preserve us from sinking into a
fleshly sense, by our daily conversation with, and use of fleshly things. He
shows us how we may lift up our minds, even by those things which are apt to
depress them; and take an advantage from these inferior comforts, to climb up
toward those higher satisfactions. Hence it is that the happy enjoyments of
the other World are compared so often to the pleasures of eating and drinking,
whereby our hunger and thirst is assuaged, and our bodily life supported. Yea,
to a Feast; which is a more liberal entertainment of that kind, and is the
meaning of that phrase in the Gospel, which represents Lazarus carried by
Angels into Abraham's bosom; placed, that is, in the uppermost Room at that
Heavenly Feast, and treated as the noblest and most beloved guest. Yea, to a
Marriage Feast; which being a time of the greatest joy, Men are wont to make
the largest provision of good cheer, that their friends may rejoice together
with them. And lastly to a Marriage Feast made by a King; a Royal
entertainment, such as a Monarch would make at the Wedding of his Son. All
which may serve to provoke good minds to look up above such things as these,
which are most enticing in this World, and to be so far from being swallowed up
in sensual pleasures, as to give themselves thereby a more lively taste of that
excessive joy which God will impart unto them, when they shall live with him,
and be feasted by him in his Heavenly Kingdom. The like benefit you may reap
from all other things which you converse withal; and though the World will
attract your thoughts to it, and employ a great many of your hours; yet you may
draw at last something from thence, which will pay you well for the time which
you have spent upon it. As for Example, when you look about you, and behold the
delightful Objects wherewith you are environed on every side, which present
themselves continually to your Eyes, or your Ears, or your Taste, or other of
your Senses, you may think with your self,

1. If God have provided such a multitude of pleasant things for the
entertainment of this poor body in this present life; What are the joys and
delights, which he has prepared for my better part in the life which is to
come? This is the World of Bodies, the other of Souls and Spirits. Therefore if
this little Carkase, which is but as the Grass of the Field, be so well
accomodated, if there be so many rare things in the Earth, and the Sea, and the
Air for its refreshment and pleasure; What may I not expect hereafter for my
mind in those Celestial, those spacious Regions which I see above? O the
inconceivable felicity which is provided in the Paradise of God, for this more
wide and capacious Spirit, which bears his own Image, and like himself, is to
live for ever!

2. Again, you may think with your self, if there be such pleasure to be found
in a Creature, O what is there then in the Creator of all? If the sight of the
Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and all the rest of the beauties of this World be so
glorious; What will it be to see my God? to be filled with that wisdom which
contrived, and with that goodness which produced this vast, this goodly and
comely Fabric? If the melodies of Music be so charming; O what an ecstasie of
joy will it cast me into, to hear God himself say, I love thee, I delight in
thee for ever? If the love of a true Friend do so much ravish and transport my
Spirit; what pleasure is it that I shall feel, when my Soul shall love him as
much as its most enlarged Powers will enable it; and know how much I am beloved
by him? There is a delicious Meditation in St. Austin, to this effect; who thus
speaks to God in one of his Confessions. Lib. 10. Cap. 6.
I love thee, O my God; thou have smitten my heart with thy Word and I have
loved thee. Nay, the Heavens and the Earth, and all things contained therein,
admonish me on every side, that I should love thee; and they cease not to say
the same to all Men else, so that they are inexcusable, if they do not love
thee. But what do I love, when I love thee? Not the beauty of a Body; not the
grace and comeliness of time; not the brightness of light (and yet, O how
friendly and agreeable is that to these eyes!) not the sweet melodies of
well-composed Songs; not the fragrant odors of Flowers, or unguents, or costly
Spices; not Manna; not Honey; not the embraces of the dearest, and most lovely
Person: these are not the things that I love, when I love my God. And yet I
love a certain light, and a certain voice, and a certain grateful odor, and a
certain food, and a kind of embracement when I love my God; the true light, the
melody, the food, the satisfaction and the embracement of my inward man. Where
that shines to my Soul, which no place can contain; where that sounds, which no
time can snatch away; where that scents, which no Wind can disperse and scatter
abroad; where I taste that which eating cannot diminish; where I cleave to
that, which no fullness, no satiety can force away. This is that which I love,
when I love my God. And what is this? I asked the Earth, and it said, I am not.
I asked the Sea, and the Deeps and all living Creatures, and they answered, We
are not thy God; look above us, and enquire after him, for here he is not. I
asked the Air, and all its Inhabitants, yea, the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and they confessed, We are not him whom thy Soul seeks. And I spoke to
all things whatsoever, that stand round about the Gates of my Flesh, saying; Ye
tell me that ye are not my God, but tell me something of him. And they all
cried out with a loud voice, He made us. Look therefore how great, how goodly,
how glorious, how beautiful and pleasant we are; and he is incomparably more
bright, more sweet, more harmonious, more filling and contenting than the whole
World, which is but his Creature.

And having thus a little raised up your mind above all things visible, you may
proceed to a new Meditation in this manner.

3. If a Soul enclosed in this Body can see and apprehend so much of God; O
what a sight of him shall it have, when it is freed from these Chains? If
whilst we look out of these Windows of Sense, such a glorious Majesty presents
it self before us; in what an amazing splendour will the Divinity appear, when
there is nothing to interpose between us, and its incomparable beauty? If
whilst there are so many other things to employ our thoughts, he discover so
much of himself to us, What will he do when we shall be alone with Him, and
seeing face to face, shall know as we are known? Is it not a Miracle to see so
much light conveyed to us, through so little a hole as that of the eye? to
behold so much of the Heaven and the Earth at once, and such a company of
beautiful objects crowding in together at so narrow a passage without any
disturbance or discomposure? O what an admirable pleasure then (as Seneca
discourses with himself) will the Soul be surprised withal, when it shall come
into the Region of light? when it shall be all surrounded with this glorious
Body? when on every side, as we may conceive, it shall take in light, and be
adorned and clothed with it, as with a Garment? And may we not with greater
reason meditate on this manner, when we think of God the Creator of light, and
of all those goodly things which it discovers to us? Ought we not to say to our
selves; O what wisdom, what greatness, what riches of goodness is this, which
shows it self in all his works of wonder? What a World of things has he
comprised in this one little Being, which calls it self Man? whose mind is
circumscribed, and yet extends it self beyond the limits of this sensible
World? which remaining in this body, swiftly runs and takes its circuit, and
views all Creatures in Heaven and Earth? and united to these Senses, abstracts
it self from them, and goes to the Father of Spirits; whom it meets with every
where? Is it thus active, thus busy, thus capacious and discerning, whilst it
is thrust up in such a close and little Room, as this poor Body, and shall it
not be more vigorous, more piercing, more enlarged, when it is set at liberty
from this imprisonment? It will then sure stretch it self to receive more of
him; it will see him more clearly, and comprehend him more fully, and admire
him with more improved and extended thoughts, and love him with a more ardent
flame, and feel more of his wisdom, more of his goodness pressing in upon it,
and filling of it with infinite joy and satisfaction.

4. Again, you may think with your self, if God bestow so many goodly things
even upon the wicked, then what shall be the portion of the just? Do not the
worst of men possess great plenty of his blessings? Does he not entertain them
here with strange variety of delicious enjoyments? Are they not so liberally
and abundantly provided for, that Silver and Gold and Jewels are theirs? and
all Creatures in the Earth, and the Air, and the Water are pressed for their
Service? O what Treasures, what Riches of Glory, what excess of Joy then will
God confer on those who are most dear unto Him? If he treat his Enemies in this
manner, how sumptuously will he entertain his Friends? If he let such Rebels
live in a Palace so stately, so richly furnished, as this great World is, which
he has built for good and bad; what Mansions may we think are those, which are
peculiarly prepared for them, who live in faithful obedience to him?

5. And think again, if God has made this Building wherein we dwell so
sumptuous, though it be to continue but for a time; O how glorious are those
Mansions which are Eternal in the Heavens? If he has bestowed so much cost on
that which waxes old, and shall vanish away, what are the Ornaments of that
which shall never decay? Is not this very mortal Body which we inhabit very
fearfully and wonderfully made? Is it not contrived with admirable art, and
curiously wrought in the lowermost parts of this little World? O how beautiful
then will that Body be which is from Heaven, and shall never be dissolved, but
remain Immortal there? With what luster shall we shine when this vile Body
shall be changed, and made like to the glorious Body of Christ our Lord?

6. And cannot you easily make your self believe the inconceivable splendour of
that place where God himself more particularly dwells, since he has made for
us so fair and goodly an Habitation? Heaven you know, is called his
dewlling place; and our blessed Lord calls it his Fathers House, where there
are many Mansions for all his beloved Ones. O how beautiful, how glorious, how
full of Majesty must this needs be; seeing we, and other of his lower Creatures
live in a World which is so richly adorned, and so fairly beautified both above
and beneath? Do you not see how the roof of this Palace (if I may so speak)
wherein we are, is all gilded with innumerable Stars? how the Floor of it is
overlaid with wonderful variety of pleasant Plants and lovely Flowers? O how
glistering, O how refulgent then is that place, may you think with your self,
in which the Lord of Heaven and Earth himself is pleased, in a special manner,
to reside? where he keeps his Court; where all the Angels minister to Him;
where he shows the Greatness of his Glory, and where our blessed Savior sits
at the Right Hand of the Throne of that Majesty on High?

7. And when was it that he brought you into this delightful Dwelling; so
rarely furnished and richly adorned? Was it not as soon as you were born;
before you could know to whom you were beholden, or could give him any proof of
your love and fidelity? Think with your self then, and say, If God has granted
us such a World of good things by way of gift, O what is that which he will
bestow, when he shall come to reward? If before we do our duty to him, I mean,
he is so bountiful, nay, opens his Hand so wide, and fills every living thing
with good, though they cannot acknowledge him; what blessings will he pour
forth, what liberality will he express, when he comes to recompense our
faithful services, and give us according to our works? For we see that gracious
Princes, who grant many immunities, and privileges to their subjects, only
because they are their subjects, do not fail to raise and advance their good
and valiant subjects, who have performed some noble acts in their service, to
eminent Honors and High Places. Now since that which God will bestow in the
Life to come, though it be a free gift, yet, is called a Reward and Recompense,
praise and commendation, you may well think it will be very illustrious; when
you consider how rich in mercy he has been to us, before we could do any thing
praiseworthy.

8. And you may consider again, how that excellent Princes, when they give
rewards, are not wont to have respect so much to the Persons on whom they are
conferred (who may be but mean, and of low condition) as to the greatness of
their own Persons, by whom they are bestowed, whom it does not befit to give
any thing mean and below the name and the Authority which they bear. From
whence you may conclude, how inconceivably great that reward will be, which the
Majesty of Heaven and Earth will honor us withal. If a Prince do but send his
Charity to the Poor, it is not like one of us, but like himself; and therefore
such will the favors of God be, which he intends to deal to all his Servants.
Though they are but servants, though they are but unprofitable servants, and
have done no more than was their duty to do; yet he will reward them like a
King, like the King of all the World, like the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, who only has immortality. He will feast
and entertain them sutably to the excellence of his own Infinite Majesty, and
not proportionably to the poverty of their Persons, or of their deserts.

9. For you may consider again, that it is the reward which the Lord Jesus has
received, to give us, for all his pains, and tears, and sweat, and blood. It is
the purchase of the blood of the Son of God, the recompense of his obedience to
the death; and therefore must needs be of great and inestimable price.

10. Nay, it is the glory of Christ himself, the same happiness which he
enjoys; according to his own words, The glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, and enter thou into the joy of thy Lord: and according to that of
St. Paul, We are Heirs of God, Coheirs with Christ Jesus; who is gone into the
Heavens, as he told his Apostles, to prepare a place for us. To prepare a place
for us, you may say? How long will it be a fiting? When shall we come to it?

11. Truly, from thence you may take some estimate of it; by considering the
time you must stay and wait till your happiness be completed, and that is till
the Day of his appearing again unto Salvation. They are great things, which are
long in preparing. And therefore the longer your Life is hid with God in
Christ, (as St. Paul speaks) the more glorious will it appear, when it shall be
manifested. The longer your body sleeps in the dust, to the greater dignity
shall it be raised. God will pay us (if I may so speak) principal and use, and
all. The Treasure multiplies, the longer it lies in his hands. If he should
give us our reward now it could be but little: but it increases infinitely,
beyond all our thoughts by being deposited with him, till the Lord Jesus shall
come from Heaven, with all his mighty Angels, to be admired in his Saints, and
glorified in all them that believe.

12. And now in Conclusion, think with your self, what a pleasure these short
and little thoughts have given you; how delightful that minute is, in which you
have had a glance of your future happiness; and say to your self, if a small
taste be so sweet, O what will the full draughts be, when he makes me drink of
the Rivers of his Pleasure? Are not Men of contemplation wonderously
transported with some few discoveries, which they have made, of the secrets of
nature? Are they not perpetually thirsting and seeking after more? Do they not
spend their time and their estates in such enquiries, though they never hope to
find out all? What would not these Men give, (were it in their power) if the
earth, or any other part of this world, would reveal all the Treasures that are
hid in it? What a satisfaction would they esteem such a vast discovery, when
some little scraps of knowledge are so surprising? The same you may think of
the other World; and raise your spirit by such Meditations as these, to expect
an inconceivable joy, when all the glory of that shall be opened, which now
darts such cheerful Rays of Light into your mind. Behold, what manner of love
the Father has bestowed upon us, says St. John, that we should be called the
Sons of God. Beloved, we are now the Sons of God, but it does not yet appear
what we shall be. But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him;
for we shall see him as he is. What that will be we cannot tell: but we feel
now how delicious it is to resemble him, though but a little, in his Wisdom,
in his Goodness, in his Love and Charity, in his Meekness and Patience, and
such like Heavenly qualities: And if in a drop of Honey, that distills from
above, there be such sweetness, what satisfaction, what fullness of joy shall we
find, in an Ocean of pleasure? If the morning star be so bright, then what is
the Sun it self, in its greatest luster? It is one of the Meditations of St.
Austin; O God, if thou do such great things for us in the Prison, what will thou do for us in the Palace? If thou grantest such solace in the day of our
tears, what will thou give us on the day of our marriage? When we shall not
only behold Jesus in all his glory; but live with him, and live with him for
ever, and receive the utmost effects of his mighty love, and be preferred to
sit with him in Heavenly places, and have a Crown of Righteousness set on our
Heads, which he the righteous Judge will give to all those, who love his
appearing.

And is there not great reason, My Friend, that we should love it, and set our
hearts on this, as the most desirable good; which so far surpasses all others,
that they have no power at all to tempt us from it, while we keep in mind its
incomparable greatness? Persuade your self therefore as strongly as you can,
that Jesus lives; and that because he lives you shall live also; and that you
shall live with him in inconceivable bliss, according to his gracious promises.
Believe them heartily, fix them deeply in your mind, and by such arts as these
represent to your self, as sensibly as you can, how exceeding precious they
are: for it is neither the certainty, nor the goodness, nor the greatness of
any thing, but the lively faith which we have of it implanted in our Souls,
that will make us seek and labor for it. If our faith be superficial, we shall
be no more moved by it, than if it were a thing of little moment, or but a
devised tale, and some idle fancy. You must settle in your Soul therefore, I
say again, an unmovable belief of Christ's great and precious promises, and
present them to your heart, that it may be affected with them, and value them,
according to their worth. Then you will not be unwilling to do, nor backward to
suffer any thing, that he would have you. This will give you a great spirit and
courage and joy in both. You will take a great pleasure in godliness, which
has such a recompense of reward. Nay, all the afflictions of this present time
will seem inconsiderable, in compare with the glory that shall be revealed. Can
any heart think much to abstain a while from sinful pleasures, when he
believes, nay tastes the pleasures he shall shortly enjoy at Gods right hand?
Will not any covetous desires be content to be denied, when you see it is for a
Kingdom, and a Crown of Life? Of what should a Soul be ambitious beside whose
desires are pitched upon so noble a good, as honor, glory, and immortality with
Christ? Who would not watch and pray unweariedly, that he may come to this
Celestial Rest with the People of God? Can there be any higher pleasure, than
to lift up our mind to our heavenly Country, and to think of the happiness
which there expects us? In what can we better spend our time, than in
meditating of the great love of God, which has prepared such excellent things
for those that love him? It is a good thing sure to give thanks unto the Lord,
and to sing praises unto his high and holy Name. There can be no more delicious
life than this, which will conclude in his everlasting praises. And suppose we
must sometime take up a cross, where is the mischief of it, what should render
it intolerable, if we look at Jesus, who for the joy that was set before him
endured the Cross, and despising the shame, is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God? From thence he stretches forth his hands to call us; there
his Arms are open to embrace us; and there he would gladly see us. Out of that
glorious place he holds forth a crown of life to us, saying; Follow me, and let
none of these things dismay you. Behold the Majesty, wherein I am enthroned;
see the glory to which I am promoted; Do not faint in your mind, nor be weary
of well-doing; but press on toward the mark, for the prize of the high-calling
of God, in me your Savior.

There is nothing sure can hinder us, or pull us back, unless we cease to look
at Jesus, and turn away our Ears from harkening to his gracious voice. For do
you not see what power a worldly faith has over Men's hearts? How fast one
rides to take possession of an Estate, of which he hears he is left the Heir?
How another sails through dreadful dangers, because he believes he shall
arrive at a rich Country; which will send him home laden with precious
Commodities at the last? Why should we think then the Christian Faith is less
powerful, or fancy that we are in truth endued with it, unless our belief of
the other World have the same effects? Let it lay its commands upon all the
powers of our Soul, and engage them to do their several works. Let it excite
our minds, and our wills, and our affections, and our endeavors, to a constant
pursuit of these Heavenly enjoyments; that we may know indeed, that we believe
to the saveing of the Soul. Look upon that faith which was built on weaker
grounds and lesser evidences, and darker promises. See how it wrought in
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and in the rest of the ancient Patriarchs; whose
belief of the Word of God made them forsake their own Countries, quit all their
Possessions, when he required it, live as Pilgrims and strangers in the Earth,
and depend merely on the love and care of his never failing providence. By
faith they slighted the pleasures of Kings Courts, the Honor of a Throne, and
the Riches of Egypt. By Faith they wrought Righteousness, subdued Kingdoms,
stopped the mouths of Lions, endured all reproaches and afflictions, would not
accept of deliverance, and life it self, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection. Now since the Christian Belief relies upon better Promises, a
clearer Revelation, and stronger grounds of hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus
from the dead; what a shame will it be, if we do nothing worthy the name of
Men, much less of the Disciples of Christ, and of the Sons of God? To what
cause can it be imputed, but because there is no Faith in the Earth, or it
rests only in the brain, and floats in the imagination, but never descends to
touch the heart and affections. Bring it down then, My Friend, and stir up your
self to a serious and affectionate belief of the life to come. Spare no pains
to consider, and lay to heart (that which is the greatest comfort of your life)
all the glorious things which you read of in the Gospel of Gods grace; which
Christ has sealed by his blood, and God confirmed by his Resurrection, and
has been attested by signs and wonders of the Holy Ghost, and by the Life and
Death of a number of great Souls; who have followed Jesus even to his Cross,
and declared their belief of those things by sacrificing all that was dear unto
them here, to win his favor in another World. Look often upon their constancy,
upon their zeal, upon their contempt of Riches and Pleasures, and Life it self,
when it came in competition with the will of Christ; for whose sake they
rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer, especially since he had
assured them, their present troubles should work for them a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. And then in imitation of them, you will put on
their resolution; and lifting up your Eyes to Heaven, will be moved to speak to
this effect. O blessed God, how much am I beholden to thee, that thou have
showed me such things as these! How much am I beholden to thee, that thou have
inclined my heart to make them my choice! I would not be as I was before, for
all the World. Away you frivolous temptations; you vain delights, you
unprofitable labors: Never renew your importunities, for I will not hearken; I
tell you, I will not listen to you any more. I am resolved to proceed in this
holy course to the end of my days. You will but make me meditate the more; and
pray the more; and lay to heart the more the love of my God: I shall but fix my
Eyes the more steadfastly on that blessed place where Jesus my Savior is at
Gods right hand. At his will I hold my riches, my honors, yea, and my life
also. Let him dispose of them as he pleases. And let it please the Lord of life
and glory to accept of this most hearty oblation which I make of all I have
unto him. Let it please him to strengthen me in my holy resolutions, to open my
eyes, that I may still see more of that wonderful love which he has discovered
in his Gospel, and to accompany me with his grace, till I arrive at his
heavenly Court. O let his good Spirit breath upon me, and carry away my Soul in
holy desires toward him. Let it guide my course through this troublesome Sea
wherein I am tossed: Let it shine upon me, and prosper my endeavors: Let it
bring me safely to a quiet haven in Eternal Rest and Peace.

These pious aspirations you may still pursue at the end of these Meditations,
in some such Prayer as this.

A PRAYER.
I Praise Thee; I magnify thy wise and mighty Goodness, O Lord, who have made
this great World, the Heavens and the Earth, with all things contained therein,
to the everlasting honor of thy Name. I thank Thee, with all my Soul, for
bringing me into it, and for advancing me so much above the rest of thy
Creatures here below, that I see the glory of thy Majesty shining every where,
and hear thy Name proclaimed and praised by all thy works of wonder. But above
all I acknowledge thy bounty, with the most admiring thoughts, and the devoutest
affections of my heart, for sending Jesus Christ upon Earth, to open unto us
the Kingdom of Heaven, and to show us the glories of another World. O the
exceeding greatness of that love which gave him to dye for us, and rewarded all
his sufferings with a blessed Resurrection, and then translated him to Heaven,
and appointed Him Heir of all things, and settled his Throne for ever and ever,
on the right hand of thy Majesty on high. From thence he has sent the Holy
Ghost, to be witness of the fullness of his Royal Power and Love, and has shown
himself sometime in Majesty and Glory above the Sun, when it shines in its
strength; that we might hope in thee for the like Resurrection to a glorious
immortality in the Heavens. No tongue can utter, nor heart conceive, what
Honor, Glory and Peace, what joy and gladness of heart, thou have prepared
there for those that love Thee. But blessed, for ever blessed be the riches of
thy grace, whereby I understand so much, as to feel most earnest longings in my
Soul after a fuller sense of that, which thou have made me taste and relish
beyond all the pleasures of this Life.

O raise and enlarge my Spirit unto clearer and more comprehensive thoughts of
that supreme blessedness. Thou who entertainest all thy Creatures with so much
liberality; who causest thy Sun to shine upon the good and the bad, and the
showers of Heaven to fall on the just and the unjust; deny not to satisfy the
pious desires of a Soul, in whom thou have excited an ardent thirst after its
proper and eternal good. But inlighten the eyes of my understanding, that I may
know more and more, what is the hope of thy Heavenly calling, and what the
riches of the glory of thy Inheritance in the Saints, and what the exceeding
greatness of thy power to usward who believe, according to the working of thy
mighty power, which wrought in Christ when thou raisedst him from th dead, and
set him at thy own righ^ hand in the heavenly places. O life up my mind to that
high and holy place, where thou dwell, and where Jesus is inthroned, and
where the Angels and Saints continually behold and praise, with joyful hearts,
the Majesty of thy glory, and where our Lord has promised all the faithful
shall live and reign with him for ever.

Help me to climb up daily by all thy Creatures, on which thou have set such
marks of thy Greatness, Wisdom, and Goodness, to the contemplation of that
Celestial Bliss: And possess me with such a constant sense and desire of it,
that nothing here may engage my heart, which will indispose me for the happy
company and society of the blessed. Assist me, good Lord, by such Meditations
as these, to discern more and more the incomparable and surpassing greatness of
that felicity, which thy Royal bounty will bestow upon our advanced spirits and
bodies, in the world of rewards and recompenses. Affect my heart more
powerfully with it; and fill me with love and joy unspeakable and full of
glory, when I turn my eyes toward it. Stir me up thereby to prepare my self
with diligence and care, by a lively resemblance of the Lord Jesus, for the day
of his appearing: and to wait with patience for that blessed Hope, when I shall
not see, as now, through a Glass darkly, but face to face; and be made
completely like him, by seeing him as he is. Enable me always to live upon this
Hope, and according to it; that growing in all goodness, by a cheerful
obedience to his holy commands, I may be found of him in peace, and be so happy
as to hear at last those gracious words of his; Well done, good and faithful
Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Amen.
III.
I Need say no more to excite one of your virtue, to the frequent exercise of
such Meditations as these, which are no less delightful than they are useful.
Let me next unto this advise you to study the truest notions of God and of
Religion, the love of which is the way to that transcendent bliss and
happiness, of which I have spoken. As you must believe things unseen, and
persuade your self thoroughly, that they are; so it is necessary you should
inform your mind aright, what they are. And in particular look upon Religion as
a most pleasant thing, and represent it to your self with a face as fair and
beautiful as you can. If it seem cloudy, dark and melancholy, it will make you
to be of the same complexion: But if it have a lovely and cheerful aspect, it
will incline you always to smile upon it. The poor Norwegian, whom stories tell
of, was afraid to touch Roses, when he first saw them, for fear they should
burn his Fingers. He much wondered to see that Trees (as he thought) should put
forth flames and blossoms of Fire: before which he held up his hands to warm
himself, not daring to approach any nearer. But as he you may be sure was
happily undeceived, when he came not only to touch, but likewise to smell those
innocent Flowers, which seemed to burn in his eyes: so will it be with us, when
we come rightly to understand and feel the pleasure that Religion gives us;
which at first sight, before we come acquainted with it, looks as if it
intended to make us Martyrs, but not to crown us with any joys or contentments.
As the Martyr said of the real, fire, wherein he was covered, that it seemed to
him, as if it were a Bed of Roses; so shall we say of true Religion, which we
are afraid will scorch us, and prove too hot for us: Its flames are but the
flames of love; and it makes us not lie down in sorrow, but in the most
comfortable sense of the tender love of our dearest Lord.

Think with your self therefore, when you go into your Closet, and betake your
self to your private retirements, I am going to God, my exceeding joy, to my
happiness, to my hearts delight. Welcome beloved hour, which have more of
eternal life in Thee, than of Time! Rejoice my Soul, that thou art among Angels
now, and not among men! Yea let my flesh be glad to become of a poor Souls
Cottage, the Temple of the most High God! Look upon Prayer as that which brings
down Heaven to you; and upon Praise and Thanksgiving as that which lifts you up
to Heaven; and upon Meditation as that which is the bond of the two Worlds, and
ties Heaven and Earth together. Yea, let every other good action seem a favor,
rather than a charge; a recreation, rather than a work.

And then, for your notions of God, do not look upon him as a rigid and
unmerciful exactor of your labors; but as a loving Father, who is easily
pleased, and makes a most gracious allowance for your weaknesses and
unavoidable impediments; and is ready to forgive your many oversights and
frequent neglects. When we represent him to our selves, as exceeding angry at
every little indisposition and dullness that seises on us, that very thought
makes us more dull and indisposed; because we imagine that we shall never be
able to please him. Or if we deem him, though not implacable yet, much in love
with revenge, and ready to strike upon every offense that we give him, I know
no readier way to render his service a most tedious task unto us; because we
shall go in perpetual fear of thunderbolts hanging over our heads, and ready to
fall down to do some mischief or other to us. As we ought to have a great and
scrupulous care to avoid all that is evil, so we must believe, when we commit a
fault against our will and design, that there is an Advocate with our Father,
who is a propitiation for our sins. And when we look upon him thus, as one
ready to forgive, that had rather do us all good than any harm, and desires
rather to see his commands better observed, than the penalties, for the breach
of them, inflicted; this will encourage us to address our selves with a fresh
cheerfulness to his service; and breed in our hearts a great love to him, which
above all other things has a most powerful hand upon our obedience.

The more you heighten your love to God, the more motion and activity will the
heat of it give you: and the more you heighten his love to you, the greater
flames will there arise in your heart to him. Just as you see the Sun in its
nearest approaches to us, when its beams are directly over our heads, produces
a vigorous heat and life in all Creatures; but when it is in the Southern
Countries, and looks upon us with an oblique aspect, is not able to make us
warm by its rays: So it is with the Divine Goodness, which is the life and
comfort of our hearts. If we think that he looks asquint upon us, and cares
very little for us, we shall be cold and frozen, like so many dead Creatures,
in our affections to him; but if we think his face is toward us, and that his
eye, and the light of his countenance (as the Scripture speaks) is full upon
us, that he highly favors us, and his heart is very desirous to pour down a
world of blessings into us; it will make our Souls leap for joy, our love will
spring up apace, and the odors of it will be like the smell of Spices, sweet
both to God and to our selves. We love God commonly (if not always) in the
beginning of our friendship with him, because of the good that he does, or that
we think he will do to us: and though afterward this breeds a strong
inclination in us to love that most excellent Nature from which all good comes,
yet that inclination will still grow stronger, by the continued thoughts of his
kindness to us. And therefore this belief is, by all means, to be nourished and
preserved in our hearts; especially considering that the stronger our love and
inclination toward him grows, by frequent reflecting upon his love and good
will to us, the more cheerful and constant obedience shall we pay to him.

I have represented this so largely in another Discourse, (which you know very
well) that it may seem unnecessary to add any thing to it it here: But it will
not be unprofitable I am sure, to recommend to you this one consideration more.
That the hearty love of God (which naturally springs out of a steadfast and
unmovable belief of his love to us) is a thing so comprehensive and so
powerful, that it includes in it all the means which are necessary for the
accomplishment of our end; and contains the force of all those rules, helps and
furtherances, which are commonly prescribed for the better observing of Gods
commands. Let me instance in these Five great Exercises, to which you are often
exhorted, both in Sermons and good Books, for the preserving you in his
Obedience: First, To live, as in Gods sight. Secondly, To pray continually.
Thirdly, To watch. Fourthly, To depend on God for his assistance. And, Fifthly,
To look for his mercy to Eternal Life: and plainly show you that they are all
comprehended in Divine Love, and cannot be separated from it.

For the first, it is well known that this passion is not wont to let the
Object on which it is fixed be absent from it; but at whatsoever distance it be
removed, love brings it near, and sets it ever before the eyes of him, to whom
it is dear. And therefore if our hearts be full of love to God, we cannot be
without his Presence, but shall live as in his sight: Or, to speak in the
language of David, Psalm. 16.8. We shall set the Lord always before us.
Whatsoever we do, we shall think of him; and consequently do it well and
exactly: we shall study purity of heart, and the greatest clearness in our
intentions; because he sees us, and penetrates into our secret thoughts. There
is no more easy observation than this, that nothing makes a Man so diligent,
so curious, so circumspect, so decent and comely in all his behavior, as to be
continually under the eye of one whom he loves; to whom he desires, every way,
to approve himself. And it is as certain, that ardent love makes a Person ever
present to us, and will not let us be divided from him.

When Phidias, the famous statuary, made the Image of Jupiter Olympius, one of
the goodliest that ever was, he could not forbear, but he must privately
ingrave upon his little Finger, the Name of one whom he dearly loved, in these
words; PANTARCES IS FAIR. (...).
For it was not Jupiter (says Clemens Alexandrinus, from whom I have this
story) who was fair in Phidias his eyes, but the youth whom he loved. The
thoughts of his God could not put out of his mind, the thoughts of him, whom he
loved better. If therefore we had such a love to God, as others have to the
things of this World; the thoughts of them could not quite thrust out the
thoughts of him. But still we should be apt to write (if I may so speak) upon
the very forehead of every earthly good, God is most lovely: or, God is my
exceeding joy; the Lord is my portion; O how amiable are his Courts! or as an
holy man (who it is said could never get these words out of his mouth) My God
and all things. Where he is, there, in effect, are all things: and where his
love dwells, there he will be sure to be. We shall meet him every where, see
him in every beautiful thing, and taste him, before we have done, in all the
delightful enjoyments of this life.

2. And as it comprehends in it the practice of making God present (which some
Masters in Divinity have said may serve instead of all other Rules, for the
ordering of our life aright:) so it contains in it likewise the very spirit of
Prayer to God; which all acknowledge to be not only a great part of a godly
life, but a great help and furtherance to us, in all the rest of our Christian
duty. If by Prayer we understand, as some have explained it, the ascent, or
raising up of the Soul to God, it is love only which continually aspires
toward him, and carries the heart aloft, from other things, to be joined to
him. Or if we call it the converse of the Soul with God, (which are the words
of Gregory Nyssen) or a holy conference and discourse with the Divine Majesty,
(as it is termed by S. Chrysostom) it is manifest the love of God includes
this in it: for it is the nature of this passion, to make us frequent the
company of those whom we love. Their conversation is most welcome; their
discourse delightful; we are exceedingly desirous to impart our mind to them;
and especially to let them know how much we love them. For which purpose it
needs not always the help of the tongue, but can frame a language of its own;
and speak by the very countenance and the eyes, and make use of silence instead
of words to declare its inclinations. According to the admirable expression of
the Psalmist, who, setting forth the pious affections of the People to God
their Deliverer, says, Praise is silent for thee, O God, in Sion (so the
Hebrew has it, as your Margin tells you) to Thee shall the vow be performed.
But let us take it simply for the desiring and requesting good things of God,
and then we must needs acknowledge, that love being a passion full of desires,
cannot but comprehend in it (as I said at first) the very spirit of Prayer and
Supplication. You know how much we long for that, to which we have given our
hearts. And therefore if they be devoted in love to God, we cannot choose but be
ever breathing after more sensible apprehensions and tastes of him. So much as
we love him, so much we shall thirst after a larger communication of his Divine
Grace to us. It will make us sigh for more tokens of his favor; and wait for a
greater power of his Holy Spirit; and vehemently long to be more transformed
and changed into his Image. What was it but this, that made David say, Psalm.
42.1. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after
thee, O God? The chased Deer in a great Forest, and in the midst of Summer did
not more long after the streams of Water, than this good Man (being it is
likely in the Wilderness of Judah, and so denied the favor of going to the
Tabernacle of God) did ardently desire the happiness which there he had
sometime tasted in the Divine Presence. He opens his mouth, and pants after
this with a thirst so vehement, that it makes him cry out in the following
words, O when shall I come and appear before God? It is the heat of that
Creature (to whose pantings David compares the longings of his Soul) which is
the cause of its thirst; and that being a constant desire, which goes not off
by continuance, as many inconveniences do, but rather more increases, it bears
the greater resemblance to this Divine passion of love; whose fervours and
ardent longings are perpetual, and do not abate by length of time, but grow
still greater and greater. There is nothing so likely as this, to enable us to
fulfill that exhortation of the Apostle, Pray without ceasing, and to make us
importunate and unwearied in it; which are the two qualifications our Savior
requires in our devout addresses to God, Luke 18.1. Where you read a Parable of
his to this end, that Men ought always to pray, and not faint. It marvelously
disposes us also for the Divine favor, by moving us to quit all that is
inconsistent with our desires, in hope of that which we pray God to bestow upon
us. There was a Monarch, you have heard perhaps, who offered his Kingdom for a
Cup of cold Water, in a time of extreme thirst. And therefore what is it which
the heat of this heavenly affection will not make us resign to God and
absolutely part withal, that it may obtain its Petitions, and have its desires
satisfied? Besides it has one wonderful power in it (which nothing else can
furnish us withal) to make our Prayers prevalent; and that is by fixing our
thoughts, and fastening our minds to the business which we are about. For love,
you know, does not willingly stir from the Object to which it is devoted. It is
this flame which keeps our heart close to the Holy Sacrifice, and will not
easily suffer us to wander from the Gate of Heaven. It sets us in the Presence
of God; it keeps our eye upon him; it makes us converse attentively with him;
and while the power of it lasts, our very hearts are tied to him, and cannot go
aside from him. But as soon as ever it begins to dye or decay, then it is that
the mind steals away, and gads about the World; till this flame revive again,
and make us fly back to the Altar of God. The best Soul that is, I confess, may
feel some looseness and distraction of spirit; (especially at some untoward
season) some ashes may dim and dull the Fire: but yet this love and ardent
desire will keep the greater part of our thoughts together, and knit our heart
so to our duty, that there shall be no long nor wide breaches in it; but it
shall still be strong, and fervent, and effectual with our Heavenly Father.

Thus you see how wisely these two are joined together by St. Jude, v. 20. Who
after he had exhorted the Faithful to Pray in the Holy Ghost, immediately bids
them, keep themselves in the love of God. There is nothing comparable to this,
to inspire us with devout and earnest desires. And it has an equal force also
to excite us to Praise and Acknowledge our great Benefactor, who gives us so
many good things, even before we desire them. Do you not see how Men delight to
commend, extol and magnify that they love? And how lavishly they are wont
sometime to bestow those praises? There is not any thing in this World so
excellent, but they will borrow a Metaphor from it, wherewith to adorn their
beloved. They go to the precious stones and to the stars nay to the Sun it self
to fetch some luster from them for their expressions. And more than this, it is
usual with love (as every one may observe) to go beyond the nature and value of
things, and to make those hyperboles not uncomely, which in other cases are
ridiculous. And as for gratitude, we are all sensible that nothing is so
acknowledging as love: Every favor it esteems a Treasure; and studies all
means to express its resentments. So that if it become a divine passion, you
may learn from King David, how much it will dispose our hearts to admire and
extol the perfections of God, and excite us to give him thanks, because he is
good, and his mercy endures for ever. Do but read the beginning of the 103.
Psalm. and observe how he calls up all the faculties of his Soul to assist in
this Holy Duty of praising and blessing the Name of God. And then being
conscious to himself of his own disability to offer him the praises that are
due unto his Great and Glorious Name, you may take notice how in other places,
he goes to all his Friends, and begs of them that they would join in consort
with him, saying, Psalm. 33.23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints; and 34.3. O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. Let Israel now
say (Psalm. 118.) that his Mercy endures for ever. Let the house of Aaron now
say, that his Mercy endures for ever. Let them now that fear the Lord say,
that his Mercy endures for ever. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good:
for his Mercy endures for ever. And lest all these should not be able to make
this joyful sound loud enough, he invites all strangers to come, and help them
to the discharge of this debt, saying, Psalm. 100. and 117. O make a joyful
noise unto the Lord all ye Lands. Serve the Lord with gladness; and come before
his Presence with singing. O praise the Lord all ye Nations: praise him all ye
People. For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the
Lord endures for ever. Praise the Lord. Yea, it is frequent with him to extend
his entreaties to the Angels, that they would lend him their help to acquit
himself, 103.20. and he calls ( Psalm. 148.) upon all the lower Hosts of God,
who are in the Heavens nearer us, and in the Earth also, that if they can do
any thing, they would bear a part in his Song of Praise, which he composed in
honor of him. And in the very conclusion of his Heavenly Book, that he might
say all he could, he thus bespeaks the voice of all things, which either by
Nature or Art are framed for delight and pleasure; Let every thing that has
breath, praise the Lord. All which Observations I thought good to annex to this
Discourse of the Power of Love in Prayer, because, when we have said all we
can, there is nothing so prevalent for a new favor, as praising God, and being
heartily thankful for the benefits we have already received. To which the love
of God disposing us so effectually, that it never thinks it can praise or
acknowledge him enough, it must needs obtain much of the Divine Grace for us;
and consequently secure our obedience to him, above all other things.
Especially since,

3. Love is ever Watchful: which is another means, to be joined with Prayer, to
keep us from entering into temptation. It always has its light burning, and
its loins girded. It is ready and forward to apprehend and embrace any
occasion of serving him, to whom it is engaged. It is jealous of every thing,
which would rob it of that good, which it ardently desires. And therefore has
its eyes always open, and by reason of its heat will not easily fall asleep;
nor suffer that dullness and weariness to infest it, wherewith others are
usually surprised. I need not pursue this Argument any further, it being so
apparent that fervent love and affection chases away all drowsiness of Spirit,
and makes a Man slip no opportunity, to do that which is pleasing in the eyes
of God. And I am the more willing to quit it, because I have been so long in
the former, and have two other Considerations still to add.

4. One of them is (which I shall but briefly touch) that it will breed in us a
pious confidence of the succors of Gods holy Spirit, in the power of which we
shall be able to undertake any thing that he commands. It is impossible to have
any heart to do well, if we have not this hope rooted in us; and it is as
impossible to doubt of it, if we feel the love of God burning in our hearts.
Which is both a testimony of his Divine Power already working in us, and an
argument that he is as willing to do any thing further for us, as we find
thereby that we are, to do any thing for him. It does not only widen the heart
to impart, but also to receive. And the very same motion which carries it out
toward God, and toward others in sincere affection; brings home large
assurances that he will abundantly communicate himself to it on all occasions,
for the encouraging and assisting of its faithful endeavors, to do his will in
every thing.

5. The other is this (which shall put an end to this part of my discourse)
that it has no less power to make us fully assured both of the blessed
rewards, I spoke of, in the other World, and of the greatness of them; which
are the strongest Motives to our obedience. There is nothing so sharpens the
sight to discern, or enlarges the heart to conceive the things of God, as this
does. For God is love, as St. John tells us, and therefore he that dwells in
love dwells in God, and God in him. Among all the goods of this World, we find
no where such repose and quiet, as in hearty love and true friendship. Nothing
give us such a taste of pleasure, and, if the Object be worthy, such
satisfaction. Of two it makes one, so that they communicate in each others
happiness. And this satisfaction is wont to make them forget all other things,
at that instant: For love is of such a nature, that it endeavors to take up
all the room in the heart, and would leave none for any thing else; that it may
be entirely and wholly possessed of that which it loves. And therefore when it
is turned toward God, and settles it self in him, it must needs give us a
lively sense of future bliss, by uniteing our hearts, and gathering up our
minds (as I may speak) wholly unto it. It participates with that supreme good,
to which it is united. It carries in it self a great deal of the life of God;
it is a part of Heaven, and the business of the other World. But besides the
solace which is inseparable from it, there is this remarkable property in the
passion of love; that it strangely disposes us to believe all the kind
expressions of our friends, and makes us easily receive whatever they say, for
certain truth. Upon which account the love of God will incline us, above all
other things to entertain every thing that he shall communicate of his mind
unto us. And there is nothing so great, nothing so magnificent declared in the
Gospel of his Grace, but he that loves God will presently believe it, and lay
it up in his heart, as a singular expression of his divine favor. For he feels
by the power and force of this affection in his own heart, what God is inclined
to do for those, whom he loves and takes delight in; though it seem incredible
to other Men. And therefore, as it does not pose his belief who loves God, when
he hears that the Word was made Flesh for the good of men; that the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily in Jesus; that he dyed for sinners, and laid down
his life for the Redemption of Enemies: So the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead, his Ascension to Heaven, the exaltation of our Nature, in his Person, at
Gods right hand, the Glory and Majesty in which he is said to shine there, and
in which we are told we shall at last appear together with him, are no riddles
nor incredible things to him. No; Love sees him there preparing a place for us,
making all ready for the joyful Marriage to be celebrated in his glorious
Kingdom, coming in the Clouds of Heaven to call us up thither, and to advance
all his Subjects to reign, as so many Kings, together with him. This makes a
man presently understand how God should design to reward our poor endeavors
(those services to which we stand obliged, though but weakly performed) with an
everlasting inheritance. How he should compensate our present sufferings which
are but for a moment, and not worthy to be named, with a far more exceeding
Eternal weight of Glory. Hyperbole's go down easily with this Man's Faith. He
can believe beyond them all, and see what is far beyond, that far more
exceeding Eternal weight of Glory, as the Apostles words import, 2 Cor. 4.17.
He is assured the love of Heaven will enkindle a new life in our dead ashes. He
beholds it sublimating this earth, to an Heavenly state. And can well conceive
this thick Clay shining as the Sun, and made like to the glorious Body of
Christ: This Soul also, as pure as the light, saluting its new born Body, and,
possessed with a mighty love, rejoicing for ever in Gods bounteous kindness to
it. All this it sees, nay feels; being already filled, as St. Paul speaks, with
all the fullness of God. For it feeling, First, what a vast difference there is
between it self now, and what it was before, when it was pent up in scant and
narrow affection to these petty goods here below, makes no doubt there may be
as wide a difference between what it shall be hereafter, and what it is now. It
presently concludes, that the same powerful goodness which roused up, and
called forth its sleepy thoughts and drowsy desires toward it self, can still
further awaken and raise all its faculties to a more quick and lively sense: or
call forth some hidden power and virtue in the Soul, which has as yet no more
appeared, than those motions which now it feels did, before it was touched by
his Almighty hand. And Secondly, finding its own nature by this touch of the
Divine Love made so free and benign, so abundant and overflowing in kind
affection to others, so open-hearted and gracious, it concludes that the
Almighty goodness not only can but will do more for it; and confidently expects
to be lifted up to an higher state of bliss, proportionable to the
superabundant kindness of that most excellent Nature, which has produced
already such good inclinations in it. It is impossible for a Man to be under
the power of love, to feel the huge force of its flames, to perceive of what a
spreading and communicative Nature it is; and not conceive very magnificently
of the bounty of God, and have a faith in him as large and capacious as his
love.

Love God therefore, My Friend, as much as ever you can; with the greatest
passion and most ardent affection: and you shall find Heaven coming apace into
you, and taste the good things of the promised World to come. You shall not
only guess at your future state, and make conjectures about it: but in some
measure know and feel the all-filling joy of our Lord, and possess that quiet,
tranquillity and peace, which passes all understanding. For this Divine love
is the right sense whereby Heavenly things are apprehended. It is that which
fits the mind rightly to understand, and the will firmly to believe those great
and transcendent things, which the Scripture reports, as the portion of the
Saints in light. It gives us a sight of things as much differing from all
other, which we have merely by dry reasoning, and which we spin out by
thoughtful Discourses, as the sight of a great beauty before our Eyes, differs
from the description of it, which we read in a Book: or as the warmth of fire
on the hearth, does from that we see in a Picture; which cannot loosen and
inliven our stark and benumbed Joints. And if you would love God, I have told
you the ready way to it; which is by preserving in your mind a constant and
lively sense of his infinite love and good will already expressed to you: for
this will naturally and easily produce a reciprocal love to him; and that will
make you look for more of his mercy, even to Eternal Life. This you understand
so well, that I shall not say a word to you more about it; but proceed to the
next, when I have left a few words with you to say to God.

A PRAYER.
O God, how great is thy love! how excellent is thy loving kindness toward us
thy unworthy Creatures! To whom thou take such pleasure in communicating thy
blessings, that thou do not stay till we ask them of thee, but pourest them
down plentifully before and beyond all our desires. O the inconceivable depth
of that love, from whence thy Son Jesus was sent to dwell among us! who has
done so much for us, that he has left us nothing to do, but to consider and
lay to heart thy love, which has so marvelously abounded toward us. For all
things, I know, are easy and pleasant to those that love Thee. Great Peace
have they that love thy Law: and nothing shall offend them. O possess this
heart, which opens it self to thy gracious influences, with such a mighty love
to thee, as may set Thee always before me; and carry forth my Soul in ardent
desires after thee; and fill me with an humble confidence in thee; and make me
watchful, active and zealous in my duty; and never suffer me to distrust thy
pity and indulgence when I unwillingly offend thee; and assure me of thy kind
intentions in all the cross accidents of this life, which are most offensive to
me.

I doubt not, O Lord, of a power from above continually to attend me, now that
I feel thy love so strong and powerful in me. I believe thou will do more for
me, both here and eternally, than heart can conceive. O how great things have
thou laid up for those that fear thee! O the height of that joy which thou
have set before us, to encourage us in our Christian race! O the comfort of
those gracious words, which promise us, after our short pains and trouble here,
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory! How pleasant is it to wait
for thy Son Jesus from Heaven, to give a Crown of righteousness to me, and to
all those that love his appearing! Preserve, I beseech thee, this holy love and
faith most fresh and lively in my heart, to my great increase in all the fruits
of righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus unto thy glory and praise. Maintain
in me such cheerful thoughts of thee, that Religion may be my delight, as much
as it is my duty; and I may always approach unto Thee with a joyful heart, being
glad to leave the company of all other things, to go to thee, my God, my
exceeding joy. Reconcile me so perfectly to every other part of my Christian
duty, that all the actions of an holy life may be but so many motions of hearty
love to thee; and I may so feel the ease and satisfaction of all well doing, as
to love and delight the more in thee, whose ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all whose paths are Peace.

I am sensible of the uncertainty of all things else, but only of thy love,
which will inspire me, I hope, to behave my self worthy of the greatness of it,
in every state and condition of life. O that in prosperity I may think I have
an opportunity to show, how much I love Thee above the World, by exercising
humility, heavenly-mindedness, charity, temperance and purity: and in
adversity, how much I love thee more than my self, by expressing all patience,
meekness, forgiveness of others, cheerful submission to Thee and confidence in
Thee, with thankfulness for all thy past and remaining mercies. Be they always
acknowledged, and never forgotten by me. For which end I again consecrate my
Soul to be thy holy Temple, wherein may dwell continually pious and religious
thoughts; devout Meditations of Thee, and remembrance of thy loving kindness;
entire love to Thee, sending up perpetual Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving,
together with the constant sacrifice of an humble and obedient heart. That so I
may be filled with the comfort and joy of the Holy Ghost at present; and
hereafter be admitted into the fellowship of Saints and Angels, with them to
rejoice and praise Thee, in fullness of love, World without end.

Amen.
IV.
BUT as I would have you exceedingly in love with Religion, so I must advise
you, not to charge your self with too many or too long exercises of Devotion.
For Honey it self will cloy us; and a perpetual scent of Roses may become
offensive to us. Observe therefore what you can do with ease, and a
pleasantness of Spirit: And when you find your self to be free and forward,
then you may be the longer and more enlarged in your Devotions. But when you
are very heavy and straightened, then it is not fit to tire your spirits and drag
them along with you, whither they have no strength to accompany you, nor any
disposition to comply with your desires. Our Body is such a beast, and
sometimes so dull and restife, that if we spur it on to a faster pace, it not
only quite tires; but will have no list to travel any more. Whereas if we bait
it a while, and suffer it to take some repast, and give it some rest; it will
go along with us to the end of our Journey. When our spirits are dull already,
we make them more dull by our restless importunity to do as we would have them.
As a Child you may have observed, when he cannot think of his Lesson, the more
his Teacher chides and calls upon him, the more blockishly he stands, and the
further it is beat out of his memory: so it is very frequently with the natural
spirits of every one of us. They are so oppressed and stupid at certain
seasons, that if we labor to set them in motion, it does but dispose them the
more to stand stock-still. But if we let them alone, and for that time leave
them, they will be like the same Child, who in a short time comes to himself,
and is able to say his Lesson perfectly. They will go whither we would have
them, and perhaps run before us.

We must do then with our selves, as one that is weak, and going up an high and
steep Hill. When he feels his Legs begin to fail him, and complain that they
are weary, he rests a while and sits him down to recruit himself. And it will
not be long before he hear his mind calling on him, to try if he has not
gathered some new strength, with which he marches a little further, according
as it will carry him. And if he has any cordial spirits in his Pocket, a
little taste of them may much revive him in this languishing condition: Yea,
the pleasant prospect of the Fields round about him, and the various Objects
that gratefully entertain his eyes if he cast them on every side, will be a fit
divertisement for his mind, to turn it from thinking of his weariness. Thus I
say, My Friend, it is advisable for you to do; rest your self a while, and
make a pause, when you perceive your spirits begin to flag. Break your
Devotions into little parts, and take not the Journey you have set your self,
all at once. When your mind tells you, that now you are better able, or prompts
you to try your strength, then up again and go forward. And between whiles,
turn your mind aside to something or other, that is wont to please you much.
Think of some good Friend, of the many fair accommodations that God has
afforded you, of the pleasant Meadows (as I may call them) and the still Waters
by which he leads you; or betake your self to some Divine promise, and take a
taste of the love of God contained therein, which is as a Cordial to cheer and
refresh the Spirits; or run to the extract or quintessence that you have drawn
(as I shall direct you anon) out of former Meditations: and some of these, its
possible, may make you quite forget that you were faint and weary.

And truly, for the most part, I think it is best, not to be over long in your
Devotions. I have heard of a very good man, who was wont to pray to God, that
he would forgive him his long Prayers. Which though they proceeded from an
honest zeal, yet wanted their efficacy, by being indiscreetly tedious. For
whilst Men study to stretch and wire-draw their Meditations to the utmost
length, what they gain that way, they lose another; having the less of strength
and solidity, the more they have of length. No Metal, you know, is more massy
and ponderous than Gold; yet it may be beaten so thin, that it may be blown
away with ones breath, or broken with the least touch of ones Finger. So, many
times it is with our Devotions, which have some weight and force in them, if
they be contracted and gathered into a little room: but while we spread them,
and beat them out to a tedious length, they become so thin and weak, that very
Object which stirs, blows away our thoughts; and great breaches are made in
them, by the least imagination that thrusts in it self upon them.

This is capable to be abused, I am well aware, by Souls that are not truly
pious: but those that are, may as much abuse themselves, unless they understand
and use it. Indeed when the Soul is very strong and full of heat, or when it is
awakned by some remarkable stroke of Divine Providence, or when the mighty hand
of the good Spirit of God is upon it, then it may, and will, let it self run
without any cautions or restraints: and we shall have nothing to do but to
follow those thoughts willingly, which in another case we could not persuade to
follow our wills. Our mind then will run (as it were) before us, our hearts
will be pregnant and teeming with many good Meditations; which at another time
we shall not be able to draw after us, nor make to conceive or bring forth one
thought that pleases us. But now you must take great heed, lest at this or any
other such happy time, you think to attain presently to the perfection you
desire. Alas! My Friend, it is a great way thither: and it cannot be safe to
make too much have, though you find your self never so willing and forward. For
many there are who running full speed, have strained themselves, by fetching
too great a leap, and disabled their Souls for some time after. And therefore
run not your self out of breath, from an eager desire to be at the very end of
your Race. Let fair and softly be your ordinary Rule: though sometimes, in a
very smooth Rode, and when your Spirits are brisk, you may make as much speed
as you can, for a little way. But we have seen several ride upon the Spur,
especially in the Morning when they first set out, who have been left behind in
the Afternoon, by those whom they seemed to have many Miles over-stripped. And
therefore it is necessary counsel (to those chiefly who are beginners) to
Travel so in the Christian Path, as we hope we may be able to hold out; and not
to be so fiery at first, as to make us dread Zeal, when there may be good use
of it.

There is another thing so nearly related to this matter, that it would have
challenged the next place in this Discourse, did your necessities require it.
And that is to take heed you do not tire your self with any one thing, for that
will make you indisposed to all the rest. This I take to be good advice to my
self, who ought to be cautious, lest by overmuch study I so dull and blunt my
Spirits, that even Devotion it self become irksome to me. And I doubt there are
too many of the Gentry and better rank, who so disspirit themselves by some of
their recreations, that they are fit for nothing but to lie down and sleep. But
to such as you, I need only say, that You must not weary your self with any one
pious Exercise. For I can tell by my Employment, that if I keep one Author
company so long, that I grow weary of him, I shall have no mind to return in
have to him, and all others will find me more morose and indisposed for Society
with them.

Let me only add, that you will the better do this, if you labor to understand
the true reason why you do every thing, and mark the fittest occasions wherein
it may be done. The difference between the grounds (as we speak) or reasons of
our motions, and the occasions of them, is this. The former persuade our will
either to decline or to pursue something, that appears either good or evil;
and therefore the stronger the Reasons and Motives are, the more shall we be
induced either to avoid or embrace what is before us. The latter is only the
opportunity or season, the advantage of time or place, which does not so
properly move us to do a thing, as to do it now. Time and Tide, we say, stays
for no Man; and because the opportunity does not always happen, therefore it
stirs up our Soul (which is already engaged by some reason) to work more
powerfully at this present, than otherwise it would have done. So that if you
understand not only good Reasons for your actions, but mind also the Occasions;
you will be mightily inclined by the one always, and more mightily by the
other at certain times.

To grow in Knowledge and Wisdom is exceeding necessary, not only because it
presents us with great variety of things to entertain our mind withal, and
makes Religion more pleasant, and renders our Soul more firm and strong, more
solid and compact: but likewise because while we search into the reason of our
actions, we shall discern whether the thing be only lawful, or it be convenient
also and prudent, and withal necessary to be done. And accordingly we shall
know how to make a proportionable allowance of our time and strength, and
earnestness unto it. If the business be merely lawful you will do it when you
have nothing else to do. If it be necessary you will give it a more certain and
likewise a larger portion of your time and strength; and the very thought of
its necessity, will enforce you to it. And it it be judged though not
absolutely necessary, yet convenient, and more acceptable to God, if you
perform it; then you will do it when you are best disposed, and in the fittest
temper to do him that more pleasing service. And then, being possessed with an
habitual love to God and to Religion, upon such satisfactory Reasons as you
have propounded to your self, and well considered; the observing of the
Occasions, which either time or place, or company, or such like circumstances
present you, to express it, must needs be a mighty awakening to your Spirit, to
bestir it self with all diligence, in the improvement of such an advantage. And
these occasions are therefore of such force to call up our endeavors, because
we know, that as much may be done then, which cannot be performed at another
time, so they will not wait upon us and stay our leisure; and that as they pass
away, so we know not when they will come again. For May (as the Proverb is)
comes not every Month: and a fit opportunity lies not, in every lock of Times
head. And if there should, yet it is bald behind; and we cannot call back that
which is gone, which may be better, than will be presented to us again. And if
we find by experience that these occasions do excite our Souls, then the
observing and embracing them will be an excellent means to keep us from
dullness; because it is likely that God will favor us with more of them, when
he sees that we use those well, which he has given us already.

But yet you ought to be cautious that this do not prove matter of scruple and
perplexity to you, if you neglect an occasion, when you are otherwise
necessarily employed. For both prudence and the forwardness of our affections,
and every thing else, must give way to a real necessity: and of two necessary
things, that seems to be most necessary, in which we are already engaged. Make
therefore a short Address to God, and both comfort and quicken your self, after
this manner; when you are dull and indisposed, or otherwise apt to be
perplexed, upon such accounts as these.

A PRAYER.
O My God; whose Name is most excellent in all the Earth, and ought to be
celebrated with the highest and continual Praises of Men and Angels. How happy
are they whose minds are ever delighted in the thoughts of Thee; and whose
hearts constantly burn with ardent affection and devotion to Thee! It is some
satisfaction to think of that vehement love, wherewith the Holy Spirits above
perpetually acknowledge thy bounty to them, to us, and to all thy Creatures: and
to feel my self desirous, if it were possible, to accompany them at all times,
with the like affections of a most cheerful and joyful heart, in that Heavenly
employment. Accept, I most humbly beseech thy Divine Goodness, of these sincere
desires that thou have wrought in me. Graciously accept of these pantings of my
Soul, after a freer and more delightful converse with Thee. And pity the great
weakness and dullness of my nature, which will not permit such ardours of love
to continue always, as by thy grace I sometimes feel, in my heart toward Thee.
Pity, O pity, and take compassion upon me, when I am so heavy, as not to be
able to lift up mine eyes toward Heaven; or when I move so slowly and faintly,
as if I had no lift to serve thee, in the works of piety, righteousness and
charity. O that I may feel my spirit stirred with a greater zeal, and carried
with stronger desires, at all other times; when I am better disposed for thy
service: that then I may run the ways of thy Commandments, when thou have
enlarged my heart.

And endue me likewise with prudence, equal to that uprightness and integrity
of heart, which I hope I shall always carefully preserve. That I may neither
neglect any occasion of exciting and expressing a most fervent love to Thee;
nor dispirit my self by an indiscreet heat and forwardness, to the performance
of any part of my Christian duty. Dispose me but to be ever serious, resolved,
steadfast, and watchful, to be always well or innocently employed, and to be
still going on with continued and constant motions, to perfect holiness in thy
fear; and I shall hope, by thine Infinite grace, to finish my course at last
with joy, and to arrive at the happiness of that blessed company, who, as they
do thy Commandments, harkening to the voice of thy Word, so they are not weary
in their obedience to Thee; but with incessant Praises and Thanksgivings serve
Thee, World without end,

Amen.
V.
YOU see already how necessary it is, well to understand our selves; and
therefore, lest you should think the pleasures of Religion to be other than
they are, it will concern you, My Friend, in the next place, to Distinguish
carefully between those consolations that are spiritual, and those that are
sensible. For your receiving benefit by this Rule, you must consider, that the
spirit of man being (as I said) joined to a body, and made a member of this
World, and yet belonging to another Country, has several sorts of faculties
(which we call its upper and lower powers) whereby it converses with both. With
the former, which are the mind, understanding and will, it has intercourse
with God and Invisible things, and is fitted to improve all lower objects to an
heavenly end: with the other, which we call sense, imagination, and sensitive
appetite, we can maintain acquaintance with nothing, but this outward World. Or
rather this one Soul of Man is fitted with Capacities of such different kinds,
that it can hold correspondence with God and the higher World, and likewise
with the goods of the body, in this World which is sensible to us.

Now such a friendship there is between the Soul and the Body, by reason of
their nearness, and between the upper and lower faculties of the Soul (if you
so conceive of it) by reason, as I may call it, of their oneness; that they do
mutual good offices for each other, when they are able. And as the Soul lends
such a great part of it self, to serve the Bodies necessities: so the bodily
spirits likewise are ready to assist the Soul, in their better Moods, to a
freer pursuit of its own concernments, in its motion toward God and the things
above. And more than this, the pleasures of the one redound to the other; what
the Soul does for the Body, returning upon the mind it self, and the bodily
spirits likewise oft-times feeling the contentment, of which the mind tastes.
Hence it is that by discreet use of bodily enjoyments, and due attendance to
the outward Man's moderate satisfaction, the spirits ofttimes are made so mild
and sweet, so cheerful and compliant; that the Mind finds them more ready and
forward to accompany it in the contemplation of Diviner objects; and it serves
it self the more, by serving the Body for a while. And on the contrary part,
when the mind converses with Heavenly things, they so powerfully touch it, at
certain Seasons, that they make a motion there all over, even as far as the
very skirts of its Territories. The Heart is glad, the Spirits leap and dance
for joy, and the very blood in our Veins runs the smoother for it.

Now while we have this sensible delectation in the borders of our Soul by the
agitation of the Animal Spirits, to which the mind communicates its
resentments; there is no part of us, but can be well content to accompany the
mind in its devotions, and they will not be inclined to with draw their
attendance from these delightful services. But on the other side, if the Mind
(through incapacity, it is like, of the Body to receive them) cannot impress
its perceptions upon the Spirits, nor make such a warmth and heat in them, that
they are pleased, and move delightfully; though it really has no less of God
in it self, than it had before when they skipt for joy; yet now the Body
becomes like a lump of Clay, and cannot endure to be drawn any longer to these
Holy Duties. Yea, the Soul it self (unless it duly consider) will begin hereat
to be greatly dejected; and to have little list to that, which gives so small
contentment to it, as it is an Inhabitant in Flesh, and which makes its abode
nothing pleasant and comfortable, for the present.

But, if in this state, the Mind recollect it self and consider, that, for its
part, it does what it did before (though it does not feel it self and perceive
its power in the same manner) and that it is not bound to produce these
pleasurable motions in the lower man, and that they are more pleasing to us,
than unto God; it might presently have rational satisfaction and tranquillity
in its own breast (which is the best of all other joys) and be persuaded to
hold on in its course, notwithstanding this seeming discouragement. And if the
Mind by these, or such like considerations, be induced to do as it was wont,
then I cannot see but all its performances would be both more acceptable to
God, and in the issue more delightful to it self.

For there is more strength of a Man's reason and will in them, now that he
wants that pleasing assistance which the Body used to afford him in the doing
of them. His love to God is the more fervent and unconquerable, in that it will
not cease its motion toward him, though all things else fail it, but only the
force of its own inclination. He is not, in true understanding, more weak and
feeble now, but a Person of greater might and courage than he was before. He
breaks through all difficulties, and will not suffer himself to be overborn by
the great load, that lies upon his Spirits. I said just now that the lower man
finding a delectation in Gods service, might be well contented with it, if not
desirous of those Holy Duties: and so the Soul in doing them, gave no great
proof, at such a time, of the power and vigor of its own affections to them;
because there was no impediment or reluctance, in the other party. But when
there is nothing but a sense of its duty to invite it, and all beside begin to
withdraw their consent; then it is, that it shows its resolution, and what it
can do by it self. Then a man demonstrates his heart to be so set toward God,
and to be so much in love with him, that he will please him, though he cannot
please half of himself in what he does, in obedience to his commands.

And besides, by a right understanding of this that I have said, there may be
some way perhaps found of recovering these sensible joys; which are so
grateful to us, that we never think we have enough of them. Either (1) by more
preparing our Mind, and laboring to work in it a deeper apprehension of what
we go about: And if the fault be there, this will cure it. Or (2) by gratifying
our outward man with some recreations and sensible goods, that it is in love
withal; whereby its spirits may be better cheared, than they can be, for the
present, with Divine exercises. Seeing it cannot now have a good liking of that
which the mind does most desire, let the mind make no scruple to comply more
freely with it, and entertain it with those innocent pleasures, which agree
best with its inclinations. And if the fault lie there and arise from its
lumpishness, this may be a Remedy for it. Or (3) by using humiliations of the
Body, by abstinence and fasting (if through too much fullness it be indisposed)
or by smiting on our Breast, casting down our selves on our Face (if through
too strong a taste of earthly joys it be grown untractable:) and if the fault
be partly in the mind, and partly in the body, it may be in this manner
removed. No body doubts, but discreet Fasting is very profitable in some cases;
and for the other, we find so many examples of them in the Holy Books, that we
cannot think they are to be despised. Nay, it is likely that good men found by
an outwardly humbled body, that the mind was more affected, and apt to be
humbled therewith.

But then remember that it is far better when the Mind affects the Body, than
when the Body affects the Mind: and we should strive rather after that, though
we should not reject the help of this. I will give you an instance, which
shall, at once, prove this; and show withal the influence the Body has upon
the Mind. Let a Man Pray or Preach in a melting tone, with much action of his
hands, and with earnest looks and motions of his Head; and the affections of
the People shall be exceedingly stirred: when as the very same matter and words
delivered after another manner, shall not half so much work upon them. Nay, if
the Voice be but sweet, and the carriage graceful, though there be little
action of the Body, and no arts of insinuation to conjure up the affections;
yet the discourse which comes with these advantages, shall find more favor and
better entertainment with the Hearers; than that which proceeds from an harsher
mouth, and a less plausible behavior, though otherwise it be of far greater
weight and moment. And so we see many People choose to sit in the Ministers
face, rather than behind a Pillar or the Pulpit, because they say their minds
are made more attentive, and their hearts more engaged thereby. From all which
you are satisfied how much the Soul many times is beholden to the eyes, and
ears, and those stirrings in the blood, which outward Objects create. But yet
you know very well also, that one strong touch or stroke that the Mind gives it
self by a piercing consideration, is of far greater force to breed even a
sensible delectation, if the Body be disposed; than all the commotions and
agitations in the Body are to beget a rational satisfaction and contentment of
mind, though it be never so desirous of it. And the affections, you know
likewise, that are raised by those outward means, are not half so much worth,
as those which the mind it self excites, from the matter, and not the manner of
what is delivered.

These sensible consolations then are not to be slighted, but it is far better
to look after the other. And if when we desire them, it were as a step and help
to the other, they were the more to be valued and endeavored after. As the
pleasant trembling and warmbling (I may call it) of the Spirits does much
clarify them, (just as the Air is purified by being shaken) upon that account
it is desirable; for the affording our mind a freer sight of its own objects.
But if we love it only for the harmony and ravishing delight that is in it
self; then it may prove dangerous, because it is apt to take the mind off from
its own proper pleasures. It is to be acknowledged that when the Spirits are
refined by gentle agitations, the Soul sits in the Body like to the Eye in a
clear Sunshine day: But if at such a time it gaze merely on this light, and do
not make use of it to look upon other objects, it loses by its advantages; and
for an eye full of light, lets go an heart full of joy and pure contentment.
And besides this, it is to be considered that we may be easily cheated by these
sensible delectations; and therefore they are not to be desired so much as the
other, wherein there is not so much danger of being cozened. Many warm Souls
think themselves very Religious, because they are moved at a Sermon, or can
weep in their Prayers; whereas they remain as cold as a stone, and as dry as a
rotten stick to all good works. They are covetous, peevish, proud and
censorious: and yet these ill qualities do not trouble them, as long as they
feel those pleasing motions, which tickle them into a belief that they are
beloved of God, though they be no better. And on the other side, many good
Souls imagine that they have more of God in them at such times, when they find
such melting affections in their hearts, than they have at others, when they
are without them; whereby they set a lighter esteem upon far greater
testimonies of Gods love (which then they need not want) such as Humility,
Patience, Denial of our own wills, and resignation to his good will and
pleasure.

Upon this account many Papists, that have left our communion, are wont
wretchedly to deceive and abuse themselves: who profess that they find their
hearts more stirred before a Crucifix, and the Image of the blessed Virgin, and
with Prayers which they hear in an unknown Language, than they were while they
attended on the Divine Service of our Church; where they knew, or might have
known, as much of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and all spiritual things, as
they can do now. Alas! they consider not how much the fancy is taken with
Pictures, and Bodily Gestures, and all things of Novelty; without any preceding
consideration of the mind, or any consent of the will before demanded. These
may be but natural motions (such as are common to us with brute Creatures)
which are raised by outward objects, and not by our selves. And as a drop of
sweet phlegm that trickles down upon a Man's Palate in a slumber, makes him
think he swallows honey, or is glutted with sweet meats: So many times do
drowsy and inconsiderate Souls dream that they are full of the joys of God, and
satiated with Divine Pleasures, when they are but mocked with those natural
delights which agreeable Objects stroke them withal, while their fancies are
awake, and their minds are asleep.

Let us attend therefore, My Friend, to the giving all satisfaction to our
inward man, and seriously comply with our noblest desires of pleasing God, by
doing his will in every thing. And, if we can likewise give contentment
thereby, to all about us; well and good: but if that be not possible, let us
not think we are the worse because we cannot; since we are not the better, if
we can. And seeing variety is so grateful to our weakness, you may try what
passions you can excite in your heart, by this short address to God, which I
shall add, at the end of this particular, to many others which you are
acquainted withal: advising you still to be satisfied and well pleased, in the
doing of what you ought, though it prove not so delightful to you as you desire.

A PRAYER.
O Great God. What an happiness is this, that I should be beloved of Thee, who
art the Lord of all things! What contentment! what joy! what gladness of heart,
ought I to conceive in the thoughts of thy surpassing love to me? and how
willingly, how cheerfully, ought I to do thy will, that I may be more beloved
of Thee? Thy love is wonderful and unsearchable: we have nothing in us whereby
to take a measure of it. It is beyond our understanding, and has exceeded all
our desires; and what have we larger than these? I must turn my thoughts
therefore into admiration, and stand amazed at thy mavelous love; who have
done such things, for such poor, and inconsiderable Creatures as we are. Thou
have sent thy Son to be our Servant: and he has laid down his Life for our
Redemption: and he is alive again and exalted in Heaven to give us hope of thy
endless love, in life Immortal and glorious.

O how short is my understanding of all this! O how weak are my thoughts, now
that I reflect upon it! And my affections, alas! how short do they fall of my
thoughts, and how soon do they vanish and expire! I can only cry out, What is
man that thou art so mindful of him? Lord, what are all the Sons of men, that
thou make such account of them? And when I have said this, I have said
nothing, but that I know not what to say, or what to think of thy love. But it
is part of the love, which I admire, that thou will accept of such as we have:
of our little thoughts, and feeble desires, and weak endeavors, when they
proceed from true love and sincere affection to thy service. That, O Lord, I
most heartily profess. Truly, I am thy Servant; I am thy Servant: and resolve
for ever to continue in faithful and absolute obedience to all thy holy and
good Commandments. I am willing to be, and to do what thou please. And I
refuse nothing (O that I knew how to attain that happiness!) which may make thy
service always pleasing to me. Support me howsoever, I most earnestly beseech
thee, with thy Almighty Grace, that I may not be disheartened in my duty, by any
dullness or indisposition that seises on me: but persevere in well doing, with
an humble trust and confidence, that I shall never forsake Thee, nor be
forsaken of Thee. Preserve me from vain elation of mind, and false opinion of
thy favor, when I feel my self transported with extraordinary delight in thy
service; and from all dejection of spirit, and unjust suspicions of thy anger
and displeasure, when I find less delight and complacence in the sincere and
careful performance of all the duty which I owe thee. Fix me in such a steadfast
and immovable love to justice, mercy, soberness and godliness; that serving
Thee constantly in these with an equal and quiet mind, I may have an unshaken
belief of thy immutable love to me, in all the alterations and changes which I
feel in my self in this life; and an undoubted hope of a better condition in
the life to come, through thy inconceiveable mercies in Christ Jesus the
righteous.

Amen, Amen.
VI.
BUT that your mind may not grow quite dull, when your bodily spirits begin to
sink, and to be flat and listless, Observe, My Friend, what it was that first
begat devotion and lively affections in you, toward God and Goodness: for that
will be most effectual to continue them. It is an ordinary Maxim in Physic,
that we are nourished out of the same things, of which we consist. Liquid
things agree best with a Child, while its Flesh is soft, and but newly come
from swimming in its Mothers Womb. Every Lamb runs to the Ewe that yean'd it,
and lays hold of her teates; which are near the place where it lately lay. And
so may we hope to suck both most sweetness and most proper sustenance, from
those truths which first affected our hearts, and wherein we have been wont to
find the greatest relish. It is observable that Iron, which naturally moves
toward the Lodestone, when it has once saluted it, and has been received
into its embraces, is more possessed with a magnetic love, and grows more
sensible of its attractions, and more desirous of an union with it, than it was
before that touch, which made it feel how it could awaken and enliven it. Even
just so it is with our hearts; which when they feel the kind influence and
invigorating power of any thing upon them, are the more disposed to receive the
touches and impressions of it again, and naturally open themselves, and wish
for it with greater passion, than they did before they had that acquaintance
with it.

If it was the loveliness and beauty then of the Divine Nature and Perfections,
which first awakened your Heart, think of that, and turn your eyes toward it;
for it is not at all withered or decayed. How does a fair Image sometimes slip
through a Man's eyes into his heart, and ingrave it self so deeply there, that
it is past his power to raze it out? And will not a sense of God and the light
of his countenance, if it shine upon us, leave such a lasting remembrance of it
in our Souls; that we shall like him, and love him longer than a Day? And if
the first glance of him be so surprising, and make us, that we cannot easily
forget how amiable he is; O how infinitely more affecting will a serious and
constant contemplation of him prove? If a little ray from his face, that glided
into our hearts, we know not how, was so striking and glorious; how shall we be
inamoured, when we steadfastly, and on purpose fix our minds and affection on
Him, desiring to be better acquainted with his Excellencies? It is impossible
but you should find your heart more powerfully stirred toward Him; when you
consider likewise, that you can never discover all of him, but new beauties
will every Day present themselves, and shine upon you, while you feelingly
converse with him. You will not endure your self, if you should love him the
less, because he admits of your love, and every day appears more lovely and
desirable.

But it was a sense of his love to you perhaps (which is far more common) that
begat in you the affection of love to him. Then there cannot be a more
delightful subject for your thoughts: nor can Religion commend it self by any
thing more than this, that it is love, begot by love. And there is nothing
surer than that you shall be constant and unwearied in your duty, if Gods
mercies and kindnesses can affect your heart, for they are constantly and
unweariedly poured forth upon you. The new ones you enjoy daily are so many,
that you may know by them the old ones are innumerable. You can turn your eyes
no way, but you see your self incircled with them, and hear something calling
for your love. All his works declare, not only the excellence of his Nature,
but his goodness likewise and bounty toward you. For every one of them does
you some office of love. They all wait upon you at the command of your Heavenly
Father; and they would instantly deny their Service, did not he continue it by
the Word of his Power. He must be blind and never saw the Sun, who sees not God
and his goodness every where: What beauties does not that great Luminary
create? What fruits and flowers does it not produce? What Liquors does it not
generate? How does it cherish all Creatures? How does it fill your eyes and
ears, and all your Senses with its Heavenly influences? And how many of those
good things, which you behold by its light, has God bestowed on you for your
portion? Rather than not love some higher Being, one would be tempted to fall
down and worship this. The poor Persians of old, knowing nothing more glorious,
had their hearts wounded with the Rays of the Sun, and the light and warmth of
its beams seemed so admirable, that they adored and loved it as their God.
Shall not we then love him most heartily, who made that, and all things else:
who has opened to us also another World (as I have told you) by our Lord
Jesus, far more beautiful and glorious than this, to make us love him? You can
never want matter to feed your thoughts, and to recreate your mind with
delightful Meditations, and your heart with Heavenly affections; when his
goodness is so largely diffused, beyond the bounds of all things visible. Or
if, when you would meditate on his innumerable favors, you find that your
thoughts stand still, and will not stir, or that they go backward and start
aside to something else: Your heart will even then burst forth into admiration
and great expressions of love, to think that his goodness should be so great to
us, who can scarce thank him for it, or consider it.

But suppose it was a sense of sin, and the evil of it, which most startled
your mind, when you began to be Religious; then every thing you see, every
thing you can think of, will help to aggravate it. And the more you heighten
its malignity, and represent to your self its formidable nature; or reflect
only on its baseness and disingenuity, together with its pride and arrogance;
the more you will unavoidably be roused out of the sin of slumber and stupidity.

Or if it was the promise of Heaven, and the belief of immortal life (that I
may name no more inducements) which first invited you to od; that is a thing so
vast, that your desires and hopes of enjoying it, will not let you be weary of
thinking of it. Immortal Life! What a good is that, will you say to your self?
On what should I fix my eyes so much, and with so much pleasure, as on that
blessedness? Who would lose his Portion in Immortal Life, for all the dying
pleasures and possessions of this World; though he could be sure to enjoy them
to the end of his days? Immortal Life! I am not yet awake sure; or else the
very Name of it would make my Heart leap, and quicken this dull and sluggish
Spirit, to the most earnest and cheerful pursuit of it, in all the exercises of
Christian godliness. What should make me move so heavily in the ways of God,
unless it be, that I forget to look continually toward this Immortal Life? And
what is that should make me forget it? How come I to lose that sense, and let
go my hopes of Immortal Life? O wonderful Love! O patient goodness! which still
waits and attends upon me, to remind my Soul of its everlasting bliss. May I
after so long a time of sleep, and such forgetfulness, be favored with a sight
of it? Will my love and free obedience be yet accepted? Awake, awake then all
the hidden powers of my Soul; rise up and call him blessed. Who can withold
his heart from devoting it self affectionately to him? With what pleasures can
I entertain my self, comparable to those which grow out of the hope of Immortal
Life? Or what service can be unpleasant, which is undertaken for so great an
happiness? The thoughts of it make my Soul light and aerial, even under the
burden of this Body. I feel it drawing me up above: from whence when I look
down upon all the men of this lower World, how do they appear, but as so many
little Ants, busily creeping on a Molehill; while I sit upon the holy Hill of
God? O that my mind could dwell there! Or, since I cannot reach so high a
felicity, it may never descend from thence, but with a lively remembrance of
the joys of that Celestial Hope; which may bear me up above all the petty
temptations of this World! For what is it that I labor and toil, with such
restless thoughts and desires? For what am I troubled and discontented? Can any
thing make him absolutely unhappy, who hopes to live for ever with God? No; I
will rejoice in my Lord always, again I say, I will rejoice. I will bear at
least, even all my dullness and listlesness to my duty, with a quiet and
composed mind, in hope one day to be more full of life.

Here my Pen is very forward, and would be running on further than my design
will allow. And therefore I must restrain it, and abbreviate also the remaining
Counsels, having been so long in some of the foregoing: lest instead of a
little Book to carry about with you and refresh you, I should send you a
tedious Volume that will quite tire you. Let me only annex, before I leave
this, a Prayer to God, which relates to what has been now said, and with which
you are not unacquainted.

A PRAYER.
O Most Holy, and blessed for ever more. Who art the most excellent Nature, the
Perfection of beauty; happy in thy self alone, and need not the Company of
any of thy Creatures, to make thee happier than thou art. It is we poor
beggarly things, that stand in need of thy continued grace and love; who art
the Father of our spirits, the only hope and stay of our hearts, the joy and
comfort of our life, that filling and satisfying good, in whom alone our
desires can meet, with perfect rest and repose. The most glorious of all the
Heavenly Host can find no higher pleasures, than those of loving and praising,
and obeying thee; whose Ministers they are and delight to be, in executing the
commands of thy holy will in every thing. For thy will is guided by the best
and most excellent reason, and is so propense, we see, to goodness, benignity,
and charity, that all its commands must needs be reasonable and good too, and
intend the greatest kindness to those that are obedient to them. Every Creature
in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, and in the Sea, obeys thy Almighty
Word; declaring thee to be as good as thou art great, Rev. 5.13.
and giving not only glory and power, but blessing and honor, unto thy Divine
Majesty, and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Yea, that blessed Son of thy
love, when he came into the World, freely chose to do thy will and not his own,
saying, I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea, thy Law is within my heart,
Psalm. XL. 7.

What is there then in Heaven or Earth, that I can wish, but to be united in
hearty, devout and cheerful affection, together with my dearest Savior, and
all the Saints and Heavenly Host, to that most holy will of thine, by a free
and constant obedience to it. It is infinitely fit and desirable, I am sure,
that we, above all the rest of thy Creatures, should take a perfect contentment
and pleasure in serving thee, who have not only gratified all our senses with
great and delightful variety of good things in this World; but also sent thy
Son from Heaven to entertain our Spirits, with joyful hopes, of having our weak
and short obedience here, rewarded with great and endless pleasures at thy
right hand, in the World to come.

Lord, what is man that thou should have such a regard unto him? And what
hearts have we, if after all thy grace we should delight in any thing more than
thee; or be weary and faint in our minds, while we are doing thy blessed will?
O how deeply should we have been indebted to thee, if thou had only admitted
us to the happiness of knowing and loving thee, and complying with thy good
will, while we dwell in this body! But that thou should design, when we
expire, to recompense the mere discharge of our duty here, with the continued
happiness of being with thee, and enjoying thee for ever; is an expression of
thy bounty that exceeds all our wonder and admiration. If a full sense of this
thy stupendous goodness, should now possess our spirits, they would grow, I
believe, too big and large for our bodies; and bursting forth in passionate
love, would make their way into Eternity, which only is wide and long enough,
to admire, and love and praise thee in.

But be pleased, O Lord of love, in thy infinite goodness, to give me at
present such a true and lively feeling of it, as may make me think of nothing
so much, or with so much delight and satisfaction of heart: and as may inflame
me with such a fervent love unto thee, that it may melt and dissolve my will
into thine, and consume all my corrupt desires, and abate, at least, the
chilness and indifference of my spirit, and offer me up a whole burnt
Sacrifice, to thee, my God. And then stay, I most humbly beseech thee, for the
fullness of my love, and praises, and joyful acknowledgments, till I come to
that happy liberty, of having nothing else to do, but to love, and thank and
magnify thy Name for ever and ever.

It is my daily and repeated desire, according as our Lord has taught us, that
thy will may be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; to which, both now and ever,
I say most heartily, Amen. O purge and refine my nature to such a degree of
virtue and goodness, that I may at least delight to do thy will, as those
heavenly Creatures do. O that those little, little acts of Piety and Charity,
which I am able to exercise in this World, may never want this complacence in
the performance of them; which is the only thing, that can give any value to
them. It is a shame, that I should groan, or go heavily, under the sweet, the
easy and gentle Yoke, of my most loving Savior; none of whose Commandments
are grievous, but all his ways, pleasantness; and his paths, peace. But there
is nothing more frightful than to think, that I have at any time opposed his
will, and thrown off the light burden of obedience, which he lays on me. I
adore thy pardoning mercy: and wait on thee likewise for power from above, to
save me from reproaching his Religion, by so much as any unwillingness to obey
him. I implore thy Divine Inspirations, to preserve in my heart that delightful
sense of Thee, which may render it no less my contentment than my duty, to
follow Jesus, in his humility and condescension of spirit; in his meekness and
patience; in his kindness and tenderness; in his holiness and purity; in his
love to thee, and to all mankind; in doing good, and suffering evil; in
resolved denial of my own will, when contrary to thine; and in every thing
giving thanks to thee, O Father of Mercies, which is thy will concerning us in
Christ Jesus: To whom be Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
VII.
AND having thus poured forth your Soul to God, you may feel your self
sometimes so mightily moved; that your heart runs out, with much pleasure, in
abundance of pious thoughts and holy affections, which you are not wont to find
at other times. And then, My Friend, let me tell you, it would be of singular
use, if you would set down those extraordinary thoughts and passionate
effusions of your Soul, which you feel in your greater enlargements. These are
as so many Records, which you have to show of the Spirits prevalency and
triumph over the dull flesh. They are the flights of your Soul, whereby you see
to what it aspires; and how great and happy it may be, when God pleases. They
are the tokens of Gods love, whereby he would indear himself to your heart. And
you may look upon them, as if they were Golden Chains let down from Heaven, to
draw and attract you thither; and bind you fast, but willingly, to your duty.
It is great pity to throw away such sweet flowers, after once smelling of them:
to lay by such good thoughts, as we do a common Book after the first reading. I
would wish you to find some safe repository for them, and to lay up carefully
such expressions of your mind in Meditation or Prayer, as are most lively and
affecting; and to fetch them out for your use, when any dullness or straitness
shall oppress you.

As a good Student when he reads a Book, though he may let pass the most of it
which he knew before, yet, remarks and preserves in his Notes the choicest
parts, in which he finds great strength of reason, or sharpness of wit, or may
be any ways useful to him in his design: so would I have you mark those
passages in your converse with God and Divine things, which have in them some
fullness of sense, some liveliness of conceit, some elevation of mind, and are
so much beyond the ordinary strain of thinking; as if they were some beam of
light darted from an higher hand, or the utmost endeavor of the Soul to be
with God. When you find, I say, your conceptions so fit and proper, that you
seem to behold the bare face of truth, when some thing smites your heart with
such a force of reason, that you are constrained to yield, or when such an holy
breath comes into you, that your Soul swells and grows too big for your body;
let them be noted as carefully as the Month and the Day was, by your Parents,
which brought you into the World; or as you remember the happy time, when God
bestowed some singular blessing on you, which made this World a more
comfortable place, than otherwise you should have found it.

Examples you know are wont to move us much; and therefore of what power may we
suppose it to be, when we can propound our selves for an Example to us? This
Copy, as I may call it, of our selves, besides that it will make us blush at
another time, to see how unlike we are to our selves, will also excite us to
recover the same countenance and aspect that once we had; and make some color
come into our Faces and warmth into our Spirits, when we are pale and cold in
the service of God. It will remember us likewise of the pleasurable motions,
that were then in our hearts; and remembrance is the way to call them back
again. It will furnish us also with some matter for our thoughts, when they are
barren, and can bring forth nothing. For, though reading of some good Book, in
this case, may be very advantageous to us, yet nothing can more assist us than
a Book of our own making; the births, as I may term them, of our own mind: Both
because they best suit with our notions, and can soon find the place where they
lay before, and because they will remember us also of Gods grace and goodness
to us; so that either shame, or love, or hope will make us strain to do the
same again, or to excel our selves. When no thoughts will stir within, we must
call for some helps without to move us; and what is there that will so easily
enter, as that which was once within us before? Nothing sure can better fit us,
than that which our own Souls have cut out and shaped for themselves.

As a Chemist therefore that is drawing out the more retired spirits of things,
if he grows faint in his work, takes a drop or two of his own extracts, to
bring his Soul back again: so should we do, when our liveliness begins to
forsake us, and our Soul complains of its weak and fainting Fits. We must pour
in some of those thoughts which we have formerly drawn out of our hearts; which
are, as it were, the quintessence of our Souls, and the very spirits of our
Devotion, that they may recall the life that is flying away. And tell me, I
beseech you, what a reviving it is, but to think that we once had such thoughts
in our mind? What a Cordial is it, to the languishing Soul to feed, as I may
say, upon its own Honey, and taste of its own sweetness? How greedily will it
embrace, and how gladly will it smile upon the Children of its own Womb? How
pleasant will it be but to hope, that it may become fruitful again, as well as
it was before? to behold the Picture of what it may be, as well as of what it
has been in former times?

Save therefore some of these; and let them not all be spilt, as they distill
from your Soul. Lay them up in store; considering the time may come when your
Soul will be glad to have them restored to it, and will receive them as so many
drops of Balm. Keep them by you, as you do some precious Liquor; which by long
labor, and many Operations, you have fetched out of a number of excellent Herbs
or Spices, or other rare Ingredients. For, though you must not have recourse to
them every day, yet there may be a season, you see, when they will do you so
high a pleasure, that you may owe your life or your cheerfulness to them. They
may stand you, at least, in so much stead, as to preserve you from utter
distaste of your self, and despair of Gods favor; when you are apt to droop,
nay sink under the weight of your Body, or any other load that lies very heavy
upon you.

Cheer up your Soul then with some of its own sublimer thoughts; and turning
your self to the Father of Mercies, say;

A PRAYER.
O My God; What pledges of thy Love are these which I have received already
from Thee! How precious are thy thoughts toward me! and how dear and precious
have they been in mine eyes! O how great is the sum of them! I see, I see,
how gracious thou art. I am not without many tokens of thy readiness to help
me; and of thy kind intentions to promote me, by patient continuance in my
duty, to everlasting happiness. O how sweet is the remembrance of that time,
when thou wast pleased to visit me, and inspire my heart with devout affections
to thee? How joyful have thou made me with the light of thy countenance, which
is better than life it self?

Accept of such thanks, as I am now able to offer thee, for thy abundant
goodness to me. Blessed be thy goodness; that I have not lived all my days, as
a stranger to thee! that my Soul has not always grovelled on the earth, but
been lifted up sometime unto Heaven! Blessed be thy goodness; that it has not
lay'n continually as a barren Wilderness, but been fruitful in some good
thoughts, and pious affections, and zealous resolutions, and worthy designs to
do thee honor and service in the World. O that this remembrance of thy past
loving kindness, and of the powerful operations of thy holy Spirit in my heart,
may at this time mightily move and excite me to the like devout expressions of
my love to thee. O that I may feel it renewing my strength; or reviving my
Spirit, at least, to a comfortable hope in thee, that thou will never utterly
forsake me. There is all reason, I confess most thankfully, that I should
confide in thee: and wait upon thee still, with a steadfast faith, for fresh
influences from Heaven, to make me, howsoever, persevere with a constant mind,
notwithstanding all the discouragements I conflict withal, in a careful and
exact observance of all thy commands.

This I know is the best proof of my love to thee. And therefore help me, as to
pray always so, to exercise my self in works of mercy, to do justly, to be
clothed with humility, to preserve my body and soul in purity, and to discharge
all the duties of my place and relations with an upright heart and willing
mind. And when thou graciously vouchsafest to enlarge my Spirit, in abundance
of delightful thoughts of thee, and to raise me to the highest pitch of love to
thee; O that it may not only please me, but make me better. Lift me up thereby
above all the temptations of this World; and quicken me to be the more fruitful
in all good works, and to excel in virtue: to increase especially and abound
so much in love toward my Brethren, and toward all Men, that my Heart may be
established unblameable in Holiness, before Thee, my God and Father, 1 Thessalonians.
3.12.
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Saints.

Amen.
VIII.
AND here I cannot but commend to you frequent Meditation and serious
consideration (which you might expect to have heard of before) as of singular
use, for the continuance either of your diligence, or of those delectable
affections in it. For the Soul is a thing so entire in it self, that if one
part be strongly moved, the other will be so too: just as when the Nave of a
Wheel turns round, it makes the outermost circumference to circle about with
it. Much is said by many on this subject; and therefore I shall only direct you
how to Meditate, when you are dull, and unfit, as you imagine, for any thoughts.

When we discourse (you know) with a Servant, and desire to affect him with
what we say; if he be stupid and heavy, and seems not at all to be concerned in
our words, then we are wont to make use of interrogations, beseechings,
objurgations, exclamations, corrections of our selves, admirations, and such
like ways, to rouse his apprehension. For we find that if an object touches any
of our senses gently and softly, we mind it not while we are intent upon other
matters; but if it strikes us with some smartness, and comes with a vehemence
and importunity, it alarmes the whole Soul, and makes it not only hear but
demand what is the matter. And thus it is in our discourses, if they barely
present themselves before Men's Souls, that are otherwise engaged, they regard
them not; unless by some such form of speech, as I have mentioned, they put on
some sharpness, and be armed with some Authority. If we speak, for example, to
one that has committed a fault, in such terms as these; Indeed you are very
much to blame; You ought not to have done thus; it is contrary both to God and
to your self; the World will cry shame of you; no body will endure you; etc. He
stands perhaps as if he were marble, and had been composed of insensible
materials. But if we say, what did you mean, when you did such or such an
action? Whither were your wits and your conscience gone? Could you do thus, and
not tremble at Gods displeasure? Nay, answer me, do you think that God is an
Idol, who regards you not, and cannot strike? Oh, that any Man should be so
sottish; that he should be such an ill Friend to himself! Ill Friend, did I
say? such a desperate Enemy, I meant, such a fury, such a Devil to his own
Soul, etc. This kind of language, it is likely, may make him seem a Man; one
that is made of flesh, and not of stone.

In such like manner then may you learn to Meditate alone; by discoursing with
your own Soul after the way of expostulation, chiding, reprehension, and such
like: wherein there is great variety; and therefore great easiness, and no less
pleasure. It was a more awakening expression, for David to say, Why art thou
cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? (XLII. Psalm. 5)
than if he had only said, I do not do well to be dejected on this fashion; it
is to no purpose to afflict and trouble my self; far better and more seemly
were it for me to rest contented. And the repetition of this again (V. 11. and
XLIII. 5) gives it a greater force, and adds a sharper edge to it, than if it
had been but a single question. And so likewise does it more pierce a sinners
heart to hear God say, as you read in the Prophets; Why will you dye? Will thou
not be made clean? When shall it once be? Shall I not visit for these things?
says the Lord: Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? than
barely to tell him, that there is no reason a Man should destroy himself, and
that He is very desirous of his good, and that it is high time also a sinner
should amend, and if he will not, that He cannot suffer it, but will certainly
punish such continued contempt of his forbearance. And therefore you need not
doubt but your Soul will sooner open to you, at such knocks as these, and more
speedily bring forth its conceptions and passions by the Midwifry (as I may
call it) of such like questions and arguings with your self; than by any other
way whereby you endeavor to help its delivery.

Let me present you with an example of such a discourse, suitable to the drift
and design of this Treatise. O my Soul (may you or I say) are we now to learn
that there is a God? Do thou know nothing but what thine Eyes see, and thy
Hands feel, and thy Palate tastes? Strange! that thou should so forget to
look into thy self! And must I be ever demonstrating to thee, that thou art not
of this earth, but a parcel of another World? What? Do thou not call God thy
Father? Is it not him thou seek? With him would thou not live for ever?
Say, would thou not? Is not this thy earnest desire? Speak, and tell me if
thou art not of this mind. Need I use so many words to extort from thee this
confession? O how dull art thou, if thou do not yet understand the difference
between his favor, and all the Kingdoms of this Earth! And is it possible thy
memory should be so perfidious, as to have no remaining sense of the
incomparable happiness, thou have sometime seen, he is preparing for thee?
Where have thou been? What have thou been doing? What is become of all those
holy thoughts, and of that blessed Hope of immortal life, which was so lately
the joy of thy heart? Is that happiness grown less? or is it less certain than
it was, that thou art grown so cold, so listless and indifferent? Let me hear
thee speak what thou think of it. Is it true, or is it not? Do we Dream, or
is it a certain Report which comes to our Ears, when Jesus tells us he will
give Eternal Life to them that obey him? What answer do thou return? Would a
man take all the World in exchange, for his Portion in such a bliss? Shall our
present satisfaction here be dearer to us, than our future repose and fullness
of joy in the presence of the Lord? What did I say? Satisfaction? Alas! how far
are we all from that? The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear filled
with hearing. Who has bewitched thee then, to think of seeking thy happiness
here? Is there so much as room for thy choice, whom thou will love, and to whom
thou will cleave, as thy chiefest good? Does not necessity carry thee to God,
and to the eternal World, if thou meanest to have satisfaction? O how glad am I
to find that there is thy heart! What a pleasure is it to love thy God, and to
hope thou art beloved of him? Do thou not hold every thing for thy enemy,
which would rob thee of such a Pleasure?

But alas! how long shall I find thee full of these apprehensions? Can thou
assure me how many days this sense will abide with thee? O how suddenly may I
feel thee altered, and become a senseless thing! How treacherous wast thou
lately; how false to thy own resolutions? Would one think thee a rational
being, when thou so forgattest thy greatest interest? Was it thou who then
did govern me; or some brutish soul that came for a time and officiated in
thy stead? How often have thou told me of a World of Enemies that watch for our
ruin! and yet how negligent and supine art thou, as if we had none? Need I
remember thee how long ago it is, since thou did yield, and submit thy self
to the weakest of them? Thou know very well, that on such a day thou were
very angry; but can thou tell me for what? On another day (would I could say
but one day) thou wast lazy; Were thine Enemies then all asleep? At another
time a slight occasion made thee omit a good duty; O at what a small rate art
thou willing to part with thy peace? Can one trust any more such a silly and
fickle thing as thou art? Can one rely on any of thy promises? How will thou be
able to hold out in such a long contest, as we are engaged to maintain? how
will thou be patient to the end? Such a dull and lazy Soul as thou art, so
timorous, so inconstant, so easily abused, so soon pusht down with every
occurrence; what hopes can one have of it? --

By this vehement inveighing against your self, it is possible your Heart may
be much awakened, even in its most listless moods, to some generous resolution:
and it may answer it self after this sort.

Sad things are here objected against me, or if that be too mild a word, why
did not I say insufferable things? Much sloth, idleness, impatience (I wish
thou could tell me all) I am accused of; and alas! my present dullness assures
me it is too true. O that I could deny it, without any fear of a terrible
rebuke! But must I therefore be so cast down, as to be discouraged? Can he that
has done ill, never be so happy as to be able to do well again? May I not hope
so much, as that I may be chidden into better behavior? Where is the doom
passed that I shall never amend? Show me that it is impossible, or else I will
not despair of it. True it is I need a great deal of patience; but where should
I begin to practice it, but upon my self? Is it not fit to attend and wait till
I can grow better? Many enemies indeed I have; but shall I become an enemy to
my self also? and shall I imagine, that I have no Friend? I have been
inconstant, and peevish, and discontented, and a lover of the World, etc. But
must I therefore be always so? No; Therefore I will not be so always. It is
confessed, my endeavors have been careless and lazy: What should I do
therefore, but be more vigilant and industrious? I have fallen sometimes; but is
it wisdom therefore to lie still? Do you call this good reasoning? Is there
any sense in such a conclusion? Rather I will take more heed to my self, and
walk with greater care. What though I have given back in some assaults? May not
a Man recover his courage, and behave himself more valiantly? O the folly of
humane Nature! that we should undo our selves at every turn; first by doing
amiss, and then by despairing to do otherwise! Bless the Lord, O my Soul, that
we are aware of this dangerous mistake. And let us not despond, though we have
no reason to boast, and glory in our resolution.

Was not this the condition of other of the Saints, long before I was born? Am
I the only example of an heavy and sluggish Soul? Must I be recorded the first
in the Catalogue for inconstancy? What helps and assistances then had they, to
restore themselves and to preserve them to the end, which are strangers to our
ears? Must I dispatch a message to some Foreign Country for their Recipe's,
as we send for Drugs and Spices? Cannot we tell without the charge of going to
Hippo, what Holy Austine strengthened himself withal? Must we take a Pilgrimage
to Rome to learn St. Hierome's Medicines? Sure, my Soul, thou have the same
gracious Savior, the same compassionate High Priest, the same cordial
promises, the very same hope of the Gospel, which revived and supported their
hearts; or if thou have not, speak, that I may go and seek them. Look then on
thy blessed Savior, look on his holy Apostles, nay, look upon all those
excellent Persons in the Church that have succeeded them; Shall we not follow
such glorious Leaders? Are their Examples impossible to be imitated? If they
be, they are not examples. How can we be cold, when we think of the flames of
their love? How can we be lazy and unwilling to do, when we see how forward,
how vehemently desirous they were to suffer? What should hinder us from going
on, when we have such a Multitude of Triumphant Souls before our eyes, whom
nothing could drive back? Shall pleasures, shall the encumbrance of business,
shall Relations and Friends, yea, shall dangers, shall Death? No; I am not
enchanted, I am not affrighted with these words. Be gone you false and
deceitful pleasures. How dare you perplex me, you impertinent employments? No
more of your importunity, I charge you, if you will be my Friends. Welcome
contempt, welcome reproach, welcome poverty, or any other thing, which will
certainly bring me nearer to my God.

But what is it that gives you this sudden confidence? How come you of a
coward, to grow thus courageous? Of a Snail, who made you thus to mount up in
your thoughts like an Eagle? Who will believe that thou will do such things? I
will believe it (may you answer again to your self) whatsoever can be objected
against it. Why are these called sudden thoughts, which are my most deliberate
resolutions? Through the Lord I shall do valiantly: He it is that shall tread
down mine enemies under me. --

The like discourse you may have with your self about God, or any other
subject. You may consider not only that he is gracious, and merciful, but cry
out, O how great, how great is his goodness! Is there any thing thou can name
comparable to his loving kindness? What makes thee then so unwilling to go to
him? What Is the cause of such a diffidence and unbelief, as has deadned and
dispirited thine heart? Could I think that any thing would make thee fall into
this stupidity? Did thou not once look upon him as the first Beauty, as the
joy, the health and the life of our Souls? Who is it that is altered and has
suffered a change? He or thou? Is he not the same to day, yesterday, and for
ever? Why should not thou be the same too? Or, why should thou not think
that he will make thee the same again? How many times is it repeated in the
Book of God, that his mercy endures for ever? For whom was it but such
trembling Souls as thou, that he proclaims himself so often, to be abundant in
mercy, goodness and truth? But must we not then believe it? Is this the way to
obtain his mercy, by distrusting of him? What a preposterous course is this?
How unseemly, nay, how unkind is it to question these gracious declarations of
his love? Let us be confidently persuaded he has a greater desire than we,
that we should be true and faithful to him. Let us rest our thoughts in this
conclusion that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Now when you find any benefit by such expostulations and reasonings with your
self, and hope it would do you some good, if you should use the like in an
humble address to God; you may be furnished with several strains of devout
Admiration, and Pathetical Appeals to his all-seeing Majesty out of the Holy
Scriptures. There are Examples also of the other; but expostulations with God
are not to be imitated without much caution and holy fear, and ought not to be
commonly used. It may be sufficient to conclude the foregoing Meditations, with
some such form of words as this.

A PRAYER.
O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth? who have set thy
glory above the Heavens. When I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers,
the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; What is miserable man that
thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou visitest him? For thou
have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with Glory
and Honor. Lord! what honor is that which thou have conferred on him? in
setting him now in the Person of Jesus, above the Angels themselves? For to
which of the Angels did thou say at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee? And, again; Let all the Angels of God worship him? Who in the
Heaven can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the mighty can be likened unto
the Lord? And therefore whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek
thee. My Soul thirsts for Thee, and longs after Thee. O when will thou come
unto me? There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon me. Show me thy self, and it suffices. Lord,
what wait I for? Truly, my hope is in Thee. My Soul, wait thou only upon God,
for my expectation is from him. By thee, O Lord, have I been holden up from the
Womb; thou art he that took me out of my Mothers bowels. My Praise shall be
continually of Thee.

But who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all his
praise? Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and
thy thoughts which are to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
Thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear Thee;
which thou have wrought for them that trust in Thee before the Sons of men?
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? I will
delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved. My Hands also will I
lift up to thy Commandments which I have loved: and I will meditate in thy
Statutes.

O how I love thy Law! it shall be my Meditation every day. How sweet are thy
words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than Honey to my mouth. Through thy Precepts
I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way. Do I not hate them, O
Lord, that hate thee? and am I not grieved with those that rise up against
thee? I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies. Search me, O
God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts. And see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy
Name. So will I praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
glorify thy Name for evermore.

Amen.
IX.
AND that you may be the more humbly confident both of Gods continued goodness,
and your own fidelity and the more fit likewise for pious Meditations; labor,
I entreat you, as much as ever you can, to maintain a constant cheerfulness of
spirit, and lightsomness of heart. Without this, it will be always night with
you, or but a cold Winters day; and as you will have no list either for
meditation or any other employment, so you will be apt to live in perpetual
suspicion of God, and of your Friends, and of your self.

Melancholy is a dull lumpish humor, which makes us of a frozen disposition,
and a Leaden temper. It inclines us not only to think worse of our selves than
we are, but to do worse than otherwise we should. It represents those things as
exceeding difficult, which may be done with ease; and those as impossible,
which have in them any considerable difficulty. It benums and stupifies our
Souls; and will let us feel nothing but it self. It quite dispirits us, and
will not suffer us to do any thing, because it imagines we cannot stir. It
shows us to our selves in an ugly Glass; and then no wonder we look amiss upon
all things else. Some things it makes to appear bigger than they are; and then
all the rest appear less. And having conceived them otherways than they are, it
nourishes the conceit till we believe it real.

As under the weight of some sluggish matter in the blood, a man sometimes
fancies his Arms are as big as Posts, and then his Hands seem as heavy as a Pig
of Lead, and he thinks he is unable to lift them up to his Head: so it is with
our minds, when they are oppressed with the burden of a sad and melancholy
humor. It makes all our duty seem very great, and our strength to be none at
all. All impediments it renders as big as Mountains; but our selves not of
force enough to remove a straw. It first binds up all the powers of the Soul,
and then will not let them be unloosed. It makes us very fearful of that, which
it persuades us we cannot avoid. And it afflicts us for that, which yet it
makes us fancy we cannot do. In an heat it pushes us forward; but suddenly it
cools, and says we cannot go. If it catch fire it makes us wild; and when it
has spent that flame, it leaves us sots and fools. It pricks us forward
sometimes to an enterprise; but it self is the shackles and fetters that will
not let us move.

This heaviness you must take heed of, and give no indulgence to it: For it is
the worm of the mind (as one of the Ancients expresses it) which eats up its
Parent that brought it forth. Contrary to the nature of other births, it
pleases us much, when we bring it forth, but proves a miserable torment to us,
as soon as it is born. Melancholy musings, I mean, are at first a very
delightful entertainment to the mind; but they grow in a little time to be a
very troublesome brood. They are a dangerous maze, in which a Man may easily
lose himself, and from whence he cannot, without much difficulty, get forth.
Honey is not sweet to a feverish man; nor are the sweetest truths acceptable
to the sad. Clogs are not a greater impediment to the Feet, than this humor to
the motions of the Soul. The eyes are not more darkened with some kind of fumes
and vapors, than the understanding is with its black imaginations. The Air is
not more poisoned, when it is charged with a thick and stinking mist, than the
mind is offensive to it self and others, when it is buried in its Clouds. And
as the Sun, when it looks through a Fog, seems as if it were all bloody: So do
the fairest objects, even God himself, appear in a dismal and horrid shape,
when these sullen exhalations gather about us.

Labor then continually to disperse them, and blow them away by such means as
you find, by experience, to be most available to that purpose. For cheerfulness
causes the Soul to breath in a pure Air; and to dwell in a wholesome and sweet
enclosure. It makes our work seem easy, and difficulties seem little, and God
seem good, and so our strength seem great and irresistible. It inlightens the
mind, it incourages the heart, it adds wings to the affections: and therefore
he that forbids it to our Souls, keeps out the welcomest Guest, and the best
Friend that Nature has. It misbeseems none but the wicked, in whom it is
commonly a light mirth and a foolish jollity. As you see fine ornaments and
curious dresses set off an handsome Face, though they render those who are ugly
more ill-favored: So does cheerfulness exceedingly become good Souls, though
in bad men it be most ridiculous.

For which cause, it is neither unmeet to use any helps that Nature affords us
to acquire it; nor to call in the assistance of innocent arts and pretty
inventions to invite it to keep us company. Socrates blushed not to be found at
Boyes-play with his Children. The wise and solemn Cato sometimes stooped to be
a little frollick. The great Scipio thought it not unbecoming his triumphal
body (as Seneca calls it) to use grave dances, and trip about a Room in decent
measures. Some devout men indeed have pronounced of such like pastimes, as
Physicians do of Mushromes, that the best ordered are worth nothing: but they
did not mean sure to decry all those pleasures which of themselves are
indifferent, and which the intention alone can render good, as well as evil.
You ought not to refuse any ingenious or harmless recreations, which you find
will cherish or refresh your spirit; though by Souls of a dark complexion they
be deemed fooleries. It is too great a burden to impose on your self such
restraints, as not to dare so much as laugh; for fear of giving occasion of
suspicion to the weak, or of slander to the wicked. But since a spirit free and
full of life is most useful, being endued with more strength and ability than
any other, it ought to be preserved in its alacrity; and when it droops and
languishes be excited to recover its cheerfulness again.

I know you do not think it a crime to laugh; nor are you in love with a
studied face. You are none of those who take innocence and severity to be such
inseparable companions, that they can never be found asunder: nor that judge a
free carriage to be a certain sign of an ill mind; and a merry humor to be a
constant token of levity of spirit, or want of judgment. But I desire that you
would not only think it lawful, but necessary, to be pleasant; and that you
would by no means suffer your self to become sad, under the notion of being
serious. The Ancient Christians were so cautious in this Point, that we read in
Palladius of an old Hermit, who, having five hundred Scholars, would never
dismiss them without this Lesson, My Friends be cheerful; do not forget, I
beseech you, to be cheerful. This was his constant lecture; which he repeated
as often as St. John did those words (which he is reported always to have had
in his mouth) My little Children, love one another. He took it, I suppose, out
of St. Paul, who gives this admonition thrice to the Philippians, III. 1. IV.
4. Rejoice in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say rejoice. It
is an unseemly thing for you to be sad and heavy, who serve so good a Master,
from whom you shall receive the reward of an Eternal Inheritance. If they that
traffic in earthly Goods rejoice in an advantageous bargain; Why should not
Religious People, whose Merchandise is Wisdom (a choiser thing than Silver or
Gold) who have many divine blessings already in possession, and are in certain
hope of more and greater; cherish a perpetual joy, and ever be of good comfort?

By which you may see, whence we are to derive our cheerfulness, and to what we
must be principally beholden for it. It springs out of an hearty and solid
belief of the blessed Gospel, and out of a sincere obedience to it; and
increases with our growth in spiritual knowledge and understanding, and in love
to God, and all our Brethren. All which, it would be easy to show you, is
comprehended in those words of the Apostle to the Colossians, 11.2, 3. where he
expresses his earnest desire for them, and other Christian People, that their
hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of
the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of
God, and of the Father, and of Christ; in whom are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge.

But when our natural spirits fail and sink within us, we must use natural
remedies to recruit them and raise them up again. None are to be rejected which
are not sinful; or will endanger to make us so. But those especially are to be
chosen, which will cheer the Body, and yet do no injury, but rather prove
beneficial, to the Mind. Of which sort I shall recommend one to you, when I
have concluded this Advice, as I have done the rest, with a short Prayer to God.

A PRAYER.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all comfort: who have given us everlasting
consolation; and good hope through thy grace in Christ Jesus. Blessed be thy
abundant love, which has exceeded toward us in him, beyond all our desires. O
how excellent is thy loveing kindness, O God, which has so blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, that it is become our duty to rejoice in
him always, and to be exceeding glad, even in the midst of all the troubles of
this life! O that I could keep such a perpetual and fresh remembrance of his
benefits in my mind, as may make me rejoice evermore! That so I may recommend
the Religion of our Lord Jesus to all others; and testify to all the World, by
my alacrity in doing and suffering his blessed will, that his Yoke is easy,
and his burden is light.

Possess me with such right notions and apprehensions of thee, and bless me
also with such integrity of heart; that I may both have the peace of a good
conscience, which is a continual feast, and be filled likewise with joy in the
Holy Ghost, out of a sense of thy divine favor to me, which is better than
life it self. Deliver me both from unprofitable sadness, and from vain mirth.
Preserve me constantly in an equal tranquillity of mind, and a becoming
cheerfulness of spirit. Bear me up, I beseech thee, above all the afflictions
which may befall me, by the joys of faith, and hope, and love. And when I
shall need the relief of inferior pleasures; O that they may never make me
lose the taste of Heavenly delights; but rather dispose me, by the refreshments
of my body, to a more lively discharge of all my duty, and to a quicker sense
of all divine enjoyments. And teach me to be so wise in the choice of my
pleasures, that they may not leave me sad afterward: but I may remain innocent
and unblameable before thee, and be better pleased also in the humble
expectation of the times of refreshment, which shall come from the Presence of
our Lord.

Amen.
X.
THIS puts me in mind to speak a little of Good Company, as a singular means
not only to cheer and refresh your spirits; but to quicken and improve your
mind also, in wisdom, or virtue. The joy of one Soul, is no joy, say the
Hebrews in their common Proverb; which is much-what the same with that of the
Greeks, One man, is no man. Good Company will help to divert our thoughts, and
yet not let us spend our time unprofitably. It will make us cheerful, and yet
wise and serious: It will delight us, and do us no harm; but make us rather
much better.

Some cheerfulness, I confess, is supposed in a Man's spirit, to make him good
Company for his Neighbors; for it renders his conceits quick and pleasant, his
words gracious and acceptable, and his very countenance smooth and obliging.
But if some dullness at present make him not to be a good Companion for them,
yet they may be the better company for him; and their cheerfulness may serve to
revive his spirits, and make him as brisk and well pleased as themselves. For
it is not more natural to us to yawn, when others do; than to be uncloudy in
our countenances, when the Faces of others shine.

We can scarce refrain from sighing, when we are entering upon a very long
Journey, through ways in which there are many dangers, and which we have never
gone before. But to perform it all alone is so uncomfortable, that we are apt
to grow weary as soon as we have begun it: and therefore are mighty inclined to
seek for some Fellow-travellers, to make it seem less tedious. Our very Horses
will go the better, when they travel together: And the Beast (as some
Philosophers call our Body) which we carry along with us, will not be so soon
tired, if we let it have some to follow, and bear it company. Whether it be
that the forwardness of others spurs us up to mend our pace, or whether it be
that love to them makes us like them, I know not; but so it is, that they who
have the goodness of others to help and encourage them, are wont to find
themselves better disposed, than otherwise they should have been, if they had
lived alone.

It is Solomon's Observation, XIII. Prove. 20. that, He who walks with wise
men shall be wise; but a Company of Fools shall be the worse for it. We have an
example of the former part of it (says R. Eliezer) in Lot; who by the pious
Example of Abraham with whom he lived, became a good Man, imitating his works,
and walking in his steps. For as Abraham, when he dwelt in Charran, was wont to
exercise hospitality, and to receive strangers: So did Lot when he dwelt in
Sodom; whereby he had the happiness to entertain Angels. As a Man (says he)
who goes into the Shop of one that sells Spices, though he cheapen and buy
nothing, yet receives a grateful odor, and carries away a refreshment: So does
he that converses with the just, partake of their good manners, and carries
away a sweet remembrance of their works. Therefore, either society, or death,
is a common Proverbial wish among the same Hebrews. One cannot tell which is
the greater desert, as Nausiclides was wont to speak, (as Athenaeus tells us) a
place where there is no spring, or where there are no good Neighbors. He must
be more than a Man, whose spirits do not fail him, if he want this refreshment.
He will soon be gone to another World, if he have no society in this. It is a
thing so necessary, that company not so good as we would wish, proves, now and
then, better than none at all; if it be but to make us more contented when we
are alone, and the more to prize our solitary opportunities.

And if we cannot have the society of many, yet we may find great use of one
special Friend, if well chosen. Nay, it is the advice of the wise Son of
Syrach, VI. Ecclus. 6. Be in peace with many: nevertheless have but one
counselor of a thousand. O how great a good is this, for a Man to meet with a
well-prepared Heart; wherein to lay up his secrets, more safe than a Jewel in
his Cabinet? whose conscience and fidelity he shall stand in less fear of, than
his own, whose discourse shall lenifie his carefulness; whose Opinion shall
dispatch his Counsels; whose cheerfulness shall dissipate his sorrow^^; and
whose very aspect is delightful! This is a Jewel worth ones seeking; and he
that has him not is but half a Man. A man without a Friend is like the left
hand without the right, as one of the Jewish Doctors speaks. He is an imperfect
Creature; and, according to this Man's Opinion, wants the better part of
Himself. But howsoever we may take Solomon's word for it, that two are better
than one. If we have the use of another Man's parts, time and labors; it is as
if we had two Souls, and as many Bodies; and did see with four Eyes, and think
with two understandings. He illustrates this in that place, IV. Eccles. 9, 10,
etc. by putting three Cases, (which may be easily applied to our spiritual
concernments) wherein the benefit of a virtuous friendship plainly appears.
First, In the case of inward weakness he says, if the one fall, the other will
lift up his fellow. When we slip, a good Friend will support us; or if we be
down, he will presently restore us to our selves again. Secondly, In case of
dullness, if the one be cold, the other may communicate some heat to him. If any
Person think himself so strong, that he is not in danger to fall, yet the best
grown man may feel some chilness, and spiritual numbness creep upon his Soul:
for, alas! we are at a great distance from the Sun, in compare with those who
are above, and it is, as it were, a Winter with us, while we are here in this
lower World. Now, how can one, says he, be warm alone? But, if two lie
together, then they have heat. As two Fire-sticks will singly cast no warmth,
but let their Flame dye; whereas both together will make a good Fire in the
Chimney: so will two Friends that lie close to each others hearts, keep
themselves from that coldness, which separated would seize upon them both. And,
Thirdly, In the case of worldly troubles and violent enemies that outwardly
assault them, though they may prevail against one, yet two, he says, shall
withstand them. When we have a second, we may venture to go into the Field: and
by a double strength we may take up the Bucklers, and hope to overcome, when we
might justly doubt of our own single valor.

But I cannot better represent the truth of all this, than in the words of
Simplicius, In Epict. Cap. 37.
an excellent Philosopher; who has briefly, but fully demonstrated the many
happy advantages of pure and hearty Friendship, in a discourse to this effect.

There is a truth in what is commonly said, that when a Man has got a Friend,
he has no longer one, but two Souls and Bodies. And then who can doubt, but
that they who are possessed of each others Persons, will have a communion in
their external goods? But what is this, in compare with that great light of
truth, which shines in united Souls? and with that complete virtue, which,
arising out of what excels in each, and being brought, as it were, into one
common stock, is countenanced by the Heavenly Powers, who shine upon it,
because of its perfection? They are safer than other Men in their Counsels;
they are less apt to trip in their actions; which are corroborated both by
Prudence, and by Power. Nay, suppose a Man's occasions call him into a far
Country; he is present, by his faithful Friend, to all the relations he leaves
behind him at home. Nay, not only while he lives, but when he is dead and
departed to another World; he is as secure of their happiness, during the life
of his Friend, as if he still remained himself and conversed among them. And
what is there more pleasant than the sight of a Friend? What more grateful,
than to hear his voice, and to behold his worthy actions? And as for trust and
confidence, neither Kindred, nor alliance to great Persons, nor Riches, nor any
thing else can so much assure it, as generous friendship. And therefore
Alexander was not ill advised, who pointed to his Friends, when some asked
where was his Treasures? There is no such Instructor and Tutor, as a Friend.
None can persuade us with so much ease; nor can any Man reprove us with so
little offense; nor do we fear to offend, and do amiss, upon the account of any
ones displeasure, so much as his. When he is present, he improves our
pleasures, and augments our prosperity: And as for our cares, he very much
lightens them, and eases us of their burden. And what is there that can teach
us civility, and an obliging conversation, so much as he? Observe how willing,
or rather glad we are, to yield him the precedence in all things. We readily
pass by his faults, and overlook his errors. We declare our mind to him simply,
and without any disguise. We are studious how to requite his favors; and
preserve, at least, a grateful remembrance of his good turns. And as for
humanity, kindness, and good nature, there is none to whom we extend it with so
much alacrity, as to a Friend. For whom we are not unwilling to expose our
selves to any danger: in so much, that if there were an Army of Friends listed,
a few Persons would conquer great Multitudes. And therefore if a Man exercise
himself in these things diligently, toward such a Person, and make them
familiar and easy to him by means of this friendly sympathy; without all doubt
he will be disposed, when occasion requires, to do the same proportionably, and
as far as is meet, unto all other Men. Behold, the benefit of Friendship: whose
sweet influences all the neighborhood feels, and fares the better for it. For
it is not unworthy of remark, that it is Friendship which is the best bond, and
ties us fastest to natural Relations. Nothing but this can link us to them with
a strong affection, and make us truly forward in their service. For whether
they be Brethren and Sisters, or Parents and Children, or Husband and Wife, if
they be not Friends also, though they be obedient to good Precepts, and perform
the duties of their natural Relations, they will not discharge them with a
cheerful will, and with gladness of heart. They may be constrained to serve
each other, lest they should seem to neglect their duty: but it is not nearness
of blood, nor any thing else, that will make them freely apply themselves to
it, as a good that they love, and on which they have set their delight. They
must be beholden for this, to friendly affection, which alone can make these
relations happy. Whose power is therefore so predominant, because it is the
daughter of the will, the fruit of a voluntary choice. This makes it excel all
natural affections, as much as the rational and voluntary operations, transcend
all the other motions in humane Nature.

But what is all this, though great and wonderful, to that which may be still
said in its praise? We have spoken hitherto, but of an humane good: That which
is the greatest of all, and the most Divine thing in it, is not taken notice
of; viz. the approaches it makes to the other World. For sincere friendship
contracting the Souls of two into one, is the most excellent endeavor of
humane nature, after union and conjunction with God. The union of Souls, who
are near of kin here, is the preparation for the Heavenly union: and it is
impossible without this, to be a consort of the better Beings. The sense of
which made the Pythagoraeans prefer friendship before all other good qualities,
and to call it the bond and combination of all the virtues. For no Man that is
unjust, or intemperate, or fearful or ignorant and foolish can be capable of
it. But he that would be a Friend, must purge himself from all the brutal
affections of the Soul; and then seek for his like. And when he has found him,
let him embrace that Person, as if he had met, according to the fable of
Aristophanes, with the other half of himself.

But the difficulty, you will say, is in finding him. True; and it requires
some judgment to make a right choice. We must deliberate of all things with
our Friend, but first of our Friend himself. And therefore you must remember
the advice of the Son of Syrach, VI. Ecclus. 7. If thou would get a Friend,
prove him first; and be not hasty to credit him. For though Friendship begin in
conversation, where Men soon find a mutual liking of each others Persons, Words
and Actions; yet they cannot so soon discover that likeness of humor and
disposition, and that sympathy in desires, which has the greatest power to
unite Souls. In so much that when by continuance of conversation and mutual
liking and happy agreement in all things, they are made one; the state of
things is so altered, that as at the first the Person was liked for what he
said or did, now the speeches and actions shall be liked, because they are said
and done by that Person.

But I shall scarce say any thing new in this Argument, (of which you know
where to find a larger discourse) and therefore I shall only add this, which is
suitable to the business in hand. When you want such an one, let him not be a
Person that is sad and melancholy, or that loves always to be complaining; for,
though he be never so honest and faithful, he will prove but an heavy
Companion. And on the contrary, one that is too merry and jocund, will be no
less disagreeing to a serious spirit; and be apt to offend more by his levity
and imprudence, than he gives content by his liberty and mirth. The happy
mixture of both these humors, which will serve for a remedy to each other,
compounds that Person, after whom we enquire. Just as the Romans (it is
observed by an ingenious Person) esteemed best those Tribunes, who testified
most inclination to the Senate; and among the Senators thought those the best,
who favored most the Peoples side: So it seems that the best of the pleasant
humors are those that come nearest to the melancholy; and the best of the
melancholy, those that approach nearest to the pleasant. For where there is
this temperature, the first sort will be more discreet and prudent; and the
latter less austere and incompliant. And if such a person have a quick sense of
Divine matters; and be of a pitiful and sympathizing disposition, free from
envy, patient of labors, and temperate in his pleasures; if he have done us
good before he was asked, and when he had done it, keeps it as a secret, and
speaks not of it (which Aristotle observes, is a sign he does it for our sake,
L. 2. Rhetor. cap. 4.
and for no other end) you may repose the greater confidence in him, as one
that is both more able and more willing to do you service.

And therefore when you have found such an one, think you have found great
riches, though you should be never so poor. Great Riches, did I say? Rather the
greatest Treasure in this World. For if a Man be more worth than all the World,
(as our Savior supposes, IX. Luke 25.) then he is the most wealthy Person, who
entirely possesses a worthy Man, that is like himself: And there is no way to
acquire such a possession, but only this. For though a Slave or a Servant be
ours, yet they are so but in part. The first gives us power over him out of
fear, and the second, for reward: But it is a power over their Bodies only, and
not over the men. Because neither fear of punishment will tie up a Slave from
rebellious thoughts; nor hope of reward oblige a Servant, to a cheerful
obedience in his will. He only has entirely gained a man, and so added to
himself something better, than any possession in this World, who enjoys a
Friend, and has won an absolute power over the heart and affection of another
Person. This is a rich man indeed, especially when the Person he enjoys is one
of real worth; having a mind stored with the Treasures of Divine wisdom, and an
heart full of the love of God. Otherways it must be confessed, a Man loses by
this gain, and has the less by this accession of seeming riches. It was an
audacious fancy of Boccalin's, and an unjust estimate which he made, when (in
his Balance wherein he weighs all the States of Christendom) he supposes
England, which he throws into the Scales for a counterpois to France, to weigh
the lighter upon the addition of Scotland to it. But if we conceive the like
Balance for our purpose, we shall find it too true, that he who contracts a
Friendship with a prating Companion, or a Person of no inward worth and value,
will feel himself the poorer and the weaker (when he comes to weigh what he
has got) for his pretended increase; and the annexing of a Friend, will be an
heaviness, and not a refreshment to his mind.

Whosoever fears the Lord, therefore, shall direct his friendship aright: (as the
Son of Syrach speaks, VI. Ecclus. 17.) for as he is, so shall his Neighbor (or
Familiar) be also. God loves ever, as the ancient Greek saying was, to bring
like to like. He will guide a good man in his choice, and lead him by the hand
to one that is good. In whom he will make account he has found such a
plentiful fortune, that he will not be content to forgo it, and take his
portion in some other goods. For, you may trust the same wise man, Nothing does
countervail a faithful Friend, and his excellency is unvaluable, v. 15. It is a
great comfort to us, but to think that we have such a treasure: for we receive
no small benefit by him, even when he is only the companion of our thoughts,
and is not otherwise present with us. And therefore, change not a Friend for
any good by no means: neither a faithful Brother for the Gold of Ophir, VII.
18. Covet his company above all others; and do not think you can press too near
him, or be too familiar with him. Love him exceedingly; and be not willing, on
any occasion to be divided from him. There can be no danger you should clash,
by being ever together: For as one of the Hebrews excellently expresses it, A
Needles eye is not too strait for two Friends; and all the World is not wide
enough for two Enemies. And if you must live at a distance from him; be not
jealous of him, nor suspect his constancy. For solid love, whose root is
virtue, can no more dye, than virtue it self; as Erasmus excellently speaks, in
a Letter of his to one of our Countrymen. When covetousness, says he, Lib. 9.
Epist. 12.
makes Men Friends, their love and their gain must needs end together. And they
whom pleasure allures to friendship, will make an end of loving, when they are
satiated with it. And lastly, they who have a great kindness one for another
out of a childish forwardness, or a juvenile heat, will forsake one another
with the same levity, that they embraced. Our kindness relies on stronger
Pillars; for it was neither hope of gain, nor pleasure, nor youthful affection,
but an honest love of wisdom and our common studies which joined us together.
For good men are linkt and chained to each other, by their admiration and
esteem of the same things. And since the study of virtue is not subject to
those alterations and changes of fortune that other things undergo: the
benevolence of good men must needs be perpetual, and is not in danger to suffer
that decay, which is wont to be the fate of vulgar friendship. But that it may
be the better preserved and maintained, it is necessary that Friends frequent
the company and conversation of each other, as much as they can. For, as
Themistius well notes, Exercise is all in all things: and mutual conversation,
Orat. 3.
or correspondence is the exercise of friendship.

But it is time to make an end of this, which I have the longer continued for
the reason now named; because the writing of all this is a good exercise of my
Friendship to you. Let me only cast in this one Rule, at the bottom of it. It
is good to observe when any chilness and heaviness creeps upon you, from what
quarter it comes. I mean, you must follow the stream backward to the Fountain,
and inform your self of the cause of the alteration. If it be too much company;
then, as soon as you can, seek retirement, and betake your self to private
Meditation. If too much solitariness; then find out some agreeable company, or
run to your Friend. If the change of weather, then wait, if there be no other
relief, till it change again. If you know not what, then believe you shall find
a remedy in Gods goodness, you know not how. And it may give you some pleasure
perhaps, when you are most indisposed, as to think of your Friend, so to send
up this short Prayer to Heaven for him, and for all those that heartily love
you, and to hope that they also are making the same address upon your account.
I put them all together indistinctly; it is in your power, at any time, to make
it as particular as you please.

A PRAYER.
THou art love, O God: and art to be infinitely loved above all things. Blessed
be thy goodness, who would have us dwell in love; that we may dwell in Thee,
and Thou in us. Blessed be thy goodness, that I am capable of such happiness;
especially of loving so great a good as thy self, who art the fountain of all
other good, from whom comes every good and perfect gift. To thee I owe my
Health, my Peace, my Plenty, my Wit, and all other Indowments, either of my
body or of my mind. I am exceedingly indebted to Thee, for the inconceivable
felicity which thou have put me in hope of in the other World; and that thou
art pleased to let me begin it here, in the company and society of good men,
especially in the love of kind and faithful Friends.

I thank thee again, O God, and can never thank thee enough, for this and all
other thy gifts, wherewith thou have enriched me: Beseeching thee that my love
may grow more fervent, by the daily consideration of thy love to us all; and
that I may have grace to improve and make the best use of this blessing, to my
further increase in Wisdom and Goodness, which are the greatest treasures of
all. O that I may feel my heart disposed and inclined, by a particular love to
some, to be kind and loveing to all other men; and especially to love thee and
our blessed Lord the more, my best and my eternal Friend.

Bestow upon those to whom I am united in friendly affection, all that I can
desire for my self: An healthful body, a long life, a clear understanding, a
ready apprehension, an exact prudence, a virtuous will, an unwearied diligence,
a constant cheerfulness, a sweet and obliging behavior, an useful
conversation, and good success in all their undertakings. Requite all their
kindnesses to me, in multitude of blessings; and above all with a sense of thy
Divine favor, and with the perpetual joy and comfort of the Holy Ghost.

O blessed Lord, hear all their own Prayers. Hear them for themselves, and for
me also. And stir us up all, to pray with greater ardency; with a more zealous
affection to thy Honor, and each others good; and with a most inflamed desire
to be as like thee, as possibly we can. That after a constant and hearty
friendship here in this World, we may have a comfortable departure out of it;
and rest in a joyful hope to meet together in the other life, and embrace in
the bosom of our blessed Lord, Christ Jesus.

Amen, Amen.
XI.
IN the next place I must exhort you, to exercise a great faith in Gods good
Providence, which rules in all affairs. This is of great force to banish all
perplexing thoughts; and consequently to make you of a cheerful spirit, and to
be good company for your self when you are alone, or about your necessary
employments. And it has not only this oblique aspect upon our Souls, to defend
them from that heaviness and sadness which is too apt to oppress them; but is
of a more direct and manifest influence to comfort and enliven them, on all
occasions. By removing, that is those impediments out of the way, which are a
clog and a burden to our spirits, and by begetting likewise an higher faith in
Gods goodness to our better part, which takes such care of our lower
concernments. For what is it that makes our heart unwilling to go to God, and
to wait upon him, as Mary sat at our Saviors Feet; but the multitude of
businesses wherewith, like Martha, we incumber and trouble our selves? We
imagine we can never take care enough about those things; and when we have done
our best, still we remain solicitous about the success. And so our Souls being
already filled and crowded with these thoughts, there is no room left to admit
of any other, till they be thrust out.

And suppose now our own Conscience begin in this case to reprove us, and bid
us go to our God; yet if it be that only which urges us, and not a quiet faith
in his good providence, how do we hear those things calling us off again, and
inviting, nay drawing our hearts to them; as being indeed their own? It is
nothing else that distracts us but these cares; which are not ejected by faith,
but only silenced and stilled a little by natural conscience, which tells us we
do amiss. Or if they have lain quiet a while, and given us leave to pray to
God, and think of better things; how easily do they thrust out all our good
Meditations and pious affections, when they return again? Nay, how do they eat
up and prey on the very Soul it self, as well as on all the good notions which
are within it?

If we be necessarily engaged then in more affairs, than willingly we would; it
is as necessary we should be strongly persuaded of the Care which God takes of
all things, that they shall go well with those who trust in him. That so we may
use but a moderate diligence, and not trouble our selves about issues and
events: and that we may save abundance of time for better thoughts; and that
these affairs may not take up our hearts, both while we are in them, and when
we are out of them too. That Is too much familiarity with them, when they will
never let us alone. And we ought to endeavor that, though they employ our
minds for many Hours, yet, when we have done our work, they may not then
ingross our time also.

The care of Religion is great enough; we need not take upon us the care of the
World too. With what reason do we complain, that we find it difficult to govern
our selves, when it seems, we think our selves meet to govern this World and
all? No wonder that we are weary of our work, when we have not only our own to
do, but will needs undertake Gods work likewise. We may well sigh and be
discouraged, when we carry such a vast burden upon our Shoulders. There is no
end of these Cares; which intermix themselves not only with our particular
businesses, but trouble us continually with sad and fearful thoughts about the
affairs of Nations, and the state of the public, wherein our private wealth
is embarked. And this is the mischief of it, that when we are discouraged by
this means, it is a sin, and not merely our misery: because we will meddle with
more than belongs unto us. We put our selves to an unnecessary pain, to put our
selves out of the favor and care of him; who would ease us of this burden, by
casting it upon his merciful providence. It is an uncomfortable and a sinful
condition; which is aggravated by this, that it is a needless and a bold
intrusion into his business who governs the World. It is as if I should be very
solicitous, whether the Sun will shine to morrow or not; when I have occasion
to stay all Day about my affairs at home.

Let us do what concerns us; and leave God to dispose of all the rest* And let
us believe that he will assist us in our dispatches; and a great deal the more,
if we will not stretch our selves to meddle beyond our line. He will help us to
do what we ought, when we do no more than we should. When we are not oppressed,
I mean, with fear that we shall not be able to go thorough our employments; and
when we are not too careful what will become of them, after we have finished
our work. God will take care that we shall do them, and that they shall have
the best success, when they are done. Look upon your self as a part of the
World, and upon God as the Governor of the whole. And then by faith in him,
make your self (as it were) a part of himself; that so he may have a particular
concernment in your affairs. Look upon your self not only as one of his Family,
and therefore under his General Providence: but also as one of his Children,
for whose good he will more than ordinarily provide. And be always confident he
will provide the better for you; because you trust him, and leave your self
wholly to his Wisdom and Kindness.

I could entertain you here with a delightful Discourse on this Argument; were
it not that I would not burden you, as I said before, with too great a Book.
Let me only advise you of this, which shall excuse me from adding a Prayer at
the end of this Discourse; especially since you know where to find one in
another place. That as it is most for our ease to recommend all we have and do
to Gods good providence, and resolutely to rest satisfied in what he
determines: so the most effectual course to obtain this resignation to him and
confidence in him, is rather to exercise it in our Devotions by acts of
resignation and expressions of our trust in his great goodness, than to be
petitioning him continually to bestow upon us this grace. Say therefore, with
the heartiest affection, upon all occasions, in the words of David.

Thou art my hope, O Lord, thou art my trust from my Youth. I trust in the
Mercy of God, Psalm. 71.5.14.52.8.141.8.56.3.92.2.118.9.37.2.5.
for ever and ever. Mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: I will hope
continually, and will yet praise Thee more and more. What time I am afraid, I
will trust in thee. I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge, and my fortress:
my God, in him will I trust. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
confidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
Princes. I will therefore trust in the Lord and do good: I will commit my way
unto him, that he may bring it to pass.

Behold, O Father of Mercies, how entirely I confide in thee. I absolutely
resign my self and all I have unto thee. I rely upon thy bounty, for what thou
judge fit and needful for me. Thy Goodness is the greatest treasure; thy
Truth and Faithfulness is my best security; thy gracious Promises and careful
Providence is my comfort; thy Wisdom is my satisfaction in all events and
accidents; thy Power is my support, protection, and safeguard. Lead me whither
thou please; and I will follow thee with a cheerful heart. I refuse nothing
which comes from thy hands, O most loving Father. I submit to thy orders; and
hope that all things shall work together for my good. And I trust in thy grace,
that I shall always do as I do now: steadfastly adhering thus unto thee, and
never suffering any thing that befalls me, to pull me away from this humble
faith in thy wise and almighty Goodness; to which I refer my self, now and
ever.

And the more to awaken you to this; let me tell you, My Friend, that we find
examples of it, even in the Heathens themselves, who, in a strange fit of
devotion, have sometime cried out on this fashion.

O man, what do thou? Why do thou not free thy self from all this trouble?
Adventure at last, Arrian. Epict. L. 2. Cap. 16.
with eyes lifted up to God, to say unto him. Use me at thy pleasure, O God,
for the time to come. Thou have my perfect consent. I am of the same mind that
thou art. I have a mind to nothing but what thou think good. Will thou have
me bear an Office; or shall I lead a private life? Must I stay or must I fly?
Shall I be poor or shall I be rich? I am ready to obey. I will defend thee,
against all the World. I will apologize for thy providence about these things,
to every body. I say that all is good, because thou art so.

Thus they exhorted men to follow God cheerfully, in a belief that he is Wise
and Good: for we can never be happy said they if we follow him sighing and
groaning; as a man does one that is stronger than he, who pulls him after him,
when he has no mind to go. Let us begin every thing (says the same
Philosopher in another place) without too much desire or aversation. Let us not
incline to this, or to the other way. But behave our selves like a Traveller,
who when he comes to two ways, asks him whom he meets next, which of those he
shall take to such a place: having no inclination to the right hand rather than
to the left; but desiring only to know the true and direct way that will carry
him to his Journeys end. Just so must we come to God, as to a Guide; as to one
who shall dispose of our motions as he pleases. We must not look about us, and
desire of him this or the other thing which we fancy. We must not direct Him
what course he should take with us; nor desire him to show us this rather than
that: but embrace that which he proposes; and desire only he will conduct us in
the right way to happiness. This is our duty and our safety. Whereas now you
shall see Men run to him, and say, Lord have Mercy upon me; deliver me from
such and such a thing. Wretch that thou art! Would thou have any thing but
what is best? And who can tell what that is? Is there any thing best, but that
which seems so to God? Why then do thou endeavor, as much as in thee lies,
to corrupt him who is to judge; and to seduce Him who is thy Counselor; and to
move him, by thy cries, to do otherways than he thinks good? Cease these
clamours, and do not urge him to incline to thy desires; but suffer him to
follow his own Wisdom. It cannot be any delight to him to cross and vex us. If
what we are inclined to desire be conformable to his judgment; he will not deny
it us, merely because we are inclined to desire it. But he will give us that
which is good in his eyes, as the holy Scripture speaks; And what would we have
more? Will it not suffice us to have our own hearts desire? And what should
that be, if we are well advised, but this; that we may have what unsearchable
Wisdom, united with Infinite Power and Goodness, shall think to be fittest for
us, and most convenient? Of this we need not doubt: And this is sufficient for
any Man's satisfaction.

XII.
AND, as a means to all this which has been said in the foregoing Advices, I
cannot but desire you, in the next place, to Receive as often as you can the
Holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. For there you have an ample
testimony of Gods tender love to you, and care over you. There a number of
Christian Brethren and good Friends meet, to rejoice together. There your Soul
is excited to the noblest thoughts and sublimest Meditations of your Savior's
love, and of the purchase he has made for you: The sight of which will not let
you stand in need of being chidden, by your self, into the devoutest
affections, and the most cheerful resignation to him; who having given so great
a gift as his Son to you, will not deny, you may be confident, to bestow lesser
benefits, when he sees them expedient for you. In brief; This is an holy Feast,
where our Lord not only makes you good cheer for the present; but renews your
decayed strength, and begets in you a greater liveliness for the future.

One great end of the institution of public Feasts, among all Nations in the
World, was for the maintaining of unity, love and friendship among the People
that lived under the same Laws; and for the recreating of those who were tired
with their constant labors. And it is the design, we likewise see, of our
private Feasts; which are times of ease and refreshment for our neighbors, and
preserve also good will among them: according to that of Ben Syra, a famous
Person among the Jews, Spread the Table and contention ceases. We are all good
Friends at a Feast; Upon which account Plato was of Opinion that their Gods
themselves, in much pity to Mankind, whose life is full of labor, (...),
etc. Lib. 2. de Leg.
did appoint those Festival times for them; that they might have a little
relaxation, and be encouraged by those public joys, to proceed without any
murmuring, in their several employments.

We are very sure that God has instituted, by his particular command, this
Holy Feast (like to which none ever was, and which we may celebrate as often as
we please) upon the Body and Blood of his dear Son. Whereby a great love, sure,
will be begot in our hearts to him and his service, whose guests we are; and at
whose cost the entertainment is made, merely out of his extraordinary grace and
royal favor toward us. This sure will be a singular refreshment and
restorative to our spirits; when we grow weary, and almost spent in the work of
our Lord. The sweetness of this will be like Wine to the Heart, or like Marrow
and Fatness to the Bones. It will stir us up, when we are listless; and comfort
us, when we are sad; and put life into us, when we are dead; and make us not
only able but willing to be Religious, being both our pleasure and our food.

Seneca, speaking of times of relaxation and rest from labors, says, he knew
some great Men, L. de tranq. animi.
who once a Month would give themselves a Day of play; and others that every
Day would allow some Hours, wherein they would not so much as write a Letter,
or meddle with any thing that had the show of business. If we in like manner
did, though not every Day, yet every Month take this sweet repast; if out of
love to Christ, and consideration of our own necessities, we did lay aside all
other thoughts, and give up our selves to those delightful Meditations, which
here present themselves unto us; it would ease us of many cares and troubles,
and make us more cheerfully do the will of God at other times, and dispose us
to attend the whole business of Religion as the pleasure rather than the labor
of our life.

But if you be cast into a place, where you have not the opportunity so
frequently to celebrate the remembrance of Christ's death, by receiving the
outward and visible signs and pledges of his Divine Grace; then you may the
oftener communicate with him spiritually in your own heart, and represent his
dying love as lively as you can to it, in your retired thoughts: Beseeching him
to accept of your unfeigned desires, to make him your public acknowledgments,
and to join with all those pious Souls, which are then met together throughout
the Christian World to show forth his praise, and to offer up themselves in
holy love to him, and to our blessed Redeemer Christ Jesus. For which purpose I
would advise you to make use of all such Meditations, Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, as are wont to attend those Solemnities: altering only those
words which relate to your actual receiving at the Table of the Lord.

The profit of such a frequent remembrance of our Lord one way or other, will
be exceeding great; for the securing your duty, and the making all those
Counsels, which I have given you, the more effectual. It will put you in mind
of the worth and dignity of your Soul; for which Christ has done and suffered
so much, and on whom he bestows such precious tokens of his love. It will
quicken your love to him, which is the life of Religion. You shall taste how
sweet it is, beyond all comparison, to be Religious; whereby we have such hope
in God. There you shall be remembered how gainful it is to be good, beyond all
the purchases of this World; for Christ imparts himself to you and all his
benefits. There you pray with the greatest devotion, and offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices; and you represent also the Sacrifice of Christ, to prevail for
blessings for you. And there you are most likely to have the most plentiful
communications of God's Holy Spirit to you; and to feel your Heart dilated in
the largest affection unto Him. There you confirm your promises to God; and he
seals his to you. You cannot there be of another judgment, if you would, than
this; that since Christ dyed to give you life, you ought not henceforth to live
to your self, but unto him which dyed for you, and rose again.

This, I make no doubt, is one reason, why those promises wherein Men stand
engaged to God, are no better performed; because they do not frequently repeat
this holy action, in the exercise of which, they find their hearts, at present,
fully resolved for God and goodness. This is the cause that they waver again;
and all their Promises and Vows wherein they bind themselves, fall off like
cords of vanity. Whereas, did they upon all occasions communicate with our
Savior, they would find their resolutions grow so strong and steadfast, that no
temptation would be able to break them. They would be like Bands of Iron, or
Chains, rather, of Gold; that would hold them for ever to their duty. You have
heard, I believe, the story of Mithridates; who by often use of the Antidote
which he invented, so fortified his Spirits; that they resisted the force of
all Poison. Insomuch that when, to avoid the Roman slavery, he would have
dispatched himself by a strong venomous draught, he was not able to effect it.
Such a sovereign virtue you will find, in the frequent devout receiving of the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. It will secure the life of your Soul;
confirm your strength; arm you against the bitings of the old Serpent; and make
it, in a manner, impossible for you to be impoisoned, by any naughty affections.

But I have writ so much, on this Subject, in other Books already, that I need
not say any more of it here. You find, I hope, those Treatises useful to the
stirring up Devotion, and to the making a Soul more forward and unwearied in
Gods service. And there likewise you may meet with a particular Prayer, for
Love to the Holy Communion: wherefore let me proceed, without any stop, to the
next Advice.

XIII.
IF so be you find your Dullness and backwardness to your Duty, at any time,
continue so long and increase so much, that you are afraid there is danger in
it, and it may prove pernicious to your Soul; then go and take counsel of your
spiritual Physician, to whom I would have you open your case, as plainly and
fully as you can. There is no small safety in taking a good Guide by the hand,
at all turns, as you walk in your way to Heaven. But then especially it is a
necessary piece of wisdom to ask about your way betime, when you fear you may
be out: and to open your grief at the beginning, when you are wounded with sad
apprehensions, before the Sore fester.

And if your Physician or Director could be your Friend also, then you would
have a threefold advantage for your relief; by the advice of a good Man, a
Friend, and one of Gods Officers. For I believe the same words spoken by him,
and by another, are not the same. They are the more acceptable when they come
from a Friend; and carry the greater Authority from the Mouth of God's
Minister. And therefore be no more backward to reveal the secrets of your Soul
to Him, when it is beyond your own skill to heal your distempers; than you are
to let a Physician know those Maladies in your Body, which must be beholden to
him for a Cure.

He may furnish you with incentives, if you need quickening. He may revive you,
when you seem as if you were a dying. He may lend you his supports and
comforts, when you are feeble and disconsolate. He may help you to distinguish
between your fears and real dangers; between your weakness and your wilfulness;
between your laziness, and your caution; between your bodily and your spiritual
infirmities. He will be as a good Pilot to steer your Soul, when you are tossed
(like a Ship in a dangerous Sea and a dark Night) in the doubts and waverings
of your own Mind. Yea, in your best estate, he may be of singular use to you,
to keep you within the bounds of prudence; that you be not overborn with the
too violent gusts of your own awakned affections and desires. A Ship needs a
Pilot in fair weather, as well as in a storm: when it has a prosperous Gale,
as well as when it is driven with rough and furious, or with cross Winds. She
may be in danger then by undiscovered Shelves and Rocks, or by carrying too
great a Sail; as in the other case she is, by Tempests and Hurricans, which
tear her Sails in pieces. And she must never sail at random, but steer to some
certain Port; which cannot be performed without his direction, and must be the
effect of his skilful guidance. Even so it is in the case of our Souls; which
may be overturned in our spiritual fervours, unless we have some to manage us.
When all things favor us, we may strain our selves too much and be overset, if
there be none to govern our Motions. Our zeal may be indiscreet, if we have not
a wise and faithful Adviser. It may spend it self on little things, or those
that are unprofitable, if there be none to give directions about it: Or it may
drive at no certain end, but flote as it happens, unless some body sit at the
stern, to order and rule it. We may hoyse up too high a Sail, and by making
too much have be endangered; if we have not the assistance of one that can judge
what we are able to bear, and that shall sometimes slacken us in our too speedy
course. In short, a great deal of time may be spent in some cases, to small
purpose; without a greater prudence than our own, to husband it, and lay it out
for us.

I must commend to you therefore the Rule, which one of the Jewish Doctors gave
his Scholars (half of which you have had already) Provide your self, In Pirke
Aroth, Cap. 1.
of a good Teacher, and a good School-fellow. A good Guide, and a good
Companion, you will find exceeding useful to you. Especially the Guide; who may
sometime be your Companion too. Such the holy Scripture calls our Leaders
(Rulers we render it, XIII. Hebr. 17) the Conductors, and Governors of our
motions, in the way to Heaven. Those that take us by the hand, as I said, both
to guide and to support us: by their advice and counsel; by their admonitions
and exhortations; by Prayer and Blessing; by comforts and spiritual
consolations. They are Ministers of the Word; Expounders of the holy Books;
Monitors to our Duty; Mediators with God; and Dispensers of the Mysteries of
Salvation: And therefore it will not be safe to travel without the Instructions
of some or other of them. To whom when you have committed your self, look upon
Him as your good Genius, or tutelar Angel, (by which Name the highest Ministers
in the Church are called) whom you would have as near you as you can; and in
whose company, and under whose care and tuition you may hope to arrive in
safety at your Journeys end. To him it will be necessary to repair on all
occasions, that He may instruct and teach you in that whereof you are Ignorant;
or awaken you, when you are sleepy; or refresh and cheer you, when you are
weary; or cure you, when you are sick and ill at ease; or resolve you in your
doubts; or quicken your dullness; or bridle your fervours; in short, that he may
illuminate your mind to make a difference between truth and falsehood, reality
and appearance, good and evil; and excite your will to embrace the one, and
refuse the other, with a constant affection.

For suppose (to give an instance) any Man should make a tendry to you of some
Principles, which he labors to prove you ought to receive, as Articles of the
Christian Faith: How can you be secure that you shall not drink in some
poisonous Conceits, under the sugared Name of Truth; unless you take advice of
those, that have their Senses more exercised to discern, than your self? And
so, in all other cases, know for certain, you will never be so well able to
instruct and counsel your self, as they: never so well understand the Sacred
Books, as by the help of their Interpretations: nor be so well satisfied you do
your duty, as by consulting with them, whose work it is to search and make
enquiries into the Laws of God. Every Man may know so much of the Law, as to
keep him from quarrelling, or trespassing upon his Neighbors: But he will not
depend upon his own knowledge in every thing that concerns his estate,
especially when any part of it is in dispute, or he would have it well settled
according to his hearts desire. And though some ordinary things in Physic, the
virtues of certain Herbs and Plants, may be understood by any Body with a
little pains; yet none will trust themselves, or their next Neighbors, in case
of a sharp Disease, but send, if they be able, for a Man of the greatest repute
in his faculty, to look after their health, and administer Medicines to them.
Just thus it is in the case of our Souls: it is too much presumption and
careless confidence, to rely upon our own counsel alone, in the setlement of
our everlasting estate, or in the Cure of those Disorders and Distempers in our
mind which threaten danger; we ought to take good advice, and, for fear of
mistake, have the judgment of some more skilful Person to secure us, as well
as our own.

And indeed, from hence you may learn what account God makes of your Soul (and
how highly it ought to be valued by your self) for the safety of which He has
made such careful and plentiful provision. Having, next to the gift of his Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, settled an order of men to minister unto Souls; to look
after them, and see that they do not perish, for want of instruction or good
advice. As he would have our Savior lay down his life for them, so he has,
thereby, made him a most compassionate High Priest, and preferred him to a
Kingdom; which is nothing else but an Office, Power and Authority, to take
care of Souls, and do them good continually. By virtue of which, he has
committed Authority unto others in a perpetual succession, that they should
watch for Men's souls, as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks: declaring to them
their own worth, and his love; ingrafting that Word in them, which is able to
save them; calling them to repentance; establishing them in the Faith;
encouraging their Progress in virtue; ordering their goings; feeding them with
his blessed Body and Blood; absolving them from their sins; assisting them in
their last agony, that they may finish their course with joy.

This is the effect of a peculiar kindness to Souls. He has not dealt so with
our Bodies: for we never heard of a Company of Men appointed by God to invent
pleasures and contrive ways for the feasting of our Senses. There are none
separated and set apart by him, to teach the World how to get riches, and
improve their Estates, and fill their Coffers. But all the wisdom of Heaven is
employed to other purposes: having ordained Men to teach us how to live above
those things, and to replenish our minds with his knowledge, and our wills with
his love. This he has made their constant function, and perpetual employment,
to the Worlds end.

And therefore be not slack to use their Ministry, nor doubt of the blessing of
God upon it. But have so much love to your Soul, as to apply your self to them
for assistance, who are particularly concerned to give it: and so much love to
God, as to be confident he will make those means successful, which he has
particularly ordained for your good.

A PRAYER.
I Adore Thee, O Lord, the Father of Mercies, who have designed Mankind to the
greatest felicity in everlasting Life. And have not left us, in pursuance of
it, to the uncertain guesses of our own Mind; but sent thy dear Son into the
World, both to assure us of that happiness, and to direct us, by his holy
Doctrine and Example, how we may attain it. Blessed be the tender mercy of our
God, whereby the Son of Righteousness has visited us from on high, to give
light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide
our feet into the way of peace. Great is thy love, O Lord, which, after he had
left the World, sent his Apostles, and other Ministers of thy Word, to be the
Messengers of Reconciliation and Peace, the Leaders and Conducters of Souls,
the Stewards of thy Mysteries, and the Guides unto Blessedness. Great is thy
love; which to this day continues a merciful care over Souls; in providing a
succession of faithful Pastors and Instructors, to teach us our duty, to reduce
us when we go astray, to resolve us when we doubt, to help us when we are weak
or weary; and by their counsels, admonitions and comforts, to bring our Souls
back again safe to Thee, the Father of Spirits.

I see, O Lord, how dear and precious our Souls are in thy sight: for which our
Savior has done and suffered so much, and imployeth still the care and pains
of so many Persons to take the charge and oversight of them, and guide them
unto their Rest. My Soul blesses Thee, and all that is within me praises thy
holy Name, as for all other thy Benefits, so for the many good Instructors I
have met withal, the many good Lessons I have been taught, and the pious
Counsels and Advices I have received. I thank thee for putting me into the
Hands of such Friendly and skilful Guides; and that I have never hitherto
wanted some to conduct me, in all the dangerous and troublesome passages of my
Life. Be pleased still to favor me with the continuance of the like happiness:
enduing me with wisdom to choose, and grace to follow such a person, who may,
on all occasions, clearly inlighten my understanding, settle my doubts, confirm
my resolutions, quicken my endeavors, direct my zeal, keep all my passions in
order, and secure my goings in thy paths. That so I may neither miss my way,
nor proceed with irregular motions, nor be discouraged in it: but hold an even,
steady and constant course in well doing; till they to whom thou have committed
the care of me, deliver me up in peace and safety, into the hands of the great
Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls, Christ Jesus. To whom be Glory and Dominion
for ever.

Amen.
XIV.
BUT when you are in your best moods, and think your self furthest off from
danger, it will be good to exercise an Holy Fear and Jealousy over your self;
least you should give way to any thing, which may make you grow worse. Remember
how false and treacherous the conquered Enemy is; and therefore it ought to be
narrowly watched. Though it promise fair, Remember that you must not trust it
without a constant Guard. And mark the least beginings of an evil, for fear, if
they be slighted as small faults, they draw you into a greater. Though we must
not be dejected for our little irregularities, yet we must not pass them over
neither, without a serious observance. If a Father laugh or smile when he
chides a wanton Child, it is so far from being a check to his follies, that it
does the more embolden him to play those idle tricks, for which he is reproved.
And so it is to be feared we shall find our selves disposed; if we be not in
good earnest displeased at our selves for any thing that borders upon Vice, and
do not reprove our selves seriously for making too much use of our liberty: We
may be in danger by this mildness and gentleness, to take the boldness to
proceed to further transgressions.

But I may seem to forget to whom I write; and, considering what a great
quantity you have of this fear, I had need give it a large dash of some other
mixture; least it turn into timorousness, and hurt your Soul. And this indeed
is the skill we should all learn; to behave our selves with such caution and
evenness in the exercise of fear, that it do not make us Superstitious, nor,
through a despondency of Spirit, cast us into that dullness and weakness, which
we are striving to avoid. You must let your Fear therefore be tempered with so
much of a Divine Faith; that like heat and moisture, they may make up one
healthful constitution.

Faith in God, I say, is another thing that you must carefully and daily foster
in your Soul; if you would be constant in his Service. Be verily persuaded that
he loves you infinitely more, than you love him; and therefore is more
desirous, than you can be, to see you do well and continue in well doing to the
end. Think that his eye is upon you; that his arm is under you; that he is as
near to you as you are to your self: for, in all regards, we live and move, and
have our Being in Him. Think therefore that you behold Him, the Father of
Lights, sending in rays of light into your mind, as you see the Sun looking in
at your Windows, and filling the room with its cheerful beams: and that you
feel Him pouring in life constantly into your will, as the Heart spurts out
blood into all the Arteries of the Body. Never entertain such a thought of Him,
as though he was willing to desert you, and cast you out of his friendship; now
that he has done so much for you, and you have been so long acquainted. By no
means hearken to any jealous thoughts, that are but whispered of his goodness;
whatsoever the jealousies be, which you have of your own inconstancy.

Was it not He that called us, when we were in horrid darkness and
forgetfulness of him; bending all our thoughts and desires to our own ruin and
his dishonor? Was it not He that assisted us to get the victory over so many
Enemies? Who but He is it, that has hitherto enabled us, in our study to live
virtuously, and please Him in all things? What should now move him to alter his
mind? After such numerous tokens of his love, what is it should make him hate
us? Will he bear with no weaknesses; or shall a fault that we have committed,
wholly alienate his affection from us? If when we lay in our filthiness, he
took pity on us, pulled us out of the Mire, and laid us in his bosom; now
that we are washed all over, will he shake us off, and cast us out of his
embraces, because our Feet (as our Lord speaks) still need some washing? He
that invited us so kindly when we were strangers, and took us into his house,
and made us become not his servants only, but his Children; will he now turn us
out of doors presently, and thrust us into the wide world again, because we
have offended Him? When we had no strength, did he inspire us, and has he thus
long tenderly followed us, and trained us up in his service; and will he now
forsake the conduct of us, and abandon us to the mercy of our Enemies? Why did
He then with so much labor purchase our love? Why has He been at such vast
expense on our account? Why would He take such incredible care to lose us, when
we might have perished by his no care of us?

O unworthy thoughts of so gracious a Master, so loving a Father, so tender a
Husband! Rather let us think the Sun may refuse to rise and shine upon us, or
the Sea may be dried up; than imagine that He should be willing to cast us into
our former darkness, and not let the current of his grace still run toward us.
Let us at least make him as good as an ordinary Mother, who not only suckles
her Child when it is young, and indures many tedious Days and wearisome Nights,
in the midst of its cries and froward humors; but likewise loves and looks
after it when it can go alone, and make some provision for its own good and
safety. Far be it from us to make him like the silly Birds, that attend their
young no longer than they are in the Nest, and leave them to shift for
themselves, when they have once taught them to use their Wings. Will not the
Divine love think you endure far more untowardness, peevishness and waywardness
in our hearts, when our grace is but in its infancy and childhood; than a
tender Mother indures in her little one, before it can speak and tell its mind?
And will he not bear then with some indiscretions or faults afterward; but
cast us out as Sarah did Ishmael and the Handmaid into a Wilderness; where
there is no provision for us? Nay, will He that took compassion on that poor
outcast and his Mother, to whom he sent his Angel for their preservation, leave
his dear Children to become a prey to the wild Beasts of the Desert? Far be it
from the Father of Mercies, the God of love and all comfort, to deal so with us.

And let me tell you that, the more confidence we repose in his love, the more
he hates to use us so unkindly. What man is there so hard-hearted, that seeing
his Neighbor ready to fall and hurt himself, will deny him his help, and
withdraw his support; especially when he falls into his arms, and desires
wholly to lean Himself on his Breast? Who can endure to fail a Man, and let him
be undone; that comes and puts his estate and his life into his hands, though
otherwise he be undeserving? If a poor Bird fly to us for protection from the
ravenous Kite that persecutes it, Can we find in our hearts to throw it into
its Enemies claws? Who can then suspect, that God, who has declared himself
otherwise willing to do us good, should then cast us off and forsake us, when
we altogether rely upon his goodness, clemency, wisdom and power to help and
relieve us? When we fly to none else for shelter; when we say as David does
(LXII. Psalm. 1, 2, 5.) Truly my Soul waits upon God, from Him comes my
Salvation: He only is my rock and my salvation, he is my defense: The rock of
my strength, and my refuge is in God: Who can let it enter into his thoughts,
that then He will turn away from us, and suffer us to be greatly moved?

But more than this; there is no Man among us, unless he will make himself most
infamous, can fail and desert another; who, upon his earnest invitation, and
kind proffers of security, comes and puts Himself wholly under his Wing, and
trusts to his Covert for safe protection. Men are not arrived yet at such
inhumanity; but are ashamed to be so barbarous, as to inveigle Men with fair
promises and shows of kindness to come, and take Sanctuary with them, and then
betray them. Let the Lord of Heaven then never be held in the least suspicion
of such unfaithfulness as well as unkindness to us, whom he has invited and
persuaded to confide and put their whole trust in him. Never so much as
imagine, that he will disappoint those good Souls, that rely and depend on
nothing in their obedience to him, but his undoubted promises. Let it not come
into any our minds (or let the thought of it be abhorred and rejected with
indignation) that after he has made us such assurances of his Care and Love,
he will break his word, and let us fall, when we have fast hold of his Mercy
and his Truth. Men may prove false and treacherous; there may be such Monsters
whose kindnesses are but flatteries, and their invitations but insnarements:
But faithfulness it self cannot be unfaithful; God's Goodness cannot mock us;
His infinite perfections will not let Him have any unworthy designs upon us, or
any ways delude us.

What? deceive a Confident, and fail a Friend? -- Such God is pleased to esteem
us, when we devote our selves in love to his Service: which is a farther
consideration, of greater moment than any else; to secure us of his faithful
kindness. For if our heart will not serve us, to let a poor neighbor fall to
the ground; when we can easily support him; much less to desert one that has
entirely trusted us with all he has, and who by our desire reposed this trust
in us; then least of all can we be inclined to abandon the care of him, who by
long conversation with us, and experience of us, is become our Friend. This
gives him a new and a stronger title to all that we can do for him; and because
we have been so kind, will be the best reason why we should continue to be so
still. Consider but the Natural works of God; does He begin to form the life of
a Child in the Womb, and leave it before it become a perfect Creature? yea, if
it be but a Chicken in an Egg, does he not bring it to its full growth, unless
(in either case) something extraordinary hinder? Why then should we dream that
he will desist, and forsake the formation of his Son Christ in us; the lively
Image of whom he has already begun? It must be some strange violence which we
offer to our selves, some very ill use of our Souls, and great straining of the
conscience, that can make us miscarry.

I have asked the Question, you know, elsewhere, and let me briefly repeat it
again in this place; Who was it that bid S. Peter to walk upon the Water? At
whose command did his body, though apt to sink like a stone, tread in that soft
and yielding Element? Was it not our Savior that said, Come? and that was
enough. His word made the floods that they could not swallow him up. He felt no
more difficulty or danger in those paths, as long as he believed our Savior's
Power, than if he had walked on dry Land. Then it was that he began to sink,
when his faith turned into fear. His heart sunk before his body; and his
courage yielded before the Waters. Just so it is with us, who are compounded of
earthly materials, and yet are bid to wade through this world to heaven. A
Miracle it is, that our dull Nature which hangs downward, and is inclined to
sink into the soft delights of sense, should be able to look up above, and not
be swallowed up in a gulf of sin and misery. For this we stand indebted to the
Divine Power, upholding and aiding our weakness. And He that has called us, as
he did Peter, and bid us come to him, continues his mighty word with us, and
bids us go on in the ways of his Commandments. What need we fear, as long as
we have him in our company, to go along with us? And when is it that we are in
danger of drowning; but when we grow diffident, (as St. Peter did) and our
minds are fixed more upon the Wind and the Waves, the hardships and the
hazards, that threaten us, than upon the grace and power of our Lord, that
takes the charge of us?

And yet if through our fearfulness and distrust, we chance to stagger and
waver in our resolution; we are not utterly undone, but have a Remedy very near
us. Our Lord will put forth his hand, even in the midst of these fears, and
hold us up, as he did that faint-hearted Disciple of his, when we cry out to
Him in his words, Lord save me.

It is stoutly resolved by an Heathen, that seeing all disorders in man arise,
partly from the weakness of those reasons that are in his mind, and partly from
the excessive abundance of gross matter, to which he is chained; and seeing
those Reasons and Notions are Divine, and near of Kin to the Gods themselves;
the insuperable and irresistible power of the Gods will come to the assistance
of their Kindred, Proclus, L. 1. in Timaeum. (...), etc.
and so revive and renew those Reasons, so comfort and cherish their weakness,
that they shall be able to conquer the heaviness and dullness of the bodily
impediments. Let us much more resolutely conclude, that seeing our Souls
(though here in this Prison) are the offspring of God, and seeing likewise he
is manifested in our flesh, and has married it (as I may say) to himself; he
will mightily encourage and strengthen the one, and help us to disburden the
other, and purify both: and that he will never despise the faintest essays of
any honest Soul that faithfully strugles for greater liberty; but assist it in
all its attempts and endeavors, to be unloaded and made more free and cheerful
in his service. These very motions derive themselves from Heaven; and may as
confidently expect to be succored from thence, as a Child to receive relief
from his Parents when he is in distress, and when, by his order also, he is
engaged to apply his weakness to a mighty work, which without his help, he
knows, cannot be accomplished. It is incredible that the Father of Mercies
should expose that which is born of him, to be undone and perish; which will
certainly be the fate of all that is good in us, without his constant care and
assistance for its preservation. Do not doubt, but God will look after his own,
and see that the little portion of goodness which is remaining in this World,
be countenanced and encouraged. In assurance of which, you may address your
self unto him, after this manner.

A PRAYER.
O Lord; who have breathed into me the breath of life, and endued me with an
Immortal Spirit; which looks up unto thee, and remembers it is made after thine
own Image, and that thou have sent Jesus Christ from Heaven to repair and renew
that Image in wisdom, righteousness and holiness: Behold with grace and favor
the ardent desires which are in mine heart, to recover a perfect likeness of
Thee. By thine Almighty Love, all Praise be unto Thee, my mind is already
awakened to some sense of Thee; and my will overcome to yield up it self
entirely to obey Thee; and I have been assisted hitherto in performing my duty
to Thee. Yea, I have tasted so often how gracious thou art; that I account thy
service the most perfect freedom, and find that in keeping of thy
Commandments there is great reward.

My Hope is, that thou, Lord, who have never failed those that seek thee, Psalm.
9.10.19.11.138.8.
wilt perfect that which concerns me, and not forsake the works of thine own
hands. It is Thee whom my Soul seeks; that I may have a more lively and
prevailing sense of Thee, that I may most ardently love Thee, and constantly
adhere to thy will, and do Thee honor by a cheerful observance of all thy
Commands. And from Thee it is that I have received these good inclinations, and
holy desires. They are the fruit of thy love, and therefore cannot but be thy
delight: which makes me still trust in Thee, that thou will rejoice over me,
and do me good.

I have thy Word to encourage me, upon which thou have caused me to hope. And I
know that thy Word is true from the beginning: 119. Psalm. 90.160.
and that thy faithfulness is unto all Generations. They are not the things
which thou have never promised us that I come to beg of Thee; riches, honors,
long life, or the rest of the goods of this World (for which I refer my self to
thy wisdom, to give me what portion of them thou please) but thy Holy Spirit,
which my Savior has told me thou will as readily give to those that ask it,
as a tenderhearted Parent will give food to his hungry Children, when they cry
unto him. I desire only that thy own life may be nourished and protected in me,
and vanquish all its enemies, and be completed in a blessed Immortality. I beg
of thee more of the Grace of Humility, of Meekness, of Temperance, of Patience,
of Brotherly-kindness, and of Charity. Endue me with moderate desires of what I
want, and a sober use of what I enjoy; with more contentedness in what is
present, and less solicitude about what is future; with a patient mind to
submit to any loss of what I have, or to any disappointment of what I expect;
with a pious care to improve my precious time in all other actions of a
Christian life; and with a willingness to conclude my days, and return back to
thee, to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness, in these things, be for my comfort,
119. Psalm. 58.76. 1. Colos. 9.1. Phil. 11.15. Romans 13.14. 1. Pet. 5.10.48.
Psalm. 14.
according to thy Word unto thy Servant. I entreat thy favor with my whole
Heart: Be merciful unto me according to thy Word: Which has pronounced those
blessed that hunger and thirst after righteousness, and promised that they
shall be filled. Fill me, O Lord, with the knowledge of thy will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding. Fill me with goodness, and the fruits of
righteousness. And fill me with all joy and peace in believing, that thou will
never leave me nor forsake me; but make me perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle me, and be my God for ever and ever: my Guide even unto Death.

Amen.
XV.
AND now is there any need to use many words, to show how much force there is
in the Meditation of Death to make you lively? It is the common opinion, that
all things intend themselves more earnestly, and act in the extremity, when
they meet with their contrary, which threatens their destruction: As Springs
are hottest in the coldest seasons, and Fire it self most scorching in frosty
weather. Even so if we set Death very seriously before our mind, and laid the
thoughts of it close to our heart, would it cause our life to be more full of
Life. We should gather together all our might, to do as much as we can; if we
looked upon our selves, as going to the Grave; where there is no work to be done
at all.

The mind of Man is too apt to feed it self with the fancy of several
pleasures, that either Nature affords, or Art has invented. Among all which a
good natured mind finds none so delicious; as the conceit which frequently
starts up in it, of the excessive pleasure he should enjoy, were he always in
the company of a Friend whom he loves entirely, and might they spend their
days, even as they list themselves, and dispose of all their Hours according to
their own inclinations. But if a thought of Death interpose it self when he is
in the height of this delight, it dashes all these fine Bubbles of the
imagination in pieces: All Is gone, and vanishes into a sigh; or there is
nothing of them remains, but a drop as big as a tear. And therefore if it be so
sharp a curb to the forwardness of our desires, and serve as a Bridle to hold
in our headstrong passions; we may use it also as a good Spur to prick them on,
when they are too sluggish, and to stir them up when they have no list to move
at all.

When we are ready to fall asleep, did we but think of dying, it would make us
start and say; Who would sleep and dream away his time in this manner, when,
for any thing he knows, he has but a few Sands left in his Glass? Death is
coming to draw the Curtains about me, and to make my Bed for me in the dust;
Awake then, up, and be doing, because there is a long Night near at hand,
wherein we must rest and not work. And is it not a very great grace, if for so
small, so short a work, we shall receive so vast, so long a reward? It is a
great shame to stand all the day idle, if it be but for this very reason, that
our best diligence, though it could be continued for many more years than it is
like to be, can never deserve such a recompense.

Place your self therefore, as if you were upon your Deathbed, and think with
what ardent desires, with what passionate groans, with what an heartful of
sighs, you would seek after God, if your Soul was just taking its flight out of
this Body; and perhaps this will send it out beforehand in the like sighs and
groans, which will help to waft You toward Heaven. Just as when a man is to
write to the dearest Friend he has in the World, and thinks they are the last
Lines that ever he shall send him; his very heart dissolves and drops it self
into his Pen: So would all our affections melt and flow forth toward God, if
we seemed to our selves, as if we should never speak to him more with a Tongue
of Flesh, nor look upon him through these Windows of Clay; but should shortly
dwell in silence, and go down into the House of Darkness. O how would our Souls
thirst for God (as David speaks) for the living God! How much should we love
him, and endeavor to confirm our friendship with him! that when our Bodies are
disposed of into the Earth, our Souls might still live and rejoice with Him in
Heaven; expecting also a blessed Resurrection.

And if you say that in this state of dullness, that I am speaking of, a Soul is
fit to think of nothing; this thing will tell you how it alarms the heart, and
makes it muster up its thoughts, and collect its scattered Forces, that it may
be in a readiness to receive the approaches of Death, and its assault upon us.
And the thoughts of it, at such a time, are the more natural and easy, because
there is nothing more like to Death than this unactive and sluggish temper;
when the Soul seems as if it were buried in the Body, and intombed already in
this Vault of Flesh.

And it would be very easy to show how much every one of the foregoing counsels
would be improved, by our frequent conversation, on all occasions, with our
Graves. It would excite our minds to enquire after another World; and make us
very desirous to find it out. It would raise our esteem of the great love of
God, who has given us such assurance of a never dying life. It would carry
away our thoughts from this Earth, as not the place of our settled abode. It
would presently send them above; and bid them see the pleasures which we do but
imagine here, in their full growth, and perfection of joy and happiness there.
O how delightful would Religion and Virtue be unto us, which is the only thing
we can carry away with us? How curious should we be to judge aright, that Death
may not be the first thing that shall undeceive us? How would it open our
heart, as I said, to pour out it self in devout affections to God? and what a
comfort would these be to us, if the records of them were spread before us at
our dying hour? This is so far from being an enemy to cheerfulness, that it is
a forcible reason why we should freely enjoy all that God has given us,
because we must shortly leave it. Our Friends also we shall therefore be
inclined to embrace more ardently, and do them the more good, and covet their
company, because we have not long to stay with them. For when I said the
thoughts of Death are apt to restrain our too forward desires, I did not mean
that it checks or abates our love to our Friends. No; Love is strong as Death,
and hard (or unyielding) as the Grave: the Coals thereof are Coals of Fire, a
most vehement flame; as Solomon speaks, VIII. Cant. 6. It burns, that is, like
the Fire on the Altar (for in the Hebrew the last words are; the Flame of God)
which came down from Heaven and never went out. Nothing can conquer it, no not
Death which conquers all Flesh. That can only teach us not to place our chief
contentment in any thing here; no, not in the best good in this World, though
never so dear unto us: because it may shortly leave us only its shadow, the
image of it in our memory; which putting us in mind of our forepast pleasures
will make us so much the more sad, if we have not hope to find that good
improved, by its departure from us, in another World. And is not the use of a
Friend then most visible, when we think of our departure, by whom as I said, in
one of the former Discourses, we shall still remain with those whom we leave
behind? But what Friend is there like to our blessed Lord; whose love we shall
the oftener remember by commemorating his Death, if we think of our own? We
cannot choose but be excited to prepare our selves thereby, for an happy and
cheerful dissolution. And why should we not trust God with all we have for a
little time, whom we must shortly entrust with Soul and Body to all Eternity?
But I list not to prolong this Discourse, with such collections as these; which
I will leave to your own thoughts, with this Prayer, wherewith you may awaken
your mind, when you find it necessary.

A PRAYER.
THou art worthy, O Lord, of all Praise, Glory and Honor; by whose Omnipotent
Will, and for whose pleasure, all things in Heaven and Earth were created, and
by whose indulgent Providence they are continually maintained and preserved.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure: yea all of them shall wax old like a
Garment: 102. Psalm. 26.73.26.
as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art
the same, and thy Years shall have no end. I prostrate my self before Thee in
an humble sense, that I am but sinful dust and ashes; who have nothing to glory
in, neither riches, nor strength, nor wisdom; but only this (O how happy is it
for me!) that I know thee, the ever living God, the Rock of Ages, the only
solid foundation of our comfort and joy, who when my Flesh and my Heart
fails, wilt be the strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever.

I am now presenting my Soul and Body to Thee, in perfect health: but cannot
tell where I shall be the next moment, or whether I shall live to breath out
the desires of my Soul, once more, unto Thee. For in thy hand is the breath of
our Nostrils, and when thou please we are turned to destruction. We dwell in
Houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust; and they are daily crumbling
and mouldering away, so that we know not how soon they will vanish and be seen
no more. O how serious should the thoughts of this make me in all my addresses
unto Thee? How dead to all the sinful enjoyments of this World? How holy and
pure? How heavenly minded and spiritual? How ready to do good, and to
communicate to others those things which I must shortly leave? How diligent to
assure my self thereby of better enjoyments, and to make friends in Heaven;
that when I go hence I may be received into everlasting Habitations?

I see, O Lord, now that I think of my departure, how unprofitable my too many
cares are for the things of this life: How vain my eager desires after
unnecessary riches, and honors: how trifling all my pleasures; and that there
is no solid happiness but in thy love, and a pious hope of immortality. O my
God, be so good to me as to turn my thoughts frequently toward my latter end:
and to fix in my mind a lively sense of the uncertainty of my being, and the
fickleness of all things belonging to it. That, since I must shortly leave them
all, even my dearest Friends and Kindred, and this body too, (which must be
turned into corruption) I may most zealously endeavor to secure thy love and
friendship in a better life, by the constant, cheerful and earnest exercise of
all godliness and virtue, while I tarry here.

Help me to be as humble and lowly as the dust to which I am going: to bury all
anger, hatred, and enmities, since we must needs dye, 2 Samuel 14.14.
and be as Water spilt upon the Ground, which cannot be gathered up again: to
discharge my mind of all superfluous cares, and of immoderate love of dying
things: to enjoy them innocently and cheerfully: to do good with them heartily,
and to envy no Man's greater prosperity: to suffer evil, and to take the loss
of them patiently: to admire that mercy which still prolongs so frail a life as
mine is: and especially to admire the gracious terms of thy holy Gospel, which,
for our short labors or sufferings here, has promised us the reward of an
endless life in a better place. Dispose me likewise to be willing to leave this
World, and to be always in a readiness for my departure: that I may never be
surprised with sudden Death, nor obey thy summons with an heavy heart; but
freely resign my spirit unto Thee, who gave it.

O how much do I desire the continuance of these holy thoughts and
inclinations: that so I may have such a love to this world, as is consistent
with my hope of Heaven; and be so busied in earthly affairs, that my heart may
be there, where my treasure is; and be tied to my friends in such affection,
that we may not be eternally divorced. And the nearer I draw to that eternal
World, O that I may be the more pure and separated from all worldly mixtures;
and the clearer sight and prospect I may have of my happiness; and attain the
greater assurance of thy love; and be the fuller of joy in hope of thy glory.
Pity my present weakness; increase my strength; help me not only to resist,
but to overcome all temptations; enable me to discharge the duties of my
several relations; prepare me for all varieties of conditions; that in
prosperity I may not forget Thee, nor imagine in adversity that thou forgettest
me, but in all I may be the same, and have the same thoughts of thee, love to
thee, and delight in Thee, till I come to an unchangeable goodness and
happiness with the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
XVI.
BUT if you be so much discomposed at any time, that you cannot get your
thoughts close to this business, nor find any relief in any of the foregoing
counsels; I must then, in the last place, send you to a never failing remedy;
which is, to Exercise a great deal of patience toward your self. I am so well
assured of your goodness, and that my judgment is not herein blinded by my
affection to you; that I dare conclude with this Advice: Be content to be dull
sometime, and able to do nothing as you would; and yet do not think the worse
of your self for it. But if it do stir up any suspicions in your mind, of you
do not know what fault; yet never bluster at your self, but with a calm and
gentle spirit suffer this distemper. Look upon your self as sick, and think
that it is not good now to stir any humors. And therefore strive not too much
neither with your self [do not distrust this counsel] when you are thus
melancholy; for that will but cast you more into it. You will be the sooner
eased, if you do as well as you can; and add not a greater load to your spirit,
by your own fretful thoughts at this untoward indisposition.

You must consider that our Bodies being a part of this World, will be
obnoxious to those changes which are in things adjacent to them. And that your
Soul being united to your Body, cannot but feel its vicissitudes: Just as when
the House smoaks, the Inhabitant is offended, unless he can step out of Doors.

Consider also that the same work is not required of a weak, and of a stronger
Person. The Nemalim and the Gemalim (as the Jews speaks) must not be alike
loaded: that is, the Ants cannot carry such a Burden as the Camels.

You must thank God it is no worse with you; and that you have not quite forgot
Him. Thank him, I say, that you have any use of patience, and that you are not
under an absolute stupidity.

Remember likewise that it will be better with you. As long as there is the
same Sun in Heaven, the Clouds will be dispersed, and we shall have fair days
as well as foul: and as long as our Lord lives and changes not, there will be a
brighter season, and we shall be warm as well as cold.

Think likewise how unworthy the best of us is, to live always under the
Sunbeams. And that as there are many Countries more North (...) gland, who in
the depth of our Winter, are in a long and dismal Night: so there are many
Souls who are in a colder case, and more remote from the Sun of righteousness,
than yours is.

But however think, that after you have done what you can, it is the will of
God that you should be as you are. And if this dullness please him, it need not
displease you.

Remember also, that he is not perfect in patience, who can bear with others,
but not with himself.

And again, that there is good reason you should bear with your self; because
accidentally this dullness will breed a greater activity, when you come out of
it: Both out of justice, that you may make some recompense for that drowsiness;
and out of gratitude to him, by whose goodness you were delivered from it. For
Nature, you know, instructs us to be very kind to those who have helped us ou^
of a very great distress; and it is not easy, to blot their readiness to
relieve us out of our memories.

And besides, it is manifest there are some kinds of dullness and indisposition,
which arise from the mere necessity of Nature: With which we can no more
reasonably quarrel; than we do because it rains or snows, when we would have it
fair weather. Can it be expected, for instance, that a Woman with Child should
be so vigorous as she was wont? She must be content perhaps to spend that time
in vomiting, which once she did in praying. It must not put her to pain in this
case, that she cannot read or think so long, or with so much delight, or with
such clearness of understanding as formerly she could: but she must comply with
her condition, and, considering no more can be done in such circumstances,
believe that God requires no more. There is as much reason to be troubled,
because she has not Wings to fly, or cannot walk now as fast up her stairs, as
when she had no burden; as to chide her self that she cannot be so earnest, so
long, so cheerful as formerly in the performance of Holy Duties.

There are many cases like to this* in which there is no more caution
necessary, but to see that too much care of our ease, and indulgence to our
present infirmity (which must at such a time be liberally allowed) do not tempt
us to be negligent in that, which it is in our power to perform. We may often
retire to God in shorter thoughts, and affectionate longings and pantings after
him; and thereby keeping our hearts in a glowing temper, we may prevent that
chilness and laziness, which otherwise might creep upon us, and make us imagine
our selves less able than we are. And particularly I would advise you, on such
occasions, to lift up your Soul frequently to God in earnest desires,
beseeching Him to preserve you from cheating your self; and that he would help
you to discern clearly when it is the flattery, and when it is the mere
weakness of Flesh and Blood, that hinders you from doing as you were wont.

When you cast a glance, I say, toward Heaven, and send up a sigh thither now
and then, (as you are able) let this be one of your desires; that God would be
so gracious, as to give you to feel plainly, when mere necessity requires your
attendance on your Body, and when it calls for more than it needs. For he loves
that in every thing we should make known our requests to Him, and will
certainly some way or other satisfy your mind in such concernments. And when
you have used the best judgment you have and can procure, together with your
Prayers, about them; then I hope you will be cheerful, and let your thoughts
trouble you no more. Or if a thought should happen to start up and strike your
mind, telling you that you are lazy yet believe, I beseech you, your more
deliberate, and not these sudden conclusions.

There is one case, I know, of this kind, wherein though it be certain that it
is impossible for us to do as we were wont, and that we are not hindered by any
fault in our will, but by the mere indisposition of nature, yet it may be hard
sometime to avoid dejected and complaining thoughts upon this account: It is in
sickness; when the Mind necessarily languishes with the Body. You may chance
then to imagine that some sin or other is the cause of this Correction (and so
you have drawn this disability upon your self) for which you cannot now be
humbled as you desire. But I hope, My Friend, that you take such an exact view
of your life, that sickness will not let you see any fault, that was not
visible to you before. And I know you to be wiser, than to torment your self
with a fancy that there is some sin lurking in you, though you cannot find it
out. But if any thing should discover it self to you, which was not so evident
before; let me beseech you, not to pass any hard censure upon your self: But to
remember that this has been bewailed whenever you lamented the general
infirmity of your nature; and that now perhaps it is represented to you more
ugly than it does deserve, or if it be not* yet it is sufficient only to beg of
God to accept your hearty confession and your promise of amendment (when you
are able) and to desire your spiritual guide to be the witness of your sincere
resolution, and to give you absolution, and his blessing; and so rest satisfied.

But there may be another reason likewise assigned of our heaviness at certain
seasons, which I have no^ yet named: and that is, the withholding, in a great
measure, of tha^ strength and power which was upon us from the Holy Ghost, to
raise and elevate us to an high pitch of love, activity, and joy in well doing.
For as the help of that does lift us up above our selves, so, when it much
abates, we are apt to fall as much below our selves; and to be surprised with
sadness and dejection of spirit, to see our selves so strangely changed. And
this may be denied us for several causes; either because we have not improved
it, so well as we might; or because our Lord sees that our Nature cannot bear
always such extraordinary motions; or that he may make us more sensible of his
favors, and raise their price and value in our esteem; or that he may try our
strength, as a Mother lets go her hold of the Child, to make it feel its Feet;
or that he may thereby bow our wills more absolutely to his, and break our
self-love, which desires nothing but pleasure; or that he may prove whether we
will love him for himself, and not for the delicate entertainments which he
gives us; or for some such cause unknown to you and me, and every body else.

And shall we not yield submission quietly, to a thing for which there may be
so many reasons; and those not at all to our prejudice, but to our profit? Let
me say a few words concerning the two last things mentioned; and show you that
if our Patience be exercised upon those accounts, it will prove very beneficial
to our Souls.

I cannot say (as some have done) that we ought not to desire goodness for our
own good, but merely because it is pleasing to God. No; this seems to me a very
absurd doctrine, and utterly impossible, that we should separate these two,
Piety, and our own good. We cannot so much as desire to be good, but we shall
feel a satisfaction in it. For the very Name of good carries a respect in it,
to something in us to which it is agreeable and convenient. We do not mean when
we bid you love God for himself, that you should not therein love your self,
and seek your own contentment; for you cannot choose but be pleased in the love
of God and virtue. But this I may affirm with safety; that there may be
sometimes too much of self-love in our vehement desires after the extraordinary
pleasures and joys of piety: and that if we could be content, after we used
due diligence, with our dryness and barrenness of spirit, with our dullness and
want of vigor, nay, with our frailties and faults too, merely out of
submission to God, and because he thinks not fit to give us the pleasure of
being wholly without them; it would be highly acceptable to him, and no less
advantageous to us. If in all things, I mean, we could rest satisfied that
God's will is done, though ours be denied, if we could forbear to prosecute our
own will even in those matters, and desire him to give us as much Life, and
Spirit, and cheerfulness and joy as he pleases; we should be so far from
offending him, that he would take it for a very grateful piece of service to
him.

This is not to teach any remisness in your desires and endeavors; but it
supposes you do your best, and only advises you, that if notwithstanding you
cannot be as you would, you do not let your spirit fall into any impatience or
fretfulness. For this is to prefer God's pleasure above your own. It is a
subjection of your will to his, in those points wherein you are most desirous
to have it gratified. It is an unusual instance of resignation to him; which
declares there is nothing so dear to you, but you are willing to quit it, so
you may but do well, and be accepted with Him.

And here remember these two things: First, that our solid comfort does not
depend upon doing every thing so readily, easily and delightfully as we would;
but in accomplishing Gods will, however it be done. And 2dly, That Humility,
Patience and Submission to God in the midst of our infirmities, may be more
acceptable to him than that complacence and joy which we feel to arise merely
from the sense that we have of our strength and abilities. To be pleased in our
successes is not so pleasing to God, as to be patient in our Contests. Nay, to
rejoice and triumph in our Victories, is nothing so good, as to be constant and
resolved, notwithstanding that we are a little overcome. In those spiritual
consolations which we thirst after, we do not always receive so much profit as
we do pleasure* but in the want of them, if our wills be thereby more perfectly
subdued to his, we receive both a very great benefit, and in the issue, no
small pleasure.

You have seen perhaps, or you may imagine, the smoke of a Potters Furnace; how
thick and black it is, as if it would make a Picture of Hell it self. Who would
think that the Vessels of Clay, which are baked there, would not be burnt to
ashes by the fury of the Fire; or that at lest they would come out as black as
soote, by the foulness of the smoke? And yet when the Fire is put out, and the
Vessels unfurnaced, you see there is no such thing: But that which was soft and
yielding, is become hard and strong; and its complexion likewise is so much
mended, that a Prince need not disdain the use of some of these Cups. Just thus
it is with a distressed Soul, when it is covered with a Cloud, and wrapped in
darkness; and burns thereby in a great and sore displeasure against it self. It
is apt to think, that this sure is the Gate of Hell; that it is forsaken of
God; and shall either perish in this condition, or not escape out of it,
without much loss. But after a while, when the work of God is done, and the
vapors are vanished and disappear, it finds it self to be grown much in
firmness, purity and splendour; and that it is made a Vessel of honor fit for
the Masters use. There is no loss of any thing, but of its self-will. Nothing
is consumed but its softness and delicacy; which made it loath to be touched.

The like may be said of many little passions and disorderly desires, to which
our frail Natures are subject. If we can free our selves from one inordinate
passion, which is a too vehement desire to be quite rid of them; it might bring
us little less peace, than if we were: and our profiting would no less appear,
in continuing still to do our duty, of which we complain that they are so great
an hinderance. However, there is no reason for such conclusions as those, which
good minds have been apt to make in a gloomy day; that if God loved them, he
would not treat them after that manner. There is rather great reason,
considering what has been said, to be not only patient, but thankful to him in
such a condition. For it is not inconsistent with his care and infinite
kindness, to let us be obnoxious to those changes, and those weaknesses too,
which I have mentioned: but you see plainly it must be so; and therefore it is
best to be well pleased with these Methods of our Heavenly Father, at least
contented that it should be so.

And let me add this for a conclusion of this Discourse; that God may suffer
some Persons to be thus overcast with darkness, and he may withold his
gracious influences from them, for the sins of their former life, before they
were converted; which deserved he should never have afforded his grace unto
them at all. What are we, should such Men say, that we should expect to live
always under the light of his countenance? Alas! one age of darkness is too
good for us; and we have reason to thank him, if we be not eternally banished
from his sight. Why should such poor things as we think to receive every day
some extraordinary tokens of his Divine favor; when one good look from him, is
enough to oblige us as long as we live? How much more reason have we to praise
him, that all our days are not gloomy, that our Sun is not always eclipsed, or
rather that our life is but one long Night; than to complain that a Cloud
sometimes passes over us, or a Mist gathers about us? It is but fit that we
should be hereby taught what it is to sin against God; and it is well for us
that we were not sent to learn it in outer darkness. We are not ill dealt
withal, if we can learn at so cheap a rate the value of pardoning mercy: but
shall have cause in Heaven to praise God, that we paid no dearer for it. Is
this all the punishment that is due for our many faults? Does he not use us
very kindly, if we be not quite cast out of his Presence? O what a joy will it
be to us, to find that we are in his favor in the other World? And we may be
content, if he please, to stay for our joy till that time; when we shall
certainly know, whether we have reason to rejoice or no.

But I shall say no more of this to you, who have spent your time so innocently
and virtuously, that there is reason you should reap the fruit of it now in
perpetual joy and satisfaction of heart, from the consideration of God's
goodness to you. And I had wholly omitted this last Advice, did not I know the
weakness of humane Nature to be so great, that the best disposed Souls may
sometimes feel such alterations in them, as may make it very necessary. In
which case, if ever you should find your self, doubt not to approach to God,
and say to him, with all humility of spirit, some such words as these.

A PRAYER.
I Acknowledge, O great God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that I am not worthy
of the least glimpse of thy divine favor. It is sufficient that I live and
behold the light of the Sun, and am not banished into outer darkness. And it is
more than enough, for so wretched a thing as I am, that thou art pleased, at
any time of my life, to bestow upon me the smallest testimony of thy love. But
that I live in hope to pass through all these Clouds, and to behold my blessed
Savior in inconceivable splendour, and rejoice with him for ever; O what a
grace is it! How infinitely am I indebted to Thee, for such riches of mercy! It
ought to make me contented with any condition here; and exceeding thankful to
Thee, that it is no worse. Deal with me, O merciful God, even as thou please,
so that I may but have this humble hope preserved in my heart, of seeing and
loving my Lord, not as now darkly and dully, but in the clearest light, and
with the most ardent love, in Immortal Glory.

I submit to thy Infinite Wisdom under all that heaviness and listlesness of
spirit, wherewith I am oppressed; from which I know thy Infinite Power, if thou
did judge it most convenient, is able to deliver me. Thou art not unwilling
neither, I know, to gratify the desires of pious hearts, who sincerely long
after a state of more perfect love to Thee, and would gladly with more active
and unwearied spirits serve thee, and all mankind. But since thou art pleased
to leave us to contend with many and great infirmities of our mortal Nature,
thy will be done. I deserved none of that power and strength from above, which
I have received; O that I could say that I have always employed it, or been so
thankful for it, as I ought! By thy grace I am what I am. And by its assistance
I hope to persevere in my duty, and in thy love; though thou denyest me all the
satisfaction, which I am inclined to desire. I am content to serve thee on any
terms; yea desirous to have my will subdued, in every thing, perfectly unto
thine.

O that I may but feel my Soul growing more humble, more submissive, more
patient, more entirely resigned to thy pleasure; and I shall think my self a
great gainer, by all the loads and pressures under which I groan. O that they
may depress me more in my own thoughts; and make me more admire thy indulgent
kindness which exercises no greater severity upon me; and raise in me an higher
esteem of those favors, which thou art pleased at any time to communicate to
me; and make me place my satisfaction, in a constant and resolute obedience to
Thee (whatsoever discouragements I meet withal) and in the expectation of an
happy translation from this earthly state to an Heavenly, which thou have
promised as the reward of faithful obedience.

Into thy hands, O Lord, I now commend my Spirit, as I must do when I leave
this World. I trust my self with Thee; beseeching thee to conduct me safe
through all varieties and changes both bodily and spiritual, unto thy eternal
rest. And for that end, bestow upon me such an attentive and sincerely
discerning spirit, that I may never be cheated by the laziness of fleshly
Nature; nor call that my infirmity, which is my carelessness and negligence.
Preserve me from all affected Ignorance, from idleness, from rashness, from
self-flattery and presumption: as well as from all causless jealousies of my
self, and too much sadness and dejection of spirit. Help me to overgrow daily
the unsteadiness of my mind and thoughts, and that backwardness which is in my
will and affections; together with all other imperfections and weaknesses of
this state. But as for all the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, or the
pride of life, O my God, I hope I shall be a perfect stranger to them, and far
removed from them.

Help me in all conditions steadfastly to love the good which thou have
commanded, and the good which thou have promised: And enable me as patiently to
bear the evil which thou inflictest, and as vehemently to hate the evil which
thou forbidest, and to be much afraid of the evil which thou threatnest, and to
be well pleased with every thing that thou sendest. If thou make me rich,
keep me from being wanton, or proud, or in love with this World, or loath to
leave it: Help me discreetly to taste of these good things, but to live upon
those which are Heavenly. And if thou art pleased to reduce me into want, keep
me from all repining thoughts, from distrust of Thee, and from too great
carefulness and solicitude of mind: and help me then to remember that I have
still the same most loving Father, who fed me in the days of my fullness and
prosperity. While I have my health, good Lord, make me serviceable; that if I
be sick, I may not be disconsolate, nor uneasy to my self and others. In all
my employments dispose me to be cheerful, in all my enjoyments thankful, and on
all occasions very watchful, that I fall not into temptation: And be thou my
Guide, my Helper, my Defender, my Comforter, and indulgent Father also, that if
I do fall, I may not utterly be cast down; but live in hope to recover more
strength, and to Glorify Thee by bringing forth much and better Fruit, through
Christ Jesus our blessed Savior. By whom I believe in Thee who have raised Him
from the Dead, and given Him Glory, 1 Pet. 1.21.
that our Faith and Hope might be in Thee our GOD.

Amen.
THUS, My Friend, I have finished this little Labor of Love (to speak in the
Language of St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.) which I wish may prove so serviceable to
you, that it may do more than produce that Patience of hope in you, which he
mentions in the same place. I would have you to be filled with the joy of hope,
or, as he speaks in another Epistle, (XV. Romans 13.) with all joy and peace in
believing. It becomes one of your understanding and goodness: nor is there any
greater effect of true Wisdom (as Seneca has observed) than the equality and
evenness of our joy. Nothing sure can hinder it in you, but the inequality
perhaps at sometimes of your bodily temper, which is not to be avoided. But in
that case I have instructed you what to do; and I am sure you will not fail to
follow my Directions therein, and in all the rest, whatsoever pains it cost
you. For I need not send you to Musonius to learn this great truth (of which
you are as sensible as it is incourageing) that if a Man do any good thing with
labor, the labor passes soon away, but the good remains: and if he do any
evil with pleasure, the pleasure presently flies away, but the evil remains. So
great is the difference between doing well, and doing ill, that you can never,
I know, be tempted from the one unto the other. It is too late now to put a
cheat upon you. The pleasures of sin cannot deceive one, whose senses are so
well exercised to discern between good and evil. You may be abused, it is
possible, with fears and jealousies of your self; and be cast down when you
have no list to do any thing that is good, or when you mistake, or have
committed a little fault: but as I said in the beginning, so I conclude, be
sure you hold fast an unmovable belief of the goodness of God to you; which
will defend you from the danger of those assaults, and prevent all the mischief
which otherwise they might do you.

He does not expect Children without all faults; and you may be sure cannot be
unwilling to pardon them, when he knows that is the way to encourage them to
grow better. There is no reason to suspect his sincerity, when he tells us,
that he desires not the Death of a Sinner: Or to imagine that he secretly
undermines us, while he openly professes love and friendship to us: or to fear
that he intends to make us the Trophies of his mere Power and Greatness; or to
draw us after Him, as his Captives, in any other Chariot than that of his
Omnipotent Goodness, in which he rides all the World over. Believe this, and it
will never let you despond in the worst condition; nor suffer you to be jealous
of any of his commands, or fancy that he will lay impossible tasks upon you.
And you will have as little cause to be suspicious of his Providence, or to
take too heavily any thing that he does: but will still believe,
notwithstanding any objections or contrary appearances, that all things shall
work together for your good. And whatsoever there is that might dishearten you,
this will make you persist in a resolute persuasion that GOD is willing and
desirous to receive your Petitions, and will grant a gracious answer. He cannot
envy his blessings to any: nor loves he to suppress his kindness within
himself. For envy proceeds from weakness and from want, which incline a Person
to seek how he may ingross every thing, and appropriate it to his own
particular being. But he who in his own Nature is so perfect that he can want
nothing, is inclined no doubt to let others participate with him in his
happiness, since he will still remain as full as he was.

You think it is impossible (as Proclus well says) that darkness should
approach the Sun, who is the Parent of Light: (...).
But it is more impossible that any envy should touch God, whose Nature is so
excellent, that he has given to all what they have. What is there left for him
to envy, who has already all that can be? For what want can there be in
Infinite Fullness? What Weakness and Infirmity in the Omnipotent Deity? Who is
there that can share and go halfs with the Fountain of all Good? Let Us not
therefore look upon GOD, as if we thought Him afraid that we should be too
good, or enjoy too much good; or as if He were unwilling we should be exceeding
happy. For He is such a Good, that He has filled and replenished all things;
and does good, and bestows Benefits continually upon them all. And why should
you think your self excluded out of the vast compass of his Love; or imagine
after He has done so much for you, that his Bounty is exhausted? Do you not
feel what kindness GOD has implanted in our Hearts, toward each other? How
free, how diligent, how unwearied a Friend is in serving a Person whom he loves
entirely? And what is there better natured than that Religion which Christ has
taught Us; the top of which is Love and Charity; and that is both a Bountiful,
and a Meek, and a Patient Virtue? For it suffers long and is kind, so St. Paul
begins its Character; it bears all things, and indures all things, so he ends
it. And is it possible, do you think, that GOD should give Us that, which is
not in Himself? Or that He should command Us to accomplish our Souls with that
Perfection, which is not eminent in his own most excellent Nature? We are sure
that our loving kindness is but a weak imitation of His. And therefore may
conclude that He will have Patience with Us, and not be easily provoked; but
bear with our Infirmities, and be exceeding kind in bestowing his Blessings,
and Pardoning our Offenses, and delight in doing both; because there is nothing
He so much delights to see in Us, as this Image of His loving kindness. So the
greatest Men in the Church of CHRIST have resolved.

Some empty their Bags, (says Gregory Nazianzen) others macerate their Flesh;
Orat. 17.
and there are those who quite abandon the World, and retire out of it; and
some who have consecrated their dearest pledges to GOD. But thou need do
none of these; there is one thing thou may bring and offer to Him in stead
of all, and that is loving kindness, (forgiving of Injuries, and doing
Benefits) in which God rejoices more than in all the rest put together. A
proper Gift; an unspotted Gift; a Gift that provokes the Divine Bounty to be
still more Liberal in His Favors to Us.

For, it is impossible that He should be outdone by Us, or that we should
equal Him in tenderness and compassion: of which He has given Us such a
surprising and glorious instance in the Son of his love Christ Jesus; that we
should be very unjust as well as ungrateful and unkind, if we should not expect
more from him, than we would do from the best Friend in the World. We see in
our Lord what the Divine Love will incline Him to do: We are satisfied beyond
all reasonable cause of distrust how propitious and gracious He is: So that you
ought to be confident, whatsoever defects you find in your self, that He who
has begun a good work in you, will pe^form it unto the Day of CHRIST JESUS. It
is but handsome and becomeing that you should have this Opinion of Him. Judge
by your self and your own good inclinations, whether you ought not to have such
high thoughts of Infinite Love. You owe to Him all the good you have: and there
is more Reason, as I told you, that He should perfect his own work, than there
was that He should begin it. And therefore let your Eyes be ever toward the
Lord. Commit your Self to Him, in assured hope of His continued Love to you.
Beseech him to fulfill in you all the good pleasure of his goodness; and that,
according to the trust you have reposed in Him, He would keep you from falling,
and present you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding joy.

I cannot tell you how often I have said AMEN to this; nor how much I am inclined
to continue this Discourse further than I have designed: For Wisdom it self
(as the same Gregory Nazianzen has observed) which give measures to all things
else, sets none to Friendship; which ought to know no bounds, nor be confined
within any limits. Orat. 12.
But I shall contain my self within the compass which I prescribed my self at
first; and add no more, unless it be that Prayer of R. ElieZar, with which he
is said to have concluded Daily all his other Prayers.

Let it be thy good pleasure, O Lord, that Love and Brotherly kindness may
dwell in our lot.

For why should I prolong this Letter, in making any needless declarations, how
much I am, where, or how-soever our lot falls,

Yours in love unfeigned, S. P.

THE END.

