A Brief Account Of the Intended BANK OF ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1694.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the Intended Bank of England,
THE want of a Bank, or public Fund, for the convenience and security of great
Payments, and the better to facilitate the circulation of Money, in and about
this great and oppulent City, has in our time, among other Inconveniences,
occasioned much unnecessary Credit, to the loss of several Millions, by which
Trade has been exceedingly discouraged and obstructed: This, together with the
height of Interest or Forbearance of Money, which for some time past has born
no manner of proportion -- to that of our Rival Neighbors, and for which no
tolerable Reason could ever be given either in Notion or Practice, considering
the Riches and Trade of England, unless it were the want of public Funds; by
which the Effects of the Nation, in some sort, might be disposed to answer the
Use, and do the Office of Money, and become more useful to the Trade and
Improvements thereof.

These, and such as these, were the Causes that the Nature and Use of Banks and
Public Funds; have been the Discourse and Expectation of many Years; but all
this while our more refined Politicians assured us, that we must never think of
settling Banks in England without a Commonwealth: And this Notion became so
universal, that it was a matter of derision, for any one to seem to be of a
contrary opinion. Thus the modish vein, of Farce and Ridicule, so prevalent
over the Morality, Virtue, and Reason of our Times, had like to have deprived
us of this.

But the notion of Banks and Public Funds were entertained by some mercurial
Heads, who finding the main Objection against them in England to be, the danger
of Violence from the Prince, they therefore invented certain imaginary Banks
and Funds, which they designed to settle far enough from the Prince's reach, or
any bodies else. The first Design of this nature was, to turn a Lumbard into a
Bank, and to that end they cried down the use of Gold and Silver, and up that
of other Materials in lieu thereof; but when they found the World very
unwilling to leave their old way without a better Reason, or something more
enticing, they run from their new Mistake to an old one, which was, That the
Stamp or Denomination gives or adds to the value of Money. With this they
resolved to run counter to all Mankind; yea, they would anticipate Ages, and
attract, or rather imagine, inestimable Value from innumerable Years to come;
all which was to be crammed down Men's Throats as a Punishment of their
Infidelity, who could not believe a Lumbard to be a Bank: and here was occasion
for the power of an Act of Parliament at least, to conjure every Man's
Imagination into the latitude of theirs. Thus we see the Genius of some of our
Countrymen are as vastly above and beyond, as others are below and beside, the
practice of extraordinary things.

Thus between the new-acquir'd Maxims of our modern Politicians on the one
hand, and the incomprehensible Notions conceived on the other, it became very
scandalous to countenance or; espouse any thing of a Proposal relating to a
Bank; but when this War begun, the Credit of the Nation was low, and the Wits
on both sides, found no better nor honester way to supply the Necessities of
the Government, than by enhauncing the Price and Interest of Money; the effect
of which was, that the Government was obliged to pay from double to treble, or
higher Interest: The Disease growing daily worse, Men were tempted to draw
their Effects from Trade and Improvements, and found the best and securest
Gain, in making Merchandise of the Government and Nation.

For remedy of which it was proposed some years ago, That a public
transferrable Fund of Interest should be established by Parliament, and made
convenient for the Receipts and Payments, in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster, and to constitute a Society of Moneyed Men for the government
thereof, who should be induced by their Interest, to exchange for Money, the
Assignments upon the Fund, at every demand. In this manner it was proposed,
that the constitution of this Fund, should in the practice answer, the End of a
public transferrable Fund of Interest, of a Bank, and of a public Lumbard at
once, and a good part of the Effects of the Nation, might thereby be rendered
useful to the Trade and Business thereof, which would of course, have lowered
the Interest of Money, and prevented the drawing thereof, from the Countries
and places remote from Trade. But no sooner was this Proposal stated by a
Society of considerable Persons, but the notion of Currency was started, and
carried so far before it was well perceived or understood by some, that it then
proved of pernicious consequence, to the success of this Undertaking: Some
understood it only as a Convenience, others, as it seems, it was at the bottom
intended, a downright Force, the effect of which would have been, to turn the
Stomachs of Mankind against it, Coertion being of sufficient force, to mar a
good thing of this nature, but never to mend a bad one.

All this while the very Name of a Bank or Corporation was avoided, though the
Nature of both was intended, the Proposers thinking it prudent, that a Design
of this nature, should have as easy and insensible a beginning as possible, to
prevent, or at least gradually to soften and remove, the Prejudices and bad
Impressions, commonly conceived in the Minds of Men against things of this
kind, before they are understood: but that sort of People, who ought, and in
whose power it was, to encourage this Undertaking, could no ways understand it,
which put the Proposers, upon heightning the Proposal for Interest, and upon
particular Undertakings, for the Sum proposed, which at several times, and upon
diverse occasions, produced certain narrow and sinister Designs, no way
becoming, so noble and universal a Work as this.

As the Proposers found great discouragement from one sort of Men, who could by
no means reconcile this Proposal with their own Apprehensions, and the old
Norm^n way of borrowing Money; so others seemed to understand it too much, and
would only have it proposed at four, or four and an half per Cent. whereof
three per Cent. to be allowed to the Fund, and the remainder for those who
should furnish Money to circulate the same, for otherwise, say they, it will
quite and clean discourage Land, for every body will be for disposing their
Money upon so convenient, clear, and secure an Interest, rather than to expect
something more with Trouble and Uncertainties; but afterward it was found
convenient to put it to hazard, and expose so much of the nature of the thing,
and its constitution, as was needful to have it espoused in Parliament.

But though the gilded name of a Bank, and the popular one of a Corporation,
became more formidable to the Senses of a sort of People who wanted the Money;
yet what by the instigation of a few, from a Principle of Interest, and of some
who are no great Friends to the Government, as from some jealous Apprehensions
arising from the newness and strangeness of the thing, diverse otherwise
well-meaning People, became possessed with monstrous and frightful Idea's and
Conceptions of the Matter, which begot whole Swarms of Objections, which are
hardly ever like to be answered, unless it be with one another, or with the
Practice, or at least until the Antagonists have reconciled their Positions.

One pretended Patriot comes and tells us, This Design will make the King
Absolute, by becoming Master thereof, nor is there any way to prevent it; For,
says he, Rich and Moneyed Men, we find by experience, are naturally timorous
and fearful, and are easily brought to comply with the Times to save what they
have. And the keeping of this Fund being of necessity committed to such, the
prospect of their Profit, in conjunction with their natural Easiness, will of
course induce them to join with the Prince, who is always best able to
encourage and support them.

Another comes Cock-a-hoop, and tells ye, That he, or his Grandsire, Uncle, or
some of the Race, have been abroad in some Country or other, and in all their
Peregrinations they never met with BANKS nor STORKS any where, but only in
Republics. And if we let them set footing in England, we shall certainly be in
danger of a Commonwealth. Nay, he goes further, and tells ye, That the very
establishing of a Bank in England, will of course alter the Government, for
that is to entrust the Fund of the Nation in the Hands of Subjects, who
naturally are, and will always be sure to be of the popular side, and will
insensibly influence the Church and State.

Some who pretend to see further into a Millstone than others, will undertake to
make it plain, that it will raise and enhance the price of Land, and utterly
discourage and ruin Trade; For by this means, say they, all Real Securities
will become current, or near as good as current, in or by the Bank; which will
very much lessen, if not put an end to the Credit of Personal Securities, for
Usurers will be content with such an easy, secure, and convenient Profit,
rather than hazard their Principal, and embarase themselves in Trouble for a
greater Interest.

Others of the Learned tell us, That this Bank or Fund will be so profitable,
easy, and secure for Receipts and Payments, that all the Money of the Nation
will naturally run into Trade, and none will be left to purchase Lands, since
Men may continue their Money in Bank, on demand, upon the best Security in
Europe, and yet have a daily Interest running upon it, and thus have Trade and
a Real Estate at once.

But to leave the Objectors to confer Notes, reconcile their Notions, and to
answer one another, it may be to better purpose to give some brief Account of
the Nature of this intended Bank, with the good Effects and Consequences which
may be expected therefrom; and in the first place it is necessary to premise
whatever our Notionists may imagine to the contrary.

1. That all Money or Credit not having an intrinsic value, to answer the
Contents or Denomination thereof, is false and counterfeit, and the Loss must
fall one where or other.

2. That the Species of Gold and Silver being accepted and chosen by the
Commercial World, for the Standard or Measure of other Effects; every thing
else is only counted valuable, as compared with these.

3. Wherefore all Credit not founded on the Universal Species of Gold and
Silver, is impracticable, and can never subsist neither safely nor long; at
least till some other Species of Credit be found out and chosen by the Trading
part of Mankind, over and above, or in lieu thereof.

Thus having said what a Bank ought to be, it remains to show what this is
designed, and wherein it will consist. This Bank will consist in a Revenue or
Income of Eight per Cent. per Annum, for and upon the Money subscribed; and
what Profits and Improvements can be made from the Business or Credit of the
Bank, will be also divided among the Proprietors. Thus this Company or
Corporation will exceed all others of that kind known in the Commercial World.
For here will be Eight per Cent. per Annum certain upon the Capital; and as
good and great a probability of other Profits as ever any Company had. And as
to the Security of the Bank, for such as may entrust their Effects therein, it
will be clear and visible, and every way equal to, if not exceeding the best in
Christendom; for the other Funds or Banks in the Christian World, at best have
only Effects to answer, without pretending to have any thing over: Nor are they
Corroborated by the Interests, Property and Estates of Private Men, that of
Genua only excepted; but this Bank will always have Twelve Hundred Thousand
Pounds, or One Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum, over and above Effects to
answer, whatsoever Credit they may have. For the Company will be obliged never
to make any Dividend, but out of the yearly Profits arising from their capital
Stock or Fund; nor will they ever make any Dividend out of their Profits, until
after some Months notice, that such as apprehend the Security will be weakened
thereby, may have opportunity to withdraw their Effects, before the same be
made. Thus a Society of Private Men will be obliged by their Estates and
Interests, to strengthen and corroborate the public Security of this Bank.

As to the common Objection of the danger from Alteration or Changes of
Government, This Foundation is grounded upon a Revenue that cannot fail, but
with the Nation, settled by Parliament for the uses thereby limited and
appointed, it will, for many Reasons both of Right and Interest, become the
best and highest Property, grounded upon so just and valuable a Consideration,
as the Value paid to Their Majesty's, for the use and service of the
Government: And there being no Country in Christendom where Property has been
more sacred and secure for some Ages past, notwithstanding all our Revolutions,
than in England, it must needs follow, that nothing less than a Conquest,
wherein all Property, Justice, and Right must fail, can any way affect this
Foundation: And in such case this would be but in common with every thing else.

Being to show how this Design may redound to the Benefit of the Trade and
Improvements of England, we find our Politicians have split the Connection, the
better to understand the Text, and distinguish between the Interest of Land and
Trade, as they have lately done between that of a King and his People. The
Truth on it is, they are possessed with a sort of factious Reason, which runs
extremely upon Divisions and Separations; for when any Principle or Position
proves too heavy for their Heads; they are presently for dividing it, and as it
were of spite, because they cannot apprehend themselves: they employ their
Faculty to reduce every thing to such Confusion, as not to be understood by any
body else: but until our Politicians are pleased to show some better Reasons
than they have hitherto done, for their splitting the Interest of Land and
Trade, we will leave it as it is, concluding that they are, and were, and of
right ought to be, in and of one and the same Interest; and as such we shall
consider how this Bank may be beneficial to both.

It is an infallible sign that Money abounds and is plentiful, when the
Interest thereof is low; for Interest or Forbearance is the Price of Money, as
it is such; and if Money be plentiful, People will thereby be enabled and
induced to Trade and Purchase, and by the plenty of Money other things must in
proportion bear the better Price. And if the Proprietors of the Bank can
circulate their Fundation of Twelve hundred Thousand Pounds, without having
more than Two or Three Hundred Thousand Pounds lying dead at one time with
another, this Bank will be in effect as Nine Hundred Thousand Pounds, or a
Million of fresh Money brought into the Nation; and Nine Hundred Thousand
Pounds, or a Million, that must have been employed in doing what the Bank will
supply, may be employed to other purposes. And as the Effects in this Bank will
be a growing and increasing Money, and bring great Advantage to Trade, by the
secure, easy, and convenient way of Receipts and Payments therein: It Is Safety
from Fire, Thieves, and other Disasters, which Gold and Silver are subject
unto: it is giving a Profit upon a great part of the running Cash of the Nation,
the practice of which will naturally and gradually lower the Interest of Money,
as it has done in Holland, Genoua, and all other places where Banks and Public
Funds are used: all which will render it the highest Interest of the Government
and People, to preserve, maintain, and improve it in all time to come.

Whatever the groundless Jealousies of Men may be, none can reasonably
apprehend any other Consequences of this Design to the Government and Nation,
but that it will make Money plentiful, Trade easy and secure, raise the Price
of Lands, draw the Species of Gold and Silver into the Hands of the Common
People, as we see it in Holland, Genoua, and other places, where these Funds
are accomodated to Receipts and Payments: It will make the Stock or Fund of the
Nation go abundantly further than otherwise it could. Thus the Effects of the
Nation will, at an easy and reasonable rate, answer the End, and command the
use of Ready Money; that we may be no longer a Prey to consuming Usury; that
the many Landed Men in England may be delivered from the Oppressions they too
frequently lie under, from the few that have Money: and what ought at all times
to command Money readily and easily, will hereby be put in a condition to do
it. Nor can it be reasonably supposed to make any alteration in our Government,
unless it be to make Property still more fixed and secure, and to link the
People more firmly to our English Constitution, and insure them as it were
against the itch of Change.

Whatever a sort of People may pretend, who profess themselves to be greater
Friends to borrowing than to lending Parliaments, and whose Talent lies not so
much in removing Inconveniences as in finding them; Men are the best, truest,
and most natural Defenders and Guardians of their own Properties and Estates,
and we have hardly ever found the Liberty and Property of England wronged, but
by such as had no great Share therein, and who for want of Money have often
sold what was none of theirs.

It Is worth any ones Observation, to take notice, how much, and what sort of
unusual Opposition this Proposal has met with; Why not the like Struglings
against that Chimera of Survivorships? Our Funds for Lives, or the late
Lottery, which however they have succeeded, the same Funds might have raised
double the Money, and been very near as soon paid off; and these had been Funds
beneficial to Trade and the Industry of the Nation; whereas the other are quite
contrary, Nurses of Idleness, Baits of Vanity, possessing the People with a
certain sort of Levity and Giddiness, and filling them with fond Expectations,
destructive to their Welfare and future Improvements. But there are three sorts
of People, how much soever otherwise their Interest and Humors differ, have,
notwithstanding all Civilities showed them, unanimously joined issue against
this Undertaking. The Jacobites, who apprehend it may contribute to lessen
their Monarch of France, and some few Usurers and Brokers of Money, and the
third sort are commonly such as have not wherewith to Trade, unless it be like
Haman of old, for whole Nations or Peoples at once. But, after all, the Happy
Effects of this Undertaking, like almost all other great things in Trade, will
be best understood by the Practice thereof, when Time shall convince the
Ignorant, and when Men will come to apprehend it as it is; when these conceived
Hobgoblins, frightful Monsters, and horrid Specter, with which some are
possessed about it, shall vanish, cease, and be no more.

To conclude, Reproaches and Aspersions on such a Work as this, is neither new
nor strange, as being the common Fate of all good and generous Undertakings,
that are, or ever were, in the World, the Nature of Men being bent against
every thing which they fancy Innovation; so well, out of a fond and
presumptuous Principle, that none knows, or at least ought to know more than
they, as out of a natural Unbelief and Suspicion of all they cannot see, which
makes them follow Success, or any thing like it, more than Reason, and Example
more than Rule. But the Apprehensions or Difficulties which were in the way,
have not discouraged the Proposers from doing their utmost, to bring the
designed Work to perfection, which seems to be reserved for such a time as
this, the better to enable the Government and People of England to revive,
recover, and transmit to Posterity, the Virtue, Luster, and wonted Glory, of
their Renowned Ancestors; and to lay a Foundation of Trade, Security, and
Greatness within this Kingdom, for the present and succeeding Ages.

FINIS.

