A BRIEF Account of the new SECT OF LATITUDE-MEN Together with some reflections
upon the NEW PHILOSOPHY.

By S. P. of Cambridge.

In answer to a Letter from his Friend at Oxford.

Quod verum, id antiquissimum.
Fama vix vero favet,
Pejus merenti melior, and pejor bono.
London, Printed and are to be sold in St. Paul's Churchyard, and in
Westmimster-Hall and Oxford and Cambridge, 166^.

For my worthy Friend Mr. S. P. at Cambridge.
Sir,
THat aversation which I perceive to be no less in you than in my self, from
the impertinent exchange of mere words and complements would soon put a period
to our formerly more frequent intercourse; but that I have a certain itch of
curiosity, to know what news there is abroad, which though it may be, is as
impertinent, yet it serves to correct the severity of that other humor, which
if too much indulged, would make the friendship of those that live at distance
too dull and stupid, and no better then what may be between the living and the
dead. Which consideration advantaged by that natural inclination of mine, as it
has formerly created you some trouble about matters of no great importance, so
it is likely to supply me with frequent occasions of the same kind for the
future; but at present I shall not need to seek for that which obtrudes it
self upon me, whether I will or no. I can come into no company of late, but I
find the chief discourse to be about a certain new Sect of men called
Latitude-men: but though the name be in every man's mouth, yet the explicit
meaning of it, or the heresy which they hold, or the individual persons that
are of it, are as unknown (for ought I can learn) as the order of the
Rosy-crucians. On the one side I hear them represented as a party very
dangerous both to the King and Church, as seeking to undermine them both: on
the other side I cannot hear what their particular opinions or practices are,
that bear any such dangerous aspect; to say the truth, I can meet with nothing
distinct concerning them, but that they had their rise at Cambridge, and are
followers for the most part, of the new Philosophy, wherewith they have so
poisoned that Fountain, that there are like to issue out very unwholesome
streams throughout the whole Kingdom. I should be very glad from your own
mouth to be resolved of the meaning of this mystical name, and the Sect it
denominates, which all of sudden is become so formidable, if we have any Act
this year to invite you to Oxford; if not, pray fail not to do it in as ample
a manner in writing, to which if you will add your thoughts also concerning the
New Philosophy, you will not a little gratify the rest of your old
acquaintance here, as well as

Sir, Yours and G. B.
Oxford May 15th. 1662.
For Mr. G. B. at Oxford.
Sir,
YOurs of the 15th of May I lately received, wherein when you desire to see me
at Oxford next Act, (if you have any,) it is, I suppose, rather of course than
out of any such expectation, I having been twice already there, and yet could
never be so happy as to get you over to our Commencement. Truly it is as far
from Cambridge to Oxford, as it is from Oxford to Cambridge, and therefore you
must hold me excused if you see me no more there till you have repaid me with a
visit here: but to say the truth I must presently after the Commencement
prepare for my journey into the North, where my friends are ready to fall out
with me for neglecting them so long.

2 As for the question you desire to be resolved in, it is more than I dare
undertake to do; for though this name of Latitude-men be daily exagitated
amongst us both in Taverns and Pulpits, and very tragical representations made
of them, yet we know as little what it means, as you at Oxford do; and I verily
believe the men of that Sect are as little able to give in a list of their
fraternity, and are as free from any plot against King or Church, as King
Arthur's Knights, or the Rosy-Brotherhood, which you have very happily compared
them with: and truly it is to be suspected they fly in the air too when they
meet in their invisible conventicles to promote their unheard of machinations.
A Latitude-man therefore (according to the best definition that I can collect)
is an image of clouts that men set up to encounter with for want of a real
enemy; it is a convenient name to reproach a man that you owe a spite to,
('it is what you will, and you affix it upon whom you will) it is some thing will
serve to talk of when all other discourse fails.

3. But you would think I had a mind to shuffle with you, if I should give you
only this general account; for you will not imagine I can be so short-sighted,
but that I may be able to see farther into the matter than so; that I may not
therefore frustrate your expectation, I will tell you all that I am able to
understand or conjecture concerning it; the greatest part of the men that seem
to be pointed at under that name, are such, whose fortune it was to be born so
late, as to have their education in the University, since the beginning of the
unhappy troubles of this Kingdom, where they ascended to their preferments by
the regular steps of election, not much troubling themselves to enquire into
the Titles of some of their Electours; they are such as are behind none of
their neighbors either in Learning or good manners, and were so far from being
sowred with the Leaven of the times they lived in, that they were always looked
upon with an evil eye by the successive usurping powers, and the general
outcry was, that the whole University was overrun with Arminianisme, and was
full of men of a Prelatical Spirit, that had apostatized to the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt, because they were generally ordained by Bishops; and in
opposition to that hide-bound, strait-lac'd spirit that did then prevail, they
were called Latitude-men; for that was the first original of the name, what
ever sense has since been put upon it: this was a certain bar to their
preferment, as they were sure to find, if any of them came before the Committee
of Tryers, who (as it was reported) had gotten a List of all those that were
Ordained by the Bishop of Norwich; and truly if they that were turned out of
their preferment, were esteemed Martyrs, I know not why these that were
debarred thereof upon the same grounds may not be called Confessors.

4. And now this being the state of the University, can it be wonderful, if
upon the happy restitution of the Church, there were a general readiness in
most men to conform to the commands and injunctions thereof? and yet I am sorry
to hear some men, even in those discourses when they should be careful to
deliver nothing but the sacred oracles of God, talk at such a rate as if they
were offended to see so general a conformity. It seems very strange that any
son of the Church should be displeased to see the number of her children to
increase beyond expectation. I hope it is not because there will be the more
likely to lay claim to a share in the patrimony; nay I am well assured it is
far from any of her genuine offspring, that are faithful to her interest, to
be so affected; or if at any time some less becoming expression should drop
from them, it has only proceeded from misinformation and want of a right
understanding of things, which upon better thoughts it is likely they could
wish unsaid. But it cannot be expected but the prosperity of the Church, will
occasion the flocking in of many less worthy persons, who will be very
ambitious to be accounted in the number of her Children, who for want of
something else to render them more considerable than their Neighbors, must
make use of an unmeasurable ostentation of their Zeal and forwardness, which
they think is best expressed by slandering and reproaching those whom they have
out-stripped, not in sincerity, but in show and appearance; and it may be some
of them may hope to expiate their former disaffections by their present
overdoing, and think to recommend themselves by calling others Hypocrites: It
were I say a thing to be wondered at, if there should not some such men as
these creep into the Church, since it is become a profitable way, who by such
unworthy acts will endeavor to compass their designs, and by breeding and
fomenting public differences, will hope to serve their private turns; but I am
confident their number is very small, and that the most part are men of more
noble and generous spirits, that hate such unworthiness, however their names
may sometimes be abused by some few unquiet spirits that make all this noise
and stir. For I must tell you, I do not find that the grave heads, or other
prudent persons of the University give any countenance to this peevish talk of
some few, who for distinction sake, (if Latitude be a name of reproach) will
not I hope be offended to be called Narrow-men, notwithstanding. But that there
may remain no suspicion of their disaffection to the Church in any respect, I
will give you a brief account of what I conceive to be their sentiments in each
point relateing thereunto, which are the Liturgy, the Ceremonies, the
government, and the Doctrine of the Church. As for the first, they conceive
there ought by all means to be a settled Liturgy, it having always been the
practice both of the Jewish and Christian, and more or less retained by all
reformed Churches; that there can be no Solemnity of public worship without
it, that it is the greatest check to devotion that can be, to hear men mix
their private Opinions with their public prayers, which are for the most part
false, and have an evil influence on the lives of men: yet this has been
almost the Universal practice for these twenty years; The like may be said of
those absurd, ridiculous, blasphemous expressions that do so frequently occur
in extempore prayers, under the pretense of being familiar with God Almighty;
to say nothing of those seditious and traitorous principles, craftily thereby
insinuated into the minds of people, with greater authority than in their
Sermons could be done; for as much as there is a greater aw and solemnity in
the one above the other; which also shows how uncomely a thing it is for men
to ostentate their parts and abilities therein, as they were wont to do by
their empty Rhetorications and tedious prolixity. Our Latitudinarians therefore
are by all means for a Liturgy, and do prefer that of our own Church before
all others, admiring the Solemnity, gravity and primitive simplicity of it, its
freedom from affected phrases, or mixture of vain and doubtful opinions; in a
word they esteem it to be so good, that they would be loath to adventure the
mending of it, for fear of marring it.

As for the Rites and Ceremonies of Divine worship, they do highly approve that
virtuous mediocrity which our Church observes between the meretricious
gaudiness of the Church of Rome, and the squalid sluttery of Fanatic
conventicles. Devotion is so overclad by the Papists that she is oppressed and
stifled with the multitude of her own garments: Pars minima est ipsa puella
sui: some of our modern reformers to make amends, have stripped her stark
naked, till she is become in a manner cold and dead; The Church of England only
has dressed her as befits an honorable and virtuous Matron. There are few men
so abstractedly intellectual, but that their devotion had need to be advanced
with something that may strike upon their outward senses and engage their
affections; and therefore while we live in this Region of mortality we must
make use of such external helps, and recommend Religion to the people by those
ornaments which the Church has according to her prudence thought fittest for
those ends. The Church of Rome is a luxuriant vine, full of superfluous
branches, and overrun with wild grapes, from whence many a poisonous and
intoxicating potion is pressed forth; But the greatest part of Reformers have
done like the rude Thracian in the Apologue, who instead of moderate pruning
and dressing his vines, as his more Skillfull Athenian Neighbors did, cut them
up by the Roots; but the Church of England is the only well ordered Vineyard.

In like mannner they have a deep veneration of her Government, which they
steadfastly believe to be in it self the best, and the same that was practiced
in the times of the Apostles. They did always abhor both the Usurpation of
Scottish Presbytery, and the confusion of Independent Anarchy; and do esteem it
one of the methods which the Prince of darkness uses, to overthrow the Church
and Religion, by bringing the Clergy into contempt, which experience tells us
will necessarily follow upon the removing the several Dignities and preeminence
among them; for when the Bishops are once levelled with ordinary Presbyters,
the Presbyters will soon be trampled on by the meanest of the Laity: and when
every Preacher would needs be a Bishop, every Rustic and Mechanic took upon
him to be a Preacher.

Lastly for the Doctrine of the Church, they do cordially adhere to it, as does
sufficiently appear by their willingness to subscribe to the thirty nine
Articles, and all other points of Doctrine contained either in the Liturgy or
book of Homilies, and particularly (whatsoever may be privately whispered to
the contrary) they do both devoutly adore the blessed Trinity in the Letany,
and make solemn profession of their Orthodox faith, both concerning it and
other points, in the three Creeds, not excepting that which is commonly
ascribed to Athanasius, nor is there any Article of Doctrine held forth by the
Church, which they can justly be accused to depart from, unless absolute
reprobation be one, which they do not think themselves bound to believe.

5. Nor is it credible they should hold any other Doctrine than the Church,
since they derive it from the same fountains, not from the Spinose schoolmen,
or Dutch systematicks, neither from Rome nor Geneva, the Council of Trent, nor
Synod of Dort, but from the Sacred writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, in
interpreting whereof, they carefully attend to the sense of the ancient Church,
by which they conceive the modern ought to be guided: and therefore they are
very conversant in all the genuine Monuments of the ancient Fathers, those
especially of the first and purest ages, not to gather out fine phrases and
quaint sentences, but that they may discern between the modern corruptions, and
ancient simplicity of the Church; to distinguish between the Doctrines received
in these latter ages, and those which the primitive Christians received from
Christ and his Apostles: for those opinions in Religion, how specious soever,
are justly to be suspected, whereof there are no footsteps to be discerned in
that golden age of Christianity, that was tried and purifyed in the fire of
persecution: we are not so secure of the succeeding silver age of peace and
prosperity, but that there might be some drossy mixture, inferior to the
golden, but better than the brazen that trod upon its heels;

Saevior ingeniis and ad horrida promptior arma, when the Christians had taken
up the swords formerly of their persecutors, and drew them one upon another:
but -- de duro est ultima ferro,
Protinus erupit venae pejoris in aevum
Omne nefas; fugere pudor verumque, fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.


And by this time sure there was need of Reformation, to bring al things to the
primitive pattern, to purge out the dross and Tinn, and all baser metals,
which the Church of England has most happily achieved.

And now let no man accuse them of harkening too much to their own reason,
since their reason steers by so excellent a compass, the ancient Fathers and
Councils of the Church. For Reason is that faculty whereby a man must judge of
every thing, nor can a man beleve any thing except he have some reason for it,
whether that reason be a deduction from the light of nature, and those
principles which are the candle of the Lord, set up in the soul of every man
that has not wilfully extinguished it; or a branch of Divine revelation in the
oracles of holy Scripture; or the general interpretation of genuine antiquity,
or the proposal of our own Church consentaneous thereto, or lastly the result
of some or all of these: for he that will rightly make use of his Reason, must
take all that is reasonable into consideration. And it is admirable to consider
how the same conclusions do naturally flow from all these several principles;
and what in the faithful use of the faculties that God has given, men have
believed for true, does excellently agree with that Revelation that God has
exhibited in the Scripture, and the doctrine of the ancient Church with them
both. Thus the freedom of our wills, the universal intent of Christ's death,
and sufficiency of Gods Grace, the conditions of justification, and many other
points of the like nature, which have been almost exploded in these latter
degenerate ages of the world, do again begin to obtain, though with different
persons upon different accounts; some embrace them for their evidence in
Scripture, others for the concurrent testimony of the primitive Church for
above four hundred years; others for the reasonableness of the things
themselves, and their agreement both with the Divine Attributes and the easy
suggestions of their own minds. Nor is there any point in Divinity, where that
which is most ancient does not prove the most rational, and the most rational
the ancientest; for there is an eternal consanguinity between all verity; and
nothing is true in Divinity, which is false in Philosophy, or on the contrary;
and therefore what God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

But these men are generally suspected to be for liberty of Conscience, and
that is a principle of dangerous consequence, that will undermine the very
foundations of any Church what soever: a Church cannot be without Unity and
Uniformity; an unlimited discord of opinions and practices will as much
obstruct the edification of Gods Temple, as the confusion of Languages did the
building of the Tower of Babel. Verily this is true; and the most part of them,
who while they are under the hatches deny it, do by their practices confirm it,
when ever they get power into their hands; but how far the men charged with it
are concerned therein, remains to be inquired. Though in the first place I
cannot but take notice, that this very objection confutes the vulgar calumny
cast upon them, as if they were men of no conscience; for I dare say, by how
much the less of conscience any man has, by so much the less will he care what
impositions are laid on it, though for my own part, I shall always think him
most conscientious who leads the most unblameable life, though he be not
greatly scrupulous about the externals of Religion; and for their lives I think
the Latitude-men were never taxed by their greatest enemies. And now let us
soberly consider what was before said; they sincerely embrace all the Articles
of Doctrine held forth by the Church, they cheerfully use and approve her
Liturgy and Ceremonies, they cordially love and obey her government: how then
can they pursue any Liberty that can be dangerous to her? for in all other
things the Church her self leaves them to their liberty, and who shall blame
them for using it? but there are some men it may be, are offended that the
Church is so indulgent a Mother that will not unnecessarily impose upon the
judgment or practice of her Children; they would have all things bound up, and
nothing free; they would fain be adding some ciphers to their significant
Articles she now prodounds, and instead of 39 would make 39000. and it is well if
they would content themselves with ciphers, and not add falsityes to make up
the tale: they have it may be, an ambition to outdo the Assemblies Confession;
they would be content that Aquina's Sums were put into the Creed, and all the
janglings of the Schools into the Prayers of the Church; that so by their
Longitude, they might be even with their neighbors of the Latitude. Others it
may be think we have not ceremonies enough, and if they can find any antiquated
Rite in some moth-eaten Author, they have an itch presently of bringing it into
the Church, without considering whether there be the same reason or use of it
now, that may have been in other times and places; and then if their Neighbors
will not follow their example, but think it enough to do what the Rubric and
Canons require, they shall be cried out on for disaffected; this is all that
liberty of conscience they can justly be accused of, unless I should add that
they are so merciful as not to think it fit to knock people on the head because
they are not of our Church. The Church of England has never yet embrued her
hands in blood, and I hope the Zeal of none of her sons will ever kinle such
flames as her stepmother of Rome delights to warm her hands at.

And now having taken an impartial view of this so much exagitated company of
men, we find them so far from being any ways dangerous to the Church, or fit to
be disowned by her, that they seem to be the very Chariots and Horsemen
thereof; for by their sober and unblameable conversation, they conciliate
respect and honor to her; by their Learning and industry they defend her; by
their moderation they are most likely to win upon the minds of dissenters, who
are too many to be contemned; by their accommodating themselves to the people,
who (as is too too palpable) are possessed for the most part by the
Presbyterians, they may in time bring them over to the Church, and prevent her
becoming a society of Shepherds without any Sheep; for really I fear, if the
Fathers of the Church were not wiser than some of their angry sons, who must
needs be thrusting some of their younger brethren out of doors, if (I say) all
that have been reproached with the name of Latitude, should be disowned by the
Church, they that remain would be the least party of men of any one
denomination in England: and to leave themselves so naked, were to tempt
Providence for their preservation, especially considering they stand ready to
be assaulted on each hand by two potent Enemies, the Papists and the
Presbyterians, both of them numerous, wealthy, subtle, and industrious, who
watch all opportunities of subverting the best Church in the world. And
therefore certainly this is no time for her to mutilate her self, or to bleed
with intestine War; but let her embrace those that are so ready to serve her,
with both her Arms, and let all her Children with joint affection and consent
oppose the common Enemies.

6. But it will be said no man is angry that men conform, but that they have no
greater zeal for what they conform to; they are as men indifferent, and could
be as well content with the contrary. Truly Sir, either I am mistaken in the
men, or the charge is very unjust; for I find as many as it has been my
fortune to converse with, that they do very sincerly esteem Episcopal
govenment, both as in it self the best, and of Apostolical antiquity; they were
always approvers of a Liturgy, and think that of our own Church may easilyer
be marred than mended; That Religion would lose that due law and veneration
that ought to be preserved in it, if it were not attended with outward Rites
and Ceremonies; that private persons are not the judges of that decorum,
whereby these things are to be measured, but only the Governors of the
Church; and that the Church of England, as well in these as all other things is
the best constituted Church in the world. But they presume no man would have
them to think the whole weight of Religion lies in externals, or that they are
of greater account than the eternal and indispensable Laws of good and evil,
but that Ecclesiastical laws are as the Jews were wont to say, an hedge about
the laws of God; these ought stiffely to be observed, and therefore the other
not to be neglected; that they do not consist so indivisibily, but that if it
should seem meet to the Fathers of the Church to make any alterations, they
were equally bound to submit thereto; this is that Latitude they are so
Tragically accused of.

5. But there is another crime which cannot be denied, that they have
introduced a new Philosophy; Aristotle and the Schoolemem are out of request
with them. True indeed it is that ipse dixit is an argument much out of fashon;
and fortasse Philosophus non loquitur ex sua sententia, sed ex mente aliorum,
would be accounted as impertinent an answer; it will scarce pass for a
Philosophical resolution of any Problem to say, It is the nature of the beast,
it is done by virtue of its form or quality; They love to search some more
particular cause than the influence of the heavens, nor will they be put off
with complementum Vniversi. They embrace a method of Philosophy which they
think was as much antienter than Aristotle, as you conceive Oxford was before
Cambridge; and was as great a bug-beare to the Presbyterians as a Cross or
Surplisse, and therefore methinks the Church of England should have less reason
to be offended with it. For my own part I never had any great skill in it, and
am now too old to learn; yet I am far from that humor reprehended by the Poet,
-- Turpe put ant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere Senes perdenda fateri.


And I suppose it is this freedom and unconcernedness of mine that makes you
think my opinion worth knowing in a matter that I am so little conversant in of
late years; wherefore I will not undertake to compare the new Philosophy with
the old, but instead thereof will tell you a tale.

7. There was a certain Husbandman who occupied a Farm with an ancient
mansion house standing in the fields remote from any Town, where there was an
old iron Clock in a large wooden frame, which had been a long while out of
kelter, and because he was much troubled to know how the time passed, that he
might order his business accordingly, he resolved to get this Clock repaired,
and while he was considering where to find a man able to do it, it fortuned
that a certain Peripatetick artificer, something above the degree of a Tinker
came that way, who undertook to mend it; but after he had bestowed a great deal
of work in oyling the wheels, filing the teeth, and hanging on more weight, and
all to no purpose, at last gave it up for naught, and told him it could not be
mended; the farmer partly out of curiosity, and partly in hope to find out the
defect, desired this Artificer to show him the nature of Clockwork, and what
was requisite to make up a perfect Clock, he though he knew very little what
belonged to it, yet being a talkative fellow, and very loath to confess his
ignorance in any thing, began a long story, that the nature of Clock-work in
general was, a principle and cause of motion and rest by means of an inward
device of its own accord and not by chance; but this Clock having no such
nature, it was indeed no Clock, and could not move; he told him also that there
are three things go to the making of a Clock, the materials, and the shape, and
the want of that shape, before it was made; for it was not a Clock before it
was made: now the materials of a Clock are four, Iron, and wood, and cords, and
lead; and besides these there is a Bell at the top that is of a fifth kind
diverse from the other four, and has a trick of sounding when the hammer
strikes upon it: Iron is a material very black and somewhat hard, wood very
hard and somewhat white, cord very white and somewhat soft, lead very soft and
somewhat black. Here the Farmer interposed and told him he would never believe
but that Iron was harder then wood; but the Clockmender replied, that in the
Art of Clockmaking softness was nothing but being easily melted: The Farmer
urged then Iron would not be hard at all; but his artificer wittily replying it
was hard to be melted, he was satisfied; the Clock-mender went on, telling him
there were other properties also in these materials derived from the former, as
that Iron and wood were stiff and unmoving, cord and lead flexible and moving;
here the Farmer interrupted him again, telling him the iron wheels moved as
well as the cord and lead, and so did the wooden hand of the dyal; to which he
answered they did not move of themselves as the cord and lead did, and that
they moved only to avoid standing still, which is not to be admitted in a
clock; but the Farmer still objected, that he saw no necessity of any such
material as wood in a clock; for the frame might as well be of iron; to which
he replied, it was for the compleatness of the clock. But (quoth the Farmer,)
the Bell is hard and black as well as the iron; no, replied the Engineer, it
appears only so, but is not so in its own nature, but only has a property of
sounding. Well, (quoth the Farmer) you have told me the materials of a clock,
which I could have told as well my self, but am never the wiser; for my Jack
has Iron and Wood, and Cord, and Lead, and if I should hang a Bell on the top
of it, it would not prove a clock: that is true said the Clock-man, for it has
not the shape of a Clock; now the shape of a clock is a certain trick of
activity in a piece of wheelwork, by the number of strokes on a Bell, to tell
the hour of the day; from this shape there arise several other propertys, as
the turning about of the wheels, the playing of the balance, a secret quality
of the hand pointing to the hour of the day, and a secret agreement between the
hand of the Dyal and the hammer of the Bell; for as often as the hand points to
any figure, the hammer strikes just so many strokes upon the Bell; there is
also a hidden disagreement between the little weights and the great ones; for
as fast as these go down, those go up. There are also some clocks of another
kind, some with an Alarm to waken a man at a certain time of the night, some
have Chimes to play certain Tunes upon Bells: There are also imperfect Clocks
called Watches that do not strike, but only have a Dyall with an hand turning
round. There are also Sun-Dyals that tell the hour of the day by Shadows. But
these are imperfect Clocks, and not compounded of all four materials; he also
reckoned up a great many famous Clock-makers of several Countries that he had
learnt his Art of, as also how many Clocks he had mended, and concluded with
the praise of Vulcan and St. Eloy, and the whole Art of Smiths work.

8. While they were thus discoursing, in comes a Lock-smith of the next Town,
who thought himself as well read in Clock-Philosophy,, as he that had read
this long Lecture, who therefore began to move many controversys, as that
Clocks might be made of other materials, viz. Steel, Brass, or Silver, (where
by the way, they digressed into a long dispute whether Steel and Iron differed
in kind, or in degree only) that a Bell was not any fifth kind, but made up of
a mixture of other metals; that there were not four materials of a Clock, but
that it might be made up of one or two of them; that cords and plummets were no
necessary parts of it, for it might be moved by a spring without them; and many
more questions they disputed about till they were both weary.

9. The Farmers Son who was newly come from the University, where he had been a
year or two, and had read Magirus, was much taken with these learned Lectures
of an ordinary Mechanic, and began to suspect he was some disguised Scholar,
in that he had so Philosophically begun with the definition of nature,
principium and causa motus and quietis ejus in quo est primo and per se, non
per accidens; then proceeded to the three principles, Matter, Form, and
Privation; after that to the four Elements of a Clock, with their Primary and
Secundary qualities, and was well pleased with his judgment in making the Bell
a Quintessence and to contain the elementary qualities not formally but
eminently; and that softness should signify liquability, answered just to
humidity signifying fluidity; and that it was as easy to excuse the iron from
melting, as the fire from fluidity: he thought also that he distinguished well
between natural and violent motions, and took notice how evitatio vacui and
complementum universi did him Knights service. So likewise he defined the form
of a Clock very well, actus primus corporis artificialis organici motum
habentis in potentia: and he believed a trick of activity was as good an
interpretation of (...) as perfectihabia which Hermolaus Barbarus learnt of the
Devil. The qualities did admirably well flow from this form, especially The
occult quality in the Dyall, and its sympathy with the Bell, as also the
antipathy of the greater and lesser weights; he also showed the several species
of Clocks whether perfectly or imperfectly mixed; how Watches had only a
material vegetative soul, the Allarum and Chimes resembled the rational, but
the ordinary Clock was of the order of sensitive creatures; and he had
excellently well described the nature of the Beast. He seemed to be well read
in the school-tinkers, had showed that Vulcan was ancienter than Aristotle, and
St. Eloy as great a master of Clockwork as St. Thomas: only the Lock-smith he
thought made foul work with him, and went as much beyond him, as Carpenter and
Pemble the more orthodox Magirus, and yet he said he might have moved a great
many more perilous questions, as whether the hammer were the intelligencer of
the Bell, and consequently whether forma informans or assistens; whether the
Bell did act upon the elementary parts of the clock, or they upon the Bell; and
if the former, whether it do it by its blackness, or its hardness, or its
sound, or by certain influences; and then whether the forms of the four
materials did remain in the Clock entire or refracted, or a fifth form resulting
from them all, and whether it were a substantial or accidental form, whether a
clock and a watch were specifically or gradually distinct, with many more which
he forbore to mention, as he told them, because they could not understand them.

10. All this while the Landlord of this Farmer was in the house to take order
about some repartions, who being an ingenuous Gentleman that had used to take
in pieces his own Watch and set it together again, and therefore could not be
ignorant of the fabric of a clock, having with much patience heard all this
Targon, at last delivered the good man (who though no fool, yet was never the
wiser for all this discourse) from the impertinences of the Clock-mender and
the young Philosopher: showing him that the cause of motion was in the weights,
which by the multiplication of indented wheels, and Nuts, was so moderated,
that the last wheel to the end of whose Axel the hand was fixed, was just
twelve hours in turning about, and that there were in every twelfth part of
that wheel certain peggs that lifted up the hold-fast of the hammer, which by
the motion of other wheels and springs would be made to strike several
successive strokes upon the Bell, till the holdfast catch in the next notch of
a wheel indented several distances according to the number of strokes at each
time to be stricken: he showed him also that the teeth of the great wheel were
so worn, that it would not answer to the just proportion of time it should move
in, and therefore he must get a new one made; in fine he taught him how the
motion was derived from part to part, that he thoroughly understood the whole
fabric, and could be able to rectify any ordinary fault that should happen in
it. But the Son all this while being as inept at understanding things, as apt
Parrot-like to catch at words, was dissatisfied that he should take no more
notice of the substantial form and qualities of a Clock, and told him that he
rejected principles, and therefore he would not dispute with him.

11. How far the Clock-menders discourse resembles the Scholastic Philosophy,
or the Gentleman's the atomicall, let others judge; I shall only propound this
general Query, whether it be any better Philosophy, to say that nature makes
the fire to burn, or there is an inward principle of gravity in a stone that
makes it fall down, than it would be mechanical skill to say that Art makes
the Clock strike, or to say that some inward device makes the hand of the dyall
move; for as Art is to artificials, so is nature to naturals; and may be he
spoke more truly than he was aware of, that called it Ars Dei. Then certainly
it must be the Office of Philosophy to find out the process of this Divine Art
in the great automaton of the world, by observing how one part moves another,
and how those motions are varied by the several magnitudes, figures, positions
of each part, from the first springs or plummets, as I may say, to the hand
that points out the visible and last effects; This Physicians have taken the
boldness in part to do, in those little watches, if I may so call them, the
bodies of animals, and Descartes has proceeded farthest in the like attempt,
in that vast machin, the Universe, with how good success, others are better
able to Judge; But this I dare boldly say, it was a noble effort, and if he had
wholly failed in it, he would have been more pitied and less envied.

12. This farther I shall add in the behalf of new and free Philosophy, That
the Theater of nature is much enlarged since Aristotle's time, and there is no
part of the world wherein there are not some notable new Phoenomena lately
discovered, that must needs be of great account in natural Philosophy: for in
the Heavens by the help of telescopes (a new invention) there are found an
innumerable company of fixed Stars unknown to the ancients, and amongst the
planets the ansulae of Saturn and four Moons about Jupiter were never heard of
till Galileo's Nuncius Sidereus brought the news, the various phases of Venus
(and other Planets) as also her being sometimes on this side the Sun, sometimes
beyond, were the suspicions of the Pythagoreans of old, and the certain
knowledge of latter times, but not agreeable with Aristotle's doctrine.
Mountains and valleys in the Moon were never seen before this age, and no body
now will venture to deny but that she is as opake as the earth, and borrows as
much light from her as she lends. That the Sun is full of scummy spots
continually generated and destroyed, and that he turns round upon his own axis.
They that will not trust Schiner, may be informed by their own eyes; the
appearing of new Stars and disappearing of old was not considered by the
ancients, nor their appearing sometimes bigger and sometimes less that comets are
above the moon, and the Heavens fluid since Tycho few men have doubted, and
therefore Aristotle's Intelligences that moved the solid Orbs, have leave to
play; and since that arched roof is gone, I know not how the Elementary fire
will be kept in: But if it should chance to prove true (and who knows what
posterity may believe, since we have been so hardy as to admit Antipodes, which
our ancestors beheld as no less formidable a bugbear?) that the Earth is a
planet, and the Sun a fixed Starr, and by consequence every planet an Earth,
every fixed Starr a Sun, it would make foul work in the Vulgar Philosophy.

13. But let us descend upon the Earth, where we shall find that Dr. Gilbert,
instead of the Oxford Friars great black rock at the North Pole, has persuaded
all men that the whole Earthly Globe is a Magnet; and though the Ancients knew
no more of the Loadstone than its coition which they improperly called
attraction, we now find it to be no less remarkable for its polar direction
(not without some variation in several places) as also its various inclination
according to its several disstance from the Equator and Poles; but the nature
of the loadstone can scarce be unknown, since we have seen the circles of the
dust about it. The distinct History of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, is also
amongst the nova rep^rta. The ancients overlook't that most Luciferous though
obvious experiment of the sling, nor did they know what use to make of the
Crystal prisme; They were over-carelesse spectatours of the rainbow; the
rosy-figured; particles of snow escaped their sight; but it were infinite to
pursue particulars; I will not stand to reckon up the several discoveries we
are beholden to the new invented microscope for, nor shall I insist upon the
many Chemical experiments that are of use in Philosophy. I pass by the
wondrous effects of Gunpowder, nor shall I mention the discoveries of the
Air-pump lately exhibited to the world by that Noble Gentleman, or the
ingenious experiments of Galileo, Lord Bacon, and many others.

14. I shall only touch upon one Topic more, which is the improvement of
Anatomy, and the knowledge of the fabric of Animals; no man thinks himself
bound to believe that the nerves are derived from the heart, and by consequence
that to be the seat of common sense, because Aristotle tells us so; nor yet,
though he could tell us no such thing, to disbelieve the circulation of blood
found out by Dr. Harvey; What should I mention those other learned Observations
of the same Author concerning the Generation of Animals? I omit Asellius his
venae lacteae, as also the ductus Chyliferus, vasa lymphatica, with many more
of the like nature, which do as much alter the face of the lesser, as those
other before rehearsed of the greater world.

15. Must we now after all these and many more discoveries about natural
bodies, confine our selves to what we find in Aristotle who never dreamed of
any such things? is it possible that so many new appearances should not alter
the frame of Philosophy, nay rather hazard the pulling down of the old ruinous
house that had too narrow foundations, that it may be built again with more
magnificence? Since we find daily Generations and corruptions in the heavens,
and that the stars themselves are not free from that fate, how can we satisfy
our selves with the four Elements of Aristotle, or the three principles of the
Chemists, which at best can be but the ingredients of terrestrial bodies?
besides that they are not so simple as to deserve those titles? and truly to
them that have once tasted of the Mechanical Philosophy, forms and qualities
are like to give as little satisfaction, as the Clock-mender did to the
Intelligent Gentleman in the Story I before told you.

16. No man would be so ridiculous as since Columbus discovered the new world
of America, as big as the old, or since the enlarged knowledge of the North of
Europe, the South and East of Asia and Africa, besides the new divisions names
and inhabitants of the old parts, to forbid the reading of any more Geography
than is found in Strabo or Mela; or since the Portuguez have sailed to the
Indies by the Cape of good Hope, to admit of no other Indian commodities than
what are brought on Camels to Aleppo; or if posterity shall find out the
Northeast or Northwest way to Cathajo and China, or shall cut the Isthmus
between the red Sea and Mediterranean, will it be unlawful to use the
advantage of such noble atcheivements: why then must Philosophy alone be bound
up still in its infant swaddling bands? and there being the same reason, why
should we not allow the same liberty of expatiating? if any man love acorns
since corn is invented, let him eat acorns; but it is very unreasonable he should
forbid others the use of wheat. Whatever is solid in the writings of Aristotle,
these new Philosophers will readily embrace and they that are most accused for
affecting the new, doubt not but they can give as good an acount of the old
Philosophy as their most violent accusers, and are probably as much conversant
in Aristotle's writings, though they do not much value those small wares that
are usually retailed by the generality of his Interpreters.

But me thinks I hear some men say, all innovations are dangerous; Philosophy
and Divinity are so inter-woven by the Schoolmen, that it cannot be safe to
separate them; new Philosophy will bring in new Divinity; and freedom in the
one will make men desire a liberty in the other. The very same argumentation
the Presbyterians used, when they bore rule in the University, and the new
Philosophy was interdicted in some Colleges upon that account. But what was
the event? it was so much the more eagerly studied and embraced; there was a
time when all Learning was upon the same pretense discountenanced; Graece nosse
suspectum erat, Hebraice plane haereticum; and there was a College in
Cambridge that shut their Gates against the Greek Testament: but all their
endeavors were but vain; they might as well have hindered the Sun from rising,
or being up, from filling the whole Horizon with light; Learning and Knowledge
will break forth like fire, and pierce like Lightning through all impediments;
politeness and elegancy has long ago subdued Monastic barbarism; Erasmus and
Melancthon with the rest of those restorers of Learning have made Holcot and
Bricot quite out of fashion; and the inquisitive Genius of latter years, like a
mighty wind has brushed down all the Schoolmens Cobwebs. There is an infinite
desire of knowlede broken forth in the world, and men may as well hope to stop
the tide, or bind the Ocean with Chains, as hinder free Philosophy from
overflowing: it will be as easy to satisfy men's corporal appetites with chaff
and straw, as the desires of their minds with empty words and terms; the Church
of Rome quickly saw her error in this point, and forbore to strive against the
stream; for when she perceived that Learning would be in fashion, she presently
set her children to School; and who so great Scholars in all kinds as they?
and she has been so wise ever since, that there shall be no piece of Learning
but some of her sons shall be masters of it: and if they will but give her
respectfull words, they may be as free Philosophers as they please; and I dare
say she would take it very ill, if any one should deny Descartes or Gassendus
to be hers. Galileo indeed fell under correction for holding the motion of the
Earth, but the true crime was his abusing his Holiness in his Dialogues under
the name of Simplicius; For others have with impunity adventured on as great
Paradoxes, but they had the good manners to make a leg and say, Omnia
Ecclesiae authoritati submittimus.

I will never therefore believe, that the Church of England can be more stingy
than the Beldame of Rome, but will do that of choice, that the other does of
necessity. True Philosophy can never hurt sound Divinity. Christian Religion
was never bred up in the Peripatetick school, but spent her best and
healthfullest years in the more Religious Academy, amongst the primitive
Fathers; but the Schoolmen afterward ravished her thence, and shut her up in
the decayed ruins of Lyceum, where she served an hard servitude, and
contracted many distempers: why should she not at last be set at liberty, and
suffered to breath in a free air? let her alone be Mistress, and choose her
Servants where she best likes; let her old loving Nurse the Platonic
Philosophy be admitted again into her family; nor is there any cause to doubt
but the Mechanic also will be faithful to her, no less against the open
violence of Atheism, than the secret treachery of Enthusiasm and Superstition,
as the excellent works of a late learned Author have abundantly demonstrated.
Nor will it be posible otherwise to free Religion from scorn and contempt, if
her Priests be not as well skilled in nature as the people, and her Champions
furnished with as good Artillery as her enemies. How shall the Clergy be able
to maintain their credit with the ingenuous Gentry, who begin generally to be
acquainted with the atomical Hypothesis, and know how to distinguish between a
true Gemme and a Bristol-Diamond? or how shall they encounter with the wits
(as they are called) of the age, that assault Religion with new kind of
weapons? will they acquiesce in the authority of Aristotle or St. Thomas? or be
put off with Contra negantem principia? let not the Church send out her
Soldiers armed with Dock-leaves and Bullrushes, to encounter swords and Guns,
but let them wear as good brass and steel as their enemies, and fight with them
at their own weapons; and then having Truth and Right on their side, let them
never despair of victory.

But I had almost forgotten that I was writing a Letter, the ordinary
proportions whereof I have already exceeded, and therefore must abruptly
conclude, assuring you that I am

Sir yours, etc. (...)
Cambridge (...)

