TWO ESSAYS SENT IN A LETTER from Oxford, TO A Nobleman in London.

The First concerning some Errors about the Creation, General Flood, and the
Peopling of the World. In Two Parts.

The Second concerning the Rise, Progress, and Destruction of Fables and
Romances. With the State of Learning.

By L. P. Master of Arts.

Edita Doctrina Sapientum Templa Serena. Lucret. Lib. 2. LONDON: Printed, and
are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCXCV.

AN APOLOGY For Writing the Following ESSAYS.
My LORD,
THE universal disposition of this Age is bent upon a Rational Religion; the
fierceness of Bigotry is in good measure calmed and allayed; therefore I
venture out upon this Pacifick Sea, hoping to reach my Port without any storm
or hardship. Most Nations in Europe allow of a Liberty and Latitude in Natural
Philosophy; Copernicus, Galileo, Campanella, Mersennus, Gassendus, Cartesius,
and many others, are not esteemed the worse Christians, because they contradict
the Scriptures in Physical or Mathematical Problems; the Sacred Writers spoke
to a Generation of Men, who were never famous in Arts and Sciences; therefore
they adapted all their sayings to the vulgar Idea's of that Time and Nation;
their design being not to compose a Natural system of the World, but to
establish the true Theocracy, and good Morals. What unjust Calumnies have been
thrown upon the Worthy Master of the Charter House, upon the account of his
Theory of the Earth, and his Archaeologia, (Pieces of admirable Workmanship)
which his Enemies may be ashamed of, as some were upon the discovery of the
Antipodes and the New World?

The Philosophic History of the Bible, is not always to be embraced; for what
an outcry against Mr. Hobs! because he described God Almighty as Corporeal,
though Moses and the Scriptures had done so before him. Things are denominated
Heresy and Atheism, not by any certain Rules of Truth, or Falsehood, but
according to the Caprice, or Interests of Sects and Parties: So the Christians
were called Athei by the Pagans, because they did not Sacrifice, nor consult
Oracles, nor Worship Images: So one Nation calls another Barbarous, because
different in Habit, Manners, Diet, and Ceremonies. The Philosophers of Athens
styled one another Heretics, as they frequented such a School, or Academy; so
in England we give Nicknames, according to the Company we keep, or the Books
we read, or as we vary in our Dreams, or Idea's, or in our Designs. Non omnes,
probe nosti, veritatem metiuntur aut estimant rationum pondere and momentis,
sed affectibus abrepti aut prejudicijs occaecati, quasi clausis Oculis, de
rerum coloribus decernunt. Saepe etiam ad concitandam invidiam Authoris mentem
aut verba in alienas parts detorquent. Haec Signa homines solent vary
interpretari, and trahere ad sua vota, aut spes, aut metus.

So, My Lord, I will conclude this Apology, which I thought necessary to
premise in order to level the way to a fair reception and interpretation of
these Essays, which come from one, whom your Lordship knows to be well affected
to the Church of England, and not in the least tinctured with Atheism; a crime
unjustly charged upon many excellent Men, who have a more than ordinary Zeal
and Veneration for the Supreme, All-Wise, and All-Powerful Being. I have
Traveled many Countries, yet could never meet with any Atheists, which are
few, if any; all the noise and clamor is against Castles in the Air; a sort of
War, like that of Don Quixotte, with the Windmills. So I take my leave, and
farewell; being,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Devoted Servant, L. P.

THE FIRST ESSAY, CONCERNING Some Errors about the First Creation, General
Flood, and the Peopling of the World.
In Two Parts.
First PART.
THE common History of the first Chaos, of the Universal Deluge, and of the
Peopling of the Old and New World, is so well known to every body, that any
Account of them in this place will seem unnecessary; especially to you who has
read so many excellent Writers upon them, as Judge Hales of the Origination of
Mankind; Dr. Burnet's most ingenious Theory; Mr. Ray's Three
Physico-Theological Discourses, etc. Therefore I will confine my self, in this
short Essay, to a plain Examination of matter of Fact, as it stands in Nature,
and as it appears to our Senses; which, I know, will please you best, who long
ago began to deride Hypotheses, and monstrous Traditions, invented and
instilled in Cells, in Nurseries, or in Schools, the fountains of Mythology;
which has in all Ages infected the purity of Nature with Fables, Chimera's,
and Romances; and even to that degree, that God Almighty himself (Blessed for
ever) must be made use of upon all occasions to invert and confound his own
settled Order of Causes, and to commit absurdities in Nature, either to make
good an uncertain Tradition, or to corroborate a vain Fancy. Non sunt ij aut
scientia aut Art divini, sed superstitiosi vates, impudentesque Harioli, aut
inertes aut insani, aut quibus Egestas imperat; Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt,
alteri monstrant Viam. Cicero de Divinatio.

But to come close to the Point: We have been told of old, That at the first
Creation all was mingled in a fluid Chaos; and that in process of time there
came on gradual Separations, Sediments, and that concreted Mass, which we now
call the World. This made some great Philosophers See Mr. Ray's Three
Physico-Theol. Discourses, etc.
conclude, That the Shells, Teeth, and other Bones of Fishes, were embowel'd in
the Beds, or Strata of the Earth, upon the gradual, or leisurely separation, or
draining of the Waters after the First Creation. We have also been assured,
that these Shells, and Bones, and Plants, were dispersed all the Earth over,
and lodged deep in its Bowels, in Beds, or Strata, at the Universal Deluge See
Steno's Prodromus, Translated by Mr. Oldenburg. Dr. Hooks Micrograph. Ray's
Travels, from p. 113. to p. 130. Plot of Oxfordshire, etc.
: But how far either of these Opinions, or Hypotheses, will stand an ordinary
Test, you will soon judge, after your wonted manner, Physically, Mechanically,
Experimentally; for I know you rely no further upon Authority, than as it is
agreeable to common Sense, or to the ordinary Providence of God Almighty.

The most rational way to examine these Problems, is by the Laws of Gravity, or
by the Hydrostaticks; because the Controversy is about the descent of Solids
in Fluids; in the managing of which there is no need of any extraordinary or
Miraculous intervention of the first Infinite Cause, the principles and rules
being originally established by it; and though we may grant that the first
Chaos and the universal Flood might be miraculously brought about; yet there is
no color for thinking that the Hand of God would confound it is own Laws (where
there was no manner of necessity) in forming and reforming the Machine we call
the Universe; especially in the Phenomenon of Gravity, for settling this
Terraqueous Globe of ours, in the Figure and Texture we now behold it.

Suppose then all the Solids dissolved, or intermixed, floating and subsiding in
the great Fluid of the Chaos, or in the vast Abyss of the Deluge; the most
ponderous must subside first, deepest, or nearest the Center; and the rest
according to their several respective weights, or specific gravities must take
their places in this new Bed, or Mass of Sediments. The Metals would be the
lowest, the rest of the Fossils above them, the Abyss of Water above these, and
so on to the Animal and Vegetable Bodies; which could not Statically subside
with parts heavier in Bulk, or in Specie.

But let us view these Layers, or Strata of the Globe, as far as they appear to
our Senses. The Metals are often at the top, Beds of Marble near the
superficies, Vegetables, Testaceous and other Animal-like Bodies lower still;
and the Abyss, or sphere of Water said to be lowest of all; an odd face of
Sediments, a fantastical descent of Solids in a Fluid; neither Natural, nor
Preternatural, nor Supernatural, without Design, or any End.

Besides, the same Shells, and Marinelike Bodies, are not only found deep in
Beds of Earth and Stone, of different specific Gravity; but also on the very
superficies of the Earth it self, as Cockles, and Cornua Ammonis (the most
ponderous) under which are several Layers of Earth lighter than they; if the
latter (viz. Cornu Ammonis) is any Species of Testaceous Animal, it is either
not extant at this day, or else lies deep in the bottom of the Sea remote from
the Shoars; where it is hard to conceive Broods of such Shellfish, where there
is such want of Air, of Food, and such a mighty pressure of Water, sufficient
to squeeze and break much firmer Bodies.

But perhaps the Water might be so kind as to dissever See Dr. Woodward's late
Essay.
, or take to pieces the Adamantine Rocks, Porphyry, and Talc (insuperable to
fire, and to most Inventions of Art) and to preserve at the same time her
brittle Shells, and the tender Plants entire and whole, whilst the stubborn
Mass of Fossils was forced to yield and lie dissolved in a furious Abyss; this
may pass with Romantic Readers, but scarce with any sound or thinking
Philosophers.

It Is hard to conceive how Leaves, and light Shells should fall in Aequilibrio
with the much heavier parts of Marbles, Minerals, and other Fossils, and be
embodied with them in the same Beds, Layers, or Strata, by the Principles of
the same specific Gravity, whose Laws are certain and constant. Crab's and
Lobster's claws, and all light Shells whatsoever, are said very seldom to occur
upon Land; because being left on the surface of the Earth after the Deluge, and
so exposed to the Air, and other accidents, they were rotted and destroyed (
Dr. Woodward in his Essay). To which it is answered, That the lightest Shells on
our Shoars, are the Echini; yet the Echinites of diverse kinds or sorts (with
respect to the number of Shells on our British Coasts) are the most common
Fossil Shells, or Shell-stones of England, and they are often found at the
depth of at least Three or Four Fathom, and that under Rocks of solid Stone;
and as for joints of Crab's Claws, they have been found lodged about Six Fathom
deep, upon the sinking of a Well.

Coral, and the Astroites Vndulatus, or the Sea-Mushroom, are sometimes found
sticking to these supposed Anti-deluvian Shells. Which is an Argument that the
whole Mineral Kingdom (of which these are properly Members) was not dissolved
in the Hodg-Podg, or Pudding of the Deluge.

The Author of the late Essay censures Dr. Burnet for broaching and vending
Opinions contrary to the sense of Scripture; yet he himself will be found to
contradict the History of Moses: For whereas he gathers from his Anti-deluvian.
Plants, that the Earth was not only totally drowned, but also dissolved
sometime betwixt the 17th of May, and the end of the same Month; Moses tells us
the Waters prevailed ( i. e. as I understand it, the Flood increased) for 150
days, ere the Fountains of the Deep were shut up; nor was it necessary, in case
the World was dissolved in a Fortnight's space, that it should Rain 40 days and
40 nights for the drowning of it. But it is no wonder to see Physical Theorists,
and Hypothetical Speculators, grope and stumble in the dark, as sooon as they
begin to desert the daylight of Sense, and to float out of all depth.

Upon enquiries made into the bottom of the Sea by Diverse, and Navigators, it
appears to consist of inequalities of Rocks, Mountains, Valleys, Beds of Sand
and Earth, of Fossils and Plants, though of different kinds from those at Land.
In this Aqueous part of the Globe, the Water is uppermost, whereas in the other
it is lowermost; an Argument that the manner of the subsiding (or descent in the
general Fluid at the Chaos, or Flood) of Solid Bodies, was quite different in
these two parts of the Globe, and therefore not proceeding from the same Causes
or Principles; whereas Nature is uniform in all her parts, and Providence
Beautiful in her Symmetry.

To conclude therefore the First Part of this Essay; I cannot but continue in
my old Opinion, That the World was thus formed from the Beginning, no total
Dissolution, nor any universal Inundation: Some particular great Changes have
happened, as new Mountains by turning up of the Earth; some new Islands,
especially at the Mouths of great Rivers, by their Sediments of Earth brought
down from the Land; some new Lakes by Earthquakes, and some other Mutations
from particular Floods, or Vulcano's; though a late Author will scarce allow of
any of these sorts Dr. Woodward in his Essay.
; nothing but a General Dissolution of the whole Terrestrial Globe will go down
with him; the smaller Changes by Earthquakes not passing current; though
History and the Observations of Sense make for the latter, and only Dreams and
Phantomes for the former.

All these Marine-like Bodies dug out of the Bowels of the Earth, may, with
more appearance of Reason, be peculiar sorts of Fossils, (as an Ingenious
Writer supposes Dr. Lister in Transact. Philosoph. and de Cochlit.
) or Natives, or Original Creatures of the Earth, (call them what you please)
rather than Strangers, brought in by I know not what barbarous Inundations, and
universal Dissolutions, and settled there by I know not what Laws, or Force, or
Power; I am confident not by any Divine Appointment, for that acts more
regularly, and more discretely.

I would gladly know why these Shelllike Bodies, or Plant-like Substances, may
not be Congenial to the Earth. Plants will propagate on Land, and in Water,
withont any visible or manifest Seed; Shells will shoot, or grow in the Glands
of Animals; and Infects may sometimes breed without Animal Parents, or Eggs, or
Seed; therefore why not Testaceouslike Substances, or Shells themselves in Beds
of Earth, or Stone, where they are found; rather than be brought and laid there
by Fairies, or invisible Agents, that must turn Heaven and Earth up to make way
for those Toys, and preserve them Miraculously in their Voyage thither?

Thus have I done with this Problem. If you please to study and know it
perfectly, you must consult many Authors: As,

Fab. Columna de Purpur. and Glossopetris, with Dan. Major his Notes. 4to
Kiliae. 1675.

Hook 's Micrography, and Lectures upon Spring.

Steno 's Prodromus. Lat. and Eng. 8vo.

Steno de Cane Carcharia and Glossopetris. 8vo.

Ray 's Topograph. Observations made in a Journey, etc. 8vo. From p. 113. to p.
131.

Ray 's Three Physico-Theological Discourses, etc. 8vo. Second Edition, 1693.

Grandius and Quirinus de Diluvio Universally a Testaceis Fossilibus. Venet.
1676. 4to.

Agostino Scilla Letter a circa 1 Corpi Marini Petrificati. 4to Con molte
Figur. Napoli, 1670. As quoted by Mr. Ray, the Book being unknown to me.

P. Boccone in his Recherches and Observe. Not. 8vo. 1674.

Dr. Plot 's Nature. Histor. of Oxfordshire. Fol.

Dr. Lister in Philosoph. Transact. and de Cochlitis.

Dr. Woodward in his Essay toward a Natural History of the Earth. 8vo. 1695.

All the aforegoing Authors, except Dr. Lister, and Dr. Plot, stretch hard to
fetch these Land Shells from the bottom of the Sea to the tops of Mountains,
and into the deep entrails of the Earth, by the means of a Chaos, a Deluge, or
Earthquakes; but all of them in different ways, and with what success, I think,
I have made clear.

But now we are upon this Subject, let us discourse a little with the Author of
the late Essay toward a Natural History of the Earth: Who says, p. 108. That
the Teeth, Bones, and other Parts of Animal Bodies, as also the Trunks, Roots,
and other Parts of Vegetables, were not dissolved in the Deluge, as all the
Fossils and Solids of the Earth were. Now if these Vegetable and Animal Parts
of the Land floated entire and whole, Why do not we find greater quantities of
them under ground? The Anti-diluvian Trees, and especially the Bones of
Terrestrial living Creatures, would be more plentifully buried, or embodied
under ground, than the remote Spoils of the Sea, which in some places must have
Traveled Two or Three thousand Miles to get into their Land-Beds, and that too
in a very short space: The Author ( Dr. Woodward in his Essay) allowing but
some time in the Month of May, for bringing about this mighty Universal Change;
which if so quick, how will he bring together into one place so many distant
and different Animals some thousands of Miles over both Sea and Land? And the
Author will have a pretty piece of work to convey all these Species of living
Creatures back again to their respective Continents and Islands, unless he
keeps in Store all his Carriages, his Pontons, his Magazines, his
Transport-Ships, and other Necessaries for long Marches and Navigations.

I thought to have proceeded in an examination of his great Abyss of Waters,
and his Subterraneous Fire over them; as also of his Origin of Springs, Rivers,
Vapors and Rain, and of his manner of forming Metals; but I refer those Parts
to abler Pens, who understand Distillation, the Calculation and Motions of
Fluids, the Generation and Growth of Metals and other Fossils: However, I will
touch a little upon the manner of stocking his New Globe a Second time, after
his great beloved Catastrophe; which he extends to all the Regions of Asia,
Africa, Europe, and America, tho only Part of Mesopotomia and Syria were
Inhabited by the Anti-diluvians, upon whose account he will have this Universal
Dissolution of the whole Globe of Earth to be brought on; which is not
agreeable to the usual methods of Providence, nor to the Wisdom of the Divine
Nature; for what design could there be in destroying all the innocent dumb
Creatures, and the Beauty of the Creation, in the Uninhabited Parts (which were
above a Hundred to One, in respect of those Planted by the Anti-diluvian
People) for the sake only of a few Wanton and Luxurious Asiaticks, who might
have been drowned by a Topical Flood, or by a particular Deluge, without
involving all the Bowels of the whole Mass, and the remote Creatures upon the
face of the Earth, in their Ruin.

THE SECOND PART OF THE First ESSAY: CONCERNING The Peopling and Planting the
New World, and other remote Countries.
THE Design of this Second Part, is not to calumniate, or diminish the
Authority of Moses, who, without dispute, was one of the Greatest and Wisest
Legislators that ever appeared in the World, not excepting Solon, or Lycurgus,
or Numa. He brought a wandering Idolatrous Nation, to the Worship of One True
God, and established many Excellent Laws amongst them: He adapted his History
of the Creation and Deluge to their Capacities; and therefore it can be no
Crime in one, who is no Jew, to Comment a little upon some parts of it, with a
Christian plainness, and a Philosophical Liberty, founded upon Nature her self.

The West Indies, and the vast Regions lately discovered toward the South,
abound with such variety of Inhabitants, and New Animals, not known or ever
seen in Asia, Africa, or Europe, that the Origin of them does not appear so
clear as some late Writers pretend; especially seeing there are no Records or
Monuments of their Transmigrations out of Asia, or any other known parts of the
World, either before or after the Flood; and their differences from all the
rest of the Globe, in Manners, Languages, Habits, Religions, Diet, Arts, and
Customs, as well as in their Quadrupeds, Birds, Serpents, and Insects, render
their Derivation very obscure, and their Origin uncertain, especially in the
common way, and according to the vulgar Opinions of Planting all the Earth from
one little Spot.

The great Zeal to maintain a Jewish Tradition, put many Learned Christians
upon the rack to make it out. Every corner is searched to find out a Word, a
Rite, or a Custom, in order to derive from thence many Millions of different
People. Some will have Norway, others Tartary and China, or some Western Parts
of Africa, to be the Source and Seminary of Creatures, unknown and strange to
those Climates. The Welchmen are not wanting in their Chimera's of Peopling
Mexico with their Colonies; and perhaps they have better Authority than any can
be produced for the rest. The Spaniards, because they found some Sticks and
pieces of Wood laid Cross-ways, would needs have the Indians to be of Spanish
Extraction. The Jews fancied the Americans to be Circumcised (their Prepuces
being only eaten with the Pox) and therefore would have them to be of Jewish
Race: But we will examine the chief of these Opinions with brevity and
perspicuity.

From Norway the Navigation is very difficult, even to our New strong built
Ships; the vast Islands of Ice, and the Weather in those Seas must have been
invincible to the little Boats or Vessels of those days; and the Journeys over
Land through Greenland are impracticable by reason of the Mountains and Rocks
of Ice and Snow; besides there is a great difference in the Color, Numbers, in
the Customs, and Mechanics of the Natives of Canada, New England, Virginia,
etc. and of the Norwegians; no footsteps of Christianity to be found amongst
the Northern Indians, which are said to Transmigrate in the Ninth or Tenth
Century. All Nations agree in some Words, and in some Customs; therefore a
resemblance in a few of them is no proof. But further, John de Laet assures us,
That with great diligence he found a Mexican Dictionary, but could not obferve
any Words to agree with any European Language. Besides, many Writers who
resided a long time in the West Indies, affirm, that there are so many
different Languages and Dialects in the same Kingdom, that one Province does
not understand another, even in Peru and Brasil; and along the banks of the
single River of Amazons there are above One hundred and sixty different Tongues
and Nations, composed of infinite numbers of various People; so that this
Country, with Peru and Mexico, might contend with any in Asia, not only in
their Inhabitants, but in their Manufactures, and Mechanics, as well as in
their Civil Governments; and they might with the same reason boast of their
giving Birth to us, as we to them.

The Origin of most, if not of all Nations, is wrapped up in fabulous
Traditions; Records and Monuments are of late dates; and when we offer at the
beginnings of things, we are swallowed up and lost in the darkness and depth of
time. Arts, Inventions, and many other things might be lost in the Universal
Devastations of Countries, and sometimes revived again in Revolutions.

The Passage from Tartary into America, is as obscure as that from Norway, and
the same difficulties lie against it; the stretching of the Tartarian Capes are
unknown; but if they should be joined to the back of Northern America, the
Journey would be very dangerous (if not impossible) to Colonies. The Tartars
abound more with Horses than all the World besides, and cannot subsist without
them; therefore it is very improbable they should swarm into America on foot
(when they ride in all other parts) and their Offspring should be so affrighted
with the sight of a Spanish Horse, that a 1000 Tartar-Indians should run away
from a single Mounted Cavalier. The Land in Tartary, said to be the high Road
for this Transmigration out of the Old into the New World, runs further North
than Nova Zembla, or Greenland; and how the Animals, that cannot endure the
extremity of Cold, should climb over inaccessible Mountains of Ice and Snow for
many Thousands of Miles together, is hardly explicable to any thinking man; and
that those Creatures, that live in the Frozen Continent, should not be able to
Travel along with tender Strangers, and delicate Passengers, is scarce
credible; Horses, Ermines, and Sables (that abound in Tartary) might have found
a way much more easily than Indian Creatures. A man must press hard to strain
Brasil, Peru, and Mexico, through frozen Seas, or congealed Deserts, made up of
Snow from the beginning, and covered with Night for half the year.

Neither is it probable that either Norwegians, Laplanders, Muscovites,
Tartars, or the People of Jesse, should carry along with them Ravenous Beasts,
or Venomous Serpents, or such Animals, as never flock into their Countries, as
Lions, Tigers, Alligators, Monkeys, Apes, Parrots, etc.

Navigations from China through the South Sea to America, are impossible to the
Jonks of that Kingdom, which cannot carry Provisions for long Voyages; besides,
the Northern Parts of the South Seas are too high for them, and the Trade-winds
always contrary at East in the Latitudes of Peru and Mexico. The Compass
(necessary in such sorts of Sailing by long Sea) could not be known to the
Chinese in those Ages; besides, the Language of China consists all of
Monosyllables, whereas those of Mexico and Peru have many. The Indians knew
nothing of Style, Pen, Ink, Paper, or any manner of Writing (so common in the
East) but reckoned the Antiquity of Time by strung Beads, Knots, and Pebbles:
They had neither Bellows, Saws, nor Nails, though plenty of Iron Oar in the
Country; but they knew not the way of separating, so long practiced in the Old
World, before their traditional passage out of it.

From the Western Coasts of Africa, the Sailing is more easy, but then the
Natives are most Negroes, or much blacker than the Americans, who have long
Hair, little or no Beards, and are of an Olive Color.

But to come closer to the matter; the Americans had neither Horse, nor our
sort of Cow, Sheep, nor our barking Dogs, nor knew the use of Iron: It Is
wonderful they should carry so many fierce and destructive Creatures along with
them, and leave the mild and useful ones behind; but more wonderful they should
exhaust the Old World of many Species of Animals, never found in it since (nor
perhaps before) their generally-believed Transmigration.

'Twill be hard to make any man (moderately versed in the History of Nature)
confess, that the Pacos, or Glama of Peru, or that the Manati (a biped Animal)
or many other Creatures peculiar to the West Indies, should Travel from Asia
(where they never were observed to exist) by I know not what ways into a
strange World, and all to support an Old Jewish Tradition.

It Is unaccountable that the Fourfooted Beast, commonly called the Ignavus or
Sluggard (that lives most upon Trees, and cannot march above Forty or Sixty
Yards in a day) should get into America from Asia, where no man ever saw it;
and that neither Jacals nor Musk Deer (nimble vagabond Creatures) nor
Rhinocerots, nor Elephants, nor Camels (Itinerant Animals) should ever slip
over into the New World by the same paths or ways that the others went, which
have lest none of their Kind behind them.

But then suppose that America was stocked some time or other (in the days of
King Arthur) from Norway, Tartary China, Land of Jesse, or Africa; yet how came
those Myriads of People and new Animals (perhaps strangers not only to the Old
World, but to the New it self) into those immense Countries, South West and
South-East of America, discovered more lately by Ferdinando Quir, Van Diemen,
Tasman, and others? The Indian Canoes could not transport them over such
boisterous long Seas; and the Lands about the Straits of Magellan are so
desert, that they could not afford such mighty Colonies; neither can we fetch
them from the Capes of Africa or Asia.

I see no way at present to solve this new face of Nature by old Arguments
fetched from Eastern Rubbish, or Rabinical Weeds, unless some New Philosopher
starts up with a fresh System; in the mean time let them all be Aborigines.

Some object, that America in former times was joined to Asia and Europe by
large necks of Land of easy passage, which were afterward broke off by
Earthquakes, Storms, or Inundations; but this is begging of the Question
without any manner of proof; suppose the fact was so, yet it gives no tolerable
account why the Animals of the New World should differ in Specie from those of
the Old; and the Americans themselves may with the same probability affirm,
that they planted Asia by these ways, seeing they were equally, if not more
populous, and excelling in Morality, and Mechanic Arts: For the first Spanish
Writers tell us, they were amazed at the sineness and contrivances of the
Indian Works, especially their Artificers in Golden and Silver Wares, their
Spinnings, and Weavings, and Joinery, etc. for which Benzo, and Garcilasso de
la Vega may be consulted.

But we will give all the rope and scope imaginable to the Mosaic History of
Adam's calling all the Animals together, and naming them, and after wards
Noah's taking every Species of them into the Ark to preserve them in the
Deluge; yet their dispersion into America, and the Terra Australis by unknown
passages, will scarce solve the difficulties in stocking the remote Islands
with men and other living Creatures above a Thousand Leagues distant from any
Land, as the Azores, Bermuda's, the Isles of the South Sea, etc. most of which
abound with Natives, Quadrupeds, Birds, and Insects, different in Specie from
those of the next Continents, or Terra Firma.

A Learned Writer urges, That the Americans could be of no long standing there,
because the Mexicans and Peruvians could give no account of their being there
above a Thousand Years before the Spanish Invasion, which is a very strong
argument against himself, considering they had not the use of Letters (which
methinks they might have brought with them from the Old World) nor Ciphers, nor
any way of Registring, but by Beads, or Stones. Besides, several European
Nations can give no account of themselves for the first Four Thousand Years;
What know we of Britain befote Julius Caesar? or of Greece it self before the
Trojan War?

I am not ignorant that some late Philosophers will have the New Animals in
America, either to be Generated equivocally there, or else to proceed from
various mixtures of Animals sent from hence; but this Hypothesis is of
dangerous consequence, even to our own History of the Old World, and may evert
the Mosaic System here at home; for if there are equivocal Generations
(especially in the most perfect Kinds) or new Species produced every day, What
need of a settled uniform Creation, and such a distinct Number of every Species
of Animals in Paradise, or in Noah's Ark? But besides, equivocal Generations do
not only tend to Atheism, but are evidently exploded by demonstrative
Experiments; and as to promiscuous Generations (commonly called Hebridous)
between distinct Kinds, they can never Propagate, as we see in Mules, etc. and
it is easily proved that there can be no Propagation of any new Species, but
that the Number of Creatures, as to their Kinds, have always been the same from
the Beginning.

As many difficulties lie against the Mosaic System of confining all Species
of living Terrestrial Creatures within the Asiatick or Primaeval Paradise, and
afterward to Noah's Ark; so more seem to arise against the Propagation of all
Mankind out of one Single Male and Female, unless all Posterity, both Blacks
and Whites, separated by vast Seas, were all included actually in form within
Adam and Eve.

The Origin of Negroes lies very obscure, for time out of mind there has been
Blacks with a Woolly substance on their Bodies instead of Hair, because they
are mentioned in the most Ancient Records now extant in the World. It Is plain
their Color and Wool are Innate, or Seminal from their first beginning, and
seems to be a Specific Character, which neither the Sun, nor any Curse from
Cham could imprint upon them.

Not the First, because many other Nations living under the same Climates and
Heats, are never Black, as the Abyssynes, the Siamites, the Brasilians,
Peruvians, etc. neither will any White ever become a Black in Guinea, Congo, or
Angola, though born there; neither will any Negroes produce Whites in Virginia,
or New England. The Textures of their Skins, and Blood, differ from those of
Whites.

Not the Latter: For what Curse is change of Color, that being only accidental
to Beauty, which consists wholly in Proportion and Symmetry? The Old Statues in
Black Marble, are as much, if not more, valued than those in White. Besides,
the Curse upon Cham's account must have turned many of the Asiaticks, and all
the Egyptians into Negroes; for they were Cursed more peculiarly than the
Western remote Coasts of Africa.

This Color (which appears to be as Ingenite, and as Original as that in
Whites) could not proceed from any Accident, because when Animals are
Accidentally Black, they do not Procreate constantly Black ones (as the Negroes
do) as in Dogs, Cows, Sheep, and in some Birds; Accidental Colors vary in the
same Numerical Subject by changes of Seasons, of Diet, of Culture, etc. but a
Negro will always be a Negro, carry him to Greenland, give him Chalk, Feed and
Manage him never so many ways.

Constantia Semina Rerum.

THE SECOND ESSAY, CONCERNING The Rise, Progress, and Destruction of Fables and
Romances. With the State of Learning.
THE bare, naked, or simple way of Instructing by Precept, being found jejune
and nauseous, a mixture of Fable was therefore thought necessary to sweeten and
allure the minds of men, naturally Superstitious and Credulous; which kind of
Philosophy was first made use of amongst the Eastern Nations, the Hebrews
themselves not excepted. Hence it is that the Oldest Books are Mythological, as
Aesop, Homer, Hesiod, Orpheus, etc. This Fabulous way of Writing passed from
the Poets to the Schools and Theaters. Sed diligenter intuere has Naenias,
quantam sub illis utilitatem reperies, nec aliud quidquam per fabellas
quaeritur, quam corrigatur Error ut mortalium, acuatque sese diligent
industria. Phoedrus.

In Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, there are many Fictions, but invented only
for want of Truth; such are the imaginary Originals of most Nations, etc. but
the true sort of History is judiciously distinguished by Diodorus, from the
Mythological or Fabulous; such as is all that before the Trojan War.

Strabo affirms, That the Histories of the Persians, Medes, and Syrians,
deserve little Credit; the inventors of Fables were in such vogue and esteem,
that all their Writers followed the Romantic vein, which had reigned long in
Egypt.

These seeds of Fiction being transplanted into Greece, found the soil very
fertile and luxuriant. The Greeks addicted to Poetry and Invention, ran all
upon Figures, Allegories, Fables, and Parables. The Egyptians before had taught
them the Mysterious way under Hieroglyphics, under masks and disguises, which
make up their Mythologick Theology. The Tales told by the Egyptian Priests to
Pythagoras, Plato, and other Greeks, failed not to tickle their curiosity and
passion of novelty. Graecia Mendax --.

The Sacred Authors themselves complied with this Humor of Parables and
Fictions, the Holy Scripture being altogether Mysterious, Allegorical and
Enigmatical; and our Savior himself gave his Precepts under this veil. The
Talmud contains Millions of Fables, every one more impertinent than another.
The Arabians excelled the Hebrews in Metaphors, Similitudes, and Fictions, of
which their Alcoran is a proof, as well as their numerous Troops of Poets,
which afterward infected Spain and Provence, with Rhodomantade and
Knight-Errantry, Giants, Dragons, Enchanted Castles, and such like acts of
Chivalry.

From these fountains the Christian Monks drunk in the art of Lying, and
composing of Legends; but they did not tell their Tales so finely as the Greeks
and the Orientals. They imitate the Sibyls and the Oracles in their Cells and
Hermitages, though not in the Wisdom or Cunning of their Precepts and
Doctrines; which yet Tully himself spoke contemptibly of. Quid vero habet
Autoritatis furor iste, quem divinum vocamus, ut, quae sapiens non videat, ea
videat insanus, and Is, qui humanos sensus amiserit, divinos assecutus sit?
Sibyllae versus observamus, quos illa furens fudisse dicitur --. De Divinat.
How long was it inculacted up and down that the Devil spoke in the Oracles, and
that they were all silenced at our Savior's coming, till D. van Dale proved
the contrary beyond all controversy and dispute. V. Dissert. de Oraculis,
Eorumque duratione and Auctoribus. 8vo Amstelodam, 1683.

I might give here an account of the famous Edda, which relates the wonderful
achievements of Woden and his Wife Frigga (whose names we still retain in our
Wednesday and Friday. See Verstegan) with the rest of our Gothish Ancestors; a
Book which for Antiquity might contend with Homer, and as Fabulous as the best.

What Stories and Tales have we of Brute, of Arthur, and Merlin? every Province
had their Romancers, their Strolers, and Fable-Mongers; the whole world was
overrun with Lies, and the Fictions of these Practitioners.

The Eastern Nations at this very day retain their old Gust for Fabulous
Inventions, Astrological Cheats, Juglers, Songsters, and lying Mountebanks.
They affect still the old Oriental Rhodomontade, which made up the profane
Learning of the Gentiles, and was sanctified even in Syria it self: The Sacred
Writers complying with the pulse of the Jews, made use of Fictions and Parables
to express their Inspirations; therefore our Holy Scripture, in the Judgment of
our best Critics, Grotius, Father Simon, Le Clerc, etc. is altogether
Mysterious, Allegorical, and Enigmatical. The Talmudists believed that the Book
of Job is no other but a Parable of the Invention of the Hebrews; the Psalms of
David, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, and other Holy Songs, are
Poetical Works, abounding with Figures, which would seem bold and violent in
our Writings, and which are ordinary in those of that Nation. The Book of
Canticles is a kind of Dramatick Poem, where the Passions of the Bridegroom and
Spouse are painted after a tender and touching manner. In the Book of Ruth, and
in the 23d. Chapter of Ezekiel there are many wanton and lascivious
expressions; insomuch that Joseph Scaliger was wont to say, that his reading of
Aristophanes, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Ovid, and other such Authors, did
very much enlighten him in the Interpretation of the Scriptures; in which there
are many things Divinely said, above the pitch of Poets or Philosophers.

I thought to have proceeded with Prodigies and Prophecies, and with a History
of Enthusiasm; but I find Dr. Spencer, the late Master of Bennet College in
Cambridge, has so ingeniously and fully handled the first, and Meric Casaubon
the latter, that a Genius much higher than mine will scarcely attempt to come
after them. I will only remark here once for all, That men in former days that
knew and performed above the ordinary level, were suspected of Magic; and
therefore the Learned Naudaeus wrote an Apology for all the Wise Men who have
unjustly been reputed Magicians, from the Creation to the present Age; and
indeed it is to be wished that some Able Pen would do the like for the many
Sagacious Literati, who are at this day most inhumanly accused of Atheism,
because they search, and find, and hunt a little out of the common field, or do
not run headlong in the high road.

Pessima res est errorum Apotheosis, and pro peste intellectus habenda est, si
vanis accedat Veneratio. Bacon. Nov. Organ.

Tam magna penuria Mentis ubique,
In nugas tam prona Via est --
Et sic Observatio crescit
Ex Atavis quondam male caepta, deinde sequutis
Tradita temporibus, serisque Nepotibus aucta.
Prudent. in Symach. To this Essay of Fables and Romances, the History of
Daemonology does properly belong, with all the terrible troops of Spirits and
Witches; but I find this Part is so Judiciously and Learnedly Treated of by our
Countryman Mr. Hobbs in that Book of his Leviathan, called the Kingdom of
Darkness; and lately by Dr. Becker of Amsterdam in Four Tomes, called Le Monde
Enchantee, that my labor will be all lost, and would only prove dull
repetition; therefore I hasten to the end and destruction of them in these
Western Parts of the World, by what steps it was brought on, and how happily
finished.

The most early strokes, we meet with, are in Dante, Petrach, and Boccace, in
Chaucer, and Wiclef; afterward upon the taking of Constantinople the exiled
Grecians fled into Italy, where under the wings of Lorenzo de Medici, sound
Learning and good Sense began to hatch and creep abroad, fostered and fed by
that Illustrious Family, cultivated by those excellent Wits, Poggius, Aretinus,
Valla, Gaza, Hermolaus Barbarus, Angelus Politianus, and others, who flourished
between 1400 and 1500.

The Art of Printing being invented about 1442, and spread up and down Europe
by 1480 and 1490, and asterwards improved and advanced to perfection from 1500
to 1600, under the care and exquisite Judgments of the Aldi, the Stephani, the
Frobenij, Commelin, Plantine, and others; the Rays of new Light began to dart
abroad, and our Hemisphere to be all Illuminated.

Reuchlin, Erasmus, Palingenius, Buchanan, etc. dispelled the Mists of Monkery,
and a sort of Reformation appeared in glimmerings and flashes.

The mighty Genius of Francis the First, sprung up about this time, and with
his Royal cloak covered the naked Muses: Hobgoblins and Phantomes fled at the
rising of this Star, which soon grew up to be the Sun and Glory of Letters, the
Father of true Knowledge, and the Patron of Arts and Sciences; in his Reign we
read of the Bellay's, the Chastel's, Budaeus, Rabelais, Julius Scaliger,
Gyllius, Bellonius, Gesner, Rondeletius, and many other Eminent Men, who
carried Learning up to a great height.

In the beginning of this last Century, England had the Honor and Felicity to
produce my Lord Bacon, a Man of wonderful Invention and Fertility in vast
Designs; he saw the Greeks and Romans had spun Humanity to its utmost Fineness
and Perfection, which laid buried many Ages under Gothic Ruins and Monkish
Rubbish; he saw the Restoration of this Ancient Civility and Politeness, and
observed the Belle Lettre to reassume its utmost strength in Joseph Scaliger,
and Isaac Casaubon; therefore he drew another Plan, and laid the foundation of
a New Experimental Learning upon the Observations of Sense and Matter of Fact;
which has been since prosecuted in the Mathematics, the Mechanics, Natural
and Physical History, with a happy success in most parts of Europe. It Is
therefore that the present Age affords so much of real Knowledge, and will not
endure empty Notions, and vain Speculations, which had so long amused and
vapoured the World: We presently call for clear Proof, Fact, or ocular
Demonstration: What Improvements in all the parts of Life might not be expected
from such sound Principles, if we had a Richelieu or a Colbert to put the
Springs and Wheels in motion? For want of such a fund, the True Philosophy
begins to degenerate and dwindle into Gossiping, into Tale-telling, into Jests,
into Romantic Hypotheses, and idle Whimsies: Nubes pro Junone.

POSTSCRIPT.
MY LORD,
I Thought to have troubled Your Lordship no further at present, my Temper
disposing me to speak little, and write short; but observing in many late
Authors a false method of making general and Universal Conclusions from some
Particulars, I could not but take notice of it in this place, because Your
Lordship has a true Logical Head, and a sound way of Reasoning.

Some Writers, because they find Shells on the Shoars, to be the Spoils or
Exuviae of Sea-Animals, and Plants at Land to rise from Seed; therefore they
conclude, That all other Shells, or Shell-stones resembling them, must come
from the same place, and all Vegetables be produced in the same manner; so they
affirm all Insects to be Generated by Animal Parents, because they observe some
to proceed from Eggs; as though Nature, or the Almightier Governor of the
Universe, must be confined in all the various mysterious ways of Generation, to
their singular or narrow Caprice, founded upon a few particular Observations.

Many Crustaceous and Testaceous Animals are peculiar to Lakes, Rivers,
Thickets, Caves, Rocks, Beds of Mud and Sand, of which many Species are unknown
to us at this day; and perhaps the Land, or Fresh Water Shells may be as
numerous as those at Sea; therefore we need not fetch all our Subterraneous
Shell-Stones from the Ocean; but I see no Contradiction or Absurdity in Nature
in ascribing the Origin of These resembling Marine Shells, to the Plastic
Power (or call it what Principle you please) of the Earth; the same may be said
of the Subterraneous Vegetables; for this way of explicating these Appearances
is not attended with half so many or great difficulties, as that of bringing
them in by an Universal Dissolution of the Earth at the Deluge.

Shells, or Testaceous figured Bodies, may be Generated in Beds of Earth, or
Stone, as easily as Animals or Plants themselves, which are sometimes found
alive upon the breaking of Rocks and Stones asunder, into which neither Water,
nor Air, nor Animal Parent, nor Ieed could have any ingress; especially if we
suppose with the late Author of the Essay toward a Natural History of the
Earth, etc. that Quarries, or the Strata of Stone, were formed upon the
Settlement of our Globe, when dissevered and taken all to pieces in the Flood.

Men conversant in Medical Observations, and Anatomical History, observe great
variety of Stones curiously Figured and Colored, as also wonderful diversity
of Worms and other Insects, to be daily formed in the Bodies of Animals,
especially in the Gall, Bladders, Stomachs, and Glands; but they meet with
insuperable difficulties when they attempt to bring them into the Microcosm
they know not what ways, nor from what places. So the Subterraneous Speculators
viewing Testaceous and other Animal and Vegetable-like Bodies in the Bowels of
the greater world are forced upon the rack when they endeavor to fetch 'em in
from strange places. The safest way is to take the nearest cause, and to
explicate Nature by her immediate steps and appearances; as Aristotle did very
judiciously upon this occasion: Testacea interdum sponte e limo proveniunt,
alia ex alio; ostreae in coenoso, conchae and quae supra diximus in Sabuloso;
circa Saxorum cava Papillae seu Tethya, Balani seu Glandes, and quae per summa
adhaerent, ut Lepades seu Patellae, and Neritae.

Neither are Shell-like Bodies sometimes thus Propagated, but Vegetables
themselves, which will often spring up plentifully in Countries where they
never grew before, even out of the Trunks of Trees, out of Stones, and on the
tops of the highest places. What Myriads of Insects are produced upon Steeping
Pepper in Rain water? And shall we wonder to see Shell-stones, Teeth, and other
Bonelike figured Bodies in the Bowels of the Earth, when we find the same, if
not greater, Wonders in our own Bodies, and in those of Quadrupeds, Birds, and
Fishes; as Teeth in Abscesses, perfect Shells in Glands, Bezoar in Stomachs,
Testaceous or Laminated stones in the internal parts of Crustaceous and Finned
Fishes, as also In naked Snails, besides curious varieties of Insects in many
parts of most Animals? Of which Physical Causes may be assigned, without taking
the Microcosm all to pieces in order to bring them in, vi and Armis, by
dissolving all that stands in their way.

It Is hard to conceive how such innumerable Aquatick Animals should be
destroyed by a Deluge of their own Element; St. Austin knew better things,
Animalia, quae in Aquis vivere possunt, Diluvij plaga non tetigit, haec enim
terrena tantum mortificavit; for God inflicted this punishment only upon the
Earth and its Creatures, Why so many Millions of Fishes Bones and Integuments
to be entombed in Graves or Beds, perhaps a 1000 Miles below the surface of the
Earth, under Layers of Stones and Marble, where they are said to fall or sink
by their specific Gravity, during the General Dissolution of the Earth by the
Deluge.

Moses seems to be of a different Opion from the Writer of the late Essay (tho
he pretends to corroborate and support the Mosaic System) for Moses gives a
plain and clear Relation of the Mountains standing firm and entire during the
whole Scene of that Action; read the 7th. and 8th. Chapter of Genesis; and if
the Hills continued in their Antidiluvian state, I do not see how so many
Millions of Shells, Teeth, and other Bones of Sea-Animals, together with such
numbers of Antidiluvian Vegetables, could possibly be buried so deep in the
Entrails of our Planet, fortified and encompassed with Arches of Metallic
Mines and Quarries. If the Ocean did overflow the whole Globe (against which
many Batteries have been raised by the greatest Scholars of this Island, Isaac
Vossius and the Present Learned Bishop of Worcester) and brought along with it
many Marine Bodies out of their natural Site or Beds; then it is probable that
the same fluid Principle, or Mass, might have rouled them back again from
whence it had driven them; for the Sea is said to return to its primaeval
Channel immediately after the work was over, so it might have carried them back
again as easily as it roused them at first from their native Depths, or Marine
Scituations.

Sir John Narborough in his Voyage to Chili, observed in several Cliffs and
Hills on the Coasts of Patagonia, lumps of Oyster Shells buried up and down at
Land; yet he could never find any Oysters in those Seas, though he had Sounded
most of the Ports of Southern America. Every body knows that this Shellfish
always breeds near the Shoars; so that flying to the deep can be no subterfuge
here.

In Europe many shell-stones, or Fossil shells, as also subterraneous
Vegetables are found, which are not to be matched either at Sea or Land; to
fancy them in dark and remote Parts of the Ocean, seems but a weak evasion; and
because some may be sampled at Sea, therefore all must come from thence, is not
a very sound Conclusion.

Several Authors have attempted to prove the Strata, or Layers of our Globe, to
proceed from the several Sediments of the Universal Deluge; and that the Lapis
Judaicus, the Astroites, or Star-stone Columns (of which there are some of
enormous Dimensions) the Bufonites or Toadstone, the Glossopetrae, and Cornua
Ammonis (though nothing like it at Sea) are really the Teeth, Spines, Bones,
and other parts of Sea-Animals, left behind in the Bowels of the Earth by the
General Flood. But, I think, all these Ingenious Writers have stronger Fancies
than Judgments, and a meaner Opinion of the Invention, Art, and Power of
Nature, then she deserves; for any common Observer must find Her to vary and
sport in nothing so much as in the Figures, Textures, Shootings, and Growths of
Fossils.

The common Problem, That a Solid included within a Solid, must of necessity
pre-exist before the external or including Solid, is notoriously false from the
daily Generation of new Solids and new Animals (as Ferrugineous and Testaceous
Stones, as also various Insects) within the Solid parts of several Bodies:
Neither does this necessarily induce any fortuitous or aequivocal Generation,
though the latter may, perhaps, sometimes be brought about in the imperfect
kinds of Animals, by the same power that intends over and governs the Univocal
Generation of Insects; for that Powerful Principle is not limited to one single
plastic Method, seeing Matter is capable of all Forms.

Jovis Omnia plena.

FINIS.

