Search the Scriptures. A TREATISE Showing that all CHRISTIANS Ought to READ
the HOLY BOOKS; WITH DIRECTIONS To them therein.

In Three PARTS.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. 1685.

Introduction.
THE Holy Scriptures, as the first Homily of our Church teaches all its
Children, in the very beginning of it, are such a Fountain and Well of Truth,
that as many as be desirous to enter into the right and perfect way unto God,
must apply their minds to be acquainted with them: without which they can
neither sufficiently know God and his Will, nor their own Office and Duty. For
in Holy Scripture is fully contained, what we ought to do, and what to eschew;
what to believe, what to love, and what to look for at God's hands, at length.
And therefore these Books ought to be much in our hands, in our eyes, in our
ears, in our mouths, but most of all in our hearts.

Unto which sort of Discourse, which is grounded upon the VI. Article of our
Religion, they of the Church of Rome are wont to make a double Exception.

One is, That there are some things necessary to be believed and practiced,
which are not to be found there: but must be received from ancient Traditions.

The other is, That those Truths which are delivered in the Holy Scriptures,
are not so clear and perspicuous, that common people should be entrusted with
the reading of them.

Now to the First of these, there has been some time ago a plain Answer made
in a Discourse about Traditions: Therefore this Treatise is intended only as an
Answer to the Second Exception. For the maintaining of which they are wont to
allege, among other places, those remarkable words of St. Peter, in his Second
Epistle, the Third Chapter, and Sixteenth Verse. Where, having made mention of
St. Paul's Epistles, which treated of the same matter, that he had just before
explained, he says, In which are some things hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures,
unto their own destruction.

Behold, say they, how dangerous it is for common people to meddle with the
Holy Scriptures: which, being compared by St. Paul himself to a two edged
Sword, ought not to be put into their hands, for fear they destroy themselves
therewith.

It is true indeed the same St. Paul teaches us, Romans XV. 4. that whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our learning: and are
profitable, as he writes elsewhere, 2 Timothy III. 16. for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness.

But this notwithstanding, there are, say they, such difficulties and
obscurities in the Holy Scriptures, as we learn from this great Apostle St.
Peter, that they ought not to be thought profitable for all people; but rather
hurtful to them that are ignorant: who therefore ought not to read them.

By which single Instance, the Reader may learn, if he mark it well, what sort
of Interpretations of Scripture we are like to have; if we trust to them alone,
and do not see with our own eyes: when these very words of St. Peter do plainly
teach us the quite contrary Doctrine to that which they would establish by them.

I. For they are so far from containing a Reason why the people should not read
them, that, First, they evidently suppose the common people, even the unlearned
among them, did in those days read the Scriptures. Else they could not have
wrested them: as the Apostle says they did; and complains of that, but not of
their reading them. And

II. Secondly, These words do not affirm the whole Scripture to be hard to be
understood, but only some part of it: St. Paul's Epistles at the most, or
rather the things of which St. Peter had been treating. And not all of them
neither, but only some things; (...), some few things which would require
pains, and diligent attention of mind, to comprehend the meaning of them. And

III. Thirdly, The Apostle does not say, that all who read those difficult
passages, are in danger to wrest them; but only the unlearned and unstable; who
abuse the plainest Truths to their own ruin. As for others, they may read even
the hardest places in St. Paul's Epistles safely enough; nay, receive great
profit from thence, as well as from other Scriptures: and they who wrest them,
are not to leave reading them; but to grow in true Christian knowledge, and in
Stability of mind.

These are the three Parts of the ensuing Discourse.

In treating and reading of which, Let us pray to God, (as the second Homily
concludes) that we may speak, think, believe, live, and depart hence, according
to the wholesome Doctrine and Verities of these holy Books. And by that means, in
this World, have God's defense, favor and grace, with the unspeakable solace
of peace, and quietness of Conscience; and after this miserable life, enjoy the
endless Bliss and Glory of Heaven.

PART I.
THat the Right of God's People to read the Holy Scriptures, is not at all
prejudiced by these words of St. Peter, appears from hence: That the Wresting
of the Scriptures by the unlearned and unstable, does suppose, that even such
persons did then read them: Which overthrows the Conclusion, which they of the
Roman Church, endeavor to draw from this place.

For there had been no possibility of perverting their sense, if they had not
been in their hands at that time; as they are in ours now. And yet the Apostle
does not reprehend their meddling with them; but their Ignorance and their
heedlesnes: which was the cause they misunderstood them; and might have been
prevented by a little diligence and care, without throwing them quite away.

For the fault was not there, but in themselves: who came to the perusal of
holy things, with unprepared minds.

Now for the establishing of this Truth, that the people were not then, and
therefore ought not now to be, debarred the liberty of reading the holy Books,
(which God our Savior has left unto his Church, as a common Inheritance) you
may be pleased to weigh these things following: which will fully settle your
minds in this persuasion.

I.
First, That the ancient People of God, the Jews, were not only permitted, but
required by God himself to be so conversant in the Law of Moses, and so well
acquainted with it, as to be able to teach their Children God's Commandments:
and for that end, to talk of them when they sat in their houses, or walked by
the way, when they lay down, and when they rose up; nay, to write them upon the
doors of their houses, and on their gates; that whenever they went out or
came in, they might have them before their eyes, and be put in mind of them,
Deuteronomy. VI. 6, 7, 8.

This the Lawgiver thought a matter of so great importance, that a little
after, in the very same Book, he enjoins it over again; for fear they should
neglect it, Chap. XI. 18, 19, 20. For the very Root and foundation (as their
Masters speak) upon which all the precepts depend, is this precept of learning
the Law: which no man can imagine how they should do, to such perfection as
Moses requires; unless they had the benefit of looking into the Book of the Law
as often as they pleased.

Of which that they might be put in mind, he took care also that the Law should
be read to them publicly every Sabbath day: whereby likewise, they that could
not read (if there were any such among them) might be assisted to inform their
Children, by hearing God's Word read unto them, in their own language.

For this is certain, that in the Synagogues, where they met, not for the
Ceremonial Worship of God (which was performed only at the Temple) but for his
Moral Service, Moses had those that preached him (or pronounced his Law with a
loud voice) (...), from ancient ages or generations; being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. They are the words of St. James, in the first
Christian Council, XV. Acts 21. Where Grotius observes that it is believed,
Moses himself was the Author of this practice, which the Apostle affirms had
been from old times, i. e. from the time of the giving of the Law. And so
Josephus expressly writes in his second Book against Appion: where he shows how
Moses propounded to the Jews, the most excellent and the most necessary of all
other Learning, viz. the Law: not by letting them hear it once, or twice, or
thrice; but every seventh day, laying aside their other works, he commanded
them to assemble together, for the hearing of the Law, and to learn it
thoroughly and exactly.

For which end his Five Books were anciently divided into so many Sections, as
there are weeks in the year: that the whole, by reading one Section every week,
might be read over once in a year, ending at the Feast of Tabernacles. At which
Feast, in the Solemnity of the year of Release (which was correspondent to the
Sabbath, because it was the seventh of years, as that was of days) Moses
required that there should be a more General Assembly of all Israel called to
appear before the Lord their God; that the Law might be read to men, women, and
children, and they might hear and learn, and fear the Lord their God, and
observe to do all the words of this Law; as he speaks XXXI. Deuteronomy. 10, 11, 12.

Where Moses declaring what God had commanded him about this matter, the Hebrew
Doctors understand those words ( v. 11.) Thou shall read this Law before all
Israel, in their hearing, to be the Command of God to Moses himself, requiring
him, as he did the Elders and Priests under him, to read the Law at this great
Solemnity, as the Ordinary Levites did every Sabbath day. And thence they,
consequently enough, conclude, that Joshua after his time, and the Judges, and
the Kings of Israel in succeeding Ages, were bound to read publicly in this
great Assembly, to as many as the largest Court of the Temple would hold, the
principal things in the Book of Deuteronomy; that the people might be moved to
have an higher esteem of their Law, and more reverently attend unto it. For it
was of mighty force to excite the people to Religion, when the chief Authority
in the Nation, not only owned it, but commended it unto them.

And because all Israel could not be contained in that Court of the Temple,
therefore while the King was thus reading there; the Levites, who were
specially appointed for this work, did the same in the City of Jerusalem: after
notice had been given of their intention, by a solemn sound of Trumpets.

Thus care was taken, that what he had enjoined, Chap. VI. 7. should not be
neglected. For if they did forget to whet the Law (as the word there signifies)
upon their Childrens minds, they themselves were excited and whetted to their
duty, by the sound of the Trumpets, by this solemn Convocation, by the Royal
Majesty appearing to awaken their attention, and by his Authority pressing the
Laws of God upon their Consciences.

This was the constant work also, it might be shown, of the Prophets; out of
whose Books, there were Lessons also added in aftertimes; to be read together
with those out of the Law of Moses.

How ancient this was, we do not certainly know: for some derive it from the
times of Ezra; others think it began after the Persecution by Antiochus
Epiphanes. Who forbidding the reading of the Law in their Synagogues, they
chose some portion out of the Prophetical Books (as near to the sense of that
Section, which should have been read out of the Law, as could be found) to be
read in its stead: which when that Persecution was over, they thought not fit
to lay aside, but continued the reading of them both. But, however that be,
this is a known truth, That when our Lord himself came, and, as his custom was,
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read, He took a
Lesson out of the Prophets, for the subject of his first Sermon at Nazareth,
IV. Luke 16, 17. And that it was, after the reading of the Law and of the
Prophets, that St. Paul stood up and preached to the Jews at Antioch, XIII.
Acts 15.

From which Examples, the custom of reading two Lessons, one out of the Old
Testament, and another out of the New, was very early taken up by Christians in
their holy Assemblies: and continued so long in the Church, it appears by
Isidore, and Gratian, that it was most worthily restored by our Learned and
Pious Reformers, whose study it was, to form such an Order of Divine Service,
as was most agreeable to the Primitive Patterns.

Which public Reading was not intended to hinder their private; but to stir
them up unto it. Insomuch that it is a Maxim among the Hebrews, That although a
man had heard the Law read in the public Assemblies on the Sabbath, yet he was
bound also to read himself, the Parascha or Section appointed for that Week.
For this is the Character which David gives of that Blessed man, who walks not
in the way of the ungodly, His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his
Law does he meditate day and night, Psalm. I. 2. That is, says the Commentary,
under the name of St. Hierom, reads the Scripture perpetually, that he may do
the things contained therein. And thus Isaiah calls upon them, in after Ages,
saying, Seek ye out the Book of the Lord, and read, no one of these shall fail,
etc. That is, when you shall hereafter see some of these things fulfilled, get
a Copy of the Prophetical Books, if you want one, seek it diligently (as the
word denotes) till you find it, and read; and you shall see that there is not
one word of what I have said, that is not come to pass: but events shall
exactly answer to these predictions.

And it is well known that Moses himself, in the very beginning, took
particular care that the King should be furnished with a Copy of the Law, and
keep it by him, that he might read therein all the days of his life, and learn
to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this Law, and these
Statutes, to do them, XVII. Deuteronomy. 18, 19. Nay, the more to imprint the words of
this Book upon his mind, the Law enjoins this as a duty belonging to the King
himself, saying, He shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that
which is before the Priests the Levites. Which, though some are pleased to
think a Privilege indulged only to the King, the Jews (who are willing enough
to excuse themselves from such laborious things) constantly affirm, that every
private man was bound to do the same; and that though the King had done it
before (as others were obliged to do) yet being exalted to the Throne, he was
bound to do it over again, out of the most authentic Records; that it might be
the more imprinted on his mind, and work in him a greater reverence thereof.

This Maimonides grounds upon those words, XXXI. Deuteronomy. 19. which concern them
all; Now therefore write ye this Song for you; as if he had said, Write the Law
for your selves, of which this Song is a part; for they were not wont to write
the Law by parcels.

Wherein perhaps they go too far; but there is little doubt to be made, that
pious Kings took care the people should be acquainted with the Law, as well as
themselves: imitating that pious Prince Josiah, who after a long forgetfulness
of the Holy Scriptures, having a Copy of the Law brought to him, which was
found in the Temple, not only caused it to be read in the ears of the people;
but (as the Jews, with great reason, affirm) commanded the Priests and Scribes
to write Copies of it, and deliver them to the people. For how should they be
able to perform the words of the Covenantwritten in that Book, unto which
Josiah engaged them (2 Kings XXIII. 2, 3.) unless they knew them? And how
should they know them more than they had done formerly, if they did only once
barely hear them? Which might give them some present sense of their duty, but
could not be remembered, unless they had the words they were to perform,
constantly before their eyes.

There might much more be added on this subject, but this is sufficient to
introduce what follows.

II.
THAT what was thus enjoined by Moses, and practiced by the people of the Jews,
our Savior confirmed by his Command, or, at least, by his approbation; saying,
V. John 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life:
and they are they which testify of me. Some indeed translate the words thus,
Ye search the Scriptures, for in them, etc. and so they are a plain
acknowledgement of what was then in use; nay, an approbation, if not
commendation, of their diligence, in turning over the holy Books; wherein they
hoped to find so great a Treasure as Eternal life. But if they be rendered as
we, and as many of the Romanists themselves translate them, Search the
Scriptures, then they are a Command; wherein our Blessed Savior requires what
Moses had formerly done, and charges them not to neglect this duty of making a
diligent inquiry into the meaning of the holy Writings; for there they would
find plain testimonies concerning the Messiah, and be satisfied that he was the
Christ whom they expected.

And I cannot see how this Precept may be safely disobeyed. But as our Lord in
the Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus, XVI. Luke 29. brings in Abraham,
sending the Rich man's Brethren unto Moses and the Prophets ( i. e. to their
Writings, for they themselves were dead and gone) for their instruction; from
whom they might learn enough to keep them from coming into that place of
Torment: So we, in like manner, ought to tell men, if they will know how to be
saved, they must repair to Christ and his Apostles; and out of the Gospel, and
Apostolical Instructions, learn the way to Heaven, and how to escape Eternal
damnation.

For there can be no good reason alleged, why the Jews should be permitted,
nay commanded to read Moses and the Prophets, and we not be allowed, but
forbidden, to read the words of Christ and his Apostles. For we are as much
concerned, or rather more, in these, as they were in them: and they are not
harder to be understood by us, than the old Scriptures were by them: we have
the same means, the same helps that they had, if not far better; to prosit by
them, and to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

And therefore it is no fault in our Preachers now, but an honest discharge of
their duty, to say to their people, as Origin does to his, in his second Homily
upon Isaiah, Would to God we did all practice that which is written, Search the
Scriptures. And as St. Basil (in his Second Book of Baptism, Cap. 4.) Let us
obey our Lord who says, Search the Scriptures: and let us imitate the
Apostles, who inquired of the Lord himself, the interpretation of his own
words; learning the truth and wholesomness of what He says in one place, by
what He speaks in another.

So far were these great and Holy men, from discountenancing the reading of the
Holy Scriptures; that they most earnestly press every body to it, as I shall
show more fully before I have done.

III.
LET us now further consider, that the Apostles of our Lord were concerned,
that what they wrote, concerning the Christian Doctrine, should be read not
only by the Elders of the Church, to whom their Writings were directed; but be
communicated to all the Members thereof, who were under their Instruction.

This appears from St. Paul's most solemn Charge, in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, that it should be read to all the holy Brethren, 1. v. 27. Who
should read it to them, but the Bishops and Pastors of the Church? Who, no
doubt, first received it; but were not to keep it to themselves, but impart it
to the whole Community. And if they read it to the whole Society, we cannot
think they refused to give Copies of it to them, if any desired it, that they
might read it themselves. Or rather they took care to disperse this Letter of
their own accord, among their Flock; as they did also send it to other
Churches, whereby by it became common to the whole Christian World

And it was a matter of such great importance, that all the people should be
acquainted with his sense, that his Charge is in the form of an Adjuration.
That if they neglected him, the Command should be obeyed, for the Adjuration
sake. For Adjurations were dreadful to the ancient Christians, though now, alas
(woe be to us) they are little regarded.

They are words of Theophylact. And to the same effect Theodoret glosses. He
adds an Adjuration, contriving that all might have the profit of the reading
this Epistle. For perhaps otherways, they that first received it, might not
have given it unto all. As much as to say, He was afraid lest the Epistle
should be suppressed, and read but by few: and therefore he requires them, for
the love of God, and as they hoped for mercy from our Lord, that it should be
read unto all. Which teaches us, that the Word of God ought not to be concealed
from the poorest Members of the Church; who are concerned in it, as much as the
greatest: And that if the Apostle were now alive, and should write to the
Churches, we may be confident, he would be more earnest, if it be possible, in
this matter: graviore contestatione adjurans, etc. (as Musculus writes) adding
greater weight o his Adjuration: and beseeching, nay, charging the Governors
of the Churches (who now with all their might oppose the peoples reading of his
Epistles) that as they expected the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was the
Witness of what he said, and would be their Judge, they would take care that
all his words should be diligently communicated to the Faithful.

It may not be amiss to take notice, that to the same purpose S. Paul writes
also in his Epistle to the Colossians IV. 16. where he commands that this
Epistle being read among them in that Church, they should take care to have it
read in that of Laodicea (by sending, that is, a Copy of it to them) and the
Colossians on the other side, should read the Epistle of the Laodiceans: that
is, the Epistle which he had sent to that Church, as some ( Theophylact
observes) anciently understood it; or the first Epistle to Timothy, which was
written by him (as others, he says, observe) from Laodicea.

These are plain demonstrations, that the Writings of the New Testament were
intended to be the common portion of all God's people, as those of the Old had
always been.

IV.
AND thus I shall now proceed to show they understood it: by representing that
reading of the Scriptures was looked upon as a Duty, and carefully practiced by
pious people, according to the forenamed injunction of our Blessed Lord, and
the solemn obtestation of the Apostle. For the same Apostle tells us, that his
Son Timothy from his infancy had known the Holy Scriptures; which will not now
be allowed in the Roman Church to grown Christians, without a special license:
no not to Regulars, as they call them; whose whole business it is to be
Religious, but may not have any part of the Bible, in their own Language,
without a faculty from their Superiors.

Read 2. Tim. III. 15. and comparing it with the fifth verse of the first
Chapter, you will sind that he received this early knowledge he had of the
Scriptures, from his Grandmother and Mother (for his Father was not a Jew, but
a Greek) and therefore they were not ignorant in the Scriptures: but had made
it their business to understand them so well, that they were able, according to
the Law of Moses, to teach them their Children.

Which they began to do, says the Apostle, (...), from their cradles, as we
speak in our Language: that is, as Josephus admirably explains it, (...),
immediately upon the first indication that they have any perception of other
things. For so he writes in the Book before named, If any man ask any one of
our Nation concerning the Laws, he will tell him all things more readily than
his own name: for learning them straightway, as soon as we come to have any
knowledge of things, we retain them deeply engraven upon our minds.

Thus the Talmudists also discourse; at five years old they put their Children
to the Bible. Whereby they arrive at such a proficiency, that in these latter
Ages they have been able to tell any thing that is there. So Ribera a famous
Jesuit relates in his Commentaries upon V. Micah 2. I knew a Jew, says he, at
Salamanca, who was sufficiently unlearned, of whom when I inquired (in the
Spanish Language, because he understood no Latin) about several things, both
in the Historical and in the Prophetical Books, he stopped me immediately, upon
the first mention of them, from proceeding further: and repeated them all
himself, without Book, in the Hebrew Tongue. Which I relating to another Jew
who was become Christian, he told me it was no wonder; for they committed all
these things to memory from their Childhood.

Which may very well put those Christians to the blush, who are as careful and
vigilant to keep not only their Children and Youth, but Elder people also from
reading the Holy Scriptures, as the Jews are to bring them into acquaintance
with them.

And it is the more shameful, because even the Proselytes, that is, they of
other Nations, who embraced the Jewish Religion, were allowed this liberty, no
less than the natural Jews themselves. Which is apparent in the History of the
Eunuch belonging to the Queen of Ethiopia: whom St. Philip found (VIII. Acts
28.) reading the Prophet Isaiah, as he was in his journey home-ward from
Jerusalem: agreeable to the Precept of the Law before mentioned, that the
Divine Writings should be their Companions when they walked on the way, as well
as when they were within doors.

This Eunuch was a man of a strange Country, bred up in the Court of Ethiopia;
which was the softest, they say, and most effeminate of all Nations: yet, being
converted to the Jewish Religion, he had so much care of his Soul, as to read
the Prophetical Books, the hardest of all the old Scriptures. The sense of
which, he confessed to Philip, he did not understand: but that did not hinder
his reading them. And because he read them with a pious mind, God sent him an
Interpreter: who improved his knowledge, and advanced him from a Jew to be a
Christian: clothing the Blackmore, as Erasmus expresses it, with the Snow-like
fleece of the immaculate Lamb.

Which that great Man justly alleges as an Argument, why every one should read
the Scriptures, though they do not understand every thing that they read. If
they do it honestly and piously, how do we know, says he, but that they may
fare as well as the Eunuch did: who felt his heart touched, in the reading, by
the Spirit of God?

V.
CERTAIN it is, you may further observe, that this was not only practiced in
the first and best times of Christianity, but it was accounted a noble quality
in those, who were seriously conversant in the Holy Scriptures. As they of the
City of Beraea may teach us: who hearing St. Paul preach that Jesus was the
Christ, which he confirmed no doubt out of the Scriptures, did not presently
reject what he said, because it crossed their Opinion, as a neighboring City
had done; but were more noble (says the Text, XVII. Acts 11.) or better bred,
than those of Thessalonica; searching the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so. Which is so far from being censured as a piece of presumption,
that God blessed these pious endeavors, and gave them a right understanding,
as a reward of their search into the Scriptures: according as it there follows,
therefore many of them believed.

And thus St. Peter also, in this very Epistle ( Chap. I. 19.) commends his
Countrymen; who attentively read and considered the Prophetical Writings: We
have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in your hearts.

The plainest meaning of which words, to me, seems to be this; That it was a
laudable and praiseworthy thing in those Jewish Converts to whom he writes
(who as yet were but weak in the Faith) that they did give heed to the Writings
of the ancient Prophets; which they took to be the surest ground of their
Faith: for in them they would sind the Lord Jesus plainly descrihed, if they
compared what the Apostles preached with that which they foretold, as the
Beraeans did. Those Writings indeed of the Prophets, did but obscurely treat of
Christ, in comparison with the discoveries of him in the Gospel, and the
Apostolical Writings (which he compares to the Day Star, and the old Prophets
but to a Candle shining in a dark place) yet the one would lead them to the
other; and by taking attentive heed to the Prophetical Writings, they would in
time find the day dawn, and the Daystar arise in their hearts: that is, arrive
by degrees at clearer demonstrations, and a fuller and brighter knowledge of
Christian Truths, delivered by our Savior and his Apostles: who being the
Light of the World, gave light even to the ancient Prophecies.

To conclude this particular; they were so far from discouraging any
Christians, in their reading the Holy Scriptures, that they commend those who
read even the hardest Books among them. Those words are very remarkable, I.
Revel. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy; and keep those things that are written therein.

Which comfortable encouragement I do not see why we may not, with the greatest
satisfaction, apply to our selves now, as they did then, to quicken us to read
and hear the things contained therein. For though we do not certainly
understand every one of those Prophecies; yet there are abundance of most
excellent instructions and admonitions, encouragements and consolations
interspersed throughout that Book: which make it sit to be read by Christian
people for their direction and support. And we may likewise from hence take the
confidence to argue in this manner: If a Blessedness be pronounced to those
that read or hear that Prophecy, and keep those things that are written
therein; then they cannot be accursed, who for the same end read other holy
Books, where such instructions and comforts are more plentifully, and plainly,
and on purpose delivered: nor can they expect God's blessing who prohibit the
reading even of those easy and more familiar Scriptures, which are
accommodated by the Divine Wisdom and Goodness to the most vulgar capacity.

Every one ought to drink of these Fountains: nor would I forbid (says Erasmus
very piously) those that thirst after Christian knowledge, to read even those
Books, which are not so open, but like a Fountain sealed up. Because they will
reap this fruit at least, that they will come more sit to the hearing of
Sermons, which touch upon, or allude to those more obscure passages. They will
hear also those things more willingly, of which they have already some
knowledge: and understand those things more easily, of which they have a small
taste.

VI.
AND there is the greater reason for it, because the Holy Scriptures are a
considerable part of our complete Spiritual Armor; without which we shall lie
so open to the assaults of our Enemies, that it will very much hazard our
Salvation. And why should we be exposed to any danger, when we may defend our
selves by the use of those weapons which God himself has provided for us? Or
how can they be Friends to our Souls, who would expose us by taking those
weapons out of our hands?

Read the VI. Ephesians. 11. etc. Where the Apostle exhorting them to put on the
whole Armor (or complete Armor) of God, that they might be able to stand
against all the wiles of the Devil; in the following Verses enumerates the
several parts of this Armor; and the last piece of it, but one, is ( v. 17)
the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. This shows that, as while we
have Enemies to fight withal, and very powerful, subtle Enemies, we have need
of all sorts of Weapons that God has furnished us withal for our defense; so
we are not completely appointed for our defense, without this weapon, the Word
of God, no more than a Soldier is without his Sword. And therefore they who go
about to deprive us of this leave us, in great part, naked to our Spiritual
Enemies: By wresting that weapon out of our hands, whereby we should beat them
off.

There is not one of the Devils temptations, ye may observe, (IV. St. Matthew.)
but our Savior vanquished it by this weapon: telling him, it is so and so
written; and the Tempter had no more to say, nor knew what to oppose thereunto.
And therefore our safety lies in the same Divine Armory of the Holy Scriptures:
unto which we ought to have resort upon all occasions; and there furnish our
selves with such holy Precepts, Examples, Promises, and Threatenings, as we may
have ready at hand to oppose to every temptation.

It is usually said, as I noted in the beginning, that men may wound themselves
with a Sword, as soon as their Enemies: and therefore it is not safe to let
every body take this weapon into his hand.

But was not the Apostle as much aware of this as we? Were not the Holy
Scriptures as liable to be perverted then, as now? And we by this reason shall
leave neither Sun in Heaven, nor any good Creature here upon Earth (as a great
Man of our own somewhere speaks) for they have been all wretchedly abused to
very ill purposes by evil men.

And besides this, it is not true that men may as soon hurt themselves, as
their Enemies, with this Sword. For who but mad men, or desperate persons, run
that weapon into their own bodies, wherewith they should defend their lives?
And who but they that are distracted themselves, will suppose the generality of
Christians to be such a frantic fort of people, that they are not to be
trusted with the means of their preservation: but must have even the bread of
life taken from them, for fear they surfeit of it?

But this will be more fully answered hereafter: and that which I have next to
represent to your consideration, will give great satisfaction to it, which is
this,

VII.
THAT the greatest Doctors in the Church have most earnestly exhorted the
people, with all the Rhetoric they could invent, to give themselves leisure
for this holy employment, of reading the Holy Scriptures.

S. Chrysostom, for instance, in a number of places, maintains these three
Propositions, with an extraordinary zeal, and passionate concern, to have them
believed and practiced.

First, That all men, of whatsoever rank and condition they be, ought to read
the Bible; not only at Church, but at home.

Secondly, That it is more necessary for a mere Layman, as we speak, to read
it, than it is for a Monk, or those that are wholly sequestered from the World.

Thirdly, That neither the obscurity of the Scriptures, nor indeed any thing
else, ought to be thought a sufficient reason why men should not read them.

I. For the first of these, [ That all men, of whatsoever rank and condition
they be, should read the Scriptures] his words are very remarkable upon that
place of St. Paul, III. Coloss. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly,
in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, etc. where he cries out
with great vehemence, (...), etc. Hearken to this as many of you as are men of
the world, and have wives and children under your care; how he commands, even
you especially, to read the Scriptures: and that net simply, nor by the bye,
but with a great deal of diligence. Which he presses, by comparing the heavenly
Treasure here contained with all other riches; and then returns to his
Exhortation again, saying, (...), etc. Hearken, I beseech you, all ye that are
Secular men: provide your selves with Bibles, the Medicines of your Souls. If
not with the whole, yet at least the New Testament; the Apostles, the Acts, the
Gospels, your perpetual Instructors. If any sadness befall thee, look into these
as into a Repository or Shop of spiritual Remedies. Hence fetch consolation in
all doleful cases; whether it be any damage in thy goods, or it be death, or
the loss of servants. Or rather do not look into them; but take them all to thy
self; carry them about with thee in thy mind. This is the cause of all evils,
not to know the Scriptures. We go to War without our Armor, without Weapons;
how can we be safe? It is easy to overcome with these; but not without them.
Do not throw all upon our shoulders. Ye are Sheep; but not irrational ones, but
reasonable: and many things the Apostle lays upon you. Who ought to learn of
us: and then your wives and your children ought to learn of you. But you would
leave all to us: which gives us no small trouble.

To the same purpose he discourses in other places of his works; and maintains
it by such arguments as these.

First, that every man has need of such instruments as belong to his art. A
Blacksmith (says he in his third Sermon upon Lazarus) or Goldsmiths cannot
work without their Anvil, their Hammer and their Tongs, and such like Tools:
which they will by no means part withal, though they suffer hunger and thirst;
because then they give up their trade, and all means of their subsistence is
gone: and even just so ought we to be disposed; who can no more go to work,
without the Apostolical and Prophetical Writings, and other divinely inspired
Scriptures, than they without those Tools. For as by those Instruments they
form and fashion all the Vessels they take in hand: So we by these, hammer, as
I may say, our own Souls, amending and reforming all that is amiss, renewing
what is decayed, nay, making our selves quite other Men. For here is the
difference between us and them: They show their art only in the outward figure
of a thing (for they cannot alter the matter of it; by turning Silver, for
instance into Gold) but we, by these Divine Instruments, may do a great deal
more; turn an Earthen Vessel, into a Golden; a Vessel unto Honor, as the
Apostle speaks, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto
every good Work. Let us not neglect therefore the getting of Bibles: Nor let us
dig for Gold, but rather treasure up these Spiritual Books. For the more Gold
we have, the more hurt it may do us: But Bibles if we get, they will do those
that have them a great deal of good.

Secondly, He presses this, by this further consideration, that as St Paul
would have us, let the Word of Christ dwell in us richly and abundantly: so St
Peter requires us to be ready always to give an answer to every man, that
asks us a reason of the hope that is in us. 1. Pet. III. 15. Now what say our
idle People, more lazy than Drones, to this? They comfort themselves with those
words in the Proverbs, Blessed is the simple Soul. For this is the cause of all
our evils, that many do not understand how to produce the Testimonies of the
Scriptures to the purpose. For the Wise Man by the Simple does not there mean,
an ignorant man, that understand nothing; but a harmless man, that works no
evil, but has skill only to do goad. Thus he discourses in his XVII Homily
upon St John's Gospel: Where he shows it is an unpardonable neglect, not to be
able out of the Holy Scriptures, to repel the assaults of Gentile Philosophers.
For it is a most absurd thing, that every Physician should be able to give an
exact account of his art; nay a Currier or Weaver, or any other Artist can do
the same; only he that is caled a Christian, cannot give an account of his own
Faith.

Thirdly, As every man is bound to give a reason of his Faith; so he is bound
to take care of his Souls proficiency in Virtue and Goodness: Which he cannot
do, unless he be conversant in the Holy Writings. For what sensible Food is to
the increase of bodily strength, that the reading of the Scriptures is to the
Soul. It is a Spiritual Nourishment; and renders the Soul stronger, more
constant, and more philosophical: not suffering it to be carried away with
absurd imaginations; but making it pure and lightsome, gives it wings to carry
it up to Heaven.

Much more to the same purpose he speaks in his XXIX Homily upon Genesis: and
begins the XXXV. in this manner. Great is the good, my Beloved, of skill in the
Divine Writings. For this makes a Philosophical Soul (that is, instructs it in
all manner of Virtue) this forms a man to be acceptable: this makes him mind
none of these things present, but to have his mind always in the other Life:
that looking at the recompense our Lord will give us, we may do all that He
would have us, and undertake the labors of Virtue with great cheerfulness. For
from thence we may exactly learn the Providence of God's speedy succor and
help; the Fortitude of the Righteous; the Goodness of our Lord; the Greatness
of his Rewards. From thence we may be excited to a zealous imitation of the
Christian Virtue of brave men: that we may not flag in the Combats of Virtue;
but be confident and assured in the Divine Promises, before they come to pass.
Therefore let us, I beseech you, with great diligence apply our selves to the
reading of holy Writings: for thereby we shall be furnished with Divine
knowledge, if we frequently make them our study: it being impossible that he
should be neglected by God, who with earnest diligence and fervent desire,
imploys himself in these Divine things; but, if no man can be found to teach
us, the Lord himself will come from above into our hearts, and inlighten our
minds, and shine into our understandings, and reveal those things that are
hidden, and instruct us in those things wherein we are ignorant; provided we
will contribute all that lies in us to the business.

Fourthly, This he illustrates by the Example of the Eunuch, in the VIII. of
the Acts: whom he magnifies in several places of his Works (as I shall have
occasion to observe) upon several accounts, belonging to this matter:
particularly here, for not neglecting to read the Prophet Isaiah; though he
himself was a Barbarian, and ignorant what the Prophet said: but because he did
what he could, and with all the diligence he was able, he obtained a Guide from
God. Consider here, I beseech you, how beneficial it was to this man, that he
did not omit reading; no, though he was in a journey, on the highway. Let those
hearken to this, who will not do so much at home: but look upon this as a
by-business, because they cohabit with a wife, or are listed Soldiers, and
have the care of children, and must look after their servants, and have a great
deal of business in the World; which they imagine sufficiently excuses them
from troubling themselves with reading the Holy Script res. For see here all
this confuted in this Barbarian, a man of business, and in his journey, etc.
who was so studious and intent upon his reading, that nothing could divert him
from it; as he proceeds to show in that Homily with a great deal of Eloquence;
which will be more pertinently alleged under some of the other general Heads.
I only observe one thing more under this.

Fifthly, That he urges this obligation they had upon them to read the Holy
Scriptures, from this Argument, That otherwise they would not be able to
instruct their Children and Families: as he tells them they were bound to do,
from the forenamed Precept of St. Paul, Let the word of Christ dwell in you
richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, etc.
Observe, says he, how the Apostle declines all that might deter them from this
business. Because there is great pains to be taken in the reading some
Scriptures, and it is a laborious business to understand them; therefore he
commends the Psalms: that he might at once delight their minds, and make the
labor easy to them. Now your Children are acquainted with Satanical Songs and
Dances; like to those who keep Victuallinghouses, and Dancing-masters: but none
of them knows so much as one Psalm. Hence all our mischiess: for like to the
Soil in which the Plant is set, will be the fruit. Teach thy Children therefore
to chant the Psalms; those that are full of Philosophy. For Example, those
straightway that teach temperance: or rather before all, those about avoiding
ill company, with which the Book begins. For upon this score the Prophet enters
upon his work with this admonition: Blessed is the man that walks not in the
way of the ungodly, etc. and again, (26.4.) I have not sat with vain persons:
and again (XV 4) in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors
them that fear the Lord. Like to these thou will find many more, concerning
bridling the appetite of meat and drink, and all the pleasures of the belly;
concerning keeping the hands from theft; against covetousness; and that riches
are nothing, nor glory neither, nor all the rest of like nature. If from a
Child thou accustom him to these Notions, by little and little thou will
advance him to sublimer apprehensions. For then he will understand the Hymns,
which have nothing humane in them, but are things more Divine. For the heavenly
Powers sing Hymns, not Psalms, etc.

By which repeated Exhortations, it appears, these were not hasty thoughts,
which on a sudden sprung up in him, when he was in the heat of his discourse:
but the deliberate, constant and settled sense of his mind; which was highly
concerned to bring all the people, committed unto his charge, to a more
familiar acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures.

This will still more fully appear in the Second Proposition which he
maintains: and that is such, as may perfectly put to shame the Doctrine of the
present Roman Church. For it is this,

II. That it is more necessary for a Layman to read the Scriptures, than for a
Monk, or those that are sequestered from the World. To this purpose he
discourses in his second Sermon upon St. Matthew: This is the plague that now
infests us, and corrupts all; that you imagine the reading of the Scriptures
belongs to Monks only, and not to you that have wives and children, and worldly
business: whereas it is more necessary for you, than for them. For they that
live in the World, being most exposed to the danger of being wounded, have most
need of medicines; to preserve them, that is, or to cure them.

Thus likewise in the third Sermon upon Lazarus before mentioned, he discourses
to this effect: Let no man tell me, I am engaged in pleading Causes, the
public business lies upon me, I have a Trade, I must live by my handy work, I
have a wife and family; in short, I am a man of the World, and it is not for me
to read the Scriptures: but for those who have bid an adieu to it. What do
thou say, man; is it not thy business to turn over the Scriptures, because thou
art distracted with worldly cares? For that very reason it is more thy
business, than theirs. For they have less need of the defense of the
Scriptures, than we have: who are tossed in the midst of the waves of business.
They are, as it were, in the Haven; they are secure, and enjoy perfect
tranquillity: it is we who fluctuate in the midst of the Sea; who are
obnoxious, whether we will or no, to innumerable sins; and therefore have
perpetual need of the comfort and the assistance of the Holy Scriptures.

What can more effectually represent the sense of the ancient Doctors, than
this? unless it be what follows, out of the XXI. Homily upon Genesis; upon
those words, Noah begat three Sons. Let us not bring forth those frigid words,
I am a worldly man, I have a wife, the care of children lies upon me: as the
manner of many is to excuse themselves, when we bid them labor to be good, and
apply their study to read the Holy Scriptures. That does not belong to me, say
they; have I renounced the World? am I a Monk? What do thou say, man? Does
this belong to Monks only to study in all things to please God, who would have
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth?

Let us not deceive our selves; but the more we are entangled in such kind of
cares, let us so much the more carefully search for a remedy, in the reading of
the Holy Scriptures. Was not Noah and such like good men, of the same Nature,
of which we are? and yet had not the benefit of those helps and assistances
that we enjoy. How can we then be excused, who enjoy such a Doctrine, who have
obtained such Grace, who have helps from above, and have received the promises
of ineffable good things; if we do not come to the measure of that Virtue, at
which those Patriarchs arrived? I beseech you therefore again, that you would
not only simply look into those things which are contained in the Holy
Scriptures; but that you would read them with attention: that by the profit we
receive from them, we may at last, though we have been a long time about it,
come to that degree of Virtue which God will approve.

The same he urges again, in the XXXV. Homily upon the same Book, from the
Example of the Eunuch reading the Scriptures in his Chariot: which he thus
concludes. I have laid this History before you, that we may not be ashamed to
imitate this Eunuch; nor neglect reading, no not in a journey. For this
Barbarian alone may suffice for a Master to us all: both to those that lead a
private Country-life, and to those who are listed to serve in the Army, and to
those that live in the Court; and in general, to all men, and to women too, and
to those that live in Monasteries also, that no time should be thought unfit to
the reading of the Holy Oracles. For it is possible, not only within doors, but
to those who go to Market, that are in Journies, that fall into a great deal of
Company, that are entangled in business, to be conversant in them: that doing
what we can, we may meet with one to guide us. And what if we do not understand
what we read? let us go it over again. For frequent meditation imprints things
on the memory and oft-times what we could not understand to day, we may find
out presently when we read it again to morrow: the most gracious God invisibly
illuminating our understanding.

Which leads me to the last Proposition; which he maintains, in Answer to all
Objections that can be made aagainst this Doctrine.

III. That, as none ought to neglect reading, because they are men of business
so, they ought not to excuse themselves, because they want Bibles; or because
the Scriptures are so obscure, that they do not understand them.

Concerning business, you have heard already what he was wont to say.

And concerning want of Bibles; he tells them, the rich cannot pretend this.
And as for the poor, I would ask them, says he, this Question, Whether they
have not all the tools belonging to their Trade. And since they can furnish
themselves with such necessary implements, why they should not judge it most
absurd to be wholly unprovided of the Holy Scriptures: which are as necessary
for their spiritual, as the other for their bodily subsistence.

But to the greatest Objection of all, the obscurity of the Holy Scriptures,
and that it is impossible to understand them, he answers very largely in
several places of his Works: particularly in that Homily forenamed upon Genesis
XXXV. speaking of the Eunuch of the Queen of Ethiopia. Who did not say, as many
do now, I understand nothing of what I read; I cannot dive into the depth of
these Scriptures; to what purpose should I take all this pains and tire my self
in vain, by reading: when I have none to lead me into the meaning? No such
thought was entertained by him, who was a Barbarian in his language, but a
Philosopher in his mind: and rather concluded he should not be despised, but
receive help from above, if, doing all that lay in his power, he continued
reading the Holy Scriptures. And therefore the most Gracious Lord of all,
seeing his ardent desire, did not overlook him, nor left him unprovided: but
straightway sent him a Master to inform him.

See here the Wisdom of God, how He expected till he first did what he could;
and then He manifested his own powerful aid. Because he prepared himself, the
best he was able, an Angel of the Lord was sent to Philip, that he might do the
rest, etc.

But this Argument he prosecutes most largely, in his Third Sermon upon
Lazarus. Where, first of all he says, a man cannot look into the Holy
Scriptures, but he must be made better: God conversing with him there in those
Writings: so that though he do not understand what he reads, yet his mind will
be much purified by reading: by a holy sense of God, he means, upon whom his
mind is fixed, as speaking to him.

But immediately he further adds, that what is objected, is not true of all
Scriptures: some being so plain, that it is impossible to be without
understanding of all things whatsoever, that we read there. For the Grace of
the Holy Spirit, on purpose ordered these Books to be composed by Publicans, by
Fishermen, by Tent-makers, by Shepherds, and such like mean and unlearned men,
that none of the common people might flee to this Pretense; but the things that
are there written, might be intelligible to all. That the Handicrafts-men, and
the Servants, and the poor old Women, and the most illiterate of all mankind,
might be gainers, and profit by the hearing of them.

And what they designed they effected; For to whom are not all things in the
Gospel manifest and clear? Who is there that reads these words, Blessed are the
meek, blessed are the merciful, blessed are the pure in heart, and the like,
that needs any other Teacher to instruct him, what it is that is said? And are
not all things that relate to signs and wonders, and the History of Christ,
clear and easy to be understood of all? These objections are but a cover and
pretext under which men hide their sloth and idleness

Which further appears from the temper of those men, that from the beginning
were counted worthy of the Grace of the Spirit: who composed all things, not as
they without the Pale of the Church, for Ostentation, and their own
Vain-glories sake, but for the Salvation of those that heard them.

The Heathen Philosophers indeed, and Orators, and other Writers, not seeking
the common good of all, but aiming at the making themselves admired, when they
said any profitable thing, made it difficult to be understood, and wrapped it up
in some obscurity: But the Apostles and Prophets did all quite contrary, making
all plain and clear, as the common Teachers of the whole World; that every one
might be able, of himself, to learn, by the bare reading only, such necessary
things as those now mentioned. Which the Prophet foreshewed when he said, they
shall all be taught of God. And every man shall not say to his Neighbor know
the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest. And so St.
Paul, I came not to you in the excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom, showing you
the Mysteries of God. And again, my Speech and my Preaching was not in the
enticing words of man's Wisdom: but in the demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power. And again, we speak Wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the
Wisdom of this World, nor of the Princes of this World, that come to naught,
etc.

And lastly, he proves this from the intention for which they wrote these
Books: which was that all might find a remedy here of whatsoever troubled them.
This he admirably prosecutes in these words, because thou art engaged in
Family-affairs and a world of business, therefore thou have the greater need of
more Medicines. For not only thy Wife provokes thee, but thy Child makes thee
sad, and thy Servant angers thee, and thy Enemy devises mischief against thee,
and thy Friend envies thee, and thy Neighbor does thee damage, and thy
Fellow-souldier supplants thee: Nay perhaps, He that sits in judgment
threattens thee, and Poverty makes thee sorrowful, and the Running away of thy
Servants fetches tears from thy Eyes: in short, either Prosperity puffs thee
up; or Adversity pinches thee sore, and makes thee shrink. There are many
occasions of Anger, many of Thoughtfulness, many of Sadness and Sorrow; and
many also of Vainglory and senslless Pride: Straits and Dificulties encompass
us on every side, and a thousand Darts from all sides come flying at us. And
therefore we have perpetual need of that Panoply (complete Armor) which is to
be setcht out of the Scriptures.

A great deal more there follows, which I shall not transcribe, to show what a
necessity there is of these Divine Remedies to heal the wounds we receive; or
rather to keep off the blow that gives them, and to beat back the fiery Darts
of the Devil, by a frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures: and concludes thus,
(...), etc. For it cannot be, it is impossible that any man should be saved,
that enjoyes not continually the Benefit of Spiritual Reading.

But after he has thus answered the Objection about the obscurity of the
Scriptures, by denying it to be altogether true: He proceeds further to show,
that granting it to be true, they are not therefore to be laid aside, and not
to be read by us.

First, Because by often reading, that which is obscure may become plain. So he
discourses in the often named Sermon upon Lazarus. Do thou not understand
what is in these Books? No, how should thou understand when thou will not so
much as look into them? Take the Bible into thy hand read the whole History;
and retaining what is plain and intelligible, read what is obscure and
uncertain, over and over again.

Secondly, Suppose thou can not with frequent reading find out the sense:
then go to one that is wiser than thy self: come to the Teacher and Instructor,
as a Scholar to his Master: Communicate with him concerning the things that are
spoken: Demonstrate a great diligence and desire to learn: and if God see this
forwardness and readiness of mind in thee, He will not overlook thy
watchfulness, and sollicitous care; but if no man can be found to teach thee,
He will reveal his mind Himself to thee.

This he explains by the example often already named, saying, Remember the
Eunuch of the Queen of Ethiopia, who being a Barbarian and engaged in a
thousand cares, and surrounded with abundance of business, and did not
understand what he read, yet notwithstanding continued reading as he sat in
his Chariot. If he showed such diligence upon the Highway, consider what kind
of man he was at home. If he would not suffer the time of his travel to pass
away without reading, how much more diligent, may we well think, he was when he
sat in his House? If when he understood not what he read, he would not omit
reading; how much more did he use it, after he had learnt something? For that
he did not understand what he read, his answer to Philip shows, when he asked
him, Understand thou what thou read? He did not blush, nor was ashamed to
confess his Ignorance; but said, how can I, unless I had some body to guide me?
Because therefore he thus employed his time in reading, when he had none to
guide him; therefore straightway one was sent to conduct and lead him. God saw
his forwardness and accepted his diligence, and presently sent him a Teacher.

But Philip is not here present with me; to instruct me, when I read. True; but
the Spirit which moved Philip is present. Let us not, my beloved, despise our
own Salvation. All these things were written for our Instruction; upon whom the
ends of the world are come.

The reading of the Scripure is a great security against Sin: and ignorance of
them is a great precipice, a deep pit, or rather bottomless gulf: A manifest
betraying of Salvation, to know Nothing out of the Divine Laws. This has both
brought forth Heresies; and led to corruption of Manners. This has turned all
things topsy-turvy. For it is impossible, utterly impossible, for any man to go
away from reading the Holy Scriptures, without some fruit; if he read them with
care.

I should tire my Reader, if I should set down all that this Great and Holy man
has said upon this subject. Which he presses, you see, with such vehemence; as
if he thought it impossible for his people to be saved, unless they read the
Holy Scriptures. So contrary was the Doctrine then, to what is now current in
the Roman Church: who teach, that people will rather endanger their Salvation,
by the reading of them.

And one thing I cannot pass by without a particular Remark, before I have done
with this. That he gives that very reason (in the words just now quoted) why
the people should read the Scriptures, which the Romanists give why they should
not read them, viz. the danger of running into Errors and Heresies. Therefore,
say they, the people ought not to read the Scriptures: no such matter, says
he, but quite contrary, they will run into them, if they do not read them.

From hence spring up myriads of evils, even from Ignorance of the Scriptures:
from hence pernicious Heresies, negligent Life, and corruption of Manners. For
as they who are destitute of light, cannot make straight paths: so such as do
not take along with them the light of God's Word, in many things necessarily
offend and stumble, as walking in utter darkness.

They are his words in his XXXII. Sermon upon St. John. And in his VIII. Sermon
upon the Hebrews, he makes a sad complaint about the growth of one particular
Heresy; that of the Manichees: and tells his people, it was because they
neglected the Scripture. For if we attended to them, we should not only
preserve our selves from the deceit, but deliver others also that are deceived,
and draw them out of the danger.

But it is time to make an end of this, and therefore I shall only add these
few memorable words of his, out of his second Sermon upon St. Matthew (that you
may see how faithfully they follow the Fathers, who pretend to be wholly guided
by them) If there be a greater sin than that of not reading the Scriptures, it
is this; to be persuaded that we need not read them, (...)* for these are words
of a Satanical suggestion; the studied invention of the Devil.

I have been the longer upon this Head, because some are more moved by a great
Authority, than by bare Reason. And I have alleged this Father's Authority
alone, not for want of other (which are ready at hand in great abundance) but
because it is deservedly very weighty; and as he is full and express in his
Judgment about this matter, so he intermixes his Discourse upon it, with many
excellent Instructions.

But if we had neither his Testimony, nor any other to produce, there is one
piece of History remaining, which is sufficient to satisfy any man in this
matter. Which is, that it was the very Mark and Character of a Christian, to
have a Bible; and of an Apostate, to deliver his Bible to be burnt; when the
Inquisitors came to search for it in times of Persecution.

As they did particularly in the Reign of Maxentius and of Dioclesian: when
they sought to destroy all Bibles, as the Foundation of Christian Religion;
which they thought would fall, when these Books were gone. And that Laymen
generally had Bibles, as well as Priests, and were guilty of this foul Crime of
delivering them up to the Persecutors, appears by Optatus in his first Book
against Parmenio.

Quid commemorem Laicos, etc. What need I stand to mention the Lay People, who
then had no Dignities in the Church, or many Ministers (he means inferior
Officers) or Deacons in the third Order, or Presbyters in the second Priestood,
when the very Supreme, some Bishops in those times, impiously delivered up the
Instruments of the Divine Law.

He names several, and among the rest Donatus. And the same we find in St.
Austin, Epist. XLVIII. and CLXXI. and other places: Where he relates how some
delivered up the Holy Books to the Persecutors; and others who did not,
communicated with them that did: mixing with the Church TRADITORVM plebem
congregatam, a whole Congregation of people that were Traditors.

Which shows, that Bibles were then as common as they are now: and that S.
Chrysostom's complaints were very just against those, who were grown so cold
and negligent in providing themselves these Holy Books, as if they still had
been under Persecution, and it were not safe to have them, now that they lived
under Christian Emperors.

VIII.
BUT now let us hear what common Reason says (as well as the Scripture, and
the best Interpreters of them, such great Lights as he now named) and that
teaches us, that since the Holy Scriptures were written for the use and benefit
of all, all should have liberty to read them.

They were written for all, it is plain; for that which they teach is the duty
of all; that which they promise is the portion of all. And if any one say, it
does not therefore follow they should be read by all, because the people may be
taught by others, without looking into the Scriptures themselves; they render
themselves suspected that they intend not to teach the people sincerely what is
written; but to establish their own Authority, instead of that of the Divine
Writings. For otherwise, why should they not rather, when they pretend to teach
others, bid them look into their Bibles, and there satisfy themselves, that
they do not abuse them: assuring them it is a faithful Translation of God's
Book, which they have in their hands; whose meaning it is their business to
help them to understand?

That is, why do they not imitate God himself? Who commanding his Prophet to
proclaim him to be the only God among the Babylonians, and that the Gods which
made not the Heavens and the Earth, should perish from the Earth, and from
under these Heavens, ordered him to do it in their own Language, that they
might read and understand it, X. Jer. 11. Where, when all the rest of the Book
is Hebrew, this Message is delivered in the Chaldee Tongue. Which we may justly
look upon, as a Praeludium to the publishing of the Name of God among the
Gentiles in their own Language, in the days of Christ. When, as Theodoret
witnesses, the words of the Apostles and Prophets, were turned into the
Language of the Romans, Egyptians, Persians, Indians, Armenians, Scythians, and
Sauromatans, and all the Languages that any other Nation used. And therefore
why should not we now have them in English? And having them, why should not all
read, that they may learn the way to be happy here and eternally; and that they
may be sure they are not led into a wrong way: and abused by pretended
Authority from God, who, perhaps, says the quite contrary to what is delivered
in his Name?

This is the Peoples Right; and it it their Duty to use it, as that Great Man
S. Chrysostom (whose words let me set down once more) teaches his Church, upon
2 Corinthians. VII. in the conclusion of his XIII. Sermon. For how can we think it
not to be absurd, that having to deal in money-matters, men will not trust to
others; but the Counters are brought out, and they cast up the Sum: but in the
business of their Souls, are barely led, and drawn aside by the Opinions of
other men? And this, even when they have an exact Scale (wherein to weigh all
things) an exact Rule, or Square (whereby to measure them) the dictate of the
Divine Laws. Therefore I beseech and entreat you all, that not minding what
such or such a man says about these things; you would consult the Holy
Scriptures concerning them all, etc.

And if you consider what kind of Auditors Christ had, you may soon come to a
conclusion in this matter; and learn from thence what his intention is.

Were they not the promiscuous multitude? People of all sorts, and conditions?
And will He take it ill to be read of those, by whom He would be heard?

Some will say, there is danger in reading; the words may be mistaken, or
perverted: And may they not be so in hearing? Can any Preacher, in the Roman
Church, so frame his discourse, that he can warrant not a word he says shall
be misunderstood, or misinterpreted, and turned to another sense than he meant
it?

By this reason the poor people shall be taught nothing at all; if we must do
them no good, because some may possibly abuse it, and turn it to their hurt.

Nay, if God himself may not be heard by the people, speaking to them in the
vulgar Tongue; I see far less reason why men should: who can say nothing but
what may be wrested and misconstrued.

Further yet; the wisest and most learned may pervert and wrest the Scriptures;
and therefore if this be a reason, why they should not be read, they must be
wholly laid aside, and none permitted to read them.

The Scribes and Pharisees, I am sure, did so; far more than the most simple
people: And yet none will say, they ought not to have read the Scriptures, it
being the profession of the Scribes.

None more obstinately resisted Christ, than they who had these Holy Books
perpetually in their hands; in which He was promised and foreshadowed. They
were his most bitter Enemies, who were the allowed Expounders of the Law and
the Prophets: making use of all they read to oppose Him. And therefore either
none, no not the most learned, no more than the simple, must read the
Scriptures; for fear of doing themselves and others harm by them: or this is
not a good Reason against the common peoples reading them; nor is it the
reading them that does hurt, but the reading them with a bad mind and with
naughty affections.

The Learned may abuse them, as well as the Unlearned, if they be ill disposed:
and the Unlearned may get good by them, as well as the Learned, if they be well
affected.

There are some things clearer, than that any can doubt of them, or stand in
need of an Interpreter; the simplest may easily apprehend them, and be
instructed by them, if they come with honest and good hearts to learn their
Duty: and yet the wisest will not apprehend them, or not receive them, though
never so plain, if their hearts be otherwise bent, and ill disposed in their
affections. They that have devoted themselves to this World, will be offended
with them: even because they are so plain, and directly cross their intentions
and designs.

For what were the things, that made our Savior so troublesome to the Scribes
and Pharisees? His Life was perfectly innocent; his Conversation free and
friendly with all sorts of people; his Heart was open to give them an easy
access into his presence and into his affections; his Power was beneficial; his
Doctrine was most heavenly; his Precepts just and good; his Promises exceeding
great and precious above all earthly Treasure. The business therefore was, they
were possessed of a Kingdom; in which they were honored as the most Learned,
adored as Saints, enriched with great Treasures, esteemed worthy of greater:
this they thought the happies: condition, this state of things they wished might
always be continued: but feared our Savior would draw the hearts of the people
from them, and that their Authority would be diminished by admitting his: and
therefore they set themselves against him, and could not endure the light of
his Gospel; which showed them how little they must be content to be in this
World, and only promised to make them great men in the Kingdom of Heaven;
whereof they made no account.

And it is to be feared, that for the very same reason some men in the
Christian World are against the reading of the Holy Scriptures, for which they
were against the receiving of Jesus Christ Himself. Their Authority, they fear,
will thereby be impaired: They shall not be able to lead the people, whither
they please, with an implicit Belief: their eyes will be opened, and seeing
how they have been abused, they will grow less credulous; and not so easily
entertain those Doctrines, which are very gainful to the Teachers, when they
see they are altogether unprofitable to them that receive them.

I am sure such evil affections will never let men understand the Scriptures
aright: but incline the wisest and most discerning men (if so ill disposed) to
bend them, sooner than any meaner persons, to their own crooked interests.

Thus I have finished the first part of this Work; when I have made a few
Reflections upon what has been discoursed.

I. And First of all this demonstrates how unreasonable, unjust, and
uncharitable (to say no worse) the Decrees of the present Roman Church are:
which deny to Christian people that liberty, which God and his Church have
always allowed them. This prohibition to read the Scriptures in the vulgar
Tongue, is a manifest Innovation. There is an evident Change in the Church of
Rome it self, since St. Hierom's days, who bestowed several Epistles upon
diverse Women, to press them to read them, and to teach them to their little
Children. Which made Espencaeus, a Romish Bishop, honestly say, that he could
not but wonder, how that should now be counted so pestilent and capital, which
the Ancients frequently commend as most wholesome.

II. Secondly, This Discourse should serve for a Caution to us, not to entrust
our Souls with such Guides, as err thus palpably, and I doubt wilfully, in so
plain a business as this. For how easily will they mistake, or mislead their
Followers, in other cases? especially where there may be some difficulty, or
some seeming Authority for it?

III. Thirdly, And this should incline every one of us, to adhere most firmly
and faithfully to this Church. Which is so sincerely honest, that it fears not
to be tried by this Touchstone, the Holy Scripture: so well constituted, that
Christians cannot, in reason, desire more free and plentiful means of their
instruction, than they have, in all things necessary to their Salvation.

Lastly, Which therefore let us take care we do not abuse: and thereby help to
confirm and harden the Church of Rome in their Errors.

We ought not, I have demonstrated, to lay aside the Holy Scriptures out of our
hands (God forbid we should consent to that) but they themselves require us, to
lay aside all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, that (coming thus
with prepared minds) with meekness we may receive the ingrafted word, which is
able to save our Souls, Jam. I. 21.

That Is the End for which we must read these Holy Books (as laying aside all
naughty affections is the Method) to know what we must do to be saved. Not to
learn how to discourse, to dispute, and argue, much less to cavil; but how to
live according to the Will of God in our several places: which is the way to
everlasting Salvation.

And whatsoever belongs either to a godly life, or the necessary Articles of
Christian Faith, is so plainly delivered there, that when we meet with any
thing that is doubtful, or hard to be understood, we are told plainly enough
what to do in that case. They themselves direct us, not to be wise in our own
conceits, not to lean to our own understanding; but to go and advise with those
whom God has appointed to expound them to us. Who will either satisfy us what
is the meaning of such places; or that it is not of such moment, that we need
to trouble our selves about it.

For these Books are so far from giving us the least encouragement to be bold
and presumptuous, to slight our Instructers, and much less, to despise our
Governors, whether Civil or Spiritual; that there is Nothing they teach us
more plainly, than to be humble and modest; and that as we ought to fear God,
so likewise to honor the King and his Ministers; and to obey those that watch
over our Souls; nay, to esteem them very highly in love for their work sake.
Which will dispose us most certainly (if we be not carried away with pride, or
any other vicious affection) to be ruled by them in dubious things: and, as it
there follows in the Apostle, (1 Thessalonians. V. 13.) to be at peace among our
selves. I must beseech therefore every Member of this Church, both for the
honor of our Religion, and for the safety of their own Souls, to be as careful
in this matter, as I would have them to be in reading the Holy Scriptures.

Take your Guides along with you; do not think your selves safe, without their
conduct; be not only willing, but desirous to learn of them; reverence their
Instructions; do not easily dissent from them; be afraid to oppose them:
especially when you have reason to think them to be serious, studious, knowing,
and conscientious men; who take care to inform themselves aright, that they may
not misinform you.

For such men look upon themselves to be bound (as has been shown in the
Treatise of Tradition, page 24.) to guide themselves in their Direction of
others, by what the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have taught out of
the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament; and thereby preserve their Flocks in
the Truth of God's holy Word. And having a great regard also to the sense of
that Church wherein they live, which by their Subscriptions they own to have
Authority in Controversies of Faith, they will no less preserve them in Unity
and in Peace.

To conclude; it is impossible but every body must reap great fruit by the
reading of the Scriptures, if they read them for no other end; but that they
may go away better from the reading of them, than they came to it: and that
they may not accommodate them to their own affections; but correct all their
affections, and desires, and the whole course of their life, by this exact Rule
of Righteousness. According to which, if we square our selves, we shall
presently learn; in difficult things to be wise unto sobriety, and in plain
things to be wise unto Salvation: that is, so wise as to do what we certainly
know to be our Duty; which is the only Wisdom that the Scriptures magnify.
Which will be the surest way, both to know more, and to know it better: that
is, to feel the comfort of what we know, in a blessed and assured hope of
everlasting life; which God, who cannot lie, has promised to us, in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

The End of the First Part.
PART II.
HAving shown in the foregoing Discourse, that those words of St Peter (2. III.
16.) which are wont to be alleged against the reading of Holy Scriptures, do
plainly suppose that the people did then read them: I proceed now in the next
place to show that the Apostle does not deter men from reading them, by
representing the difficulties that are in them, and the danger of wresting
them. For he does not affirm that all things are hard to be understood (and
consequently liable to be wrested) but only that some things are of that nature:

In treating of which, three things offer themselves to be considered.

I. First, that most things in the Holy Scriptures are so far from being hard
to be understood, that they are easy: Nay, all things absolutely necessary for
us, are very easy.

II. Secondly, That those things which are not so easy, may be understood;
though there be some difficulty in it. That is, they will require some pains to
understand them; which should not deter us from reading; but only make us
laborious to find out the sense of what we read.

III. Thirdly, When we do thoroughly understand, and heartily believe the
things that are easy, it will abate much of that difficulty; and make other
things more easy.

I.
I begin with the first of these; the Apostle only says, some things are hard
to be understood; which supposes that most are not; but rather easy: as all
those things, especially, are, which are absolutely necessary to be known, and
believed, and done, for the obtaining Salvation.

That which makes things easy to be understood, is the plain and perspicuous
delivery of them, in the words wherein they are written, or spoken. Now nothing
an be plainer, or clearer, than the words, wherein all the great Christian
Truths are revealed and delivered to us: which are so far from being obscure,
that it is not easier to see the light, than it is to apprehend and understand
the true meaning of them.

I will instance in some particulars; and have an Eye all the way upon St.
Paul's Epistles (to which S. Peter is commonly thought to have respect)
wherein, though some things be difficult, yet these are most clearly discovered.

First, That there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, as he
expressly writes, 1 Cor. VIII 6.

Secondly, That He alone is to be worshipped (as our Blessed Savior remembers
us out of Moses, IV. Matt. 10.) was the great thing pressed in his very
entrance into any place where he preached, 1 Thessalonians. l. 9, 10. XVII. Acts 23, 24.

Thirdly, As our Lord teaches us, that we are engaged by our Baptism, to
worship one God, in three Persons, XXVIII. Matthew. 19. So S. Paul affirms the
same plainly enough, in that Solemn Prayer for the Corinthians, 2. XIII. ult.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Especially if it be compared with those
places, wherein he affirms our Savior, to be over all, God blessed for ever,
IX. Romans 5. and the Spirit, to search even the deep things of God; that is, to
know his Mind exactly: for so it follows (1 Cor. II. 10, 11.) that as none can
know the things of a man, save the spirit of man, which is in him: so the
things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Which plainly tells us, if
we mind it, that the Spirit of God is in God, as the spirit of man is in man:
that is, the Spirit is God himself, and therefore fully acquainted with him in
all things.

There is some little labor indeed, in making this deduction; but it is very
easy, if we consider all these places together.

Fourthly, And the Nature of God, none can possibly be ignorant of, who does
but look into the Holy Books. Where he will immediately see Him represented to
be Almighty, most Wise, most Gracious, Faithful to his Word, and the living
God, who endures for ever. Which are Truths written there, in such great
Letters, that every one who runs (as the Prophet speaks) and does but cast a
transient eye upon them, may easily read them.

Fifthly, Particularly, his infinite love and kindness toward us the children
of men, lies before us so fairly, and shines so brightly in our eyes; that if
we do not wilfully shut them, we cannot but read it to our infinite
satisfaction. For so God loved the world, says our Lord Himself, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the
world; but that the world through him might be saved, III. John 16, 17. And so
St. Paul writes, But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ Jesus (by Grace ye are saved) And has raised us up together, and made
us sit together, in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. That in the ages to come
he might show the exceeding riches of his Grace, in his kindness toward us
through Christ Jesus, II. Ephesians. 4, 5, 6, 7.

Who can doubt at all of the favor of God, his exceeding great and rich favor
toward us, who does but cast his eyes on such words as these; and believes the
Truth of the Gospel of Christ? Which were written for this very end, that in
all future Ages of the World, after the Apostles were gone, men might discern
how abundant the Grace of God is, in his kindness manifested toward us in our
Blessed Lord. And therefore we, in this Age of the World, as well as all that
were before us, may conclude without any scruple, that God is Love (as St. John
speaks) and that he will be good to us, for Christ's sake, though we have
greatly offended his Majesty.

Sixthly, For that is the next thing; the kindness of God toward sinful men,
and his readiness to pardon them and receive them into his favor and love
again, is here also so perspicuously revealed, that there need be no question
made of it. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John IV. 9, 10.

And in the same manner writes St. Paul, After the kindness and love, or pity,
of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness that we
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. That being justified by his
Grace, we should be made heirs, according to the hope of Eternal life, III.
Tit. 4, 5.

Nay, for this very end, he says, God showed mercy to him, though a very great
Sinner, a Blasphemer of Christ, a Persecutor of his Disciples, that men might
be encouraged to hope in God; if they would repent and turn to Him, as he did,
1 Timothy I. 14, 15, 16, etc. Read the place, and you will see, that all the wit
of man cannot devise plainer and clearer words, to express the exceeding Grace
of God toward all men: which is declared so fully, as well as familiarly, that
his words need no Commentary to explain them, and make them more easy to be
understood.

Seventhly, With the same Evidence, the Gospel speaks of the way and means,
whereby this Forgiveness was procured for us: and that is by the Death, and by
the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus. Who was delivered, says the Apostle, for
our offenses, and rose again for our justification, IV. Romans ult. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of his Grace, I. Ephesians. 7. It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again; who is even
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us; who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? etc. VIII. Romans 34, 35, etc.

It would be endless to recite all that the Scriptures speak on this subject;
in terms as plain and clear as these: So that we cannot reasonably doubt, if we
believe these Books, that by one offering of Himself, he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, X. 12, 13,
14. This man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down at
the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting, till his enemies be made his
footstool: For by one offering he has perfected for ever, etc.

They that would make any other Satisfaction necessary, by the Merits of
Saints; or any other Oblation of Christ necessary, but that one which he
Himself offered, directly contradict the express words of this Book; which are
as easy to be understood, as any that the most studied invention of men can
indite.

Eighthly, And so is the way and means, whereby these Blessings, thus
purchased, are communicated to us, viz. the Mediation and Intercession of
Christ Jesus, on our behalf, whereby he can save us to the utmost, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for us, VII. Heb. 25. Nor is there any other
that can perform this Office for us, but he; for as there is one God, so one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, as St. Paul teaches in so
many words, 1 Timothy II. 4. Whereby, we cannot but in reason think, he means
there is no more than One Mediator; as, it is certain, there is no more than
one God: who communicates his Mind to us by this alone Mediator, as we must
address our selves to Him by no other.

Which St. Paul declares more fully in 1 Cor. VIII. 5, 6. Where he says,
though there be many that are called Gods (as there are gods many, and lords
many) yet to us (Christians) there is but one God the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in (or for, or to) him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him. That is, As there is but one sole Fountain of all
good, unto whom we are to direct our Prayers, and all we do (for the first
Cause must be our last End) so He derives all unto us by his Son Jesus Christ
alone; by whom therefore, and by Him alone, we are to go to God the Father, for
what we are desirous to receive from Him. None else in Heaven or Earth, is
capable of this Honor, but this great Lord alone (whom the Father loves, and
has given all things into his hands (III. John 35.) as any one that reads this
place seriously, may easily discern.

And therefore they who betake themselves unto any other Patron, to recommend
them to the Heavenly Grace, are concerned to hide this Book from the Peoples
Eyes; and to discourage them from reading it, by telling them, it is obscure
and hard to be understood. For they who do read it, see this truth so fully and
expressly asserted there, that, if their minds be not prejudiced, they cannot
think it safe to implore the assistance of any other in the Heavenly Court:
which apparently derogates from the Honor of our Lord, and is highly
offensive, upon many accounts, to Almighty God. Who has appointed Him to take
care of our affairs, who loves us better than any Saint or Angel can do,
because he dyed for us; and therefore is more inclined to have compassion upon
us, because he has that feeling of our infirmities, which no Angel was ever
touched withal, nor any Saint in such a degree as he was: Who can also do more
for us, than all the Angels in Heaven put together; being the Lord of Glory.

Ninthly, Which is another thing here clearly revealed; the Power and Glory of
the Lord Jesus, at the right Hand of God. We all with open face (without any
Veil drawn before our Eyes) behold as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, as St.
Paul speaks, 2 Cor. III. ult. The Gospel, that is, which he preached, and which
we read, represents his transcendent Majesty so evidently; that our own Face
does not appear more clearly to us in a Glass, than Christ is set before us
there, as advanced far above all Principality and Power (to use his words in
another place, I. Ephesians. 21.) and Might and Dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to come. God having
put all things under his Feet, and given him to be Head over all things to the
Church.

What may we not expect from so great a Prince, who has all things at his
command; and that for the good of his Church: if we faithfully address our
selves to God by Him alone?

Tenthly, I might say the like of the rest of the Articles of the Christian
Faith; which are here plainly taught. But I shall only add that, as the way and
means whereby Christ procured and does dispense the Divine Grace to us, is
evidently declared in the Holy Scriptures: so is the means whereby we may hope
to obtain the Benefit of his Sacrifice, Satisfaction and Intercession with God
for us. Repent, and be converted, and your sins shall be blotted out. (III.
Acts 19.) are words plain enough to be understood. And so are these, Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take my Yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find
rest unto your Souls. XI. Matthew. 28, 29. And these; In Christ Jesus, neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith working by Love;
a new Creature; or keeping the Commandments of God. For in all these terms, for
the greater clearness sake, and that no man may be mistaken, is this matter
declared by St Paul, 1 Cor. VII. 19. V. Gal. 6. VI. Gal. 15.

And therefore that the Grace of the Gospel teaches us, that, denying
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present World (2 Tit. II. 12.) is as clear as the Sun.

Nor are the particular duties, which belong to every ones place and state,
less clear and conspicuous, than these general lines of our Duty, which the
Apostle has drawn in those comprehensive words. For when the same Apostle, St.
Paul, directs his Speech (as he does commonly in the latter part of his
Epistles) unto Masters of Families and Servants, unto Husbands and Wives,
Fathers and Children; his Rules are as plain and easy to be understood by us
now, as they were to those persons who first received them.

So plain and easy they are unto all Ages, so familiar, especially to men of
meaner rank, that I much doubt (says a great Champion of our Church, in his
Comments on the Creed Dr. Jackson, Lib. 2. Cap. 12.
) whether the Pope himself, and the whole Conclave of Cardinals, would be able
in this present Age, to speak so plainly unto the capacity, or so familiarly to
the experience of men of their Quality unto whom the Apostle wrote. For,
setting aside the absolute Truth and Infallibility of his Doctrines, the manner
of delivering them is so familiar, so lowly, so heartily humble, so natural,
and so well-befitting such men's disposition in their sober thoughts, as were
impossible for the Pope to attain unto, or imitate; unless he would lay aside
his Court-State, and for seven years addict himself unto familiarity, with such
men in a Pastoral Charge.

The same may be said concerning his way of speaking, when he sets down any
other Christian Duties, whether private or public. No man could ever pretend
any difficulty in this part of the Holy Writings, which treat of a Holy Life.
All the difficulty is in men's wills; to be persuaded to consent to be governed
by these Laws, which they cannot choose but well enough understand.

And that they may be persuaded, Christ has left us exceeding great and
precious Promises, which contain the greatest part of the Gospel Grace: the
very end of which is to move us to live soberly, righteously, and godly. Having
therefore these promises, (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. VII. 1.

What words can be more perspicuous than these? And with the same clearness
these Books pronounce the indispensable necessity of a holy life; without which
the riches of God's Grace cannot save us. Follow peace and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord, XII. Heb. 14. Know ye not, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, etc nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. VI. 9, 10. Now the works of the flesh are manifest (mark that word)
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of which I have told you
before in times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such
there is no law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit,
V. Gal. 19, 20, etc.

What shall I say more? All the Promises of God, which put us in hope; and all
his Threatenings, which are designed to put us in fear (upon which two Hinges,
all Religion turns) are, you see already, declared so expressly and clearly,
that there can be no dispute about them. For this is the promise, which he has
promised, even Eternal life, 1 John II. 25. and the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness, I. Romans 18. For He will render to every man according
to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for honor,
glory and immortality, eternal life: But to them that are contentious, and do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath;
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. But glory, honor and peace to every man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. For there is no
respect of persons with God, II. Romans 6, 7, etc.

If these words be not intelligible, there can be no such thing as plain
speaking in the World? And it is as plainly and intelligibly written, that God
has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, (XVII.
Acts 31.) when he will make good all his Promises and Threatenings; and that our
Lord Christ is that great Person by whom He will judge it. All our labor, all
our Art, can never make a Proposition to be understood, if all these things
which I have mentioned (which are the substance of Religion) be not obvious and
clear to all, who will take the pains to read the Holy Scriptures, and consider
them.

And therefore they do a great injury to the Grace of God, and to the Care and
Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church; who endeavor to
persuade us, the Holy Scriptures are so obscure, that it is not fit the people
should look into them, for fear of mistaking, and running themselves into
dangerous Errors and Heresies. They may do so, though they do not read the
Scriptures, by following their own vain imaginations, and by dreaming upon that
which they hear out of the Scriptures, or which starts up in their own fancy:
but if they look into the Scriptures to know how to be saved, and have no other
end, nor neglect humbly to implore the Divine guidance, they cannot mistake;
but may be easily and fully satisfied. For God has told usall, that Jesus is
the Savior; and that he is the Author of Eternal Salvation, to them that obey
Him; and his Commandments, wherein we are to obey Him, as they are not
grievous, so they are obvious, and may be met withal every where, if we have a
mind to learn them; and he has set Pastors and Teachers in his Church, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, etc. IV. Ephesians. 11, 12, 13. So
that no man, having such directors, can miss the way that leads to Eternal
life; unless both he and they will wilfully shut their eyes: and on purpose
turn aside from the path, which the Holy Scripture shows unto them. And if the
words of the Spirit of God (which are as bright as a Lamp, to give light unto
our feet) may be mistaken or abused; then no man, no company of men; no
Interpreter, no Council, can draw up any words but they may be perverted, by
those who have no mind to be directed by them; but are concerned to put another
sense, than they intended, upon them.

And indeed it is no slight Argument that the Holy Scriptures are easy to be
understood in all things necessary for our Instruction, because God would have
all, even the meanest capacity, to read them: as I have proved in the foregoing
Part of this work, beyond any reasonable contradiction. It would have been in
vain to require men, to search the Scriptures, as not only God, but his Church
in ancient times, did; if they could not readily there meet with satisfaction.

The Doctors of the Church of Rome, I know, argue the quite contrary way;
therefore you should not read them, because they are obscure. But which will
you choose to believe? God, who bids you read them, from whence you may conclude
they are not obscure; or men, who bid you not read them, because they are
obscure? You may most safely conclude they are not obscure, because God bids
you read them; for this is a right Conclusion from Divine Premises: whereas
the other Conclusion that you should not read them, is drawn from a false
Supposition, directly contradictory to what follows from the Command of God to
be conversant in them; which is, that they are not so obscure, but in things
necessary we may easily understand them. Otherwise, our Blessed Lord, the
Wisdom of the Father, would not have bidden men search them: nor would his
Apostles have ceased to employ their pains, till they had made such things
plainer, if they had not thought they had set them down so plainly in their
Writings, that no man, who would read, could be ignorant of them.

That Is another thing worthy observation; That the very End for which the
Gospel was written by the Apostles, reproves this Pretense of obscurity. St.
John tells us, it was that we might believe, XX. Joh. ult. These things are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and
that believing, ye might have life through his Name.

By whose Authority did St. John write; or by whose assistance did he perform
this work? Was it not by our Savior's, and by the guidance of the Holy Ghost?

And to what purpose was he inspired, but to work Faith in those men's Souls,
who read his Writings? And what Faith was this? only the belief of some few
things, which are clear enough, but not sufficient to make us wise unto
Salvation. No such matter. He wrote that we might have so much Faith, as should
give us Eternal life, through Christ Jesus.

Now who can believe, that he who wrote by that Spirit, which perfectly knew
the several Tempers and Capacities of every Age; and with an intention to breed
saving Faith in their Souls, should yet write so obscurely, that he could not
be understood of them, for whose good and benefit he wrote?

Nothing but interest; that is, nothing but that very wicked Temper, which
blinded the Jews, and made them deny our Savior and crucify him, can induce a
man to be of this opinion.

It will be replied, I know by some, that however, here is a confession, that
some things are hard to be understood: and therefore it is best to keep the
Scriptures from the people, because they may do themselves hurt by those things.

Unto which I have answered already; that if they seek for Nothing but
Salvation, and how to please God in order thereunto; they will not do
themselves hurt by any thing they meet withal in the Holy Writings. But for
further satisfaction, I shall proceed to give a brief account of the second
thing, I propounded to be considered: which is,

II.
THAT the Apostle does not say some things cannot be understood; but that they
are hard to be understood. There is some labor required to the understanding
them: which, if we will take, we may comprehend their meaning.

It would be a long Work to examine what things, in St. Paul's Epistles, the
Apostle St. Peter may be thought to point at, as difficult to be understood.
But the inquiry might be very much shortened, by one small observation: which
may be sufficient to inform us, That, if men take heed, the Scriptures are not
so difficult to be understood; as Laziness, and careless Reading, and Interest
would make them.

It is only this; to what the word WHICH relates, when the Apostle says, In
WHICH are some things, etc. Whether to St. Paul's Epistles, or to those things,
which St. Peter is treating of in this Chapter, as St. Paul does in some of his
Epistles? And it is manifest to those, who will be at so much pains, as to ask
any honest man that understands the Original Language; that it refers, not to
all St. Paul's Epistles, but to those things of which St. Peter had been
discoursing. For the words are not (...), in which Epistles, but (...), in
which things, or among which things, some are hard to be understood

Now that which St. Peter had been speaking of, is the Coming of our Lord;
concerning which he says St. Paul also had written: and therefore it is most
reasonable to determine that S. Peter here means, that in those things, which
St. Paul had written in his Epistles, about Christ's Coming, there were some
things not so easy to be understood as the rest.

And what great matter is it, if we be ignorant of some things relating to his
Coming; since we know and are certain, by undoubted words of the Apostles, that
He will come; and come to render unto all according to their works?

Let us believe this, and then we shall find no difficulty in the use which St.
Peter makes of it, in the eleventh verse. What manner of persons ought we to be
in all holy conversation and godliness?

It would be very ill for us, if Christ should come now, and find us, instead
of reforming our lives, by practicing the plain Truths of the Gospel, disputing
against that Gospel, and casting reflections upon it; as an obscure Book, which
is more apt to breed Heresies, than to teach men the way to Heaven. And
whenever He does come, it will not be easy for some men to answer this
Charge, which will be brought against them, of aspersing his Will and Testament
on this fashion; as if it were apt to make his Children fall out, and not
rather agree together in pious Love and Charity.

But let those who are concerned look to that; let us, who enjoy the liberty of
reading his Holy Will, and are encouraged so to do, only endeavor, as St. Paul
speaks, to have our conversation as becomes the Gospel. And when we meet with
any thing which we do not understand therein; let our next thought be, that
there is enough which we do understand: and that if we practice it, and will
take pains, we may in time understand the rest, as far as concerns us in our
state and condition of life.

For it is easy to show, that if we extend the meaning of St. Peter further
(as we are wont to do) and look into all those parts of St. Paul's Epistles,
that are thought the hardest to be understood; we may, with some diligence and
observation, comprehend the meaning of them well enough. And till we use that
diligence, we ought not to accuse the Scriptures of obscurity, but our selves
of negligence.

All, it is true, cannot use that diligence which is necessary to understand
him in all points; because their business will not permit it: but it is as
true, that, as it is not necessary they should understand him in all things so,
if they could use that diligence which is requisite, they might (for any thing
that can be seen in St. Peter's words) understand him thoroughout. For he only
says, there are difficult things in St. Paul: but difficulties are short of
impossibilities; and we see very great difficulties, in other matters, overcome
by men's industry and God's blessing. And therefore they may be overcome here,
by those who make it their business, and have capacity to comprehend his
meaning.

And if they do not understand every particular expression or passage; yet his
scope and drift, in the whole discourse, may with careful attention and
observation, be clearly discerned.

At least, there is Nothing in St. Peter's words which contradict this; and
therefore they are vainly alleged to prove the obscurity and difficulty of the
Scriptures: when they can extend but to some places of Scripture, i. e. St.
Paul's Epistles; and but to some things in them; nay, but to some things, I
have shown, in one particular Discourse in them, about the Coming of Christ;
which have no further obscurity in them neither, but what is only an exercise
of our diligence, by which they may be understood.

But just thus other places are wrested to prove the obscurity of the
Scriptures. I will instance in one or two. The Abridger of Controversies fears
not to allege the VIII. Acts 30, 31. to this purpose. Where St. Philip asks
the Eunuch, if he understood what he read, and he confesses he did not; but
asks him again, How can I, except some man should guide me? From whence he
concludes, they are not easy to be understood.

To which the Reply is so easy, that he must have a film before his eyes, who
does not see that this place is an Argument against them that allege it. For
it proves (as I showed in the first Part) that men did then read the
Scriptures, though they did not understand what they read. And it proves not
that the Eunuch understood Nothing; but only that he did not understand that
particular place which St. Philip found him reading. And that was a place in a
Prophecy, which has some obscurity in it, till it be accomplished, though not
afterward. And it was but one thing he did not understand in that Prophecy: for
he knew what the Prophet said, but could not tell of whom. I pray thee tell me,
says he to the Evangelist, of whom speaks the Prophet, of himself, or of
some other? That was all the inquiry? the difficulty lying in that one single
point, and in that also only for a time: for by the help of an Interpreter he
soon understood the Prophecy was fulfilled, and in whom it was fulfilled. So
that this very place has now no difficulty at all in it unto us, when we read
it; though it was at that time difficult to him.

What a number of insufficiencies are there in this allegation (as Bishop
Montague justly complains) to prove the Scriptures are hard to be understood?
All that can be made of it is, that one place of Scripture was obscure; in a
particular case; and in one point only of that case; and at that time; and (I
may further add) to a stranger, who was not of the Jewish Nation; and so was
not from the beginning acquainted with their Books: who notwithstanding, with a
little help, presently found it was no longer hard to be understood; but very
easy, as it is now to us.

This is enough both to show how insufficient the proofs are which are brought
to oppose our Doctrine; and that the difficulties we at present find in some
places, may be overcome; and that one means to overcome them, is by the help of
a wise Interpreter: who may (in many cases at least) presently satisfy us, and
take away the obscurity.

There is another instance of such weak proofs, in the same Author: who
alleges XXIV. Luke 25. to prove the difficulty of understanding the
Scriptures, and therefore the danger of reading them; because the Disciples of
Christ themselves, who had been taught by him, did not understand them, and
therefore are reproached by our Savior in these sharp terms, O fools and slow
of heart to believe all the Prophets have spoken, etc.

Where it is manifest, they were only some parts of Scripture which they did
not understand; and those were the Prophets, which had some obscurity, as I
said, till their accomplishment; and Prophecies only concerning one thing, viz.
his Death and Passion which he was to undergo, before he could ascend to the
Throne of his Glory: which were hard to them at that present, but are now easy
by our Savior's interpretation: and the question is not, what the Scriptures
were in those days (when notwithstanding they read them, or else they could not
have been blamed for not understanding them) but what they are now unto us, who
have the Writings of the Apostles whom He illuminated: And lastly, his calling
them Fools, for their slowness and dullness to believe, is an evident proof that
even then, there was not so much a disability in the two Disciples, to
understand what the Prophets said; as a non-attention of mind, heedlesness, and
want of consideration, to things which were not of themselves obscure and
difficult.

However, our Lord had pity upon them all, and opened their understanding, that
they might understand the Scriptures, v. 45. which the poorest Members of the
Church do now, in those things wherein they were at that present ignorant;
being fully persuaded, that it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
dead the third day, which were the things he then showed them, were written of
him.

I conclude this with a brief state of this Case. Some places of Holy Scripture
are hard to be understood by some persons, and by some capacities, and in some
ages and times, and some matters, that are not of general concernment: but in
that which concerns men of all ages, capacities and conditions, and to every
man in his order and vocation, according to the measure of God's gifts bestowed
on him, we affirm, with the greatest reason, that the Scripture is plain and
easy to be understood: provided men have a will to learn what they are to
believe and do, though it be never so cross to their inclinations, interests,
affections and passions. If these be suffered to intermeddle, the Gospel tells
us beforehand, in plain words, that men will not see, even when they see:
according to those words very often mentioned by our Lord and by his Apostles,
Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and
shall not perceive, etc. by reason, that is, of their pride and self-conceit,
worldly-mindedness and ambition, and such like things: which blinded the eyes
of those, that loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.
But this was their condemnation (as our Savior tells us in the same breath,
III. John 19.) which it could not have been, unless the Mind and Will of God
had been clearly discovered unto them.

III.
WHICH leads me now to the third thing proposed to Consideration, in this Part
of my Discourse; that when we have thoroughly digested, and do heartily believe
the things, that are easy and plain, in the Holy Scripture, that will abate
much of the difficulty which is in other places; and prepare our minds for
acquaintance with them. Which I might wave here in this place, because it will
be sufficiently cleared in the last Part of this little Treatise; concerning
those that wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

But since it is profitable to have things distinctly represented; I shall say
something to it by it self.

There is a near Alliance between all Truths: and the more familiar any of them
are to our minds, the better disposed we are to come to the knowledge of all
the rest. But there are some of greater force than others, to widen the
capacity of our minds, for the entertainment of Divine Truth; and to free them
from all opposite qualities and impediments, that they may entertain it easily.
And they are a deep sense of, and an hearty affection unto, all those plain
Lessons, which teach us our whole Christian duty: which if we thoroughly learn,
we are certainly the Friends of God; and the more likely to be illuminated by
him to understand the highest Mysteries, as far as we are concerned in them,
and our minds are able to reach them. For the secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him: and his Covenant is to make them know it, XXV. Psalm. 14.

And therefore it was no ill advice, which Cardinal Pool (if I mistake not)
gave for the reading of St. Paul's Epistles, to begin always at the latter end
of them. For were we well versed therein; by a serious study, that is, and
sincere practice of those Christian duties, which he there commends unto us, we
should see the way more clearly, to come to the sense of the former part of
them: which is commonly harder to be understood than the latter.

For our minds being truly humble and heavenly, and thereby sedate and quiet,
free from ambition, covetousness, or any secular desire and design, they would
be more serene and clear in themselves; and also sitter to receive irradiations
from above. Whereby we might certainly discern, thus much (which is the main
thing we are concerned to know) what the general aim and scope of the Apostle
is in the former part of his Epistles; though we did not understand the meaning
and coherence of every particular Verse.

In that, it must be confessed, there is sometimes no small difficulty;
because, the Apostle writing against the Disputers of that Age, we cannot, at
this distance, certainly know every little conceit or subtilty of theirs, upon
which he briefly reflects and confutes, as he passes along. And yet
notwithstanding, we may be abundantly satisfied in the main Points of Doctrine,
which he either asserts or opposes: which is the only thing of use to us; and
enough to reward the painful inquiries of the most Learned men among us. Who by
all their studies cannot, perhaps, attain to the knowledge of every particular
passage; nay, will not see those things that are most conspicuous to others, if
they do not amend their lives by the clear light of the Scripture in other
places.

For of this we may be certain, that it is the good pleasure of God (as an
excellent Man speaks) and his unalterable Decree, that the Holy Scriptures (at
least in their drift and design) shall be plain and easy to such, as
faithfully practice, their most plain and easy Precepts: but hard and
difficult to be understood aright, of such as wilfully transgress them.

There is nothing more perspicuously set down in Holy Scripture, than this; as
would be easy to show (if it would not enlarge this Book too much) from such
words as those of St. Peter, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble. And therefore should we admit of any Authority equivalent to the Holy
Scriptures, the question would still remain, Whether the Insallibility of that
Authority could take away that blindness of heart, which by God's just
Judgment, falls upon all those, who detain the Truth of God in Unrighteousness.
If for their disobedience to evident and plain Truths. God punish them with
such spiritual darkness, that they discern not his Will revealed in his written
Word, no other infallible Authority can inlighten them; and make those scales
fall from their eyes, which hinder their sight in the means of their Salvation.
They will everlastingly go on in darkness; because having Light presented to
them, they preferred darkness before it. Those naughty affections, which have
kept the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, from shining into them, will
close their eyes so fast, that no other Light will open them. But they must
either receive and follow the plain directions of Holy Scripture, and recover
their sight by a sincere practice of known Duties; or walk on still in
darkness, and remain in the shadow of death to the end of their days.

Unto which plain direction, if men would unfeignedly submit; if thereby they
were not led to the understanding of harder Scriptures, they would however have
this benefit; that they would be secured from misunderstanding them. My meaning
is, that by understanding, believing, and keeping close, to the practice as
well as knowledge, of the easy and evident Truths of the Gospel, we should be
preserved from putting any dangerous interpretation upon those places which are
hard and difficult. Ignorant of them we might continue, or perhaps mistake
their meaning: but still innocently; so as not to do hurt to our selves or
others by them.

An illustrious Example of which we have in St. Austin's Book De Fide and
Operibus. Where discoursing (Chap. XV.) upon that place of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
III. 12, 13. (which he takes to be one of those, which St. Peter says are hard
to be understood in his Epistles) he tells us that some understood, the
building gold, silver, precious stones upon this foundation, to be meant of
adding good works to Faith in Christ: and building Wood, hay, stubble upon it,
to be meant of those that held the same Faith, but did evil. From whence they
fansied, that by certain pains of Fire, such evil men might be purged, to
obtain Salvation, by virtue of the Foundation; that is, by a right Faith only:
because the Apostle says, v. 15. they should be saved, yet so as by fire.

But if this be a true interpretation of this place, says that Excellent
Father, then all those places of Scripture, which have no obscurity, no
ambiguity in them, must be taken to be false. As for Example, that of St. Paul
in the same Epistle, Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and have no Charity, I am Nothing: and that of St. James, What does it profit,
brethren, if a man say he has faith, but has no works? Can faith save him?
And that place also will be salse, Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
they that serve Idols, nor Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
And that also, The Works of the slesh are manifest, which are, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, etc. of which I tell you again, as I have done
formerly, that they who do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
These are all false, if that interpretation be true. St. Paul contradicts
himself; and in this obscure place, clashes with his plain words: for according
to this Exposition, if men only believe and be baptized, they shall be saved by
fire, though they persevere in such wicked courses as those now mentioned.

And then I do not see to what purpose our Lord said, If thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments; telling him what belongs unto good manners. And
how will that be true, which he tells us he will say to them on his left hand,
Go ye cursed, etc. whom He sends to Hellfire, not because they did not believe
on him, but because they did not do good works. Thus that Father goes on,
heaping up a great many other places, which evidently speak to the same
purpose, and then concludes: If therefore these things, and innumerable others,
which may be found in the Holy Scriptures without any ambiguity, be false; then
that sense may be true concerning the wood, hay and stubble, viz. that they
shall be saved by sire, who only holding Faith in Christ, have neglected good
Works. Si autem and vera and clara sunt, etc. but if these things be both true,
and also clear; then without doubt, another sense of the Apostle's words is to
be sought for. And they are to be put into the number of those, which S. Peter
says are hard to be understood: which men ought not to pervert to their own
destruction, by endeavoring from them (against the most evident Testimonies of
the Scripture) to make the most lewd people secure of obtaining Salvation,
though they pertinaciously continue in their wickedness, not at all changed by
amendment, or repentance.

As for the true sense of that Scripture, though he ventures at it, yet he
says, in the next Chapter, he had rather be informed by those who are more
learned and more understanding; who can so expound it, as to let all those
things above mentioned remain true and unshaken: in which the Scripture most
openly avows that Faith profits Nothing, unless it be that, which the Apostle
defines; that is, Faith which works by love: but without Works cannot save
men, neither without fire, nor by fire.

Still he sticks to this Rule, as most certain and unmovable; that whatsoever
sense be given of an obscure Scripture, it contradicts not those Scriptures,
which are more plain: especially those which teach us to live well, and show
the necessity of it; which none that love the Truth, as it is in Christ, will
ever prejudice by any interpertation of Scripture whatsoever.

It is out of my way, to attempt the true meaning of the place now mentioned:
having no other business in hand at present, but to show that by adhering, as
this Holy man did, to the evident Truths in the Scripture, they will never
permit us to put any bad and pernicious sense, upon those that are less
evident. Let us stick, as he did, to this Rule; and we shall either put an
harmless sense upon them, or none at all.

But then, we must, as I said, be heartily in love with these plain Truths, and
frame our lives according to them; for else we shall not use due care, not to
cross them in our Doctrine, if we cross them in our Deeds: but rather be
content that by false glosses upon other places, where the fraud will be less
discernable, the Light of those glorious Truths should be obscured, and the
power and force of them enervated and broken. For what will not men say, and
do, to defend themselves in their sins, even against the clearest Convictions
of Gods Holy Word? which their bad assections teach them to oppose; nay, make
it their interest to resist.

And here it may be fit to take this occasion, to give a few directions, for
the right understanding of the Holy Scriptures: which if we observe, in our
reading them, we shall not only be preserved from dangerous mistakes, but reap
great benefit by them. And I shall the rather do it, because it will be a good
introduction to the Third Part of this Discourse.

I. The first of them is a Rule, which is necessary in all Sciences, or parts
of Knowledge; viz to learn easy things first. We can have no sound
Understanding in the Scriptures, unless we will follow their own Method; which
is to learn first, to fear God, and keep his Commandments; for therein lies the
beginning of Wisdom, as he often tells us.

It is against the very direction which the Scripture gives us, to be so
confident as to venture presently into all the depths, that are in it; and to
lose our time in puzzling our minds to unty the knots of difficult places. For
they are not to be salved but by those, who are well acquainted with what the
Scripture principally aims at; which it teaches us in plain and easy words:
and therefore they must be first learnt, as our Guides to those things which
are of higher contemplation.

And he who is resolved upon this Method, will find plain Truths enough to busy
and employ an honest and pious mind a long time: by which he is to prepare and
sit himself for more difficult inquiries; if it be needful for him to make
them. Though the truth is, ordinary Capacities may safely pass by those things
that are hard and obscure; and content themselves with the knowledge of easy
and perspicuous Doctrines, without any further search: consulting thereby best
for their own ease and quiet, and for the Peace of the Church of God.

And as for those whose profession it is, to devote themselves to the study of
all Holy Writ; even they must be sure, for their own safety and others, to lay
the Foundation well here, by thoroughly digesting the Doctrines which are after
Godliness, and deeply tincturing (as I may say) their minds therewith, before
they meddle with other matters. For a sense of true Goodness, will be as a
Light to guide us in the interpreting those things which seem dark, and need
something to illustrate them. And what can we imagine that should be, but
something contained in the same Book; even the true Light of Life, the Light
which chases away all men's evil desires, and the deeds of darkness; which makes
the Soul pure, and without prejudice; which disposes it to know God, and to
love him, and to love all men for his sake? This will instruct us how to
interpret all the rest; and not suffer us to entertain any sense of them in our
minds, which is repugnant to the Nature of God, and hinders the practice and
increase of true Godliness, or prejudices Charity, and disturbs Christian
Society: but conform all our thoughts unto a happy agreement with those great
and obvious Truths.

Which therefore let us observe and mark, as the very Life and Soul of
Religion; nay, let us imprint them on our minds, as the most necessary to be
known, and remembered, and carried constantly in mind, that we may never admit
any thing to their prejudice. For unless we be thus disposed, we shall not only
trouble our selves to no purpose, but confound all things; and overturn the
whole Frame of Religion. We shall be just like that Fool, whom Melancthon
speaks of, whose work it was to carry fuel daily to the Kitchen; and coming to
a great Pile of Wood, where little pieces lay uppermost, and the greatest
below, he would needs begin at the bottom: for which he gave this wise reason,
That it was good to do the hardest work first, and then he should be better
able to deal with that which was easy. I need not make the application to
those who love to perplex themselves with some deep, and I may say, dangerous
Points (if not well understood) before they are well studied in the common
Doctrines of Godliness, and have learnt what it is to be a Christian.

This is a preposterous course; contrary to the clear light and guidance of the
Holy Books; which teach us in the first place, to make this inquiry, What shall
we do to be saved? And we are sure none can be saved, but they who are obedient
to the Lord Jesus; whose Faith therefore teaches us to study his Precepts,
before we meddle with other matters. And these Precepts, as they are not
grievous to those that obey them; so they are not hard to be learnt in order to
that obedience. But whatsoever concerns our Duty to God and Man, and the Duty
of every particular person in the relation wherein they stand; of Parents and
Children, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, Princes and People,
Teachers and Learners, are all, I have shown, delivered here, with such
plainness and simplicity, that no Book in the World ever taught them in this
manner. About these therefore, in all reason, together with the common
Principles of Christian Faith, we must employ our most earnest care to settle
them in our minds; and make them the Rule of all the rest.

But it is not enough to bring these things into our minds; I must add another
Rule no less necessary than this: which is,

II. That to do what we know, is the way to know more what we have to do.

This I have suggested already in the body of the foregoing Discourse; and
therefore shall only commend the serious practice of one particular Duty: which
is so frequently mentioned in the Holy Scriptures, that from thence we ought to
conclude, it is of exceeding great moment It is, Humility; not to think of our
selves more highly than we ought to think; nor to be wise in our own conceits:
but to think soberly, and to be lowly in our own eyes.

There is a number of Precepts of the same import with these: the meaning of
which he ought to study diligently, and then heartily obey, who would advance
to a higher degree of knowledge: for the meek ( i. e. the humble) will he guide
in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.

If a man begin at first to think wrong of himself, he is not like to hit right
in other things: but the easier mistake in them, when he has suffered such a
cheat to be put upon him, as to have a vain opinion of himself; whom he has
better opportunities to be acquainted withal, than any thing else.

And on the contrary, he that thinks right, in the first things he inquires
into; has great encouragement and security to proceed, with hope of good
success in all that follows.

It is true, when a man knows himself, he finds that he is a Creature apt to
mistake; prone to judge amiss; forward to follow little fancies rather than
reason, or reason dipped in passion and interest, and to forsake that which is
pure and unbiassed.

But this is so far from being a discouragement or hinderance to him, in
searching after God's Holy Truth, that it is the very thing which disposes him
for it, and will secure him in it. For if he keep this humble sense in his
mind, how weak and frail a Creature he is, it will do him great service; by
preserving him from rashness, in embracing any thing without great
deliberation; and much more from hastiness, in venting any singular conceit;
and still much more from pertinacity, in defending it, if it be vented; and
most of all, from Faction and siding, and uncharitable courses; and from that
great danger of mistaking, and never reforming an erroneous Understanding.

More particularly, in this business of reading the Scriptures, this humble
sense of his own weakness will, First, make him read them with greater care,
attention and diligence; remembering how prone he is to mistake, even when he is
very serious.

And therefore, Secondly, it will make him distrust his own best endeavor,
without Divine assistance: which he will pray and wait for, with an humility as
great as the sense of his unworthiness to receive it.

And, Thirdly, it will dispose him to listen unto, and inquire after the sense
and judgment of other men, (whom he has reason to think abler than himself)
and to be willing to learn of them.

Fourthly, And more particularly, incline him to follow the Guides of Souls:
not with a blind obedience; but with a due attention to their directions, and a
great deference to their Judgment, and (where any doubt is publicly
determined) a quiet submission to their Authority.

And, Lastly, (to name no more) content himself with plain, and safe, and
necessary things: at least, preserve him from being too forward, before he be
well prepared, to meddle with those things which are not within every bodies
reach.

Now when we consider all these blessed effects of Humility, we cannot but say,
it is a special means to attain the knowledge of Divine things, from God: who
gives grace to the humble.

St Austin was so sensible of this, that he advises Dioscurus Epist. I VI.
not to think of any other way to attain the knowledge of the Truth, but that
alone, which God himself, who knows how weak we are, and how apt to slip, has
chalkt out for us. Ea est autem prima humilitas, secunda humilitas, tertia
humilita etc. And that way, is first Humility, secondly Humility, thirdly
Humility; and should thou ask me never so often about the way, I would give
thee no other answer. Not that there are no other Precepts to be learnt, but
unless Humility in all the good we do, do first go before, and secondly
accompany, and thirdly follow after; pride and vain conceit, while we are
pleasing our selves in our good deed, will wrest all the profit of it out of
our hand, and make us lose our labor. Vitia quippe caetera in peccatis,
superbia vero etiam in recte factis timenda est, etc. For though we need fear
no other vice, but when we do ill; yet this may steal upon us even when we do
well: and great care must be used, lest by the desire of praise, we spoil those
actions which are really praiseworthy. Therefore as the noblest Orator, when
he was asked, what he thought was chiefly to be observed in the Precepts of
Eloquence, is said to have answered, Pronunciation; and being asked what next,
still answered, Pronunciation; and the third time being asked the same question,
again replied nothing but Pronunciation: So as often as thou should ask me of
the Precepts of Christian Religion, I would not think fit to answer any thing,
but Humility.

This wholesome Humility then, which that our Lord might teach us, he humbled
himself, let us carefully learn: yea, let us be clothed with Humility, as St.
Peter speaks: and always carry in mind that of St. Paul, Knowledge puffs up.
There is danger in reading and getting knowledge, unless Humility usher it in,
and attend upon it, and perpetually go along with it: for it will not minister
to the nourishing of goodness; but to the feeding our ambition, and fomenting
contention, and inflaming of indiscreet zeal, and thereby troubling the state
of God's Church. But Humility is the Mother of meekness and peaceableness of
Spirit; which is both most capable of wisdom, and also most fit to communicate
it unto others with advantage, and make it appear as lovely to them, as it is
in its own nature.

We have the Authority of the Royal Prophet for it in the place before
mentioned, XXV. Psalm. 9. and of his great Son Solomon, whose Maxim this was,
With the lowly is wisdom, XI. Prove. 2. and which is more than all, of our
Blessed Lord and Savior, who thanks his Heavenly Father (XI. Mat. 25.) Because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, that is, from the
self-conceited Pharisees, and revealed them unto babes, single-hearted and
humble persons: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight; this is
most agreeable and pleasing to the Divine Wisdom, to communicate it self, not
to those who think themselves wise, but to those who are truly desirous and
studious so to be.

And so I proceed to a third Rule, which is a general one too, and arises from
the former.

III. Which supposing that doing God's Will is the main thing at which a
Christian ought to aim, it is evident from thence, that we ought to propound no
other end to our selves in reading the Holy Books, but that we may thereby grow
more holy, and be made perfect in every good work.

For this is certain, that if this be not always our end, we and these Holy
Books do not design the same thing; and so we are never like to meet. Their
design, it is visible, is to make us wise unto Salvation, to purify us even as
our Lord is pure, to help us to perfect holiness in the fear of God. If we aim
not therefore at this, they have nothing to say to us. If we lay aside these
thoughts, and divert to something else in the study of the Scriptures, we shall
wander in vain and unprofitable Speculations: and perhaps trouble the World, as
well as our selves, with unnecessary Doctrines: which engender strife, and
destroy Charity, and disturb Peace, and turn men quite away from the practice
of Piety.

If we would be truly knowing, and thoroughly wise, with the Scripture-Wisdom,
we must ever draw all we know, and meet with there, unto this end: and not
think we know it well, till we see how we may be made better thereby.

I cannot express this in fewer or more proper words, than Erasmus has done
long ago, in more places of his Works than one; particularly in his Dedication
of his Paraphrase on St. Matthew to the Emperor Charles the V. Since the
Evangelists wrote the Gospel to every body, I do not see why every body should
not read it. And I have so handled it, that the most illiterate may understand
it. Now it will be read with the greatest profit, if when any man takes it in
his hand, it be with this mind, ut seipso reddatur melior, etc. that he may be
rendered better than himself: and do not accommodate the Gospel to his own
affections, but correct his own life, and all his desires by the Rule of the
Gospel.

I conclude this with that Saying of Seneca; In the same plat of ground, the Ox
seeks for grass, the Hound seeks for a Hare, and the Stork for a Snake: and
just so it is with those that read the same Scripture; wherein one seeks
himself, and another seeks the World; one studies, that is, to please himself
with the History of ancient Times, another to furnish himself with the
knowledge that belongs to his Profession; but he alone reads it as he ought,
who therein seeks for God; and desires to be filled with the knowledge of his
Will, that he may walk before him in all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every
good work, I. Coloss. 9, 10.

IV. And whosoever he is that designs this great End, and comes to learn to be
good with an honest mind and heart, let him be careful to observe one Rule
more; which is, To study and well digest the first Elements of Christ's
Religion. For as he will never read, nor write exactly, that does not learn to
spell truly; and he must understand syllables before he understands words and
sentences: so he will never find the saving Power of the Gospel thoroughly
working on his Spirit, that keeps not the first Truths always in his mind, and
deeply rooted in his Heart.

The prime Principle of our Faith is, That Jesus is the Son of God; that He
speaks from Heaven to us the unerring Will of our Creator. The Gospel will not
have any efficacy upon us, unless we carry this along in our thoughts, when we
apply our selves to study it; that this is the Voice of God, this is the Mind
and Will of Him that made us; how shall we escape, if we turn away from Him
that speaks from Heaven to us?

This if we carry in mind, while we read the Scriptures, they will overawe us,
and make us have Grace to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.
We shall not dare to read them, as we do some humane History, wherein we are
not all concerned, but with attention, with seriousness, and with diligence:
tracing the Lord Jesus, as pious Disciples of his, in every step; observing
what he said, and what he did. And thus seeking, and searching, and hunting
after Him every where (as Erasmus his words are in his Preface to his
Annotations on the N. T.) we shall find in that most simple and rude Scripture,
the ineffable Counsel of celestial Wisdom: we shall see in that foolishness of
God (if we may so speak) which at first sight appears mean and contemptible,
that which far excels all humane prudence, though never so sublime and
admirable.

And the next Principle is like to it; viz. That the Lord Jesus will come to
judge the World in righteousness, according to his Gospel. This if we thought
of, that we shall be judged, and have Sentence passed upon us by this Rule; we
could not but lay it to heart, and square our life by it. Therefore let these
first Principles of Faith be strongly sixed in our mind, and always be in our
thoughts: and let us think we have as much use of them, as he that reads has
of his Letters; which are the first Elements of Learning.

Then for the Principles of Practice, this is the prime, the chief, the most
fundamental in the whole Gospel; He that will be my Disciple, must deny
himself, forsake all, and take up his Cross and follow me.

This our Savior tells his Disciples again and again, upon several occasions,
X. Matthew. 38. XVI. 24. IX. Luke 23. XIV. 27, 33. In the last of which places,
he lets them know, that it is as foolish to think of being a Christian without
learning this Lesson, as it is for a man to begin the building of a Tower,
before he has computed the Charge; or for a Prince to undertake a War, without
considering both his own force, and the strength of his Opposer. The sense of
which two Parables our Lord sums up in these words; So likewise, whosoever he
be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

In which few words, we have this account made to our hands (as a great Doctor
of ours speaks) that e're we can hope to be built up in the Faith of Christ, or
safely engage in the War against the Devil, the World and the Flesh, we must
make over our interest in all that is dear unto us here, and resign it up to
our Lord Christ: holding nothing so precious as his Love and his Salvation.

That is the meaning of this Lesson; We must not prize any thing so much, as
the Mercy, Grace and Favor of God in Christ Jesus. All the contentments of
this life, and life it self, must not weigh so much with us, as God's good
esteem of us, his affection to us, the Honor, Glory and Immortality that
Christ has promised us.

When we have once learnt this, and have it by heart, there will be no
difficulty in learning all the rest. The immediate result of it will be, an
unfeigned feigned assent to the truth and goodness of all that Christ, the
Prince of Life, has revealed unto us; and an uniform obedience to his Holy
Will in all things. For then there will be Nothing left to oppose him, Nothing
to gainsay him; no interest, no headstrong affection and desire to resist the
impulsions of Divine Truth: whose natural property is, to incline and sway the
Soul to all kinds, and to every part of true goodness.

It is our duty then to ruminate upon these things over and over again, to
repeat these Lessons continually to our selves; till they become familiar to
us, and have seated themselves in our hearts: not thinking we know them, till
we feel them; nor imagining we feel them to purpose, till we be transformed
into them.

That is an excellent Saying of the Hebrews, He that learns the Law, and does
not repeat it, is like to him that sows his seed, and never reaps, nor binds it
into sheaves, that he may carry it home into his Barn. And this; He that
repeats his Lesson an hundred times, is not so wise as he that repeats it an
hundred times and one.

Let us ever be telling our selves, that it is God who speaks unto us by his
Son, in these Holy Books; that this is the Rule of Life, whereby we must be
judged; that we must stand or fall before God, according as we keep these
Sayings; that Nothing is comparable to being beloved of God; Nothing so
desirable as to have our Faith found to honor, and praise, and glory at the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. And then we shall deny our selves and our
own desires, commodities and interests, that God's Will may be done by us: the
whole World will seem inconsiderable in our eyes, and we shall easily forgo any
thing that He will not allow us to keep: according to the fundamental Rule of
our Religion; He that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple.
And he that takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me.

I conclude this Part of my Discourse, with the words of one of the Homilies of
our Church: in the second Part of the Exhortation to the reading and knowledge
of the Holy Scriptures;

As concerning the hardness of Scripture, he that is so weak, that he is not
able to brook strong meat, yet he may suck the sweet and tender milk: and defer
the rest till he wax stronger, and come to more knowledge. For God receives
the learned and unlearned, and casts away none, but is indifferent unto all.
And the Scripture is full, as well of low valleys, plain ways, and easy for
every man to use, and to walk in: as also of high hills and mountains, which
few men can climb unto. And whosoever gives his mind to Holy Scriptures, with
delight, study and burning desire, it cannot be (says St. Chrysostom) that he
should be left without help.

He that asks shall have, and he that seeks shall find, and he that
knocks shall have the door open. If we read once, twice, or thrice, and
understand not, let us not cease so, but still continue reading, praying,
asking of others; and so by still knocking, at the last the door shall be
opened, as St. Augustine says.

Although many things in the Scripture be spoken in obscure Mysterics; yet
there is nothing spoken under dark Mysteries in one place, but the self same
thing in other places, is spoken more familiarly and plainly, to the capacity
both of learned and unlearned.

And those things in the Scripture, that be plain to understand, and necessary
for Salvation, every man's duty is to learn them, to print them in memory, and
effectually to exercise them. And as for the dark Mysteries, to be contented to
be ignorant in them, until such time as it shall please God to open them unto
him: but not lay aside the reading of the whole, because of the darkness of
such places.

And briefly to conclude (as St. Augustine says) by the Scripture all men may
be amended, the weak be strengthened, and the strong be comforted. So that
surely, none be Enemtes to the reading of God's Word, but such as either be so
ignorant, that they know not how wholesome a thing it is: or else so sick, that
they hate the most comfortable Medicine that should heal them: or so ungodly,
that they would wish the people still to continue in blindness and ignorance of
God.

The End of the Second Part.
PART III.
I AM arrived now at the last of those Three things I propounded, to be treated
of in the beginning of this Book.

That all who read the Scriptures are not in danger to wrest them to their own
hurt; but only the unlearned and the unstable. Such men will wrest them from
their true meaning; but so they will other Discourses, as well as the
Scriptures; and the most clear and perspicuous things, are liable to be
perverted by them, as well as the dissicult.

In this we shall soon be satisfied, if we consider briedy, whom the Apostle
St. Peter means, by Unlearned, and Unstable: which will also clearly direct us,
what course we are to take, that we may not wrest the Scriptures, as such men
do.

Now there is no great difficulty to know, who these are, if we mind the proper
use of words, and the place where they are used.

I. UNLEARNED.
AND for the first of these, the Unlearned; the Apostle cannot be thought to
have respect to such as are ignorant in those parts of Knowledge, which are now
commonly called Learning (for so the Apostles themselves were generally
ignorant and unlearned, IV. Acts 13.) but to those, who are ignorant of such
things as the Holy Scriptures treat of, and ought to be learnt by all
Christians.

This I think all will allow; and then they are more particularly meant, who
are not skilled in the first Principles of Religion. Men that know not, or mind
not those common Natural Truths, upon which all Religion is built: nor are
acquainted with those plain unquestionable Principles of Christianity, before
mentioned in the Second Part of this Discourse.

These I take to be the (...) here spoken of; who have not learnt so much as
the first Elements, or (as the Apostle speaks VI. Heb. 1.) the word of the
beginning of Christ: who wanting the foundation of true Knowledge, will be apt
to wrest every thing they read, from its proper meaning.

Such there were, even in the School of Christ, as St. Paul himself teaches us,
who were ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy III. 7. They frequented, that is, the Christian Assemblies, where they
received good Instructions: but their nanghty affections would not suffer the
known Doctrines of Christianity to find entertainment in their minds.

Which Doctrines are such as these; That there is one God, who is perfectly
just, and perfectly good, and knows the very thoughts of the heart, and changes
not. And that He has sent Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, the Eternal
Word, who was before all Worlds, to take our Nature upon him, to dye for our
sins, to rise again, that he may be the Judge of all. And that He has sent the
Holy Ghost from the Father, to teach us those Rules of Faith and Holy life,
whereby we shall be judged at the last Day: when he will raise up our dead
bodies; and give to those who have done good, everlasting Life; but send those
who have done evil, into everlasting Fire.

These and such like, which depend on these, and are coherent with them, are
the Christian Learning: which they that did not know, and believe, and
accordingly practice (as I showed in the foregoing Discourse) must needs be
very great strangers to the Holy Books; and be so far from reaping any profit
by them, that they would rather corrupt and abuse them to the support of their
own uncertain, vain, or absurd imaginations.

Nor were they secure from this danger when they had learnt them; unless they
were likewise so fixed in their minds, that they were constantly guided by
them. For the Apostle here teaches us, that not only the Unlearned, but the
Unstable also, wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

II. UNSTABLE.
WHO those are is now easier to determine, if what has been said of the other,
be admitted. They are such as do not steadfastly believe what they have learnt:
who having entertained the Truth, do not stick to those Principles of Natural
Light and plain Revelation, nor are settled in them; but sometimes believe them,
and sometimes question, or disbelieve them.

Such persons the same St. Paul also describes in the Christian Church: who
were tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine, and could six no where;
but rolled in uncertainty, from one Opinion to another, till they lost
themselves in Infidelity, IV. Ephesians. 14. The Principles they had received were
floating in their mind, and never came to any certain constant resolution:
which made them apt, on all occasions, to pervert the Scriptures, according as
their own Fancy, or the confident suggestion of some bold Seducer, inclined
them. For some men deliver the vainest Conceit, with such an assurance, and
earnest Zeal, that they may be well compared to a violent blast; which carries
those along with it, who are not settled and confirmed in their Belief.

I may make many more words about this, but I shall scarce make it plainer; and
therefore I will not endeavor it. But now desire you to mind what course these
words, thus explained, direct us to take; that we may be preserved from abusing
the liberty we have of consulting, on all occasions, with the Oracles of God.

There is some Learning, you see, required to the understanding of the Holy
Scriptures. But you need not go far to seek it: for it consists only in the
knowledge of such Natural Truths, as are engraven upon our own minds; and of
those plain Doctrines of Christianity, which are revealed in God's Word so
clearly, that there is no Controversy about them: especially of the great
Design of Christianity, which St. John expresses in this short Sentence, These
things write I unto you, that ye sin not. This is very solid and deep Learning,
to know that the first and chief End of Divine Writings, is to teach us to live
well: and the next follows in the next words of St. John (1. II. 1.) If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, etc Be
not discouraged, if contrary to the grent Design of Christianity, you fall into
sin; but hope for Mercy through the Propitiation made by Christ Jesus, who will
intercede for the sius of those, who heartily make this their main design and
business, not to sin.

Which Truths, of both sorts, we must take some pains to six in our rainds, and
root in our hearts; that our belief of them may not be shaken by any other
persuasion whatsoever: much less by any sudden conceit which starts up in our
minds, or is suggested to us by others.

And the way to do that, is to live by them: for nothing settles knowledge so
much, as saithful practice according to it; especially when we are settled in
this practice. For those St. Peter calls unstable Souls (in the Chapter before
this, v. 14.) apt to be beguiled and ensnared; who had not arrived at a settled
resolution and an habitual course of well-doing.

Now when this is done, which must be our first Work, there is but one Rule
which I shall propose (because, if well followed, it comprehends all in it) to
make our reading the Holy Scriptures safe and secure. Which is this,

Never to admit any Interpretation of Scripture from others, or fasten any
sense upon them our selves, which contradicts those known Truths which we have
learned, and in which we are fixed, as the undoubted Mind and Will of God. They
must be the measure of all the rest: by them we must judge of all things,
whether they be true or false, Whatsoever overthrows them, and will not consist
with them, must be rejected: It must not make us doubt of them; but they must
make us conclude, it is a safe Interpretation. And on the other side,
whatsoever agrees with them, though it should happen not to be the proper
meaning of a place of Scripture into which we inquire, it can do no harm, if it
be entertained.

And here now I shall do these three things.

First, Show how we are to use this Rule.

Secondly, How necessary it is to keep to it.

Thirdly, How readily thereby we may salve many seeming difficulties in the
Holy Scripture: at least pass by them safely, if we observe it.

I.
Concerning the first, I shall only say these two things.

I. First, That we must never admit any Interpretation on a sudden: till we
have examined, how it agrees with the Principles of known and undoubted Truth.

Fancy will be suggesting things to us; and if we be not attentive, will
sometimes insinuate very absurd Notions into our Belief. Here therefore our
care and labor is required, to bring along with us, to the reading of Holy
Scripture, such a sense of God, and of our known Duty to him, and of the end
and intention of Religion, that it may be ready at hand, to correct our
extempore conceits and apprehensions, which will be forward to mislead us. And
if they represent any thing to us, which makes Him unjust, or unmerciful; if
they plainly lead us to negligence and carelessness in our Duty; if they strike
at the end of the Commandment, which is, Charity, out of a pure heart, and a
good conscience, and faith unfeigned; we must as suddenly lay them aside, as
they obtrude themselves upon us. For that cannot be the Mind of God, which
crosses the Natural Notions we all have of Him; or thwarts the plain
Revelations He has made of his blessed Nature and Will; or tends to make us
less diligent in his service, less zealous of good works; unto which we are
created and formed in Christ Jesus, that we should walk in them, II. Ephesians. 10.

And we are all concerned to watch carefully, lest any thing of this kind
insinuate it self, to the high dishonor of Almighty God, and the infinite
hazard of our immortal Souls. And to watch not only when we are reading the
Holy Scriptures, but

II. Secondly, At all other times we must use due care, lest our thoughts lead
us to form any Opinions, which are contrary to the known Principles of
Humanity, and Christianity.

The thoughts of men are restless; and are apt to cast themselves into a
thousand shapes, and frame innumerable conceits. Now if we let any settle in
our minds, which agree not with the Truths, I have often named; they will not
fail to be intermedling when we read the Scriptures, and draw it to speak in
their favor, contrary to its meaning. There is no private Opinion which we
have received, but we are naturally desirous to have it justified and
confirmed: and therefore we had need take care to entertain none that are
inconsistent with Piety; for they will be sure to catch at every word of Holy
Scripture to give them countenance by its great Authority; and press it,
against its will, to come to their service. At every turn they will be
interposing their inclinations; and prove a biass upon our minds, to carry them
aside from the mark.

And the fuller we are of these, and the more desirous to have them confirmed;
the more hastily shall we persuade our selves, that the Holy Scripture speaks
in their favor: and proffers it self as a Witness, to give Testimony to the
truth of our Conceits.

Let us provide therefore by a due vigilance and attentive consideration, that
they be not formed by our own private imaginations; but by the common standing
Rule of natural Honesty, Justice and Goodness; and by all other certain
Principles ingrafted in us, or revealed to us: Which serve as an Index to point
us which way our thoughts should run; and where they should six themselves.

II.
THE necessity of which Care is the second thing, I propounded to be briefly
considered.

And here two things more may be sufficient to be duly weighed.

First, That without this Care, the plainest Scriptures will be in danger to be
perverted, as soon as the most difficult.

Secondly, The very same places of Scripture will be liable to be shamefully
wrested, to serve different purposes.

I. First, I say the plainest Scriptures will be in danger to be perverted (and
very dangerously too) as well as the most difficult. For it is not their
difficulty, that makes them be perverted, but men's own easiness to believe any
thing, which their private desires would have to be true; though never so
contrary to sound Reason and Religion: which if they had regarded, would have
directed them to make another construction of Holy Writings.

All the Metaphors, for instance, and resemblances borrowed from things
visible, to represent the Glory of Christ's heavenly Kingdom, make the
miserable Jews (as their Forefathers did before them) still entertain
themselves with pleasant Dreams, of a glorious, pompous Monarchy here on Earth:
though the Prophets, in as plain words as can be devised, represent Christ,
their King, as a man of sufferings, who should endure greater indignities than
any man ever did, and at last dye, and so rise again, to sit at the right hand
of God, and give his Holy Spirit from thence, to fill all the Earth with the
knowledge of the Lord; and thereby make them pious Subjects of a Divine
Kingdom. This drowsiness is so hereditary to their Nation, that they will not
be awakened out of their slumber; by considering how much more the Soul is
God's care, than the Body; and what the Prophets speak concerning Christ's
Government over men's minds and Consciences, and the reformation He should come
to make in their life and manners.

Some Christians have been deluded with the same Fancy; as if they had dreamt
upon their Pillow.

But there are more palpable instances, of the abuses committed among them, not
by reading the Scripture (for that they were not forbidden) but by not
observing the Rule I am now establishing. It was usual for people, even in the
ancient Times of Christianity, to interpret the Scripture according to their
fancy, merely to serve a present turn; just as many make it do now. For
Tertullian tells us, that they who, after their Conversion to Christianity,
still followed the trade of making Idols and Images for the Heathen to Worship,
defended themselves (when they were reprehended for it) by a Saying in St.
Paul, 1 Cor. VII. 20. which they thus contracted, Vt quisque fuerit inventus,
ita and perseveret; As every man is found, when he is called to Christianity,
so let him continue.

There is no man that reads what follows, but plainly sees (if he be not
resolved to shut his eyes against all that contradicts his desires) the Apostle
designs Nothing, but that all men should remain so well satisfied with the
condition in which they were when converted to Christ; that if they were mere
Slaves, they should be content to continue so; and not depart from their Lords
and Masters, unless they would give them their Liberty: which, he grants, was
much to be desired. But if the following words had not told us this is his
meaning; yet the Rule before mentioned, would have sufficiently secured them,
from the ill use they made of his words: For as Tertullian well observes (in
his Book of Idolatry, Cap. V. where he treats of this matter) it is an
Interpretation, that directly leads to all wickedness. Possumus igitur omnes in
peccatis perseverare ex ista interpretatione, etc. as his words are: We may all
then continue in our sins, according to this Interpretation; for there is not
one of us, who was not found a Sinner, when he was called into Christ's
Service: who came down for no other reason, but to deliver us from our sins.

But in the same manner they also abused, he observes there, some other Texts
of St. Paul, wherein he required, that after, his Example, every man should
work and get his living with his own hands, 1 Cor. IV. 10. 2 Thessalonians. III. 9, 10.
By which Precepts, if all that men wrought with their hands, might be defended;
then Thieves and Highway men, and Coiners of false Money, and all other wicked
persons, would be justified by them, as well as these Image-makers, who
alleged them. In a word, let the Gate of the Church be set wide open, says
he, for all Comers, who live by their labor; if there be no exception of such
Arts and Trades, as the Discipline of God does not receive.

And indeed, the Scripture it self teaches us this Truth, That it is not the
difficult places only, which men wrest to their destruction, but the plainest
also, when thereby they can have some color for their evil practices. As for
Example, what can be more certain than this, that the Apostle never gave any
encouragement by his Doctrine for men to say, much less said thus himself, Let
us do evil, that good may come. That is, a good End will warrant evil Actions.
And yet there were some, who were so audacious, as to affirm he taught this
Doctrine: whom he contents himself to confute, with these few words, and
vouchsafes them no other answer; Whose damnation is just, III. romans 8. There
was no ground, that is, for such an interpretation of his words, but only their
own evil Principles and Affections; which led them to make this Conclusion
against the dictates of natural Reason and Christianity: and therefore nothing
could be said for such men; but they would perish; and Nothing was more just
than that God should leave them under Condemnation, who perverted holy Words to
a meaning so cross to all the known Principles of natural and revealed Truth,
that Nothing could be more.

Occumenius, upon this very Text of St. Peter, gives another such like
instance, of wresting St. Paul's words, which, he says, may serve instead of
all. He having said, V. Romans 20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound; ungodly men perverting his sense, say, we have Paul on our side, who
says, (...), Let us sin the more abundantly, that we may be the more abundantly
pardoned. Which they do to their own destruction (says St. Peter) for they
that killed the Prophets and the Apostles, and they that destrey and takeaway
their words, by a perverse interpretation, are obnoxious to one and the same
Condemnation: because they slew them, that the World might be no longer taught
by them, the saving Truths of the Gospel; and these in the like manner wrest,
or put upon the rack their words, that none by them may work out their
Salvation.

Again, what is there clearer in the Apostolical Writings, than that they every
where taught, God will raise the dead at the last day; in which He will judge
the World in righteousness. And yet there were those who wrested these words so
foully, that some said, the Resurrection was past already; of whom were
Hymenaeus and Philetas, 2 Timothy II. 17, 18. and others said, there was no
Resurrection, 1 Cor. XV. 12. and others said, Christ would never come again;
but laughed at his promises of coming to reward the good, and at his threatenings
of coming to punish the wicked, as St. Peter tells us in this very Chapter, v.
3, 4. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, (there was the reason of their scoffing) saying,
Where is the promise of his coming? for since the first men fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the world. Which they would
not have had the impudence to affirm (it being so easy to disprove them) had
they not affected (as he shows v. 5.) to be ignorant of what was as plainly
recorded in the Holy Books, as any thing whatsoever; that there had already
been, long ago, a great change made by the Flood, which swept away the World of
the Ungodly. Which, if they had been serious, would have kept them from
mocking, at another destruction threatened to the Wicked, with a promise of
Salvation to the Godly, at our Savior's second Coming: and made them look upon
what was past, as an Example of the like future Judgment.

I might give more numerous instances, which would prove something beyond this;
that unpurged minds, or, which is all one, unlearned and unstable Souls, will
not only wrest plain Truths to serve their Lusts and Humors: but thereby be
apt to grow more wicked, and more prejudiced against God and Goodness. For the
opinion, or presumption (as is excellently observed by a great Man) that any of
our evil actions, or dispositions, are countenanced from God's Word, does
mightily heighten them, in a degree of evil more than usual.

The covetous, niggardly, and unmerciful, for instance, if they please
themselves, in the precepts of frugality and diligence; are exceedingly stifned
and rooted in those sins, with the pleasure they take in their conceited
conformity with the rule of Gods Word: which teaches us to avoid Riot and
Luxury, Sloth and Negligence. And thus the stubborn and self-willed, are
encouraged in their obstinacy, by the commendations which are given to the
constant and the well-resolved. And the malicious, turbulent, and seditious
Spirits, justify their bitterness, fury, and contempt of Authority, from the
examples of excessive zeal, or indignation swelling in Holy men upon just
occasions, and that, perhaps, by a special Divine incitation; which is not by
any man to be now imitated.

But it is time to leave this; and to give a short account of the other.

II. It is no less usual, for want of observing this plain Rule, to press one
and the self same Scripture, to serve for different purposes: unto the great
dishonor of God, and of his Holy Oracles; which men, from hence, imagine have
an uncertain found.

I might instance in some very ancient abuses of this nature; As that of our
Savior's, X. Matthew. 25. It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his
Master, may be strained to prove no body knows how many absurdities. You may
guess at the rest by this one, that it was alleged by the Ebionites, to prove
that Christians ought to be circumcised, because Christ their Master was (as
Epiphanius expressly remembers) and by the same reason may be urged to prove,
that no Christian ought to marry, because Christ their Master never married.

But there are modern instances, more than enough, of this; such as show, that
not only ignorant people, but the most instructed in humane Learning, wrest the
Scriptures notoriously, if they keep not close to Principles of known Morality
and Piety.

From those two words, Pasce oves, Feed my sheep, I know not how many things
are endeavored to be established, by the Doctors of the Roman Church. If you
ask how they prove the Popes Monarchy and Supreme Dominion in the Church, the
Answer is, Christ said to Peter, Simon bar-Jona, Feed my sheep; i. e. says
Bellarmine, regio more impera, command after a Regal manner. If you ask again
by what Right he challenges to be the Supreme Judge in Controversies of Faith,
which anciently was thought to belong to General Councils out of the Word of
God, the same Doctor tells you it is evident from the same words, Feed my
sheep. Hence he proves also his Infallibility, or that he cannot err in matters
of Faith, because Christ said, Feed my sheep. Nay, by the same words, a fourth
Prerogative is established, which is a power to make new Articles of Faith, if
he think good. They are alleged also for a fifth purpose, to prove that he
has a Treasure made up of the Merits of Christ, and of the Saints, which he
dispenses as he pleases to the Faithful; for so the same Doctor teaches in his
Book of Indulgences, because Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep.

By which wonderful words also, he and others labor to prove, that the Pope
can transfer Kingdoms, absolve Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, and depose
them from their Thrones. And Becanus from the same words still gathers, that he
may inflict temporal Punishments, as they call them, not excepting death, upon
those Princes that are disobedient to him.

So strangely are men bent to force the meaning of Holy Writ, though they have
never so good Parts, and great Learning; when they have once forsaken the
guidance of Common Sense, and the obvious Notions of Christianity. Nay, the
more witty they are, the worse they are; if they have lost their Conscience,
and keep not strictly to the first Principles of all Religion.

There is another Example to be given of this, of the same Nature. From those
words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc. one is
content to prove no more but this, that the Universal Church cannot err: but
another from hence affirms, that the Tradition of the present Church cannot
err: which will not satisfy others, who conclude from the same words, that the
Pope cannot err: and there are those who allege them to prove that a General
Council cannot err. These words cannot alike serve all these purposes (as our
Divines rightly have observed) for a Pope may err, where a Council does not;
and a General Council may err, where the truly Catholic Church cannot. And
therefore it is not the evidence of things, which leads men thus to expound the
Holy Scriptures; but their own private affections, and their several interests
and designs, to the advancement of which they easily consent to apply them: Not
attending to the clear scope of them; or rather shutting their eyes, not only
to that, but to the main scope of the whole Book of God, and to all other
Notices, which would give them better direction. And solve also, even many
seeming difficulties, which are in the Scripture; or, at least, guide us so
evenly, that we shall pass safely by them.

Which is the third General Truth, I propounded in the beginning of this Part
of my Discourse.

III.
AMONG all those things, which we are concerned to learn, there are none
thought more difficult than several passages in St. Paul's Epistles: some part
of which St. Peter had in his eye, when he concluded his Second Epistle. But I
may be confident, that if we will admit, or take up, no sense of them, that is
contrary to such known and confessed Truths, as are on all sides embraced, we
may give a fair account of them; at least, preserve our selves from making any
dangerous construction of them.

That which above all the rest is thought to be of greatest difficulty, is his
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation: which some take to be the things hard to
be understood in St. Paul's Epistles. But if we stick close to the known fixed
Principles of Reason and Religion, which are naturally written on our Hearts,
or revealed by our Savior, we shall be led thereby unto a fair and easy
interpretation of his meaning in these matters.

For there is an Election of whole Nations, and there is an Election of
particular Persons: and they are elected either to enjoy the means of Grace, or
to partake of Eternal Salvation.

The first of these, it is evident, are absolute, and have no dependence upon
any thing we do: but the latter are not; as St. Paul expressly teaches us, 2 Thessalonians. II. 13. where he says, God had chosen them to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Faith was supposed to
this, and the fruits of Faith, in Sanctity and Holiness. They were not chosen
to Salvation but through these; though they were chosen to be made partakers of
the Grace of the Gospel before these.

The like may be said concerning Reprobating, or rejecting men. Which sometimes
plainly concerns whole Nations; and sometimes particular Persons: and sometimes
is only from the Privileges they formerly enjoyed; sometimes from Eternal
Life; both of them for their sins; and the former (the National rejection from
their former Privileges) is designed by God to prevent the latter; viz. the
final destruction of every one of them, which he does not desire.

Thus God reprobated, or rejected and cast away Israel, as St. Paul teaches in
the Epistle to the Romans: But it was not with an intention that they should
utterly perish. No, he says more than once, God forbid: i. e. he abhorred such
a thought; he disclaimed any such meaning. For, quite contrary, by their being
rejected from enjoying the Privileges they formerly had, the Gentiles were
brought to Christianity: and the end of that, was to provoke the Jews also to
jealousy; and move them at last to bethink themselves better, and to repent of
their sin and be saved

Let any man read seriously the Tenth and Eleventh Chapters of that Epistle,
and he will be satisfied that the Reprobation spoken of in the Ninth Chapter,
was such; that they might notwithstanding be restored into the favor of God,
and be finally saved. That is, they were rejected from being his peculiar
people, as they had been: but not from all hope of his Mercy, if they did not
continue a disobedient and gainsaying people. For the Apostle still prays for
them, in the entrance of the Tenth Chapter: and begins the Eleventh in this
manner, I say then, Has God cast away his people? God forbid. That is, will
any man infer then, from what I have said, that God has utterly reprobated
them, never to receive them more? No such matter; none ought to interpret my
words to such a sense; which I disown; nor did it ever come into my mind. For I
my self am an instance of the contrary; being an Israelite, of the seed of
Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin, etc.

And yet he says afterward, that God had blinded their eyes, and given them a
spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear; according to that of David, Let their table be made a snare and a trap
and a stumbling block, etc. v. 8, 9, 10.

But what then? Have they stumbled that they should fall, and be utterly
ruined? God forbid: but rather through their fall Salvation is come to the
Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy, v. 11. For if they did not abide still
in Unbelief, he shows they might be grafted into the Church again, v. 23. And
explains his mind still more fully in this matter, v. 25. that blindness was
happened only in part to Israel, till the fullness of the Gentiles was come in:
and so all Israel shall be saved.

For though they were, as concerning the Gospel, Enemies for our sake; yet, as
touching the Election, they were beloved for the Fathers sake. They were not
absolutely and finally reprobated; but for the present did not believe, that
through the Mercy showed to us Gentiles, they might also obtain Mercy. For God
concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, v. 28, 31,
32.

All these expressions, and a number more in that Chapter, evidently
demonstrate, it was not an irrecoverable Rejection, which the Apostle speaks
of; much less a Rejection without any respect to their sins; but such a
Rejection for their rejecting Christ, as in the design of God, was to bring
them to Repentance, and to Faith in Christ; when they saw what they had lost
(and others had gained) by their Infidelity.

He now that will interpret the Ninth Chapter, according to the plain, declared
sense of the Apostle in this, will have no hard work to undertake: but easily
see that as he speaks of the whole body of the Jewish Nation, so he did not
think them to be utterly lost; but designed even their Reprobation for their
recovery.

And now I might proceed to show (if it would not enlarge this Treatise too
much) how the difficulties which are raised about Faith and Works, are not so
great neither as they seem; if we firmly adhere to common Truths. Which lead
every man to conclude, that the Faith which enters us into a state of
Justification, does include in it an hearty purpose of well-doing: and that,
being thus entered, we cannot continue in that state, unless (according to our
holy purpose) we bring forth the fruit of good Works.

And, in like manner, what he says of God's hardening men's hearts, is not
difficult to be understood by those, who are not unlearned and unstable: but
are skilful in the Principles of natural Knowledge and of true Christianity;
and who are rooted in them so, that they hold them fast, whatscever expressions
there may be, that seem to contradict them.

But it is time to draw toward a Conclusion of this Treatise; which shall end
as it began. The Doctrine of this Church, it appears, is most pure and sincere
in this Point; and most conformable to what we find delivered by the holy
Doctors of Christianity, in the best Ages. And therefore no Member of it ought
to be persuaded, for any reason, to lay aside the reading of the Holy
Scriptures; when there is a more pious course to which they themselves direct
us. Which is, to learn those things well, which we cannot misapprehend, if we
mind them; and which will keep us from misapprehending all other things, if we
stick to them, and will not desert them.

Let that be your first business, to learn all General Truths, which comprehend
the Particular in them. And when you have learnt them, receive no particular
Opinion, which crosses those general Truths; for you may be sure it is false:
because one Truth cannot cross another; and all Conclusions must be judged by
the prime Truths, which ought to stand unmovable.

But above all, let us establish those Truths in our minds and hearts, which
teach us to be good. For there is no Dispute about this, that we ought to be
devoutly Religious, and sober, and just, and temperate in all things: meek
also, humble, patient, ready to do good, and to forgive. And if we exercise our
selves continually in the practice of these, and such like Virtues, which are
evidently taught us in the Holy Books; they will preserve us from making any
ill use of any thing we read there: and teach us to turn all we read, into our
nourishment and increase in true Godliness.

Hear the First Homily of our Church; in the conclusion of it.

In reading God's Word, he most profits not always, that is most ready in
turning of the Book, or in saying of it without Book; but he that is most
turned into it, that is most inspired with the Holy Ghost, most in his heart
and life altered and changed into that thing which he reads: he that is daily
less and less proud, less wrathful, less covetous, and less desirous of worldly
and vain pleasures: he that daily (for saking his old vicious life) increases
in Virtue more and more. And to be short, there is nothing that more
maintains Godliness of mind, and drives away Ungodliness, than does the
continual reading or hearing of God's Word; if it be joined with a godly mind,
and a good affection, to know and follow God's Will. For without a single eye,
pure intent, and good mind, nothing is allowed for good before God.

OBJECTION.
THE great Objection against all that has been said is, That notwithstanding
these Directions, Laymen, we see, do abuse the Holy Scriptures; and which is
more, the reading of them has bred infinite Heresies: and therefore the safest
course is to forbid them to be read by the common people.

ANSWER I.
TO the first part of which, an Answer has been returned already, That there
is nothing in the World so useful and necessary, but it is liable to be abused;
and yet it must not therefore be kept out of the hands of vulgar people, for
their common benefit. What more useful, nay necessary than fire; and yet
malicious, or negligent people, may burn the best house that is with it, which
they should only warm.

But besides this, I have one short Reply more to make: That none have been
more guilty of abusing the Holy Scripture, than they who ought to have been
Guides to the Church and People of God, by a sound interpretation thereof.
Examples of which I am not disposed to name, unless any shall be so untoward as
to deny it: and then a great many may be produced, like to that of him, who
because Moses said, If a beast touch the mountain, let it be stoned, concluded
that no simple or unlearned man, ought to presume to meddle with the sublimity
of the Holy Scripture.

A hard case this, that vulgar people should be treated like Beasts: but thus
Learned men will misinterpret Scripture, when they are inclined only to serve
their Cause; and be as forward (if they be not disinteressed) to mislead the
people, as the people are to mislead themselves.

ANSWER II.
TO the other part of the Objection, I shall give something fuller satisfaction.

I. And first of all, it is not true that all Heresies have sprung from men's
reading the Scriptures, or from their misunderstanding them: but rather from
their not reading them, as St. Chrysostom, you have heard, was of opinion;
whose words I have quoted more than once, in the first Part of this Discourse.
Which are of the same import with those of our Savior, XXII. Matthew. 29. Ye do
err, not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God. That is, not being
acquainted with what natural Reason taught concerning God's Omnipotency, as
well as what the Scripture taught about the Resurrection.

Here it may be fit to observe these four things.

First, That the Fathers observe, all the ancient Heretics did not read the
Scripture. They are the words of St. Austin, Lib. III. Cap. 9. De Genesi ad
literam. For neither do all Heretics read the Catholic Scriptures: nor are
they Heretics for any other reason, but because they not understanding them
aright, pertinaciously assert their own false Opinions against their Truth. And
thus St. Hierom in the last words of his Commentary upon the VII. of Hosea. All
the questions of the Heretics and of the Gentiles are the same; because they
follow not the Authority of the Scriptures, but the sense of humane Reason.

Secondly, They observe, that the men who pretended most to this, were the
Original of Heresies, viz. the Philosophers. Thus Tertullian, in his first Book
against Marcion, speaking of the Professors of Wisdom, says, De quorum
ingeniis omnis haeresis animatur, From whose Wits all Heresy is begotten and
encouraged. And more fully in his Book of Prescriptions, Cap. 7. Ipsae denique
haereses a Philosophia animantur, Heresies themselves had life given them from
Philosophy. For the Aeones came out of the School of Plato: Marcion's God came
from the Stoics: and the Souls Mortality from the Epicureans: and the denial
of the Resurrection of the Body, was taken from one School of all the
Philosophers. And so he proceeds, showing how the Fables, the endless
Genealogies, the unprofitable questions, and Disputings mentioned in the
Scriptures, came out of the same Forge: and that the Apostle takes notice of
it, when he gives the Colossians a Caveat against vain Philosophy, II. Col. 8.
From whence we may note, that the Scriptures themselves assign the Original of
Heresies, and teach us to beware of it; so far are they from leading us into
them.

Thirdly, And there is a third Cause of them mentioned in Scripture also, viz.
the Traditions of men, VII. Mark 7, 8. And thus Firmilian observes in his
Letter to St. Cyprian, That Marcion, the Disciple of Cerdo, a great while after
the Apostles, induxit sacrilegaem adversus Deum traditionem, brought in a
sacrilegious Tradition against God: Apelles also, consenting to his Blasphemy,
added multa alia nova, many other Novelties; which were more grievous, and
directly opposite to Faith and Truth. And so did Valentinus and Basilides, who
rebelled against God's Church, by their wicked Forgeries.

And thus St. Hierom introduces Heretics maintaining their Errors, in the
very Dialect of the now Roman Doctors; We are the Sons of those wise men, who
from the beginning delivered unto us the Apostolical Doctrine, etc. Lib. VII.
in Esaiam, Cap. XIX. But S. Cyprian every where appeals from all pretended
Tradition whatsoever, unto the Dictates of our Lord and his Apostles, i. e.
unto Scripture-Tradition. Particularly, in that famous Epistle of his to
Pompeius; All religious and simple minds have a compendious means, both to lay
aside Error, and to find out Truth: nam si ad divinae traditionis caput and
originem revertamur, cessat error humanus; for if we go back to the Head and
Original of Divine Tradition, there is an end of humane Error. And a little
after, he tells us what he means by this Divine Tradition, when he says, If
there be any doubt, any wavering about the Truth, let us return, ad originem
Dominicam, and Evangelicam and Apostolicam Traditionem, to our Lord's Original,
or beginning, both the Evangelical, and Apostolical Traditions: that is, to the
Doctrines delivered in the Go^pels, and in the Writings of the Apostles.

Fourthly, Another Spring of Heresy were pretended Revelations. Thus the
Cataphrygae, as the same Firmilian tells us; and novas Prophetias usurpare
conantur, endeavored also to make use of new Prophecies. And a little after,
We know they cannot have Christ, who challenge to themselves their false
Prophecy, against the Faith of Christ. And whence they had their Illuminations,
who, in the bosom of the Roman Church, invented a Fifth Gospel (which threatened
the overthrow of our four) is not hard to resolve. Not out of the Holy
Scriptures, we may be sure: and therefore the taking away them from the people,
will not prevent all Heresies; but they will start up, as they have done, from
other Causes: and they will the sooner start up, if the Scriptures be neglected.

II. But I desire it may be further. considered, that as Heresies will spring
up from other Causes, though men do not read the Scriptures: so Laymen have not
been always the Devisers of them; but they to whom none deny the liberty of
reading the Holy Books. For the most pernicious Heresies, that have been in the
Church, had their beginning from Priests; as appears by Arius and Nestorius.
And indeed no man can frame an Heresy, but he that is of excellent Parts, as
St. Hierom's opinion is; whose words are these upon the X. of Hosea. No man can
devise and set up a Heresy, but he that is ardentis ingenii, of an
extraordinary Wit; and has gifts of Nature, created by God the great
Artificer: such was Valentinus, such was Marcion; whom we read to have been
most learned; such was Bardesanes, whose Wit the Philosophers themselves
admired. And therefore, either the Scriptures must be wholly laid aside, the
greatest men, for Learning and Parts, being apt to abuse them, if they be not
humble and thoroughly good: or men must be taught how to prepare themselves for
the reading of them, and what to seek for there; and then any body may safely
take them into their hands, and make them their constant Companions.

III. It must likewise be further considered, that there is something else to
be feared beside Heresy; and that is stupid ignorance, or gross Infidelity:
which, Experience shows us, have followed upon the taking the Scriptures from
the people; even as darkness comes and covers the Earth, when the light is
withdrawn from it. And ought we not, in all reason, to be as studious and
solicitous, to prevent these, as to prevent Heresy? Since they are no less
dangerous, or rather more dangerous by far: even for this reason, because they
make men liable to fall into the most sottish Superstitions; if not into
downright Idolatry; which is a worse thing than Heresy.

How Images came to be Laymens Books, it is needless to relate (the matter
being very plain) and how Image Worship thence arose; and how fatal this has
been to the vulgar people, I have not room to discourse: nor how Legends of
Saints were invented, full of absurd and incredible stories, which have
disgraced the Doctrine of Christianity, and tempted many to disbelieve the true
History of our Savior's and his Apostles Miraculous Operations. But this is
certain, that they were devised to supply the place of the Holy Scriptures;
that the people might have something to entertain them, when they were taken
away from them. It was the effect, at least, of that; these fabulous stories
being recommended to the peoples affection, when they were frighted from
meddling with the Bible, as a dangerous Book: nay, when it is credit was
disgraced by many words of reproach. Which we in this Church think our selves
bound to wipe off, by recommending it to the peoples best affection and
constant perusal; as a means to preserve them from sottish ignorance, and
stupid Impostures, and all vain Superstitions, and false Worship.

IV. Nor is it easy for our people by this means to fall into Heresy; because
they have the liberty of reading the Scriptures, but interpreted to them by the
Ministry of the Church (whereby they are taught continually to have recourse to
their Pastors) and by sundry Tracts, Expositions, and Paraphrases, allowed by
public Authority: Particularly, in the beginning of the Reformation, care was
taken that Erasmus his Paraphrase, should be placed in every Parish Church of
the Realm; in which he does not follow his own private Fancy; but, like a truly
great Man, represents the sense of the ancient Doctors of the Church.

V. Now if after all this, men do fall into Heresy, it must be imputed to some
other Cause, than their reading the Scriptures. For if they had minded them,
they would have learnt to be humble, modest, peaceable, tractable to their
Guides; and to take heed of those who cause Divisions, and are proud, and dote
about Questions and strises of Words; and that creep into houses to instill
private Doctrines, and, very frequently, lead men from the Scriptures, to
pretended Revelations or Traditions. That is, they would not have fallen into any
sort of Heresy; but kept unto the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the Doctrine which is according unto Godliness. Unto which, if men will not
attend, there is no remedy; they will fall into Heresies, or worse; whether
they read the Scriptures, or read them not. The Scripture it self tells us as
much, that there must be Heresies, 1 Cor. XI. 19. that is, God will not hinder
it, unless men will be guided by him, and be truly good: But he has a very
good end, as it there follows, in permitting it; which is, that it may be
manifest, who are honest-hearted Christians, sincerely in love with Truth and
Goodness, and who are not.

And that must be the care of every good man, not to take or throw away the
Scriptures, to prevent Heresies: but, if Heresies do arise, to endeavor
(according to the direction of the Scriptures) to approve his integrity unto
God, by steadfast continuance in Faith and Holiness.

And after the same manner must he govern himself, if the Guides of his Soul do
not perform their Duty. Which I shall represent in the words of Erasmus; out of
his Preface to the Reader, before his Annotations on the New Testament.

It is the Pastors Office to distribute the Bread of Life to the people. But
what if they do not their Duty? What must the people do?

They must implore the help of the Supreme Pastor Christ Jesus; who still
lives, and has not forsaken the care of his Flock: But being solicited by the
public Prayers of his People, will do what is promised in Ezekiel; Behold, I
will both search my sheep, and seek them out. As a shepherd seeks out his
flock, in the day that they are scattered: so will I seek out my sheep, and
will deliver them out of all places, where they have been scattered in the
cloudy and dark day; with all the rest that there follows XXX. Ezekiel. 12, 13,
etc.

The vulgar people are Sheep; but endued with reason: and out of those Sheep
are Pastors made. And sometimes it falls out, that a Sheep may know more than
his Pastor. As a Layman therefore ought not seditiously to rebel against the
Priests, lest that order be confounded, which St. Paul would have in the Body
of Christ: so the Priests ought not to exercise Tyranny over the Flock of
Christ; for if they do, the Sedition will lie at their door.

When the Pastors do their duty, they are to be reverently heard as Angels of
God, by whom Christ speaks to us. And when they teach unsincerely, the people
must pick out all that is good, if there be any mixed with it. But if they teach
not at all, or teach those things that are plainly repugnant to the Gospel, let
every man refresh his Soul with private reading. And Christ, who promises to be
present when two or three are gathered together in his Name, will not be
wanting, by his Spirit, to one Soul that meditates piously in his Holy Word.

In vain are six thousand gathered together, if it be not in his Name. Now they
are gathered together in Christ's Name, who have respect to Nothing but his
Glory, and the eternal Salvation of their Souls.

CONCLUSION.
I shall conclude all with the sense of that great Man, St. Athanasius: who
wrote a little Treatise on purpose, to reprove the audaciousness (as he calls
it) of those, who said that it was needless to look into the Scriptures; and
bad men not to search into them, nor to speak out of them, but to content
themselves with the Faith they had received. For searching into the Scriptures,
(said they) does but make things more obscure.

To which he replies many things, which I might digest into Heads; but I shall
present them to the Reader just as they lie in the Second Tome of his Works,
page 295. of the Paris Edition, MDCXXVII.

This very Assertion, says he, shows the inconsistency of their Doctrine, and
that it has Nothing to support it. He means, they would not be afraid men
should search into the Scriptures, if they thought, what was taught by them,
would be there justified.

But we trust to the truth of the Mystery ( i. e. the Scripture) and to the
help of him who cannot lie, who says, Every one that seeks shall find.

Therefore we seek as we ought; and we find what we ought; and we speak with
demonstration; and we hear with a genuine intention: that we may persuade our
domestics; and that we may confute our Adversaries; and that we may by our
search be gainers our selves; and not propound any thing that is inconsistent
unto others.

Would you have me neglect the Scriptures? Whence then should I have knowledge?
Would you not have me to mind knowledge? But whence then should I have Faith?
Paul cries, How should they believe unless they hear? And again, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. He then who forbids the Word,
obstructs hearing, and throws out Faith.

No man can be ignorant of the Roman Laws (being a Member of the Empire)
without danger. They then who forbid us to study and learn the great Oracles of
the King of Heaven, what kind of mischief do they not craftily contrive against
us?

The Scripture is the food of the Soul. Cease then, O man, to starve the inward
man, and to kill it with hunger: introducing a famine, not of bread nor of
water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord.

There is one that inflicts wounds; and do thou forbid the application of
medicines? For shame do not talk, as if the various wisdom in the Books of
Physicians, were vain and to no purpose. One may as well, he means, bid people
not mind their Prescriptions, though there be many Diseases in the World, as
not read the Scriptures, when their Souls are in danger.

Reverence that Lover of God's Word, the Eunuch: who did not neglect reading
upon the road. Whose good intentions our Lord accepting, sent him straightway
an Instructor; who made him understand what he read, and, by the Scriptures,
brought him to his Savior.

Hence it is that our Savior commands, Search the Scriptures: by searching,
meaning careful and sober inquiry into hidden things.

Out of the Scriptures, is the manifestation of things obscure; the
confirmation of hope; the event of promises; the finding of our Savior:
according to that, We have found Him, of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote.

Paul himself uses Scriptures for the establishment of the Truth. And if he
that heard ineffable things, he that was thoroughly instructed in secrets, he
that had Christ speaking in him, does not simply use his own private Authority,
without the testimony of the Scriptures: how can we with safety now neglect the
Divine Legislation, and speak what we think good out of our own hearts?

But there are some things transcending our Conceptions. I say so too: and this
we learn out of the Scriptures; that we may understand what things are fit for
us to seek after, as being attainable.

For it is neither pious to venture upon all things: nor is it consistent with
Holiness, to neglect all things.

What we worship, we ought all to be acquainted withal: according to that which
is written, We know what we worship. But how great, or what kind, or after what
manner, or where, it is the part of madmen to inquire.

They that would have none to judge of their Doctrines but themselves, deter
men from reading the Scriptures; pretending it is immodest to pry into such
inaccessible things: but in truth, fearing to be convinced out of them, of
holding bad Opinions.

I omit the rest, which is but little more than I have represented; and shall
end all with his words to Macarius, in the very beginning of his Works, against
the Gentiles; The holy and divinely inspired Scriptures, are sufficient of
themselves for the declaration of the Truth; and there are many Books composed
about the same things, by our Teachers of blessed Memory: Which if any man
peruse, he will know, in some measure, the meaning of the Scriptures, and be
able to attain the knowledge he desires.

The End of the Third Part.
THE END.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
Books written by the Reverend Doctor Patrick.
THE Christian Sacrifice; A Treatise showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of
receiving the Holy Communion: Together with suitable Prayers and Meditations for
every Month in the Year; and for the Principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Eighth Edition corrected, in Octavo. The
Devout Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, A Book of
Devotion for Families, and particular persons, in most of the concerns of
Humane Life. The Fifth Edition, in Twelves. An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth
Edition, in Twelves. Jesus and the Resurrection, justified by Witnesses in
Heaven and in Earth. In Two Parts, in Octavo. The Book of Job Paraphrased, in
Octavo. The Book of Psalms Paraphrased, in Octavo. The Truth of Christian
Religion, in Octavo. The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians Love to
it, in Octavo. The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with the Arguments of each
Chapter, which supply the place of Commenting, in Octavo. A Paraphrase upon the
Books of Ecclesiastes and the Song of Solomon: With Arguments to each Chapter,
and Annotations thereupon. In Octavo. New. A Book for Beginners: Or, A Help to
Young Communicants, that they may be sitted for the Holy Communion, and receive
it with profit. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist. In
Two Parts. The Sixth Edition Corrected and Englarged. A Treatise of the
Necessity and Frequency of rece ving the Holy Communion: With a Resolution of
Doubts about it. In three Discourses, begun upon Whitsunday, in the Cathedral
Church of Peterburgh. New.
Winter-Evening Conference between Neighbors. In Two Parts. The Second Edition
Corrected, in Octavo. The Old Religion demonstrated in its Principles, and
described in the Life and Practice thereof. In Twelves. New. 22 Sermons
preached partly before His Majesty at Whitehall, and partly before Anne
Duchess of York, at the Chapel at St James's. By Henry Killigrew, D. D.
Master of the Savoy, and Almoner to his Royal Highness. New, in Quarto.
Animadversions upon a Book, Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically imputed to the
Catholic Church, by Dr. Stillingfleet, and the Imputation Refuted and Retorted
by S. C. By a Person of Honor. The Third Edition, in Octavo.
The End of the Catalogue.

