A SERMON Preached before the KING, ON St Stephen's-day.

By SY. PATRICK, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Printed By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-corner, 1676.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, On St. Stephen's day, 1675.
ACT. VII. 59. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit.


O How beautiful is a Succession of Good things! (as St. Gregory Nyssen cries
out in a Sermon on this Festival.) How sweet is it when one Pleasure transmits
us to another, and the end of the present is the beginning of a new
Satisfaction! Behold here that which we all so much desire; (...), Feast after
Feast, and Grace upon Grace. Yesterday the Lord of all entertained us; to day
we are invited by the noble Imitator of our Lord. The one feasted us by putting
on the Man for us; the other by putting off the Man for him: the one by coming
down into the Dungeon of this Life (as he calls it) for our sake; the other by
going out of it for his. O happy life of Christians! whom their Lord would have
to rejoice always; and in every thing to give thanks; first for him, and then
for those Worthies that followed him.

For next to the most Blessed Redeemer of Mankind, the great Captain of our
Salvation, those blessed Saints, who were the great Champions of his holy
Truth, challenge our solemn and devout Commemoration. The Christian Religion,
which comforts us with such a blessed Hope, was propagated by their means,
especially by their Sufferings; Col. 1.24.
which filled up (as St. Paul speaks) that which was behind, or wanting, of the
afflictions of Christ in their flesh. There were no Sufferings wanting indeed
to complete Christ's Satisfaction; but there did some remain to complete the
Testimony, which he had begun to give by Blood to the Truth of God. These the
Apostles and other Great persons filled up and finished, in those parts of the
World where he had not himself in Person appeared. There they published the
same Truth for which he died, and testified and confirmed it in the same manner
that he had done, by laying down their Life for it: so that in them he still
lived, and preached, and wrought wonders, and was persecuted, and despised
Death, and subdued the Nations under his feet. He that overcame death once for
us (says one of these Martyrs) overcomes it always in us. In us he fights, and
in us he conquers. In these combats which we constantly endure, and coronat
pariter and coronatur, he both crowns, and is likewise crowned. They are the
words of S. Cyprian. Epist. VIII.


Now among all those Triumphant Souls, who so honorably witnessed to our
Savior, the most Eminent was this Glorious Martyr S. Stephen, whose Memory is
this day celebrated; because he was the first who subscribed the Christian
Doctrine, and sealed it with his Blood; becoming thereby Primicerius Martyrum,
(as S. Aug. calls him) the Chief, the Prince and Captain of the Martyrs, as
Christ is the Prince and Captain of their and our Salvation. Before he had seen
any mere Man leading him the way, when there were no footsteps but those of our
Saviors, wherein to tread; he led the way himself in a Bloody path, and
arrived to the Honor of being the Firstborn of all those whose Nativities,
that is, Martyrdoms, the Church commemorates with her Praises and
Thanksgivings. And this he did in the very first year (as it is most probable)
after our Lord's Ascension to the Throne of his Glory; and when he had but
newly received Imposition of Hands: Lib. 11. Hist. Eccles. c. 1.
(...), (as Eusebius speaks) as if he had been Ordained only for this Ministry,
to sacrifice his Life for the Testimony of Jesus.

It is an easy thing, as S. Gregory Nazianzen speaks, (...), to be a Christian
when there is no danger; and when there is, all sufferings are the easier, when
we have many Companions, or glorious Examples to encourage us. But it is the
singular privilege, and peculiar glory of this Saint, that (...), etc. He was
the first that opened the passage to the quire of Martyrs; Greg. Nyss. and
Eusebius.
the first that resisted unto blood, striving against sin; the first that was
adorned (agreeable to his Name) with the crown and diadem of confession.

It is not my intention, nor will the time permit me to relate the whole story
of this great man's sufferings, together with the occasion of them; how he
overpowered his Adversaries with the Wisdom and Spirit wherewith he proved
Jesus to be the Son of God; how he astonished them with the Wonders and
Miracles he did among the people; how he stopped the mouths of those that
disputed with him; and how False Witnesses were thereupon suborned to bring in
an Accusation against him: but shall only note the Invincible Resolution, and
the Pious Patience of this Blessed Martyr, under all that he endured: For they
stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Stoning was the heaviest Punishment that the Law of Moses enacted against the
most grievous Crimes. If a man had blasphemed God, or made his Children pass
through the fire to Moloch, or committed villainy with a Beast, or cursed his
Parents (to name none of the rest of those XVIII sorts of sinners who were to
be thus used), they could do no more, to show their detestation of his
wickedness, than to dash him against the stones; and if that did not dispatch
him, to throw stones at him till he died. Now when a whole shower of these came
pouring down on this Good-mans head, when the blind Multitude ran upon him with
such a rage, as if he had been the vilest creature on Gods earth, it did not
move his spirit in the least to any unchristian passion, nor extort from him
one angry, one revengeful, one unseemly word. He only commended himself to God,
and prayed for his Persecutors, and expressed his hope in Jesus, that when they
had beaten his Soul out of his Body, he would receive it unto himself.

And great reason he had for such Hope, being already advanced by the Faith of
Christ to such an Heavenly and God-like nature, as to express the greatest love
to those who hated him so bitterly; and to expose himself to the greatest
danger for the sake of Christian Piety, which he desired by these means to
propagate even among its most deadly enemies. And if we rightly consider it, we
shall not easily find any thing that so much declares the Greatness, the
Excellency (and as I may call it, the Divineness) of any man's spirit, or tends
so effectually to promote the Christian Faith, as truly pious Patience under
the greatest Sufferings upon its account.

I. First, I say it is an argument of a great and noble Spirit; it declares
more than any thing else, the force and virtue of any man's mind. As Complaints,
continual Repinings, and violent Commotions, argue weakness and infirmity: so
silent Meekness, cheerful Submission, and quiet composed Patience when we
suffer wrongfully, speak an Heart endued with strength and fortitude. The World
indeed thinks those most powerful, who can do wrong and not be punished for it;
they that can irresistably overpower and oppress others, have gained the Titles
of Mighty, Illustrious, and Magnanimous: but in a right estimation of things,
these Titles belong to such Souls as can suffer all the evil that those men do,
with an humble constancy, and meek resignation of themselves to the Will of
God. These are the truly Great and Unconquerable Spirits; these ought most to
be admired and renowned, for they remain Victorious even over their insulting
Enemies: they triumph over those that lead them captive: Who find a stop put to
the course of their Conquests, when they meet with such Spirits as cannot be
subdued; nay, are in pain, and inwardly grieved, to see men suffer cheerfully,
more than they can lay upon them. Jacuit inter poenas, poenis suis fortior,
Epist. XXXIV.
etc. says S. Cyprian of Celerinus. He lay tormented, stronger than the
torments he endured; freer in prison than they that shut him in; higher, when
flat upon the ground, than they that trampled on him; more at liberty in
chains, than they that bound him; sublimer by far when condemned, than they
that sat on the Bench and judged him.

It was a sublime Spirit indeed that posssed these men's Breasts: for it raised
them by these means not only above the common rank of mankind, and above all
those who had astonished the World with their Greatness and Power; but far
above those gods whom the Nations worshipped. Most of which had left no Records
but of their Amors, their Pleasures and Volupteous Enjoyments; and none of
which had made themselves remarkable for patient Innocence, and pious Passing
by injuries, without any thought or desire of revenge. This was a thing proper
to the Christian Hero's, as the Martyrs and Confessors may be justly called,
who became hereby more than Men; and, as some of the Ancients ventured to say,
more than Angels: (...), by the Agonies and Conflicts they endured in their
bodies, excelling those Natures which have no bodies, and consequently no such
pains and miseries to contend withal, as those Souls (encumbered with Flesh)
overcame. Which proclaimed so loudly the Power of the Ineffable Father in them
(as Justin one of these Martyrs speaks), that they won the hearts of sober
Pagans to the Service of that God, who inspired his worshippers with such meek
and humble, but resolved and undaunted Spirits. Which is the second thing:

II. That Christianity was hereby marvellously promoted, and made a great
progress in the World, though this seemed to be the ready way to extinguish it.
Celsus himself, as great an enemy as he was to Christianity, was put to his
shifts, and forced to quit his former Principles, when he came to consider the
sufferings of the Martyrs. Though he was an Epicuraean in his other Writings,
Lib. 1. contra Cells.
as Origin tells us; yet when he set himself to dispute against Christian
Religion, he could not but confess that it was a Generous and Worthy thing, to
lay down their Lives in the Defense of it; and, that nothing was more base,
than for a Man to flinch from a true Opinion for fear of danger. For he goes on
to acknowledge, when he was in this good mood, that there is in Man (...),
something better than his earthy part; which is, says he, of kin to God. And
therefore all well-bred Souls desire to be near to their Original, and would
willingly know more of him. A worthy Confession, which the power of Truth
sometimes extorts from its greatest Enemies. And it was eminently verified in
this holy Martyr, of whom we may speak truly in his words, that being well bred
(in the School of Christ) (...), he desired by all means to be with his
Heavenly Kindred. Which he knew would not lessen the Family of Christ here on
earth, but rather increase it, and make it more numerous. For as skilful
Wrestlers, says S. Greg. Nyss. by yielding a little, and bowing their bodies
under those that contend with them, more easily overthrow them, and lay them
flat on the ground: So did this grrat Stephen bruise the mighty Adversary the
Devil, by falling to the earth himself. Then it was that the Apostles were
driven away from Jerusalem, and began to run throughout the World. This was the
occasion of the Publishing of the Word every where, to the ruin of the Devil's
Kingdom. And besides this, his wonderful Piety, and compassionate Kindness even
to his Persecutors, we may rationally think touched some of their Hearts, and
made them relent and turn to God. For at that very time when they were
murdering him, he like a Spiritual Priest (as the forenamed Father speaks)
whose blood was sprinkled against their will before God, interceded with great
charity for them, saying, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

When their brutish fury was a little over, and they reflected on what had
passed with some coolness, they could not sure but (some of them) be melted
with such ardent love, as well as astonished at such rare courage. For in
succeeding times, it is certain, Christian Patience had such effect upon many
hearts, that it gave a great stroke to their conversion unto Christ. Justin,
whom I mentioned before, professes, That the first thing that inclined him to
the faith of Christ, was the devout constancy which he beheld in those, who
suffered for it. And Tertullian avows in his Apology to all the Pagan world,
that Cicero, Seneca, Pyrrho, Callinicus, with all the rest of their great
Writers, who had exhorted men to endure pain and death, could never make so
many Disciples by their Eloquent words, as simple Christians had done by their
deeds. Illa ipsa obstinatio quam ex probatis, Magistra est. That very obstinate
Resolution, which you upbraid us withal, is a Mistress that instructs the
world. Who is there that beholds it, and is not moved to enquire into the
cause? And who is there that takes the pains to enquire into the cause, and
does not become a Proselyte to this Religion? and who is there that becomes a
Proselyte to it, and is not ready also to lose his life for it, that he may
obtain the favor of God with the expense of his blood?

And indeed it may be questioned whether the Apostles and their followers, did
more amaze the world by the wonder of their Miracles, or by their stupendous
patience under the most cruel Torments. This, I think, is certain, That the
Divine manner of their suffering, was a thing less controverted, than their
prodigious astonishing works. They, I mean, who disputed the last, could not
but admire and commend the first. They ascribed their Miracles sometime to the
power of evil spirits: But their meek and Lamblike Patience, their
tenderhearted Charity to those that hated them, their forgiving their Enemies,
their praying for their Persecutors, their blessing those that cursed them, and
obliging those that reviled and abused them; these things the Devil himself
knew not how to calumniate, no more than he knew how to counterfeit.

His Agents and Factors had not the heart to suffer any thing, but loved their
ease and their pleasure; though they appeared with a very strange power of
marvels, and signs, and lying wonders. As Jannes and Jambres, 2 Timothy 3.8
says St. Paul, withstood Moses, so did these also resist the Truth, which was
preached by the Apostles. That is, as those Egyptian Magicians vied a while
with Moses in strange works, and astonishing operations, whereby they sought to
impair his credit with the people: So did these new Juglers contend for some
time with the Apostles, and hoped to gain as great admiration, by imitating
their Miracles. But they were not more desirous all this time to show
themselves in mighty works, than they were craftily careful to shun all pain
and trouble for their cause. For it is expressly noted as a part of their
Character by the same St. Paul, Philip. III. 18. that they were Enemies to the
Cross of Christ, in which the Apostles gloried and rejoiced, II Cor. XII. 9, 10.

And here it will not be unfit to note these two things:

I. First, That what glory soever there was in Miracles (as they did at last so
outshine all Imposters, that they quite eclipsed them, no less than Moses did
the Magicians), it never appeared more illustrious, than when the Apostles
exercised perfect patience under the sorest distresses. Then the Divine virtue
in them broke out, and shone most brightly. When they were weak, then were they
strong, as St. Paul speaks in the place forenamed. When they were crushed by
the power of their Enemies, then they most amazed them, by discovering this
mighty power of Christ in such weak and earthen Vessels. What could be more
astonishing, than to see those who were fast manacled and fettered, unloose
their own and others bands, shake the foundations of Prisons, open without any
Key, or other Instrument, the Doors which were strongly locked and barred upon
them: Nay, unchain not only fast-bound bodies, but also miserably inthralled
Souls? Was it not a great wonder to see Jaylors come and crouch to those whom
they had newly scourged; desiring to be unbound and absolved by their chained
Captives, and yiedling themselves voluntary Prisoners to those, whom they had
violently kept in durance? Yet this we read in the Story of the blessed St.
Paul, Act. XVI, who then triumphed when he sat in the Stocks; then appeared
illustrious, when he was thrust into a Dungeon (for that is the meaning of the
inner Prison there mentioned); then was highly honored, insomuch that they
were ready to kiss his Stripes, when he was treated as a man of no account.

Here the Apostles and their Successors left all their opposers far behind
them, who fled from dangers, and timerously avoided all pain and trouble, or
endured them with a base and abject Spirit, which sunk when it wanted the
peoples breath to blow it up. They were far from taking pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses;
having no hopes to win any glory by this means, as St. Paul did: who
demonstrated his Apostleship in all patience, as well as in signs, and wonders,
and mighty deeds, II Cor. XII. 10.12.

But true Patience is such an admirable property, that the Devil has not the
power to attain so much as a shadow of it. It is too beautiful for his deformed
nature, and crooked disposition: being a composition of all those lovely
virtues and graces of the Holy Spirit, to which he is a perfect stranger. He
can sometime transform himself into an Angel of Light; but when do we find him
in the form of a truly resigned and contented sufferer? This is the unalienable
Prerogative of Christ; and the great Champions of his Faith, who with such a
Charity as St. Paul describes, I Cor. XIII. 4, 5, 6, 7. (every property of
which is the Character of Patience, as Tertullian has truly observed) endured
all the contempt, hatred and cruelty of the world; accounting it a great honor
and gain (no disparagement or damage at all) to be vile, and to lose all they
had, for the sake of their Dear Lord and Master Christ Jesus.

There did, it is true, arise in after Ages such sturdy Spirits (for instance
the Circumcellions, a part of the Donatists Faction) as would endure any thing
with a barbarous resolution, for the credit of those Dotages wherewith they
troubled the world: But they were wholly void of that ancient Spirit, which had
ever been in Christian sufferers. They had nothing of that Modestissima
Patientia (as the Author of the Book de Duplici Martyrio speaks) that most
Modest Patience wherewith Christian Religion inspired its followers. Illud
placidum, illud mansuetum, etc. That sweet, that soft, that gentle and tender,
that humbly sublime (as his Phrase is) and sublimely humble Spirit, was no
where to be found but among the Martyrs; who never spoke a worse word, when
they were condemned, than Deo gratias, thanks be to God, which was the common
form wherein they received their Sentence from the mouth of their Judges:
second thing I have to add,

II. That when some Impostors endeavored to imitate the resolution of the
Apostles and Martyrs, in exposing even their lives for the sake of their vain
imaginations, they were not able to imitate them at all in the Divine manner of
their sufferings. It is excellently said by St. Gregory Nazianzen, in his
Funeral Oration for his Father, Orat. XIX.
That this blessed Martyr St. Stephen offered to God a greater thing than
Death, viz. Long-suffering, meekness, and forgiving of his Enemies. He opposed,
as the other Gregory speaks, (...), etc. to their anger a patient spirit, to
their threats silence, to their hatred ardent love, to their malignity good
will, to their false accusations preaching of the Truth. If the false Apostles
and other pretenders, could have appeared in this handsome dress, their delusion
had been very dangerous: But here they halted, and knew not how to follow the
genuine Disciples of Christ Jesus.

Their hardiness, as St. Austin speaks of the surly Sect beforementioned (many
of which would kill themselves, and force others to kill them), was to be
admired, for it was very great: but their patience was not to be admired, for
it was none at all. They suffered much evil, that they might do the more. They
cared not what others did to them; but withal, they cared not what they did to
others.

This was a remarkable difference, which is all the time will give me leave to
mention, between the Christian Martyrs and their Counterfeits: The one were
meek, the other angry and furious. The one humble, the other haughty. The one
ready to do good to those by whom they suffered, the other desirous of revenge.
The one loved their Enemies, the other only contemned them. The one were
forward to excuse their folly, the other to aggravate and upbraid them with it.
The one smiled upon their persecutors and blessed them, the other looked as if
they would pour out Anathema's, and excommunicate them from all their
charitable thoughts. Nothing was more peaceable and quiet than the one, while
the other were tumultuous and violent. The Martyrs were submissive and easily
governed, but the other were boisterous and violent. It was proper to the
former to appear with a modest cheerfulness, and a humble confidence; but the
other seemed to be surly rather than well satisfied; bold, rather than well
assured.

And therefore no wonder that these Holy Souls so mightily prevailed over all
the powers of darkness, in what shape soever they appeared; and that they
overcame, as St. John writes, the Dragon, that old Serpent the Devil, by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, not loving their lives unto
the death. And no wonder also, they had such a lively hope in God, and could
look up so steadfastly to Jesus, as this blessed Martyr did, expecting that he
would receive their Spirits, with the kindest affection unto himself: For they
had attained to the Baptism wherewith he the King of glory was Baptized: A
Baptism (as St. Cyprian calls Martyrdom) In gratia majus, De Exhort. Martyrii.
in potestate sublimius, etc. In grace greater, in power more sublime, in
honor more precious. A Baptism in which the Angels baptize, in which God and
his Christ rejoice. A baptism after which no man sins; which consummates the
increase of our faith; and parting us from the world, straightway unites us to
God. In the baptism of water is received remission of sins; but in this of
blood, the Crown of Virtues.

And a very noble Crown sure it was, that such faithful followers might hope to
receive from the hands of so gracious a Master. For being so much advanced
above the world while they were in it, and having done him such eminent
Service; they could not doubt of his favor in lifting them up to live with
himself in exceeding great bliss, when his Enemies would not permit them to
live here any longer. If there were any thrones higher than other, in those
heavenly places, where St. Stephen saw our Savior, they might very well expect
to be promoted to them; to reign with him there in endless glory, and to be
honored here on earth with perpetual praises.

I. For from all this you cannot but see how sit and just it is, that we should
make most solemn commemorations of those, to whom the Christian world stands so
deeply obliged: and that the Church should give a kind of first fruits of them
unto this glorious Martyr, Orat. XXII.
whom St. Gregory Naz. calls (...), the first fruits of those who suffered
after Christ. This the ancient Christians did with so great affection, that
their Enemies calumniated it, and said: they worshipped them. No, says St.
Cyril in his VI Book against Julian (where he justifies this practice
excellently; and therefore give me leave to contract a long discourse he has
about it), There is no (...). Man-worship among Christians. For we have not
made a God of a Man, nor adore one that is not by nature God, when we worship
Christ himself. But acknowledging that man, who appeared to be the Word of God,
by whom all things were made, we go to him as God; for so he is. As for the
Martyrs, we neither call them Gods, nor give them any Divine Worship: Yet we
cannot but honor them; or rather we crown them (...), with the highest
honors: As those who have generously contended for the truth, and resolutely
preserved the purity of our Faith, and propounded themselves as certain Images
of that so much admired fortitude and gallantry to all the world. There can be
no absurdity in it; but rather it is necessary, that they who excelled in such
famous deeds, should be crowned with endless honor. Did not common reason
teach the ancient Greeks as much? For those that hazarded their lives at
Marathon for the safety of their Country, and those that stoutly opposed the
Army of Xerxes in aftertimes, the Athenians were wont, meeting together every
year at their Graves, to crown with their Encomiums and high commendations, as
men that dyed a glorious death. And your Plato says, That they who live
excellently and dye bravely, should be honored as more than men, and their
Tombs become venerable. It is no wonder then that we account the Holy Martyrs
worthy (...) of all respect and reverence, and that we honor their very
Monuments; making a perpetual never-fading commemoration of them, serve in
stead of a small recompense of such illustrious virtue. Thus He.

And it is very well known how, in those days, their names were solemnly
rehearsed in the Public Liturgies of the Church. Which custom, though it be
not still continued, yet their memory is ever precious; we honor them with due
praise; we make mention of their noble deeds with hearty thanksgivings to God
for them: Laudamus, glorificamus, admiramur, etc. (to speak in the words of St.
Austin, or whoever he was that wrote the Book de excidio urbis), we praise, we
glorify, we admire the holy Martyrs; we celebrate their days with a pious
solemnity; we venerate their worth, and as far as we can we imitate them, and
endeavor to do as they did. For by their zealous labors and sufferings,
Infidels were converted, lapsed Christians recovered, the doubtful confirmed,
the lukewarm inflamed, the fervor of the pious doubled; and all Posterity
excited both to adore the power of the Divine Grace in them, and also to hope
in God for the like Grace, to help in time of need. Those are the two reasons
St. Basil gives why those that loved the Martyrs were so unwearied in their
commemoration of them, In XL. Martyrs.
Because the honor which is given to our pious fellow servants, is a
demonstration of our affection to our common Master: And he that entertains
brave men with due respect, will not fail to imitate them on the like occasion.

II. And that I must needs say, is the greatest honor we can do them, to
propound them always to our selves as our patterns, and to follow them in their
constant love to God, to Religion, and to all Mankind, whatsoever we suffer for
it. True Christian Piety and Virtue, if we will allow the Martyrs to have had
any judgment, is the most valuable thing in the whole world; for they preferred
it before their lives. And therefore all Infidelity is a direct reproach to
those blessed Souls; representing them as a company of rash Zealots, that threw
away their lives for a fancy: And all vice and wickedness is a constant
manifest scorn and contempt of their Sanctity, as the foolish strictness of
those who understood not their liberty. If we will honor them, we must
heartily believe and obey that Gospel which they preached and asserted with
their blood. We must endeavor, as one under the name of St. Cyprian speaks, Vt
tota etiam vita Martyrium, hoc est testimonium Deo reddat; that our whole life
may be a Martyrdom; that is, a testimony unto God. Let it testify that we own
him, that we remember him, that we fear and reverence him, and that we love
him, and esteem his love and favor more than life it self. Let it witness how
much we love his will better than our own; and what a Grace we think it, that
he has taught us to deny ungodliness and wordly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in the world. Those lusts (called worldly, because they
are so common) are the Persecutors, which now we are to conflict withal, as the
Martyrs did with other Enemies. Here is now the trial of our Virtue; here is
the proof our Fidelity; these put us to the test, whether we will stick to our
Lord and Master, or yield to their desires. Si deest Tyrannus, si tortor, si
spoliator, etc. as St. Austin: speaks; though there be no Tyrant (blessed be
God in these peaceable days), no Tormentor, no Plunderer; yet evil desires are
never wanting, to afford daily occasion of Martyrdom. For it is a kind of death
( sine cruore Martyrium, in the Phrase of Sulpitius, a Martyrdom without blood:
oecultum Martyrium, in the language of St. Ambrose, a secret unseen Martyrdom)
to suppress all desires of sinful pleasures; to bear with the unkind censures
of the envious, and the reproaches of the malicious; to forbear revenge, when a
fair opportunity is offered; to stifle all motions of anger, and wrath, and
discontent, and hatred, and pride, vainglory and ambition, when there are
constant provocations, and strong temptations to them. These are the evil
affections we must manfully resist and crucify: and when they are dead, it
will not be hard for us, by the Grace of God, to dye too, if need be, for our
Savior's sake.

III. And now especially (which is the last thing) let every one of our lives
give a testimony to God, and do honor to his Religion; when we solemnly
commemore (as we do at this time of the year) both the wonderful great Love of
our Lord the Eternal Son of God, in becoming a man for us, and the love also
which the Martyrs, those rational whole burnt-offerings (as Greg. Naz. calls
them), Oraet. XVIII. in laud. Cypr.
those perfect Sacrifices, those acceptable Oblations, expressed to him, in
dying for his Service. Let us now carefully avoid all things contrary to our
profession; all riot and luxury, drunkenness and revelling, chambering and
wantonness, foolish (that is filthy, lascivious) talking and jesting: For these
things, says the Apostle, are not convenient (do not agree with Christianity):
but rather giving of thanks for God's inestimable benefits bestowed on us. V.
Ephesians. 4. Seccine exprimitur publicum gaudium per publicum dedecus, etc. (as
Tertullian speaks of the Pagan Festivities), Is this the way to express a
public joy by a public shame? Do those things become our solemn days, which
are unfit to be done at any time? Valde absurdum est (to use also the words of
St. Hierom) velle nimia saturitate honorare Martyrem, quem scimus Deo placuisse
jejuniis. It is extremely absurd to think to honor the Martyr by excess, who
we know pleased God by fastings: To celebrate his memory, merely with Plays,
and Sports and Merriment, who we know was acceptable to our Lord, by devout
Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings: To keep his day after the Heathenish
fashion, whose Martyrdom was the destruction of error (as the forenamed Greek
Father speaks), the persecution of Vice, the drowning of Sin, and the cleansing
of the world.

Not that it is unfit now to Feast and recreate our selves: for it is never
more seasonable, nor more safe, to feast and refresh our bodies, than when at
such solemnities we have feasted our Souls. We can never be better disposed,
nor better understand how to use God's blessings thankfully, soberly, and
charitably, than when he is fresh in our thoughts, and we have been
commemorating his mavelous bounty to us all. And therefore after the Psalms
and Hymns wherewith they; Ad Sanct. Coelum. C. 12.
anciently praised God for the Martyrs; there followed in many places, (...)
(as the great Constantine speaks) most sober feasts of Christian
good-fellowship; wherein the poor were fed; and all enmities buried. Nor did
they think it an unfit expression of their joy, to dance at the Sepulchers of
the Martyrs, Hom. in Barlaam.
(...), with Godly and Religious dances; as both St. Basil and his great Friend
so often mentioned, Carm. 63.
expressly tell us. And is it not possible for us to separate such innocent
things from that intemperance and wantonness, which at last robbed the Martyrs
of this part of their honor, and caused these customs to be abolished? Let us
but so devoutly attend upon the Divine Service on such days, as to carry away a
sense of God in our mind; and the business is done. That will sufficiently
secure us, and preserve us from danger. Whatsoever we do, we shall express the
Character which Clemens Alexandrinus gives of his wise Christian, who, he says,
Strom. L. VII.
is (...), at the same time both grave and merry in all things. Grave, because
he remembers God: and merry, because of the many good things which he enjoys by
the favor of God.

For all which his Holy Name be praised, as well as for his Spiritual blessings
in Christ Jesus; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor,
thanksgiving, love and faithful service both now and evermore.

Amen.
THE END.

