Imprimatur,

Apr. 14. 1692. JO. CANT.

AN ANSWER To a BOOK, Spread abroad by the Romish Priests, ENTITLED, THE
Touchstone OF THE Reformed Gospel.

WHEREIN The True DOCTRINE of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and many Texts of the HOLY
SCRIPTURE are faithfully Explained.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON, Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON: Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

TO THE READER.
I Must let the Reader understand, that the Book which I answer, first appeared
in the latter end of the Reign of King James I. under the Name of A Gagg for
the New Gospel. When it was immediately so exposed to the Scorn of all Men, by
Mr. R. Mountague, (afterward Bishop of Chichester, and at last of Norwich) that
for many Years it sculkt, and durst not show its head, till they imagined that
Baffle was forgot; and then out it came again, in the Reign of King Charles II.
as if it had never been seen before, with this New Title, The Touchstone of
the Reformed Gospel: And the better to disguise the Cheat, they begin the Book
with a New Chapter (or Section) and have quite left out that which was formerly
the Last Chapter; transposing also the order of some of the rest; making
Amendments, as they imagine, in several places, and adding several whole
Chapters. For there were but XLVII. Points, (one of which, as I said, they now
have wholly omitted) which they charged upon us, and undertook to confute in
the First Edition: But now they are improved to Two and Fifty; and set out as
formerly, with a long Preface, of the very same Stamp with the Book; full, that
is, of broad-fac'd Untruths.

Of which it may be expected, I should here give some account: But my Answer to
the Book it self is grown so much bigger than I designed, that it must be
omitted. For the great Reason which was urged by those who had power to
persuade me to undertake a New Answer to it, was; because Bishop Mountagu's was
so large, that few could purchase it. And therefore they thought it needful
there should be a more Compendious Confutation of the Book, though now it be
enlarged: especially since they found it in every Parish of this great City,
and in the very Prisons, where the Romish-Priests could meet with any
entertainment.

For which Reason, the same Persons have persuaded me, that what I composed, at
their desire, in the latter end of the late Reign, ought now to be published,
because the Priests of that Church, they assure me, are still very busy; and
make account this little Book, which I answer, will do their business. For they
put it into the hands of all those whom they hope to make their Proselites; and
desire them to read it, as an unanswerable Piece.

Let the Reader judge of that, when he has seriously considered what I have
said, to discover both the weakness and the dishonesty of its Author: Who
understood neither the Scriptures, nor Fathers he quotes; or has so perverted
them, that as it cost me more time, so I have been forced to use more Words
than I intended to employ, to represent his unskilful, or false dealing. But I
hope I shall neither tire the Reader, nor entertain him unprofitably; but
increase his Knowledge, by a right understanding of a considerable part of the
Bible, and of the Christian Doctrine. Especially if he will be pleased to turn
to the Texts of Scripture; which I have explained, but not quoted at length,
for fear of swelling this Answer into too great a Bulk.

Febr. 22. 1690.
AN ANSWER TO THE TOUCHSTONE OF The Reformed Gospel.
I. The Protestants, he says, affirm, That there is not in the Church One, and
that an Infallible Rule, for understanding the Holy Scriptures, and conserving
Unity in matters of Faith.
Answer.
THIS Proposition is drawn up deceitfully. For neither we maintain this, nor
they maintain the contrary universally, and without limitation. No Papist dare
say there is one, and that an Infallible Rule, for understanding all the Holy
Scripture. For then, why have we not an infallible Comment upon the whole
Bible? Why do their Doctors disagree in the interpretation of a thousand
places? He ought therefore to have said, that we hold, There is not in the
Church one, and that an infallible Rule for understanding as much as is
necessary to Salvation, etc. And then he belies us: For we believe the
Scripture it self gives us infallible Directions for the understanding of its
sense, in all things necessary: which if all would follow, there would be Unity
in matters of necessary belief. But God will not force men to follow those
Directions. They may err; and they may quarrel, when they have an infallible
Rule to prevent both.

The Scriptures therefore, whereby he proves what he charges upon us, must
needs be impertinent. But it is something strange, that in the very first of
them he should be so senseless, as to give himself the lie. For he pretends to
refute our errors, as his words are, by the express words of our own Bibles,
and immediately puts in a word of his own, instead of that in our Bibles; which
say quite another thing. For instead of, according to the proportion of faith,
(which are the words of our Translation XII. Romans 6.) He says, according to the
rule of faith. What is this, but that chopping and changing, which he falsely
charges us withal, in the end of his Preface? And it is a change not only of
the words of our Bible, (which he promised to quote expressly) but of the sense
of that Scripture; as it is expounded by the ancient Doctors: particularly St.
Chrysostom and his Followers; XII. Romans 6.
who by proportion understand the same with Measure in the foregoing v. 3. And
thus Menochius, one of their own Interpreters, and a Jesuit, [secundum
proportionem and mensuram Fidei], i. e. according to the measure of
Understanding and Wisdom which God has bestowed.

Now what can you expect from a man who falsifies in this manner, at the very
first dash? In the next Scripture, indeed, he finds the word Rule, (III.
Philip. 16. III. Phil. 16.
) and presently imagines it is a Rule for the Interpreting of Scripture
infallibly, etc. Whereas it is manifest to all who are not blinded with
Prejudice, that the Apostle supposes in the words before, v. 15. they were not
all of a mind in some things, for there were those among them that believed in
Christ, who thought the observation of Moses's Law to be necessary also to
Salvation; which was a dangerous error, to mix Legal and Evangelical things
together, as Theodoret here expounds it; but might possibly be cured, if
Christian Communion were not broken on either side, by reason of this
difference: but every one, both the perfect, who understood their Freedom from
the obligation of that Law, and the imperfect, who fancied it still lay upon
them, walked by the same rule, etc. that is, preserved Christian Communion one
with another, in the bond of Peace. For he speaks here, says Theodoret, of
concord; and the Rule is, the Evangelical Preaching or Doctrine: by which if we
walked, it would help to procure agreement in matters of Faith. But they of the
Church of Rome are so far from this, that they have broken all Communion, by
their Tyrannical impositions, and making other rules besides the Evangelical
Doctrine.

VI. Gal. 16.
The next place evidently speaks of the self-same thing; that there is no
necessity of being Circumcised and observing the Law; but if we be regenerated
by the Christian Faith, we are sure of the Divine Favor. In short, the Rule
here spoken of, is that of the New Creature, mentioned in the foregoing words,
v. 15.

But the 4th Text, 2 Cor. X. 15.
more fully shows this man to be a mere Trifler with words, without their
sense. For in 2 Cor. X. 15. There is not a Syllable of the Rule, or line of
Faith, as he dreams: but only of the bounds and limits of those Countries, in
which the Apostle had preached the Gospel, as Menochius himself interprets it.
This he might have learnt, if he had pleased, by the very next words, where the
Apostle says, he did not boast in another man's line, or rule, of things made
ready to his hand: i. e. those Countries and Provinces which had been
cultivated by other Apostles; glorying (as Menochius well glosses) in other
men's Labors, as if they had been his own. Now this is a pretty infallible Rule
of interpreting Scriptures, by the Regions in which the Apostles preached. An
excellent proof, that there is one Rule of interpreting Scripture, because St.
Paul had his own Rule, and others had their Rule: that is, not one and the
same; for he took care not to preach the Gospel in another man's line; i. e. in
those places where others had done it already. Are these Romish Emissaries in
their wits, when they write on this fashion? Either they have no understanding
of what they write; or hope their Writings will fall into the hands of Readers,
who understand nothing; else they would be ashamed of such wretched stuff.

1 Cor. XI. 16.
From hence he carries us back to the First Epistle unto the Corinthians, Chap.
XI. 16. which no doubt he would have put before the Second, could he have found
the Word Rule there; which was all he sought for, not regarding the Sense. But,
alas! he could find only the Word Custom in that place; which he hoped his
foolish Reader would be content to take for the same with Rule. And what is
this Rule (as he will needs have it) of which the Apostle is there speaking? Is
it about any matter of Faith? No, only about Women's praying barefaced, without
a covering over them; which the Apostle says was against the Custom of the
Church. So the same Menochius, whom alone I mention of later writers in their
Church; because he says, in his Preface, he has gathered his Commentaries out
of all the best Writers. And what Church does St. Paul here mean? only one
Church, or all that he had planted? He himself answers; We have no such custom,
nor other Churches of God neither; therefore you not only cross us, but the
whole Church, as Theophylact expounds the words: And to the same effect
Theodoret, he shows that these things did not seem so to him only, but to all
the Churches of God. Let the Romanists show us any such Authority as this, of
all the Churches, for any thing wherein we differ, and see whether we will be
contentious: Though I must tell them, that there are a vast many differences
between the Decrees of the Pastors of late times, though never so many hundreds;
and the Authority of those few Pastors (as this man calls them) which had the
prescription only of twenty or thirty years after Christ. For these few Pastors
were the Apostles themselves, infallible men; and other Apostolical persons,
who were guided by their directions.

And now he comes to tell us, by what other Titles this Rule of Faith is called
in Scripture; instead of telling us by what names, the Infallble Rule for
understanding Scripture is called: For the good man, when he had gone thus far,
had forgotten what he was about.

The Form of Doctrine mentioned Romans VI. 17. will do him no service; For it is,
Romans VI. 17.
says Theophylact, to live aright, and with an excellent Conversation. Or that
Form of Doctrine, says Menochius, which the Apostles had impressed upon the
Romans by their preaching: Unto which, is there opposed, not disunion and
disorder, etc. (as this Scribler pretends) but their serving sin. But he hoped
his credulous Readers would never trouble themselves to look into the places he
alleges; else he would not have had the impudence (if it were not mere
ignorance and Folly that betrayed him into it) to mention the next place of
Scripture: 2 Corinthians. X. 16. A thing made ready to hand.

2 Cor. X. 16.
He should have said, things made ready, if he would have stood to his promise,
of quoting express words of our Bible. For so it is both in our Translation,
and in the Original, and even in the Latin Translation it self. By which is
meant, as the same Menochius judiciously observes, Provinces or Countries
already cultivated by the preaching of the Apostles, and prepared thereby to
bring forth fruit. And so Theodoret, he reproves those, says he, who would not
preach the Gospel among unbelievers, etc. Let the Reader here again look about,
and see if he can spy a word about disunion, discord, disobedience, etc. in
this place; of which, this man says there always is mention in the very Text
which he alleges.

1 Timothy VI. 20.
In the next indeed there is mention of vain babbling; and opposition of Science,
falsely so called, 1 Timothy VI. 20. Where he bids Timothy keep that which is
committed unto his trust, (not the Churches trust, as this man again shamefully
corrupts both our Translation and the Text.) And what is this depositum or
trust, but the plain Doctrine of the Gospel? unto which he opposes the new
Phrases, and the new Doctrines, which the School of Simon Magus had brought in;
as Menochius interprets it out of Theodoret, whose words are these; They that
had their Original from Simon, were called Gnostics, as much as to say, men
endued with Knowledge: For those things in which the Holy Scriptures were
silent, they said God had revealed to them. This the Apostle calls a false
Knowledge; From whence I think it clearly follows, that Theodoret thought true
Christian Knowledge to be contained only in the Holy Scriptures: Which is the
Doctrine he says, (let the Romanists mind this) which all that have the
dignity of Priesthood, ought carefully to keep, and propose to themselves, as a
certain Rule, and by this square all that they say, all that they do. In short,
Tertullian (de Prescript. C. 25.) understands by the thing committed unto him,
that Doctrine which the Apostle delivered in this Epistle. To which Theodoret
adds, the grace of the Holy Ghost, which he received at his Ordination: That
is, his Office committed unto him, and all the Gifts of the Spirit bestowed on
him, to qualify him for this Office.

He bids us see more in several other places of Scripture, whose words he is
not pleased to recite; and therefore I shall pass them by: Because if there had
been any thing to be seen in them to his purpose, he would have set them forth
at large.

And there is as little to be seen in the Fathers whom he mentions, to confirm
his pretended Catholic Doctrine. And therefore he does no more than name
Irenaeus, and Tertullian, without alleging their words. But he adventures to
set down some words out of Vincentius Lirinensis, tho he does not tell us where
to find them. We need not go far indeed to seek for them, they being in the
beginning of his Book: where, he that is able to read it, may find a full
confutation of the Romish Pretenses. For having said, that the way to preserve
our Faith found, is first by the Authority of the Divine Law; Secondly, by the
Tradition of the Catholic Church: He raises this Objection (which shows how
much the first of these is above the other) Since the Rule of the Scripture is
perfect, and abundantly sufficient unto it self, for all purposes, (mark this,
which cuts the Throat of the Roman Cause) what need is there to join unto this,
the Authority of the Catholic Sense? To which he answers, that the Scriptures
being a great depth, are not understood by all in the same Sense: But Novatian
understands them one way, Photinus another; Sabellius, Donatus, Arrius, etc.
another. And therefore because of the windings and turnings of Error, the Line
of Prophetical and Apostolical Interpretation, should be directed according to
the Rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic Sense. Thus he ends his Book, as he
begins it. We have not recourse to Ecclesiastical Tradition, because the
Scripture is not sufficient to it self for all things; but because of various
Interpretations. But then he immediately subjoins, in the entrance of his Book,
what that Catholic Sense is ( Chap. III. viz. That which is believed every
where, and always, and by all. Which is a Rule by which we in this Church guide
our selves, and from which the Church of Rome has departed. For which I refer
the Reader to King James I. his Admonition, page 331. and the Letter written in
his Name to Cardinal Peron, where he expressly owns this Rule, p. 22. Edit.
Land. 1612.

And yet even this Rule has its limitations given it by Vincentius himself;
which this Writer should have been so honest as to have confessed. For in
conclusion (Cap. XXXIX.) he says, that the ancient Consent of Fathers is to be
studiously sought and followed, not in all the little Questions of the Divine
Law, or Scripture, (for alas! there is no Consent) but only or chiefly in the
Rule of Faith. That is, in those Questions (as he explains it (Cap. XLI) on
which the Foundations of the whole Catholic Faith rely. And further he
observes, That all Heresies cannot always be confuted this way, but only those
which are newly invented, as soon as they arise, before they have falsified the
Rules of the Ancient Faith, and before they have endeavored to corrupt the
Books of the Ancients, by the spreading of their poison. For inveterate
Heresies, and such as have spread themselves, must not be impugned this way,
but only by the Authority of Holy Scripture; or at leastwise, by the Universal
Councils of Catholic Priests, wherein they have been convinced and condemned.

I have been the longer in this, because he is a most worthy Witness, as this
man calls him; by whom we are willing to be tried. And so we are by Tertullian,
some of whose words he also at last adventures to allege, out of two Chapters
of his Book of Prescriptions against Heretics. But as he jumbles together
words far distant one from another; so he durst not take notice of a Chapter
between the XV. and the XIX. which would have explained the reason why
sometimes they disputed not with Heretics out of the Scripture; because that
Heresy of which he there treats, did not receive some Scripture; and if it did
receive some, Cap. XVII.
it did not receive them entire, but perverted them by additions and
detractions, as served its purpose, etc. In short, they would not acknowledge
these things, that is, the Scriptures, by which they should bave been
convinced. To what purpose then had it been to talk to them of the Scriptures?
No, let them believe (says he Cap. XXIII.) without the Scripture, that they
may believe against the Scripture; just as the present Romanists now do. From
whence it is, that he calls Heretics Lucifugae Scripturarum, men that fly from
the light of the Scriptures. L. d. Resur. Carn. C. XLVII.
Insomuch that he lays down this for a Rule in the same Book, (Cap. III.) Take
from Heretics those things which they have learnt from the Heathen, that they
may state their questions out of the Scripture alone; and they cannot stand.
Unto which Rule, if the Papists will yield, their Cause is gone. Let all
Doctrines be examined by the Scripture, and we desire no more: Unto which it is
manifest Tertullian appeals in other places so plainly, that there is no way to
evade it; particularly in his Book of the Flesh of Christ, Cap. VI. Let them
prove the Angels took Flesh from the Stars; if they cannot prove it, because it
is not written, then Christ's Flesh was not from thence, etc. And again in the
same Chapter, there is no evidence of this, because the Scripture does not say
it. And plainest of all in the next Chapter, I do not receive what thou
inferrest of thy own, without Scripture.

Let these men blush, if they can, who thus shamelesly pervert all things to a
wrong sense; as they do these two words, Rule, and Form of Faith; Which this
man has the Confidence to say, is the knowledge of Tradition. But how we
should know any Tradition to be true, which is not contained in the Scripture,
is the Question; Especially since there have been so many false Traditions, as
is confessed by all sides. Besides, it is so far from being true, that the Two
forenamed Fathers lay down Tradition for the Rule of Faith, or put it before
the Scripture, that Vincentius expressly puts the Divine Scripture in the first
place as our Guide; and then the Ecclesiastical sense, as a means, in some
cases, to find the sense of Scriptures. Cap. XIII.
And Tertullian as expressly in that very Book which he quotes, and in the
Chapter preceding, makes the Apostles Creed, the Rule of Faith: Which is all
contained in the Scripture, and needs the help of no Tradition but that, to
prove it.

But after all, I must ask, what is all this which he babbles in the conclusion
of this Chapter, to that which he pretends to prove in the beginning? That
there is one Infallible Rule for understanding the Holy Scripture? Which, if he
would have spoken sense, he should have shown is Tradition: But not a syllable
of this: He only endeavors to lose his Reader in a mist of Words. He knew, if
he understood any thing, there is no Traditive Interpretation of Scripture: For
if there be, Why is there such difference among their own Interpreters in the
Exposition of it? Nay, Why do they reject Ancient Interpretations of Scripture,
for which there is some Tradition? As Maldonate, a famous Jesuit does upon
XIX. Matt. 11. Where he confesses, XIX. Mat. 11.
that almost all expound those words, as if the sense of them was, that all men
cannot live single; because all have not the gift of continency: (And among
these almost all, he himself mentions, Origin, Greg. Nazianzene, St. Ambrose)
But I cannot persuade my self, says he, to follow this Interpretation. A most
remarkable instance of the partiality of these men, who would tie us to receive
the sense of One or Two, and miscall us if we will not be bound up by them; but
take the Liberty to themselves, of rejecting almost all, when it serves their
Interest.

II. The Protestants, he says, affirm. That in matters of Faith, we must not
rely upon the Judgment of the Church and Her Pastors, but only upon the Written
Word.
Answer.
OUR Doctrine is, That the Written Word is the only Rule of our Faith: And
therefore we cannot rely barely upon the Judgment of the Church, and of Her
Pastors (as Papists do) but must have what they deliver proved out of the Word
of God.

This is not contrary to our Bibles, but conformable to them: For they call us
to the law, and to the testimony, VIII. Isa. 20. And the Apostles themselves,
we find, nay, our Blessed Lord and Savior, did not desire to be believed,
unless they spoke according to the Scriptures, unto which they appealed, XXIV.
Luke 27.44. 1 Cor. XV. 3, 4. Whose express words, if we contradict, we are void
of all sense; but if we do not, it must be confessed he is void of all shame,
in charging us with affirming that which is contrary to the express words of
our own Bibles; particularly XXIII. XXIII. Mat. v. 2, 3.
Mat. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do.

Let the Reader here seriously consider, what a Front this Man has, who talks
of express words, when there is not an express Syllable in this place, either
of Church, or of Pastors, or of their Judgment, or of Faith. O! but he speaks
of Scribes and Pharisees, which is the same. But does this answer his
Pretensions of giving us express Words, and not words Tantamount? And if
Scribes and Pharisees be equivalent to Church and Pastors, it must be his own
Church and Pastors, (for they are not our Paterns) which is not much for their
Honor to be the Successors of the Scribes and Pharisees. Whose Authority sure,
was not such, that our Savior here required his Disciples to rely upon it, in
matters of Faith. For if they had, they must have rejected their Lord and
Master, and denied him to be the Christ. Into this Ditch those blind Guides at
last plunged those who blindly followed them. Therefore all that our Savior
here meant, is, (as wiser Men than this, and Jesuits too, acknowledge) that they
should obey them, being Teachers, in all things not repugnant to the Law, and
the Divine Commandments. So the before-named Menochius upon the place, to say
nothing of the Ancients, who would have thrust out of the Church such a Man as
this, who maintains that Christ taught his Disciples, to obey those Pastors,
not only in some principal Matters, but in all whatsoever, without Distinction
or Limitation. Which I may truly say, is a Doctrine of the Devil.

Nor is there any thing express in the next place, and therefore he only makes
his Inference from it; X. Luke 16.
which should have been this, if he had known how to discourse; That the
Apostles were the Legates and Interpreters of Christ, as Christ was of God.
Therefore he that despised the Apostles, despised Christ; as he that despised
Christ, despised God. But, what then? Truly nothing to this Man's purpose. For
the Church and the Pastors now, have not the Authority of Apostles. If they
had, they would not desire, no more than the Apostles did, to be believed
without proof from the Scriptures.

Upon the next place, XVI. Matthew. 19. XVI. Mat. 19.
which is as impertinent, he passes a very wise Note; That our Savior does not
say, whosoever, but whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc. Whereby he shuts
out St. Peter, and his Successors (to whom they commonly apply this Text) from
all Jurisdiction over Persons, and confine it unto things only. Let his Church
reward him for this Service; for we are not at all concerned in his Note; but
rather note how far he is still from bringing express Texts to his purpose;
here being as little express mention of Faith, and of Pastors, and of the
Church, and their Judgment, as in the former places. And if you will believe
Menochius (a better Interpreter than this) our Savior speaks of the Supreme
Power of remitting or retaining Sins, of excommunicating and absolving; not a
word that he could see, of untying Knots and Difficulties in Matters of Faith.

He bids us see more places in XVII. Deuteronomy. 8. etc. But I would advise the
Reader not to trouble himself to turn to them. For the first, and two last, are
nothing to his purpose; and the second is directly against him. For the Prophet
does not bid them go and ask the Priests their Opinion, but ask them what the
Law of God was, in the case propounded.

And there is as little to be found in the Fathers, the last of which is no
Father. For he lived in the time of our King Henry 1. and was a stickler for
his Master, Pope Urban; who in this Man's Logic, is become the Church and her
Pastors, upon whose Judgment we must rely. In good time: they will be Judges in
their own Cause, and then the business is done.

III. His next Charge is, that we affirm, The Scriptures are easy to be
understood, and that therefore none ought to be restrained from reading of them.
Answer.
THIS is neither our Position, nor is the contrary theirs. For no Protestant
will say, That all Scriptures are easy to be understood. Nor will any Papist
say, They are all hard to be understood. Some are easy; as much, that is, as is
necessary to our Salvation. Which is the express affirmation of St. Chrysostom
in many places, (...). All things necessary are manifest, Hom. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.

Now let us see what there is expressly contrary to this in our Bible. First,
St. Peter does not say, 2 Pet. III. 16.
That the Scriptures are hard to be understood; but that there are some things
therein hard to be understood; and those things in St. Paul's Epistles. The
rest of the Scripture, notwithstanding this, may be easy; and the hard places,
he does not say are wrested by every body, but only by such as are unlearned
and unstable. Let us but learn, and be steadfastly fixed in the Principles of
Religion, and practice accordingly; then we shall not be in that danger, but
may read the Revelation it self without hazarding our Salvation. Nothing will
be in danger of Destruction by reading the Scriptures humbly and piously (as
they themselves teach us to do) but only Men's Vices, and the Roman Church;
which it is easy to see, in that hard Book The Revelation, is doomed in due
time unto Destruction. For without understanding every particular Passage, one
may easily see in general, with a little help, that Rome is there intended; and
not Pagan Rome, but Christian; which is degenerated into an Idolatrous and
Tyrannical State.

The following Text is like to this, which does not say, VIII. Acts 30.
That the Eunuch could understand nothing in the Scriptures (for then he would
not have troubled himself to read them) but that he could not understand that
place of the Prophet, which he was reading when Philip met with him. Which was
obscure to him only in part, not in the whole, before he was converted to
Christianity; but is not so to us, who enjoy the glorious Light of the Gospel.
In which there are some things we cannot understand; neither with a Guide, nor
without: But other things, as I said, are so plain, that we cannot mistake
them, unless we do it wilfully. Against which there in no help, tho we had the
most Infallible Guide that ever was.

The next place speaks not one word of the difficulty of the Scriptures, but
rather supposes them to be easy enough, even in those matters of which Christ
was speaking, XXIV. Luke 25.
(XXIV. Luke 25.) if the Apostles had not been then fools, and slow of heart.
Which Names they had not deserved, if the Scriptures had been so hard, that it
was not their fault they could not understand them before he expounded them.
The things they read there, were not in themselves difficult, but the Disciples
did not at that time sufficiently attend to what was written. For if they could
not (as this Man affirms) have understood them, I do not see how they could be
justly blamed by our Savior; much less so severely reprehended. Besides, it is
to be observed, both of this place and the former, that they speak of the
Prophetical Writings, in which there are greater Obscurities than in other
Parts of Scriptures; and yet even these, if they had not been Fools, might have
been understood without putting our Savior to the pains of expounding them.

One would be tempted to think the Man distracted, when he set down the next
place, V. Rev. 1.
V. Revel. 1. to prove his Position. For the sealed Book, which the Angel said
no man could read, was not the Bible, but the ensuing Prophecy; which our
Savior presently after opened, and has in some measure let us into its
meaning. I beseech the Reader to mark what a dolt this Man is, who makes the
Book of Scripture to be shut with so many Seals, that even in St. John 's, and
the Apostles times, none could be found either in Heaven or Earth, able to open
the same, or look therein. For what is the consequence of this, if it be true,
but that the Bible must be quite thrown away, and neither Priest, nor Bishop,
nor Pope, nor Council look therein? For they cannot be more able than St. John,
and the rest of the Apostles. O that all People would see by what sottish
Guides they are led on in darkness!

If he had thought that heap of Texts which follow, would have done him any
Service, we should have had their words no doubt, and not merely the Chapter
and Verse; but they are set down only for show, and the V. Revelat. is reckoned
again, to make up the Tale. The Holy Fathers are mentioned for no other end,
their words being so full and so numerous on our side, that it would fill a
bigger Book than this, if I should muster them up. Particularly, those very
Fathers whom he quotes, and in the very Books he mentions, are of our minds.
But it is sufficient for the ordinary Reader to observe, that at this Man's
rate of proving, no Body must read the Scriptures, no, not such as St. Ambrose,
if the Scriptures be such a Sea as he speaks of, a depth of Prophetical
Riddles. But the truth is, St. Ambrose does not say what this Man makes him
speak; Not that it is a depth, etc. but that it has in it profound Senses, and
a depth of Prophetical Riddles. It has so, and it has also plain places in
it, which are not so deep, but they may be fathomed by ordinary, even by
shallow Capacities. St. Austin says nothing contrary to this; but must be
supposed to know enough, tho much less than what he did not know. And so must
the rest of the Fathers be understood, or else the Scripture is good for
nothing, if even such Men as Dionysius, Gregory the Great, etc. could
understand little or nothing of it. If what they say be to his purpose, it is
concerning themselves, and not others; and therefore they ought to have
refrained from reading the Scripture, as well as the Vulgar. What then will
become of the Common People, if their greatest Guides could know so little of
the Mind of God?

His last Author he took upon trust, or else is an egregious Falsifier. For
there is nothing to that purpose in the Chapter he quotes, L. VII. cap. 20.
There are words to that effect in the 25th Chapter, where Irenaeus writing
against those who denied the Revelation of St. John to be a Divine Book, says,
Tho I do not understand it, yet I suppose there is a deeper sense in the Words;
and not measuring those things, nor judging of them by my reasonings, but
giving more to Faith, I esteem them to be higher than to be comprehended by me;
but I do not reject that which I cannot understand, but admire it the more,
because I am not able to understand it. Now, with what face could this Man
apply that to the whole Scripture, which is spoken only of the Book of the
Revelation? Let the Reader judge by this, what honestly he is to expect in other
Quotations.

IV. He makes us say next, That Apostolical Traditions, and Ancient Customs of
the Church (not found in the Written Word) are not to be received, nor do
oblige us.
Answer.
THIS is a downright Calumny; for we have ever owned, that Apostolical
Traditions, if we knew where to find them in any place but the Bible, are to be
received and followed, if delivered by them as of necessary Obligation. But we
do likewise say, That we know no such Traditions; for those which have been
called so, have been rejected even by the Roman Church it self; or having
received them, they have laid them aside again. In short, they sometimes
pretend to Traditions, where there are none; and where there are, they have
forsaken them; and in several Cases they pervert them, and turn them into
another thing. As they have done, for instance, with Purgatory-fire; which the
Ancients thought would be at the Day of Judgment, and not till then; but they
have kindled already, and would have us believe Souls are now frying therein.

As for ancient Customs, sometimes called also Traditions, they have not been
always alike, nor in all places one and the same. But the Church of England
declares, That whosoever through his private judgment willingly and purposely
does openly break the Traditions (i. e Customs) and Ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by
common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, etc. They are the very words of
our XXXIVth. Article of Religion. Which teaches withal, That every particular
or National Church, has Authority to change and abolish such Ceremonies or
Rites as were ordained by man's Authority, etc.

And now what has this Babbler to allege out of our Bible against this?
Truly, Nothing at all, but only the word Tradition, which he is very ignorant,
if he do not know that we own. For we affirm, That the Doctrines of the Holy
Scripture are Traditions: And of such, the Apostle speaks in 2 Thessalonians. II. 15. 2 Thessalonians II. 15.
which is thus expounded by Theodoret, Keep the Rule of Doctrine, the words
delivered to you by us; which we both Preached when we were present with you,
and wrote when we were absent. So that the things which were spoken, were not
different from those which were written, but the very same. He spoke when he
was with them, what he wrote when he was gone from them. Whence it is clear
indeed, That the Traditions delivered by word of mouth, were of equal Authority
with what was written, (as this man gravely says), for they were the same. And
it is also certain, as he adds, That before the New Testament was written, all
was delivered by word of mouth. But what then? Therefore Apostolical Traditions
are to be received. Yes; because what was delivered by word of mouth, was the
very same which afterward was written. But here is no shadow of proof, that we
are bound to receive Traditions which were never written.

Nor is there more in the next place, 2 Thessalonians. III. 6.
2 Thessalonians. III. 6. but much less; for there is not a syllable of word of mouth;
and Theodoret expressly says, That by Tradition here the Apostle means not that
(...) by Words, but that (...), by Works; that is, he bids them follow his
Example, (as St. Chrysostom also understands it) which he proves to be the
meaning by what follows; where he says the Apostle teaches what he had
delivered by his Example; For your selves know how ye ought to follow us; for
we behaved not our selves disorderly among you, etc. v. 7, 8. Wherefore (as I
may better say than this man does) in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, let
all good men withdraw ftom them, who thus falsely pretend to Tradition; when
they dare not stand to the Interpretations of the best of the Ancient Fathers;
and walk disorderly, by breaking their own Rule, which requires them to
interpret the Scriptures according to their unanimous consent. Counc. of Trent,
Sess. IV.

From hence he runs back (like a distracted man who catches at any thing at
random) to the First Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. XI. 2.
which one would have expected in the Front. But perhaps he was sensible it had
nothing in it, but the bare word Tradition, to his purpose; and therefore
brought it in after he hoped the Reader's mind would be possessed with a false
Notion; which would make any thing go down with him. And the truth is, there is
nothing here for his turn. For if the Traditions mentioned by the Apostle, be
about matters of Order and Decency, (as one would think by what follows,
concerning Praying with the head covered or uncovered) they themselves
acknowledge such Traditions do not oblige in all places and times. If the
Apostle means other Traditions about matters of Doctrine, how does it appear
that now they are not written? As that about the Holy Communion is, which the
Apostle speaks of in the latter part of that Chapter, v. 23, etc. In which the
Church of Rome has very fairly followed Tradition (I mean shamefully forsaken
it), by leaving off the ministration of the Cup to the people, which according
to what the Apostle says, he received from the Lord, and delivered unto them,
ought to be given as much as the Bread.

Consider then, I beseech you, with what Conscience or Sense this man could
say, That we reject all Traditions, when we receive this, for instance, more
fully than themselves. And how he abuses St. Paul, in making him as
schismatically uncharitable as himself, by representing him as disowning us for
his Brethren (which St. Austin durst not do by the Donatists) who are so far
from forgetting him in all things, that we remember him and his words better
than they do; and keep to his Traditions (as I said) just as he has delivered
them unto us. Poor man! he thinks he has made a fine speech for St. Paul, and
made him say to us, quite contrary to that he says to the Corinthians. Whereas,
(according to Theodoret, another kind of Interpreter than he) the Apostle
dispraises the Corinthians, as much as he makes him dispraise us: For these
words, says he, do not contain true Praise; but he speaks ironically, and in
truth reprehends them, as not having kept the Orders which he had set them. As
if he had said, You have full well observed the Traditions which I left with
you; when there is such unbecoming behavior among you, in the time of Divine
Service. Which no body need be told, unless he be such an Idiot as this, is not
a form of Commendation, but of Reproof.

Lastly, He comes from express Scripture, to none at all; for he betakes
himself to Reasoning, and asks a very doughty question; If nothing be to be
believed, but only what is left us written, wherein should the Church have
exercised her self from Adam to Moses, the space of Two thousand six hundred
years?

Let me ask him another, How does he prove nothing was written all this time?
Whence had Moses all that he writes of the Times before him, if not out of
Ancient Records? It is more likely there were Writings before his, than that
there were not. However, our saying, There were, can no more be confuted, than
his saying, There were not, can be proved.

If the Reader be not satisfied with this, he bids him see more Scriptures, and
names near a dozen places; in never a one of which there is any mention, much
less express mention of Tradition: And in the last, the Decrees which the
Apostles are said to deliver, are expressly written also in that very Chapter
and place which he quotes, XV. Acts 28. For it is said, v. 23. They wrote
letters after this manner, etc. and v. 30. They gathered the multitude, and
delivered the EPISTLE. What an unlucky man is this, to confute himself after
this fashion?

As for his Fathers, he durst not quote the words of any, but two only; St.
Basil and St. Chrysostom. The first of which are out of a counterfeit part of
a book of St. Basil De Spiritu Sancto, c. 27.
; into which somebody has foisted a discourse about Tradition, which as it
belongs not at all to his subject, so it contradicts his sense in another
place: Particularly in his book of Confession of Faith; where he says, It is a
manifest infidelity and arrogance, either to reject what is written, or to add
any thing that is not written. But admit those words which this man quotes, to
be St. Basil's, they are manifestly false, by the confession of the Roman
Church, in that sense wherein he takes them: For if those things which he
reckons up as Apostolieal Traditions, have equal force with those things which
are written in the Scripture, how comes the Church of Rome to lay aside several
of them? For instance; the words of Invocation at the ostension of the Bread of
the Eucharist, and the Cup of Blessing; the Consecration of him that is
baptized; standing in Prayer on the first day of the week, and all the time
between Easter and Whitsontide? And how comes it about that others of them are
left at liberty, such as Praying toward the East, and the Threefold Immersion
in Baptism? Both which they themselves acknowledge to be indifferent; and yet
are mentioned by this false St. Basil (so I cannot but esteem him that wrote
this) among the things which are of equal force unto Godliness with those
delivered in Scripture. Nay, he proceeds so far as to say in the words
following, that if we should reject such unwritten Traditions, we should give a
deadly wound to the Gospel; or rather contract it into a bare Name. A saying so
senseless, or rather impious, that if these men had but a grain of common
honesty, they could not thus endeavor to impose upon the world, by such
spurious stuff, as I would willingly think they have wit enough to see this is.

As for St. Chrysostom, it is manifest he speaks of the Traditions of the
whole Church. And unless they be confirmed by Scripture, he contradicts himself
in saying, Traditions not written are worthy of belief. For upon Psalm. 95. he
says expressly, If any thing unwritten be spoken, the (...), etc.
understanding of the auditors halts and wavers, sometimes inclining, sometimes
haesitating; sometimes turning away from it as a frivolous saying, and again
receiving it as probable; but when the (...), etc. Page 924. 30. Edit. Sav.
written Testimony of the Divine voice comes forth, it confirms and
establishes, both the words of the speaker, and the minds of the hearers.

V. Next he makes us affirm: That a man by his own understanding, or private
spirit, may rightly judge and interpret Scripture.
Answer.
THere is no such crude saying as this among us: But that which we affirm is,
That a man may, in the faithful use of such means as God has appointed,
rightly understand the Holy Scripture, so far as is necessary for his
Salvation. Who should understand or judge for him, but his own understanding,
we can no more understand, than who should see for him but his own eyes, if he
have any, and be not blind.

And what is there to be found in our Bibles expressly against this? The first
place is far from express; for the gift of Prophesying does not to every one
expressly signify the interpreting of Scripture; 1 Cor. XII. 8.
it having manifestly another signification in some places, viz. Inditing
Hymns. Besides, if this place were pertinent, forbidding all to interpret
Scripture, but only such as have the Gift of Prophecy; their Church must not
meddle with that work, for they have not that Gift, no more than those that
follow, discerning of Spirits, diverse kinds of Tongues, etc.

His second place is as impertinent, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
for it does not speak at all of interpreting the Scripture, but of the
Prophetical Scripture it self. Which was not of private interpretation; that
is, the proper invention of them that Prophesied; for the Prophetical Oracles
were given forth, not at the will and pleasure of man, but the Holy Prophets
when they laid open secret things, or foretold future, were acted by the Spirit
of God, and spoke those things which were suggested by Him. These are the words
of Menochius; which are sufficient to show the gross stupidity of this man's
Glosses; who babbles here about a company of men, and those very holy, who are
to do he knows not what; which private and profane men cannot do. As if all
private men were profane, and all companies of men were holy. The Lord help
them, who follow such Guides as these.

The third place, 1 John IV. 1.
if it say any thing to this purpose, is expressly against him. For it is a
direction to every Christian, not to be of too hasty belief. But to try the
Spirits, that is, Doctrines which pretended to be from the Spirit of God. Now
how should Christians try or examine them, but by using their own
understandings, to discern between pretended inspirations and true. If they
must let others judge for them, they cross the Apostle's Doctrine; for they do
not try, but trust. To tell us, that their Church is infallible, and therefore
ought to judge for us; is a pretense that must also be tried, above all things
else; and in which every man's particular judgment must be satisfied, or else
he cannot with reason believe it. And to believe it without reason, is to be a
fool: Nor does the Apostle leave those to whom he writes, without a plain rule
whereby to judge of Spirits; but lays down these two in the following words: 1.
If any man denied Jesus Christ to come in the flesh, he was a deceiver, v. 2.
And, 2ly, if any man rejected the Apostles, and would not hear them, he was not
to be received himself, v. 6. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error. This makes it plain, the Apostle did not leave them then,
without means of judging aright, as he has not left us now, who are to try all
things by the Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles.

What this man means by the spirit of the whole Church, which cannot be tried
by particular men, is past my understanding; and I believe he did not
understand it himself, but used it as a big phrase, to amuse poor people
withal. Who may easily understand that St. John speaks of particular persons,
or of the Doctrines vented by certain persons, who pretended to be inspired;
whom every particular Christian was bound to examine and try by this mark,
whether they contradicted what the Apostles taught; which was sufficient, if
they did, to discover them to be Impostors.

His Fathers he only names, and therefore they signify nothing to common
Readers; for whose sake I write this confutation of his folly. Which makes him
bring in Luther, as saying the same that he does; that is, giving him the lie;
who accuses Protestants of affirming that, which the very chief of them
(according to him) denies. But whether Luther say as he makes him, or in what
sense, I am not able to affirm, for I cannot find the words.

VI. They affirm, That St. Peter's Faith has failed.
Answer.
THere needs no more to make him confess the truth of this, than only to ask
him, whether St. Peter did not deny his Master; which our Savior supposes in
the words immediately following those he quotes, Luke XXII. 32.
Luke 22.32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. He was therefore
out of the way for a time; which is all we mean when any of us say, Peter's
Faith has failed. Not finally, but for that present. He fell, though he
recovered himself. So that this is an Equivocal Proposition, Peter's Faith has
failed, which is true; and so is the contrary, his faith has not failed. Both
are true in different respects: It did fail, and that notoriously, when he
denied his Master over and over: But it was more steadfast afterward, even by
his fall; which our Savior foreseeing, prayed particularly for him, that he
might not utterly miscarry. Which is no Prerogative, as this man fancies it,
that Christ prayed principally for him, but rather tended to his disparagement,
as denoting him to be weaker than the rest; and indeed so much the weaker,
because in his own opinion he was the strongest.

The second Text Mat. 16.18. XVI. Mat. 18.
as he manages it, is expressly to another purpose. For he lays the weight of
his Discourse (it appears by the consequence he draws) upon those words, the
gates of hell shall not prevail against: What? the Text says expressly against
it, that is the Church, not against thee, that is, Peter. They that are wiser,
argue from the foregoing words, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, etc. If
this be to his purpose, the faith of St. Peter must be the Rock upon which the
Church is built (which they do not love to hear of) and if it be the Rock, was
thrown down, and the gates of hell prevailed against it, at the time before
mentioned, when he denied his Master. Which made a great man Dr. Jacks. L. 3.
c. 7.
say, Doubtless that Religion which has no better ground of Infallibility than
Peter 's faith, which was not secured from a threefold denial of Christ, was
first planted by the spirit of error and Antichrist.

The third Text we had before in the second Chapter, where I have answered his
question, XXIII. Matthew. 2, 3
how Christ might command the people and his Disciples also, to do whatsoever
they that sat in Moses his chair bad them, and yet those Doctors might err. But
to prove that Peter's faith could not fail, he asserts the Scribes and
Pharisees, when they sat in Moses his Chair, could not err; which is to
justify their putting our Lord Christ to death. Whither will not the folly of
such men as this, carry them? who mind not when they overthrow the Christian
Religion, to establish their own conceits. Nay, this man does not mind, when he
ruins even his own conceits. For if the truth of Christian Religion has been
no better preserved by the Romanists in the Chair of St. Peter, than the truth
of the Jewish Religion was preserved by the Scribes and Pharisees in the Chair
of Moses, the Roman Church is certainly become Antichristian.

He has picked up a fourth Text, which has nothing in it of Peter, XI. Joh.
49, 51.
no more than the former, but only tells us, that the Jewish High Priest
Prophesied, XI. Joh. 49, 51. Yet this is an express Text, forsooth, to prove
that Peter's faith could not fail. It is not easy to have patience enough, so
much as to read such wretched, nay wicked stuff, as this. Which still proves,
if it be to the purpose, that the High Priest speaking forth of his Chair,
could not but determine truly; and, consequently, gave a right judgment when he
condemned Christ to be put to death. For he sat in the same Chair, when he
passed sentence on Christ, and when he thus Prophesied; both were in a Council,
which was assembled on purpose to resolve what to do with him, XI. Joh. 47.
XXVI. Mat. 57.

Here the good man is in great want of Fathers, and contents himself, because
he cannot help it, with Leo; whose words he does not rightly translate. For Leo
does not say, If the Head were invincible, but if the Mind of the Chief were
not conquered. Worsted it was for the present, though not quite overcome. For
he lost the confession of Faith with his mouth, says Theophylact, though he
kept the Faith (or the seeds of faith, as he speaks) in his heart. But unless a
man do confess with his mouth, as well as believe in his heart, he cannot be
saved. Both are necessary, unless St. Paul cross St. Peter, X. Romans 9, 10.

But what is all this to the purpose? suppose St. Peter's faith did not fail,
what then? Must we conclude from thence, the Pope's faith cannot fail? Stay
there. One of his own Communion, a great man Launoy Part V. Epist. ad Jac.
Bevillaq.
indeed, has shown, that there being four Interpretations of this place (XXII.
Luke 32.) the greatest number of Ecclesiastical Writers (he reckons up XLIV.
and among the rest this Pope Leo) expound it of the Faith of Peter alone, which
Christ prayed might not be lost in that time of Temptation which was a coming.
But next to this, they are most numerous who think Christ prayed for the
Universal Church, that it may never fail in the faith. In which number is
Thomas Aquinas, one of their Saints; who expressly proves from this place, that
the Universal Church cannot err, because he who was always heard by God, said
to Peter, upon whose confession the Church is founded, I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. Where it is evident, he did not think our Lord prayed
for Peter separately from the rest of the Church; but for the whole Church,
whose person Peter sustained, as St. Austin is wont to speak: Or, as Gregory
the Great's words are, of which Church he was the first Member.

But this belongs to the next Head; where he says we affirm,

VII. That the Church can err, and has erred.
WHich is true in one sense, though not true in another. For if by Church be
meant the Universal Church; and by erring be meant, departing from the Truth in
matters of necessary belief; then we say the Church (though it may mistake in
matters of lesser moment, yet) cannot thus err, because Christ will always have
a Church upon Earth; which cannot be, without the belief of all things
necessary to make it a Church. But if by Church, be meant the Church of Rome,
or any other particular Church, we say it may err, even in matters of necessary
belief (as St. Paul plainly supposes in his caution he gives the Romans, XI.
Romans 20, 21.) and thus many Churches have erred, and fallen from Christianity.

Now what has he to say out of our Bibles, which is expressly contrary to this?

First, he alleges a place out of the Prophet Isaiah, LIX. Isa. 21.
LIX. Chap. 21. where there is not one express word either of the Church, or of
its not erring; but only of what God will do for those who turn from
transgression in Jacob, (as the words before going are) upon whom (we may
suppose) he Covenants and engages to bestow his Spirit, etc. Now before the
Church of Rome (whom this man here intends) can apply this Text to themselves,
they must prove that they are the people who turn from transgression in Jacob;
which will be a very difficult task. And when that is done, this Text may prove
to be a command rather than a promise, that it is their duty, having God's
Spirit, who by faith and charity is diffused in the whole Church, that is, in
the hearts of the faithful (as Menochius here glosses); and his words, that is,
says he, his precepts, they should keep them faithfully, and not suffer them
to depart out of their own mouth, and their own heart (as he goes on) or out of
the mouth and heart of their Children. It is a most wretched inference (for
after all his brags of express Texts, he is fain to come to that at last) which
this man draws from hence, therefore the Church cannot err. He might (with
respect to the sense) have said more colourably, therefore the Church cannot
sin. The folly of which every one sees; men being too negligent on their part,
when God has done his.

The next place is less to the purpose; for it is a peculiar promise (as
appears by the whole context) unto the Apostles of Christ. XIV. Joh. 16.
In whose hearts he promises the Holy Ghost shall inhabit, as Menochius
expounds it, performing the Office of a Comforter, and of an Instructor. And
this for ever; not for so short a time as Christ stayed on Earth with them, but
all the days of their life. But let us extend this promise to their Successors,
they can never prove the Apostles have no Successor, but only at Rome. To which
this promise can by no inferences be confined, but must extend to the whole
Church of Christ, with whom he is still present by his Spirit, to preserve them
in the way of truth, if they will be led by it.

In the nex place, XVIII. Mat. 17. he is at his C ll^ctions again, instead of
express words; for his Talent is mere bragging, XVIII. Matthew. 17.
without any performance. But how does he gather from this Text, that the
Church cannot err? Why, that he leaves to his Reader, telling him only, it may
be clearly gathered; but he, for his part did not know how, though it may be
others do. Let them try, who have a mind. I can find nothing in this place,
which concerns matters of faith; and he himself seems to be sensible of it,
when he says the Church cannot err in her Censure. But what Church is this?
and what Censure? It belongs to every Church to censure him that wrongs his
Brother, after he has been admonished of the injury he has done, first in
private, and then before two or three Witnesses. This being done, where should
he be proceeded against, but in the Church where he lives? Unto which if he
will not submit, but continue obstinately his injurious actions, he is justly
to be looked upon as no Christian. No man that is unprejudiced, can read this
Text, with all its circumstances, and not take this to be the sense of the
words. And then, if they prove the Church cannot err, we shall have as many
infallible Tribunals, as there are Churches.

XXXV. Is. 8.
That which follows, XXXV. Isa. 8. speaks of not erring, but says nothing of the
Church; unless he make the Church to be fools, who the Prophet says shall not
err. How much wiser would this man have been, if he had but consulted some such
Author as Menochius; Who, observing that the Prophet says, v. 4. God will
come, he will, and save you, i. e. God incarnate, as he expounds it; by the way
(here mentioned v. 8.) understands that narrow way which he taught, leading by
holiness of manners and life to the holy place, i. e. to Heaven. And upon the
last words, fools shall not err therein; gives us this good Protestant Gloss;
for even the simple and unskilful might easily learn those things which are
necessary to salvation. The way is plain in these matters, and none need err
about them, unless they will. And I wish it was not a wilful error in this man,
to say that we affirm, the whole Church, and all holy men that ever have been
therein, for these 1000 years, have erred. There cannot be a greater calumny;
for we believe the whole Church cannot stray from the way that leads to Heaven;
though some particular Churches may.

There is nothing contrary to this in V. Ephesians. 27. V. Ephesians. 27.
Which if it prove any thing of this nature, proves the Church is so perfectly
pure, that it has no sin in it. But I doubt we must stay for this happiness,
till the other world, when the Church will indeed be made a Glorious Church. I
have noted, as he desires, the words, without spot, wrinkle, or any blemish;
and yet I think it possible that some Church or other has taught horrible
Blasphemies and Abominations. For St. John in the Revelation tells us, it is
not only possible, but certain, XVII. Rev. 3, 4. And there are, we think very
evident proofs, that the present Roman Church, of which he is so fond (and
always has in his mind, when he speaks of the Church) is described by St. John
in that place.

We have seen so little in these Texts, that I cannot find in my heart to look
into the rest; several of which we have had already, as XXII. Luke 32. XXIII.
Mat. 3. XVII. Deuteronomy. 8. XV. Act. 28. And he seems to have intended nothing, but
merely to make a show of more strength than he had; which made him thrust in
among the rest, V. Ephesians. 27. which I have just now examined. His Fathers also
are only Names, without their sense, and so let them pass. Next, he says, we
affirm,

VII. That the Church has been hidden, and invisible.
HE still goes on, in his ambiguous way of stating our Doctrine. There are no
Papists but confess that the most excellent parts, even of the visible Church
in this world, are invisible or hidden. For none but God, who searches the
heart, can know certainly, who are truly good men, and not hypocrites. And
there are no Protestants who maintain, that they who profess the Christian
Religion (who are the Church) have ever been hidden and invisible. But this
they say, that this Church has not been always visible, free from corruption;
and that it has not been at all times alike visible; but sometimes more,
sometimes less conspicuous. Now these men by the Visibility of the Church, mean
such an illustrious state, as by its glory, splendour and pomp all men may be
led to it. This is it, and no more, which Protestants deny. And Mr.
Chillingworth has long ago told them, that the most rigid Protestants do not
deny the Visibility of the Church absolutely, but only this degree of it. For
the Church has not always had open visible Assemblies; and so might be said to
have been hidden and invisible, when they met under ground and in obscure
places.

There is nothing in the Texts of Scripture which he quotes, contrary to this,
much less expressly contrary.

V. Mat. 14, 15.
The first of them, V. Mat. 14, 15. is manifestly a precept to the Apostles,
setting forth the duty incumbent upon them by their Office, that they might
gather a Church to Christ. So the before-named Menochius interprets those
words, Ye are the light of the world, who ought to illuminate the world by your
Doctrine and Example. You ought not to be hid; no more than a City can be,
which is seated on a hill: Men do not light a candle (much less God) to put it
under a Bushel. Our Savior, says he, exhorts his Disciples by this
similitude, that they should diligently shine, both in their words, and in
their example; and not be sparing of their pains, or of themselves, by
withdrawing themselves from the work, but communicate their light liberally to
their neighbors. But after the world was thus illuminated by their Doctrine
(which they could not always neither Preach in public, but some times only in
private houses) Christians were forced to meet together, in some places and
times, very secretly; not being able always to hold such public visible
Assemblies, that all men beheld them, and what they did.

The second we had before to prove the Church cannot err; XVIII. Matthew. 17.
and now it is served up again to prove it was never hid; and this not
expressly, but by a consequence, and that a very senseless one. For whoever said
or thought, that no body can see a Church, when it is not visible to every
body? It Is members no doubt see it, even when it is invisible to others. Any
man may be seen by his Friends, when he lies hid from his Enemies. And a Church
is visible in that place where it is planted, and by them that belong to it,
though strangers perhaps take no notice of it, especially those that are at a
distance from it.

In the third place, we have mention of the Gospel, but not a word of the
Church; 2 Cor. IV. 3, 4.
which he puts in (such is his honesty) contrary to the express words of ours,
and of all Bibles. Nor does the Apostle deny the Gospel to be hid, but expressly
supposes it (2 Cor. IV. 3.) that it is hid from those whose minds are blinded
by the god of this world; who shut their eyes against the clearest light, even
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. One
would think this man besides himself, when he bids us behold the censure of St.
Paul upon those who affirm the Gospel can be hid; when his words are a plain
supposition, that it was hid to some people; Not indeed because they could not
(for it was visible enough in it self) but because they would not see it. And I
wish there be not too many of this sort in that Church for which this Writer
stickles.

The last place is an illustrious Prophecy of the setting up the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ. II. Isa. 2.
Which was very visible in its beginning, when the Holy Ghost came down upon
the Apostles, and by them the Law, that is, the Christian Doctrine, went out of
Sion, and the word of the Lord, that is the Gospel, from Jerusalem. But did not
always continue so, when grievous Persecutions arose for the Gospel's sake, and
drove the visible Professors of the Religion into obscure places. And I hope he
will allow those Scriptures to be as true as these, which say there shall be an
Apostasy from the Faith, and that the Church shall fly into the Wilderness, 2 Thessalonians. II. 3. XII. Revel. 6. which is not consistent with such a visibility of
the Church as this man dreams of.

As for the Prophecies which mention a Kingdom of Christ, particularly VII.
Dan. 14. VII. Dan. 14.
they point at a state of his Church, which is not yet come; and when it does
come, will be with a vengeance to the Roman Church. Whose present state will be
utterly overturned, to make way for the setting up of Christ's Universal and
Everlasting Kingdom. Which is to be erected when the Mystery of God is
finished, X. Revel. 7. and XI. 15. and that cannot be, till Babylon, that is
Rome, be thrown down, XVIII. Revel. 2. and XIX. 1, 2, 6. And we are so far from
thinking this Kingdom will be invisible, that we believe it will be the most
illustrious appearance that ever was, of Christian Truth, Righteousness,
Charity and Peace among men.

He bids us, as his manner is, see more in other places. But if they had more
in them than these, we should have had them at length. And his Fathers also;
some light touches of which he gives us, just as he found them in a cluster
altogether, word for word, in a Book called, The Rule of Faith, and the Marks
of the Church; which was answered above LXXX. years ago, by Dr. J. White, who
observes, Way to the True Church. Sect. 23.
that when Origin (whom upon other occasions they call an Heretic) says, The
Church is full of VVitnesses from the East to the West; he speaks not of the
outward state or appearance thereof, but of the truth professed therein. Which
though clear to the World, when he said so; yet does not prove it shall be
always so; for a Cloud of Apostasy might and did afterward obscure it.

St. Chrysostom does not mean that the Church cannot be at all darkened; but
not so, as to be extinguished, no more than the Sun can be put out. For he
could not be so senseless, as not to know, that it had been for a time eclipsed.

When St. Austin says, They are blind, who see not so great a mountain. He
speaks against the Donatists, who confined the Church to themselves, as the
Papists now do. And he justly calls them blind, who could not see the Church
all Africa over, it being at that time as plain as a Mountain, or a lighted
Candle, as our Church now is at this day. But his words do not imply, that the
Church shall always be so manifest, and never hid; Mountains themselves being
sometimes hidden in a mist. For he says in other places, The Church shall
sometimes be obscured, and the Cloud of Offenses may shadow it, Epist. 48. It
shall not appear by reason of the unmeasurable Rage of Ungodly Persecutors,
Epist. 80. It is like the Moon, and may be hid, in XIX. Psalm. Yea, so
obscured, that the Members of it may not know one another; as he speaks in his
sixth Book of Baptism, against the Donatists, C. 4.

What St. Cyprian says, is not contrary to this.

V. We maintain, he says, That the Church was not always to remain Catholic,
or Universal; and that the Church of Rome is not such a Church.
Answer.
WE maintain the quite contrary to the first Part of his Proposition; asserting
that the Church is always to remain Catholic, or Universal; not confined to
one Country as the Jewish was, but spread all the World over. The second Part
indeed we do maintain, That the Church of Rome is not such a Church; that is
(which is the thing they contend for) is not the Universal Church, but has its
limits, and was anciently bounded within certain Regions, beyond which it did
not extend.

The first Scripture he alleges against us, is a promise to Christ, which we
believe has been fulfilled in part, II. Psalm 8.
and will be more and more fulfilled before the end of the World; but has
nothing in it peculiar to the Church of Rome; which at the best, is but a piece
of his Inheritance.

The second speaks expressly, not of the Universality of Christ's Kingdom, I.
Luke 33.
but of its Perpetuity; and is as much verified in other Churches, as in the
Roman; which is so far from being the only Universal Church, that in this
sense, it is not Universal at all.

The third is directly against him. For it shows that the Faith of the Gospel
(unto which he now skips, I. Colos. 3, etc.
when he should have said the Church, of which he was speaking) was planted at
Coloss, (which was never under the Jurisdiction of Rome) and there fructified
and grew, as much as in other places.

Nor will the next place help him; where St. Paul does not call the Faith of
the whole World, the Faith of the Romans, but only says, I. Romans 8.
their faith was spoken of throughout the whole world, I. Romans 8. that is, the
fame of it was spread all the world over; as Menochius, one of their own,
honestly interprets it. For what was done at Rome, could not be concealed from
the rest of the World, says Theodoret, because the Roman Emperors having their
Palace there, from whence all sort of Officers were sent, and whither all
People resorted who had any boon to beg; by whom it was signified every where,
That the City of Rome had received the Faith of Christ. Thus he; which shows
the Gospel was spread in the World, before it came to the City of Rome; it not
coming from thence, but from Jerusalem; and not coming thither till many other
places had received it, who were not beholden to Rome for it. With what face
then, against such a clear sense of the words, could this Man say that St. Paul
in express terms, calls, The Faith of the whole World, the Faith of the Romans,
or the Church of Rome? When the words rather import, that he calls the Faith of
the Romans, the Faith received in the whole World. But he says neither the
one, nor the other; tho if he had, it would prove nothing, but that there was
one and the same Faith then at Rome, which was in other places. The truly
Catholic Faith, from whence Churches were named Catholic, (not from their
extending all the World over, which was impossible) and Jerusalem, and other
Churches were as much so, as Rome it self, and were so before there was a
Church at Rome. In short, a Catholic Church signified no more than an Orthodox
Church.

It is a matter of serious Lamentation, that men should go about to pervert
such plain and easy Truths, as this; and should heap up Scriptures to prove
mere Nonsense: For all the Scriptures which he bids us further look into, he
says, are not to be understood, That the whole World should be Catholic at
one and the same time. Let the Reader consider what it is, for the whole World
to be Catholic, as he has explained it, but for the whole World to be the
whole World.

And he will have an hard task, to make Sense of the next words; that the whole
World being converted unto Christ at sundry times, it shall comprehend a
greater part of the World, than any Sect of Heretics shall ever do. I thought
the whole World would certainly comprehended the whole World, and not only the
greater part of the World. It is impossible, by such Jargon as this, to
understand the true Sense of being Catholic or Universal. Which the Church is,
either with respect to Faith; because there is the same Faith in all parts of
the true Church; or with respect to Place, because no Country is excluded from
it, which will receive this Faith; or with respect to Time, because it
continues throughout all Ages, tho not always in such an extent, as to be
actually in all Nations. For those Countries which were once Parts of the
Catholic Church, are not so now: And if those that are now so, should lose the
Faith, still the Church might be Catholic, if others embraced it, as
Bellarmine L. IV. De Eccles^ c. 7.
himself confesses, If only one Province should retain the true Faith, the
Church might truly and properly be called Catholic; as long as it might be
clearly shown, that it was one and the same with that, which had been at
sometime, or in diverse throughout the World.

According to his former Method, he carries us now to the Fathers, and m^k^s
them guilty of as much Nonsense as himself. For he makes St. Cyprian confess,
that part is the whole. But the comfort is, he either did not understand, or
else misrepresents St. Cyprian, who speaks not there of the Authority, but of
the Example of the Roman Church, and especially of Cornelius their Bishop; who
remaining constant in time of Trial, made all his Brethren every where rejoice;
particularly Cyprian himself, who in that very place styles Cornelius and
others, his Fellow-Priests or Bishops. For what Priest, says he, can choose but
rejoice in the praises of his Fellow-Priests, as if they were his own? It is
not to be expressed with what Joy and Exultation he heard of his Fortitude,
whereby he made himself a Captain and Leader of Confession unto the Brethren,
etc. And then follows, While there is among you (i. e. Cornelius and his
Brethren) one Mind, Epist. LX. Edit. Oxon.
and one Voice, all the Roman Church has confessed, that is, their Faith which
the Apostle praised, was be come famous, as it follows in the next words; and
while they were thus Unanimous, thus Valiant, they gave great Examples of
Unanimity and Fortitude to the rest of their Brethren. This is the meaning of
Ecclesia omnis Romana confessa est: They were all steadfast in their Faith;
which this poor man construes, as if St. Cyprian owned Rome for the only
Catholic Church. By translating those words thus, The whole Church is
confessed to be the Roman Church. Which he vehemently denied, ordaining in a
Council at Carthage according to Ancient Canons, That every man's Cause should
be heard there where the Crime was committed; and commanded those to return
home, who had appealed to Rome; which he shows was most just and reasonable,
unless the Authority of the Bishops in Africa, seem less than the Authority of
other Bishops, to a few desperate and profligate persons, who had already been
judged and condemned by them. Epist. LIX.
This he writes in another Epistle to the same Cornelius; to which I could add
a great deal more, if this were not sufficient to make such Writers as this
blush, if they have any shame left, who make the whole Church to be the Roman
Church.

St. Austin (of whom I must say something, lest they pretend we cannot answer
what is allegded out of him) and the whole Church of Africa, in a Council of
Two hundred Bishops, made the same Opposition to the pretended Authority of the
Roman Church; and therefore could mean no such thing, as this man would have,
in his Book of the Unity of the Church. Where he says, in the 3d Chapter, That
he would not have the Holy Church to be shown him out of Humane Teachings, but
out of the Divine Oracles; and if the Holy Scriptures have designed it in
Africa alone, etc. whatsoever other Writings may say, the Donatists he
acknowledges will carry the Cause, and none be the Church but they. But he
proceeds to show the Doctrine of the Scriptures is quite otherwise, designing
the Church to be spread throughout the World. And then he goes on to say, (
Chap. 4.) that whosoever they be who believe in Jesus Christ the Head, but yet
do so dissent (those are his words, which this man recites imperfectly and
treacherously) from his Body, which is the Church, that their Communion is not
with the whole Body, wheresoever it is diffused, but is found in some part
separated; it is manifest they are not in the Catholic Church. Now this speaks
no more of the Roman Church, than of any other part of the Catholic Church;
and, in truth, makes them like the Donatists; since their Communion is not with
the whole Body (which they absolutely refuse to admit to their Communion) but
they are found in a part of it separated by themselves.

The rest which he quotes out of Saint Austin, I assure the Reader, is as much
besides the matter, and therefore I will not trouble him with it. And I can
find no such saying of St. Hierom, in his Apology against Ruffinus. But this I
find ( L 3.) the Roman Faith praised by the voice of the Apostle (viz. I. Romans
8.) admits not such deceit and delusion into it, etc. Where it is to be noted,
That the Roman Faith commended by the Apostle, is one thing; and the Roman
Church, another. And the Faith which they had in the Apostles time, was
certainly most pure: but who shall secure us, it is so now? If we had the voice
of an Angel from Heaven to tell us so, we should not believe it; because it is
not what they then believed, nor what they believed in St. Hierom's time, but
much altered in many Points. And suppose St. Hierom had told us, It is all one
to say the Roman Faith, and the Catholic Faith; it must be meant of the then
Roman Faith: and it is no more than might have been said in the praise of any
other Church which held the true Faith. No, nor more than is said; for thus
Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, writes in an Epistle Council of Ephesians.
p. 107.
to Leo Bishop of Rome, We also have obtained the name of New Rome, and being
built upon one and the same foundation of Faith, the Prophets and Apostles,
(mark that, he does not say on the Roman Church) wh^re Christ our Savior and
God is the Cornerstone, are in the matter of faith, nothing behind the elder
Romans. For in the Church of God, there is none to be reckoned or numbered
before the rest. (...).
Wherefore let St. Paul glory and rejoice in us also, etc. ( i. e. if he were
alive, Nicephorus doubted not Saint Paul would have commended the Faith of that
City, as he had theirs at Old Rome) for we as well as they, following his
Doctrine and Institutions, wherein we are rooted, are confirmed in the
Confession of our Faith, wherein we stand and rejoice, etc.

X. The Reformers, he says, hold That the Church's Unity is not necessary in
all points of Faith.
Answer.
THIS Writer has so accustomed himself to Fraud and Deceit, that we can scarce
hope to have any truth from him. For no Reformers hold any thing of this
nature, if by Points of Faith be meant what the Apostle means in the Text he
quotes; where he says, IV. Ephesians. 5.
there is One Faith. Which we believe is necessary to make One Church: every
part of which, blessed be God, at this very day, is baptized into that one and
the same Faith (and no other) contained in the common Creed of Christians,
called the Apostles Creed. Therefore so far Church Unity is still preserved.
But it is not necessary there should be unity in all Opinions that are not
contrary to this Faith. Nor should the Differences, which may be among
Christians, about such matters, break Unity of Communion. And if they do, those
Churches which are thus broken and divided, by not having external communion
one with another, may notwithstanding still remain, both of them, Members of
the same one Catholic Church, because they still retain the same one Catholic
Faith. Thus the Asian and Roman Churches in Pope Victor's time, and the African
and Roman in Stephen's time, differed in external Communion, and yet were still
parts of one and the same Church of Christ.

This is more than I need have said in answer to him, but I was willing to say
something useful to the Reader; who cannot but see that he produces Texts of
Scripture to contradict his own Fancies, not our Opinions. We believe as the
Apostle teaches us, IV. Ephesians. 5.
IV. Ephesians. 5. and from thence conclude, That Unity is necessary in all points
of Faith, truly so called; that is, all things necessary to be believed. Nor do
we differ in any such things; and therefore have the Unity requisite to one
Church.

II. Jam. 10.
The second Text II. Jam. 10. speaks not a word of Faith, therefore, instead of
express words, this man tells us, by a likeness of reason, it is the same in
Faith, that it is in Sin: he who denies one Article, denies all. We deny none;
but only their New Articles, which are no part of the Ancient Apostolic
Catholic Faith.

IV. Act. 32.
The next, IV. Acts 32. speaks of the Brotherly affection and unanimity that was
among the First Christians. And that which follows, 1 Cor. I. 10.
1 Cor. I. 10. does not tell us what was, but what ought to be in the Church:
For among those Corinthians there were very great Divisions, as appears by that
very Chapter. Therefore he is still beside the Book; and very childishly
objects to us the Sects that are among us, as an Argument we are not the true
Believers the Apostle speaks of: when the Apostolical Churches were not free
from them while the Apostles lived: nor is the Church of Rome, or any other
Church, at such unity, but there are various Sects among them.

He has little to do, who will trouble himself, upon the account of such a
Scribler as this, to consider that heap of Texts which he has hudled together,
without any order, or any regard to his Point he was to prove. What St. Austin
also, and the rest of his Fathers say about Unity, does not at all concern us:
who preserve that Unity which they have broken, by preserving that One Faith,
from which they of the Church of Rome have departed. For it will not suffice
them to believe as the Apostles did; but they have another Faith of their own
devising. This is that wherein we cannot unite with them. And all the Unity
they brag of, is, in truth, no better than that of the Jews, Heretics and
Pagans: who, as St. Austin De Verbis Domini Sermon. VI.
speaks, maintain an Unity against Unity. In this they combine together to
oppose that one Faith the Apostles delivered, as insufficient to Salvation.
Which is a conspiracy in Error, rather than unity in the Truth.

XI. That St. Peter was not ordained by Christ the first Head, or Chief among
the Apostles; and that among the Twelve, none was greater, or lesser than other.
Answer.
WE are now come to the great Point, which is the support of the whole Roman
Cause. But he neither knows our Opinion about it, nor their own: or else dares
not own what it is. We believe Peter was the first Apostle, and that he was a
Chief, though not the chief Apostle. For there were others who were eminent
(that is, Chiefs) upon some account or other, as well as himself, 2 Cor. XI. 5.
XII 2. But what he means by a first Head or Chief, neither we, nor those of his
own Religion know, unless there were secondary Heads and Chiefs among the
Apostles, one over another. This is strange language, which none understands.
Peter was first in Order, Place, Precedence, but not in Power, Authority, and
Jurisdiction; in these, none was greater or lesser than another. Which is not
contrary to any Text in the Bible, but most agreeable thereunto.

For so the Text says, X. Matthew. 2. X. Matthew. 2.
and we needed not his Observation to inform us, That all the Evangelists, when
they mention the Apostles which Christ chose, put Peter first: Which does not
signify he was the worthiest of them all; that no way appears; but that he and
Andrew his Brother were first called, we expressly read, and possibly he might
be the Elder of the Two. But if it did denote his Dignity and Worthiness, it
does not prove his Authority over the rest, (as he is pleased to improve this
Observation, in the Conclusion of his Note upon this place) for tho he had some
eminent qualities in him which perhaps were not in others, they gave him no
Superiority in Power; but in that, every one of them was his equal. What
follows upon this Text, is so frivolous and childish a reasoning, it ought to
be despised.

Next he betakes himself to the Rock, XVI. Matthew. 18.
mentioned XVI. Matthew. 18. which they have been told over and over again, (but
they harden their hearts against it), is not spoken of Peter, as this man most
impudently, contrary to his own Bible, makes the words sound, but of the Faith
which Peter confessed; as the general current of Ecclesiastical Writers expound
it. But if we should by the Rock understand Peter, it insinuates no Supremacy,
much less clearly insinuates it. For none but such a man as this, to whom the
Bell clinks just as he thinks, would have thought of that, at the reading of
the word Rock; but rather of Firmness, Stability, or Solidity; which the Word
plainly enough imports, but nothing of Authority. Our Blessed Lord himself is
not called a Rock or Stone, with respect to his being the Sovereign and
Absolute Pastor of his Church, but because of the firm Foundation he gives to
our Hope in God. Next to those who by Rock understand, as I said, the Faith
which Peter confessed, the greatest number of Ancient Expositors understand
thereby Christ himself. Unto whom this man has the face to say, these words do
not agree, because he speaks of the time to come, I will build; as if Christ
were not always, what he ever was, being the same to day, yesterday, and for
ever. It is a burning shame, as we speak, that such men as this should take
upon them to be instructors, and to write Books, which have nothing in them but
trifling observations, and false allegations For after all, should we grant
Peter to be the Rock, it will not exclude the rest of the Apostles from being
so, as much as he; for the Church was built upon them all, on the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, II. Ephesians. 20. And accordingly St. John had
represented to him, not One alone, but Twelve Foundations of the Wall of the
New Jerusalem, i. e. the Church of Christ; which had in them the names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lord, XXI. Rev. 14.

The next place XVIII. Matthew. 18. XVIII. Matthew. 18.
is so plain a promise to all the Apostles, that it is impudence to restrain it
to St. Peter, or to conclude from thence any Preroragative to him above the
rest; especially if it be observed, that when this Promise was fulfilled, they
were all equally partakers of it; when our Savior breathed on them, and said
unto them, (mark that, he breathed on them all, and said not to Peter alone,
but them, i. e. the Apostles), Receive ye the Holy Ghost; Whose soever sins ye
retain, XX. John 22, 23.
they are retained, etc. XX. John 22, 23.

Now he falls a Reasoning again (for, alas express Texts fail him) but it
amounts to no more than this, That our Savior did not call him Simon in the
forementioned place, but gave him another name. I am sorry for his ignorance,
that he did not know, or for his dishonesty, that he would not consider; this
was become his name as much as Simon, before this time; for at their first
meeting, Christ gave him this name of Peter, I. John 43.

1 Cor. III. 4.22.
From that which follows, 1 Cor. III. 4, 22. there is a wonderful fetch. For as
before he argues Peter's Supremacy from his being named first, so now he argues
it from his being named last; whereas in his first observation it was an
argument of Judas being the unworthiest, because named last. When he thinks
again, perhaps he will prove his Supremacy, because in II. Gal. 9. he is named
neither first nor last, but in the middle, between James and John. And
according to his wise note, That the Apostle ascends from those he would have
esteemed lesser, to those whom he would have esteemed greater, we must look
upon Apollos as greater than Paul, because he ascends here from Paul to him,
and so to Peter. Whither will not the Folly of these men lead them?

XXII. Luke 31, 32.
His Reasoning (for we are not to expect Express Texts, whatsoever he vainly
b^ags) upon the next place, XXII. Luke. 31, 32. is still more strange. For who
ever heard that to strengthen or confirm his brethren, can be nothing but to
practice and exercise his greatness over them? This Greatness of his runs so in
their heads, that they fancy they see it every where, even where there is not a
shadow of it: For none before him sure ever thought, that to strengthen others,
is an exercise of Greatness, but rather of Goodness: It implies indeed, that he
who establishes another, is in that greater than he; but it does not follow he
is so in any thing else; nor does it imply any thing of Jurisdiction over
others: Tho if it did, they are not the Apostles who are here intended to be
strengthened (for they were as strong as himself) but the Converted Jews, who
might be in the same danger wherein he had been. And therefore our Lord bids
him learn to pity their weakness, by the remembrance of his own; and to
establish them in that Faith which he had denied.

From hence he leads us back to v. 26. XXII. Luke 26.
of the same Chapter; and from the vain ambition which was in the Apostles, who
strove which of them should be accounted the greatest, (v. 24.) concludes, That
really some of them was greater than others, viz. in Power and Authority over
the rest; or else he concludes nothing: But this vanity our Savior checks; and
therefore it is far from truth, that one of them was accounted greater than
another, even by Christ himself. No such matter; he only shows them, that if in
any quality one excelled another, it should make him more humble and
subservient to his Brethren, not swell him, and make him perk up above them.
And thus Theophylact understands it not of any Superiority in Power, but in
other things. For the occasion of their contention, Who should be esteemed
greatest; he thinks was this; That there being an enquiry among them which of
them should be so wicked as to betray their Master, ( v. 23.) and one perhaps
saying, Thou art likely to be the man; and another, No, it will be thy self;
They proceed from hence to say, I am better than you, and I am greater; and
such like things: Which our Savior expresses in the following words, The Kings
of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, etc. but it shall not be so among
you, etc Which is a pretty plain denial of any Authority they were to have one
over another. And indeed, when he comes to speak of Power in the following
Verses, v. 29, 30. he says indifferently to them all, I appoint unto you a
kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, etc. It was divided among them;
and none had an higher Throne given him than his fellows.

We are at last come to the main prop of this Cause, which is as weak as all
the rest, XXI. Joh. 15, 16, 17.
XXI. John 15, 16, 17. For who told him that the word used the second time by
our Savior, which we Translate Feed (...).
, must interpret the other two, which are used at first and last? Why may not
they, being used twice, rather interpret that, which is used but once? And how
does he prove, that it signifies to govern and rule, rather than feed? Or if it
do signify Government, what is this to his governing the Apostles, who had as
much Power to Feed and Rule both Lambs and Sheep as himself? And thus the
Ancients understood this to be spoken unto all the Apostles, as well as unto
him; and even his own Companions, who have more Wit, and less Impudence, by
Lambs and Sheep, understand, not the Apostles, but weaker and stronger
Christians. I will mention only Menochius, whose words are these, in his Notes
upon this place; By Lambs, he signifies, as the very name sh^ws, those that
were newly converted to the Faith, and were weaker in the Faith; whose number
was very great, when the Apostles began to preach, and therefore needed greater
care; for which cause Christ repeats this twice, FEED MY LAMBS, and but once,
FEED MY SHEEP, who are those that are stronger in the Faith, and therefore
needed less pains to preserve them. This is spoken like a man of sound sense:
And with the like Judgment and Integrity he interprets the rest directly
contrary to the silly Reasonings of this Trifler; who says, Peter loved Christ
more than the rest, and therefore it follows necessarily, he received more
Power to feed, than all the rest did. This is more than Peter himself durst
say, That he loved Christ more than the rest. No, says Menochius, He dares not
answer, that he loved more than others, but only that he loved; for his fall
had made him more modest. He had preferred himself to others, when he said
XXVI. Matthew. 33. Though all be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended; and after this he fell more foully than others; therefore now he
speaks of himself what he thinks to be true, but he does not prefer himself
before others, whose hearts he did not see.

Now I thought we had done; when like a man out of his wits, or rather
possessed, he flies to the Devil to help him at a dead lift; and thus argues
(for express Scriptures have failed him long ago), from XII. XII Matt. 24.
Matthew. 24. Satan therefore has a kingdom, whereof he is chief. And what then?
One would think he should have concluded, Therefore so has our Lord Christ.
But he was afraid of that; for he saw it would not do his business, but ours
rather, who own Christ for the only Head of the Church. He tells us therefore
(as if he had found it in the Text), There is but one visible Head, even in
Hell, as there is one visible Head of the Church Triumphant in Heaven; and
therefore why not a visible Head on earth? He might as well have asked, Why not
one Universal M^narch over all the Earth? Which is as reasonable from these
Principles, as one visible Head of the Church. But to answer his question
plainly; There is no one visible Head here, because Christ the Head of the
Church, both Triumphant and Militant, has ordered it otherwise. Having placed,
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. XII. 28. in the Church, first Apostles; not Peter, or
any one alone over the rest, but the Apopostles were left by Christ, the
Supreme Power in the Church.

Here I cannot but conclude, as that great and good Man Dr. Jackson L. III Chap
^
does, upon such an occasion: Reader, Consult with thy own heart, and give
sentence, as in the sight of God; and judge of the whole Frame of their
Religion by the Foundation; and of the Foundation (which is this Supremacy of
Peter) by the wretched Arguments whereby they support it.

For from the other Scriptures which follow in this Writer, their Arguments
stand thus; David was made Head of the Heathen (XVIII. Psalm. 43.) therefore
Peter was made Head of the Church. Instead of the Fathers shall be thy
Children, whom thou may make Princes in all lands (XLV. Psalm. 16.) therefore
Peter ruled over all the rest as a Prince. Simon he surnamed Peter (III. Mark
16.) therefore he had authority over all, because named first. The same is
gathered from I. Act 13 merely from the order of precedence, which must be
granted to one or other, in a Body where all are equal. Finally, Christ's
kingdom shall have no end (I. Luke 33.) therefore St. Peter must reign for ever
in his Successors. St. Paul was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles,
(2 Corinthians. XI. 5.) therefore what? common Reason would have concluded,
therefore there were more chief Apostles besides Peter; and St. Paul was not
inferior to the greatest of them, not to Peter himself. These are his
Scripture-Arguments for their Supremacy.

And his Fathers affirm nothing at all of Peter, which is not said of other
Apostles. Particularly St. Chrysostom (who says no such thing of Peter, as he
makes him, in his 55th Hom. upon Matthew) expressly says, St. Paul governed the
whole World as one Ship, Hom. 25. upon 2 Corinthians. and frequently calls him, as
well as Peter, Prince of the Apostles: and calls them all the Pastors and
Rectors of the whole World, in his 2d Hom. upon Titus. And, to be short, the
Author of the imperfect Work upon St. Matthew (commonly ascribed to St.
Chrysostom.) calls all Bishops the Vicars of Christ. Hom 17. Finally, there is no
Title so great, which is not given to others as well as Peter, by ancient
Writers; even the Title of Bishop of Bishops, the name of Pope, Holiness,
Blessed, and such like.

XII. We hold, he says, That a Woman may be Head, or Supreme Governess of the
Church, in all Causes, as the late Queen Elizabeth was.
Answer.
NOne of us ever called Queen Elizabeth the Head of the Church: unless, as it
signifies Supreme Governor. And that indeed we assert she was, and all our
Kings are, of all persons whatsoever, in all Causes. But because some lewd
People perverted the meaning of this, our Church took care to explain it in one
of the Articles of Religion; that no man might mistake in the matter, unless he
would wilfully, as this Writer does; who could not but understand, that it is
expressly declared, Article XXXVII. that when we attribute to the Queen's
Majesty the chief Government, we do not give to our Princes the ministering
either of God's Word, or the Sacraments, etc. but that only Prerogative, which
we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in the holy Scripture by
God himself. That is, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed
to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and
restrain with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers. This is our avowed
Doctrine.

Now, what do our Bibles say against this? Nothing, but a woman may not teach,
1 Timothy II. 12.
etc. 1 Timothy II. 12. And do not we say the same, that our Princes may not
minister the Word, or Sacraments? What a shameless sort of People have we to
deal withal; who face us down that we affirm what we flatly deny? And when he
pretends faithfully to recite the words of our Bible, after the New Translation
(as he does in his Preface) here he gives us another Translation in the second
Text he alleges, 1 Cor. XIV. 34. But take it as it is, it proves nothing but
his folly and impudence; unless he could show that Queen Elizabeth preached
publicly in any of our Churches. But see the Childishness of this Writer, in
alleging these Texts against the Queen, which make nothing against our Kings;
who are not Women sure: And we ascribe the same power to them, which we did to
her; and no more to her than belongs to them.

From Scripture he betakes himself to Reasoning; which proceeds upon the same
wilful, Mistake we cannot call it, but, Calumny, (against our express
Declaration to the contrary) That we give our Kings such an Headship, or
Supreme Power, as makes them capable to minister the Word and Sacraments. From
whence he draws this new Slander, That many hundreds of them have been hanged,
drawn and quartered, for denying this Power. Whereas every one knows the Oath
of Supremacy is nothing else but a solemn declaration of our belief, that our
Kings are the Supreme Governors of these Realms, in all Spiritual things or
Causes, as well as Temporal: and that no Foreign Prince or Prelate has any
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, in these Realms, etc.

Now what can he find in his Fathers to oppose this? There were none of them,
for above 800 years, who did not believe this; that Emperors and Kings are next
to God, and the Pope himself ought to be subject to them. L. II. 1.
The words of Optatus speak the sense of them all; There is none above the
Emperor but God alone who made him Emperor. And none can deny the Ancient
Custom to have been, that the Clergy and People of Rome having chosen the Pope,
the Emperor confirmed or invalidated the Election as he pleased. Adrian indeed
would fain have changed this Custom, ( Anno 811.) but still it continued a long
time, that the Election was not accounted valid, till the Emperor's
Confirmation. And he cannot but know, (if he have read his own Authors) that
after Adrian's attempt, above forty Popes, from John IX. to Leo IX. were all
created by the Emperors, who frequently also deposed Popes. And Popes were so
far from having any such Authority over the Emperors, that when Pope Gregory
VII. adventured upon it, it was esteemed a Novity, not to say an Heresy, (as
Sigebert's words are, ad Anno 1088.) which had not sprung up in the World
before.

But the Reader may here observe how well skilled this Man is in the Fathers,
who places John Damascen in the very front of them, who lived in the Eighth
Century, and yet is set before Theodoret who lived in the Fifth, and St.
Chrysostom who lived in the Fourth, nay, and before his Ignatius, who lived in
the time of the Apostles; whose words import no more, but that all must obey
their Bishop as their Pastor; which agrees well enough with the Bishop's
obeying the Emperor as his Prince. What John Damascen says, I cannot find; nor
is there any thing of that nature in the place he quotes out of Theodoret. But
Valens was an Arian, who commanded things contrary to the Christian Religion,
and so was not to be obeyed. It is mere tittle-tatle about St. Chrysostom's
calling the Bishop a Prince, as well as a King; for a greater than he,
Constantine the Great, in like manner calls himself a Bishop, as to all
External Government.

XIII. That Antichrist shall not be a particular Man; and that the Pope is
Antichrist.
Answer.
THIS Proposition has two Parts; neither of which are the settled Doctrine of
our Church, or of any other Protestants; but the Common Opinion of all, some
few excepted. Especially the first Part, That Antichrist shall not be a
particular Man, but a Succession of Men; which may be evidently proved from the
Confession of the ablest Men in the Roman Church. For it is the Opinion of
almost all their Interpreters, that the last Head mentioned by St. John. XVII
Rev. 11. and called after a signal manner by the Name of THE BEAST, is no other
than Antichrist. Now all the forgoing Heads do not signify so many single
Persons only; but all Expositors, says their Ribera In XVII. Revel.
, have understood that in every one of those Heads, there are a great many
comprehended. And never has any man, but Victorinus taken them only for Seven
single Persons, whose Opinion ALL do deservedly gainsay. To the very same
purpose, also Alcasar, another famous Roman Expositor, writes upon the same
place. And let this man, or any one else tell me, if they can, why the last
Head, i. e. Antichrist, as he is commonly called, should not comprehend a
Succession of single Persons of the same sort, as it is is manifest the Beasts
in Daniel signify. The Ram, for instance does not signify Darius only, but the
Ruling Power of Persia, during that Kingdom. And the He-goat, not Alexander
alone, but him and his Successors, VIII. Daniel 4, 5.

Now from this ground, it may be plainly proved, (which is the Second thing)
that the Ruling Power at this time in the Roman Church is The Beast, that is,
Antichrist. For the Beast and Babylon are all one in this Vision; and by
Babylon is certainly meant Rome (as their great Cardinal Bellarmine and
Baronius, the best of their Authors, not only confess but contend). And not
Rome Pagan, but Rome Christian, because she is called the Great Whore, XVII.
Rev. 1. which always signifies, a People apostatized from true Religion to
Idolatry; and because it is the same Babylon, which St. John says, must be
burnt with fire, Ver. 16. XVIII. 18. From whence Malvenda, another of their
Authors, confesses it probable, that Rome Christian will be an Idolatrous
Harlot, in the time of Antichrist; because it is to be laid desolate, it is
manifest, for some Crime against the Church of Christ.

Now that this Antichristian Power ruling in that Church, is not to be
adjourned to the end of the World, as they would fain have it, but is at this
present; appears from hence, that the Sixth HEAD being that Power which reigned
when St. John saw this Vision (XVII. Rev. 10.) there was but one Ruling Power
more, and that to continue but a short space, to come between the end of the
Sixth HEAD, and this last HEAD or Power, called in an eminent sense, THE BEAST,
v. 11. Now that Imperial Power which reigned at Rome in time of St. John, it is
evident ended at the fall of the Western Empire with Augustulus; when another
settled Authority was received by the City of Rome it self, instead of that
former Imperial Government. Which new Authority lasting but a short space, as
the Vision tells us, it is plain, THE BEAST, that is, Antichrist, is long ago
in the Throne of the Roman Church. Let this Man, and all his Friends, try if
they can answer this Argument, and see how they will free the Papacy, from
being that Antichristian Power, which St. John foretold should arise, and make
it self drunk with the Blood of the Saints. I am sure this is a stronger and
clearer Explication of that Scripture, than any he has attempted.

And now let us examine whether there be any thing in our Bible contrary to
this. The first place he produces, 2 Thessalonians. II. 3, 2 Thessalonians. II. 3.
etc. most evidently overthrows both parts of his Proposition; as I shall
demonstrate. For the Man of Sin, and the Son of Perdition, v. 3. is no more to
be restrained to a single Person, than he who now lets, v. 7. is to be
restrained to a single Emperor. Now St. Chrysostom in plain terms says, that
the Apostle by the (...), v. 5. that which withholdeth this Man of Sin from
appearing, was the Roman Empire: And the (...), v. 7, he who now lets, the
very same Roman Power, that is the Roman Emperors; not one particular Emperor,
but the whole Succession of them, who as long as they lasted would keep back
the Man of Sin. And this is not only his Sense (in his Comment upon the place)
but the general Sense of the Ancient Fathers ( Tertullian, Lactantius, Cyril of
Jerusalem, St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, and St. Austin, and a great number of
Schoolmen in the Roman Church) that upon the fall of the Roman Empire,
Antichrist shall come. Which may satisfy any unprejudiced Man, both that
Antichrist is come, and that he is not a particular Man, but a Succession of
Men, who altogether make up one Person, called the Man of Sin, who can be none
else but the Papacy. For what particular Man is there, to whom this can be
applied, after the fall of the Empire?

His next place of Scripture, as he quotes it, is neither out of our Bible,
XIII. Rev 18.
nor out of theirs (so little is his honesty). For thus the words run in both,
Let him that has understanding count the number (not of a Man, as he falsely
translates it, but) of the Beast, for it is the number of a Man. Now I have
proved the Beast does not signify a particular Man; and therefore this Number,
whatsoever it is, ought not to be sought only in one Man's name. Which is not
the meaning of the Number of a Man, as this Man would have it; but signifies,
as a better Interpreter than he (viz. Arethas out of Andreas Caesariensis) A
number, or counting, usual and well known to Men. And if we will believe
Irenaeus, (who in all probability was not the Inventor of it, but had it from
the foregoing Doctors of the Church) it is to be found in the word (...), i. e.
L. V. cap. 30.
Latin, for says he, They are Latins who now Reign; but we will not Glory in
this. For it being the Common Opinion of the Church, the Latin, i. e. Roman
Empire was that which hindered the appearance of Antichrist; Irenaeus might
thence conclude, that Antichrist should reign in the Seat of that Latin
Empire, when it was fallen. And Antichrist not being, as I have proved, a
particular Man, this Number must be common unto all that make up that
Antichristian Rule in the Roman Church. In which the Popes are all Latins; and
they are distinguished from the Greeks by the Name of the Latin Church, and
they have their Service still in the Latin Tongue; as if they affected to make
good this Observation, that in them is found this number of the Beast. But I
lay no great weight upon this Opinion of Irenaeus, tho it will be very hard for
them to confute it.

1 John II. 22.
As to the 1 John II. 22. we do not say the Pope is the Antichrist there meant;
and yet for all that, he may be the Great Antichrist. For it is to be observed,
That St. John says there, v. 18. that there were many Antichrists in his time;
and this Antichrist who denied Jesus Christ to be come in the Flesh, or that
Jesus was the Christ, was one of them; yet not a single Person, but a Body of
Men; there being several Sects of them, under Simon Magus, Cerinthus, and the
rest who belonged to this Antichrist. All which Heretics their own Church
acknowledges, were the foreruners of the Great Antichrist, whom we are seeking
after, and can find no where but in the Papacy.

From hence he runs back again to the 2 Thessalonians. II. 4. where those very
Characters, 2 Thessalonians. II. 4, etc.
which he says do not agree to the Pope, are those whereby we are led to take
him for the Man of Sin. He being manifestly, (...). That wicked One; we
translate it, who will be subject to no Laws; and sits in, or upon the Temple
of God, that is, the Christian Church; where he exalts himself over all that is
called God, that is, all Power on Earth; whom he makes subject to his decrees,
which he would have received as the Oracles of God, and that by a blind
Obedience against Men's reason; which is more than God himself requires of us.
The Original of his Greatness was out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire. His
coming was with lying Wonders; and (whatsoever this Man fancies) our Lord Jesus
Christ, tho not yet come, will come and certainly destroy him: When the
kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever, XI. Rev. 15.

The last place upon which he adventures to discourse, is V. John 43. V. John
43.
where we have only his word for it, that when our Savior says, If another
shall come in his own Name, he means, especially the wicked Antichrist. Why him
especially? Or him at all? And not rather any one, who should pretend to be the
Christ? As several did (according to our Saviors Prediction, XXIV. Matthew. 5.)
such as Theudas, Barchozba, mentioned by Josephus, and another of the same Name
in the time of the Emperor Adrian. And indeed there are such clear
Demonstrations (which I have not room to mention) that this word another ought
not to be restrained to one Single Person (such as they make the Great
Antichrist) but signifies any body indifferently, who pretended to be the
Christ; that we may well conclude those to be blinded, who make Christ have
respect to the Great Antichrist, and from thence conclude the Pope not to be
that Antichrist, because the Jews do not follow him. Alas! they see as little
concerning Antichrist, as the Jews do of Christ (as was truly observed by an
Eminent Divine of our own long ago). For as the Jews still expect the Messiah,
who is already come, and was Crucified by their Forefathers; so they of the
Roman Church look for an Antichrist, who has been a long time revealed, and is
reverenced by them as a God upon Earth. Thus Dr. Jackson Book III. On the
Creed, Chapter 8.
, who ventures to say further, That he who will not acknowledge the Papacy to
be the Kingdom of Antichrist, has great reason to suspect his heart, that if
he had lived with our Savior, he would scarce have taken him for his Messiah
Ib. Chap. XXII. p. 452.
.

They that have a mind to see more of this Man's folly, may look into the other
Scriptures, he barely mentions, where they will soon discover, how much they
make against him.

What the Fathers say about this matter, I have already acquainted the Reader;
which is so positive and unanimous, that it is sufficient to overthrow what
some of them say conjecturally. Particularly, upon the place last mentioned, V.
John 43. concerning which they speak with no certainty, as they do of the rise
of Antichrist after the Roman Empire was removed out of the way, which gave the
greatest advantage to the Bishop of Rome to advance himself unto that unlimited
Power, which he has usurped over the Church of God. In short, this Man has
stolen all his Authorities about this matter, out of Feuardentius's Notes upon
Irenaeus Lib. V. C. 25.
, where he makes this alius, another, to be Antichrist; because he is alienus a
Domino; an alien from the Lord; which is not the right Character of Antichrist,
whom St. Paul makes to be no less than (...), an Adversary, who opposes our
blessed Savior. And to show that this is a mere Accommodation, he adds in the
next words, that he is the unjust Judge, whom Christ speaks of, that feared not
God, nor regarded Man. It any one can think the Fathers intended to expound the
Scripture, and to give us the express sense of it in such Speeches as these, he
has a very strange understanding.

XIV. That no Man, nor any but God, can forgive, or retain Sins.
Answer.
THE strength of these Men lies only in their deceit and fraud. They dare not
represent either their own Doctrine, or ours truly. For this Proposition, is
both true and false, in diverse regards. It is true, that none but God can
absolutely and sovereignly forgive Sin: But it is false, that no Man can
forgive Sins Ministerially and Conditionally. For by Authority from God, Men
appointed thereunto do forgive Sins, as his Ministers, by Baptism, by the Holy
Communion, by Preaching, and by Absolution. The only Qustion is, Whether their
Absolution be only declarative, or also operative? And in this, if we be not
all agreed, no more are they of the Roman Church. For P. Lombard did not
believe that the Priest wrought any Absolution from Sins; but only declared the
Party to be absolved. And the most Ancient Schoolmen follow him; such as Occam,
who says, according to the Master, that Priests bind and loose, because they
declare Men to be hound and loosed. In short, the Doctrine of the Church is,
that God absolves by his Ministers; who cannot see into men's hearts; and
therefore can only pronounce, that he absolves them in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, upon supposal of their unfeigned Repentance. But it is
apparent the Church always believed, it is God who properly absolves and
forgives Sins, not the Priest. For all the Ancient Rituals show that the
Absolution was given by Prayer to God for the Penitent, there being no other
Form of Absolution in them, but Prayers; which being made in behalf of the
Penitent, they believed did obtain from God the pardon of those Sins, which he
had with all humility publicly confessed. And therefore the present form, I
absolve thee, (which was never used but in the Latin Church, and not there
neither, till the middle of the XIIIth. Century) must be understood to be only
a very solemn declaration, That God forgives the person, upon his sincere
Contrition and Repentance.

This is the meaning of our Savior, XX. John 21. XX. John 21.
when he made the Apostles his Delegates, saying, As my Father has sent me,
even so send I you. Which supposes a s^perior Power to theirs, in whose Name
they acted only as Ministers.

And therefore when he adds in the next words, Ibid. v. 22, 23.
v. 22, 23. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted,
etc. Menochius expounds it thus; That though the Holy Ghost was not given till
the day of Pentceost, yet on the first day of the Resurrection, they received
the Grace of it, by which they might remit sins, and baptize, and make children
of God, and give the Spirit of Adoption to them that believed, etc. Now let any
man tell me, whether it were they that, for instance, gave the Spirit of
Adoption, or God himself; they that healed and wrought Miracles, (as they did
after the day of Pentecost), or God by their Ministry. In like manner, it was
not they who conferred Forgiveness of Sins, but God properly bestowed it, as he
did the other Blessings; they only serving as Ministers, by whom he conveyed it
to the Penitent.

In the next place of Scripture he makes bold to add words, which are neither
in our Bible, nor theirs, IX. Matthew. 8. When the multitude saw it, (i. e. the
man take up his bed and walk) they marvelled and glorified God, which had given
such power unto men, he adds, as to forgive sins. Whereas the Evangelist speaks
of the power of healing a sick man, which they saw plainly; and which our
Savior alleges as an Argument that he could forgive sins; which the multitude
could see no other way, but in this miraculous demonstration of it. But suppose
the multitude had admired at his Power to forgive sins, will it follow that any
body else has that Power which Christ had? No; Christ could as man, forgive
sins, yet not as any sort of man, (says Menochius Non ut qualiscunque homo,
sed ut homo Deus.
himself), but as God-man; which no Priest whatsoever is.

He bids us, after his usual form, see more in several Texts which he sets down
without the words; and we are very willing to obey him, if there were any thing
to be seen to this purpose: But the two first of them are only a promise of
what our Savior afterward bestowed; and we have heard what that was, from XX.
John 23. The two next speak not of forgiving sins, nor merely of retaining
them, but of delivering men up to Satan, which no body now can do.

2 Cor. II. 10.
The next, 2 Cor. II. 10. proves too much, if it prove any thing to this
purpose; for it speaks of the whole Church giving Pardon to an Offender, viz.
by receiving him again, by the Apostles order, into their Communion. V. 19.
The next, 2 Cor. V. 19. relates to the Apostles reconciling men, by preaching
the Word of God, as Menochius expounds it; or if by Word of Reconciliation we
understand, says he, the thing, that is, Reconciliation it self, then the
Apostle speaks of the whole Power and Ministry of reconciling men to God. The
last place out of V. Numb. 6. is as impertinent, as the quotations that follow
out of the Fathers; which they have a little mended, since Bishop Mountague
lashed this Author severely for his childish and careless Transcriptions of
them out of Father Bellarmine. You may judge of them all, by the last save one
(which was the first heretofore) out of Irenaeus, L. V. c. 13. who proving that
we have a Specimen of the Resurrection, in those whom Christ raised from the
dead, instances in Lazarus, unto whom he said, come forth, and the dead man
came forth bound hand and foot, etc. A Symbol, says he, or Type of that man,
who is tied and bound in sins; and with respect to this, the Lord said, Loose
him, and let him go. But what good would their loosing him have done, if Christ
had not first raised him from the dead? unto whose power, not theirs, all that
followed is to be ascribed. And to whom did Christ speak, when he bad them
loose Lazarus, but to the Jews who were present? As Maldonate, one of their own
good Writers expounds it, and says, It is the opinion of all good Authors,
except Austin, Gregory, and Bid; and adds, That to found the Doctrine of
Confession or Absolution upon this place, is no better than to build upon sand.
But if it be supposed that he here speaks to his Apostles, and bids them loose
him, still it can figure no more, but a declaration of Pardon of Sins, granted
already by the Mercy of the Almighty. What St. Austin therefore says in the
place which this man mentions first, is to no purpose; for it is the very same
with this of Irenaeus: For having said in the beginning of that Tractate Tract.
XLIX. in John.
, that the works of our Lord were not only facta, but signa, and showed how the
three persons raised by him from the dead, signify the raising up three
degrees of sinners out of their sins: When he comes to this passage in the
story of Lazarus's Resurrection, Loose him and let him go; he says, What is
loose him, etc. but what ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven? And let
it be so, that our Lord's words fitly represent this, yet still it was God that
properly loosed men from their sins; the Apostles were but Ministers in this
business, who declared what God had granted: As God raised up Lazarus from the
dead, they only untied him, after he had really made him alive, and raised him
out of his Grave.

All the rest out of the Fathers, is no better than this, and therefore I will
not trouble the Reader with it, but pass to the next: Where he makes us say,

XV. That we ought not to confess our sins to any man, but to God only.
Answer.
THis is a most impudent falsehood; for we press this as a Duty in some cases,
for the quieting of men's Consciences, when they are burdned with Guilt;
particularly, before they receive the Communion, and when they are sick. But
that which we affirm in this matter, is, That God does not require all
Christians to make a particular Confession, privately to a Priest, of every sin
he has committed, tho only in thought, under pain of being damned, if he do
not. Much less do we believe such Confession to be Meritorious, and
Satisfactory for sin. Nor do the Scriptures which he quotes, prove a syllable
of this doctrine.

The first he alleges, III. Matthew. 5, 6. Matthew. III. 5, 6.
speaks of those who confessed their sins, before they received Baptism of John
the Baptist. But what is this to Confession of sins after Baptism? And besides,
there is not a word of their confessing them to John; nor of particular
Confession of every sin: And therefore Maldonate tells such raw Divines as
this, We ought not to rely upon this Testimony, for it is manifest it does not
treat of Sacramental Confession, which was not yet instituted. And Bellarmine,
their great Master, durst venture no further, than to call this, which was done
at John's Baptism, a figure of their Sacramental Confession. And this poor man
himself concludes no more from hence, than this, That we may confess our sins,
(who doubts of it?) not only to God, but also to man. But this is very short of
what he undertook to prove by express Texts, That we ought to confess, etc.

Act. XIX. 18, 19.
Nor dare he venture to conclude any more from the next place, but that we may
confess our sins to men, XIX. Acts 18, 19. Where he bids us, Behold,
Confession, but does not tell us to whom: So we are never the wiser; because it
might be to God, and that before all the Company, as the words seem to import.
But he bids us also, Behold Satisfaction; because several people, (not the same
he spoke of before) brought forth their curious Books, which were worth a great
deal of money, and burnt them before all men. A plain and public demonstration
indeed, that they detested those Magical Arts whereby they gave also
satisfaction to all men, of their sincere renunciation of such wicked
practices: But what proof is this of a Compensation made to God hereby for
their Sins, which deserved of him an acquittance?

His Third Text is still more remote from the business, V. Numb. 6, 7. Numb. V.
6, 7.
and therefore alleged by wiser heads than his, such as Bellarmine, only as a
figure of Sacramental Confession; the least shadow of which does not appear:
For there is neither Confession of all sins here mentioned, but only of that
particular for which the Sacrifice was offered; nor Confession of the sin to
the Priest, but rather to the Lord, as the words more plainly signify; If a
man or w^^an commit any sin that men commit, and do trespass against the LORD,
and that person be guilty, then they shall confess their sin which they have
done. An unbiassed Reader would hence conclude, they were bound to confess
their sin to the LORD, against whom they had trespassed.

His other Scriptures, perhaps, he was sensible, were nothing to the purpose;
and therefore he only sets down the Chapter and Verse, as his manner is, when
he bids, See more, where nothing is to be seen: For the first is only the same
we had out of St. Matthew. The next, V. James 16. speaks of one man's
confessing his sins to his neighbor. The next we had before, under the former
Head: And the last I am willing to think is mis-printed, or his mind was much
amiss when he noted it, XVII. Matthew. 14.

His Fathers also have only the word Confession, not saying, whether to God, or
to man; and he thinks that enough: But it is a shameless thing to quote St.
Chrysostom for this Doctrine; who in so many places exhorts his people only to
confess their sins in private to God; that Sixtus Senensis is forced to expound
him, as if he spoke only against the necessity of such Public Confession, as
was abolished at Constantinople. But Petavius (who proves there was no such
Public Confession) is fain to desire the Reader to be so kind, as not to take
St. Chrysostom's words strictly, but spoken popularly, in a heat of
declamation: And we are content to do so, if they would be so just as to do the
same in other cases: But still we cannot think St. Chrysostom so very
hotheaded, but that sometimes he would have been so cool, as to have spoken
more cautiously, and not have so frequently overlasht, as they make him.

That which he quotes out of Ambrose, he is told by Bellarmine, is Greg.
Nyssen; so little does this poor man know of their own Authors. As for his
sitting to hear Confessions, (if his Author be worth any thing, which is much
suspected by Learned men of his own Communion) it is meant of Public
Confession, such as was in use in his time.

XVI. That Pardons and Indulgences were not in the Apostles times.
Answer.
NOthing truer, by the Confession of their own Authors; particularly Antoninus
Part I. Tit. X c. 3.
in his Sums; Of these we have nothing expressly, neither in the Scriptures, nor
out of the sayings of the Ancient Doctors. The same is said by Durandus, and
many others; who have been so honest as to confess, That such Indulgences and
Pardons as are now in use, are but of late invention: There being no such thing
heard of in the Ancient Church, as a Treasure of the Church, made up of the
Satisfaction of Christ and of the Saints, out of which these Indulgences are
now granted, for the profit of the dead, as well as of the living. Whereas of
old they were nothing but Relaxations of Canonical Penances, when long and
severe Humiliations had been imposed upon great Offenders; which sometimes were
thought fit to be remitted, upon good considerations, either as to their
severity, or as to their length. Now this, which was done by any Bishop, as
well as he of Rome, we are not against. But such Indulgences are in these ages
of no use, because the Penitential Canons themselves are relaxed, or rather
laid aside, and no such tedious and rigorous Penances are inflicted; which the
Church of Rome has exchanged for Auricular Confession, and a slight Penance
soon finished

The first place he produces out of our Bible to countenance their Indulgences,
2 Cor. II. 10.
we had before to prove men may forgive sins, Sect. XIV. and others have
alleged it to prove men may satisfy for their sins; now it is pressed for the
service of Indulgences. What will not these men make the Scripture say, if they
may have the handling of it? But after all, this will not serve their purpose;
for the Pardon the Apostle here speaks of, was nothing but the restoring him
again to Christian Communion, who had been thrown out of the Church. But is
this the Indulgence they contend for in the Church of Rome? Will this serve
their turn? Then every Church has as much power as this comes to; and the
whole body of the Church will have a share in this power of Indulgences: For
St. Paul speaks to all the Corinthian Christians in general, that they should
forgive him.

And so he does also in the next place here alleged, v. 6, 7. Ibid. v. 6.7.
of the same Chapter; which speak of a Punishment inflicted ed by many; which
he tells them ought not to be continued, but contrariwise, Ye ought to forgive
him, and comfort him, etc. Upon which words hear what your Menochius says, This
Punishment was public Separation from the Church, out of which he was ejected
by MANY, i. e. by you all, with detestation of his Wickedness, etc. The
forgiveness of which, was taking him into the Church again, as Theodoret
expounds the next words, v. 8. Unite the member to the body; join the sheep
together with the flock; and thereby show your ardent affection to him.

He bids us see more in two other places of Scripture, which we have examined
before for other purposes, but he would have serve for all: A sign they have
great scarcity of Scripture-proofs; and therefore he gives us a larger
Catalogue of Fathers; which he packs together after such a fashion, as no
Scholar ever did. For after Tertullian and Cyprian, who speak only of the
forenamed Relaxation of Canonical Censures, he mentions the Council of Lateran,
but does not tell us which; though if he had, it would have been to no end: For
the first Lateran Council was above Eleven hundred years after Christ: And
Innocent III. who is his next Father, lived an hundred year later; holding the
IVth. Lateran Council, 1215. After these he brings St. Ambrose, Austin,
Chrysostom, who lived 800 years before, and knew of no Indulgences, but such
as I have mentioned. Lastly, He tells us, Urban the second granted a Plenary
Indulgence; and when lived this holy Father, do you think? Almost eleven
hundred years after Christ, Anno 1086. A most excellent proof, that the Romish
Indulgences were in use in the Apostles times. Can one think that such men as
this, expect to be read by any but fools? who perhaps may imagine this Urban
was contemporary with the Apostles. It is some wonder he did not quote that
holy Father Hildebrand, Greg. VII. who something before this, granted Pardon of
Sins to all those who would take up Arms against his Enemies. Poor man! he did
not know this, else he would have mentioned him rather than Urban, who was but
his Ape.

The Protestants hold (if you will believe him),

XVII. That the Actions and Passions of the Saints, do serve for nothing to the
Church.
Answer.
A Most wicked Slander; for we look upon what they did and suffered, as
glorious Testimonies to the Truth they believed and preached, as strong
incitements to us to follow their Examples, and as eminent Instances of the
Power of God's Grace in them; for which we bless and praise him, and thankfully
commemorate them.

But all this serves for nothing to the Church, that is, to the Church of Rome;
unless men believe there is a Treasury which contains all the superfluous
Satisfactions of the Saints, who suffered more than they were bound to endure.
Of which vast Revenue that Church having possessed it self, it serves to bring
abundance of Money into their Coffers; which must be paid by those who desire
to be relieved out of these superabundant Satisfactions of the Saints, by
having them applied to them, for the supply of their defects. This is the
meaning of this very man, it appears, by the Scriptures he quotes for their
belief.

I. Col. 24.
The first is, I. Col. 24. which speaks of the Persecutions St. Paul endured, in
Preaching the Gospel to the Colossians; which tho grievous to him, was so
beneficial to them, that he rejoiced in his Sufferings, and resolved to endure
more for the confirmation of their Faith, and for the edification of the Church
of Christ. This he calls, filling up what was behind of the afflictions of
Christ: Because Christ began to testify to the Truth, by shedding of his
Blood, and thence is called the Faithful Witness: But it remained still, that
the Apostles should give their Testimony by the like Sufferings, because the
Gospel was to be carried to the Gentile World; which could not be effected
without their enduring such hardships, as Christ had endured in Preaching to
the Jews. Thus Theodoret expounds, That which was behind, or which remained of
the Affliction of Christ. But here is not a word of Satisfaction; no, not by
Christ's Sufferings, which were of such value, that there was nothing of this
nature left to be done by others. This, better Men than this, of their own
Church, ingenuously confess. Particularly, Justinianus, a Jesuit, whose words
are these upon this very place, He says he filled up what was wanting of the
Passion of Christ, not to merit indeed, or make Satisfaction (for what can be
wanting to that which is Infinite?) but as to the Power and Efficacy of
bringing Men to the Faith; that his Mystical Body, which is the Church, may be
perfected, etc. For he signifies in the latter end of the Verse, That he
suffered for the enlarging or propagating of the Church, to confirm and
establish its faith, that he might provoke others to his imitation.

I could add many more, to show the Folly of this Man; who says, From hence
Ground has always been taken for Indulgences. A notorious falsehood; not
always, for Indulgences are late things; not by all Men in their Church, since
it used them. For Estius in his Notes upon this place, absolutely disclaims it,
and says, Tho some Divines hence argue that the Passions of the Saints are
profitable for the remission of sins, which is called Indulgence; yet he does
not think this to be solidly enough concluded from this place.

Which I have been the longer about, because they are wont to make a great
noise with it. The next place they curtailed heretofore in this manner; Philip.
II. 30.
He was nigh unto Death, not regarding his Life, to supply your lack (leaving
out what follows, of service toward me) which made it sound something like, as
if their lack of Goodness had been supplied by his Merits, or rather
Satisfaction: for Merit will do no service in this case. But Bishop Montague
banged them so terribly for this foul play, that now they have printed it
right; tho, alas! nothing to the purpose. And therefore this Man does not
venture to say so much as one word upon this Text; but barely recites the
words, and leaves the Reader to make what he can of them. And all that
Menochius, a truly Learned Expositor of their own, could make of them, is this,
That St. Paul being in Prison, Epaphroditus performs him those good Offices,
which the Philippians should have done, had they not been absent: But he so
much neglected himself, while he was wholly intent upon serving the Apostle,
that he fell dangerously sick, and lay for a time without hope of Life.

Finding so little relief in these places of Scripture, he betakes himself to
arguing from that Article of our Creed, The Communion of Saints. Which
Bellarmine, L. 1. de Indulg. c. 3.
from whom he borrows these goodly proofs, manages on this manner, We are
taught by this Article, that all the Faithful are Members of one another, being
a kind of living Body. Now as living Members help one another, so the Faithful
communicate good things among themselves; especially when those which are
superfluous to the one, are necessary or profitable to the other.

This is admirable Catholic Doctrine. The Saints have more than they need, and
therefore they communicate it to us, for the supply of our wants. But this
should have been proved, and not supposed, that the Saints have more than
enough, something to spare; and that their Passions were Satisfactions, and
Superabundant Satisfactions. After which it would still remain a pretty
undertaking to prove, that because one Member helps another when it suffers any
thing; therefore the Sufferings of one Member will Cure another Member; the
Pain, for instance, of the long Finger will free the little Finger from the
pain which it it suffers. Thus the Actions and Passions of Saints are not
imparted to us; as this Man presumes from the Relation we have one to another;
and yet they serve for very good purposes to the Church, as I have already
shown.

And one would imagine he distrusted this Argument after he had set it down,
because he runs back again to the Scriptures. A great Company of which he heaps
up, to no more purpose than if he had quoted so many Texts of Aristotle. I will
give the Reader a taste of one or two: The first is, CXIX. Psalm 63. I am a
companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts. Thus
the words run expressly in our Bible. Now let me beseech the Reader to consider
what Action or Prayer of the Church Triumphant, for the Church Militant or
Patient, or for both, he can find contained in this Text, as he says there is
in all the Passages he quotes. Let him look into the next, and I will be his
Bonds man, if he meet with a word of any Action or Prayer of the Church
Triumphant; but only mention of many Members, which make up but one Body, 1
Cor. XII. 12. And what Action or Prayer of the Church Triumphant, can one
gather out of St. Paul's care for all the Churches, 2 Cor. XI. 28. As for LIII.
Isaiah, the Church always thought it a Prophecy of the Sufferings of Christ,
and not of the Saints; and so the Apostles interpret it in many places. If he
mean, LIII. Psalm 9. (as one Edition of his Book has it) there are not so many
Verses in it; and we should be as far to seek for any sense, if we should see
more, and therefore I will look no further.

What the Fathers affirm, he bids us also see, but does not tell us; and I
cannot trust him so much, as to think it worth my pains to look into the
places, to which he points us. St. Austin, I am sure (the first he names) is
abused by him; who has not a word of this matter in his Second Chapter of his
Book, about the Care of the Dead; which is altogether concerning this Question,
Whether the Dead suffer any thing for want of Burial? Upon the LXI. Psalm
indeed (which he quotes at last) he mentions that place of St. Paul, 1 Coloss.
24. and discourses how Christ suffered not only in his own Person, but in his
Members; every one of which suffers what comes to his share; and all of them
together fill up what is wanting of the Sufferings of Christ. So that none has
Superabundant Sufferings; but he expressly says, That we every one of us, Pro
modulo nostro, according to our small measure, Pay what we owe, (mark that, not
more than we are obliged unto, which is the Romish Doctrine, but what we are
bound unto) and to the utmost of our Power we cast in, as it were, the stint or
measure of Sufferings, which will not be filled up till the end of the World.
Which is directly against what this Man, and his Church, would have: For they
that bring in but their share, and nothing more than they owe, have no
redundant Passions, out of which flow superfluous Satisfaction.

XVIII. That no Man can do Works of Supererogation.
Answer.
HOW should he? When no Man can Supererogate till he have first erogated. In
plainer terms, no Man can have any thing to spare, to bestow upon others (for
this they mean by Supererogating) till he has done all that is bound to do for
himself. And therefore Bishop Andrews Resp. ad Apolog. Bellarmini, p. 196.
well calls these works of Supererogation, proud pretenses of doing more than a
man needs; when he has not done all he ought. For these two things are
necessary to make such Works, as they mean by this word. First, That a Man have
done all that God's Law commands. Secondly, That he have done something which
it commands not. But who is there that has done all which God's Law
requires? That is, who is without all Sin? Therefore, who can by doing some
voluntary things, to which he is not bound, do above his Duty, when he falls so
much below it, in things expressly commanded? There is another great flaw also
in this Doctrine; for they suppose precepts to require a lower degree of
Goodness, and counsels a more high or excellent. Which is false, for Gods
Precepts require the height of Virtue; and Councils only show the means whereby
we may more easily, in some circumstances, attain it. As forsaking all, keeping
Virginity, are not perfections; but the Instruments of it, as they may be used.

The places which he brings to prove men may do such works, are first, XIX.
Matthew. 21. XIX. Mat. 21.
Where there is not a word of doing any thing which might be bestowed upon
others; but only of laying up treasure to himself in Heaven, by doing a thing
extraordinary. We do not say, all things are commanded, but some are
counseled; yet there are men of great Name in the Church (such as St.
Chrysostom, and St. Hilary) who call this a Commandment which Christ gave the
young man. And so it is, if he would come and follow Christ, that is, be one of
his constant attendants, as the Apostles were, who had left all, that they
might give up themselves wholly to his Service.

The next is no more to the purpose, 1 Cor. VII. 25. 1 Cor. VII. 25.
for no body thinks there is any command to live single; but it was a prudent
Counsel of the Apostle at that time, when the Church was in great distress;
which made it advisable for People, if they could, to keep themselves single,
whereby they would shift the better, and be freed from a great many Cares and
Troubles of this Life. But he does not say, that hereby they would lay up a
Treasure of Satisfactions, which would serve more than themselves, and might be
bestowed upon others. This is the meaning of the Roman Church.

The third, XIX. Matthew. 12. XIX. Mat. 12.
has no more in it, than the two former. It is a Counsel, He that is able to
receive it, let him receive it. But they who received it, did not thereby make
Satisfaction for defects in obedience to God's precepts; muchless, did they do
so much as to have to distribute unto others. Let who will look into the other
Scriptures, which he barely notes, he will find them as empty as these;
especially the first of them, X. Luke 25. X. Luke 25.
which contains only a question propounded to our Savior by a tempting Lawyer:
Unless he means the Answer to it, which is a Command for loving God with all
the Heart, and all the Soul, etc. And it is not left at our liberty, I hope,
whether we will thus love him or no.

Not one of his Fathers say what he would have them. The first of them, St.
Ambrose, only says, He that obeys a Counsel (for instance, sells all his Goods
to follow Christ) may say more than he that obeys only a Precept. For he may
expect a reward, as the Apostles did, when they said, Behold, we have left all
and followed thee; what therefore shall we have? Whereas they that do what they
are commanded, must say, We are unprofitable servants, and have but done our
Duty. Now, what does this Discourse prove? But that they shall have a greater
reward themselves? but there is not a syllable of their supererogating for
others. Nor in Origin, nor Eusebius, much less St. Chrysostom^, whose business
it is to prove, that God's Commands are not impossible. What is this to
Counsels? Of which Gregory the Great indeed (not Greg. Nyssen. who has no such
Work) speaks in his Morals; but is so far from maintaining works of
Supererogation, that none can be more express than he for the Protestant
Doctrine; Of the imperfection of all men's righteousness, and renouncing all
confidence in our own Merits.

XIX. That by the fall of ADAM, we have all lost our Free Will; and that it is
not in our Power to choose Good, but only Evil.
Answer.
THIS is another insufferable Slander in the first part of it; for if we had
all lost our freedom of will, we should be no longer Men. We only say, we have
not such a freedom of Will as we formerly had, and so all say. And he that
says, (which is the second Part of this Proposition) It is in our power to
choose that which is Good, without the assistance of Grace, is a Pelagian, that
is, an Heretic; as this Man is, by contradicting what we affirm, That it is
not in our power (that is, our natural strength) to choose Good, that is,
Spiritual Good; of which, if he do not speak, he only babbles. For the will of
Man (says Bellarmine L. VI. de lib. arbitr. and gratia, c 4.
himself) in things appertaining to Piety and Salvation, can do nothing without
the assistance of God's Grace; yea, without his special assistance. This is the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and is our Doctrine in the Tenth Article of our
Religion, unto which he has nothing to oppose.

For not one of his places of Scripture prove, Man has a Power of himself to
will what is good, without God's Grace. His first Scripture, 1 Cor. VII. 37.
1 Corinthians. VII. 37. speaks of a thing that is neither Good or Evil in it self;
but indifferent; for no man is bound to Marry, or not to Marry; but it may be
as he pleases, either way. Yet it is manifest by the very Text, that the
Apostle supposes some Men have not a power to contain; and so, in their case
Marriage becomes necessary.

As to what he intermixes with this, (which is very foreign to it) My Son, give
me thy heart; let me demand of him, whether any man can consent to this, unless
God draw his heart to him, when he asks a man to give it? And he that is drawn,
says St. Hierom L. III. adv. Pelag.
, does not run spontaneously of himself, but he is brought to it, when he
either draws back, or is slow, or unwilling. But I will not abuse the Reader's
time in so much as mentioning the rest; since we say nothing in this matter,
but what the Gospel, what the Ancient Fathers, particularly St. Austin, say,
nay, what Bellarmine himself confesses to be true; whose words in the
conclusion of this Controversy, fully express our sense, and give an answer to
all that this man foolishly as well as falsely charges us withal.

The Conversion of Man to God, L. VI. De Great. and Lib. Arbit. c. 15. Decima
sent.
as also every other good work, as it is a WORK (that is, an human act) is only
from his free Will, yet not excluding God's general help; as it is PIOUS, it is
from Grace alone; as it is a PIOUS WORK, it is both from our free Will, and
from Grace. To this we subscribe.

XX. That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, tho assisted with
his Grace, and the Holy Ghost.
Answer.
THIS is such a downright Calumny, that I cannot but say with the Psalmist,
What shall be done unto thee, O thou false Tongue? We most thankfully
acknowledge the Power of the Divine Grace to be so great, that it is possible
for us to keep God's Commandments, to such a degree as he requires and accepts;
tho not with such an exact and strict obedience, as to stand in no need of his
gracious Pardon of our defects.

Phil. IV.
St. Paul means, no more, when he says, he could do all things, that is, all
before mentioned, and harder things yet, if occasion were, by the help of
Christ, who administered strength to him, to do all those things, as Menochius
interprets it. IV. Philip. 13.

I. Luke 5, 6.
Nor does St. Luke's Character of Zachary and Elizabeth, amount to more than
this, that they were sincerely good People; who were therefore Blameless, or
Irreprehensible, (as Menochius translates it) because, says Theophylact, they
acted out of pure respect to God, and not to please Men. For many walk in the
Law of God, who are not irreprehensible, because they do all to be seen of men.
But Zachary both did what God commanded, and did it irreprehensibly; not
performing such things that he might please men. Thus he, and St. Austin gives
another reason of this, glossing upon the Virgins mentioned Revel. XIV. In
whose mouth was found no guile, because they were irreprehensible (as he
renders the word, we (translate, without fault) before the Throne of God: They
were, says he, therefore without reprehension, because they faithfully
reprehended themselves; and therefore guile was not found in their mouth;
because if they had said, they had no sin, they had deceived themselves. It is
plain by this, they did not look upon such persons as without all sin, but only
sincere and entire in their obedience to Christ's Commands. Nay, it is evident
Zachary himself, whom St. Luke so highly commends, was not thus blameless, as
to be without all sin; for he was much to blame in not believing the Angel, who
brought him a message from God, and was punished for not believing it, by being
struck dumb till the Angel's word was fulfilled.

All his other Scriptures therefore, and Fathers, proving that which none of us
deny, are here alleged in vain.

He next of all says, we maintain,

XXI. That Faith only justifies; and that Good Works are not absolutely
necessary to Salvation.
Answer.
WHat shall one do with a man that opposes he knows not what? The first part
of this Proposition is St. Paul's, who in effect says the same, III. Romans 28.
II. Gal. 16. Therefore no man should be so bold as to contradict it, but rather
explain it; which it is easy to do; for when we say, Faith only justifies,
this Faith includes in it a sincere purpose of good living; without which, we
believe it will not justify. And therefore the second part of it is a new
slander, That we affirm Good works are not necessary to Salvation; the direct
contrary to which, we heartily believe: For it is absolutely necessary to our
Salvation, we all affirm, that we act according to our Faith; tho by such Good
works, we can merit nothing, neither Justification, nor Salvation: But we are
accounted righteous before God, only for the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ;
by Faith, not for our own works or deserving, as the words are in the XIth.
Article of our Religion. So that when we say, by Faith, it is manifest we
exclude not Good works, but only the merit of them. And thus Luther himself
shows (upon V. Gal.) That Faith alone will not suffice, tho Faith alone
justifies.

Therefore all his Scriptures might have been spared, especially the first of
them, 1 Cor. XIII. 2.
1 Cor. XIII. 2. which speaks of a miraculous Faith; and besides, does not
contradict us, who believe Faith without works will not avail to Salvation;
though let us do never so much, we can never merit it by what we do.

The second Text, II. Jam. 24. James II. 24.
is agreeable to what we say, That the Faith which justifies, includes in it a
purpose of well-doing. Such an one as was in Abraham, whose Faith, in purposing
to offer up Isaac, was imputed to him for Righteousness, tho he had not
actually done as he purposed to do. In like manner, if any man sincerely
profess the Christian Faith, and be baptized, he is justified, tho he have not
as yet brought forth the fruit of it in good works; (witness the Eunuch, VIII.
Acts 37.) which if he should not produce afterward, he could not be saved. St.
Austin in that very Book and Chapter which he quotes, expressly says, Good
Works follow him that is justified, they do not precede him that is to be
justified. What does he think of the Thief upon the Cross, who only believed,
and was not so much as baptized?

II James 14. is not contrary to what we say, but according to it. Mr. Calvin
himself upon these very words, says, Therefore we are saved by Faith, because
it joins us to God; which is done no other way, but that living by his Spirit,
we be governed by him. St. Paul and St. James agree very well; though the one
say: We are not justified by Faith only, (which is St. James's Doctrine); and
the other, St. Paul, in effect says, We are justified by Faith only, when he
says, We are justified by Faith, without Works. As he shows in Abraham's case;
where he opposes Justification by Faith, and Justification by Works; and
affirms Abraham was not justified by Works, but by Faith. St. James alleging
the same case, and the very same words, proves he was justified by Works, and
not by Faith only. Can any one think they make use of the same instance, for
quite contrary ends? It is a wonder men do not learn this plain and easy truth
from hence; That Faith alone (having in it a purpose of well-doing) enters us
into the state of Justification, before we have done what we purpose; but Good
Works are necessary to continue us in this state, and so may be said to
justify us; that is, continue our Justification, which Faith only cannot do.

The last place, V. Gal. 6. we have noted so well, that we expressly declare in
our XIIth. Article, That Good works cannot put away our sins, and endure the
severity of God's Judgment, (these are the great things we deny) yet they do
spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith. And the Doctrine of St.
Austin L. de F^de and Operib. c. 14.
is perfectly ours; which I will set down, because it explains all that I have
said: A good life is inseparable from Faith; yea, in truth, Faith it self is a
good life. And again Lib. Quest. 83. q. 76.
How can he that is justified by Faith, choose but work Righteousness? But if
any man, when he has believed, presently depart this life, the Justification
of Faith remains with him; no good work preceding, because he came to it, not
by Merit, but by Grace; nor following, because he was not suffered to remain in
this life. From whence it is manifest what the Apostle says, We conclude a man
is justified by Faith without works.

All his other Scriptures therefore serve only to show his Ignorance, if not
his Malice, in charging us with the denial of that which we affirm, That good
works are necessary to Salvation. His Fathers he had better have kept to
himself; for they frequently say, Faith only justifies. Even Origin In Cap. III.
, upon that very Book, the Epistle to the Romans, affirms, that Justification
of Faith alone suffices, tho a man has not done any works. Which he proves by
the example of the Thief upon the Cross; and the Woman in VII. Luke, to whom
our Savior said, Go in peace, thy Faith has saved thee. But perhaps, says
he, some reading this, may think he may neglect to do well, since Faith alone
suffices to Justification. To whom we say, That if any man does wickedly after
Justification, without doubt he despises the Grace of Justification. Neither
does a man receive Forgiveness of sins for this, that he may think he has a
License given him to sin again; for a Pardon is given him, not for sins to
come, but for sins that are past. And what he says upon the next Chapter, (not
the Vth. as this man quotes him, but the IVth.) does not contradict this; Faith
cannot be imputed to those who believe in Christ, but do not put off the old
man with his unrighteous acts. Which very well agrees with what he said before,
and we with him: Faith enters us into a state of acceptance with God; but we
cannot go to Heaven, unless we bring forth the fruit of Faith in new Obedience.
So he explains himself most excellently, in that very place, a little before,
in these words, which comprehend the whole business: I think that the first
beginnings, and the very foundations of Salvation, is Faith; the progress and
increase of the building, is hope; but the perfection and top of the whole work
is Charity. I will not trouble the Reader with what the rest of his Fathers
say, since they themselves are sensible their Cause is endangered by the
Fathers. Which is so notorious, that they have taken care to have this passage
expunged out of the very Index of St. Austin's works Printed 1543. apud Ambr.
Girau.
upon the Psalms, Through Grace we are saved by Faith; tho St. Paul affirms the
same, II. Ephesians. 8. And out of the very Text of St. Cyril upon Isaiah, these
words are ordered to be expunged (by the Spanish Index of Gasp. Quiroga) the
Grace of Faith is sufficient to the cleansing of sin; and Christ dwells in our
heart by Faith. In I. Isa. and in 51.
No wonder then they have dealt thus with later Authors of theirs own, who
followed the Fathers Doctrine; particularly with Vatablus, out of whose
Annotations upon VIII. Isa 32. they have ordered these words to be blotted out,
They that beliive in the Lord, shall be saved; but they that do not, shall
perish. And these upon VIII. Luke Faith saves.

XXII. That no Good Works are Meritorious.
Answer.
AT last he speaks some truth, tho very lamely. For if by meritorious were
meant nothing, but that good works are highly valued by God, when performed out
of love to him, and we deny our selves to serve him; which undoubtedly he will
reward with a glorious Recompense, tho far transcending our services; there
would be no quarrel about this matter. But by works meritorious, they mean such
as are no ways defective, and have such an exact proportion to the Reward, that
God is bound in strict Justice, to bestow, or rather pay it. Now this is it we
deny, believing that Good works in the rigor of Justice, do not deserve
eternal life as wages; and this is it which they presume, but can never prove.

His first Text, XVI. Mat. 17.
XVI. Matthew. 17. is so far from express, that quite contrary it says, God will
only reward every man according to his works, not for the merit of his works;
which imports them to be an adequate cause; whereas according, signifies
nothing of a cause, but only of a respect, or comparison between the work and
the reward; so that they who have done evil shall be punished, and they that
have done good be blessed. And he belies St. Austin (according to the manner of
their Catholic Sincerity) to justify his Interpretation. For St. Austin
speaks of the Punishment of Sinners, Sermon. XXXV. de verbi. Apost.
not of the Reward of the Righteous. I beseech you, brethren, attend
diligently, and be ye afraid as well as I, for he does not say He will render
to every one according to his mercy, but according to their works, (he says
not a word of their Faith, which this man put in of his own head) for now he is
merciful, but then just. Would to God they would take St. Austin's counsel, and
so diligently attend to this, as to repent of their shameless Forgeries, that
they may find Mercy with God, which hereafter will be denied.

The word for Reward in V. Matthew. 12. is not to be interpreted, Wages, and
Hire, due to the work. For the Laborers who came at the Eleventh Hour into the
Vineyard, as St. Hilary In Psalm. 129. in fine.
observes, received Mercedem, their Reward, not of the work, but of Mercy:
Which is exactly according to St. Paul, IV. Romans 4. where he says, there is a
(...), (which this man would have translated, Wages), Reward of Grace, not of
Debt. Which place St. Austin In Psalm. XXXI.
having occasion to mention, thus glosses; Now to him that works, that is,
presumes of his Works, and says that for their merit the Grace of Faith was
given, the Reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt. What Is this, but that
our Reward is called Grace? If it be Grace, it is freely given. What Is meant by
freely given? It cost thee nothing. Thou did no good, and Remission of sins
is bestowed upon thee. I have quoted this at large, that if it be possible,
such men as this may be put to the blush, if not confounded. As one would
expect they should be, when they read St. Paul; who tho he say, Death is the
wages of sin, yet says, Eternal Life is the Gift of God: Which the Fathers
take great notice of, particularly St. Hierom; he does not say, the wages of
Righteousness, as he had said the wages of sin; for eternal life is not earned
by our labor, but graciously bestowed by God's gift.

The same Answer serves for the next place, X. Matthew. 42. and all such Texts.
And 2 Cor. V. 10. was answered before; that we shall receive according to what
we have done in the body; they that have done well shall be rewarded above
their deserts; and they that have done evil, receive what they have deserved:
Which is the highest encouragement unto well-doing; to believe, That God will
do more abundantly for us, out of his infinite bounty, than we can ask or
think; and not consider our merits (which are none at all) but his own
incomprehensible Goodness and Mercy. They that teach otherways, derogate from
the Grace of God, and proudly arrogate to themselves a worthiness, of which
creatures are not capable.

I need not examine that heap of Scriptures, which he confusedly huddles
together; for they have no more in them than these we have already considered.
And as for the Fathers, it is a most insufferable impudence to say, as he does,
That they unanimously confirm the same. The quite contrary has been
unanswerably proved by our Writers, That the Fathers from the first times, down
to Venerable Bede, have taught as he does, That no man ought to think his own
merits will suffice him to salvation; but let him understand, That he must be
saved by the sole Grace of God In Psalm. 31.
.

It is frivolous to alledg the word Merit, so often used by the Fathers; for
they mean no more thereby, but obtaining that which they are said to merit. So
the word is used in innumerable places, and in many Authors: Insomuch, that in
the Passion of St. Maximilian, it is said, his Mother, after he was killed,
merited his Body of the Judge; that is, she obtained it by her Entreaties.
Every Novice in Learning knows this.

XXIII. Faith once had, cannot possibly be lost.
Answer.
IT was not possible for him to go on to speak some Truth; but he returns to
his old way of Calumniating: For there is no such Position maintained among us,
but expressly the contrary, in our XVIth. Article: After we have received the
Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given (and Faith is a Grace and Gift of
God) and fall into sin; and by the Grace of God we may rise again, etc. The
only question is, Whether they that once have Saving Faith, may lose it totally
and finally. In which there are various opinions, not only among us, but among
themselves; some saying, it may be lost totally, but not finally; others, that
it may be lost in both regards. But this is no matter of Faith, but only of
Opinion; for which we do not break Communion.

All his Proofs therefore out of Scripture, are perfectly impertinent; for they
prove what none of us deny, That men may lose their Faith, after they have
received it. As for his Fathers, St. Austin in that very Book which he quotes
De correp. and gratia, c. 12.
, asserts the direct contrary to what is here pretended to be his sense, That
there are some who cannot finally lose the Grace of God. For comparing the
Grace which Adam had, with that which is now given to the Saints, he says, To
the first man (who had received a power not to sin, not to dye, not to desert
the good estate in which he was created) was given the aid of Perseverance; not
whereby he was made that he should persevere; but without which, he could not
by his Free Will have persevered. But now to the Saints, who are predestined
by God's Grace to the Kingdom of God, there is not only given such an aid of
Perseverance, but such an one, that Perseverance it self is given them; not
only that without this gift they cannot persevere, but also that by this gift
they cannot but persevere. For our Savior says to his Apostles, not only,
without me ye can do nothing (XV. Joh. 5.) but withal, v. 16. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and
that your fruit should remain. I have quoted this at large, that such Writers
as I have to deal withal, may blush, if they can, at such shameless Untruths as
they father upon St. Austin. And let a deeper blush color this man's cheeks,
who quotes the Council of Trent, which was but a little above a hundred years
ago, among the Ancient Fathers. His next Charge is,

They maintain, XXIV. That God by his Will and inevitable Decree, has ordained
from all Eternity, who shall be damned, and who saved.
Answer.
AND who is he that dares maintain the contrary? When our Lord has said in
express terms, XVI. Mark 15, 16. Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved;
but he that believes not, shall be damned. This is the eternal purpose of God
in Christ, which the Apostles were commanded to publish every where, as his
inevitable Decree concerning mankind, which cannot be avoided: That if they do
not believe the Gospel which is preached to them, they shall perish; but if
they sincerely believe it, and be baptized, they shall be saved.

This Babbler, I doubt not, would have said something else, but he had not the
wit, viz. That we maintain, God has for his own mere Will and Pleasure,
without any respect to men's Faith or Unbelief, resolved to damn some, and to
save others. But this is not the Doctrine of our Church, as he might have seen
in our XVIIth. Article. If any among us teach such Doctrine, it is no more than
some of their own Doctors have taught. And it is a most senseless thing to
accuse us of that, which if it be a fault, they are as chargeable with it
themselves.

His Scriptures prove nothing contrary to us; but we expressly teach according
to the first of them, 1 Timothy II. 3.
1. Tim. II. 3. That we ought to receive God's promises in such wise, as they
be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture. And therefore we must believe,
That God would have all men to be saved; notwithstanding which, such Triflers
as this man is, must be told, that God will have some men to be damned, (as I
showed before) and these two Propositions do not contradict one the other.

The next is of the same import, 2 Pet. III. 9. 2 Pet. III. 9.
God is not willing any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
And yet he is willing, nay resolved, that all those shall perish, who will not
repent.

For want of other Scriptures, he runs to those that are Apochryphal, and
quotes a passage out of the Book of Wisdom; which we believe to be Canonical
enough in this point: And then he returns to Scripture; a great many Texts of
which he jumbles together with some Apocrypha; but if any one will take the
pains to consult them, he will find they do not contradict any thing that We or
other Protestants affirm. Even they who believe the absolute and irrespective
Decree, consent to what the Prophet Hosea says, (XIII. 9. which is his first
place), That every man's destruction is of himself. He beats the air therefore
in alleging those places, and the sayings of the Fathers; to which we
subscribe, and so do all other Protestants; whose true opinion this poor
Ignoramus did not understand, and therefore could not oppose. For those that
say, the cause why some are reprobated, is God's Will and Pleasure, yet
maintain the cause of their Damnation and Destruction, is their own sins. This,
if he had questioned, and asked them, Why God reprobates this man rather than
another? they would have had St. Austin as ready at hand, as he has, to answer
for them. You seek to know the Causes of God's Will, when the Will of God is
the very cause of all things that are For if the Will of God have a Cause,
there is something which antecedes his Will, which it is impious to believe. If
any man therefore ask, Why God made this? The Answer is, Because he would. If
he go on to ask, Why would he? He searches for something greater than God's
Will, when nothing greater can be found. Let human temerity therefore bridle it
self, and not seek for that which is not, lest he do not find that which is, L.
de Genesis contra Manich. C. 2.

Further they hold (says he) XXV. That every one ought infallibly to assure
himself of his Salvation; and to believe that he is of the number of the
Predestinate.
Answer.
NO man in his wits, much less any Church, ever uttered such foolish words as
these; which are inconsistent with the former Assertion, That God has resolved
to damn some men. How can they who say this, oblige every man to believe he
shall be Saved? The most that any one has said is, that (not every one, but)
every true believer; every one that is justified, ought to be so assured. So
Bellarmine himself represents their Doctrine, which has as many friends and
favorers in the Roman Church, as it has in ours. Where no more than this is
commonly taught, That being assured of the truth of the Divine promises (which
cannot deceive us) we are so far assured of attaining them, as we are certain,
that we faithfully perform our duty; which is the condition upon which the
attaining of them depends.

But this is a very strange Man; for because every Man ought not to be assured
of his Salvation, he will allow no Man to be assured; no, not St. Paul.
Expressly against the Doctrine of his own Church, which looks upon him as a man
particularly elected by God, not only to the Apostleship, but to Salvation. Nor
does he contradict this, in 1 Cor. XIX. 27. 1 Cor. XIX. 27.
but rather tells us how he secured his Salvation, by keeping under his Body.
By which means, we also may be secured; for if we continue in his Goodness, as
the next Scripture speaks, XI. Romans 20, XI. Romans 20, 21.
21. we ought not to doubt he will continue it unto us to the end. And we teach
no other assurance of Salvation, but by constant Fidelity unto Christ; which as
long as we maintain, we ought to be certain of the other. The only fear is,
lest we should not be steadfast; and therefore we are well admonished in the
next Scripture, 2 Philip. 12.
II. Philip. 12. to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling. But so
doing, we shall undoubtedly be saved.

No Church in the World more beats down vain security, than this of ours; nor
does any more encourage it, than the Church of Rome; where men are secured of
their Salvation, if they can be so vain as to believe it, by confessing to a
Priest, and receiving his Absolution at the last Gasp.

The other Scriptures which he has shovelled together, are of no different
import from these, and therefore need not be examined. Nor his Fathers neither,
which they have now made a shift to scrape together, tho they had none in the
first Edition of this Book. For they that read Bellarmine, could not but know
what a great number of Testimonies are brought out of the Fathers, to confirm
their Opinion, who hold men may be so certain they are in a state of Grace,
that they may be assured of their Salvation. Particularly out of St. Austin, in
a great number of places; more especially in XXII. Tract. upon St. John, where
he argues thus. Our Savior has told me, He that hears my words, and believes
on him that sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation.
Now, I have heard the words of my Lord; I have believed; when I was an Infidel,
I was made a faithful man; and therefore, as he tells me, I have passed from
Death unto Life, and shall not come into Condemnation; not by my presumption,
but by his own promise. Which words are so convincing, that Bellarmine L. III.
de Justif. C. X.
himself acknowledges, every one may conclude from this promise of Christ, he
is passed from Death unto Life, etc. The only question is, with what certainty
this can be gathered, which St. Austin, says he, does not explain. But it is
plain to every understanding, that there is the same certainty of the
Conclusion, that there is of the Premises. A man may be as certain of his
Salvation, as he is, that he sincerely believes Christ's words, and is obedient
to them. Nor does the place, which this man quotes out of St. Austin,
contradict this, but rather confirm it; if the following words be added, which
this man fraudulently conceals. They are these In Psalm XLI.
, There is no stability, nor hope in my self. My soul is troubled within me:
Will thou not be troubled? do not remain in thy self; but say, To thee, O Lord,
have I lift up my Soul. Hear this more plainly. Do not hope from thy self, but
from God. For if thy hope be from thy self, thy Soul will be troubled; because
it has not yet found, whence it may be secure of thy self. Which shows St.
Austin thought men might attain to security, but not in or from themselves; but
in God alone, before whom every one ought to humble himself, that he may exalt
him. It is to no purpose to examine the rest.

XXVI. That every Man has not an Angel-Guardian, or Keeper.
Answer.
MEN may believe, either that every one has, or has not, and yet not
contradict our Church, which has determined nothing about it; nor has it been
resolved in any Church, but every one left to think as he pleases. For all that
Suarez and Vasquez (other kind of men than this) durst say in this case, is
this; that tho this Assertion be not expressed in Scripture, nor defined by the
Church (mind that) yet it has been received with such an universal consent,
and has such great foundation in Scripture, as understood by the Fathers, that
it cannot be denied without great rashness, and almost Error. See here how
cautiously these Learned men speak, and and how ingenuously they confess the
Church has determined nothing in this Point, but it is a kind of popular
opinion. As for Scripture, in direct contradiction to this man, they tell us,
it is not expressly delivered therein: And whatsoever foundations they think are
there laid for this Opinion, it seems to me, upon serious consideration, that
the Scriptures rather suppose, that every man (no, not the good) has not a
particular guardian Angel, that constantly attends him: But God sends either
one or more Angels, as there is occasion, and as he thinks fit, to do what he
appoints: Who after they have dispatched that business, depart from them, till
he thinks fit again to employ those, or some other Heavenly Messengers for
their good. This seems very manifest to me, in that which is reported,
concerning Abraham, Daniel, St. Peter, St. John, and the Blessed Virgin her
self in the I. of St. Luke. Let him, or any one else, show such proofs, if he
can, out of Scripture, That the Angels do constantly remain with those whom
they sometimes attend, and are fixed in their Office of Guardianship to them.

XVIII. Matthew. 10.
XVIII. Matthew. 10. Speaks not of One Angel, but of more: and does not say, they
Guard Christ's little ones, but that they always behold the face of his Father in
heaven; that is, wait to receive his Commands (as Servants who stand before
their Master) which they are ready to execute. This confirms the other Opinion,
I now mentioned, that Angels are only sent as God Orders, and are not fixed in
their Attendance. Neither does this Text speak of every man, as this Scribler
idly talks; but of Christians, and particularly the weaker sort, called little
ones, who most needed their Ministry. Mr. Calvin also in that very place, which
this man mentions, restrains his question to the faithful; who, he dare not
say, have every one of them a particular Angel to minister to them, but rather
inclines to the contrary Opinion.

The XCI. Psalm 11, 12. XCI. Psalm. 11, 12.
Proves the very same, That God gives his Angels charge of Good men. But it
neither speaks of one who is the Angel-keeper, nor that the Angels, whether
more or fewer, remain always with good men. There were a great many about one
Prophet Elisha, 1 Kings VI. 12. But it is not likely, that those Troops were
his constant Guard. But it is in vain to appeal to S. Cyril of Alexandria his
opinion, that it is meant of the Angel-keeper; for they will not in other
cases, as I shall show shortly, stand to his judgment.

It is true, in the XII. Acts 13. XII. Acts 13.
The Jewish Christians, who were assembled in Mary's House, were of opinion,
That it was the Angel of St. Peter, who knocked at the door: But whether this
opinion was true, or no, is the question: which the Scripture does not resolve:
Nor can we gather the Faith of the Primitive Church (which this man thinks is
apparent from this place) from the opinion of a few of the Jewish Christians;
who had many opinions, which I hope this man will not justify. And though this
should prove such a man as Peter had an Angel-Guardian, it will not prove that
every man has. For this seems to have been the old opinion among the Jews,
That only excellent men, Persons of great integrity and usefulness, had such
attendants to take care of them; for instance, Jacob, as one may gather out of
St. Chrysostom's Third Hom. upon the Colossians. But it does not appear that
they thought they had them always; nor one and the same, when God favored them
with their Ministry. And thus Mr. Calvin (in that place of his Institutions,
which this man quotes) says he does not see what should hinder us from
understanding this Angel of St. Peter, of any Angel whatsoever, to whom God
committed the care of him at that time, whom we cannot therefore conclude to
have been his perpetual keeper.

Let who pleases see more; he will not find one of the Scriptures he quotes,
speak home to the point: No, not those out of Tobit (which he knows we do not
own for any part of the Rule of our belief) for it does not follow, that every
man has an Angel-Guardian, if Tobit had one who accompanied him in that
journey. No, Tobit himself had not his company always; but the Angel when he had
finished his journey, departed from him. See how foolish this man is, who not
only quotes Books, which we allow not to be Holy Writ, but alleges places
there, that make against him.

And his Fathers he quotes as madly, beginning with St. Gregory; and putting
even Gregory of Tours before St. Austin. And the Reader may judge of what value
his Testimonies are, by what he alleges out of St. Hierome; whose words if he
would have given us entirely, it would have appeared they carry no Authority
with them. For it immediately follows, Whence we read in the Revelation of St.
John, to the Angel of Ephesus, of Thyatira, and the Angel of Philadelphia: As
if these had been Guardian Angels of these Churches, to whom our Savior wrote;
when all agree, they were the Bishops of those Churches; as Ribera confesses;
who justly wonders that St. Hierome, or any one else, should think them to be
Angelical Spirits. If St. Hierome wrote those Commentaries, it is manifest he
departed from the opinion of other Fathers, when he says, That every soul has
its Angel assigned it, from its Nativity: For they say only, That every
Believer has this privilege. There needs no more be said in this matter, which
can at most be no more than a probable opinion; and therefore it is not
contrary to the Faith, to deny, that every one of us has an Angel for his
custody and patronage.

XXVII. That the holy Angels pray not for us, nor know our thoughts and desires
on earth.
Answer.
NOne of us say, That the holy Angels pray not for us in general, (no, many
Protestants grant it) but we have no reason to believe they pray for us in our
particular concerns; and we are sure they do not intercede for us by their
Merits, for they have none. We are sure also, that they know not our thoughts
or desires; unless they be discovered by external effects or signs, or they be
revealed to them by God. For the Scripture expressly says, God only knows the
heart, 1 Kings VIII. 39. 1 Cor. II. 11. And this Suarez L. 2. de Angel. c. XXI.
n. 3.
himself says, is a Catholic Assertion, That an Angel cannot naturally know
or see the act or free consent of any created will, unless by him that has
such a tree affection, it be manifested to another. And this he says is de
fide; and proves it from Scriptures and Fathers. Now if any one will say, that
God does reveal our internal thoughts and desires to the Angels, he is a very
bold man; unless he have a Divine Revelation for it. None of the Scriptures
here mentioned, say any such thing.

The first of them, I. Zach. 12. I. Zac. 12.
only proves, That an Angel prayed (not for a particular person, and his
particular necessities, but) that he would have mercy upon Jerusalem and the
cities of Judah; that is, upon the whole Nation. This many Protestants grant;
and therefore he belies them when he says, They believe the Angels do not pray
for us. For this very place is alleged by the Apology for the Augustan
Confession, and by Chemnitius in his Common-places, as an argument why they
grant, Angels pray for the Church in general: For this Text proves no more.

The next, Tob. XII. 12.
(tho out of an Apocryphal Book, XII. Tob. 12.) says nothing of the Angels
praying for us, but of their bringing men's prayers before the Holy One: Which
the same Protestants also allow; meaning thereby only a Ministerial Oblation of
men's Prayers before God, (as they explain themselves) not a Pr pitiatory
Oblation, which is proper only to Jesus Christ.

VIII. Rev. 4.
Unto whom the third place belongs, VIII. Rev. 4. not to an ordinary Angel, but
to that great Angel of the Covenant (whom the Prophet speaks of, III. Mal. 1.)
out of whose hand the smoke of the incense came, and ascended up before God. So
St. Austin, and Primasius; nay, Viega, a famous Jesuit, affirms, that most
Interpreters, by this Angel understand Christ: And he gives these good reasons
for it: Unto whom, but to him alone, does it belong to offer the Incense of the
whole Church, that is, their Prayers, in a golden Censer? Who but he could send
down part of the Fire with which the golden Censer was filled, ( v. 5.) upon
the earth, and inflame it with the Fire of the Divine Love, and the Flaming
Gifts of the Holy Ghost? etc. See the Folly of this man, who applies that to
Angels, which belongs, in the opinion of most Interpreters, unto Christ alone.
And see his Falseness also, who would make his Reader believe that Irenaeus
understood this place as he does; when he speaks not one word of this matter in
the place he mentions; but only says, There is therefore an Altar in the
Heavens; for thither our Prayers and our Oblations are directed, and to the
Temple there; as John in the Revelation says; and there was opened the Temple
of God, and the Tab^^^acle; for behold, says he, the Tabernacle of God, in
which he will dwell with men. In which words he has no respect to this place,
but to XI. Rev. 19. and XXI. 3.

Once more, take notice of the wretched performance of this man, who took upon
him to prove, That Angels not only pray for us, but know our thoughts and
desires upon earth; about which there is not the least touch in any one of
these places, which are all he quotes at large. And as for those, the Chapters
and Verses of which follow, they only tell us, what Angels knew of the mind of
God, which they brought in messages to men; but nothing of their knowing the
minds of men. Let the Reader, if he think good, peruse them, and he will see I
say true. What heart then can one have to look into his Fathers, when he deals
thus insincerely with the Holy Scriptures? But to show that nothing else can be
expected from such men, I will briefly note, That St. Hilary expressly speaks of
such a Ministerial Intercession as many Protestants grant; that is, of their
bringing men's Prayers to God, as he speaks. Whose words are a gloss upon the
Apostle's, I. Heb. For they are ministering spirits sent forth for to minister
to them who are heirs of salvation Whereupon follows the words he quotes,
Therefore the nature of God does not need their intercession, but our
infirmity; for they are sent forth for those who shall be heirs of salvation.
What can be plainer, than that he speaks only of a Ministerial (for they are
sent forth to Minister) not of a Powerful Intercession?

XXVIII. That we may not Pray to them.
Answer.
HERE he speaks some Truth again; and a great many of his own Church
ingenuously confess, That there is no command in Scripture, nor so much as an
example of Praying to them.

The Text they have most in their mouths, who assert we may Pray to them, is
this which he first quotes, XLVIII. Genesis 16.
XLVIII. Genesis 16. But by this Angel, a great number of the Fathers understand
Christ himself, St. Cyril, for instance, (to whose Authority, I told you, they
dare not always stand) thus expounds it, L. 3. Thesaur. C. 1. And so does
Novatianus in his Book of the Trinity, C. 15. St. Athanasius also against the
Arians, Orat. 4. And St. Chrysostom upon the place ( Hom. 66. in Gen.) and
diverse others. Therefore this is no sorry shift, (as this ignorant man presumes
to call it) having such very great Patrons to maintain it. And what if St.
Chrysostom in another place, understands this of an Angel, which attends (not
every man, as this Writer pretends, but) every Believer (as his words are
expressly, and St. Basil's) it is no more than some Protestants do, even Mr.
Calvin himself is content with this Exposition in his Institutions, (tho in his
Commentaries on Genesis he says it is meant of Christ), but they of the Church
of Rome gain nothing at all from this concession. For Jacob's words are no
direct formal Invocation or Compellation of the Angel, (for he does not say, O
Angel of God, bless the l^ds) but only an earnest desire that they might have
the Angelical Protection; for which he prays to God, That he would send the
Angel to preserve them, as he had done him.

Tobit himself meant no more in the place which he next alleges, V. Tob. 16.
That God who dwells in Heaven, would prosper their Journey, by sending his
Angel to keep them company. For it is certain, that the Jews never prayed to
Angels; and it is as certain, that they constantly define Prayer by a direct
and express relation to God, and none else. And therefore it is not to be
thought, that any good man among them, ever joined Prayer to God and an Angel
together in the same breath; as he makes Tobit do in this place. No, this is
contrary to the sense of the greatest Divines in his own Church.

XII. Hosea 4.
Before he ventured to allege the next place, XII. Hos. 4. he should have been
sure that the Prophet speaks of a Created Angel, and not of the Son of God, who
in the Opinion of Justin Martyr, Eusebius, St. Hilary, and many more Fathers,
appeared to Jacob, and blessed him. Whence it is that he called the place
Peniel, having there seen the face of God. And to this sense the next verse
inclines, where he is called the Lord God of Hosts, who found Jacob in Bethel.
Which the Fathers in the Council of Sirmium thought so certain, that they
denounce a Curse against those that maintained it was the unbegotten Father,
not the Son, (for God they concluded he was) that wrestled with Jacob. But
suppose it was an Angel, the H^brews are so far from thinking that Jacob m^de
supplication to him, that they conceive (many of them) the Angel made
supplication to Jacob, for he prayed him to let him go. Take it otherwise; it
signifies no more but that he desired him to give him his blessing: which we
desire of men here upon Earth, to whom we do not properly pray.

From hence he passes to satisfy Scruples, which he says some have: who say,
they would pray to them, if they could be assured that they hear us, etc. Who
they are that say thus, I know not: they are none of us. For we do not think it
lawful to pray to them, though they could hear us. But how does he prove that
they can hear us? Why, he brings the common place, XV. Luke 10. which says
there is joy in their presence, that is, in heaven (as it is, v. 7.) over one
sinner that repents. Which shows they know when there is joy in Heaven, and
what that joy is for; because they are in Heaven: but it does not prove they
know all things that pass upon earth; but only those things, of which notice is
given in Heaven. At this rate we may prove, that good men know all that is done
on Earth, because they rejoice at the Conversion of of a Sinner: that is, when
they hear of it; and the Angels rejoice no other ways.

They that like his Performances upon these Texts, may look into the rest: and
see how, to fill up the number, he alleges the same over again, XII. Hos. 4.
and now also quotes XIX. Genesis 18, etc. to prove we may pray to Angels, which in
the foregoing Section, he brought to prove, that they pray for us. Nay, sends
us to the Song of the three Children; where I can find nothing of praying to
the Angels, no more than of praying to the Sun, and Moon, and Stars.

His quotation out of St. Austin's Annotations on the Book of Job, is not worth
our regard. For St. Austin See his Retract. L. 2. C. 13.
himself was doubtful whether he should own them, being put forth by others,
rather than him; and so corruptly, that he would scarce say they were his. And
being admitted for his, he does not speak home to this man's purpose: For he
only says, Job seems to entreat the Angels, that they would deprecate for him;
or rather the Saints, that they would pray for a Penitent. Now this is not the
Religious invocation, which the Romanists plead for; but only such a desire as
we make to a Friend here on Earth, to help us by his prayers. But whatsoever
St. Austin may be supposed to say, it is manifest, he that thus interprets the
place, mistakes very much; fancying those to be Friends in Heaven, who are
Friends on Earth; of whom Job most certainly speaks. V. Job 1.
And so does the next place; V. Job 1. which speaks not at all of praying to
the Saints, but of desiring them to appear for him, and testify to his
innocence. Thus Menochius himself expounds it, The meaning seems to be, I (that
is Eliphaz) have already told thee my Opinion, If thou have any Patron among
the Saints, or whose testimony thou can bring forth in thy defense; do not
delay, but produce it before us. They can tell of none (as others enlarge upon
the words) who was ever oppressed with such Calamities as are fallen upon thee,
unless they deserved them for their sins. If these words relate to Angels, as
some Protestants think they do (because the LXX. here have Angels, instead of
Saints) the meaning is the same: If thou have seen an Angel, as I have done
(IV. 15.) he can give thee no other answer. Thus the same Menochius.

Protestants hold, he says, XXIX. That the Angels cannot help us.
Answer.
THIS man seems to have been in love with lying: else he could not have
invented such a senseless falsehood. For no Protestant ever was so foolish as to
say, they cannot help us. We believe they both can, and do: and we thankfully
acknowledge their ministry, in our Public Prayers on Michaelmas day. But we
look upon them only as Ministers; who can do nothing of themselves, but as they
are ordered. For they are not set over us as Lords, to act according to their
own pleasure: but sent by the great Lord of all, to do us service as he
appoints them.

Neither his Scriptures, nor Fathers, say more than this, and we say the same:
therefore what a Trifler is this, who blots Paper to prove the Sun shines!

XXX. That no Saint deceased, has afterward appeared to any upon Earth.
Answer.
THIS is just such another Falsehood, devised on purpose to have something,
right or wrong, to object against us: For no Protestant is of this mind. He
says, he has met with some such: But for my part, I cannot give any credit to
one, who has told so many untruths.

The Scriptures therefore which he alleges, need not be considered; much less
his Story out of the Maccabees. And his Fathers are such as were imposed on by
Fabulous Relations, devised to make way for the belief of Purgatory. And such
Apparitions we have great reason to doubt of.

XXXI. That the Saints deceased, know not what passes upan Earth.
Answer.
NO; not every thing that here passes, as his words seem to import. For so
Aquinas Pars I. Q. XII. Art. 8. ad 4.
himself resolves, speaking of the knowledge of the Blessed in Heaven, Though
it be the natural desire of a rational Creature to know all things which belong
to the perfection of its understanding (which are the species and kinds of
things, and the reasons of them, etc.) Yet to know particulars, and the
thoughts and actions of them, belong not to the perfection of a created
understanding: nor does its natural desire tend to this. The very same say we;
and a little more: they may know some particulars, at some times; but not all,
at all times. And let us hear what this vain Talker has to say to the contrary.

XVI. Luke 29.
First, He says, out of XVI. Luke 29. That Abraham knew there were Moses and
the Prophets Books here on earth, which he had never seen when he was alive.
What a Ninny is this! who undertakes to prove they know what passes here at
present (or else he does nothing) by proving they know what is passed and gone
long ago: Which they may know, and not understand what is done at this instant.
Besides, if they know some such general things, it does not prove they know all
particulars: For instance, what I am now writing about this matter. St Austin,
in that Book he mentions, L. de cura pro mortuis.
does indeed say, Abraham knew of Moses: But in the very same Book, and the
Chapter foregoing ( C. 13.) he expressly says, the spirits of the dead are
there, Where they do not see whatsoever things are done, or come to pass, in
the life of men. And in the same place he alleges, LXIII. Isa. 16. to prove,
That Abraham and Israel did not know what is done in this world, nor how their
children fare. And (to confound this man, and all such false pretenders to
Learning) he says, in that very Chapter quoted by him (which is the 14th. not
the 24th. for there are not so many Chapters in the Book) in express terms, he
knew those things, not while they were a doing when they were alive, but being
dead he might know them from Lazarus; and thus he resolves, lest it should be
false which the Prophet says, Abraham knows us not. And then immediately
begins the next Chapter, in this manner, It must be confessed therefore, that
the dead do not know what is done here, while it is doing; but may hear it
afterward from those, who dying, go from us to them. Not all things indeed,
but such as they are suffered to relate, and such as they are suffered to
remember, and such as are fit for them to hear. They may hear something also
from the Angels, etc. It would be too long to Transcribe the rest; and this is
sufficient to convince those that have a mind to understand the truth, how
little credit is to be given to such men as this, Who to give us farther proofs
of his folly, alleges, V. John. 45. V. John 45.
to prove the Saints know what is done here. When it is evident our Savior does
not speak of Moses his Person, but of his Writings, or Laws; as he himself
could interpret it in the foregoing place.

XII. Rev. 10.
And who for shame (to use his own word) but such a man as he, would quote the
XII. Rev. 10. to prove the Saints must know what is done on Earth, because the
Devil does; whose business it is to go to and fro (which the Saints do not)
while he seeks whom he may devour: And to prove likewise the Devil knows what is
done, because he lays false accusations to the charge of good Christians. So
this Text signifies, as Menochius himself expounds it; The accuser, says he,
is the backbiter, the calumniator, the detractor, who accuses the Saints with
false criminations, and calumnies, as anciently he did Job. A most excellent
argument to prove the Devil knows what is done here, because he is a liar, a
false accuser, who tells what was never done. Will people never open their
eyes, and see the senselessness of these men, who trouble the World with their
Brainsick Discourses?

He promised express Scriptures, and perpetually falls into pitiful arguing. As
he does here upon another Scripture in the Old Testament, 2 King. VI 12. where,
because Elisha is said to know what the King of Israel said in his Bedchamber,
2 Kings VI. 12.
he concludes that he knew by the light of Prophecy, even the inward thoughts.
And what it God had revealed this to him (which he did not) would it follow
that he knew the words and the thoughts of all Israel? And because he knew what
the King said in secret, at some time, that he knew what he and all his People
said at all times? These are extravagant Conceits; fit only for men in B^dlam.
What the light of glory, as he calls it, can make the Souls of the Blessed
understand, we cannot tell: but they are not capable to understand all
particulars, as you heard before. And therefore St. Austin Cura pro M^^tuis, c.
14.
, in the Book and Chapter before-quoted by himself, argues quite otherwise:
that it does not follow, because the rich man told Abraham how many Brethren he
had, therefore he knew what his Brethren did, and what they suffered at that
time. In like manner, he would have argued, no doubt, in any other case, if
there had been occasion; that because the Saints, for instance, know some
things which they are told by others from this World, we must not infer that
they know other things besides them.

That which follows is like this, but much worse. For because Elisha, 2 Kings
V. 26. 2 Kings V. 26.
being afar off, as he says, saw all that passed between Naaman and Gehasi,
therefore the Saints, he concludes, see what passes in this World. What mad
stuff is this? Elisha was not afar off, for the Text says expressly, v. 19.
Naaman was departed from him a little way, when Gehasi ran after him. And in
the very same Book we find, that though Elisha knew this thing, at some
distance from him, yet he did not know another, which was as easy to know,
viz. That the Shunamite's Son was dead, 2 King. IV. 27.

And how does St. Paul's being wrapped into the Third Heaven (which is his next
proof) give us any reason to believe that they who are there, know what is done
upon Earth? These things hang together, like Harp and Harrow.

Nor does it appear that St. Stephen saw from Earth, as far as Heaven. Our
Savior indeed presented himself unto him, standing (not sitting, VII. Acts 55.
as this man quotes it) at the right hand of the Divine Glory; which then also
appeared. But so it had done, in ancient times, in the very door of the
Tabernacle; where the Congregation of Israel saw it without looking as far as
Heaven. But if we take it otherwise; it does not follow, that because God can
make his Divine Glory shine from Heaven to Earth, therefore any one can see
from Earth to Heaven, or from Heaven to Earth. Much less, that the Saints can
always see what is done here on Earth: For St. Stephen could not always behold
the glory of God, and our Lord standing at his right hand; but only at that
time, upon an extraordinary occasion, when God in an extraordinary manner shone
upon him.

All his own Divines will tell him, that Arguments are not to be drawn from
Parables: such as that of the Rich man and Lazarus, (to which he makes his next
resort). For if we allow that way of reasoning, then he may prove from hence,
that we and the Saints may talk together, though at this distance one from
another; as the Rich man did with Abraham, and Abraham with him. Of all the
ways that have been invented, to show how the Saints may know what we do; there
was never any so extravagant as this, of their seeing from Heaven what is done
here.

I believe the Reader is weary of such Discourse as this; especially if he
looked for express Scripture; which this man bad him expect. Therefore I shall
not exercise his patience, with any further notice of what he says, about the
Communion of Saints, which may be without the least knowledge they have of us,
or we of them: as appears by the Communion of all the Members of Christ's Body
here on Earth; some of which never heard of, or have ever seen the other.

Look never so long in the other Scriptures he quotes, you will find nothing in
them to the purpose. And the first of his Fathers is a Counterfeit; the two
next we shall meet withal presently, to prove we may pray to the Saints; which
is the drift also of this Discourse.

XXXII. That the Saints pray not for us.
Answer.
THere is no such assertion as this among us; but he again calumniates us. For
though the Saints cannot know our particular wants, and therefore cannot make
particular Prayers for us; yet that in general they pray for that part of God's
Church, which is here on Earth, and perhaps (for this we cannot affirm
certainly) for some particular persons, who were well known, and dear to them,
when on Earth, we do not deny: But if we did, he is so ill provided of Proofs,
and of Scripture for it, that those which he alleges will work no belief in us.

For in V. Rev. 8. V. Rev. 8.
there is a plain representation of the Church here on Earth, not in Heaven. So
the latter end of their Song, v. 10. might have informed him, where they say,
Thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the
Earth. And thus many of the Fathers understood it; as he might have learnt from
Viega, one of their own Doctors. So that he might have sp red his lo, how, etc.
and we may rather say, in imitation of it, Lo, how silly an Interpreter this is
of such Divine Mysteries!

What is recorded in a Book of no authority, 2 Macc. XV. 14.
2 Maccab XV. 14. concerning Judas his Dreams, is not worth considering: and it
proves no more if we should allow it, but only a general recommendation of that
Nation to God.

XV. Jer. 1.
The next place out of XV. Jer. 1. does not imply that Moses and Samuel then
prayed for them in Heaven, but that if they did, or rather if two such powerful
persons were then alive to intercede for that People, they should not prevail.
And so St. Hierom (whom this man belies, as he does us) plainly enough expounds
it. Nay, his own Sixtus Senensis says, upon the like place (though Noah,
Daniel and Job stood before me) that the Prophet speaks upon a supposition,
that if such men as they were in this sinful World, they should deliver none,
etc. God would not hear them, for such a wicked People.

It is of no consequence, what Baruch says, being never reputed a Canonical
Book, and, according to his own Rule in his Preface, ought to pass for nothing;
unless he had proved the same that Baruch says, by places of Canonical Writ.
Besides, III. Baruc 4.
dead Israelites may mean no more but those now dead, who when they were alive,
prayed as their Posterity now did. And so Nich. Lyra understands by dead
Israelies, the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, who when they were alive, prayed
for the good Estate of their Posterity. Or dead, may signify those, whose
condition was so low, that they could do nothing for themselves, as he
describes all Israel, v. 10. that they were accounted with them that go down
into the grave, that is, dead men. This, I will stand to it, is an
Interpretation they cannot confute. Theodoret does say, that these words
clearly prove the immortality of the Soul: and that is all.

I see no reason why II. Rev. 26, 27. may not be interpreted of the preferment
Christ promised, in this world, to those who should keep his words, i. e.
fulfill his Commands, to the end of that present persecution. But, if it relate
to the other World, Menochius (a better Interpreter than he) expressly says,
that Christ speaks of the power which the Saints shall exercise in the day of
judgment over all Nations, which did not obey Christ: judging them with Christ,
and delivering them to the punishment of eternal death. Agreeable to what we
read III. Wisd. 8. They shall judge the Nations, and have dominion over the
people. St. Austin has not a word of this matter upon the second Psalm, but
only says, these words, ruling with a Rod of iron, is as much, as with
inflexible Justice. We see what th^se men would bring things to, it they be let
alone. The Saints may be looked upon now as Rulers of this World, by a power
imparted unto them from Christ, who has thus established them, this man says,
over the Nations. He should have shown us where he reads this, for we cannot
find it here.

But this leads him into reasoning again (finding so little help in his express
Scriptures) and that is as weak as all the rest. For it is out of a Parabolical
Scripture before-named; from which all acknowledge Arguments ought not to be
drawn. And besides, it is not a Prayer to Abraham, but such a request as we
make one to another here, when we want relief.

What St. Austin says on this place, is not worth the searching after; for it
will prove no more than what he quotes out of his XVth. Sermon (de verb.
Apostol.) he should have said the XVIIth. where he distinguishes between the
Commemoration that was made of the Martyrs at the Altar, and of other Faithful
persons. For the l^tter they prayed; but this would have been an injury, he
thinks, to the Martyrs, by whose Prayers we rather should be recommended to
God. But this signifies no more than a general recommendation of the Church to
God's Mercy. His next Father, St. H^lary, speaks only of what Angels do, not of
Saints: And I gave an account of that before, but for want of company he brings
him in again. He concludes with Damascen, a Father that lived almost Eight
hundred years after Christ; and was so credulous as to vouch it for a Truth,
That Trajan's Soul was delivered out of H ll by Gregory 's Prayers; and says,
The whole world witnesses it. Which all the world now, even their own Church,
believes to be a fable. And yet this Damascen s^ith no more, but that they are
to be honored as those that make Intercession to God for us; that is, for the
Church.

XXXIII. That we ought not to beseech God to grant our Prayers, in favor of
the Saints, or their merits: nor do we reeeive any benefit thereby.
Answer.
IT is no small favor, that we can get so much truth out of him, as to
confess, That this is one way of their Praying by the Mediation of Saints, to
beseech God to grant their desires in favor of them and their merits. For some
of his brethren mince the matter, and say, they only desire the Saints to pray
for them. But their Missals and Breviaries confute such men, as notorious
dissemblers; for there are abundance of Prayers like this, That December. VI.
by the Merits and Prayers of St. Nicholas, God would deliver them from the
fire of Hell. Which if it be an allowable way of Praying, I do not see but the
Saints are Mediators of Redemption, as well as of Intercession, (as they are
wont to distinguish) for by their merits is a great deal more, than by their
Intercession. And if they intercede by their merits, wherein do they fall short
of Christ? who by his Merits redeemed us, and in virture of the same Merits
intercedes for us.

But let us hear his Scriptures; which the Reader may take notice are every one
of them out of the Old Testament, during which (according to the common
Doctrine of their Church) the Souls of pious men were held in a Limbus, remote
from God, in the borders of Hell; and therefore could not be Intercessors with
God; much less plead their merits. This is enough to overthrow his whole
Discourse in this Chapter: yet to show his folly a little more fully, I am
content to consider them particularly.

The first is XXXII. Exodus 13. which he has the confidence to say, XXXII.
Exodus 13.
is against us in express words; when there is no mention of merit, and the
sense is evidently declared in the Text it self; which speaks of the Oath of
God to those great men, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: showing that Moses his Prayer
was grounded not upon their merit, but upon God's gracious Covenant with them,
confirmed by his Oath, XXVI. Genesis 3. Which is the sense of Theodoret also (whom
this man most shamefully belies) in the place by him quoted: Moses mentions the
name of the Patriarchs, instead of supplication: and remembers the Oaths made
to them, and begs that the Covenants wherein he was engaged to them, might
stand firm. Who would trust such a man as this, who makes Theodoret say that
Moses added the intercession of the holy Patriarchs, thinking himself
insufficient? when he only says, he mentioned their name (as men i. e. in
covenant with God) instead of supplication. And thus he deals with St. Austin,
or rather worse; who, in the place he mentions, says not a word of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, but only of Moses, whose merits were so great with God, as
his most faithful Servant, that God says, Let me alone, etc. upon which
Passage he makes this reflection, We are admonished hereby, that when our
merits have so loaded us, as to make us not beloved of God, we may be relieved
by the merits of those whom God does love. For when he says, Let me alone that
I may destroy them; what is it but to say, I would have destroyed them, had
they not been beloved of thee? Now what is this to the meritorious intercession
of the Saints in the other World, when he speaks of the merits (as his phrase
is) of Moses here on Earth?

I have been the longer in this, 2 Chronicles. VI. 16.
because it will serve to answer all the rest. For in 2 Chronicles. VI. 16. the
Prayer expressly relies upon the promise God had made to his Servant David, not
upon David's merits.

In the next place, CXXXII. Psalm. 1. CXXXII. Psalm. 1.
God is desired to remember David's afflictions; but how does it appear that
they merited? If this Psalm was made by David, (as many think from the first 8
Verses of it) sure he was not so immodest as to plead his own merits with God.
The truth is, the Penner of this Psalm, whoever he was, most likely Solomon,
puts God in mind of David, and his fidelity to him under all his sufferings;
because of the Covenant God had made, and confirmed by an Oath, with that pious
man, v. 10, 11, 12.

He does wisely only to name the next place, 2 Chronicles. I. 9. for the words are
expressly against him, which are these, Now, O Lord God, let thy promise unto
David my Father be established. But the alleging LXIII. Isa. 17. argues gross
Ignorance, for it is a plain desire God would return to them, for the sake of
the Twelve Tribes of Israel, which contained his people, who were his
inheritance, as Menochius, and indeed the Text it self, expounds it. And this
desire is founded upon the abovenamed Covenant, Promise, or Oath, made to
their Fathers: which he may find in a number of Places, 1 King. VIII. 25, 26. 2 Chronicles. XXI. 7. LXXXIX. Psalm. 3, 4.

Why he adds the two next places, unless to make a show, I cannot imagine. For
H ster's Apocryphal Prayer has nothing in it sounding this way, but only those
words, O God of Abraham. And David only says, 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 8. O God of
Abraham Isaac, and Israel, our Fathers. Which no Man in the World but himself,
I believe, will take to be naming them for his Intercessors, (as he speaks)
when they evidently signify the favor and kindness God had to them, which he
hoped he would graciously continue, according to his Promise, unto his People
Israel.

The last place, XX. Exodus 5. is a direct Confutation of all that he says; for
it mentions not the Merits of good Men, but the Mercy which God will show unto
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments.

God of his infinite Mercy, put an end to the reign of these Men, who thus
foully abuse his holy word; that they may no longer pervert the right way of the
Lord, and mislead his People into pernicious Errors.

XXXIV. That we ought not expressly to pray them to pray or intercede to God for
us.
Answer.
HEretofore the words were these, That we may not pray to them; which is the
true point. But now they are changed into, We may not pray them to pray for us.
As if the Church of Rome did no more than this; when it is manifest they pray
directly to them; and Invocation, according to their Doctrine, is a part of
that Worship which is due to them; whereas praying them to pray for us (as one
man desires another to do) has nothing of worship in it. He could not go on to
deal sincerely, as he had begun in the former Section. Truth is a very great
stranger to them; and their great business is to misrepresent both our Opinion
and their own.

Luke XVI. 24.
The very first Scripture also, which he quotes over again, if it prove any
thing, proves more than he would have us think is their Opinion. For the Man
does not say, I pray Father Abraham pray for me* but have mercy on me. But I
have told him before, this is a Parable, which he will by no means allow, and
thinks to choke us with the Voice of ten Renowned and Ancient Fathers, who all
affirm this to be a true History, and not a Parable. But this Man has very ill
luck with his Fathers; for the very first he mentions (who should have been one
of the last) Theophylact, not only calls it a Parable, but is so confident of
it, that he says they think foolishly (so it is in the Greek, tho in the Latin
they leave out that word, (...), foolishly) who take it for an History. The
Reader, I believe, blushes for this Man, who if he could or would have looked
into Maldonate, (a Jesuit of no mean note) he might have found several other
Fathers, whom Theophylact follows in this opinion. And St. Chrysostom among
the rest, who indeed sometimes says it is a History; but does not say, as this
Man makes him, that it is not a Parable. And if the Cause must be carried by
the Voices of Fathers, I can name him more than Ten, or a Dozen, who say the
Souls of the Faithful do not enjoy the Glorious Vision of God till the
Resurrection. And therefore Saints can neither know our Prayers, nor are to be
invoked, as he concludes merely from this Parable. Concerning which, I think
both Maldonate and Menochius (two considerable Jesuits) have very judiciously
resolved, for the quieting of this doubt, whether it be History or Parable;
that it is both. For that there was a rich man, and a poor, called Lazarus;
that the one when he died went to Hell, and the other was carried to Abraham's
Bosom, is a History. But that the rich man talked with Abraham, and desired
him to send Lazarus to cool his Tongue with a drop of Water, is a Parable
adjoined to the History; for they that are in Hell, do not ask Courtesies of
the Saints. Now it happens unfortunately for this man, that what he grounds his
Argument upon, falls within that part which is Parable, Father Abraham, have
mercy on me. Which Maldonate judiciously observes, is a form of Speech, which
Beggars use; as they lie in the Highway, showing their sores; and well
represents how Lazarus and he had changed Conditions. Lazarus was poor here,
and the rich man stripped of all there. Here the rich man enjoyed his pleasure,
and there Lazarus rejoiced. No man of sense can reject this Interpretation. And
yet this Writer cries out, Lo, two Saints are here prayed to, and besought in
one verse. Nay, he has the Confidence to ask us, For God-sake, where are your
Eyes? Truly, mine are newly open this morning, when men are wont to be most
sober; and I can see none to whom the rich man addresses his Request, but
Abraham, alone. How this man came to see double, I leave it to himself to
consider. Here is not a word said to Lazarus in this Parable, but all to
Abraham; who is desired to send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger,
etc. And yet this man was so intoxicated with some thing or other, that he
thinks the rich man called upon Lazarus also, to have Mercy on him. For shame,
let them throw this Book away, and not give it about any more. For all that can
be gathered from this story is, that such was the torment of the rich man, that
if he could have seen Abraham, and Lazarus in his Bosom, and have spoken to
him, he would have expressed in some such words as these, his intolerable pain.

It is to no end to look what St. Austin says I know not where, when he
declares himself so positively L. XXII. de Civ. Dei c. 10.
, That tho they named the Martyrs at the Altar, yet they were not invoked by
the Priest that sacrificed.

The next place of Scripture, I have considered before, V. Job 1. and both
given the meaning, and answered his Cavils, when he brought it to prove praying
to Angels, as now (so indigent and beggarly they are) it is pressed for praying
to Saints.

He will lose his labor, that looks into the other places, which he barely
names; or into his Fathers. Some of which are forged, as Dionysius Areop.
Athanasius de Annunc. St. Chrysostom, Hom. 66. ad Pop. (for there is but one and
twenty in the Ancient Greek MS. as Posevine acknowledges) Maximus Taurin. whose
Sermon upon Saint Agnes is by others ascribed to St. Ambrose; but Bellarmin
confesses it contradicts St. Ambrose in another place, and therefore cannot be
his, nor any one's else on whom we can rely. And others of his Fathers are
falsely alleged, as St. Basil, who only says, that People run to their
Memories, or Monuments; viz. there to pray to God, not to them. St. Bernard is
a Father that lived above 1150. years after Christ, who should have learnt of
his Elders; particularly Epiphanius Her. LXXXIX.
, that Mary is to be honored, but God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost alone to
be worshipped. I could name a vast number of the Fathers, who expressly condemn
this Worship of Saints; and none more than Saint Chrysostom. St. Hierom does
not pray to Paula, but speaking to her in an Oration, as if she were present,
says, Farewell Paula, and help thy honourer (that is, him that honored her
when she was alive) with thy Prayers. From hence one may plainly conclude, he
never intended to pray to her, for he takes his leave of her, and bids her
adieu; and is one of those Fathers, who believed the Saints do not know what we
do here; as appears by another Epitaph he made upon Nepotian, as this upon
Paula; where he says, Nepotian was happy in that he neither saw, nor heard the
Calamities which were then upon the Church.

XXXV. That the Bones or Relics of Saints, are not to be kept, or reserved; no
virtue proceeding from them, after they be once dead.
Answer.
HEre he says some truth. We do beli^ve they ought not to be kept or reserved
(that is, to be worshipped) but to be decently buried: as we read, in the most
ancient Letter of the Church of Smyrna, the Relics of Polycarp were.

His first Text, 2 King. XIII. 21. 2 King. XIII. 21.
says not a word (much less speaks expressly) of their taking the Bones of
Elisha out of the Sepulcher; but, for any thing that appears, they let them lie
there still. Nor does it say, any virtue proceeded out of them, but that, upon
the touching of them, the dead man revived and stood upon his feet; that is,
was raised by the power of God. Who thereby testified to the truth of Elisha's
Prophecy; and confirmed the Israelites in the belief of what he had said a
little before he died, concerning their Victories over the Syrians.

Acts V. 14, 15.
The next place V. Act. 14, 15. is alleged so senselesly, that it may tempt one
to be a little pleasant upon it. For is not a shadow cast from a man's Body a
pretty Relick? Who caught it? How did they keep it? Who can show us this
Relic? or where shall we find it reserved? And what proof is there that
virtue proceeded out of Peter's shadow, and cured sick People? we believe it
went forth from our Lord, as Peter passed by, and cast his shadow upon them.
The Sermon he quotes of Saint Austin, is a Bastard, lewdly fathered on him. And
the gloss which this man makes upon this passage of it, is very idle. For it is
most reasonable to take the sense of it to be this, that if they received so
much benefit by his shadow, the fullness of his power could do more for them;
speaking, not of what he can do now in Heaven, but what at that time they might
have received, when his very shadow coming upon them, they were healed of their
Infirmities. So he says, the words are in their Bible; but he undertook to
confute us out of our own. And if this passage was in ours (as it would have
been now, if it had been found in the most ancient Copies) it would have
signified no more, then the rest of the words do without it. Which give us
sufficiently to understand, that the sick were cured when Peter's shadow
overshadowed them.

XIX. Acts II. 12. says not a syllable of those Aprons and Handcherchiefs being
kept as Relics: much less of their working any Cures when the Apostles were
dead, or after that time when they were immediately brought from St. Paul's
Body unto the Sick. St. Chrysostom might well argue the Divinity of our
Savior, from the power that wrought in his Servants, nay accompanied their
very Shadows and Napkins. But does this prove, that these Napkins were kept as
Relics (Shadows we are sure could not) and that this virtue proceeded from
them, was inherent and continued in them when the Apostles were gone? For this,
the Reader may go look, if he know where.

Hitherto we have not heard one word to the purpose; and if we will see more,
we shall find nothing but that they carried Joseph's Bones with them when they
went out of Egypt (XIII. Exodus 19. XIII. Exodus 19.
) because he charged them so to do: as an argument God would bring them into
Canaan; where he desired his Bones might be laid in the Grave of his Father;
not kept as Relics for People to kiss and worship. We read also that Elijah's
Mantle fell down from him, when he was carried to Heaven; with which Elisha
smote the waters, 2 Kings II. 2 King. II. 8.14.
8.14. but what became of this Mantle, we do not read; it is most likely he
wore it out. I can find nothing of the reverend esteem St. John Baptist had of
our Savior's Shoe-latchet; much less of his keeping it for a Relick; I. Joh.
27.
I. John 27. He only expresses his reverent esteem of our Savior, whom he was
not worthy to serve in the meanest Ministry; as the Woman did her high opinion
of him, when she stooped to touch the hem of his Garment.

His Fathers help him not at all. For Eusebius only says, the Chair of St.
James, first Bishop of Jerusalem, was preserved: but not a word of its having
any virtue in it; or of its being kept to be worshipped, as they now do
Relics. Athanasius In Vita S. Anton.
speaks of an old Cloak, and another Garment which St. Anthony desired might be
given to him (who had bestowed it on him new) when he died; as we are wont to
bequeath something or other in remembrance of us: But that he laid it up, and
delivered it to posterity as a sacred Relick, we are yet to learn. And how far
he was from desiring to have his Garments preserved as Relics, appears from
the Charge he gives, in the same place about his own Body, which he would not
have them carry into Egypt, lest it should be reserved in some of their Houses
(...).
(mind this) but bury it in some unknown place. And so they did, none knowing
where they interred it, but only two Servants to whom that care was committed.
His Friends indeed, he says, kept those Garments, as some great thing: but
mark what follows as the Reason, For he that saw them, thought be saw Anthony;
and he that wore them, was as if he carried about with him joyfully his
Precepts. They were not laid up then as Relics, but used still as Garments,
which put them in mind of him, and of his words. St. Basil does speak of
wonderful things at the touch of the Bones of a Martyr, whom God was pleased to
honor at that time, to convince Unbelievers of the truth of that Religion,
which Martyrs sealed with their Blood. But there is no reason to expect such
things now; nor have their Bones been preserved to this Age. Saint Chrysostom's
words are falsely alleged by Bellarmin (from whom this man has all these
Fathers) when he makes him say, Let us visit them often, let us adore their
Tombs; when in truth the very Latin Interpreter has it, let us adorn their
Tombs: and this not according to the Greek, where it is, let us touch their
Coffin. St. Ambrose his honoring the Ashes of Martyrs, is nothing to the
worshipping of them. If we knew of any true Relics of their Bodies, we should
not fail to honor them: And we think the greatest honor would be, to give
them a decent burial.

XXXVI. That creatures cannot be sanctified, or made more holy than they are
already of their own nature.
Answer.
NO; not so much as to make them become Sacramental things, which have a power
in them to purge away venial sins, cure diseases, drive away devils, preserve
from all dangers, and produce other suchlike supernatural effects; which they
ascribe to Holy Water, and many other blessed things. But that creatures may be
set apart to holy uses, we own by our practice; and withal acknowledge, That by
Prayer and Thanksgiving to God, they may be blessed to us in the use of them,
more than otherwise they would be. It is only the forementioned Sanctification
of them, which we believe to be superstitious and magical; for we can find
nothing in God's Word, to warrant such consecrations of creatures to those
supernatural effects.

St. Paul in 1 Timothy IV. 4. 1 Timothy IV. 4.
speaks only of a general sanctification of the things we eat and drink; which
may be performed by any good Christian; not of such a special one as this man
intends, made by the Bishop: For does any creature that we receive (tho
sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer) cure diseases, lay storms and
tempests, preserve from Thunder and Lightning, and suchlike mischiefs? The
Apostle plainly disputes against those who condemned the use of certain meats
(as not only the Jews, but the Followers of Simon Magus, Ebion, and others did)
which he proves from the words of Moses, as Theodoret observes, are all good in
their kind. And if they be received with Thanksgiving, in remembrance of God
(who has made these things, and by his Word given us allowance to eat them)
they become more than good, says the same Theodoret; being sanctified by that
holy action, which makes the use of them well-pleasing to God. That Is the most
that can be meant by Sanctified: And so Emanuel Sa, one of his own Interpreters
expounds it. It is sanct fi^d, that is, made fit for food Which Claud.
Guillandus, like a man of learning, thus further explains; It is sanctified by
the word of God, 'by which we believe that nothing is any longer common or
unclean; and by Prayer, whereby we request that such things may be given us,
and for which, being given, we return thanks to God. But the Popish
Sanctification of Creatures, supposes, that they are not only unclean, but that
the Devil is in them, or that they are under his power (the very opinion of the
old Heretics), which is the reason of their Exorcisms, that they may cast the
Devil out of them. Whereas, should we grant they are any way unclean (as
Theophylact and Menochius think the Apostle speaks by way of Concession) it is
quite taken away and purged (that is all they understand by Sanctification, if
we take this to be the sense) by God's word, which allows the use of them; and
by Prayer and Benediction, when we sit down to eat our meat.

We need not be told, That in ancient time they sent sometimes part of the
Consecrated Bread unto their neighbors, in token of mutual love and fellowship
in the same Faith: But this was forbidden by the Council of Laodicea; and when
afterward they sent only Bread Blessed, not Consecrated, unto those who were
not yet baptized, but in the number of Learners under instruction; that had the
like meaning, to put them in hope they should at last be taken into Church
Communion. But what is this to the Blessing of Water, and Oil, and Wax, etc.
for such purposes as Agnus Dei's are Consecrated in the Roman Church? Which may
be seen in several of our Authors out of the Ceremoniale.

His Texts out of XXIII. Matthew. 17, 19. prove no such Sanctification either of
the Altar or Gift, but only the separation of them from profane uses; which
does not amount to the making them powerful against sin, the Devil, and all
manner of evil.

He bids us see more in 2 Kings II. where we find Elisha cast salt in the
waters, and thereby made them wholesome to drink; but did not infuse into them
such a virtue as they pretend to give to the water mixed with salt, which the
Priest exorcises in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with Crosses
at the name of every one of them; that it may become an exorcised water, to
drive away all the power of the enemy, and to root out the Enemy himself, with
all his apostate Angels; as their Church speaks in the Office for this purpose.

Why he mentions Raphel's using the Liver of the Fish to drive away the Devil,
and David's Harp to keep the evil Spirit from Saul, I cannot devise; for I
never read, nor he neither, that they were sanctified any way.

None of his Fathers, tho half of them are young ones, in comparison, ascribe
any supernatural virtue to such things; and therefore it is to no purpose to
consider what they say of any other kind of Holiness.

XXXVII. That children may be saved by their Parents Faith, without the
Sacrament of Baptism.
Answer.
NOW he falls again to his old trade of downright calumniating our Doctrine.
For we teach, That there is no Salvation for Infants, in the ordinary way of
the Church, without Baptism. Insomuch, that by an express Canon (LXIX.) every
Minister is to be suspended for three months, who suffers any Infant in his
Parish to dye without Baptism, being informed of its weakness, and danger of
death, and desired to come and baptize the same: And is not to be restored,
till he acknowledge his fault, and promise before his Ordinary, that he will not
wittingly incur the like again. But we do not tie God to those means, to the
use of which he has tied us; and therefore do believe, that by his infinite
Grace and Mercy, those Infants may be saved, who, without their own fault, dye
unbaptized. And this was the Faith of the Ancient Church, as appears from
Socrates L. V. Hist. c. 22.
, who says, In Thessaly they baptized only at Easter, by which means many dyed
unbaptized; and by a Decree of Pope Leo I. which shows it was an universal
custom in other places, to baptize only twice a year; which custom, he says,
has been changed, because a great many departed without Baptism. But still
this is an evidence, they did not think it absolutely necessary; nor do the
greatest Doctors of the Roman Church, such as Gabriel Biel, Card. Cajetan, and
many others I could name, condemn children to Hell, who dye unbaptized; but
being the children of Faithful Parents, look upon them as within the Covenant
of Grace, and capable of eternal life: For which they give these reasons: Frst,
The infinite Mercy of God, who is not tied to the Sacraments which he has
ordained: And secondly, The like case under the Old Testament, when
Circumcision answered to our Baptism (as this man acknowledges) and the
children dying unbaptized, were notwithstanding saved by the sole Faith of
their Parents. So S. Bernard, Epist. 77. ad Hug. de S. Vict. and Cajetan in 3.
part. Thom. Q. 68. From whence we may gather, That even this notion of
childrens being saved by their parents Faith, without Baptism, is no more our
opinion, than it is theirs. Some say so among us; and so do some among them.

Matters therefore being thus stated, all his Texts are already answered. We
say the very same our Savior does, III. Joh. 5. III. Joh. 5.
in the very entrance of our Office of Baptism. Where we make it as a reason
why the Church should pray, That God will grant to the child, that thing which
by nature he cannot have, etc. But tho this be the ordinary way, we dare not
say it is the only. God's Grace, many of themselves acknowledge, supplies the
want of Baptism, in extraordinary cases. Thus even Lorinus a Jesuit, in X. Act.
44. and he alleges St. Austin for it (who was very rigid in this point) that
the invisible Sanctification sometimes is sufficient, without the visible
Sacrament; when not by contempt of Religion, but by mere necessity, they are
deprived of Baptism. And thus Peter Lombard L. IV. Distin. 4. c. 2.
understands this Text, it is to be understood of those who can be baptized,
and contemn it.

III. Tit. 5. proves no more, but that Baptism is the ordinary way, and ought
not to be neglected, where it can be had.

From XVI. Mark 16. he concludes peremptorily, That children must be Baptized
or not Saved, XVI. Mark 16.
because they cannot believe; which is to make Baptism more necessary than
Belief: Whereas they cannot be baptized, but upon a supposition of belief, as
his own Church acknowledges in the Council of Trent Sess. VII. Can. 14.
: Children wanting Faith in the first act, are baptized in the Faith of the
Church. And therefore the true way of arguing from this place is, that as our
Lord says, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; so he would
have said (had he thought Baptism absolutely necessary) he that believes not,
and is not baptized, shall be damned. But he only says, He that believes not,
shall be damned; which makes Faith only, absolutely necessary. And I showed
before, there are those in his own Church, who think the Faith of the Parents
sufficient for this purpose.

And thus the most learned of the Fathers expound those words of St. Paul, 1
Cor. VII. 14.
1 Cor. VII. 14. particularly Theodoret: The unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife, and the unbelieving wife by the husband; that is, says he, has
hope of Salvation; but if either he or she continue in this disease, their seed
shall partake of Salvation: Which is but reason; for if the unbelieving
husband, suppose, should not have suffered the child begotten of his believing
wife to be baptized; who can think this child, so dying, perished?

His last Text, XVII. Genesis 14. XVII. Genesis 14.
proves no more but the necessity of both Circumcision and Baptism, where they
could be had; as was shown before. For it is evident the children of Israel
were not circumcised while they were in the Wilderness, V. Josh. 5. But who
will say, that all they who were born, and died within that time, which was
forty years, went without remedy to Hell?

His Fathers, which he has picked up out of Bellarmine, are not worth
examining; because some of them speak only against those who deny Infants to be
regenerate in Baptism, as St. Austin, Epist. 90. Others speak of it in such
terms as are not easy to be understood; for let him inform us what Irenaeus
means in the place he quotes, That our bodies have received unity by the
washing of incorruption, and our souls by the spirit: And others speak such
words of the necessity of Baptism, as the Papists themselves will not abide by;
but confess St. Austin was too hard in his opinion, which must admit of some
exception: And his opinion is condemned by later Fathers, as they call them;
particularly St. Bernard, who disputes against it at large in the Epistle
beforementioned. As for St. Cyprian's Epistle to Fidus, it is wholly against
the opinion which that Bishop had received, That children of two or three days
old were not to be baptized; but they were to stay till the eighth day, as in
Circumcision. But there is not a word of the absolute necessity of Baptism; but
that none should be denied it, tho newly born; who the rather should be
received, because, not their own sins but another was there remitted to them.

XXXVIII. That the Sacrament of Confirmation is not to be used.
Answer.
HE knew very well, that tho we deny Confirmation to be a Sacrament, yet we use
it; not as a Sacrament, nor as absolutely necessary to Salvation (for we have
declared that children baptized, dying before they commit actual sin, are
undoubtedly saved), but so necessary unto complete Communion, that we require
the Godfathers and Godmothers to bring children baptized, to the Bishop to be
confirmed by him, when they come to years of discretion; and we admit none to
the Holy Communion of Christ's Body and Blood, till they be confirmed, or be
ready and desirous so to be.

Now where does the Scripture say it is a Sacrament? There is not a word of it
in VIII. Acts 14. VIII. Acts 14.
much less is it there expressly declared, and declared to be necessary, or so
much as to be used by others; but only that the Apostles laid their hands on
those who were baptized, and they received the Holy Ghost; which I am sure no
body can now communicate in such Gifts as were then bestowed. But above all, it
is to be noted, that there is nothing said here of the Chrysm, or anointing
with holy Oil; in which they make this Sacrament consist; but only of laying on
of hands, unto which they have no regard. For thus Confirmation is performed in
the Roman Church; the Bishop takes sanctified Chrysm, as they call it, made of
Oil and Balsom, and therewith anoints a person baptized, with the thumb of his
right hand, in the form of a Cross, upon the forehead, which is bound with a
fillet on the anointing, till it be dry; and it is also accompanied with a box
on the ear; all which is plainly ordered to be done in their public Office of
Confirmation. But nothing of laying on of Hands is there mentioned, which they
deny to be either the matter, or the form of this Sacrament; tho we read of
nothing else but this laying on of hands, either here, or in what follows. A
clear Demonstration, that this place is expressly against their pretended
Sacrament of Confirmation.

VI. Hebrew 1. is so far from being contrary to our Doctrine, that some of
their own Authors Salmero and Justinianus.
think it does not speak of Confirmation at all, but of the Benediction of
Catechumens, and others; and some of our Authors think it does, even Mr. Calvin
himself. But then, it is expressly said to consist in laying on of hands; and
ought not to be turned into a Sacrament; but looked upon as a solemn Form of
Prayer (as St. Austin calls it) for Youth, who being grown beyond Childhood,
made a Profession of their Faith, and thereupon were thus blessed. Which pure
Institution (as Mr. Calvin's words are) is to be retained at this day, and the
Superstition corrected. Behold, how vilely the Protestant Doctrine is
calumniated by such wretched Writers as this, who seem not to understand Common
Sense. For he says, Confirmation is here called, not only one of the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but a Foundation of Repentance; when all,
but such as himself, clearly see, that the Apostle here makes the Foundation of
Repentance from dead Works, to be one of the Principles of Christ's Doctrine,
as laying on of hands, is another.

He betrays also notorious ignorance, or falsehood, in the Citations of his
Fathers, to which he sends us. For Tertullian plainly speaks of the Unction
which accompanied Baptism in his Country; not of a distinct Sacrament from
Baptism. And Pacianus also mentions it, as a solemn Right in the Sacrament of
Baptism, wherein Children are regenerated. So does St. Cyprian likewise, even
in that place which he mentions; where is no such sense as he dreams. For he
disputes for the Re-baptizing of Heretics, because it is not enough if hands
be laid upon them, unless they receive the Baptism of the Church; for then they
are fully sanctified, and made the Children of God, if they be born by both
Sacraments; for it is written, Unless a Man be born again of Water, and of the
Spirit, etc. This latter part this Man conceals, which shows St. Cyprian speaks
altogether of Baptism, in which there were then Two Rites, Washing with Water,
and Laying on of Hands. Which were not Two Sacraments properly, but Two parts
of the same Sacrament; which he calls both the Sacraments of Baptism. Just as
Hulbertus Carnotensis, calls the Body and Blood of Christ in the Communion, Two
Sacraments, which in truth are but one. For speaking of three things necessary
to Salvation, he says of the Third, that in it Two Sacraments of Life, that
is, the Lords Body, and his Blood, are contained. St. Hierom likewise speaks of
Laying on of Hands, but not as a distinct Sacrament: For he earnestly contends
(in that Book) that the Spirit is conferred in Baptism, and that there can be
no Baptism of the Church, without the Spirit. I have not taken any notice of
St. Ambrose, for those Books of the Sacrament, which gounder his Name, are none
of his.

XXXIX. That the Bread of the Supper of the Lord, was but a Figure, or
Remembrance of the Body of Christ received by Faith; and not his true, and very
Body.
Answer.
THIS is Fiction, and false Representation. For we expressly declare in the
XXVIII. Article of our Religion, That it is a Sacrament of our Redemption by
Christ's Death, in so much that to such as rightly, worthily, and with Faith
receive the same, the Bread which we break, is a partaking of the Body of
Christ, etc. And in our Catechism we also declare, That the inward and
spiritual Grace in this Sacrament, is the Body and Blood of Christ, which are
verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper. And
Mr. Calvin himself says as much.

But if we had not been of this mind, his first place of Scripture, XXII. Luke
15. XXII. Luke 15.
would have proved nothing against us; for it speaks only of eating the
Passover; in which he instituted this Sacrament; but that followed after: Here
he speaks only of the Paschal Feast. Insomuch, that Menochius thus interprets
it, He most earnestly desired to eat the Paschal Lamb of this year, and this
day, in which the Eucharist was to be instituted; and shortly after it was to
be shown by his Death, how much he loved Mankind, whom he so redeemed. It was
not therefore the Pasche (as this Man speaks) of his true Body and Blood, which
our Savior thus desired to eat. This is an idle fancy of a dreaming Divine,
who has a Divinity by himself; which forbids him to admit Faith to have been
in the Son of God. But St. Peter was a better Divine than he, who applies those
words of David to our Blessed Savior, My flesh shall rest in hope, because
thou will not leave my soul in hell, etc. II. Acts 26, 27. Now I would fain
know of this Learned Divine, whether there can be any Hope without Faith, which
made him confidently expect to be raised out of his Grave.

XXII. Luke 18.
That which follows also in XXII. Luke 18. I will not drink of the fruit of the
vine, etc. plainly belongs to the Paschal Feast, as they stand in St. Luke; who
immediately thereupon proceeds to the Institution of the Sacrament; and speaks
of the Cup that is there administered, as different from the Cup he had before
mentioned. If this Man had understood his business, he should rather have
alleged XXVI. Matthew. 29. where immediately after the Institution of the
Sacrament, he adds these words, But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth
of the fruit of the vine, etc. which St. Luke puts before the Institution. But
it is a wonderful stupidity, to conclude from hence, as this Man does, That
Christ will drink his own Blood in Heaven, (or else he concludes nothing)
because there is no material Bread and Drink in use there. Menochius (to name
no others) might have taught him better, who thus expounds this passage. Our
Savior speaks after the manner of men, who being to depart from their Friends
for a long time, are wont to say, We shall Eat and Drink together no more. As I
shall not drink of this fruit of the vine, till that day, etc. when I shall
drink ANOTHER New and Celestial Wine with you, in the Banquet of Eternal
Glory. And he might have known, that we from hence, with a wonderful force, (to
use his own phrase) conclude, That Wine remains in the Sacrament after
Consecration; because our Savior calls that which he said before was the New
Testament in his Blood, the fruit of the Vine, that is Wine. And so not only
we, but Origin, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Austin, Hierom, Epiphanius, Bid,
Euthymius, and Theophylact, refer the fruit of the Vine unto the Blood of
Christ, before mentioned; as Maldonate himself acknowledges, and could not
produce so much as one Father to the contrary.

He might have known also, that a great many of his own Church, VI. John 51.
do not think St. John VI. 51. and other verses of that Chapter, speaks of
Sacramental Bread; as for other reasons, so for this; that if he did, then such
as Judas, who eat the Sacramental Bread, must have Eternal Life. Which we find
our Lord promises, v. 40, 47. to those who believe on him; and this we take to
be the eating he here speaks of, as appears by the whole scope of the Chapter.
For if any such Conversion, as they fancy in the Sacrament, and call
Transubstantiation, could be proved out of this Text, it would prove the Flesh
of Christ is turned into Bread, rather than the Bread into his Flesh; because
he says. The Bread that I will give you, is my Flesh. To make this good
literally, it is manifest, his Flesh must be made Bread. See into what
Absurdities these men draw themselves, by their perverse Interpretations. It is
not worth considering what he says about Beza's interpretation of one word in
this Verse; there being those of his own Church, as well as he, that by living
Bread, understand Bread that gives Life; which is must suitable to the words
preceding, and unto v. 33.

We have noted often enough our Saviors words, both in XXVI. Matthew. 26. and
XXII. Luke 19. And therefore do not say, as he slanders us, That Christ gave,
and the Apostles received, nothing else but bare Bread; for it was the
Sacrament of Christ's Body; as Druthmarus, and a great many more Ancient than
he, expound those words, This is my Body. We believe also, and thankfully
acknowledge, that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, is the Communion of the
Body and Blood of Christ. But those are St. Paul's words, 1 Cor. X. 16. not our
Saviors; which spoils this man's Observation, that our Lord calls it his Body,
both before, and at the very giving of it. Which if he had done, (tho these, as
I said, are St. Paul's words, who only calls it the Communion of his Body,
etc.) it would prove nothing, but that the Bread is his Body, which we believe,
and they are so absurd as to deny. Tho we have bidden them note, how St. Paul,
in that very place he next mentions (1 Cor. XI.) often calls that, which he
says is the Lord's Body, by the name of Bread, v. 26, 27, 28. But they shut
their Eyes, and will not take any notice of it. Why should we then regard his
frivolous Argument (to which he at last betakes himself) against our true and
real receiving of Christ by Faith? Unto which Dr. Fulk has long ago given a
sufficient Answer, in his Notes upon this Chapter. We receive him after a
Spiritual manner, By Faith on our behalf, and by the working of the Holy Ghost
on the behalf of Christ. So there is no need, either of our going up to Heaven,
or Christ's coming down to us, as he sillily argues.

His Ancient Fathers have been so often viewed, and shown to be against them by
our Writers, and that lately (particularly the two first he mentions) that I
will not go about a needless labor, to give an account of them.

XL. That we ought to receive under both kinds; and that one alone suffices
not.
Answer.
VEry true: for so Christ appointed; so the Apostles both received and gave it;
so the Church of Christ for above 1000 years practiced; and woe be to them, who
alter Christ's Institution. Which cannot be justified by such fallacious
Arguments as this man here uses, instead of giving us express Scripture for it.
That he promised, but alas! could find none; and therefore makes little
trifling reasonings his refuge.

First from VI. John 51. VI. John 51, 53.
which I have shown does not speak of Sacramental eating: but if it did, the
next Verse but one, he could not but see, told him, that it is as necessary to
drink Christ's blood, as to eat his flesh. To which the Answer is not so easy
as he fancies: for we have only Dr. Kellison's word for it, that the
conjunction and is used for or. Men may put off any thing by such shifts: and
it is as sufficient, and as learned, for us to say, it is expressly and in our
Bible, and not or; and you do nothing if you confute us not, as you undertook,
by the express words of our own Bible. How strangely do men forget what they
promise, and what they are about? Besides, the Fathers from these very words
prove the necessity See late Treatise against Communion in one Kind. Chapter 3.
of giving both the body and blood of Christ: and attribute a distinct effect
to each of them. Particularly the Author of the Comments under the name of St.
Ambrose, in I. Cor. XI. The flesh of Christ was delivered for the salvation of
the body, and the blood was poured out for our souls.

He should have proved, not barely affirmed, that Christ gave the Sacrament to
the Disciples at Emaus, XXIV. Luke 30, 35.
XXIV. Luke 30, 35. We say he did not; though if he had, it is to be supposed
there was Wine as well as bread: else it will prove it is lawful for their
Church to consecrate, as well as to give the Communion, in one kind alone. Nor
are there any of the ancient Interpreters who thus expound it. St. Austin and
Theophylact, only apply it allegorically and mystically to the Sacrament (as
Jansenius ingenuously acknowledges) the virtue of which may be here insinuated
(as Theophylact phrases it, not expressly declared) to enlighten the eyes of
men. The Author of the imperfect Work upon St. Matthew is thus to be
understood: or else we must make St. Paul's breaking bread in the Ship among
the Soldiers and Mariners (Acts XXVIII.) to be giving the Sacrament: for that
Writer joins this together with the other. The later Scholastic Writers, all
expound it of common breaking of bread, such as Albertus Magnus, Bonaventure,
Dionys. Cathusianus, nay Tho. Aquinas himself, whatsoever this man is pleased
to say, as any one may be satisfied who can look into him, in Tertull. Did.
XXI. Q. 55.

It is more impudence to quote II. Act. 42. to prove one kind to be sufficient:
when all acknowledge this Action was performed in the Apostolical Assemblies,
by giving the Wine as well as the Bread. Therefore breaking of bread is used as
a short form of Speech, to signify they had Communion one with another, at the
same holy Feast.

He durst not here quote so much as one single Father, as hitherto he has done
every where else: because they are all manifestly against him. As not only
Cassander, and such as he, acknowledge, but Cardinal Bonel Rer. Liturg. l. 2.
c. 18.
himself says, that Always and every where, from the beginning of the Church,
to the Twelfth Century, the faithful communicated under the Species of Bread
and Wine.

XLI. That there is not in the Church a true and proper Sacrifice; and that the
Mass is not a Sacrifice.
Answer.
HE began to speak some truth in this Proposition, but could not hold out till
he came to the end. Falsehood is so natural to them, that it will not let them
declare the whole truth, when that which they said already, would directly lead
them to it. For having said, we do not believe there is a true and proper
Sacrifice in the Church, why did he not conclude, that we deny the Mass to be a
proper Sacrifice? This had been honest; for it is the very thing we have
constantly said: because proper sacrificing is a destructive Act; by which that
which is offered to God, is plainly destroyed; That is, so changed, that it
ceases to be, what before it was. This they themselves confess: and it is from
this principle (among others) that we conclude, there is no proper Sacrifice in
the Sacrament.

Malachy I. 11. It is manifest, Mal. I. 17.
from the current Consent of the Ancient Interpreters, speaks of an improper
Sacrifice; viz. prayer and thanksgiving, represented by the Incense. So
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, Chrysostom, and diverse others. His reasoning
upon this place therefore, is very childish: for the Offering here spoken of,
is neither Christ sacrificed on the Cross, nor Christ in the Sacrament; for he
cannot be often sacrificed. But if we will apply it to the Sacrament, it is the
Commemorative Sacrifice which is there made of the Sacrifice of Christ; with
the sacrifice of Prayer, Praises, Thangsgivings, and the oblation of our
selves, Souls and Bodies to him. Such a Sacrifice we acknowledge is offered in
the Holy Communion.

The Psalmist in CX. Psam 4. Psalm. CX. 4.
speaks of the Priesthood of Christ, which endures for ever in Heaven (not of
any Sacrificing Priest here on Earth) where he presents himself to God, in the
most holy place not made with hands. Nothing can be more contrary to the
Scripture, than to say Melchisedeck sacrificed Bread and Wine: unless we will
make his offering them to Abraham (unto whom he brought them forth, as several
of the Fathers consent) to be a proper Sacrifice. But what dare not such men
say, when he affirms, that Christ exercises an eternal Priesthood upon Earth,
tho the Apostle expressly tells us the contrary, VIII. Heb. 4? Some of the
Fathers indeed make an Analogy between the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, and
that which Melchisedeck brought forth: but this is against the Popish Notion,
who will not have Bread and Wine to be sacrificed in the Eucharist, though the
Fathers expressly say they are.

His Argument from XXII. Luke 19. is very idle. For when Christ says, This is
my Body which is given for you; the meaning is, which I have offered to be a
Sacrifice to God (X. John 17.) and am about actually to give in Sacrifice for
you. And so their own Vulgar Interpreter understood it, and translates this
word, 1 Cor. XI. 24. tradetur, not which was then given, but was to be given,
viz. to die. And so he constantly interprets the other part, not is shed, but
shall be shed. And if he spoke here in the next words (XXII. Luke 20. of what
was given to the Apostles in the Sacrament, it would prove that the Blood of
Christ is shed in the Sacrament: which is directy contrary to their own
Doctrine, which makes it an unbloody Sacrifice.

All the other Scriptures speak of the Priesthood of Christ: which none can
exercise but Christ himself. See them who will, he will find this true.

Not one of his Fathers have a word of a proper Sacrifice; much less of a
Propitiatory; but of a reasonable, unbloody, mystical, heavenly Sacristce:
which proves the contrary to what they would have. As the Fathers do also, when
they say it is a Sacrifice; and then immediately correct themselves in some
such words as these, or rather, a Commemoration of a Sacrifice (viz. of Christ
on the Cross) a Memorial, instead of a Sacrifice: And thus Aquinas himself
understood it.

XLII. That Sacramental Unction is not to be used to the Sick.
Answer.
THERE are many things Sacramental, which are not Sacraments: and others called
Sacraments by the Ancients, which are not properly so; as the Sign of the
Cross, the Bread given to Catechumens, washing of the Saints Feet, etc. because
they were Signs and Symbols of some sacred thing. So was Unction; but not
appointed by our Savior to be a Sacrament of the New Testament. This he should
have proved, if he could have performed any thing; and that it confers grace
from the work done; or has a power by Divine Institution, to cause holiness
and righteousness in us, as the Roman Catechism defines a Sacrament. But it was
impossible; and therefore he uses these dubious words, Sacramental Unction:
which we see no reason to use; unless we could hope for such miraculous Cures,
as were performed therewith by the Apostles.

V. Jam. 4.
His first Text, V. Jam. 4. has not a word of Sacrament, or Sacramental in it:
and plainly speaks not of their Extreme Unction, which is for the health of the
Soul, when a man is a dying: but of anointing for the health of the Body, and
the restoring a man to life. Therefore he might have spared his Discourse about
the matter and form, etc. of a Sacrament: for their Sacrament is not here
described, but an holy Rite, for a purpose as much different from theirs, as
the Soul is from the Body, and Life from Death.

VI. Mark 13. Mark VI. 13.
His own best Writers confess belongs not to this matter; containing only an
adumbration, and a figure of the Sacrament, but was not the Sacrament it self,
as Menochius expounds the place, according to the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent, which says, this Sacrament (as they call it) was insinuated in VI.
Mark: Now that is said to be insinuated, which is not expressly propounded (mark
that) but adumbrated and obscurely indicated. See how ignorant this man is, in
his own Religion.

XVI. Mark 18. makes not any mention of anointing, but only of laying on of
hands: and yet this man has the face to ask (as if the Cause were to be
carried by impudence) if they are not sick in their wits who oppose so plain
Scriptures? When nothing is plainer, than that these places speak of Miraculous
Cures; as they themselves would confess, If they would speak the truth (to use
his words) and shame the Devil. For Cardinal Cajetan, a man of no small
learning, expressly declares, neither of the two places where anointing is
mentioned, speak of Sacramental Unction. Particularly upon those words of St.
James (which is the only place the best of them dare rely upon) he thus writes.
It does not appear that he speaks of the Sacramental Unction of Extreme
Unction, either from the words, or from the effect: but rather of the Unction
our Lord appointed, in the Gospel, for the cure of the Sick. For the Text does
not say, Is any man sick unto death; but absolutely, is any man sick? And the
effect, was the relief of the sick man, on whom forgiveness of sins was
bestowed only conditionally: Whereas Extreme Unction is not given, but when a
man is at the point of death, and directly tends, as its form shows, to
remission of sins. Besides, St. James bids them call more Elders than one unto
the sick man to pray, and anoint him; which is disagreeing to the Rite of
Extreme Unction. Nothing but the force of truth could extort this ingenuous
Interpretation from him: for he was no Friend to Protestants; but would not lie
for the Service of his Cause. And before him, such Great men, as Hugo de S.
Victori, Bonaventure, Alex. Halensis, Altisiodor. all taught, that Extreme
Unction was not instituted by Christ.

His Fathers say not a word of this Extreme Unction. Both Origin and Bid, as
Estius acknowledges, accommodate the words of St. James unto the more grievous
sort of sins, to the remission of which there is need of the Ministry of the
Keys; and so they refer it to another Sacrament (as they now call it) viz. that
of Absolution. See the Faith of this man, who thus endeavors to impose upon
his Readers; as he does also in the citing of St. Chrysostom, who says the
same with the other two; and of St. Austin, who only recites the Text of St.
James in his Book de Speculo, without adding any words of his own to signify
the sense. As for the 215. Sermon. de Temp. it is none of his. Next to this, he
makes us say,

XLIII. That no interior Grace is given by Imposition of Hands, in Holy Orders.
And that Ordinary Vocation, and Mission of Pastors, is not necessary in the
Church.
Answer.
HERE are Two Parts of this Proposition; in both of which he notoriously
slanders us; and in the first of them dissembles their own Opinion. For we do
not say, That no interior Grace is given by Imposition of Hands, in Holy
Orders; but that this is not a Sacrament, properly so called, conferring
sanctifying Grace; and that the outward Sign among them is not Imposition of
Hands; but delivering of the Patin and Chalice, concerning which the Scripture
speaks not a syllable. Nor is any man admitted to be a Pastor among us, but by
a Solemn Ordination; wherein the Person to be ordained Priest, professes he
thinks himself truly called, according to the Will of our Lord, etc. unto that
Order and Ministry; and the Bishop when he lays hands on him, says in so many
words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. which is the conferring that Grace, which
they themselves call gratis data; and which the Apostle intends in the
Scriptures he mentions.

1 Timothy IV. 14.
In the first of which, 1 Timothy IV. 14. there is no express mention of Grace,
(which he promised to show us in our Bible) but of a Gift. By which Menochius
himself understands, The Office and Order of a Bishop, the Authority and Charge
of Teaching. And so several of the Ancient Interpreters, such as Theodoret, St.
Chrysostom, understands it: As others take it to signify extraordinary Gifts,
such as those of Tongues, Healing, etc. none think it speaks of sanctifying
Grace. So that I may say (alluding to his own words) See how plain it is, that
this Man does not understand the Scripture! And has made a mere Rope of Sand
in his following reasoning; for there is this Mission among us, of which the
Apostle speaks, viz. A Designation unto a special Office, with Authority and
Power to perform it.

The Apostle speaks of the same thing, in 2 Timothy I. 6. 2 Timothy I. 6.
where there is no mention of Grace at all, but only of the Gift of God, which
was in him. Which if we will call a Grace, (a word we dislike not) it was not a
Grace to sanctify, but to enable him to perform all the Offices belonging to
that Order, ex gr. strenuously to Preach the Gospel, and to propagate the
Faith, etc. They are the words of the same Menochius; from whence I may take
occasion again to say, See, how plain the Scripture is against him. And how
foully he belies us, in saying that we affirm, Laying on of Hands, not to be
needful to them, who have already in them the Spirit of God. For after the
Bishop has asked the question to one to be ordained Deacon, whether he trust
that he is inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon him that Office and
Ministration, etc. And he has answered, I trust so; then the Bishop (after
other Questions and Answers) lays hands on him. Which is not to sanctify him,
for that is supposed; but to empower him to execute the Office committed to him
in the Church of God.

The Apostles words, V. Hebr. 4. are alleged after his manner, to prove what
none of us deny, That no man may take this Office upon him, unless he be called
to it.

They who have a mind to see more, may soon find that the rest of the
Scriptures (some of which are the same again) prove nothing but a Mission, by
laying on of Hands, which we practice. And one of them, 1 Timothy V. 22. can never
be proved to belong to Ordination; being referred by many, of no small Name, to
Absolution. For Imposition of Hands was used in giving that, as well as in
giving Orders; which is an unanswerable Argument, that this is not a Sacrament;
because the only sign that can be pretended out of Scripture, to belong unto it
(viz. Imposition of Hands) is not proper to giving Orders, but common to other
things.

None of his Fathers, nor any others, for many Ages, knew of more proper
Sacraments, than two only. And therefore it is but to waste Paper, and abuse
the Readers patience, to show how impertinently those, whom he mentions, are
alleged.

XLIV. That Priests, and other Religious Persons, which have vowed their
Chastity to God, may freely Marry, notwithstanding their Vow.
Answer.
THERE is no such loose Doctrine among us: But we say, That it is free for
Priests to Marry, as well as other Persons; for Marriage is honorable in all,
and the Bed undefiled. Which signifies, we think, that Chastity may be
preserved in Marriage, as well as in Virginity. Therefore, we further say, no
man ought rashly to Vow he will never marry, when he is not sure of his power
to contain For this is not given to all, as Christ himself says, XIX. Mat. 11.
but every one has his proper gifts from God; one after this manner, another
after that, 1 Cor. VII. 7. If any one has made such a Vow, we say, he ought to
use his endeavors to keep it; but if he cannot without Sin, he ought to Marry;
for in this case, the matter of his Vow ceases. This is our Doctrine, which is
not contrary to the Scripture.

XXIII. Deuteronomy. 22.
There is mention of a Vow, in XXIII. Deuteronomy. 22. but not of Chastity, which he
undertook to show us expressly in our Bible. Alas! that was impossible; and so
he falls a talking of Vows about other matters. And yet, even in such Vows as
this, whereof Moses speaks, if a Person was not in his own power, or vowed a
thing impossible for him to give, or a thing not acceptable to God, he was not
bound by his Vow.

1 Timothy V. ^ 12.
The next place, 1 Timothy V. 11, 12. is against him. For the Apostle would not
have Widows taken into the Office of Deaconesses, when they were young (as the
Church of Rome lets Boys and Girls of Sixteen years old, vow Virginity) but
requires Timothy to refuse such, if they offered themselves to that Service,
and take in none under the Age of Sixty; when it was likely they would have no
mind to change their Condition, as the younger would be apt to do. Who thereby;
became guilty of a great fault (as Menochius expounds, having Damnation) in
departing from the Covenant they had made, to devote themselves to the Service
of the Church. For they had not chosen Widowhood with the Judgment of Reason,
or just Consideration, (as Theophylact glosses) in which case the Apostle
allows them to Marry, v. 14. Upon which the same Theophylact thus again
Paraphrases; In the first place, I wish they would not make void their
Contracts (or Covenants) but because they desire Marriage, I desire it also,
condescending to them. For it is better they should be Mistresses of Families,
that is, look after their own House, and Labor, than running about to other
Folks Houses, be trifling and idle. Which is the sense of more Ancient Fathers
than he; particularly of St. Cyprian, who speaks of Virgins, that after they
had dedicated themselves to God, were found in bed with men, says, It was
better for them to Marry, than to fall into the Fire by their Offenses Epist.
ad Pompon.
. His Master, Tertullian, says the same, speaking of this very Text. Nay, St.
Austin, tho he do not approve of Marriage after a Vow, yet resolves that such a
Marriage is not to be dissolved. And their own Doctors determine, That when a
thing is unprofitable, and hinders a greater good, what is promised by a Vow,
ought not to be kept. Upon which their Dispensations are founded, even in this
solemn Vow of Chastity.

1 Timothy V. 15.
I have said the more of this, because it answers what he pretends out of the
15th verse of the same Chapter; where the Apostle does not call their Marrying,
turning aside after Satan. For he had just before given them leave, or rather
advised them to Marry, lest they should give occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully, etc. that is, as Theophylact explains it, Give the Devil
occasion to make a mock of them, by drawing them into Adultery, through the
unstedfastness of Youth. And for this very reason, he thinks the Apostle
endeavored to bring them under the yoke of Marriage (as his Phrase is) lest
being left loose, they should run into the aforesaid mischiefs.

By this the Reader may be convinced, with what Honesty this man quotes the
Fathers, and reproaches those that Marry, (after they have unadvisedly devoted
themselves to single life) as God's Adulterers; when they say the Apostle
directs them to Marry, that they may not be such Adulterers.

In all the other Scriptures which he would have us see, there is not one that
speaks of the Vow of Chastity: But of Vow of Offering Sacrifice, or of being
Nazarites (which was in some cases but for a time) or such like things, as any
one may satisfy himself that will read the places.

We and the Fathers do not differ in this point, as I have already said; and
therefore I will not swell this Book by an unnecessary account of what they
say, in the places he mentions.

XLV. That Fasting and Abstinence from certain Meats, is not grounded on Holy
Scripture, nor causes any Spiritual Good.
Answer.
FAsting, that is, Abstinence from all Meat and Drink, is grounded on
Scripture, and does much good: But Fasting, or Abstinence from certain Meats
only, is not Fasting, and has no ground in Scripture, nor do we see any
Spiritual Good in it; but, rather much hurt, because it cheats men into a
belief that they Fast, when they Feast.

XXXV. Jer. 5.
The Prophet, XXXV. Jer. 5. does not speak of fasting from any Meat whatsoever,
but of a total forbearance of all Wine, and from dwelling in Houses, or having
any Land, etc. And all this, not out of Religion, but for a Civil Reason, as
the very Text tells us, v. 7. Which laid no Obligation upon other People so to
do, no not upon the Israelites, much less upon us Christians; being an
Injunction to one Family only, by the Father of it. Are not these men rare
Interpreters of Scripture, who expound it at this rate, and apply it to any
purpose; for this very case, just before, was brought to prove the Obligation
of Vows.

The next place, I. Luke 15. is alleged as sillily. For it proves too much; an
Abstinence, which no man thinks himself bound unto, from all Wine and Strong
Drink, as long as he lives. Which John Baptist himself would not have
practiced, had he not been disigned to an austere sort of Life, after the
manner of the Ancient Nazarites, as Menochius expounds this place. It is a
wonder, when there are so many Texts that speak of Fasting, this man should
pick out such as these, which have no respect unto it.

The next indeed has, XIII Acts 3. and accordingly we have our Fasts before
every Ordination, in the Ember weeks.

XVII. Matthew. 27. proves nothing, but that upon extraordinary occasions, there
must be extraordinary Prayer and Fasting; which we also both affirm and
practice.

The rest of his Scriptures, and his Fathers, I assure the Reader, say nothing
that we deny; but he had a mind to slander us, as if we were Enemies to
Fasting; when we Fast truly, by total Abstinence from Meat and Drink on our
Fasting-days, they Fast only nominally, eating all sorts of Fish, and drinking
Wine on their Fasting-days. Whereby they hope also, to satisfy for their Sins,
and to merit a Celestial Reward; as Bellarmine speaks in his Second Book of
Good Works. Why did he not prove this end of Fasting, and not spend his time
about that which is not questioned; for we acknowledge that Fasting is good, if
rightly designed.

XLVI. That Jesus Christ descended not into Hell nor del^vered thence the Souls
of the Fathers.
Answer.
WHat an impudent Liar is this, to say we deny that which is an Article of our
Creed, professed by us every day, That Christ did descend into Hell? Not
indeed, to deliver the Souls of the Fathers in Limbo; because we read of no
such thing in any of the Scriptures which he mentions.

Ephesians. IV. 8.
The Apostle in IV. Ephesians. 8. says nothing either of their Limbus, or of the
Souls of the Fathers; but of leading captivity captive. Which has no relation
to the Souls either of the glorified, or of the damned, but of such men and
women as we are: Whom Christ did not captivate, when we were free (says
Theodoret upon the place) but being under the power of the Devil, he rescued
us; and making us his captives, bestowed liberty upon us. To the same purpose
Theophylact, but a little larger, (comprehending all our enemies) What
captivity does the Apostle mean? That of the Devil: For he took the Devil
captive, and Death, and the Curse, and Sin, and us, who were under the Devils
Power, and obnoxious to the forenamed enemies.

The next place, II. Acts 27. II. Acts 27.
only proves our Savior descended into Hell, but says nothing of the Fathers
being there. What St. Austin says, is not the business, but what the Scripture
says expressly. Yet the words which he quotes out of him, touch not us. who
believe Christ's Descent into Hell, as much or more than himself. And it is
worth the noting, how in this very place where he calls it Infidelity to deny
Christ's going into Hell, he overthrows this end of it, (to fetch the Fathers
from then^e); for he professes he could find the name of H^ll no where given
unto that place where the souls of righteous men did rest.

There is no mention in 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. 1 Pet. III. 18, 19.
of so much as Christ's descending into Hell, but only of his Preaching to the
spirits in prison; and that not in person, but by that Spirit which raised him
from the dead. St. Austin wishes us to consider (in that very Epistle which he
just now named, XCIX. ad Euod.) lest perhaps all that which the Apostle speaks
of the spirits shut up in prison, who did not believe in the days of Noah, do
not at all belong to hell, but rather unto those times (of Noah) whose pattern
be applies to our times. And this St. Hierom relates as the opinion of a most
prudent man; and is followed by Bid, Walfridus, Strabo, and others. And if
this place should not be thus interpreted of his Preaching by his Spirit in the
Ministry of Noah unto the old world, but of his own Preaching unto the spirits
in hell, it must be to the damned spirits (for we read of no others there) as a
great many Ancient Writers, through mistake of this place, conceived: And this
is as much against his opinion, as against ours.

The XI. Heb. 39, 40. proves no more, but that they had not their complete
happiness; yet were not in Hell, as that signifies any thing of torment; but in
Heaven, tho not in the highest felicity of it. Thus Theodoret, and others of
the Ancients understand it: Tho the combats of these men were so many and so
great, yet they received not their Crowns: For the God of the Universe, says
he, expects till others have finished their race, that then he may solemnly
declare them all together to be Conquerors. Which Theophylact thus farther
enlarges, Is not God unjust then unto them, if they who have got the start in
labors, must expect us in Crowns? No such matter, for this is very acceptable
unto them, to be perfected with their brethren; we are one body, and the
pleasure is greater to the body, if all its members be crowned together, etc.
but God gave to those who preceded us in labors, a certain foretaste, bidding
them wait for the complete banquet till their brethren come to them. And they
being lovers of mankind, joyfully expect (note that) that they may be all merry
together. This plainly shows such men as these did not look upon the Fathers as
in Hell, but in Heaven, in a state of joy; tho not consummate, but in
expectation of its completion. I could show this to be the sense which men in
his own Church put upon this place; but I am afraid of being tedious, and
therefore shall make shorter work of the rest.

Jonas, mentioned XII. Matthew. 40. XII. Mat. 40.
was a Type of Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection; and the Whale's belly
represented his Grave, and nothing else. So Menochius acknowledges, That tho
many by the heart of the earth, understand the Limbus of the Fathers, yet
others take it for the Grave. As Ignatius does, in that very Epistle which he
quotes presently, and St. Chrysostom, to name no more.

St. Matthew, XXVII. 52. speaks of the Resurrection of many out of their
Graves; but whence their Souls came, neither he nor Ignatius say a word.

IX. Zach. 11.
There is no reason to think that IX. Zach. 11. speaks of fetching souls out of
the infernal prison; but Theodoret says expressly, That if by the Pit or Lake,
we shall understand either Eternal Death, or Idolatry, we shall not miss the
mark. For when men were bound in this lake, our Lord Christ loosed them and
brought them out; and bestowed liberty upon them by his Precious Blood, and
sent them forth into the way of life, when he gave them the New Testament. And
so St. Austin LXVIII. de Civit. Dei, c. 25.
thinks it is best understood, of the profundity of human misery. And I assure
the Reader, that both St. Hierom, and St. Cyril, (to the great shame of this
false Writer) understand this place, as Theodoret does.

1 Samuel II. 6.
1 Samuel II. 6. is very foolishly applied to this matter; for the plain meaning
is, as Menochius acknowledges, That God, if he pleases, raises dead men to
life again; or by way of Allegory, he restores unhappy and miserable men to a
hapyy and flourishing condition, according to his will: As in the next verse
(says he) is more clearly repeated, he raises up the poor out of the dust,
etc. that is, from a low condition. He did not think it absurd to understand
the Grave, by that word which they translate Hell; concerning which it is not
proper now to dispute, because he promised to confute us out of our own Bible,
not out of theirs. Nor is it fit to trouble our selves about the rest of his
Scriptures (which he barely names, and some of the very same over again) or his
Fathers, which we have seen he alleges withour Judgment or Fidelity.

XLVII. That there is no Purgatory fire, or other Prison, wherein Sins may be
satisfied for, after this life.
Answer.
VEry right; and there is nothing either in Scripture or Antiquity to prove it.

The fire spoke of, 1 Cor. III. 13. 1 Cor. III. 13.
is by their own Authors interpreted, to signify the fire at the day of
Judgment, in the Conflagration of the World. So Menochius and Estius expressly
disputes against the application of this to Purgatory. Nor does one of the
Ancient Fathers, in the Six first Centuries so understand it; but all apply the
words to other purposes. St. Austin in a great many places, particularly in his
Enchiridion Cap. 67, 68. etc.
expounds it of the tribulations of this life, and that grief, wherewith a
man's mind is stung, when he loses those things which he dearly loves; And
hence says, it is not incredible, that some such thing may be after this life;
but whether it be so or no, he leaves it to every ones inquiry. Which
demonstrates, he did not look on this, as an Article of Faith, but as a thing
uncertain; and it is certain, understood these words of St. Paul otherways. And
in the place he here mentions, Psalm 37. it is evident he speaks of the fire at
the end of the world, as any one may see who will look into it.

The Learned reasoning (as he esteems it) of Card. Allen upon XI. John 22. XI.
John 22.
is so frivolous, that it shows how impossible it is, with all the Learning or
Wit in the world, to make good their Cause. For Martha's Speech, any one may
see without much Learning, has respect to the Resurrection of her Brother out
of his Grave, not to Praying for his Soul in Purgatory: Which if she learnt in
the Synagogue, we have the less reason to receive it: Especially if she was
then so ignorant, as he says she was, that she did not know our Savior to be
the Son of God.

It might be sufficient to Answer to the next place, II. Acts 24. II. Acts 24.
that he falsifies our Bible, to make a show of an Argument against us, for we
Translate those words, God has raised him up, having loosed the pains of
death; not as he reports it, the sorrows of hell. And St. Chrysostom, with
other of the Ancients, justify our Translation, when by the pains of Hades,
they understand Death; which suffered grievously by Christ's Resurrection from
the dead. Menochius himself puts in both words, and says; The pains of death
and of hell, are by a Metanymy, most grievous pains: So that the sense is, God
raised up Christ, death and hell being overcome, with all the pains that attend
it; he loosing, that is, making void whatsoever death had done by its pains and
torments. See by what pitiful wresting of Scripture these men maintain their
Doctrine: Applying that to Christ's loosing others, which is evidently spoken
of God's loosing him from the bands of death (as the plainest meaning is) for
it was not possible he should be held by it, as the next words explain it.

If those words, baptized for the dead, 1 Cor. XV. 29. 1 Cor. XV. 29.
afforded such an evident proof, as he pretends, of the help which the Souls
departed out of this world, may receive by the Church on Earth, for their
deliverance out of Purgatory: It is a wonder that not so much as one of the
Ancient Interpreters, thought of this sense of the words, among the very many
they have given; but every one carry the sense another way. St Chrysostom, with
many other of the Greek Writers, and some of the Latin, expound them of the
solemn Baptism of the Faithful; which is said to be for the dead, because they
are all Baptized into the belief of the Resurrection of the dead. This is a
plain and natural Interpretation: Whereas this man's sense of the word
Baptized, is violently forced and strained. For to be Baptized, no where
signifies to afflict ones self, or to do penance. Our Savior indeed says he
had a baptism to be baptized withal: But he does not call any sort of
afflictions by this name, much less speaks of afflicting himself, but of his
suffering death. And if we thus understand the word Baptize in this place of
the Apostle; Guillandus, a Doctor of his own Church (to name none of ours) has
given this probable Interpretation of those who were Baptized for the dead;
that they were such, as did not stick to suffer Martyrdom, for the defense of
their belief of the Resurrection of the dead.

There are very few Scholars in the Roman Church, who adventure to allege XVI.
Luke 9. for a proof of Purgatory. XVI. Luke 9.
For it is manifest, says Maldonate, That the Poor, are the friends, who are
to receive us into everlasting habitations. That is, we shall be received
thither, for our Charity to them. And in this he says, all Authors consent,
except St. Ambrose, whose singular opinion it is, that they are the Holy
Angels, which is deservedly rejected by all: And yet this poor Creature follows
that rejected opinion; (else why does he quote St. Ambrose)? though it makes
nothing for his purpose; Which is to prove, not what Angels, but what we on
earth can do for the help of the dead. After the like senseless manner he
alleges St. Austin, who says not a word of Purgatory in the place he names:
But mentioning a double order of those that shall be saved, he says, some have
lived in such sanctity, that they may help their friends to be received into
everlasting habitations; and others lived not so well, as to have been
sufficient to attain so great a blessedness, unless they had obtained mercy by
the Merits, that is, the Prayers (as Bellarmine acknowledges) of their Friends.
Now what is this to Purgatory? Unless it can be proved that there is no way to
receive Mercy from God, but by passing through that fire, of which he says
nothing. How the word fail in this Text, inforceth, as he fancies, receiving
succor after death, I cannot conceive. For it signifies our dying, as Menochius
himself expounds it; departing this life, as Theophylact, who knew of no other
sense, unless it be understood, says he, of Pusillanimity being condemned.

Nor does St. Austin in the next place, XXIII. Luke 44. say that Souls may be
helped in Purgatory: But expressly declares, if no sin were to be remitted in
the last judgment, our Lord would not have said of a cert^in sin, it shall not
be remitted in this world, nor in the world to come. Which the Thief hoped for,
when he Prayed, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And if the
Theif had any such erroneous Notion in his head (which we do not believe) of
going to Purgatory, when he died; our Lord presently freed him from that false
conceit, by that gracious promise, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

It is a lamentable Cause which must be supported by such an Author as Jason of
Cyrene, whose Book is of no credit. But if it were, the place he cites, 2
Maccab. XII. 44, 45. proves nothing but Prayer for the dead, which does not
infer a Purgatory. For the Greeks use Prayer for the dead, who believe nothing
of Purgatory. And indeed the Text it self tells us, their Prayers had respect,
not to the deliverance of those Prayed for out of the flames of Purgatory, but
to their Resurrectien: And if they had believed Purgatory, they could not,
according to the Popish opinion, have prayed for these men who died in mortal
Sin; being defiled by things belonging to Idols, which were found under their
Garments. Now the Romish Church does not admit such people as die in mortal
Sin, into Purgatory. See how weak all their proofs are, of this great Article
of their Faith. For there is no greater strength to be found in the rest of his
Texts, which he has jumbled together, after a very strange fashion, as if a
long row of Chapters and Verses would do his business. Nor did the Fathers in
the Six first Ages, know any thing of this Doctrine. Gregory indeed, called the
Great, began to talk of it, and laid the foundation of it: But his Authority is
not great, being much addicted to Fables, and relying upon pretended
Revelations, Visions, and Apparitions. And as for Origen's Purgatory, St.
Austin says, De haeres. ^. 43.
What Catholic Christian is there, whether learned or unlearned, who does not
vehemently abhor it? And yet this man is not ashamed to allege his Testimony;
by which the Reader may make a judgment of the rest.

XLVIII. That it is not lawful to make, or have Images.
Answer.
THIS is another shameless slander, as his own Bellarmin confesses; ^. 2. de
Eccles. Triumph. c. 8.
who says, the opinion of Calvin himself is this, That Images are not simply
forbidden, but he admits only of an Historical use of them. The sum of our
Doctrine is this, That it is not lawful to make an Image of God (and so some of
their own Church have confessed) nor to make any Image to be worshipped. If we
should have further added, That it is unlawful to make or have Images, because
of the danger of Idolatry, we could have justified our selves by the Authority
of as wise men, as any in their Church. For more than one of the Ancient
Fathers were of this opinion; who were never condemned by the Ancient Church,
nor was this reckoned among their Errors.

His Texts of Scripture are impertinently alleged. XXV. Exodus 18.
For God might command that to be done (XXV. Exodus 18.) which he forbad them to
do, without such a special Order. And there is no proof that the Cherubins were
made with Faces of beautiful young men, as this Writer asserts; but the
contrary is apparent, as many have demonstrated. He belies St. Hierom also,
when he makes him say, the Jews worshipped them: which the best of their own
Authors deny. Particularly Lorinus, a famous Jesuit, upon XVII. Acts 25.
Concerning the Cherubims made by God's Command, and other Images made by
Solomon, it must be said, that they were only an Appendix, and additional
ornament of another thing: and were not of themselves propounded for adoration;
which it is manifest the Hebrews did not give them. And Vasquez says the same
out of Tertullian, that no worship was given to the Cherubims; alleging no
less than twelve Schoolmen of that opinion. Why should I trouble my self
therefore any further with such a Writer, whose next Scriptures are still about
the Cherubims, and therefore are already answered? For he does not believe, I
hope, that when the Apostle, IX. Hebr. 1. speaks of the Ordinances of Divine
Service, that is, Commandments about the Worship of God (as Theodoret, and from
him Menochius expounds it) and after many other things, mentions the Cherubims
of glory, he intended they should have divine service performed to them. If
not, then his observation is frivolous; for no body denies there were such
things as Cherubims in the most holy place: where no body saw them, much less
worshipped them.

When he has done with his Scriptures, he goes about to prove (so fond he is
of Images) that an Image is of divine and natural right, because we always form
one in our mind, when we conceive and understand any thing. As if it were all
one to form an Idea invisibly in the mind; and to make a vsible, standing
representation of it, in Wood, Brass, or Stone. Such Writers tire one with
their folly and falsehood: which is notorious in what he quotes out of Saint
Austin in the conclusion of this Chapter; Who taking notice that some Pagans
had forged a Story of I know not what Books, written by Christ to Peter and
Paul, concerning the secret Arts of working Miracles, says they named those two
perhaps rather than other Apostles, to whom those pretended Books were
directed, because they might have seen them painted with Him in many places.
Which, whether it be meant in private Houses (as is most probable) or in
public places, it is manifest St. Austin did not regard such Pictures; for he
presently adds, in the very next sentence (which this false Writer conceals)
these remarkable words: Thus they deserved to err utterly, who sought for
Christ and his Apostles, not in the holy Books, but in painted Walls. And it is
no wonder, if they that counterfeit (in forging Books he means) were deceived
by them that paint.

XLIX. That it is not lawful to reverence Images, nor to give any honor to
insensible things.
Answer.
NOW we are come indeed to the business: but they seem afraid to touch it. For,
first, instead of saying, it is not lawful to worship Images (as it was before,
when Bishop Montague answered this Book) now they dwindle it into reverence of
them. And then, they fallaciously tack to this a Proposition of another nature,
that no honor is to be given to insensible things. Which is a new Calumny; for
we do upon some occasions give honor or respect (tho no Worship, nor
Adoration) to things that have no sense in them.

Therefore he might have kept to himself his first Scripture, Exodus III. 5.
which is brought to prove this; not the worshipping of any Creature. For
putting off the shoes was a respect paid to earthly Princes in those
Countries, when they came into their presence.

Ps. XCIX. 5.
In the next place XCIX. Psalm. 5. instead of our Translation, Worship at his
footstool (which he promised to stick unto) he gives us their own, Adore the
footstool of his feet; expressly contrary to the Original, and to the most
ancient Translations; particularly the Chaldee Paraphrase, which runs thus;
adore, or worship in the House of his Sanctuary, for he is holy. Which is so
plain and literal an Interpretation, that Jansenius and Lorinus himself follow
it. And they, among the Ancients, who follow the Vulgar Translation, thought it
so horrible a thing to worship his Footstool) thereby underdanding the Earth,
which is called God's footstep, that they expound these words of Christ. Hear
St. Austin upon the place. I am afraid to worship the Earth, lest he that made
Heaven and Earth condemn me; (observe that) and yet I am afraid not to worship
the Footstool of my Lord, because the Psalmist says, Worship the Footstool of
his Feet. What therefore shall I do? In this doubt, I turn my self to Christ,
whom here I seek, and find; how without impiety the Earth may be worshipped;
without Impiety may be worshipped the Footstool of his Feet; For he took Earth
from the Earth, Flesh being of the Earth: and he took Flesh of the Flesh of
Mary. He must have a brow of brass, if he can read this, and not be put out of
countenance. But if they had any shame left, they would not draw in St. Hierom
to conuntenance this Impiety; Whom this man quotes again (though he tells us
not in what Epistle to Marcella we may find it) to prove that the Ark was
worshipped in regard of the Images that were set upon it, that is, the
Cherubims. A foul Forgery! For he only says, the Tabernacle was venerated;
that is, had in honorable regard, because the Cherubims were there. Veneration
is one thing, and Religious Worship is another: And his meaning is no more than
this, that they reverenced the Sanctuary (as God commanded Moses) because of a
Divine presence there. It was the more impudent to alledg him, because he is
the Father who says L. W. in Ezekiel. c. 16.
, We have one Huband, and we worship one Image: which is the Image of the
Invisible, Omnipotent God; i. e. Christ.

What he intends by alleging, II. Philip. 10. for a proof that Images are to
be worshipped, I cannot imagine: unless he be so senseless, as to take the Name
of a thing, for an Image of it. And he could not but know also, that when we
bow at the Name of Jesus, we worship our Lord Christ.

His long Discourse of the brazen Serpent, mentioned XXI. Numb. XXI. 8.
Numb. 8. is as impertinent. For there is no proof that it was an Image, nor
the least signification that it was set up to be worshipped. If it were, why
did Hezekiah break it in pieces; for that very reason, because, in process of
time, People burnt incense to it? He ought to have known also, That Vasquez (as
I showed before) together with Azorius, both learned Jesuits, with a great many
other of the best Writers of his own Church, acknowledge that no Image among
the Jews was set up for worship. And Azorius expressly confutes his most learned
Dr. Saunders, for abusing the Testimony of some Fathers to prove the contrary.
As this man does those whom he has named, particularly their Pope Gregory the
Great: who is known to all the World to have been against the Worship of
Images; though he earnestly contended to have them in Churches. But I refer the
Reader to Bishop Montague for satisfaction about his Fathers (some of which are
forged, others say nothing to the purpose, and John Damascen was no Father, but
a superstitious Monk) because, contrary to his custom, he takes notice of some
of our Objections against Image Worship, and endeavors to answer them; which
may seem to require consideration, though I think the most ordinary Reader
might be left to grapple with him.

His Answer to the first Objection, of Hezekiah's breaking the brazen Serpent,
seeing it the cause of Idolatry, if it have any sense in it, is an audacious
reflection upon that good King; nay, upon the Holy Ghost, who commends him for
what he did: Whereas this man going about to prove, that the abuse of a good
thing, ought not to take away the use of it, does as good as say, Hezekiah
should not have broken it, but left it as a Monument of God's Mercy to them,
without destroying it. What is this but censuring him, instead of answering us?

His Answer to the next, is an impudent denial of their Principles, and of
their Practice. For their greatest Writers say, it is the constant Opinion of
Divines, that the Image is to be worshipped with the same worship wherewith
that is worshipped of which it is the Image. So Azorius.

The third is no Answer to what we charge upon them, but a false Charge upon
us; Who do not fall down before the Sacrament, and worship it as an Image of
Christ; but worship Christ himself, when we receive it upon our Knees.

The Fourth is a fresh piece of Impudence; in denying Images to be set up in
Churches with a special intent, that People should worship or adore them: and
in affirming, That the worship is given them, as it were, by a consequence; and
rather, because it may be lawfully given, than because it is principally sought
to be given. For their great Cardinal Bellarmin L. 2. de Imag. c. 21, 22.
, to name no other, expressly says, That the Images of Christ, and of the
Saints, are honored, not only by accident, and improperly, but per se, and
properly: so that they terminate the Veneration, as they are considered in
themselves; and not only as they represent their Exemplar. And their Opinion
savours of Heresy in that Church, who say that they are not set up to be
worshipped. Of which this man, I believe, was sensible, when he tells us, They
are partly set up in Churches, to stir up our minds to follow the Example of
those holy men, whose Images we behold. Which supposes this not the whole end
for which they are set up; but that they are partly intended for another
purpose. What that is, he durst not confess; for fear he should confute
himself: For he knew that the stirring up of Peoples minds to follow the
Saints, is but a small part of the reason for which Images are set up in
Churches: the great end is, that they may be worshipped.

His distinction between an Idol and an Image, is as vain as all the rest (as
our Authors have demonstrated a thousand times) and that they do not give
Latria to Images, is another egregious untruth: for they expressly say in the
Ceremoniale, that Latria is due to the Cross: for which reason it is ordered to
take place of the Imperial Sword, when they are both carried together.

Neither he, nor any any one else (whatsoever he vapors) dare break in pieces,
or tear a Crucifix, or Picture, solemnly consecrated to be worshipped: not with
an inferior sort of Worship (as he pretends); for that, the greatest Men in his
Church acknowledge is downright Idolatry. And therefore maintain, that the
Image, and the Person represented by it, are worshipped as one Obect, with the
same act of worship.

What the Council of Trent says, has been considered by a number of our
Writers, who have shown, that the Prayers wherewith Images are consecrated, the
Pilgrimages that are made to them, the Prayers to the Wood of the Cross, do
suppose they expect virtue, yea very great benefit from them: and that,
notwithstanding all their distinctions, the worship of them is Idolatry.

Thus much I have thought good to add in this place (that I may not be less
careful than he) for the preservation of our People from being deceived by
those who mince this matter of Image Worship. Concerning which, I may truly
say, as Dr. Jackson has done, that the Primitive Church abandoned it, as the
Liturgy of Hell.

L. That no man has seen God in any form; and that therefore his Picture, or
Image cannot be made.
Answer.
IN the First Edition of this Book, they condemned us for saying, No man has
seen God at any time (so well are they skilled in Scripture, where we find
those very words, I. John 18.) but having been soundly lashed for this foul
Ignorance, by Bishop Mountague, now they have altered the words, they think,
more wisely; tho still with a contradiction to St. Paul, who says of God, that
no man has seen him, nor can see him: Which is as much, we think, as if he had
said, no man has seen him in any form, because his words import, that it is
impossible one should see him at all.

From whence it is a plain consequence, that his Picture, or Image, cannot be
made. And nothing but stupid superstition, that horrid blindness where with
those are struck, who fall into Idolatry, could make any man affirm the
contrary. Their Ancient Schoolmen, it is well known, absolutely condemn the
making any Picture of God; but only, as in Christ he took upon him our Nature.
Nay, the Second Council of Nice (as blockish as they were) had so much sense
remaining, as to condemn the making of an Image of God, when they established
the Worship of Images. And John Damascen himself says, it is the highest
madness and impiety, to make any Figure of the Deity. But time has wrought
men's minds into this Madness: and one would think a real frenzy possessed this
man, when he thought of the III. III. Genesis 8.
Genesis 8. (which only says, They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the
garden) to prove God has been seen in a Corporal form: As if hearing were
seeing; or one could paint the form of a sound, or of motion. To what Impiety
may not such men arrive, who can satisfy themselves with such Arguments?

XXVIII. Genesis 12.
Nor is there the least mention of anyform, wherein the Lord appeared to Jacob,
XXVIII. Genesis 12. But if there had, it would be the highest impiety to call that
the picture of God, who has no form, no shape, no figure, or lineaments; and
therefore cannot be Painted.

God speaking to Moses face to face XXXII. Exodus 11. XXXII. Exodus 11.
does not imply God to have a face; but only that he spoke most familiarly to
him, as one Friend speaks to another. His own Menochius goes farther; for his
Interpretation is, By an Angel appearing in corporeal and humane shape, God
spoke most familiarly to him. And indeed it is the opinion of his Order (the
Jesuits) and of all later Divines in the Roman Church, very few excepted, that
God never appeared, but by the Ministry of Angels.

Which answers what he alleges out of VII. VII. Dan. 9.
Dan. 9 To which Menochius also gives this farther satisfaction, That every
thing which is here attributed unto God, signifies only the splendour of the
Divine Majesty; which, in one word, may be called Glory. This is the only thing
that can be represented; which it is impossible for any one to describe.

As for VI. Isa. 1, 5. 1 Kings XXII. 19. There is not the least signification
of any form wherein the Divine Majesty appeared. His reasonings upon these
Texts are so weak, that they are not worthy any ones notice: But lest he should
be wise in his own conceit, let him take this rational account from Abulensis,
an Author of his own Church, why no Image of the Trinity should be made. First,
For fear of Idolatry, lest the Image it self should be worshipped. 2dly. For
fear of Error and Heresy; in attributing to God corporiety and essential
differences, such as we see those Three Figures represent. This is sufficient
to convince any man, who is not drunk with the cup of fornication, mentioned by
St. John in the Revelation.

We hear not a word of Fathers to countenance this Doctrine, which is a shrowed
sign it is so far from being Ancient, that they speak directly against it. And
it is observable, that they bring in the Gentiles excusing their making Images
of their Gods, just as the Papists now excuse themselves, and as this man
argues: That Images were unto men, instead of writings (or Scriptures) upon
which fixing their sight, they might have some Conceptions of God. They are the
words of Athanasius in his Oration against the Gentiles. And so Eusebius tells
us, Porphyry said, That men by Statues, as by Book^, have learnt to know the
Doctrine of the Gods. Behold the Fathers whom they follow. Thus the Sworn
Enemies of Jesus Christ were wont to discourse.

LI. That Blessing, or Signing with the sign of the Cross, is not founded in
Holy Scripture.
Answer.
IT is uncertain, what he means by this proposition; whether he make Blessing,
and Signing with the sign of the Cross, Two several things, or the same. If he
mean that we say, Blessing things or Persons is not founded in Scripture, he is
a notorious Calumniator; for we Bless our Children and our Meat. But if he
mean, That Blessing by Signing with the sign of the Cross is not founded there,
he says true; for we find no Precept or Example for such a way of Blessing.
Anciently indeed, when the Cross of Christ was counted foolishness, Christians
used to sign themselves in the Forehead with this sign, in token that they
gloried in the Death of Christ; which was nothing else, but to make a
confession of their Faith, and to testify in what esteem they had Christ
Crucified. The use of the sign upon such an occasion is not to be condemned,
nor the use of it in their Benedictions: Whereby they declared their Belief,
that they and all they had was Blessed by Christ, who was made a curse for us;
and that through his Death and Passion (of which the Cross was a Memorial) they
expected all manner of Blessings from God. But all this was of Humane
Institution; for which we find no directions in Scripture.

None of the places he alleges, say a syllable of it; much less expressly
mention this sign; Let the Reader look as long as he pleases into VII. VII.
Rev. 3.
Rev. 3. he will find no more, but that the Angel was commanded to Seal the
servants of God in their Foreheads; With what mark we are not told.

In the X. Mark 16. and XXIV. Luke 50. we read of Christ's blessing the
Children that were brought to him, and of blessing his Disciples; but nothing
of signing either with the Cross, or any thing else; which therefore is not
founded in these, or indeed in any other Scriptures.

The Fathers, we know, speak of the use of the Sign of the Cross upon several
occasions; but do they say it was founded in Scripture? Not a word of that,
which is the only point. And signing with the Cross may be laid aside now, as
many other Rites have been; which were no less in use in Ancient times, than
that was; particularly, the Custom of Praying Standing, not Kneeling on the
Lord's Day and every day between Easter and Whitsuntide. Which was decreed in
the famous Council of Nice; and as it had been in use before, and not then
introduced, but only confirmed, so continued in the Church for 800 years; and
yet is now quite disused. I say nothing of the Spiritual Virtue, as well as
Bodily Protection, which they in the Roman Church, now expect from the Sign of
the Cross; for which there is not either Scripture, or other Ancient Authority.

LII. That the Public Service of the Church, ought not to be said, but in a
Language that all the People may understand.
Answer.
IT is some satisfaction that we shall part fairly; for in Conclusion he speaks
truly and plainly. This is our Doctrine, which is so agreeable to the express
words of the Bible; that unless the Bible contradict it self, nothing can be
found there to the contrary.

I Luke 8.
St. Luke I. 8. says nothing of any words the Priest spoke, when he ministered
in the Sanctuary. Nor do we find in the Bible, the least mention of Public
Prayers he made there, but only of burning Incense; which the People well
understood represented the going up of their Prayers to God with acceptance;
which they made without, while he burnt Incense within. Which may be called a
Symbolical Prayer; the meaning of which was as well understood by the People,
as what they themselves spoke. The Angel indeed tells him, v. 13. thy Prayer is
heard; but this does not prove he spoke any words, but rather lifted up his
mind to God, when the Incense ascended toward Heaven. For it is manifest he
continued his Ministration after he was struck Dumb; and therefore it was not
the Custom to speak any words. But suppose he did, how does it appear he did
not speak in the Language he used at other times, the Language of the Country?
Tho it is not material whether he did or no; for the People were not in a
Capacity to hear his Voice. And therefore this place, if it prove any thing,
proves too much; that the Public Service of the Church may be said in a place
separate from all the People, where they can neither hear, nor see the Priest.

The XVI. Levit. 17. XVI. Lev. 17.
is most absurdly alleged to serve this purpose, because it speaks of a
Typical Service in the most Holy Place; unto which we have nothing here
answerable upon Earth, but is fulfilling in the Intercession which our Lord
Jesus Christ makes for us continually in Heaven, by virtue of his most precious
Blood, wherewith he entered in thither. Besides, the High Priest of old, said
not one word while he staid there; and therefore this can be no argument the
People need not understand the Public Prayers of the Church, which are made,
not in such a Secret Place as that was, but openly in the hearing of all the
People. Who, by this reasoning, may be shut out of the Church, as well as
excluded from understanding the Prayers, and the Priest left there to a silent
Service by himself.

Here Fathers being wanting (for they are all against a Service in an unknown
Tongue) he pretends he has no need of them; tho he needlessly heapt them up,
where he could find a word, that seemed to look that way he would have it. But
he supplies this want with a bold untruth, That the practice of the whole
Christian World, for these many hundred years has been against us, who would
have Divine Service in a Language the People understand: Which can be salved by
nothing, but by another proud falsity, that the Roman Church is the whole
Christian World. For no Church uses Latin Service, but such as are under the
Dominion of the Pope of Rome; all others use the Language of their several
Countries. Nay, there are some who have acknowledged his Authority, that would
still have the Public Service in their own Language, which the People
understood.

For shame, let these men leave off Writing, and betake themselves to their
Prayers, that God would forgive them their abominable Falsehoods, wherewith they
have labored to maintain their Cause; particularly in this point, about
Public Service in a Language the People do not understand. Which they are
sensible is against the express Doctrine of St. Paul, in 1 Cor. XIV. and
therefore this man thinks himself concerned to attempt an Answer unto what we
allege from hence.

At first he distinguishes between Public Prayer and Private, which here is
very idle, for it is evident, the Apostle speaks of Public Prayers in the
Church, verse 19. When the whole Church came together in one place, verse 23.

Secondly, He says this place is against us, because it proves the Common
Service of the Church, was not then in a Tongue which every man understood, but
in another Language, not so common to all, verse 16. Mark, how he contradicts
himself; before he supposed (or else he talked impertinently) that the Apostle
discourses of Private Prayers; now he acknowledges it is the Common Service of
the Church, of which he speaks, but shows it was not in the Common Language.
What a brow have these men, who can thus outface the clearest truth? That
which the Apostle condemns as a fault of some Persons, and condemns as utterly
inconsistent with the very end of Speech, as well as with the Edification of
the Church; this man makes to have been common allowed Practice. Was there ever
such Prevarication? A man had better have no use of Reason, than Discourse on
this fashion; no Tongue at all, than talk at this rate, expressly against the
Apostle's Injunction, who requires him, who could not deliver what he spoke in
a known Tongue, or had no Interpreter, To hold his peace, and speak to himself,
and to God, v. 28.

His Argument to justify their Practice is so silly, that it cannot but make a
good man sigh deeply, to think that poor ignorant People should be mis led by
such Idiots. For he takes him, who occupied the place of the unlearned (in
verse 16.) to be one, who was required, or supposed to be there, to supply the
unlearned man's place, That is, says he, one who should have further
understanding of that Tongue in which the Service of the Church is said. Which
he imagines is a proof, the Service was not in the Vulgar Tongue, for then
there had been no need of one to supply the Idiots place, etc. This is such a
gross piece of Duncery, as his Master Bellarmine would have corrected, if he
had looked into him, or any of the Ancient and Modern Interpreters: Who by one
that takes up the place of the Unlearned, do not understand, one that acts in
the stead of an Unlearned Person, (that is a dull fancy, never heard of among
the Learned) but one that sits in the Place or Bench, is in the Form, as we
speak, of the Unlearned. That is, an Ignorant Person, who is the man that the
Apostle says, could not say, Amen, if he understood not what was said in the
Thanksgiving. So Menochius upon that Text, He that sits among the Simple and
Rude, who are ignorant of Tongues, how shall he say, Amen? That is, approve thy
Prayer, if he do not understand it.

His Cavil therefore at the Geneva Ministers is foolish, if not malicious; for
they translate the words honestly, not deceitfully, according to the certain
sense of them; there being no difference between an Idiot, and he who supplies
the place of an Idiot.

We know of no Reformed Churches, where they do not say Amen to their Public
Prayers. Here we are sure the People are enjoined so to do. Therefore it is
another Slander, if he object this to us, who have not turned Amen into So be
it, as he says many of the Reformed Churches have done. If it be true, that any
have expounded the word, into others of like signification, it was for the
Edification of the People, and no body has just reason to find fault with
them, if the People did not understand its meaning. Which they did in Greece,
as much as in Judea, and therefore the Apostle had reason to retain it.

But he belies St. Austin, as he has done us, when he makes him say, It is not
lawful to turn Amen into any other language, without the scandal of the whole
Church. For he says, L. 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 10.
There is such variety of Latin Interpreters of the Scripture, as makes the
knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek necessary; that when one doubts of the Latin,
recourse may be had thither; (this is worth marking for other purposes). Tho
some Hebrew words indeed we often find are not interpreted, as Amen, Allelujah,
Racha, and Osanna, etc. Which Antiquity has preserved, partly, for the more
sacred Authority, tho they might have been interpreted (observe that) as Amen,
and Allelujah; partly, because it is said they cannot be translated into another
tongue, as the two other words, Racha, and Osanna. In which discourse he says
nothing of the unlawfulness of Translating the Hebrew words, nor of the scandal
their Translation would give; but only of some of them, particularly, Amen,
being more venerable in the Original Language, than in any other. What he says
in his Epistles I cannot stand to examine; for in that Epistle which he quotes,
there is nothing to be found about this matter.

In conclusion, he is driven to this shift, to say, That our own Service is not
understood, because it consists partly of the Psalms of David (which he most
falsely says are the hardest part of all the Bible) and of Lessons out of the
Old and New Testament, which are not understood by the people. But is this all
that our Service consists of? Have we not Prayers and Thanksgivings, easy to
be understood every word? As in the other part of the Service they understand
enough for their Edification; whereas of their Mass, the simple people
understand nothing: Or suppose they understand a little, yet this will not make
their case like ours; because the people with us have all in their vulgar
Language, tho they do not every one understand all; but they have not a word in
their vulgar language, tho some perhaps may understand a little of the Latin
Tongue.

And what is the reason they dare not trust the Mass in the vulgar language?
Because it is hard to be understood? No, but quite contrary, because the people
would easily find things there which confute their own Religion, and are
conformable unto ours. For who would believe Purgatory any longer, who heard
the Priest say in the vulgar tongue, Lord, remember thy servants and handmaids
that are gone before us, with the sign of Faith, and sleep in the sleep of
peace? If they be in peace, every one would be ready to say, Then they are not
burning in the Purgatory fire; and what need I give my money to Pray them out
from thence? The like passages there are, that would make them believe
Transubstantiation to be a Fable; and that it is a novel thing to have the
Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue; which I have not room to mention: But
desire the Reader to observe how this practice is condemned out of the mouths
of many great persons in their own Church. I will name Two.

One is Cardinal Cajetan, upon 1 Cor. XIV. who says, Out of this Doctrine of
Paul we learn, That it is better for the Edification of the Church, that the
Public Prayers which are said in the audience of the people, should be said in
the tongue common to Clerks and People, than said in Latin. A most ingenuous
Confession; in which he does but follow one of their Saints, viz. Anselm, in
his Exposition of the same Chapter; That is good which thou say, but another
is not edified by thy words, which he understands not. Therefore since you meet
in the Church for Edification, those things ought to be said in the Church,
which may be understood by men, and afford Edification to the hearers.

CONCLUSION.
NOW I leave all men, who have a grain of common sense and common honesty,
whether this man, who (both in the Title and Conclusion of his Book) pretends
to judge us out of our own mouth, II. Jam. 4.
be not, as St. James speaks, a judge of evil thoughts: That is, as his
Menochius expounds it, one who reasons ill, and therefore judges ill: 1 Timothy
I. 7.
Who desiring to be a Teacher of others, understands neither what he says, nor
whereof he affirms. As will be confessed by all who follow our Savior's Rule,

VII. John 24. Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 38. line 20. r. to be come. P. 54. l. 26. r. of Religion. P. 90. l. 24.
r. all together. P. 105. l. 1. r. Arts; whereby. P. 145. l. 24. r. 1 Cor. IX.
27. P. 172. l. 25. r. heard of, much less have ever seen. P. 184. l. 5. r. Rich
Man. P. 187. l. 14. r. ad Pop. Antioch. P. 193. l. 21. r. things done at. P.
207. l. 15. r. solemn Rite. P. 213. l. 6. r. most suitable. P. 217. l. 16. r.
Tert. Sum. Ibid. l. 17. r. mere impudence. P. 218. l. 1. r. Bona for Bonell. P.
224. l. 21. r. S. Victore. P. 231. l. 21. r. speaking of Virgins. P. 250. l.
antepenult. r. visible. P. 253. l. 11. r. God's footstool. P. 262. l. 14. r. of
Fathers to countenance.

