A SERMON PREACHED AT S. PAVL COVENT GARDEN. On the late Day of Fasting and
Prayer. NOVEMBER. 13.

By SIMON PATRICK, D.D. Rector of the said Parish, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
his MAJESTY.

IMPRIMATUR,

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Nov. 23. 1678.
LONDON: Printed by R. E. for J. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russelstreet in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza. 1678.

TO THE Inhabitants OF THE PARISH of S. Paul Covent Garden.
THis Sermon being Printed, merely because many of you have desired it; I hope
you intend it shall not lose its Fruit, but be imprinted in your Memories, and
on your Heart. It is plain, as becomes the Habit of a Mourner; but what it
wants in Ornament, it makes up, I trust, in honest affections, and substantial
endeavors to do you good: and if it be received into honest and good hearts,
may conduce much to your happiness here and hereafter. I pray God it may; and
beseech you every day to commit the custody of your selves, so seriously unto
him in welldoing, that you may every one of you be able to say boldly, The Lord
is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me: Nay, you may have
that comfortable hope which S. Paul had, and say with him, 2 Timothy IV. 17, 18. I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion: And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

Jeremiah XIV. 9. latter part. Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we
are called by thy name, leave us not.
THE occasion of our solemn meeting at this time is, an Information that has
been given (as we are told in the Proclamation which called us hither) of an
horrible design against the life of his Sacred Majesty; which must needs have
drawn along with it such fatal consequences, had it succeeded, as would have
endangered the subversion of the Protestant Religion, and Government of this
Realm: which God of his infinite mercy has hitherto prevented, and it is to be
hoped will prevent for the future.

These Reasons have moved the Parliament to desire, and His Majesty to grant
and appoint, that this day be set apart, for the imploring the mercy and
protection of almighty God to His Majesty's Royal Person, and in him to all his
loyal Subjects: and to pray that God would bring to light more and more all
secret Machinations against his Majesty, and the whole Kingdom.

For the obtaining these great blessings, we ought in the devoutest manner to
lift up our hearts and our hands (as this Prophet speaks elsewhere) to God in
the Heavens: Acknowledging indeed that we are a very sinful Generation, a
people laden with iniquity, who deserve, if he should punish us according to
our provocations, to be utterly abandoned by him; but humbly beseeching him, of
his infinite clemency to have patience with us and spare us; and not to cut us
down as barren Trees that cumber the ground, but to try us, at least a while
longer, whether we will bring forth the fruit he justly expects from us. Which
though we have often promised, and not performed, and thereby made our selves
the more obnoxious to his heavy displeasure; yet since he has not taken the
forfeitures we have made of his favor, but still continues it to us, nay, in a
wonderful mannner defeats the attempts of those, who would subvert our
Religion; we have encouragement to importune him in such words as these I have
now read, and to say, though we have been false to thee and to our own vows,
Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy Name, leave
us not.

Which are part of an humble deprecation of Gods displeasure, which the Prophet
Jeremy makes in the behalf of Judah and Jerusalem: And are the fittest I could
think of, to put into your mouths at this time, for the averting of Gods
Judgments from this poor Church and Kingdom.

The Jews, for whom the Prophet was so importunate in those days, languished
under, and were in danger to be devoured by, a most miserable Famine: which in
that Country was wont to come from want of Rain, as here, in this part of the
world, from overmuch moisture. Thus the Chapter begins (as the words run in the
Hebrew) The word of the Lord, that came to Jeremiah concerning the restraints,
which were upon the clouds, that is, by the command of the Almighty; who
detained their showers, and so brought a dearth upon the Land.

This dearth is described in a very dreadful manner, from thence to the 7th v.
But looks nothing so terribly, to my apprehension, as a famine of the word of
God would do; which we may fear would have followed here in these Countries, if
God had permitted our Enemies to accomplish their designs against us. For they
would have shut up the holy Scriptures from you, and laid a restraint upon that
Heavenly Doctrine which has so many years (to use the words of Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.2.) Dropped upon you as the rain, and distilled as the dew: as the small rain
upon the tender herb, and as showers upon the grass.

Our unfruitfulness indeed under such sweet influences of Heaven, may bring
upon us this sore punishment: For we must confess, as Jeremy does in the 7th v.
That our iniquities testify against us. They are open and apparent; they
accuse us heavily, and demand judgment upon us; they plead for our condemnation
and the severest executions: For our backslidings are many, and we have sinned
against God most grievously. And therefore, unless he will be favorable to us,
as the Prophet there speaks, for his own Namessake, we must look for nothing
but utter destruction.

That is our only hope, as it was theirs. But alas! such was the sadness of
their case, that they had too much reason to fear, he who was the hope of
Israel (as it follows v. 8.) and the Savior thereof in time of trouble, would
not regard them, nor take any farther care of them. For that is the meaning of
those questions; why should thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a
wayfareing Man, who turns aside to tarry for a night? That is; as one that
minds not what becomes of us; no more than a man is concerned for a place where
he intends not to inhabit; but only to pass thorough, in his way to some other
Country. Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot
save? Or as some render it, like one that is weary, with his former labors and
toils for the good of his neighbors; which he finds have been bestowed to so
little purpose, that he has no encouragement to do any more to help them. God
seemed, that is, to be resolved to send them no more deliverance, but to
abandon them to inevitable destruction; or matters were come to such a pass,
that the Prophet feared he would soon be so resolved: their behavior toward
him being so ungrateful, as it gave him just cause to be like a stranger among
them, and to employ his power no longer for their Salvation. Only this they
could say that he was not yet departed; upon which the Prophet grounds some
hope he might be prevailed withal to stay with them -- Yet, O Lord, thou art in
the midst of us, etc. This was the only thing remaining, upon which they could
build any comfortable expectations; and they were not without a great mixture
of fear, that notwithstanding these addresses to him, he might forsake them.

How like our condition is to theirs, I need not stay to tell you; We have too
much cause to fear lest God, who is our only Hope, and has been heretofore our
Savior, should let us reap the fruit of our own doings, and interpose no
farther for our deliverance. He shows us indeed what he is ready to do for us,
if we were disposed to receive his new offers of Salvation: But we have been so
little the better for what he has wrought for us, in a long series of Wonders,
that it will be no wonder if he resolve now upon another course, and be, as the
Prophet here speaks, like a mighty man that cannot save; having wearied himself
with unprofitable care and pains for our welfare.

But we ought not for all this, to cast away all hope in him, since it is
apparent by the unexpected discovery he has made of the horrid designs of our
Enemies against us, that he is still in the midst of us; nay is desirous, if we
be willing, to save us. And therefore the fears, and sad apprehensions we have
should only keep us from presuming too much, even upon this singular privilege
and encouragement; and excite us to cry the more passionately and devoutly, O
Lord, leave us not; forsake us not, Good Lord, though we are unworthy thou
should stay with us.

In which humble suit that we may prevail with him, I shall endeavor.

1. First, to make you sensible, what a privilege; what a Glory and Security
it is, to have God in the midst of us: That so you may be awakened to use your
best endeavors to keep him with us.

2. And you will be more excited to this, if I briefly show you in the Second
place, that this extraordinary presence of God with the people, will not secure
them from the severest punishments, if they be disobedient to him; nor is any
reason for their presumption that he is immutably tied to them. No,

3. It will be apparent that it ought rather to be expected he should punish
them, because of his care of them (expressed by this phrase,) and that he
should quite leave them, if they will not be amended by those punishments,
because they are insensible of his care.

4. And how great a plague that is, I believe you will be sensible, though I
say nothing of it. And therefore,

5. In the last place I shall direct you how to prevent it, by such prayers to
God as may obtain the favor of his continued presence with us.

I.
The First of these will need no other illustration, but the explaining of
these two Phrases in my Text; Thou art in the midst of us, and we are called by
thy Name, By which we shall presently discern what a glory and security this
was to Israel; and what, by a parity of Reason, we may now, upon the same
account, make our boast of, above many other Nations. The explication of the
latter depends upon the former; for therefore they were called by his Name, i.
e. owned by him for his peculiar people, because he was in the midst of them.
This alone then will require my pains to explain it. And there are Six
expressions, which I have observed in the holy Scriptures, that testify the
extraordinary presence of God among that people, (who now were in danger to be
deserted by him) and abundantly satisfy us in the meaning and propriety of
this speech, that he was in the midst of them.

1. First, they are said to be a people near unto the Lord, Psalm. 148. ult. He
also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints, even of the
Children of Israel, a people near unto him. Which signifies a particular
affection he had for them; inclining him to use them in a more familiar manner,
than he did any other people upon the face of the Earth. For the rest of the
world were treated as strangers, while these had the honor to approach unto
him as his companions and friends. And therefore,

2. As they are said to be near unto him, so he is said to be nigh unto them.
Which is the reason of the former; and justly esteemed by Moses to be a
privilege wherein they excelled all mankind, Deuteronomy. IV. 7. What Nation is there
so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things
that we call upon him for? And what Nation is there so great, that has
statutes and judgments, so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you
this day? The Psalmist you read in the place forementioned, speaks of his
exalting the horn of his people, and the praise of his Saints; that is, making
them a Nation praised, famed, and renowned throughout the World: And here you
find what it was that made them so great and illustrious, viz. The gracious
presence of God among them, ready to do any thing for them that they desired;
as appeared in that admirable form of Government and Divine Service which he
had already established in their Nation.

3. Gods nearness to them and theirs to him, was manifested in this, that He
dwelt among them, Exodus XXIX. 45, 46. And I will dwell amongst the Children of
Israel, and will be their God. And they shall know that I am the Lord their God
that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am
the Lord their God. It was a considerable Testimony of their nearness to God,
that they had stood before him at mount Horeb, and received the Law from his
mouth: which moved Moses to charge them to preserve a special remembrance of
this, as you may read at large in Deuteronomy. IV. 10, 11, 12. But though this was a
most memorable, yet it was not the only, nor the greatest (because not the most
lasting) token of their nearness to him. For, lest it should be thought that he
was then only present among them, at that famous time and place; he was pleased
to declare afterward that he would dwell among them, and settle his abode with
them; that in all future successions, and whithersoever they went, they might
be assured of the same Divine presence, which appeared to them at Horeb.

4. In order to which he commanded them to build him an House, called the
Sanctuary, or holy place; that they might be the more sensible of his constant
abode with them, Exodus XXV. 8. And let them build me a Sanctuary, that I may
dwell among them. Accordingly he there gives directions how it should be built;
and orders how it should be furnished, with a Table, and Dishes, and Spoons,
and Candlestick and Snuffers, and abundance of other household stuff: Whereof no
reason can be given but this, that it might represent in the most familiar
manner to the grossest souls in the Nation, that God dwelt, and, as it were,
kept house among them.

5. And that it might be more apparent this was his House, and that herein he
dwelt among them; this House was seated in the midst of their Camp, ( Numb. XI.
17. v. 3.) and there was also a glorious cloud covered it, whereby it was
sanctified to be his habitation, Exodus XXIX. 43. The pillar of the cloud and
fire, that is, which had led them out of Egypt, and was the special token of
his presence with them, he there promises should rest upon this House, and
consecrate it to himself. And accordingly you find that as soon as Moses had
finished this habitation, and set it up, A cloud covered it, and the glory of
the Lord filled the Tabernacle: So that Moses was not able to enter into the
place, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the LORD filled it,
Exodus XL. 34, 37. On the outside of the house, that is, there was a smoke; but
within there was a most glorious brightness; which sometime broke forth in an
amazing splendour, as a visible token of his presence in the midst of them. So
you read in many places, which I cannot stand now to mention, that the Glory of
the Lord appeared in the cloud; and stood in the door of the Tabernacle, and
appeared to all the congregation; dazzling their eyes, and frighting them, when
they were in the greatest tumults and rebellions against Moses and Aaron: For
it looked then like a consuming fire, which they thought would presently devour
them.

Lastly, Gods dwelling among them was so clearly demonstrated, he was so nigh
to them, and made himself so familiar with them, that he is said to be seen
face to face among them. So you read, Numb. XIV. 14. Where the people being in
a mutiny against the only good men amongst them, The Glory of the Lord appeared
in the Tabernacle, and the Lord threatened to disinherit them, and had then done
execution upon them; had not Moses interposed for them, by this argument, that
the people of Canaan would make an ill construction of it, For they have heard
that thou LORD art among this people, that thou LORD art seen face to face, and
thy cloud stands over them, etc. Read also Deuteronomy. V. 4. And when you have
considered all this seriously, you will see there was reason to say that the
LORD was in the midst of them; and in an extraordinaary mnner sensibly present
to this people. They were above all others dear to him, and had the highest
marks of his favor and love. None could more presume of his indulgent kindness
to them, or be more assured of his tender and affectionate care, watching over
them to preserve them: Unless it be our selves, who have a greater grace
vouchsafed to us, and more illustrious demonstrations of his powerful presence
with us, to bless protect and defend us, than the Israelites, though so much in
his favor, could boast of.

We, whom he has Elected to be his peculiar people, called to be Saints, and
sanctified, excel them as much as they did other Nations. He has exalted our
praise far above theirs, who were heretofore so much renowned; and has
approached so nigh to us, and made us so near to himself, that we may glory in
his holy Name, and say, in a far more noble sense than they could, that he has
spoken to us face to face. For no man has seen God at any time; but the only
begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. And the
Word was made flesh, say the Apostles of our Religion, and dwelt among us, and
we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, Joh. I.
14.18. God shone into the very hearts of these holy men, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. IV. 6.
And what they saw and heard they have declared to us, that we might also have
fellowship with them; and (they protest that) truly their fellowship is with
the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John I. 3. Who is the image of the
invisible God; and the brightness of his glory. By whom God looks upon us and
speaks to us, through our own flesh: for he dwells not now, as he did among
them, in a Tabernacle made of Curtains and beasts Skins, or in a house of
stone; but has made our Nature his dewlling place. The flesh of man, is become
the Sanctuary of God, wherein he will dwell for ever. As our Lord has assured
us, by sending down from his holy place, the HOLY GHOST, the Spirit of glory
upon us: whereby all Christians are built together, for an habitation of God
through the Spirit, Ephesians. II. 22. Who has delivered to us his Oracles in the
holy Gospel; where such things are revealed unto us as the Angels desire to
look into, 1 Pet. I. 12. For the New Jerusalem, of which we are Citizens, came
down from God out of Heaven; and when it descended S. John heard a great voice
out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them, and be their God, Rev. XXI. 2, 3.

Nor was all this proper only to those times, when Christianity was first
planted in the world; but we have still visible assurances of his gracious
presence among us, and of his dear love to us: And that is, in the holy
Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood; where he really and indeed makes himself
present to all the faithful, and is in the midst of them. There he calls unto
us, and says, See the love I bear to you. Behold the tokens of my everlasting
remembrance of you. Believe it, I am with you always to the end of the world. I
assure you hereby, that my Body and Blood shall preserve you to eternal life:
Because I live, ye shall live also.

And though you may imagine this to be a privilege common to all Christians;
yet, if the matter be well considered, it will appear that we have a peculiar
Claim to this honor of being a people nigh unto him; or may, at least, in a
double regard challenge a special interest in his favor, above all those who
endeavor wholly to ingross and limit it to themselves.

First, In that we have the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood more
entirely and purely administered unto us. Whereby we are assured he is there
present among us; when as they that depend upon the intention of their Priests,
can have no certainty of so great a blessing. We have him presented to us
according to his own Institution, and therefore cannot reasonably doubt of
receiving there all the fruits of his dying love: Whereas they that glory most
in his favor, have an imperfect representation of him, a lame and defective
ministration of that Divine Grace, which he there communicates to his people.

2. We believe also and are sure, that our Lord is so nigh us, that we may
immediately address our selves to him, and be confident of finding access,
though we take no Saints or Angels in our way to his blessed presence. We need
none to intercede with him for us; like those of the Church of Rome, who beg
the assistance of this or that Saint, (especially of the blessed Virgin his
Mother) to introduce them into his favor, and to recommend them and their
suits to him. Which manifestly supposes him at a distance, and not to be nigh
to such Supplicants; who depend upon I know not how many men and women, whom
they suppose to be great Favorites in the Court of Heaven, and whose Mediation
they must use, before they can approach him.

This one thing alone is sufficient to entitle us to this privilege of being a
People nigh unto the Lord, and having him in the midst of us, above all those
Churches of that Communion. It is no fancy but a real Truth; that we stand in
a nearer Relation to him, and may be confident of his favor, more than they
can be, who dare not go to him but by the intercession of others, whom they
desire to procure them acceptance with him. Which very thing also is such an
Offense to him, that I am confident it sets them still at a greater distance
from him. For it is an imitation of that Worship which God abhorred so much in
the Heathen world, that he sent his Son on purpose to destroy it; and to bring
them to the acknowledgment of this truth, that there is but one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.

This Truth, blessed be God, we have received, and hold, as it has been taught
us by his holy Apostle St. Paul, 1 Timothy II. 4, 5. And by virtue of this, our
glory ought to be great in his Salvation, and we should triumph in his praise,
saying, What Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the
Lord our God is, in all things that we call upon him for? We may lawfully look
upon our selves (and most thankfully acknowledge it) as having the most High in
the midst of us after a peculiar manner; to bless, save and deliver us; in one
word, to be our God and singular Benefactor. Which as it is the greatest glory,
so it was ever accounted the greatest safety and security ( Zach. II. 5.) For
if God be for us, as the Apostle speaks, who can be against us? We need not
care, that is, who opposes us; nor fear what man can do unto us: But though all
Nations should compass us about (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. CXVIII. 10,
etc.) we might say with the same courage and resolution that he does (could we
but be assured that God is with us) In the Name of the Lord will we destroy
them. They compass us about, yea they compass us about, but in the Name of the
Lord will we destroy them. They compass us about like Bees, but they shall be
quenched as the fire of thorns; for in the name of the Lord will we destroy
them. They may thrust sore at us, that we may fall; but the Lord will help us.
The right hand of the Lord shall be exalted, the right hand of the Lord shall
do valiantly. We shall not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

This is such a satisfaction that it is a wonder we are not all more solicitous
to secure the Divine presence with us, whereby we might live not only safely
but confidently, without those fears and dreadful apprehensions that are apt to
possess and terrify us. Which would all vanish, could we but rationally hope
that we abide under the shadow of the Almighty, and could say of the LORD, he
is my refuge and my fortress; my God, in him will I trust. Surely he shall hide
me from the Counsel of the wicked, and from the insurrection of the workers of
iniquity. There is not a Man of us, one would think, but would put away all
other fears, and dread this alone, lest God should not be with us; did we not
presume too much of his favor, and vainly hope for his continued protection,
though we be so negligent, as to remain utterly insensible of what he has done
for us, and to take no care to behave our selves worthily as becomes those who
have the honor to be so nearly related to him.

II. III.
Let me therefore briefly awaken you, as I propounded in the Second place, to a
due use of Gods singular grace to you: by representing how far the
extraordinary presence of God among a people, will be from exempting them from
the severest punishments, if they prove ungrateful and disobedient to him.
There is so little reason for any presumption of such immunity,(...) we may
rather justly expect, as I said in the third thing I propounded to your
consideration, (which for brevities sake I shall join with this) that he should
punish them sorely, nay utterly forsake them, if they will not be reformed by
those punishments.

The Israelites are a woeful example of this: who fancied indeed strongly that
God was tied to them so fast by his promises, that they were in no danger to
lose him, though they took no care to keep him with them; but found their error
to their cost, and paid dearly for it; throughout all generations. When he
first manifested himself to them, at their coming out of Egypt into the
Wilderness, you know how many of their carcases fell there; till they were all
consumed but two men, who were the only persons that followed God fully. The
cloud which you heard stood over them, as a shelter to them while they were
obedient to his word, would defend them no longer when they rebelled against
him; but poured down fiery indignation upon them, and destroyed them. From that
Lord who was in the midst of them, from that dwelling place which they had
built for him, out of the house of his glory in which they trusted, there came
forth several sorts of sore judgments and smote down the choicest of them. For
that, without all doubt, is the propriety of such phrases as that in Numb. XVI.
46. Wrath is gone out from the LORD, the plague is begun. From the glory of the
Lord, i. e. which appeared then to all the congregation at the door of the
Tabernacle ( v. 19.42.) there issued out the tokens of his divine displeasure
in a noisome pestilence: by which and other suchlike punishments, Their days
did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. For he who had been so
kind to them, was so incensed by their repeated rebellions, that he had sworn a
little before Numb. XIV. 22, 23. That they who had seen his glory and his
Miracles, should not see the land which be promised to their Fathers; surely,
says he, there shall not any of them that provoked me see it.

And they that did, when they turned their backs, and dealt deceitfully like
their Fathers, provoking him to anger with their high places, etc. felt the
same severe strokes of his just indignation. For when God heard this, says the
Psalmist, He was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel: So that he forsook the
Tabernacle of Shiloh (which was the first place where the Ark of his presence
fixed after they came to Canaan) the Tent which he placed among men: and
delivered his strength into captivity, and his Glory into the enemies hand,
Psalm. LXXVIII. 59, 60, 61.

And as he did to Shiloh, so he threatened, for the same reason, to do to
Jerusalem; where he afterward chose to dwell, in the famous Temple which
Solomon built for him. So we read very often in this Prophecy of Jer. VII. 12.
etc. Go now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the
first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. And now
because ye have done all these works, says the Lord, etc. therefore will I do
unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, as I have done
to Shiloh; and I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast all your
Brethren the whole seed of Ephraim. Which he repeats again, chapter XXVI. 4.5, 6.
And at last fulfilled the curse which he there threatens in so terrible a
manner, that, as Jeremy relates in his Book of Lamentations, all that passed by
clapped their hands, and hissed, and wagged their heads at Jerusalem. For he cast
off his Altar, and abhorred his Sanctuary: He gave up the VValls of her Palaces
into the Enemies hands; and made her Inhabitants as the offscouring and refuse
in the midst of the People.

But I will not spend the time in relating things so well known: But only
remember you how he who appeared to them face to face, as I have showed ( i. e.
in an open and friendly manner) told them at that very time when he was so
gracious to them, that if they despised his Statutes and refused to observe his
Laws, he would set his face against them, Levit. XXVI. 15, 17. In that very
face which shone upon them so brightly, they could see nothing but frowns and
the saddest tokens of his high displeasure, when they set at naught his
Counsels, and would not be ruled by his will, but followed their own foolish
lusts and vain imaginations. He turned then to be their Enemy, and was so far
from sparing them, because they were called by his Name, that he verified to
the full those words of Amos III. 2. You only have I known of all the Families
of the earth: therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities. And there
was very great reason for it; as I had better show you some other time, than
hinder my self now in that which I mainly intend, and you, I believe, expect.
For you are convinced, I suppose, that the Lord was in the midst of them, not
merely as a Benefactor, but as a Lawgiver and their Judge: And that if they
offended him by strange Worship, and contempt of all the rest of his Precepts,
he stood engaged in honor to depart from such a rebellious people. By whose
Example and your own sad Experience, you are sufficiently taught, I should
think, not to presume of the continuance of Gods gracious presence with us in
this Church and Kingdom, but rather expect to be abandoned by him; if we take
not some better course, than we have done, to prevent a judgment, which we have
most justly deserved.

IV.
What that course is I know you would gladly be informed: and therefore I
shall spend the rest of the time in the last thing I propounded; to direct you
how to pray to God with such prevailing Supplications, for the continuance of
his mercies to us, that we may feel our hearts revived by a comfortable hope,
that he will not leave us. Fot as yet he is in the midst of us, and we are
called by his Name; and therefore ought not to despair of this blessing, but
only sue unto him the more importunately for it, saying, Lord forsake us not:
That is, withdraw not thy Divine Protection from us; deliver us not over to the
will of our Enemies; deprive us not of thy holy Gospel, and thy blessed
Sacraments; nor suffer that light which has so long shone among us to be put
out or obscured.

1. For these blessings we must pray, first, with great fervency and
earnestness of spirit. For cold and listless desires will do nothing;
especially in a case of such great danger. Which should stir us up (as all
dangers when we apprehend them are wont to do) to cry mightily to God; as the
King of Nineveh ordained, when he heard there was a Decree of Heaven gone out
against them for their destruction, Jonah III. 8. Every soul of us should cry
mightily to him in secret, where no body hears us but only God: and in our
Families (a thing too much slighted) beseeching him to be a guard to us: and in
the Public Prayers (which you should frequent as much as is possible) crying
unto the Lord at all times, as the poor distressed Mariners in Jonah did, and
saying; We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish. Nay, in
such a dangerous time as this, it behooves every man, who knows any of his
Neighbors or Familiars to be negligent in this Duty, to awake him as the
Shipmaster did Jonah in the midst of that dreadful Storm, saying, What meanest
thou, O sleeper, arise, call upon thy God; if so be that God will think upon
us, that we perish not, Jon. I. 6. And it concerns us all to mind more
seriously what we say daily in the Public Prayers, when Priest and People call
upon God in these words, O God, make speed to save us; O Lord, make haste to
help us. For there was never more need of that passionate importunity; which we
should use at home too, saying, O God be not far from us: O our God, make haste
for our help. We are poor and needy, make haste unto us, O God: thou art our
help and our deliverer; O Lord make no tarrying.

2. And as we ought to pray with great earnestness, so with great humility, and
deep sense of our own unworthiness to find acceptance with God, and obtain the
favor of him which we desire. Our souls must lie as low before him as our
bodies; and we must sorrowfully acknowledge that we deserve to be utterly
abandoned by him, whom we have most shamefully forsaken, and highly provoked to
cast off, and let us perish in our iniquities. So Jeremiah teaches us in this
Chapter, v. 20. and we cannot address our selves unto him in better words, We
acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our Fathers: for we
have finned against thee. The remembrance of these ought to be very grievous to
us, and the burden of them intolerable. Which if we feel sensibly, it will
dispose us to cry to God with the greater fervency and frequency; and to
beseech him the more earnestly to spare us, saying as Baruch a great Friend of
Jeremiah teaches us, III. 1, 2. O Almighty Lord, the soul in anguish, the
troubled spirit cries to thee. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art
merciful; have pity upon us, for we have sinned against thee. And if he do
condescend to our request, we shall the more magnify his mercy, and his
clemency will be the more admirable in our eyes; when we have been made
thoroughly sensible how little we deserved it, nay how justly we had incurred
his severest displeasure.

3. The sense also of our ill deservings, will help another way to make our
Prayers effectual, because it will move us wholly to depend upon God for our
deliverance. That Is a third thing necessary to make our supplications
prevalent. We must in this humble manner apply our selves to God, and (quitting
all confidence in any thing that we can do, even in our Prayers) desire him to
save us merely for his own sake; there being nothing in our selves to move him
to any thing, but only displeasure against us. This Jeremiah also teaches us in
the next words to those now mentioned, v. 21. Do not abhor us (though we and
our Fathers have been great sinners, yet) do not abhor us, for thy Names sake,
do not disgrace the Throne of thy glory. Which argument he uses also a little
before my Text, v. 7. O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, do
thou it for thy Names sake. A most excellent Form for us to imitate; who may
and ought to say, as it there follows, Our backslidings have been many, we have
sinned against thee; O thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of
trouble, we have provoked thee to resolve that thou will save and deliver us no
more: but do it for thy Names sake, do it for thy Truths sake: disgrace not thy
holy Religion here established among us: though we be wicked, that is pure;
though we deserve to be deserted, that is worthy of thy defense and protection.
And may we take the boldness to add (as thy Servants heretofore have done) thou
have many holy devout Worshippers among us, for whose sake we beseech thee to
do it. O look not upon the sinners of thy people; but on them which serve thee
in truth, 2 Esdras III. 28.31.34. and VIII. 26. Are their deeds any better who
inhabit Babylon, that they should therefore have the dominion over Sion? Weigh
thou our wickedness now in the balance, and theirs also that dwell in the
world: and so shall thy Name be found no where, as it is in our Israel. Psalm.
CXV. 1. Not unto us therefore, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give
glory: for thy mercy and thy truth sake. Remember not the iniquities of our
Forefathers, but think upon thy Power and thy Name now at this time. For thou
art the Lord our God, and thee, O Lord, will we praise; and for this cause have
thou put thy fear in our hearts, to the intent that we should call upon thee.

These last are the words of Baruch III. 5, 6. who imitates, you see, his
Friend Jeremiah, as they all do the Psalmist, with whose words I shall conclude
this particular LXXIX. 8, etc. O remember not against us former iniquities, let
thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low. Help us, O
God of our salvation for the glory of thy Name; and deliver us, and purge away
our sins for thy Names sake. Wherefore should they say, where is now their God?
Let him be known among them in our sight, by the revenging of the blood of thy
Servants which has been shed.

That Is the third thing: Let us profess our sole dependence on him, and
expectation merely from his goodness and for his glory; disclaiming all
confidence in our selves, and (let me add) in man too; that is, in all humane
help and Counsels. For which end let me recommend that Form of Prayer to you,
for perpetual use, Psalm. LX. 11. Give us help from trouble, for vain is the
help of man. I say perpetually,

4. For we must pray to God in this manner with perseverance; continuing
instant in Prayer, as the Apostle speaks, Romans XII. 12. praying always, with
all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto, with all
perseverance, Ephesians. VI. 18. That is, we must not be discouraged if we obtain
not our suits presently, but pray still with all prayer, secret, private,
public; and in the Spirit, with earnestness and fervor; watching thereunto;
i. e. borrowing some time from our sleep, or our business, rather than neglect
this Duty of fervent prayer; resolving not to be weary, but with all
perseverance, to cry mightily to him till he have mercy upon us.

This is our Saviors Doctrine, Luke XVIII. 1. where he spoke a Parable to this
end, that men ought always to pray and not faint, or grow weary. For if, as he
shows, an unjust and impious Judge may be moved by importunity to do a poor
Widow right, shall we think that God will not avenge his Elect, which cry day
and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will
avenge them speedily, v. 7, 8. And this was the course that Jeremy here
resolved to take, in their great distress for want of Rain, ver. last of this
Chapter, Can any of the vanities of the Gentiles give Rain, or the Heaven give
showers? Art not thou he, O Lord our God? therefore will we wait upon thee. And
so truly must we; praying in the Psalmists words, Psalm. CXXIII. 2, 3, 4.
Behold, as the Eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the
Eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress: So our Eyes wait upon the Lord
our God, until that he have mercy upon us.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly filled
with contempt.

Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease:
and with the contempt of the proud.

Let every soul here present put up, at least, this short petition to God day
by day for this Church and Kingdom; besides those he makes for himself and
Family. And as often as you can, set apart some time for more solemn
importuning of his mercy toward us.

5. And let us be sure to take care of one thing more, without which all this
labor will be lost, viz. to make all our supplications with hearty
resolutions, to reform every thing that we know to be amiss in our hearts and
lives.

This was the course to which the King of Nineveh directed his People by his
Proclamation; requiring all (in the place I mentioned before) high and low to
fast, and put on Sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea let them turn every
one from his evil way (says the Royal Edict) and from the violence that is in
their hands: Who can tell if God will repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not? A Heathen Prince, you see, had more sense than to
hope he should prevail, merely by fasting, humiliation, and earnest cries to
God for mercy: And therefore it would be a burning shame, as they speak, if we
who are better instructed should trust to these things alone, without a sincere
and thorough repentance and amendment of life.

This was the unpardonable stupidity of the Jews (whom I hope you will no
longer imitate) that when they had fasted, and cried to God, and implored the
intercession of the Prophet also, who here beseeches God not to leave them;
they imagined the business was done, and took no further care to bring forth
the fruits that God expects from Penitents. For which reason God bids Jeremiah
hold his peace, and say no more in the behalf of such a naughty Generation, as
it follows immediately after my Text, v. 10, 11, 12. Thus says the Lord unto
this people, thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their
feet: therefore the Lord will not accept them, etc. Read the rest, and you will
see his resolution was this; that if they intended no more than they had done,
neither their cries nor Jeremy's should obtain his mercy, though they were
never so importunate. The main thing was still wanting, which is this I am
pressing upon you, most humble addresses to God with hearts fully purposed to
amend. This and this alone will do the business, and undoubtedly prevail;
though the condition of a Nation seem hopeless. For it is plain, Jeremiah does
not cease to pray for his people, as you may read here, v. 19, 20, 21. but
notwithstanding the prohibition now mentioned in the 11. v. continues to be
their Intercessor with God. Which is a sign that he did not understand it as if
he were absolutely forbidden to pray for them; but only in case they remained
impenitent. Let them but forsake their sins and love no longer to wander in
forbidden paths, and he was confident God would hear his Prayers and not depart
from them.

To this remedy therefore we must fly, as the chiefest of all; if we would have
Gods gracious presence still continue among us: and not imagine we are safe,
because we have kept a solemn day of fasting and prayer, and resolve, perhaps,
to continue instant in prayer when this day is done. We have been told often
enough there is some thing more which God requires of us, and cannot be
ignorant that not all prayers, not all importunate prayers, but the effectual
fervent prayers of a righteous Man, avail very much. Which makes it the more
strange that of all things we cannot be persuaded to become truly righteous and
good men; but are averse to nothing so much as to that, which alone can do us
any good. It is a sad thing that we will still split upon the same rock; where
we see so many wracks before us. And our condition, let me tell you, will be
the fadder; because we have no excuse left us if we will not beware, and in
time make use of this effectual remedy, which has been so long prescribed us.
We are in a far worse condition than the stupid Jews, if we still neglect so
powerful a means of our deliverance.

For mark, I beseech you, how much Jeremy had to plead for his Countrymen:
Which God indeed would not allow for a sufficient reason to free them from
blame, and yet there is no such thing to be alleged in our behalf. You read v.
13. how Jeremy sighed and said, Ah Lord God, behold the Prophets say unto them,
ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you
assured peace in this place. As much as to say, this people are to be pitied,
for though they are bad: alas for them! they are very bad; yet this is not so
much their fault, as the fault of their Prophets, who have assured them they
are not in such danger as I tell them, and that none of the judgments I have
threatened, shall come upon them. This he thought might at least alleviate their
guilt; that they were cheated and abused by their guides, who soothed them up,
and dandled them in their sins.

But God would not admit of this Apology; but declares that they and their
Prophets should all perish together. v. 14.15, 16. Then the Lord said unto me
(this was the reply) the Prophets prophesy lies in my name, I sent them not,
neither have I commanded them, etc. Therefore, thus says the Lord concerning
those Prophets which say, Sword and Famine shall not be in the land, by Sword
and by Famine shall those Prophets be consumed. And the people to whom they
prophecy, shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine
and the sword, etc. For the people ought not to have believed those that
flattered them in their vices; which natural reason, without the help of
Prophecy, teaches us to be pernicious. And they ought not to have given up
themselves so easily, to beileve those who brought no sufficient testimonials
along with them, to convince serious minds that they were sent by God to them.
It was their love to wickedness, which made them so readily assent to liars,
and resign up their faith to bold deceivers; who preached only the dreams of
their own deceitful hearts.

What a case are we in then, if we do not reform, in whose behalf, there is not
a syllable of this (though alas! but a feeble refuge) that can be pretended to
diminish our crimes? There is not one of the Ministers of God among us, that
has preached peace unto us. No, they have said it over and over again with one
voice, that God is exceeding angry with us; and that he is not yet reconciled,
after so many sore judgments as he has sent upon us; and that there is no way
to atone him but by unfeigned repentance; and that our repentance is but
feighed and insincere without amendment of life. They have cautioned the Nation
also against all false Prophets, as we may call them; particularly against the
Romish deceivers, who would lull you asleep, and promise no body knows what
golden days, if we would but return into the bosom of their Church. They have
discovered likewise all the impostures of men's own naughty hearts, and have
alarmed the whole Kingdom, and bid them beware of danger; and uprightly shown
the way to escape it. And therefore if God would not spare such a poor,
deceived, hoodwinkt, besotted people as the Israelites, who were led blindfold
into destruction, because they loved to be deceived: How can we think he will
spare us, who are faithfully admonished, and not in the least bolstered up in
our wickedness, if when we see ruin just before our eyes, we will not go out
of our way to avoid it? You cannot name any one of this Church, that has
confidently prophesied of glorious times. Nor above one impious Writer of any
note (and he not pretending to the Ministry) that has laid down Principles to
encourage men in wickedness and irreligion. And therefore if we will
notwithstanding run on in our evil courses, it is a sign we have no heart to
any thing else; but that this is our inclination, nay our resolution; and that
we being unreformable must perish, because we have no mind to be saved in Gods
way, but to hurry on to destruction in our own.

Never any Nation perhaps perished, if we must be undone, against so much
Reason, against such plain warnings, against so many mercies to invite us to do
better, and so many judgments to deter us from our evil ways; against so many
convincing instructions, clear and rational arguments, solid confutations, not
only of all lewd and atheistical Principles, but of Popery and of all Fanatical
Doctrines. There can be nothing therefore pleaded in our behalf, but we must be
left, as the man without a Wedding Garment, perfectly speechless. A sad and
most wretched condition! Sad, because we shall be extremely miserable: and sad,
because we shall not be able to say why we were so frantic, as against so many
restraints to cast our selves into such miseries.

Which I beseech you let every one of us, for our parts, endeavor to prevent
by timely repentance, never to be repented of: For that is the thing, I have
shown you, still wanting for our preservation. And I must tell you further in
the last place,

6. That, as the case now stands, it is not an ordinary Repentance and
Reformation that will serve the turn. We are gone too far, I doubt, toward
ruin, to be delivered without some extraordinary endeavors to put a stop to
it: and therefore I must say to you, for a conclusion of all, as our Lord
Christ does to the luke warm Church of Laodicea, Rev. III. 19. Be zealous
therefore, and repent. Repentance is not sufficient for the recovery of a
Church, when there is a great Apostasy and defection in Faith and in Manners;
but we must join zeal with it, which is a pious warmth in our affections for
all that is good and virtuous; and that will certainly do the business. We need
not fear then the most desperate Enemies; no, not our sins: but look upon all
the Judgments God has sent upon us, as tokens of his love to us, if they
awaken us to zealous repentance. For so our Savior there incourages us to
hope, in the words foregoing: As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be
zealous therefore and repent. There would be some hope of us, if we could but
see that indifferency, that chilness, nay deadness which is in too many
spirits, turned into a warm, nay burning zeal both in the Service of God, and
for his Service.

I. Be zealous therefore, first in your Devotions; of which I have spoken
something already. But let me again beseech you to stir up your selves to make
your supplications to God, with more inflamed affection, for the King, for the
Parliament, for the Bishops and Pastors of the Flock of Christ; for the
Magistrates, for one another; that all and every of these in their several
places may attend their duty, and perform it faithfully and zealously. Instead
of finding fault, as the manner is, with this and the other person, whose
actions do not please us, let us fall upon our Knees, and with fervent prayers
entreat the Divine Majesty, that he will bend their hearts to study to do those
things which are pleasing and acceptable in his sight; and to do them with all
their might, remembering there is no work nor device in the Grave whither they
are going.

We tell God every day in the Collect for our Sovereign Lord the King, that we
most heartily beseech him, he may always incline to Gods will, and walk in his
way. O that there were indeed such a heart in us, as Moses speaks; and that we
would constantly with more fervor than ever, put up that Petition for his
Majesty! Beseeching him also by whom Kings reign, to be his defender and
keeper, and not to suffer any of the Sons of violence to approach to do him
hurt.

With the like ardent zeal should we daily say the following Prayer for the
Queen, his Royal Highness, and all the Royal Family, that he would endue them
with his holy Spirit, and enrich them with his heavenly grace. Of which things
did we make a greater conscience, and were not careless and frozen in our
Devotions, we might hope to obtain that which we so much desire, a clearer
discovery of the snares our Enemies have laid for us.

For which I beseech you to pray with all the ardour that you are able to raise
up in your hearts, that God would bring to light still more and more the hidden
works of darkness. Be importunate with him who sees into the greatest secrets,
to lay bare to the very bottom all the wicked contrivances that are against us.

Call upon him likewise with the same fervor, that he would endue his
Ministers with righteousness, and inspire them with such courage that they may
behave themselves like men, who have not received the spirit of fear, but of
power, and of love, and of a sound mind.

Pray also that he would raise up the Spirits of those who are assembled in the
High Court of Parliament, to consult for our good, unto the loftiest pitch of
Christian resolution, wisdom, and integrity. Beseech him to send among them a
Spirit of might and power, whereby they may act so resolutely and worthily,
that if any be false they may be daunted, if any be fainthearted they may be
encouraged.

Finally pray that all the Lords people, may Watch, and stand fast in the
faith, quit themselves like men, be strong; and do all their things in charity;
loving one another with a pure heart fervently, 1 Cor. XVI. 13, 14. 1 Pet. I.
22.

II. But we must not content our selves merely with this zeal in our devotions;
we must be zealous also of good works, Tit. II. ult. In order to this (which is
all, the time will now give me leave to mention) every soul of us must bestir
himself to give a severe check to all vicious affections and actions, and to
root them out of himself, and his family, and wheresoever he has any power:
looking upon these as the greatest Traitors in the Nation. And since true zeal
will always begin at home, where we have most power to reform, let every man
search out with great care, and cast out with great indignation, whatsoever he
finds in himself that is contrary to his Religion: having a holy jealousy over
himself lest any thing should escape his strictest examination. For why should
we think that God will preserve our Religion, and maintain it against those
that seek to destroy it; if we make no other use of it, but only to fill us
with vain confidences of his love and favor, while we continue in our
impurities? If we have any love to it, any value for it, let it have its due
effect, upon us; by purging us from those things which disparage it: That we
may be vessels of honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared
unto every good work, 2 Timothy II. 21. And in what work can they that have
authority better employ themselves, than in setting themselves to chastise evil
doers; to reform all abuses in the places where they live; to discover all
workers of iniquity, and to pursue them, when they are discovered with a just
indignation, and bring them to condign punishment? They are very useless if
they neglect this, and have little love to their Master and his Religion: which
had such power over men's hearts heretofore, that even after they had left their
first love and declined in their affection to Christianity, they had so much
zeal remaining as not to be able to bear them which were evil. It is our
Saviors Character of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. II. 2, 4. among whose works
(though short of what they did at first v. 5.) he reckons this for one, and
commends them for trying them which said they were Apostles and were not, and
for finding them to be liars.

III. Which will lead me to the last thing I am to press upon you; and that is,
to be zealous for the defense of our Religion. Godly zeal I suppose you all
know, is nothing else but the affection of love to God raised to the pitch of
fervency; which will not let us endure any hurt or contempt should be offered
to that which he loves, if we can remedy it. Now what does he love more than
true Religion? which the purer it is, the dearer without all doubt it is to him
that hates all iniquity. And where I beseech you can you find any Religion,
which in this regard may be compared with that which is by Law here
established? Which deserves therefore all the zeal you can express for its
preservation; and at this time calls for all the zeal that it deserves. For it
is lost, in all likelihood, without every man's zeal in his place to save it. We
are undone, if we have not a heat, activity, and courage proportionable to
theirs that seek to destroy it.

And is it not a shame, that false Religion should make men more busy and
active, more bold and undaunted, than true Religion does those who have so long
professed it, and been instructed in the worth and excellency of it? Or do we
expect to have it preserved without so much ado? Are we such Fools as to
imagine, that if we defend our selves weakly, faintly, and timorously, when
they assault us not only resolutely but boldly and furiously, we shall get the
Victory? No; the Magistrates must do all that is in their power, to execute his
Majesty's Command for the finding out and expelling those that oppose it. And
they that are not Magistrates, must give them their assistance, and quicken
those that are. Call upon all your Acquaintance who have any power or interest,
to be honest and upright; to preserve their integrity, and not be tempted by
any thing in this world to betray their Religion. And tell them it is not
enough to be upright, but they must be diligent and zealous: because now is the
time for every man to show himself, and to do all that lawfully he may, for the
honor and safety of his Religion. There are no other bounds that I know of,
which we are to set to our zeal for our Religion, but only this; that we do
nothing contrary to it. Whatsoever it allows, it now requires; that we may not
lose it. We must not suffer our zeal to be damped by politic considerations,
respect to our private interest, and desire to please Men: but waving all
these, take care only that others be not wronged by it, while we suffer,
perhaps, very much in our own concerns.

For he knows nothing of the nature of holy zeal, who does not feel it
transport him, to act beyond himself; and to make him quite forget his own
private concerns, which he thinks of no further, than as they are included in
the public good. There can be no other meaning of that which the Apostles
apply to our Savior [ The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, Joh. II. 17.]
than this; that he regarded not his own particular interest, nor minded what he
was likely to suffer, but all thoughts of it were swallowed up in his zeal to
serve God. Who will not be served indeed by our private passions and evil
affections; but does expect that we should not consult with the wisdom of this
World, which is for suffering nothing, but avoiding all that may hurt and
prejudice us, though God may be thereby very much honored. And therefore his
wisdom (of which we ought to take counsel) bids us forget the damage we may
suffer, and lay aside all thoughts of our selves; so we may but promote his
glory. When we have any hope of that, we must hearken to no other advice but
that of the Apostle, Romans XII. 11. Not slothful in business: but fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord. We would be glad perhaps, to follow the other reading
of the last part of that Verse, serving the time; but not in the right sense:
serving the time, by serving the Lord faithfully in our several stations.

This he expects from us; this our Religion and all good men expect from us;
that at this time, when the Zealots of the Romish Church are so outragiously
set to destroy us, we should pluck up our spirits, as the phrase is, and
imitate or rather excel them; not in that cutthroat zeal (God forbid) which
made the Jewish Nation, as it does them, so infamous; but in a just indignation
against such barbarous persons and practices, and in a zealous resolution
always burning in our breasts, to defend our Religion, the best we can, against
their attempts. I am bold to speak in this manner, without any undue transport,
because I find God himself expressing his zealous affection for the defense of
his Church in far higher terms than these, Zach. VIII. 2. Thus says the Lord
of hosts, I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy; and I was jealous for
her with great fury.

Do not you then listen to any motion which may be made to you, I will not say
to leave your Religion, but to be remiss and not so zealous for it. Think what
a dishonor it will be to you, and how it will endanger it: if when so many
bend their tongues like their bow for lies, you should not be valiant for the
truth: Which was the charge that Jeremy ( chapter IX. 3.) brought against
Jerusalem, but I hope will never be your guilt; who have such a Religion to
defend, as will not let you be Cowards, if you understand the difference
between it and that which opposes it. Consider it, I beseech you, beforehand,
that if any body should attacque you with Arguments to desert it, you may be
steadfast and unmovable, in nothing terrified by your adversaries, when they
tell you Popery will prevail notwithstanding all our endeavors to keep it out.
Resolve it shall never prevail over your souls, whatsoever may become of your
bodies: But as you now pray solemnly God will not leave us, so you will
fortify your selves impregnably against all persuasions to leave him, by
quitting your Religion.

Do not so much as stoop to hearken to any such seducement; but considering, as
I said, well beforehand what it is you must leave, and for what (if you forsake
the Communion of this Church) stand fast in one spirit, with one mind (in
perfect unity) striving together for the Faith of the Gospel. So I may truly
call our Religion here established; from which if you should depart, you leave
the old way of serving God for new inventions. For you forsake a Religion
wherein God is purely worshipped, for one that joins Saints and Angels with
him. You forsake a Church that prays to God alone, through the intercession of
Christ Jesus, for one that prays to Saints in the very same form of words
wherein they pray to him. You leave the holy Scriptures, to follow uncertain
Traditions; and part with your Bibles, for Legends and fabulous Stories. You go
away from Prayers and Hymns you understand, to a Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Instead of the whole Sacrament you must be content with half; or rather with
none at all. For it is certain, where the Blood of Christ is not imparted to
you as shed, or poured out of the Body (as it is not in the Roman Church) it is
not communicated at all, and the people have no fellowship with Christ in his
death, being deprived of his blood, which was shed for the remission of sins.

Instead of sure and certain comfort, you must rely in all holy Offices upon
mere uncertainties: for if the Priests intention be wanting (of which none can
be sure) there is no Baptism, no Communion, no Orders, no Priesthood, no
Church. And consequently you leave the worshipping of Christ, for a Worship,
which, for any thing you can know, may be mere Idolatry. For in case there be
no Transubstantiation, but the Bread and Wine still remain after the
Consecration, they themselves have acknowledged it is Idolatry to worship them.
Now we are sure there is no Transubstantiation, and it is impossible that they
should be sure there is; (even according to their own principles, because they
can never be sure the Priest actually intends to do what Christ commanded, and
then nothing is done) and therefore they can never be sure that they are not
Idolaters.

If you join with those of Rome, all the ancient Councils must signify nothing
with you, in comparison with one late Conventicle; which was no better than a
Conspiracy of a few men against the Church of Christ. You must quit a Church
which teaches you to be subject to the King as Supreme, for one that teaches
you to be subject in the first place to the Pope. Exchange a Church that
requires of all its Members the strictest obedience to their Governor, for one
that at least suffers the most rebellious principles to pass for Christian
Doctrine; and the most bloody murders to pass for Christian, if not
meritorious, actions. You must leave a Church that bids you look about you, and
see that you be in the right, for one that would put out your eyes, and bids
you blindly follow them: A Church that, in St. Paul's words, requires you to
prove all things, for one that requires you to renounce your Reason, nay common
sense, that you may believe the greatest absurdities.

If you leave the established Religion, you forsake a Church whose Service is
performed in a plain and grave, a comely and decent manner, for one that is
burdened with more Ceremonies by far, than are contained in all the Law of
Moses. You depart from a Church which only seeks the good of your souls and the
glory of God in all its Ministrations, for one that is apparently contrived for
enriching the Priests, and for the glory of the Pope. You leave a Church which
teaches you to live piously, or else gives you no hopes of salvation, for one
that indulges men to live as they list, and yet not utterly perish at the last.
A Church you abandon that is mild and gentle to those that are deceived, for
the sake of one that prosecutes all those who dissent from it with Fire and
Faggot, Massacres and unheard of butcheries. Nay, you relinquish a Church that
is very charitable in her Opinions and Censures, for one that damns all those
to the pit of Hell, though never so blameless in their lives, and steadfast
believers of the three ancient Creeds, if they be not of their Communion.

You leave a Religion which proclaims that Marriage is honorable in all, and
the Bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, for one that
strictly forbids her Priests to marry, but connives at their Fornication. That
is, you leave a Religion in which you are taught to have the greatest regard to
the Commands of Christ, for one wherein you may more safely break many of his
Precepts, than one of the Laws of the Church. To conclude, you leave a Religion
which is sincere, and void of all deceit and fraud, for one which cheats men
with hallowed Trinkets, (such as Roses, Beads, Swords, Agnus Dei, and other
waxen ware) whereby they draw vast sums of money from the simple, for mere toys
and bables.

They that consider not the case may look upon all this as an invective, which
in truth is but a bare Narrative: and no more than is necessary to be said, our
enemies themselves being Judges, at such a time as this. For they would look
upon us, I am confident, as a company of despicable wretches, if we should not
dare on such an occasion to speak for our Religion. Which teaches us, after the
example of St. Paul to be jealous over you with a godly jealousy: fearing lest
by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. XI. 2, 3. In
which you ought to preserve your selves, and not admit of the Romish mixtures,
whereby the simple Religion of Christ is adulterated; if you have any regard
either to your Souls, or your Bodies, or your estates, which are all in danger.
Be zealous therefore in your Religion, and for your Religion. Show that you
mean not to leave it (for that is in effect to leave your reason, that you may
be robbed of your faith) nor to leave off your most vigorous endeavors to
preserve it.

And truly we have the greatest cause to be thus zealous both in our prayers
and in our endeavors, to fortify our selves and one another; to rouse up our
courage, to maintain what God has so long by many wonderful providence
maintained and preserved: because he does not seem to have a mind to leave us,
if we will not basely desert him and his cause.

For mark, I beseech you, what encouragement he gives us to hope, that
notwithstanding our vile requitals of all his lovingkindness, we may be
delivered, if we will at last take such a pious course, as I have described.

First of all, he has graciously heard the Prayers of his faithful people, who
have often besought him, that he would bring to naught all the evils which the
craft and subtilty of the devil or man works against us. He has strangely,
when we looked not for it, detected their secret Counsels; and thereby delivered
our Sovereign (whom God long preserve) from the detestable design which was
against his life. This was the Lords doing alone, and it ought to be mavelous
in our eyes; and excite us to do all we can for our own preservation, seeing he
has done so much already. For unless the Lord had been our help, our souls had
quickly dwelt in silence, Ps. XCIV. 17.

Another encouragement is the happy agreement, hitherto between the two houses
of Parliament: who both are industrious to make further discoveries of those
ungodly devices which are in part come to light, and to provide the best means
they can think of for our safety.

His Majesty's gracious Declaration also, that he is ready to join with them in
all the ways and means that may establish a firm security of the Protestant
Religion as our own hearts can wish, is a further encouragement.

But the greatest of all is, that God has done all hitherto for us himself,
for his own Names sake; notwithstanding our high provocations. There has been
little of man seen in all this business, or in any of our former deliverances;
which have been a succession of Miraculous works, for the preservation of this
Church and Kingdom. We cannot say that it was the prudence, the diligence, the
watchfulness of our Counselors, which brought to light the deeds of darkness;
but Gods infinite mercy alone who touched the heart of one man to reveal those
secrets, which, for the present, has dashed their designs in pieces. As
confident as they were they are fallen short of their aim; and the prey is
snatched, as it were, out of their very teeth. They opened their mouth against
us, they hissed, and gnasht their teeth; but have not as yet been able to say,
we have swallowed them up, certainly this is the day that we looked for: we
have found it, we have seen it, Lam. 2.16. No; Blessed be the Lord, who has
not given us as a prey to their teeth: Which we may very well look upon as a
token for good, saying with David, Psalm. XLI. 11. By this I know that thou
favourest me, because my enemy does not triumph over me. When they were in so
fair a way to it, then to be disappointed of their triumph, is a manifest sign,
I think, that God has a kindness for us. And may encourage us to say when we
see them rave, and hear them still brag that the day shall be their own, Talk
no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come forth out of your mouth;
for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. He will
keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness: for by
strength shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel II. 3, 9.

Did we thus religiously depend upon him, and trust in him, I am very confident
he would still defeat our enemies; and not suffer them, howsoever they may
boast, to triumph over us: even for this very reason because they are so
insolent and barbarous. That Is a new thing to be considered for our
encouragement. The savage cruelty and bloodiness of their designs, against
those among whom they live peaceably, and who have been kind as well as gentle
to them, is an argument that God abhors them as much as we can do; and that he
will confound them, if we do not provoke him to abhor us and cast us off, for
our ingratitude and gross negligence in that Religion, which has been so often
most wondrously preserved. We may make the same complaint to God that David
did, and thereby move him to pity us; that they are not only our enemies
wrongfully, but have rendered us evil for good, and hatred for our good will:
which is the character of the worst natures in the world.

It would have been easy for us, were we so disposed as we find them to be, to
have destroyed them all long ago: Our Numbers and strength being so vastly
greater, that nothing could have restrained us from it, but only this, that our
Religion is better. Which may make us hope God will be farther merciful to us;
and not let them prevail, who are emboldned by nothing else to attempt to
destroy us, but by this alone; that we are taught to be so kind to them as not
to destroy them.

If David made this an argument why God should defend him from those that rose
up against him, because they were gathered together, not for my transgression,
nor for my sin, O Lord, as he speaks, Psalm. LIX. 3. We may much more urge the
same motive, with a little alteration of his words, saying, Deliver us from the
workers of iniquity, save us from bloody men. For lo, they lie in wait for us;
the mighty are gathered together against us; not for our transgression, nor for
our sin, O Lord (but quite contrary, because our fear of thee forbids us to
destroy them) They run and prepare themselves without our fault: awake to help
us, and behold the danger wherein we are. Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts,
the God of Israel, awake to visit them: be not merciful to any wicked
transgressor. Consume them in wrath, consume them that they may not be: and let
them know that God (not they) rules here, and unto the ends of the Earth.

And it is a singular comfort surely to know and steadfastly believe, that as
the Psalmist says elsewhere ( Psalm. XCIX. 1. according to the old translation)
The Lord is King, be the people never so unpatient; he sits between the
Cherubims ( i. e. governs the world) be the earth never so unquiet. Upon him
therefore let us depend and commend our selves piously to his protection, and
we need not fear all the power on earth, that they can raise against us. As for
their interest in heaven, we are sure it is very small; For if the Lord had not
been on our side, when they rose up against us; then they had swallowed us up
quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. They depended it is like
very much upon their supposed interest in the Saints: whom they ply hard with
their prayers, and it is probable besought their help very earnestly upon this
occasion. For I find they have relied upon them, more than they are willing to
confess, in former times: particularly when the Spaniards invaded us with their
Armada called Invincible. An Image then of the Blessed Virgin, famous as they
pretend for Miracles both on the Sea and Land, was brought in great pomp from
Del Puig to the great Church of the City of Valentia. And there a Solemn Litany
was Sung to her upon the 17.. of July being Sunday 1588. part of which I shall
recite (out of Ferdinando Texeda) that you may see how little credit is to be
given to them, when they tell you they only desire the Saints to pray for them.

We Sinners beseech thee to hear us, that thou would impetrate true
Repentance for us.
We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou would take care to preserve the Apostolic See, and all
Ecclesiastical Orders in Holy Religion.
We beseech thee to hear us.
That all Storms allayed thou would conduct the Catholic Fleet of the
Catholic King in safety to the desired Haven.
We beseech thee, etc.
That thou would make the Catholic Fleet of the Catholic King victorious
over Savage Heretics.
We beseech thee, etc.
That thou would smite the obstinate Heretics of England with fear and
trembling.
We beseech thee to hear us.
I omit the rest, because this is sufficient to show where their great strength
lies (as to the other World), which as it failed then, so no doubt it ever
will in time to come. For they are instigated to their bloody attempts by
another sort of invisible powers, who, if God permit, may give them indeed very
great assistance. But the blessed Virgin and the Saints, if they know what is
doing here, we are well assured will pray against them, and join with us
(without our supplicating their favor) in such humble requests as these, O
God, to whom Vengeance belongs: O God, to whom Vengeance belongs, show thy
self.
Lift up thy self, thou Judge of the Earth; render a reward to the proud.
Lord, how long shall the Wicked, how long shall the Wicked triumph?
How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers of
Iniquity boast themselves, Psalm. XCIV. 1, 2, 3, 4.


And if I put into your Mouths a whole Psalm appointed to be read this morning
(and composed in some such distress as now presses us) with such alterations as
may make it applicable to our condition; I am confident I shall neither offend
the Saints in Heaven, nor the Saints on Earth.

Psalm. LXXXIII. Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not
still, O God.

For lo, thine Enemies make a tumult; and they that hate thee have lift up the
head.

They have taken crafty Counsel against thy People, and consulted against thy
hidden ones.

They have said, come, and let us cut them off from being a Church that their
Name may be no more in remembrance.

For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate
against thee.

We cannot tell their Numbers, and their Combinations; like those of Edom and
Ishmael, etc.

But do thou unto them as unto the Armada of which they boasted: and as unto
the Gunpowder Conspirators, etc.

O Our God, make them like a Wheel: as the stubble before the wind.

As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on fire;

So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy Storm.

Fill their faces with shame: that they may seek thy name, O Lord (that great
happiness we wish them with all our hearts.)

Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea, let them be put to shame,
and perish.

That they may know, that thou whose Name alone is JEHOVAH art the most high
over all the earth

FINIS.

