A SERMON PREACHED Before the KING, ON THE Second SUNDAY in ADVENT, December.
viii. 1678.

BY SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for R. Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1678.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the KING.
ROMANS xv. 4. beginning. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning.
THE Holy Scriptures are so full a Storehouse of all Divine Learning, and we
are so frequently exhorted to repair thither for our constant Instruction; that
as there is no Excuse for those who would lock them up from the people of God,
and not suffer them to look into them: so they are no less worthy to be
condemned, who will not look into them when they may; nor take any care to
enrich their minds with those heavenly Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, which
the Royal Psalmist thought more precious than thousands of Gold and Silver.

To correct this Negligence, Our Church now calls upon us to pray in the
Collect for this Second week in Advent, that we may in such wise hear them,
read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that by Patience and Comfort of
his holy Word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of
Everlasting life; which is infinitely more worth than all our present
possessions in this World.

Now that we may do according to our Prayers, mark I beseech you the first
words of the Epistle for this day, which I have now read unto you: in which the
Apostle commends to us the study of the holy Scriptures, from the Benefit we
may receive by them; even by those parts of them which may seem to you perhaps
very barren, or little conducing to the Profit of Christian People. For First
of all, we may learn something, he tells us, for our Christian Instruction, out
of those Scriptures which were written aforetime; in ancient days, before the
Advent or Coming of our Savior Christ. And Secondly, this Instruction is to be
met withal in every part of these ancient Writings; for he says, Whatsoever
things were written heretofore, in the Sacred Volumes, were written for our
learning. There is nothing unprofitable, nothing needless and superfluous in
them; but all tends to Edification. Nor were they written (you may further
consider in the Third place) for their Benefit alone who lived when they were
written; but for our learning also, who live in the days of Christ. For
whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning.

For the clearer understanding of all which Particulars, you may be pleased to
observe, that these words seem to come in as an Answer to a tacit Objection, of
such as might fancy the Scriptures of the Old Testament did not appertain to
Christians, or contained nothing of Christ in them. For the Apostle had just
before quoted a place out of the Psalms of David, and applied it to our
Savior; Who did not please himself: but as it is written (Psalm. lxix. 9.) The
reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me. And then (to prevent such
an Exception as I now mentioned) immediately adds, For whatsoever things were
written before time, were written for our learning. As if he had said; Do not
tell me that David speaks there concerning himself: for, though that be true,
He represented also a greater King than himself; and in such words as those
Prophesied of the Reproaches and Persecutions of Christ by the Scribes and
Pharisees, after the same manner that he suffered by Saul and his Servants.

This plain declaration of the Apostle about the Scriptures written aforetime,
should have sufficiently secured them, one would have thought, from all
contempt; and preserved a due Reverence toward them in the minds of all those,
who are called by the Name of Christ. But so desirous the Malignant Spirit is,
to have those Holy Books thrown out of peoples hands; that he has stirred up
several Sects, who have not only aspersed them, but utterly rejected them; as
useless and unprofitable; nay dangerous and hurtful. In the Answer to whose
Allegations I shall fully explain my Text; and show how every part of those
Holy Books, which were written before Christ's coming, contain something for our
learning and instruction.

And for our clearer proceeding, I think it will be necessary to observe, that
the first Blasphemers of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, were they who
introduced the Doctrine of two Gods; one an Evil being, the God of the Hebrews;
the other a good and gracious being, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Ringleader of these, in all probability, was Simon Magus the
Samaritan; who was followed by a rabble of vile people, such as Basilides,
Carpocras, Valentinus, and a number more whose names are not worth the
remembering. Who, though they did not profess his Name, yet followed his
opinion, as Irenaeus Lib. I. cap. 30.
speaks, For whosoever they were, says he, that Adulterated the Truth and
spoiled the Doctrine of the Church, they were all the Disciples and successors
of this Man. No body doubts but the Gnostics were; who are said among the rest
of their Doctrines to have had this; of a Good God and an Evil God. They are
the Words of St. Austin, Cap. VI. de Haeres.
in the conclusion of the account he gives us of their Heresy. Which was
followed no doubt by Marcion, Apelles and their Disciples; who openly
maintained this, to the great scandal of our Religion. For from hence I suppose
it was that Celsus the Philosopher took occasion to charge Christians with this
detestable opinion; that they held an Execrable God ((...)) opposite to the
great God of all. But they cleared themselves so well of this Crimination, in
their admirable writings; that they neither left any color for it, nor any
considerable person that durst maintain it. Till, not long before the days of
St. Austin, there started up a Persian, whose surname was Manes: who following
other ancient Heretics (as St. Austins words are Cap XLVI. de Here Is.
) revived this Opinion, when it was in a manner dead and buried: and from him
it was ever after called the Heresy of the Manichees. Who held two first
Coeternal principles of all things, diverse from, and adverse to each other:
(as he also speaks) as opposite as Light and Darkness; the one a Good, the
other an Evil Being.

Now the Doctrine of these men concerning the Holy Scriptures, was conformable
to their first foul opinion concerning God: and may be comprehenped in these
Five propositions.

First, they said that the Writings of the Old Testament were from the Evil
Principle;

Secondly, that they belonged only to the Jews, not to Christians;

Thirdly, That they were not profitable for the Confirmation of Faith; nor,

Fourthly, For the teaching good Manners; but rather destructive to them; And

Lastly, That they contradicted the New Testament of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus.

The folly of which, if I may have leave briefly to represent, it will be the
clearest Explication I can give of these words of St. Paul; and let you see how
much we may learn, even out of the Scriptures which were written aforetime.

I.
The first of them [viz. That the Writings of the Old Testament were from the
evil Principle, the Law and the Prophets being dictated by bad Angels,] is such
a senceless Blasphemy, that I should have wholly omitted it; were it not for
the reason now mentioned: that it gives a fair occasion to show, there is
something worth our learning even in such Historical passages of the Old
Scriptures, as seem less instructive. For S. Paul having plainly declared that
the Law and the Gospel had the same Author, when he says iii. Galat. 24. The
Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ: proceeds in the next Chapter
of that Epistle to illustrate this most elegantly from the History of Abraham;
who had two Sons (iv. Gal. 22.) the one by a Bond-maid, the other by a
Freewoman: the first of which was born after the Flesh, but the other was by
Promise. Which things (says he, v. 24.) are an Allegory: for these are the two
Covenants, or Testaments; the one from Mount Sinai, which gendreth to Bondage;
the other from Jerusalem or Sion, which is free, the Mother of us all.

Where we learn these two things. First, That even in such historical Relations
as these, the Apostles read diviner things; which they saw there lie hid and
concealed. For that is his meaning, when he says, these things are an Allegory;
aliud portendentia (as Tertullian expounds it L. V. contra Marcionem, c. 4.
) a speech about another matter, portending something else than at first sight
appears. For he clearly discerned, that under the Names and Actions of Sarah
and Hagar, Isaac and Ishmael; God was pleased to foreshadow what He intended to
do in future times, both at the giving of the Law, and when He sent his Son to
preach the Gospel. And Secondly, we learn, that as those two Wives of very
different Condition, had but one and the same Husband, who was the Father of
those two Children: So the two Testaments, the Old and the New, which were
represented by those two Women, belong to one and the same God; who brings
forth and breeds up his Children under various Dispensations, but is the Father
of all those who lived piously under the Old Testament, as well as of those who
live so under the New.

This is the necessary Consequence of the Apostles Discourse. If those two
Wives and their Children were an Allegory of the two Testaments, and of those
who were born and bred under them; then as those two Children had the same
Father though different Mothers, so the two Testaments have the same Original;
though they be Dispensations as different as the Bondwoman and the Free. There
cannot be a more evident Confutation of the false Principles of these Men, than
this Observation of the Apostle. Who in the beginning of this Epistle (i. Romans
1, 2.) calls himself an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God, which he had
promised before by his Prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. And in the entrance of the Epistle to the Hebrews openly
avows, that the same God who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke unto
the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son.

But I shall not trouble you any further in so manifest a business; having thus
far obtained my end; which was to show that the Historical Books are not
unuseful, but more serviceable than many imagine; not merely because they
relate the wonderful Providence of God over that People for whose use they were
first written, in blessing them when they were faithful to him, and punishing
them when they revolted from him; but because they contain many secret
Representations of things belonging to the Person and the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

II.
The next part of their wicked Doctrine was, that the Old Testament did not
belong to Christians, but only to the Jews. This Faustus the Manichee (against
whom St. Austin wrote XXXIII. Books) endeavored to persuade by his Natural
Eloquence and smooth way of speaking (for which he was famous See St. Aust.
Confessions, L. V. cap. 3. and 6.
) without any judgment or reason at all. For it is directly confuted by the
words of my Text; as if the Apostle intended to anticipate such an Objection,
and prevent the entrance of this extravagant Conceit into any bodies mind. The
absurdity of which appears also farther from hence; that the Promises made in
the Old Testament belong to us Christians, who are therefore concerned in the
Testament it self. Which is a Consideration to which St. Paul directs us in the
Epistle for this day; a little below my Text: v. 8. Now I say, that Jesus
Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision; sent, that is, to preach the Gospel
unto the Jews; for the truth of God; to justify, that is, the Faithfulness of
God who promised to send him, as it follows; to confirm* the Promises made unto
the Fathers; that is, make good those Promises he had passed to them in ancient
time; among which this was the chief, that he would send a Person into the
World in the fullness of time, in whom all Nations should be blessed. So it
follows, v. 9, 10, etc. And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his Mercy;
as it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and
sing unto thy Name. And again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles, with his People.
And again, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, etc. And again Psaias says, He
that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.
All which places of the Old Scriptures are alleged to show, that though this
was the grand Privilege of the Jews, that God had expressly obliged himself
by Promises to their Fathers to send his Son Christ to them; of which Promises
the Gentiles, i. e. People of other Nations were wholly ignorant, and knew not
a syllable of this Grace: yet God intended to be so merciful as to make all
the world partakers of those Promises which the Jews alone had recorded in
their holy Books. Which the Apostle proves was agreeable to the Books
themselves wherein these Promises were contained. For they predicted that the
Gentiles also should rejoice in God, and praise him, and sing unto his Name,
because Christ the Son of David should reign over them as well as his Ancient
People, and they should place their hope and trust in him. This he urges from
more places of the Old Scriptures (as well of the Law of Moses, as of the
Prophets and Psalms, as you will find if you take the pains to examine them)
than he alleges for the proof of any one thing whatsoever; for this great
reason, That the Gentiles might be the more confirmed and settled in the Faith
of the Gospel, when they saw it was brought to them not by the Will of Man, but
by the good pleasure and Counsel of God, long before predicted in the Holy
Scriptures of Truth.

This is a plain demonstration how much we are concerned in the Scriptures
written aforetime; whose true Learning the same Apostle shows in another place,
is not understood by the Jews, but only by Christians; to whom the Grace of God
is translated, which is taken away from the other, till they also Believe on
Christ Jesus. Read 2 Corinthians. iii. 14, 15. where he says, their Minds are
blinded, and that they have a Veil upon them in the reading of the Old
Testament: Which veil is done away in Christ, i. e. when men become Christians.
But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart:
nevertheless when it (their heart) shall turn to the Lord (our Savior Christ)
the veil shall be taken away; and not till then. Which is an evidence that we
have more benefit by the Scriptures written aforetime, than the Jews
themselves, till they also turn Christians; and abundantly confirms that pithy
saying of Tertullian (which comprehends all that need be said in this
Argument,) Novum Testamentum in Vetere latet, Vetus Testamentum in Novo patet;
the New Testament lies hid in the Old; and the Old Testament is revealed and
discovered in the New. And so I have done with the Second Cavil of these men
against the Old Testament.

III.
The third part of their impious Doctrine about this matter was, That the
Scriptures written aforetime were unprofitable for the confirmation of our
Faith. Which is directly against the whole Scope of the Apostle in this place,
and is confuted in express terms by our Blessed Lord himself in several places
of the last Chapter of the Gospel according to S. Luke. Where speaking of his
Passion to two of his Disciples, v. 25. 27. He upbraided them that they were
such Fools, and slow of heart to believe what the Prophets had spoken: and
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures, the things concerning himself. And not long after appearing to all
the Apostles, and eating with them, he said ( v. 44.) These are the words which
I spoke unto you while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled
which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms
concerning me. And then opening their understanding, that they might understand
the Scripture, he said, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again the third day, etc. So abominably false it is, which
those Heretics were wont to assert, that in the Old Testament there was no
Testimony concerning Christ. They are the words of Faustus, as they are
reported by St. Austin Lib. xii. contra Faust c. 1, 2.
: and may well make us wonder how any men that were called by his Name should
arrive at such a boldness, as to contradict Christ himself, who proved all
things concerning himself out of those ancient Books.

But this it is to be proud and self-conceited; to be forward to teach Vid. S.
Austin, Confess. l. v. c. 5.
, before men have learnt; to be addicted to a Sect, and to love to contradict;
to be engaged early in a party, and then to stop ones ears against the means of
Information; to be carried away with a strong antipathy to that, which men do
not understand, nor have duly weighed and considered. Against all which Vices
the Scriptures caution us sufficiently, if we mean to understand them: telling
us plainly, that if we will not purge our selves from such ill humors, we
shall become vain in our Imaginations, and our foolish hearts will be darkened.
Witness the foolish exception that these men took to the Books of Moses,
because they represented God, according to their Imagination, as desirous of
the Blood and Fat of Beasts, which he required to be offered in Sacrifice to
him. Whereas nothing is more manifest, than that God himself by the Prophets
(who spoke as they acknowledge by the same Spirit that Moses did) utterly
disclaimed any delight or satisfaction that he took in mere Sacrifices, though
never so numerous and costly: Nay, protests that he abominated them, if they
were not brought to his Altar with a pious mind, and accompanied with actions
of Justice and Charity. Which makes it apparent, that it was the heart of the
Offerer to which he had regard; and that he looked upon these, but as outward
testimonies and significations of a grateful Mind, or of a penitent heart, or
of a Soul resolved to devote it self to his service.

I need not add, that they were manifest Figures and Presignifications of the
great Sacrifice of Christ Jesus, who has purged away our sins by his own
blood: nor take any further pains to confute these audacious Heretics from
other places of Holy Writ. I will rather take to task a little another sort of
men, no less bold and shameless; who would fain be thought the greatest Enemies
to Heretics, of all men in the world. I mean them of the Romish Religion, who
notwithstanding their glorious pretenses, would be heartily glad if this
Proposition could be made good, That the Scriptures written aforetime, are
unprofitable for the Confirmation of Points of Faith. For our Writers have so
overpowered them with Testimonies fetched from thence, that they are not able to
stand before us to defend the Prime Article of their present Faith; that
Article which is the principal Cause of the Divisions of Christendom, for
whose sake* all other Controversies have been craftily kept on foot; I mean
that of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome Rome enim subjici, inde pendere,
haec Vestrae Religionis summa est. Resp. ad Tort. p. 81.
: Which we utterly confound by beginning at Moses (to allude to the words
before mentioned) and so showing through all the Scriptures written aforetime,
that, He, and Joshua, and David, and Solomon, and Asa, and Jehoshaphat, and
Hezekias, and Josias, governed the Priests and the whole Tribe of Levi:
Ordering the time of their waiting and officiating in their Courses; appointing
Judges in Ecclesiastical Causes, and setting Presidents over those Judges;
taking away abuses and corruptions in Religion; commanding the Ark to be
removed from one place to another, and calling the people by their
Proclamations, to come and meet there before the Lord; requiring the Priests to
read the Book of the Law, and to reduce things to a Conformity with it;
renewing the Covenant of Moses for Reformation of Religion; making Missions of
Priests into such parts of the Country, as they saw needed their assistance;
and (to say no more) ejecting the High Priest himself, and deposing him from
his Office.

Now what say our Adversaries to all this? Truly, after many other poor shifts,
they are at last driven thus far to side with the Manichees, as to say, that
these things belong not to us: for that Authority which was in Kings under the
Old Testament, is now translated (if you will believe those Doctors) unto the
Priests under the New. But what man of sense can entertain this wild fancy,
that Kings under the Government of Christ, are in a worse Condition than they
were in under the Discipline of Moses? Or that Christ should single out Kings
of all other men, to be injurious to them, and deprive them of their former
rights; when he left every body else in the very same estate wherein he found
them? Was this our Saviors business (when he came to reign over the Gentiles,)
to strip their Princes of their Prerogatives, and lessen their Power and
Authority over their Subjects? How detestable would the Apostles have been, if
they had broached this Doctrine, when they went out to convert the World? Or
shall we be so impious as to think, that St. Paul equivocated, or had some
mental Reservation, when he Commanded every Soul in the Roman Church to be
subject to the higher Powers? Mark, I beseech you; it is upon the Church of
Rome that he presses this Doctrine (Chapter xiii. of this Epistle,) more than
upon any other Church whatsoever: as if he foresaw there would be an Apostasy
among them from this Faith. Let every Soul be subject: though thou be an
Apostle (and the Bishop of Rome I hope was never greater than so) though an
Evangelist, though a Prophet, or whatsoever thou be, thou must be subject:
as S. Chrysostom (whose words these are) faithfully expounds the Apostles
honest meaning.

And so Christian Princes long after his time, understood him; and did not fear
both to assume this Authority, and to justify it when they had done so, after
the same manner that we do, by the Example of the Kings that ruled over the
People of God before the Coming of Christ. Witness, to name one for all,
Charles the Great; a Prince as great in Ecclesiastical Policy, as in Feats of
Arms: who, in his Preface to his Capitulary, tells the Clergy of the Empire,
That he had sent his Deputies to them; that they by his Authority, might,
together with them, correct what stood in need of amendment; according to the
Example of the godly King Josias, who endeavored, says he, to restore the
Kingdom which God had given him to the Service of the true God; by going about
it, by correcting and admonishing it, as we read in the xxiii. Chapter of the
Second Book of the Kings.

And they had been very much to blame if they had not taken this pains. For as
the forenamed S. Chrysostom admirably speaks in a Sermon of his, recorded by
one of the writers of his Life * (...) Georgius Alexandrius. Tom. Ult. p. 265.
The Care appertaining to Kings is not so much about War, as about the Church;
not so much about Political Affairs, as about the Church: with whose
Preservation and Safety God having been pleased to entrust them; he expects
they should be as angry with those who would Adulterate his Worship therein
settled, as Moses was with Aaron, when he had made the Golden Calf. That very
example is sufficient to show the Authority, which the Civil Magistrates have
in matters of Religion. With which they ought not to part, no more than they
would with their Crowns: nor to suffer their people to be deprived of these
Holy Books wherein they may read these things; and thereby be so thoroughly
possessed with a sense of their high Authority, that they may never be Debauched
from their Duty. But of that more presently.

IV.
Let us first hear what the next exception of the Manichees was aginst the
Scriptures written aforetime; which they said were unprofitable to teach men
good manners; nay, were destructive and contrary to them. There are two parts
you see of this wicked suggestion, the first of which is so directly confuted
by St. Paul in another place, that one would think these men never read the New
Testament at all, nor the Old for any other end, than to carp at it and frame
Objections against it. For in 2 Timothy iii. 16. he expressly says that (...) All
Scripture (speaking of the Old, for not much of the New was then extant) given
by inspiration of God, is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in Righteousness. Upon which words you may be pleased to take
this short gloss. All Holy Learning consists in being wise and in being good;
in acquiring of both which, the Scriptures, being Divinely inspired, give us
singular assistance. As for the first, (Christian Wisdom) it consists in
knowing the Truth, and in rejecting Falsehood. Now behold how profitable the
Scriptures are in both regards: For they are profitable for Doctrine which is
teaching the Truth; and for reproof, which is confuting the falsehood of Error.
And then for the Second (learning to be good) that consists of two parts more
as the Prophets instruct us, to cease to do Evil, and to learn to do Well. To
both which ends also the Apostle affirms the Holy Scripture is profitable: for
correction that is, when we do amiss; and for instruction in Righteousness, to
make us do better. And that (I may add) not only by its Precepts, but by its
Examples: examples which strongly excite and quicken us to our duty; and which
mightily deter and withold us from doing wickedly. I shall only mention some of
the latter sort, which are drawn up to my hand by St. Paul in the next Epistle,
1 Cor. x. where he sets before that Church the example of the ancient
Israelites; with many of whom God was not well pleased, for they were
overthrown in the Wilderness, after he had brought them out of the bondage of
Egypt, v. 5. And lest they should think themselves unconcerned in such stories,
he adds, v. 6. Now these things were our examples; to the intent that we should
not Lust after evil things as they also Lusted. Neither be ye Idolaters as were
some of them; as it is written. The people sat down to Eat and Drink, and rose
up to Play. Neither let us commit Fornication, as some of them committed, and
fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some
of them tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. Neither murmur ye, as some of
them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Now all these things
happened unto them for Examples; and they are written for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the World are come. So he concludes, after the same manner as
he began, this pathetical discourse: Which we ought to lay to heart, and apply
to our selves as much, as if he had told us in other words (which are but an
explication of these,) I would not willingly have you abuse your selves with
false Opinions, and therefore do not imagine, I beseech you, that these things,
which were done so long ago, do not belong to you; or that the Sins I have
mentioned are not so deadly now as they were then: because those dreadful
Miracles are ceased, and you see no devouring Fire, no Earth gaping to swallow
you up, no fiery Serpents, nor destroying Angel smiting Multitudes dead in an
instant. For all these things, that is, these Punishments, happened unto them, or
were inflicted upon the old Israelites, for Examples (or for Types, as it is in
the Margin) of that Punishment which (notwithstanding Gods wonderful Grace to
us, in delivering us out of a worse Slavery than that of Egypt,) shall fall
more heavily upon us than upon them, if we be disobedient to him. The reason
is, because we are a Diviner and more Spiritual People, of whom they were but
the Types and Figures; and therefore can less expect to be indulged in such
wickedness as they smarted so sorely for: but ought to be warned by their sad
Examples, and to look upon these things as recorded for our admonition; that we
may learn, i. e. to beware of such sins as those now mentioned, which are far
more provoking now than they were in former times.

But to this those Manichees object (as we find in the formentioned Faustus
August. L. XXII. cap. 1. contra Faust.
) that there are abundance of evil Examples in the Old Testament; which, they
fancy, justifies the Second part of this Proposition, That the Old Scriptures
teach things contrary to good Manners. For we find in the Lives of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, some things, not only blameable, but very wicked; as
the Drunkenness of Noah, the Incest of Lot, the Murder and Adultery of David;
and such like.

To which I have a plain and true Answer; that even from the recording of these
things we may learn very much; if we will read such parts of the Holy
Scripture, as we ought to do all the rest, with a piously disposed Mind. I
shall mention four things, that those Examples teach us, if we be inclined to
make a good use of them. 1. Something to confirm our Faith. 2. Something to
guide the Course of our Lives. 3. Something to preserve us from Sin. And, 4.
Something to recover us, in case we fall into it.

I. First, I say, they may serve very much to confirm our Faith; and to make us
less doubt of the truth of the History of the Bible. Which it is manifest was
not invented for the Honor and Credit of the Jewish Nation; because it
faithfully relates even the soulest blemishes of their Noble Ancestors: which,
if it had been indicted by their private spirit, should have been carefully
concealed. The Holy Books may be compared to a pure Looking-glass; which shows
not only the Beauty, the lovely Features and comely Proportions of those
Persons that are represented in it, but all their Spots and Deformities. They
flatter no man's Person, but praise all the Actions, even of bad men, which are
worthy of Commendation; and reprehend all that are otherwise, even in the good
and virtuous. And therefore,

II. We may learn something from these Examples for the guidance of our Lives,
and reforming our Manners: which is to follow Precepts, not Examples. For
Examples then alone are imitable, when they are conformable to those Rules,
which make them good Examples. The best of men may err; and therefore we are
not so much to mind, which Way they go, as which way they ought to go. For
there is a Rule, by which they are as much bound to walk, as we; from which if
they swerve, we are to leave them, and stick to that. For against a Rule, no
Examples can be a sufficient Warrant. They are so far from having any such
Authority; that we are to examine, whether the Rule it self by which holy men
heretofore governed their actions, was a General Rule; or only Particular. For
if it was special and personal, there it must rest; and the Example of those
who obeyed it must not carry it any further. If it do; we act by our own
private Authority, and apply to our selves things that belonged peculiarly to
other men: and so, doing such things as they did, without such a Warrant,
involve our selves in a Guilt of which they were innocent. In short, they that
do not live regularly themselves, cannot be a Rule to others.

III. But there is still a good use, which we may and ought to make of such
irregular Examples. From which we may learn something that will be a
Preservative from Sin, not an Incentive to it: and that is, deep Humility; a
pious Fear, with due Caution and Circumspection; Distrust of our selves and of
our own strength; with earnest Applications to God for his gracious Assistance;
and a lively Faith and Confidence in him, as our best Security. For if such
great, such Holy men fell, and fell so foully, and bruised themselves so
sorely; have not we just cause to be jealous of our selves, and to live in a
godly fear, lest we also be tempted, and carried away from our stedfastness? As
we shall be most certainly; unless we be careful and cautious, watchful and
diligent; adhering closely to God by a constant vigorous sense of him preserved
in our Minds: which we should learn to awaken and quicken by frequent
Reflection upon such lamentable Examples of humane weakness and frailty.

IV. From which also we may learn, in case we should be so unhappy as to be
surprised, and fall into Sin, something that may help to recover and restore
us. Which is, not to despair of Gods Mercy; but to hope, by unfeigned
Repentance, and greater care for the future, we may obtain a Pardon, and be
accepted again into his favor, as they were; some of whose Repentance is as
remarkable, in the ancient Story, as their sin.

This is the use we ought to make of such parts of the Holy Writings: By which,
if we will encourage our selves to be bold to do wickedly, because such pious
men fell into sin; or to presume of Gods Mercy, though we continue in it, and
do not rise again by Repentance; or take occasion to despair of doing better,
because of the deplorable weakness of Humane Nature; we must be accountable to
God, for such perverse abuse of his Holy Word; which contains no such Examples
among all those that it propounds to our Imitation.

V.
There is one thing more remaining, which if they could have made good, would
have been an Objection indeed; and that is, That the Old Testament opposes and
contradicts the New. About this Adimantus a Manichee the Master of Faustus
wrote a whole Book: but the Instances he alleges are so frivolous, that they
are scarce worth the confuting. I will mention one, because it may suggest
something for our Learning, whereby you may judge of all the rest. In the Old
Testament we read, that if any man hurt his Neighbor, he was bound to satisfy
to the full for the damage done, by suffering the very same himself; Eye for
Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, and Foot for Foot, etc. xxi. Exodus 24, 25.
But our Savior says in the New Testament, Whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if a man take away thy Coat, let
him have thy Cloak also. v. Matthew. 39, 40. Are not these things opposite? I
answer with St. Austin, who has made an excellent Reply to this Cavil, both in
his Book against Adimantus Cap. VIII.
, and against Faustus Lib. XIX. cap. 25.
; to this effect. These things discover no contrariety in the two Testaments;
but only the different degrees of their perfection. For there being two degrees
of Meekness and Forbearance; the first that the Grief of the injured person do
not provoke him to seek a revenge, beyond the measure of the damage that was
done him; the second that the injured person pardon and pass by the whole
wrong, though grievous to him, with a peaceable and appeased mind: the Old
Testament, as less perfect, preserved carnal men within the bounds of the first
degree of Patience, and kept them from extending their revenge too far; but the
New Testament, as more perfect, advances spiritual men to the most excellent
degree of a plenary remission, without any revenge at all.

So that even from such passages as these we learn, you see, how much we are
indebted to God, for a greater abundance of his Grace, than he bestowed in
former times. Which should raise us, as to a greater degree of grateful Love
to him, so, to a more excellent degree of Piety and Virtue; to which He intends
to improve us by this New Revelation he has made of his good will to us in
Christ Jesus.

And that is part of the use we may make of what has been said.

If we may learn so much from those Books which were written aforetime, in the
days of old, before the Coming of our Savior into the World: what may we do
from those which were written since his appearing; who is the very Wisdom of
God, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, and has
declared him unto us? They prescribe us a more rational Service of Almighty
God; and raise us to a higher pitch of brotherly Love; and teach us greater
Purity of Body and Mind; and press all these upon us by more perfect Examples,
and by more excellent Motives; especially by the blessed hope of Immortal Life;
which if we have any sense of our own dearest Interest, we ought to embrace and
to hold fast (as it is in the Collect for this day) being willing to do and to
suffer any thing that God would have us, rather than lose so great, so
incomparable a good: Which the more we think of, the more it attracts us to it,
and holds us fast in its embraces* as a perfect satisfaction to all our desires.

But from that Consideration we may take occasion also to reflect, how
injurious they are to Christian People (to whom God has been so bountiful) who
forbid them without their leave to meddle with these holy Books; wherein their
Hope of Immortal Life is contained: Nay, make a severe Inquisition after them
that dare be so bold as to have, in their own Language, a Copy of the Will and
Testament of their blessed Savior, (or if you please so to call it) of that
Deed of Grace whereby he has conveyed to them the Eternal Inheritance. S.
Peter indeed, 1 Epist. ii. 9. honors all Christians so much as to call them a
chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People: But
they, who pretend to succeed him, use them as if they were no better than base
Slaves, nay vile Beasts; who are not fit to be entrusted with this Liberty, and
enjoy the Privilege of hearing God himself speaking to them in his holy
Gospel. No, there is a Caution in the Law, says Innocent the third, that if a
Beast touch the Mountain, it shall be stoned: from thence concluding that the
simple and unlearned should not meddle with the Subtilty of Holy Writ. And
herein we agree with him, that from all Subtilties and curious Inquiries, every
body ought to abstain: But we are not satisfied that He or any man else has
Authority, to compare the People of God to Beasts. As others among them have
done in a most scornful manner; when they prove from hence that the People
must not read the Scriptures, because we must not cast that which is holy to
Dogs, nor throw Pearls before Swine. This is very rude Language; but the
Authors are well known who have spoken thus contemptuously of the Flock of
Christ (whom he calls his Sheep, but they call Dogs and Swine) and thereby
debased Christians below the most blockish Jews, who did never so abuse their
Holy Books, as to forfeit the liberty of Reading them; which they challenge and
use as a Right belonging to all at this very day. What Reason can be given for
such unworthy. Treatment of those whom the Apostles so highly esteemed, and
spoke of with so much respect, but only this; that they see there is such a
manifest disagreement between them and the Scriptures, that their Errors would
be in danger to be detected by the simplest people, if they should be permitted
to come into this light?

And here let me note, that such guides are fallen into a contrary error, to
that of the Manichees, of which I have now treated. They do not say, that the
Books of the Old Testament are superfluous and unnecessary; but that they, and
the Books of the New Testament to boot, are defective and imperfect: and that
their defects must be supplied, out of such Traditions as they propound to our
belief. But among opposite Errors, the causes of erring are commonly the same,
as the great Philosopher observes; and is very true in this case. For though
there be several ways the Enemy of mankind has taken, to compass his design
of bringing the Scriptures into disgrace, and setting up the inventions of men
instead of them, or in Conjunction with them; yet the reason still is one and
the same: which is, that the holy Scriptures are not for his turn; he cannot
deceive men so easily, if they keep close to this hold. Which is a strong hold
indeed; and comprehends all that we need to know, or believe, or do: to which
nothing need, nothing ought to be added as necessary to our Salvation.
According to that peremptory resolution of St. Austin in his third Book against
Petilians Letters, (Chapt. vi.) Whether it be about Christ, or about his
Church, or about any other thing whatsoever, that belongs to Faith or to our
Life, I will not say we (who are by no means to be compared with him that said,
licet nos, although we) but as he presently adds, if an Angel from Heaven shall
declare to you any thing, besides that which you have received in Scripturis
Legalibus and Evangelicis, in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let him
be accursed.

To which let me add this notable sentence of S. Basil the Great, who
comprehends all that I have said in a few words, in his Sermon of Faith Tom.
II. page 251.
. It is a manifest falling of Faith, and may be justly charged with Pride;
either to reject any thing that is written; or to introduce, and bring in over
and above, any thing that is not written.

This was the ancient Catholic Doctrine; which it is the Interest (let me take
the boldness to say) as well as the Duty-of-Christian Kings and Princes, above
all other men, to assert and maintain. For by these Holy Books their Authority
is as strongly supported; as by the pretended Traditions of the Roman Church it
is notoriously undermined and subverted. Upon which account it is a point of
their greatest Wisdom, not only to keep these Books in their Peoples hands; but
to encourage, nay command the conscientious reading of them; that they may
there learn how plainly they are taught, and how Religiously they are bound to
fear, honor and obey their Sovereigns, even though they were Pagans; much more
when they are Christians. Of which Liberty if they suffer their People to be
deprived, they shall soon be taught that they owe no further respect to their
Princes, than it pleases the Bishop of Rome to allow them. Who from the Dignity
of a particular Bishop and Pastor of Souls, is raised to be a Worldly Monarch,
above all Kings and Emperors; by sewing several patches and shreds to the
ancient Christian Doctrine, under the Name of Traditions. For nothing is more
apparent in History than this; that as the Bishop of Rome's Greatness
increased, so Traditions were still more and more multiplied; which in process
of time were more recommended than the Scriptures themselves, and more
Religiously observed.

There is another Reason also, why Princes should keep the Holy Books open
before their Subjects eyes, and suffer no Man to shut them and seal them up:
Because it plainly appears by them, that their Persons and Office are Sacred;
not a mere humane Institution, but the Ordinance of God, by whom Kings reign,
and by virtue of whose Laws they demand Obedience. The contrary to this is
taught by the Popes Creatures; and will soon be obtruded for Christian
Doctrine, if the Holy Scriptures be laid aside. Bellarmine, for instance, in
his Book against Barclay, maintains, that their Power proceeds not from God,
but is the Institution of Man. Conformable to that memorable Maxim of Father
Binet, in a Discourse of his with the famous Casaubon Epist. ad Frontonem
Ducaeum. p. 209.
, about the business of Garnet (which he calls the Immortal God to witness is
true) That it were better all Kings should perish, than the Seal of Confession
so much as once be violated; for the Authority of Kings is by Humane Right, but
Confession by Divine. Which sounds so horridly in all true Christian ears, that
it is hard to find any thing more contrary to common Reason and to the Holy
Scriptures, among that (...) (as Andraeas Caesariensis calls them Cap. IV. in
Apocalypse.
) that crazed, stupid Tribe of Manichees, whose Frenzies I have in part
represented. But this is not a place to lay open this Mystery of Iniquity;
whereby Kings are almost Dethroned, and manifestly deprived of that which
assures their Crowns and their Lives; far more than the constant Guard of their
Bodies, or the most powerful Armies they can raise. For though by those they
may strike terror into their Subjects minds; it is only the Sense of God that
can frame their hearts to Obedience. Then the Fidelity of Subjects will be firm
and unmovable, when it is incorporated into Piety, and accounted a part of
Religion; a necessary piece of that Service which we owe to God Almighty. For
which end the Scriptures must lie open before the People; that there they may
read their Duty, and have their Souls molded into a Sense of God; and not
merely receive such Impressions, as the Interests of men shall be pleased to
stamp upon them.

I conclude all with those Notable words of S. Chrysostom in his Second Homily
upon S. Matthew; where he justifies what I have said, from the words of St.
Paul before mentioned. It is a great fault in Christian People, that they do
not Read the Scriptures: but to think it is a needless and superfluous thing to
read them, is a far greater Crime. This is language of the Devils invention:
for do you not hear what S. Paul says? That these things were written for our
Instruction.

God grant we may in such wise hear, read, mark, learn and inwardly digest
them, that we may bring forth Fruit with Patience; and do our Duty so
faithfully to Him, to our Sovereign, to one another, and to all men, that in
the end we may attain Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be given by us and by all others, all
Honor, Glory and Praise, both now and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

