A brief Exhortation TO Those who are Shut up from our Society, and deprived at
present of Public Instruction. Which may be useful to others also who have
any feeling of Gods Judgments.

By Simon Patrick Rector of St. Paul Covent Garden.

LONDON, Printed by J. Hayes for S. Thomson, at the Sign of the Bishops Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

Beloved,
IT is so natural to every one when he is in distress, to think of those sins
which he presently concludes have brought him into it, that I am willing to
presume there is none of you, but has reflected on himself before this time,
and asked his soul, What have I done? Affliction is the season for
consideration. It is the mother of many wise thoughts, and much knowledge,
especially of men's selves; to whom they are too great strangers till that day
comes. In a time then of such great Calamity as this, when the Hand of God
presses you so sore; to suppose you to be without all serious reflections on
your ways, would be to imagine you as hard as the Stones. We cannot believe
you are so insensible. Now that Death presents it self so near, and looks you
in the very face, it is not possible but that you begin to consider how you
have lived, and what preparation you have made for another stare: Now sure you
ask your selves these questions with some passion, What have we done? and What
shall we do to be saved? Nay, my Charity carries me so far as to think, that in
such straits as these to which you are reduced, you have done a great deal
more; and proceeded to make many resolutions of amendment. You have vowed to
God (I persuade my self) that if he will spare your lives, you will forsake
those sins which have made you so miserable; and live hereafter in a stricter
observance of his holy commands. You are willing to receive your lives from his
hands on these conditions. You ask them on no other terms, but that they may be
better employed for him. And desire him (I presume) to deal with you, as you
seriously mean to become new men.

These things therefore passing for granted; I will not fill up this little
Paper with earnest exhortations to repentance, for which the Rod of God calls
so loudly; but rather direct you to make it such a repentance as shall never be
repented of. And awaken your selves, I beseech you, to consider what I say. Sit
down and pause a while as you go along, to urge every thing upon your heart.
And what is said here in brief, make long discourses of to your selves;
laboring at this present to supply the Preachers place.

I. And first, Since you are now looking into your selves, I beseech you search
to the very bottom of your hearts. Though it be a great way thither, yet God
has now given you time and leisure enough to descend into it. As near as you
can therefore unravel all your life, that you may see what the whole course of
it has been. Reflect, I mean, not only on some sins that are nearer at hand,
but look on those that are further off, and lie more out of your view. Lay your
selves naked and examine your selves all over, both without and within, that
you may find out every thing which is offensive to God. Else I must tell you,
this affliction will only make hypocrites, in stead of producing good
Christians. The fruit of it will be only a partial reformation, which in effect
is none at all. Shall I assist you a little in this great affair?

Know then that the sins which you are in search of, are commonly (for more
easy understanding sake) comprehended under these three heads: 1. Such as are
directly against God. 2. Such as are an injury also to your neighbor. And 3.
Such as are against your selves. Some of which likewise consist in doing what
you ought not to have done: and others in not doing those things which you
ought to have done.

And therefore in your inquiry after the offenses against the Majesty of God,
you must consider such things as these. Have you not been wont to blaspheme the
Name of God and his Son? Is it not your custom to swear and curse; to deride
Religion; and to make a scoff of Holy things? Or at least have you not been
very negligent in your thoughts of God? Have you used your self to call to
mind, who made you? Have you spent any time in pondering his great love in
sending his Son to you? Have you not resisted many motions of the Holy Ghost?
Have you not omitted to worship God as you ought, by daily prayer, and giving
him thanks? Have you constantly attended his public service? Have you not
staid at home, when you ought to have been in the House of God? Behold then
(before you go any further) your sin in your punishment. You may not go thither
if you would, whither when you might have gone you would not. O consider, how
many happy opportunities have you let pass unregarded? How many blessings have
you received and never minded from whence they came? How long have you lived
and yet been as without God in the world? carrying no fear of a supreme Power
in your mind, no love to the Father of your being; no grateful sense of the
benefits which he does you every moment. For these things you ought to be
ashamed and confounded. It ought to make you blush to lift up your eyes to
heaven, when you reflect on these neglects. For there is nothing so unnatural
as this, to forget him that made you, that sustains you, that provides you with
a world of good things continually, both for soul and body.

And now when you turn your thoughts from hence (as soon as sorrow and grief
will let you) to look upon the offenses which may be committed against your
neighbor, you will find them to be so many, that it will cost you some time to
do no more then know them. For as many persons as you are acquainted withal,
or stand in relation unto, so many sins may arise by your injuries or neglects
of them. Some of these persons (for example sake) are your equals. Consider
therefore; have you been always just in word and deed to them? have you
defrauded no man? have you never slaundered nor backbited your neighbors? have
you not been a makebate among them and disturbed their peace? was it not your
wont to pass the time in jeering of them? or passing rash censures and
judgments upon them? Is there no malice nor hatred in your hearts to any of
them? have you pardoned them when they wronged you? Do you not bear an old
grudge to some or other? Are you not forgetful of benefits, and revengefull of
injuries? Have you succored, as you were able, those that were in need. Have
you not been without compassion to the poor, and unmindfull of those that were
sick? All these things must be examined: and many more will present themselves
to your thoughts, if you do seriously employ them to find out those faults that
are to be amended.

And again you will see (if you look about you) that there are other persons
who stand above you, requiring other regards then your equals do. And here it
is much to be considered, whether you have dutifully carried your selves to
your natural parents. Whether you have honored the King, with your spiritual
Governors and Pastors, as you ought. And whether your Masters and all your
betters have had their due respect. Have you not been irreverent in your
behavior or speeches to some of these? Have you not disobeyed their just
commands and contemned their orders? Have you not causlesly quarrelled with
their injunctions, and found fault with their government? Nay has it not been
your manner to revile them and speak evil of them? Are you not ready to believe
all the evil that is spoken by others; and to sit in judgment upon your
Governors? Do you not slight and undervalue their authority? Have you not mean
thoughts of them, never considering that they are set by God over you? I doubt
these are sins that have spread themselves far more then the Plague. And
therefore narrowly examine your selves about them, that none of them may escape
your notice.

And then cast your eyes on other persons that are below you, who may charge
you it is possible with many sins more. Consider what care have you taken of
your children, your servants, and all others who are committed to your charge;
that they may want nothing that is needful either for their souls or bodies?
Have you made a conscience to instruct them in their duty, or to send them to
be instructed? I cannot instance in all particulars, unless I should write a
Book; and therefore I desire those who are Parents only to enquire about this
one thing which is of great moment. Have you put your children in mind often of
the vow they made in Baptism? Do you remember them of their promise to forsake
the devil and all his works, and to keep Gods holy will and Commandments? Do
you tell them that God has taken them to be his children, and that they may
not therefore do as they list, but as he would have them? Do you teach them the
Catechism which is appointed for their instruction; and take care they come to
him that has the cure of souls among you when it is required, there reverently
to receive his admonitions? I fear these things are too much neglected, if not
despised, or else we should see Christian people in better condition. If any of
you therefore intend now to make one good Christian, let him call himself to an
account in this particular.

You see (my Brethren) already, that it is a very serious business to amend,
seeing there are so many things to be set in order. And yet you have not heard
all that you have to do if you design a reformation. For you are to consider
how you have respected your selves, to whom there is a great reverence due, and
whom many things do very much misbecome. As for example, is it fit for a
rational creature to mind nothing else but getting of wealth which he must so
shortly leave? Has he nothing else to care for but what he shall eat, and what
he shall drink, and wherewithal he shall be clothed? Is it seemly for ^m to
wallow in drink, to burn with lust and filthy desires? How does he look when he
is full of wrath and transported by his choler? Is he not quite transformed?
does he not seem to be beside himself? Examine your selves then in these
things; in matters of temperance, of chastity, of meekness, of patience, of
heavenly mindedness, and such like. And think you are not your selves, till you
be reclaimed from the sottish vice of drinking and tippling; from beastly
uncleanness; from fury and rage, which are no less brutish; nay from earthly
mindedness and the love of money, which is a very gross stupidity.

But I see it will not consist with the brevity I design to say any more on
this head, but the rest must be left to your own conscience. Only let me
briefly note two benefits which you will receive by an impartial sober weighing
of what has been said. First. You will see that it is a work of time and pains
to amend so many things as you may find amiss; and therefore will require not
only your present, but your future endeavors. Especially if you consider, that
in all the cases I have mentioned, there are these things likewise to be
examined and pondered. The frequency of those sins; the delight you took in
them; the expense of time and money they put you too; the degree of boldness
and shamelessness; the scandal they brought along with them; the dishonor
they did to Religion, to holy days, and holy things; the many reproofs and
checks they were against; with all the vows and resolutions which you broke
that you might commit them. If these things, I say, be weighed, you will not
easily believe your selves, if you should fancy that the business is already
done, which I suppose was but begun together with this affliction that is upon
you. And now I mention your affliction, it gives ^it occasion for the second
note which I would have you make; viz. That your punishment is a great deal
less then you deserve. That you have not received so many stripes, as you have
committed offenses. Here being such a vast number of sins which you may find
your selves guilty of, it will make you cry out (if you be touched with any
pious sense) It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed. Why does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? There is no reason
that we should repine under his afflicting hand, but rather bless his goodness
that we are not in a far more lamentable condition.

II. And that you may not be more miserable, nor after severer strokes here
fall into everlasting condemnation; I beseech you as you love your souls, stir
them up, by the grace of God, to a through and speedy reformation in every
particular wherein you must charge your selves to have done amiss. You see your
work; do not go about it with a dull and an heavy heart; but with earnestness,
with zeal and fervor of spirit, as those who are infinity concerned in it. The
danger you are in sure will awaken you. The judgments of God which hangover
your heads will chase away all sloth and laziness. And especially the sad sense
of your former neglects will make you give all diligence that this business may
not miscarry in your hands. Which that it may nor,

III. I beseech you in the next place that your purposes of reformation (which
I hope you are now forming) may proceed upon a right ground, and flow from a
sound and lasting principle of obedience: viz. not merely from the fear and
dread of Gods present judgments, but from a true fear of himself, and a
reverend regard to his Sovereign authority. Not merely that you may now escape
out of his hands and save your lives; but that you may be really his friends
and live to him. If your resolutions take their beginning from the heavy stroke
which is upon you, yet they must take their growth and confirmation from the
consideration of the cause of it, which is nothing else but your sins against
God. These you must hate more then the Plague it self. You must purpose to
amend out of an abhorrence you have to all disobedience against his Majesty;
out of a love you bear to his blessed nature and holy will; out of a sense that
he is your Lord and Governor; that all his Laws are just and good; that he is
your chief good and last end, in agreement with whom only you can be happy. For
if it be nothing else but the present calamities which awaken you; when they
are gone you will fall asleep and be secure in your sins again. But the Fear
and the Love of God will always inspire you to do well, and they will never
let you return to folly any more. These will also make you entire in your
obedience. They are an universal cause of all virtue. They will not suffer you
to be partial in your duty, but thoroughly instruct you to every good work. And
here I beseech you again to have a respect to all Gods Commandments, for it can
never be too often remembered. Place not your amendment only in increasing your
devotion, but in bettering your manners. This is the damning hypocrisy of this
Age, that it sleights all good Morality, and spends its zeal only in matters of
Worship and Devotion.

IV. And now I have but one request more to make to you, which you will easily
grant, if the foregoing be entertained. It is this: If God be pleased to
restore you to your liberty again (which we continually pray for) be sure to
make good the Vows which now are upon you. Let it be seen that indeed the love
of God and Religion is in your hearts, and that your purposes are not the fruit
of a present passion. Cannot you remember that you have made many promises to
God before now, which were never performed? Has not a sickness, or a Sermon
begot some resolutions which all vanished away? O search I beseech you (if you
love your eternal life) after the cause of this falsness; for it will betray
your purposes again. Was it not because you did not thoroughly hate the sin
which you promised to leave? Was it not because a right sense of God and
goodness had not settled it self in your minds? Did not your disaffection to sin
arise only because the temptation was gone? Was not your appetite then
surfetted and sick, which in time recovered it self? Then just so it will be
hereafter when you go abroad again. You will renew your friendship with your
evil courses, unless you have some good principles in you stronger then all
your sinful appetites and then all the solicitations of the world.

If you mean therefore to be as good as your word, you see it is of absolute
necessity to settle some firm unalterable principle of new obedience in your
soul. The former advice must be diligently heeded, unless you intend to lose
all your labor: and so must these also that follow.

1. The better to assure your future obedience, I wish you to make some
experiment upon your selves, while you remain within doors. There are some
things that can be done at this very time: Let us see you perform them, if you
would have us believe that you mean to amend. Cannot you now be patient, and
not think hardly of God or men? Cannot you bless God for this affliction, and
pray that it may do you good? Cannot you spend your time very much in
meditation, in prayer, and in examining your selves? Cannot you seriously
desire the prayers of good people for you? Cannot you reform that vain and evil
communication which we hear many of you entertain at your Windows with idle and
loose people, that are not at all affected with the judgments of God upon the
Land? If you will not do these, never believe any of the promises you make of
amendment in all the rest.

2. And then I entreat you to resolve by the grace of God to continue those
holy exercises of prayer, meditation and examining your selves when you come
abroad again: in order to make you perform the other parts of your duty. They
are not all Religion (as men foolishly think) but they are the helps and means
to bring us to the practice of all that God commands. Therefore be sure you
spend some part of every day in calling to mind your purposes, and the grounds
or reasons on which they were made. Put your selves in mind of God, of your
dependence on him, and of the love and duty you owe him. Earnestly beseech him
for Jesus his sake to assist you with the grace of his holy Spirit that you may
keep your word. And take an account of your performance as often as you can.
And let me take the liberty to tell you it is easy here to read your sin in
your present chastisement. You have not loved to be retired, and so now God
shuts you up whether you will or no. Shut up your self therefore hereafter in
secret: get aside from all company and be alone with your selves and God if you
mean to be saved. You have complained its like in times past, that you had no
time to spare from your necessary occasions. Behold! now God has taken away
this objection from this busy City. Now they have leisure enough who would
find none before. Now he has left them nothing else to do but to consider
their ways. Their Trades stood lately in their way to Heaven: they could not
pass thither through their Shops. And so now he has shut up their shop doors,
and removed their trade from them. He has made room now for Religion, which
could find no place a little while ago. He would let that into their houses and
hearts which was barred out by innumerable employments. He seems to bid them
now be wise Merchants for better things, and to follow a traffic with heaven,
which they would have no commerce withal before. This if our people will not
see they must die (I think) of incurable blindness. And let all those whose
eyes are opened, have a care to amend this great, this first fault, which makes
so many others.

3. To which let this request be also added, that you would all remember to
confirm your resolutions by frequent and reverend receiving of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. A duty too much neglected, though it be instituted on purpose
for a remembrance of Christ's love in giving his life for us; then which there
is nothing more powerful to move our hearts to all love, and obedience. This
every little business in the world can put by. For this men can find no time;
and so their resolutions are starved and die for want of so good nourishment as
this holy feast would afford them. If then you would have them maintained in
life, do not deny your souls the benefit of this divine food, but take all
opportunities to refresh and strengthen them therewith.

4. It would be of great use also if you would often seriously reflect upon the
indulgence of God in sparing your lives when so many thousands were every week
cut off. Cast your eyes back upon this mournful time, and think why was not my
grave dug among the rest. You cannot imagine the mercy of God has so mean
an end as to continue you here only to eat and drink, to get wealth, and enjoy
the rest of the pleasures of the flesh. The world is in no such need of you
that you should stay only to take up a room in it. It would still be full
enough if you were gone. Your living when others are dead is of no consequence,
unless it be to prepare for a better life. Use it therefore for that end, and
think that you are delivered to glorify your Creator by new obedience.

5. I should have desired you withal often to think of death; and not to look
upon it as a great way off, because you have escaped this stroke: It may lie in
ambush for you in another place, and therefore you are to expect that every
where, which waits for you no body knows where.

6. And lastly, I should have commended to your most serious meditation the
promises of the life to come; beseeching you not to lose so great a good for
want of persevering a few days longer in that good mind wherein you now find
your selves by the grace of God;

But then I should leave no room for a few words to all truly pious Souls, who
may lie under this calamity as well as others. To you at last, O dear Friends,
this short Discourse addresses it self. And though I know you will not think
your selves unconcerned in all that has been said, but find something either
to be amended or completed in you; yet the promises of eternal life (just now
mentioned) seem above all other things to offer themselves as most proper for
your thoughts at this season. The hope of this will be your greatest comfort in
this affliction. This will support you, and make you to rejoice in the midst of
tribulation. What though you have the common portion of others in this present
time, since you have a great deal better prepared for you hereafter? Nay, what
though you be now excluded from external communion with the people of God? the
time is coming when you shall enter into a most happy fellowship, from which
there will be no separation. Do not therefore faint under this affliction, nor
be weary when you are corrected. Humbly submit your self to your heavenly
Father. Resign your self into the hands of his wise Love, that he may dispose
of you as he pleases. Believe firmly that he is good even when he smites. And
think that he who will give you eternal life, would not deny you a less thing
if he saw it best. Remember the patience of Job; or rather set before your eyes
the example of our blessed Savior, who was made perfect by sufferings. Think
that he pities you: and that withal he looks upon you to see how you will now
behave your self. Let him behold a Soul meek, contented, courageous, rejoicing
always; for there is not a more lovely spectacle that he can be presented
withal. And let him see your belief of his Gospel so strong and lively, that
you do not tremble to pass through that gate, which he has entered before you.
Follow him cheerfully to the grave it self. Remember that he has overcome
Death, that King of terrors: That he has despoiled it of all its power, and
made it innocent to his followers. Let it not affright you therefore; but look
upon it as a necessary passage to a better life. Welcome it as a friend, and do
not take it any longer for an enemy. Receive it with such a countenance, as if
you believed it to be a messenger sent to fetch you home to your Fathers house.
In these good thoughts I leave you; and heartily commit you to the love and
care of our dearest Lord. Beseeching you, now that our public Instructions
cannot reach you, this private Message may be embraced with as much affection
as it is sent to you. And beseeching him also that you may be as strongly moved
to a speedy consideration of these things, as I was to the writing of them, for
the use of those Souls that are committed to my Charge. Amen.

FINIS.

