THE GLORIOUS Epiphany, WITH THE DEVOUT CHRISTIANS LOVE to it.

By SIMON PATRICK, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. and R. R. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most
Sacred Majesty. MDCLXXVIII.

To the most Reverend Father in God WILLIAM by Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HAving composed a Treatise, Most Reverend Father, concerning the Appearing of
the Chief Shepherd of our Souls (whom we look for from Heaven at the last day)
I know not to whom more properly to address it, than to your Grace: whom our
Lord has been pleased to entrust with the high Office of presiding in Chief
over that part of his Flock which he has gathered within the Fold of this
Kingdom: A charge of which, as your Grace was not in the least ambitious, so
all judged you highly worthy: and may well look upon it as a token God has
still some kindness for this Church (which has been so long miserably
distracted, and torn in pieces by many sects and different factions) that He
has been pleased to guide His Majesty to the choice of a Person so rarely
qualified, both with piety and prudence, with uprightness and inflexible
virtue, as well as with Learning and other accomplishments, to be the Prime
Pastor of it.

This I am sure makes some Good men hope that He intends still to feed us in
our green Pastures, and to lead us forth beside the waters of comfort: and has
moved me to take the humble boldness (among the crowds who come upon that
errand) of appoaching your Grace in this manner; to congratulate to your Grace
that singular honor, and to the Church that great happiness.

For the continuance of which, as we ought to pray most ardently, so to do our
duties faithfully in our several stations: and to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, wherewith in this Church, we
are fed so constantly, and so abundantly replenished. Unto which as nothing can
more effectually excite us, than the serious contemplation of his appearing
again to give Salvation to all the Faithful; and especially to bestow upon all
Faithful Pastors (who as St. Peter speaks, feed his Flock willingly, and are
examples to it) a Crown of Glory that fades not away: So I hope I have done
something in this Treatise to draw the thoughts and the affections of those who
piously peruse it, to so lovely a spectacle.

Of this your Grace is so good a Judge, that it was a Principal motive to my
confidence in this Dedication. For next to the pleasure of composing such a
work, is the satisfaction of addressing it to a Patron no less Pious than
Knowing: who has accustomed himself to devout Meditations, and feels in his
own breast the same holy motions, which he sees and loves in another. This was
a Reflection, wherewith that Great man St. Hierom was much delighted, when he
was writing his Commentaries upon the Prophet Isaiah: In whose words I may more
fitly end this Preface to your Grace, than he begins one of his (upon the
sixteenth Book) unto Eustochium. It is an excellent sentence of the most
eloquent Orator, that Arts would be happy, if none did judge of them but only
Artists. And lest I should seem to borrow an example only from Profane
Writers, this is the very thing which the Prophet represents in other words,
Blessed is he that speaks in the ears of them that hearken.

They are the words, I find, of the Son of Sirach, xxv. Ecclus. 9. whom he
calls a Prophet only in a large sense (for in his famous Prologus Galeatus he
strikes this Book out of the Canon of the Scripture) because he had an
excellent faculty to comprise in a few words many profitable instructions.
Amongst which St. Hierom seasonably called this to mind (as he was writing upon
the Scriptures, to one that loved them, and was well versed in them) which is
one of the Ten things there mentioned by that wise man, whereby he thought he
might be made completely happy.

And of this happiness (to speak still in the words of that Father) your Grace
has made us partakers: having a palate to taste what is devout, as well as to
discern what is learned and judicious. To the later I do not pretend; but hope
there is something of the former, which will recommend this work to your Graces
good liking, and make it acceptable likewise to all those that love our Lord
Jesus in sincerity.

To whose powerful Protection and Guidance I most humbly commend your Grace;
beseeching Him to strengthen you to sustain the burden of so weighty a charge,
and to inspire you with all the Prudence, Resolution and Zeal, which are
necessary in these difficult times: that by your Graces wise conduct, Gods true
Religion may be so settled and firmly established among us, and sincere piety,
together with Christian-Learning and Knowledge so thrive and prosper
everywhere; that this Church (as St. Paul speaks of that of Thessalonica) may
be your joy and glory, and Crown of rejoicing, before our Lord Jesus Christ, at
his coming.

Which is and shall be the prayer of,

My Lord, Your Graces most humble and dutiful Servant, Simon Patrick.

TO THE Devout Readers.
SO adorable, as Tertullian speaks, is the fullness of the holy Scriptures, that
the more we search into them, the greater treasures of Divine Wisdom we
discover there to employ our meditations: and when we think we have found out
all that belongs to one subject, new things present themselves to fill us with
greater joy and admiration. It is not long, since I sent abroad so large a
Treatise of that Eternal Life which Christ has promised, that it seemed to
comprehend all that the holy Books have delivered in that argument: But upon
further thoughts I find, there is one most comfortable consideration still
remains, which is the subject of this present Treatise. Wherein I have
endeavored to represent what a joy it will be to see our Lord himself come
again from Heaven, attended with his holy Angels, to fetch us up thither to
live with him for ever: and what a Passion we should now have for him, and for
his coming; whereby we should run to meet him, and receive beforehand some
glimpses of that glory, wherein he will appear, and we together with him.

The greatness of that Bliss we shall then receive, ought no doubt to be the
frequent subject of our serious Meditation. Which will be the greater (as I
have said in another place) because we must stay so long for it, as till the
day of Christ's Appearing. And it is a singular comfort, we must confess, to
know that it will be so exceeding Great: though that very thing cannot but make
us the more desirous, he would be pleased to hasten it. For whatsoever joy we
shall have before that time (as no question the Paradise into which our Lord
entered immediately after his death, before he was crowned with glory and
honor, was a place of very much happiness) it will not be completed till he
come again to bring us that Great Salvation, which the Scripture speaks of, at
the Resurrection of the dead.

When we are at rest from our labors in the other world, I cannot but think we
shall long for that happy day; and that it will be part of our joy to expect
it, with perfect assurance of its coming. And therefore it cannot but be a very
delightful entertainment, to think of it, to hope and wish for it now, as the
greatest refreshment we have of our labors, here in this life. For while our
thoughts and desires are thus employed, we tread, if I may so speak, upon the
threshold of Paradise, and begin to enter into the joy of our Lord.

But there is one expression of St. Paul, which I mentioned in the conclusion
of the second Advice to a Friend (p. 64.) which excels all the rest: for he
makes it the proper mark of a Christian to LOVE his appearing. Which I have
undertaken therefore to explain in this Discourse: that devout Christians may
know, what the Blessedness of that time will be; and what the Affection is we
should have for it; and what Reason there is, we should be so affected toward
it. The subject is so unusual that I have not seen it any where handled; which
made me the more willing to set about it: that I might in part both satisfy
the desire I have to do all the honor and service I am able to our Blessed
Lord and Master Christ Jesus; and the delight I take in explaining his holy
Scriptures. Of which to be ignorant, is to be ignorant of Christ himself, as
St. Hierom's words are, in the beginning of his first Book of Commentaries upon
Isaiah.

I do not expect indeed, nor is it possible, that you should have your minds
always possessed with such thoughts, and that your hearts should perpetually
burst out into such passions, as I have here expressed: I my self cannot think
them over again, nor any like them, whenever I please. It is enough, (good
Readers) and as much as we can reach, if you be thus affected at certain times,
when your spirit is most serious and retired into it self; and if you endeavor
to habituate your selves to such thoughts and desires, that they may be so
familiar and natural, as to become easy and delightful, when you will stand
most in need of them.

More particularly, when the days, wherein you live, are evil; or when you are
under any private trouble; or when you would at any time retreat from the world
and solace your self in angello cum libello, in a nook with a Book (to speak
with Tho. a Kempis, who thought this the highest pleasure upon earth) or when
the Church calls upon you to sequester your self for devotion; and especially
when old age you feel creeping upon you, and you think of drawing your selves
by degrees out of this life: At all such seasons as these (and chiefly when you
come near to your journeys end) this Prospect cannot but be most pleasant; and
such aspirations and sighs after the day of Christ's appearing, be the most
ravishing music; and to be transported with such ardent longings, as are here
represented, make Afflictions light and easy, solitary retirements exceeding
sweet and delightful, old age cheerful, and death it self very comfortable.

But you must not imagine that Love can arrive at its highest pitch presently:
nor must you be troubled or discouraged, because you cannot instantly, or when
you would, raise in your selves such passionate longings after Christ's
appearing. Love is a thing that grows, and, as I may say, steals upon us by
degrees; and the passion we feel, at certain seasons, disposes us by little and
little to be perfectly in love with that Good, which is set before us. A Good
so great and so desirable, that we do not follow our own best inclinations, if
we use not our utmost endeavors to be so happy, as to behold that admirable
Countenance (to speak in the language of St. Chrysostom) of our blessed Savior
the King of Glory. For if (says he Homil. penult. in S. Johan. p. 925.
) when we read the story of his life, death and resurrection, we are so
inflamed, that our hearts burn within us, and we wish we had lived in those
days when he was conversant on earth, that we might have heard his voice, and
seen his face, and kept his company, and touched him, and ministered unto him:
think with your selves what it will be to see him, not any longer in a mortal
body, nor doing humane things, but attended with the hosts of Angels, when we
also our selves shall be freed from this mortality, and, beholding him, shall
enjoy such felicity as exceeds all expression.

Let us do all we can, I beseech you, that we may not miss of so great a glory.
There is nothing too hard for us, if we have a will to it: nothing too
burdensome, if our mind be not averse from it. For if we suffer, or endure, we
shall also reign with him. And what is it to suffer? If we bear afflictions, if
we endure persecutions, if we walk in the narrow way; which to nature indeed is
laborious, but to them who choose it and have a good will to it, is light and
easy, by the hope of things to come. For our light affliction which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; whilst
we look not at the things which are seen, but at those which are not seen.

Let us lift up our eyes then from these things here, and direct them toward
Heaven; let us imagine always these unseen joys, and look upon them. For if we
be conversant with these things, we shall neither be enticed with the sweet
things of this world, nor sink under the load of those that are grievous to be
born. But we shall laugh these, and all such like, to scorn; and never suffer
any thing either to depress us, or to puff us up: provided we still stretch
forth that desire, and look toward that love. What did I say, that we shall
not feel the evil things of this world to be grievous to us? More than that, we
shall scarce mind them, or think that we see them. For such is the nature of
love, that it makes us imagine we see even those who are absent from us (but
much desired by us) every day with us. (...) for great is the sovereign power,
and, as we speak, the tyranny of love. It neglects all things, and ties the
soul fast to those it loves. And therefore if we thus love Christ Jesus, all
things here will seem but a shadow, but an image, but a dream; and we also
shall say, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

I pray God increase it, and make it abound more and more in all our hearts;
that it may draw continually nearer toward its perfection: and make us
likewise to abound in all the fruits of the spirit; which are the highest
expressions of our love, and the best preparation for the day of Christ's
Appearing. For true Devotion does not terminate in the heart: it goes further,
and has its effect in the life and actions. And especially excites us to love,
or charity toward all mankind, and above all to our Christian Brethren; as
that which bears the greatest resemblance to him whom we love. The Commandment
which St. Paul charges Timothy to keep without spot, till our Lords appearing;
was, for the most part, acts of Charity, as you will find briefly touched in
this Book. And therefore these we should labor to inliven by our Devotion;
which is then truly Great, when it makes us so: and raises our spirits above
all anger and peevishness, covetousness and eager desire of wealth, envy and
vain ambition, evil surmises and jealousies, fretfulness and impatience, with
all those other mean qualities, which are the enemies of Christian Charity.

Some Readers perhaps may think, that I strain Devotion here unto too great an
height; and may be apt, at the entrance, to lay this Book aside, because they
imagine I have expressed that passion of love, which we should endeavor after
toward Christ's appearing, beyond the truth: But I must entreat them, to do me
the right and themselves the kindness, to read on; and they will find in
conclusion, the whole description of it made good by the plain words of the
holy Scriptures.

In the study of which if we did all conscientiously employ our selves, it is
to be hoped God would still preserve to us that inestimable Treasure: which
contains such admirable (...) (as the forenamed Father speaks) Medicines of the
soul; both to cure our diseases, and to comfort and restore our tired or
languishing spirits. For they are that living water our Lord speaks of; which
whosoever drinks, has in himself a Well or Fountain of comfort and perpetual
refreshment, springing up into everlasting life.

xxij. Rev. 20. COME LORD JESUS. St. Chrysostom Tom. vj. p. 709. (...).
IMPRIMATUR

Hic Liber cui titulus The Glorious Epiphany, etc.

Geo. Thorp Reverendissimo in Christo Patri and Dno, Dno Gulielmo Archiep.
Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.
April. 30. 1678.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. COntaining an Introduction to the ensuing Discourse. CHAP. II.
Showing what is meant by the APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ. CHAP. III. A
further Illustration of the APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ. CHAP. IV. The
certainty of this APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ. CHAP. V. Containing the
Use we should make of what has been delivered in the foregoing Chapter. CHAP.
VI. Of the means to excite that LOVE in our hearts, which we ought to have for
Christ's APPEARING. CHAP. VII. Two further steps in this Love of Christ's
Appearing. CHAP. VIII. The Progress of this Love to Christ's Appearing in three
steps more. CHAP. IX. This Love to the Appearing of our Lord further described
in three other fruits or marks of it. CHAP. X. All this shown to be the sense
of the Holy Scriptures. CHAP. XI. Reasons for our Love to this Appearing, drawn
from the respect we ought to have to our Lord himself. CHAP. XII. Other Reasons
why we should love his appearing, drawn from the love we have to our selves.
CHAP. XIII. Two other Reasons why, if we love our selves, we must needs love
this Appearing. CHAP. XIV. Two Reasons more, to induce us to raise our thoughts
and affections to the Appearing of our Lord. CHAP. XV. Three Considerations
more to draw our Affections to the Appearing of our Lord. CHAP. XVI. Of the
mighty power and pleasure of Love, when it is settled in the heart. CHAP. XVII.
Of the means whereby this Love may be settled in our hearts; and the Benefit
thereof. CHAP. XVIII. A continuation of the former Argument, concerning the
mighty power of the Divine Love; and the Benefit we have by loving our Lords
Appearing. CHAP. XIX. More expressions of this devout affection, toward our
Lords Appearing; and the way whereby we may excite them. CHAP. XX. The
Conclusion.
The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians love to it.
CHAP. I. Containing an Introduction to the ensuing Discourse.
WHEN we observe how the desire of life is so deeply fixed in all mankind, both
in old and young, in Kings and Beggars, in Wise men and Fools, that (as
Lactantius L. III. In stit. C. 12.
well notes) they will endure any miseries to preserve and prolong it; we are
led thereby to this Consideration, That the highest and most perfect Good to
which the soul of man aspires, is a life without end, and without those
laborious toils and troubles which attend us here in this present world. We are
naturally formed to wish, that we may be so happy; and find no thought so sad
and dismal as this, of being quite extinct, and never enjoying any more
pleasure after we are laid in our graves.

Upon which account it must be acknowledged that we are infinitely indebted to
the Grace of God, who has made that so sure, which is so desirable; and that
our Blessed Savior justly challenges our most ardent love and cheerful
obedience, whose Religion is nothing else but an acknowledgment of the Truth,
which is after godliness, in hope of eternal life. They are the words of St.
Paul ( Tit. i. 1, 2.) which import that the Gospel is a Doctrine which teaches
us to be pious, and promises to reward our piety with an happy immortality.
This is the glorious hope of Christians; whose Master Christ Jesus ( who is our
Hope, 1. Tim. i. 1.) has brought life and immortality to light; and made that
which was but obscurely delivered in times past, as clear and bright as the Sun
at noonday.

There are so many Witnesses of this, that their Testimonies have filled a
large Volume. The FATHER, the WORD, the HOLY GHOST, have all declared that we
have eternal life, and this life is in our Savior, the Son of God. So say the
WATER also, the BLOOD and the SPIRIT: they all consent in this Truth, That
Jesus is alive from the dead, and lives for evermore; and because he lives, we
shall live also.

Which welcome news filled the hearts of all those who believed it, with
excessive joy, even when they were in heaviness through manifold temptations, 1
Pet. i. 6, 8. And why it should not have the same effect on us, there is no
other reason can be given, but because we do not believe as they did. For they
of whom S. Peter speaks, had never seen our Lord when he was on earth, no more
than we; nor had they any such sight of him, as S. Stephen and S. Paul had,
after he went to Heaven; and yet believing, they rejoiced with joy unspeakable
and full of glory.

All our business therefore is, to settle this belief steadfastly in our minds.
Which will have the greater power upon our hearts, when we consider the
abundant grace of our Lord Jesus Christ toward us, and how excellent the Hope
is which he has given us. For he has not only assured us, that He has all
power in heaven and in earth; and that he will bestow the inestimable gift of
immortality upon us: But that he himself will once more come from heaven to
crown us with it. We know (as I have shown in two former Treatises) that the
Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding to know him that is
true: and This is the true God and Eternal Life, which he has revealed to us.
But besides this first coming to teach us the will of God, to dye for our sins,
and to open to us the Kingdom of Heaven, after He had shown us the way to it;
He has bid us believe there is a Second: When He will come to judge us by those
Laws which he has left his Church, and to put the observers of them into the
possession of that Heavenly Kingdom which He has promised.

And there are none of the Witnesses who testify that He is the King of Glory,
but assure us of this also, that He will appear in that glory to take us up
unto Himself. More especially the HOLY GHOST, who (as Epiphanius (...), etc.
Haeres. LXXIV. n. 10.
admirably speaks) is the only Guide of Truth, the Expounder of holy Laws, the
Inspirer of the Spiritual (or Christian) Law, the Leader of the Prophets, the
Teacher of the Apostles, the Luminary of the Evangelical Doctrines; He made his
Apostles and Evangelists clearly understand this to be our Savior's meaning,
and authorized them to proclaim this comfortable news to all Believers.
Insomuch that S. Paul triumphs in this, when he was ready to be offered for the
service of Christ, and the time of his departure was at hand, that there was
laid up for him a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord (says he) the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them
also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy iv. 6, 7, 8.

In the last part of which words there seems to me to be contained so much of
the Christian Hope, that they deserve to be explained with the same care and
labor that I have bestowed upon the RECORD which the Father, the Son, the
Holy Ghost, and all the other Witnesses have left us, to testify that Jesus is
the Son of God, and that in Him we have Eternal Life. For as it transports all
true Believers with joy, to read of a Crown of Life, a Crown of Glory, a Crown
of Righteousness, which is laid up safe with our Lord in his Heavenly
Sanctuary, as He himself and his Apostles in this and other places, confidently
assure us: So it very much raises and increases that joyful Hope, to know from
their own mouths, that He who has received and keeps it safely, will
condescend so much as to appear again one day, to confer the very same felicity
upon us, which He has obtained himself; who is crowned with glory and honor.

Next to the belief of the truth of this report, there is nothing we are so
much concerned to know, as who the persons are that shall wear this Crown, and
have their heads eternally honored with it. Piety it self, indeed, is very apt
to persuade those in whom it lives, that the unfeigned practice of it, shall
meet at last with some considerable recompense: But that it shall receive such
a Royal, such a magnificent Reward, as deserves the name of a Crown of Eternal
Glory, is a thing which that great Modesty and Humility (which is essential to
true Piety, and its highest Ornament and Crown) forbids us to be too forward to
conclude. A Person perhaps of such eminence and luster as S. Paul (one of the
Stars of the first Magnitude in our Savior's right hand) may be advanced
hereafter to shine in such Majesty: But that we dull heavy souls should be
thought worthy of the like favor, none but a man so divinely illuminated, as
He was by the power of the HOLY GHOST, is sufficient to secure us.

And, blessed be God, we do not want such a Divine Testimony. For after this
great Apostle had related what a course he had run, what agonies he had
sustained, with what difficulties he had wrestled in the service of his blessed
Master Jesus; and that he nothing doubted but He would remember him at his
coming again, and confer the honor on him which was laid up in Heaven for such
victorious souls: He encourages all other Christians to comfort themselves with
the same expectations, and not imagine they should lose the Crown (though they
came far behind him in the holy race) if they did but LOVE THE APPEARING (...)
Epiph. Haeres. LIVE. n 5.
of Christ Jesus.

That Is the particular Mark and Character which he gives of the persons to whom
this honor shall be done. For the understanding of which, and that we may the
better comprehend both the happiness it self, and that pious affection we ought
to have for it (which is the principal drift of this Discourse), we are to make
an enquiry into these three things.

First, What may be conceived to be the meaning of this APPEARING of our Lord.

Secondly, What certainty there is of it. And,

Thirdly, What the LOVE is which they should bear to it, who hope to enjoy the
blessings of it.

CHAP. II. Showing what is meant by the APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is not hard to give an account of the first of these, if we carefully
observe and examine the Words whereby the Holy Books express it: And there are
Three of them; every one of which signify, that our Blessed Lord (who now
reigns in unseen Glory) will once more appear visibly to all Mankind.

1. The first is (...), which we render only his Coming; but it is a different
word from that in our Creed, and in its proper signification denotes his
presenting himself to us, after he has been thus long absent from us. In the
Creed we profess to believe that He is ascended into Heaven (...) from whence
he shall come, etc. But that we may know what kind of Coming we are to expect
(and not imagine it is merely by an invisible power, as he came to destroy
Jerusalem), we are to mind how the Apostles speak of it as a (...); and teach
us to understand that word in the strictest sense, concerning his personal
appearance to us. Thus St. Paul discourses to the Corinthians, 1. xv. 23.
(where we first meet with this word in the Apostolical Writings) that every man
shall arise from the dead, but in due order; Christ the first fruits; and then
they that are Christ's, at his coming: in person that is, as the King and the
Judge of the World. For so he presently after directs us to expound the word
(xvj. 17.) when he declares the joy he had by the (...) coming of Stephanas,
Fortunatus and Achaicus, who (as Theodoret there notes) were the persons that
brought the Letter to him from the Church of Corinth. In such a manner he
believed Christ would come; and that he and those Christians he had converted,
appearing before him, it would prove the greatest joy and honor to him, to be
able to present to that great King, such a number of persons who had been
persuaded by his Ministry to become his Subjects, 1 These. ij. 19. In short,
this is the word that is used in most other places, where we read of the Coming
of Christ. And presently after that last named (iij. 13.) he tells us, He will
come attended with all his Saints; and therefore will personally appear, and
show himself in that Royal Majesty wherein He now reigns.

2. Thus the second Word still more fully informs us, which is (...), the
REVELATION of Jesus Christ: or his discovering himself again to the World, by
coming out of that high and holy place where He now lives, but is not seen. So
Theophylact expounds the word both upon 1 Cor. i. 7. and 2 Thessalonians. i. 7. where
he says, the Apostle calls the coming of Christ, by the name of his Revelation,
to denote that though He be now with us, yet He is hid, and then shall be
openly discovered. Which he borrows from S. Chrysostom, whose words In 1 Cor.
i. 7.
are these; The Apostle indicates, that though He be not seen, yet He is, and
is present even now; and then will appear, or show himself visibly to the
world. Oecumenius also writes to the same effect; and we may still further
establish this Truth, by considering another word of the same import with this
(and therefore I shall not mention it distinctly by it self) very much used by
St. John, who exhorts his Disciples to abide in Christ, that when (...) He
shall be made manifest, (or be shown to the world) we may not be ashamed before
him at his coming, 1 John ii. 28. So we translate the word in other places
(though here it be rendered only appear), i. Joh. 31. iij. 21. especially in
that remarkable place xxj. Joh. 1. where we read how he showed himself to them
at the Sea of Tiberias, and that this ( v. 14.) was the third time that He
showed or made himself manifest to them, after that He was risen from the dead.
In the very same visible manner will He once more appear; and be as really
manifested to raise us from the dead, and to give us life, as He was manifested
in the flesh at first (1 Timothy iij. 16), and again showed himself after his
Crucifixion, to be alive from the dead. For though our Life be now hid with
Christ in God; yet when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, or be
manifested, then shall we also appear with him in glory, iij. Col. 4. Upon
which words Theophylact has this pertinent gloss, At his second coming Christ
shall be openly manifested, and showed to all as God; though now he be so hid,
that it is the thing which is objected against him, and a pretense for men's
unbelief. And to the same purpose Theodoret bids us note, how exceeding
appositely (...), etc.
the Apostle speaks, when he says, Christ will then be manifested; who now is
not seen by Christians, nor so much as known by Infidels. But then will let no
man remain ignorant of him; because every eye shall see him, and all men be
forced to confess that He is the Lord of all.

3. For, lastly, to make this still more evident, it is called here (in the
words I have undertaken to explain) and in many other places, his (...)
APPEARING, in so clear and illustrious a manner, that St. Paul bids us look for
it as that blessed Hope of Christian people, far more splendid than any thing
that has yet been manifested. For it is the glorious Appearing, or the
appearing of the glory of the great God and our Savior, ij. Tit. 13.

Which Epithete is to be carefully observed, because it distinguishes this
Appearing from a former; and teaches us how we are to conceive of it. For every
body knows (who has any skill in these things) that there is, at least, a
double Appearing of Christ spoken of in the Holy Writings. One past, when he
came and sensibly appeared, and was manifested in mortal flesh, for these two
ends, to preach the Gospel, and to dye for our sins. Let the Reader consult the
1 Timothy i. 10. and ix. Hebr. 26. This is called the Appearing of Gods Grace (ij.
Tit. 11.) which was so manifested at this time, that it eclipsed all former
discoveries that had been made of it.

The other is yet to come; when the same Lord will as sensibly appear to reward
men according to the entertainment they have given his Gospel, and show himself
as a Royal Priest, who has so perfectly expiated our sins, and conquered all
our Enemies, that He has nothing then to do, but to give complete Salvation to
his Servants. So you read ix. Hebr. 28. that to them who expect him, He will
appear the second time ((...) make himself be seen, appear visibly) without
sin, unto salvation. As in the former coming He was seen in our flesh, but
appeared like a mean person, in the form of a servant: So in this He will
personally appear in our Nature; but in greater splendor, in the form of a
Prince; even as the Lord of all the World. And therefore in the first verse of
this Chapter (2 Timothy iv. 1.) his KINGDOM and his APPEARING, are both put
together, as things Contemporary: And as before, there was an Appearance of his
Grace; so hereafter he is said to appear in his Glory, iij. Col. 4.

To these two Appearings some add a Third, in the middle between them; and that
was His appearing to destroy Jerusalem; and therewith the Persecutors of his
Disciples: to whom, at that time, it must be acknowledged, He gave a mighty
Salvation, or Deliverance. And the very Truth is, then He is said in the Gospel
to come, xxj. Joh. 22. What if I will that he tarry (...) till I come? And i.
Revel. 7. (...) Behold he comes. Nay, in a looser sense of the Word, that time
is called by S. Matthew his (...) xxiv. 27, 37, 39. And by S. Luke the Kingdom
of God, xxj. 31. (because then He did exercise one part of his Royal Power in
punishing offenders) But I do not find that in any place it is called the
Revelation, or the Appearing of the Lord Jesus. For He did not appear in person
when he came to destroy Jerusalem, as He did at his first coming, and will at
his next; but only virtually, in such a desolation, as made it apparent that
His mighty Power was the Author of it.

There are two places I know alleged by a Great Man, which he thinks sound
this way, 1 Pet. i. 7. and 1 Timothy vj. 14. But it is far more agreeable to the
coherence of those places, to expound them of the Appearing we still expect. Of
which, we may look upon his coming to destroy his Crucifiers, and save his
Servants, as an Emblem and as a Pledge. For it demonstrated both the Power of
our Lord Jesus, and his Faithfulness to his word: assuring us, that He will one
day crown the patience and constancy of all his Friends with Eternal Life, and
punish the insolence of his Enemies with everlasting Fire.

However, it is past all doubt, that in this place I am treating of, the
Apostle speaks of the last and greatest appearing of our Savior, to finish the
work of our Redemption, and bestow the Crown of Righteousness, which is laid up
in Heaven for all that love him. Which part of our Christian Faith, I have
shown, is to be understood in this manner: That our Lord will in person present
himself once more to the World, and be seen at the last day to be what he is,
the King of Angels and Men, and all Creatures. For as at his first coming into
the World He appeared in our likeness (which the Ancients called his Epiphany,
a name that still sticks to the last day of the Feast of his Nativity) and as
He appeared in the same likeness when He rose from the dead; and in that form
and nature of a man went up into Heaven, and still keeps it there, as several
have seen since his Ascension: so he will in like manner appear in the end of
the world; only in greater Majesty and Glory as becomes Him who is over all,
God blessed for ever, Amen, ix. Romans 5.

CHAP. III. A further Illustration of the APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THERE is nothing to be added to what has been said, but only this: That the
word Epiphany or APPEARING denotes not merely the presenting of himself in
Person to the view of all the World; but the whole SHOW (as we call it) that
will accompany his coming from Heaven, and all the things that shall be done by
him, as the Lord and Judge of the World. He sits now on the Throne of his
Glory, and there shines in the splendour of the Divine Majesty; and in that
Majesty will one day descend from thence into this Air: which the King of
Heaven will never suffer his Son to do, without a most Royal and Glorious
Attendance; suitable to the quality of his Person, and to the dignity of his
Office, which is to judge the quick and the dead.

This illustrious SHOW is described by our Apostle in the 1 These. iv. 16. where
he tells us that first of all, He shall descend from Heaven, (...), with a
SHOVT. That is, with great Acclamations, such as use to be made when a mighty
Conqueror appears and rides in Triumph. Thus we learn to understand it from
xlvij. Psalm. 5. where God is said to be gone up with a SHOVT, the Lord with the
sound of a Trumpet. That is, the Ark (which was the token of Gods Presence
among them) returned to Mount Sion, with great and joyful Ovations of all the
people, after the conquest they got by the Divine aid over their powerful
enemies. In such a manner will our Savior descend, as being about to complete
his Victories by conquering Death it self, the last enemy that shall be
destroyed. For all the Heavenly Hosts, we may well conceive, will be
wonderfully pleased to see him go forth upon this design; and calling upon each
other to perform to him the most cheerful service upon that great day, will
rejoice to wait upon him in that most glorious Action, and triumph beforehand
in the assured Victory which he will get over Hell and the Grave.

2. For then, says the Apostle, will be heard the voice of the Archangel; that
is, one of the chief Leaders and Commanders of the Celestial Hosts (MICHAEL, I
suppose, the Protector of the Christian Church) shall march before his Majesty:
calling aloud to all the rest of that Heavenly company to follow after in their
order.

3. And then will the Trump of God sound; which the Apostle adds to signify,
after the manner of men, the powerful summons which will be issued forth to
alarm all the World to attend at this great solemnity. For the gathering of the
Congregation of Israel together was by the sound of a Trumpet, as we find among
other places, in iv. Jer. 5. Blow ye the Trumpet in the land; cry, gather
together, and say Assemble your selves. To which the Apostle seems to allude,
and calls it the Trump of GOD, to distinguish it from all other; and to express
such a mighty and penetrating sound as shall be heard every where: Such an one
as is fit to precede none but GOD the Father Almighty himself, or Him that
holds his place, his only begotten Son, when he comes to judge the World. In
short, this seems to be an expression borrowed from the appearance of God at
Mount So Thenphylact and other Greek Interpreters.
Sinai; whither all Israel being to be gathered together, they were summoned
thither by Thunders and Lightnings and a thick cloud, and the voice of the
trumpet exceeding loud, which made all the people tremble, xix. Exodus 16. So
that the meaning of the Apostle is, that our Lord shall come as the Great King
of the World in a most venerable Majesty; which shall make all Mankind stand in
awe of him, and tremble before him, as the Israelites did at the Appearance of
the Divine Majesty on Mount Sinai. And a great deal more. For,

4. When he appears, it will be, as I have intimated already, with innumerable
glittering troops of Angels (all clothed in very bright and shining Clouds) as
his Guard or Retinue to attend upon him. So we are informed in several other
places: For the Son of Man (says our Lord himself, xvj. Mat. 27.) shall come
in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall reward every man
according to his works. Which Saint Luke expresses thus more fully, ix. Luke
26. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of
Man be ashamed, when He shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and
of the holy Angels. Some of which glorious Creatures appeared to the Apostles
and told them as much, when they stood gazing after our Savior, as He ascended
up into Heaven, i. Act. 11. This same Jesus, say they, which is taken up from
you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into
Heaven. Now he went thither in a most illustrious manner, in the bright Clouds
of Heaven, attended by the Celestial Ministers; who came to conduct him into
his Glory. For that is the meaning (it were easy to show if this place were
proper for it) of those words a little before, ver. 9. He was taken (or lifted)
up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

In brief, He will appear as the Lord of Hosts; i.e. of all the Armies of
Heaven, whether Archangels, or Angels, Thrones, or Dominions, or Powers, or
whatsoever other name there is whereby they are called.

5. And then making the Air his Camp, where he will pitch his Royal Pavilion, a
great White, i.e. most Royal and shining Throne will be set for Him, ( Revel.
xx. 11.) and lesser Seats, it is likely, for all those whom He intends to
honor at that great day, 1 Cor. vj. 2, 3.

6. After which He will send forth his voice, his mighty voice, or most
powerful and irresistible word of Command; the efficacy of which will be such
that it will raise the dead out of their graves, and bring them before his
Throne, or Judgment Seat. So He himself tells us in v. Joh. 28, 29. The hour is
coming in which ALL that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. Of which Authority and Power
of his, He tells them ( ver. 25.) they should shortly have a proof: which was
at the Resurrection of Lazarus, when He did but say with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth, xj. Joh. 43. and immediately he that was dead (as it there follows,
v. 44.) came forth, though bound hand and foot with grave-clothes.

In as easy a manner will He at the last day raise up all mankind; who being
then gathered before him, and standing at his Tribunal, shall be judged and
sentenced by him, to receive every one according as their works have been, Rev.
xx. 12, 13. 2 Cor. v. 10.

Some indeed shall rise before others, (as St. Paul informs us in that 1 These.
iv. 16.) but such shall be the conclusion of this Glorious Appearance; which as
far as the Holy Scriptures (our only guide in those matters) would direct me, I
have briefly explained. For after he has taken an exact survey of men's
actions, and made a just distinction of their persons, in such sort as he
himself has told us, Math. xxv. 31, 32, 33, etc. (where all belonging to this
judgment is summed up) he will crown the fidelity of his obedient Disciples:
and returning back from the Air (whither they will be caught up in glorious
Clouds to meet him) he will carry them along with him to his Heavenly Palace;
And so, says the Apostle, shall we be ever with the Lord, 1 These. iv. 17.

And who is there now that would not wish to behold him come in this Royal
Majesty; and put such an happy end to all our labors and troubles here? What
soul is there that can forbear to love and earnestly desire this glorious
sight, if it hope to reap advantage by it? This is that on which all good
Christians should set their hearts. This they should wait and long for, as the
most lovely spectacle, that can bless their eyes, whenever it shall please
God to let it appear. They may be tempted rather to be impatient, because it is
so long deferred; than to be cold in their affection toward it, or indifferent
whether it come or no. Nothing can hinder it from raising the most ardent
desires to enjoy it, unless any doubt creep into our hearts, whether there will
be such a time as I have described. That distrust indeed, if we have any, must
first be removed. We ought to look after a good assurance of the certainty of
that, which we make the object of our love, and most passionate expectations.

For if we expect a SHOW, that is only painted in our own fancies, in curious
colors, but has no real existence any where else, what an amazing
disappointment will it be to find we have set our hearts on that which is not,
and have embraced a Cloud instead of God? How miserable should we feel our
selves, if at last we perceived that we had pressed a dream, and with long
outstretched arms (as I may speak) most ardently claspt about a shadow? Into
what a gulf of shame should we tumble, if we saw in the conclusion and issue
of things, the whole weight of our souls and most hearty affections fall upon
the thin air, and have nothing to support them? Nothing can express the
confusion it would throw us into, to find that we had courted, so many years or
ages perhaps, a mere vision of our own hearts; and let our affection loose to
wander in the paradise of fools.

That we may be out of fear therefore of any such disappointment; and have our
affections powerfully excited toward so great a good, and be engaged most
earnestly to pursue it; I shall proceed to the second part of this Discourse,
which is to show the grounds we have to expect the APPEARING of the Lord Jesus
the second time unto our eternal Salvation.

CHAP. IV. The certainty of this APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ.
TO prove that there will certainly be such an APPEARING of our Lord, as will
surpass even the Glory wherein the Apostles saw him on the Holy Mount (which
St. Luke plainly shows was a figure of it, ix. Luke 26, 27, 28.) I might
allege all those Arguments which assure us there will be a day wherein God
will judge the World in righteousness; and that the Lord Jesus is ordained to
be the Person by whom he will judge it. Which is as much as to say, that all
those Arguments which prove him to be the Son of God, might be employed to this
purpose; for in that Name is included (as I have shown in former Treatises) His
power and authority to be the Judge of the World. This the Father, the Word,
the Holy Ghost, and the other WITNESSES on Earth, as well as those in Heaven,
testify to be an undoubted Truth; and therefore I might from every one of
their mouths demonstrate, that He shall appear again in such a manner as I have
described. For all Judges, much more the supreme Judge of all, ever ascend
their Tribunals in Robes of State, and royally attended; as those that
represent the Majesty for whom they judge.

But it would be too tedious to follow that Method, and it is not needful I
should lead you so far about to bring you and this Truth together. There is one
place in the writings of the Apostle St. Paul, which if well expounded and
understood, will be sufficient to persuade us, we do not abuse our selves with
vain expectations of this Appearing. And therefore with the explication of that
(which contains diverse Arguments to establish us in this belief) I shall
content my self, without having recourse to every one of those WITNESSES. And I
shall the rather confine my self to it, because I shall illustrate a very
considerable portion of Gods Holy Book (which upon all occasions we ought to
design to make perspicuous) while I endeavor to give satisfactory reasons,
that our Lord Jesus will appear again, and in so glorious a manner as has been
related.

It is in his former Epistle to this very Person, his beloved Son Timothy,
Chap. vj. where he charges him ( v. 13, 14.) to keep the Commandment he had
given him without the least violation of it, until the APPEARING of our Lord
Jesus Christ. That is, till his coming from Heaven, with all the glorious train
of Angels to recompense men according to their works. Now that Timothy might be
fully persuaded there would be such a blessed time, and to be more ready and
cheerful in his obedience to this exhortation, the Apostle assures him that
this is no such spectacle as is formed merely in the imagination: but which God
the Possessor of Heaven and Earth will really exhibit in his time. So the words
are ( v. 15, 16.) Which (Appearing) in his times He shall show, who is the
blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: who only has
Immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom no man
has seen nor can see.

Where we are first to observe well those words which begin this description of
Him who will show our Lord Christ in such excellent Glory, (...), in his times
(we render it), or rather in the proper seasons for it. That is, in the time or
season which God in his unsearchable Wisdom has appointed. From which phrase
three things offer themselves to our consideration.

First, That the time, indeed, of this APPEARING is not revealed and made known
to us. We must be content to be ignorant of it; for it is kept as a secret in
his own breast, and it becomes not us to determine the season which he has
reserved to himself. Some great men, it is true, have adventured upon it; and
Saint Hilary, Canon xvij. in Matthew.
for instance, has delivered his opinion, that the Transfiguration of our
Lord, Six days after he had spoken of his coming in his Kingdom (xvij. Mat. 1.)
prefigured the Honor of the Celestial Kingdom, (as his words are) after the
World had continued six thousand years. But this and the current fancy among
many in ancient times, that because the World was six days in making it should
last just six thousand years, had no better foundation than those misapplied
words of St. Peter 2. iij. 8. That one day with the Lord is as a thousand
years. And therefore it is deservedly censured by St. Augustine (upon xc. Psalm.
4.) as a presumption reprehended by our Lord himself, when he told his
Apostles, (i. Act. 7.) It is not for you to know the times or the seasons,
which the Father has put in his own power. And yet there have been those who
would needs be meddling and conclude this from no better reason than the
Translation of Enoch, who was the seventh from Adam. And there is one of great
note in these later times (to name no more) who has been so bold as from a
slighter ground to conjecture the time of the Coming of our Lord. Who having
said in iv. Luke 19. that according to Isaiah's Prophecy he was come to preach
the acceptable year of the Lord, or to proclaim a Jubilee to the World, Cusanus
thence concluded that for every year of our Saviors life, the Church should
continue a Jubilee, that is fifty years. And therefore he rising again in the
34th. year of his Age, the Church should have its blessed Resurrection when the
34th. Jubilee was past: That is, after the year 1700. before the year 1734.
which he endeavors to make more probable from the similitude of the flood,
which our Savior, he observes, uses when he speaks of his coming: Fancying
that as from the first Adam to the destruction of the World by water, there
passed according to Philo just 34. Jubilees; so there shall be the like number
of years from the second Adam to the consumption of it by fire. There are
several other little fancies whereby he studies to strengthen this conceit: But
I shall not mention them, because as St. Austin has rightly pronounced again
in another place, Epist. LXXVIII.
from that saying of our Savior before mentioned, it is better to confess our
Ignorance, than to profess a false knowledge. And this we have reason to think
is no better, because such supputations of the times, as he speaks, that we may
know when will be the end of the World, and the coming of the Lord, seem to be
nothing else but a desire to know that which he himself has said, the Father
has reserved only to himself. Which words our Savior did not speak, because
he was ignorant of the time about which the Apostles enquired, but (as
Oecumenius well notes) because it would contribute nothing to their salvation
to be acquainted with it. And it is the office of an excellent Master to teach,
(...), etc. not what the Scholars desire, but what it is profitable for them to
learn. This was the only reason he denied to satisfy them; for he himself knew
very well the times and seasons, as the same Writer adds, because, All that the
Father has is the Sons also. Now,

We are to consider (in the second place) that God the Father has determined
and set down a time for this appearing of his Son Jesus, though he has not
thought fit to have us acquainted with it. It is not the less certain, because
he has not revealed when it will be; since he has fore-appointed in his own
secret counsel, a season proper for this business. This ought to give no small
strength to our Faith and Hope; for we are wont always to make the surer
account of a thing, and look for it the more confidently; when we know there is
a time limited and prefixed for its performance.

The Apostle indeed supposes (which is the third thing) that many Ages might
pass before this appointed time arrived; but yet it will not fail to come at
last. The Phrase being in the Plural number (...), times.
, seems naturally to denote a long time hence. And if we observe the use of the
very same phrase in another place of this Epistle, Chap. ij. v. 6. (where he
says our Savior gave himself a ransom for all; a testimony (...), in due
season, as we there translate it) we cannot well allow it any other meaning in
this. For there it signifies that our Lord at last did give a most memorable
testimony of the exceeding great Grace of God, though several Ages were passed
by (since the first promise made of his coming) before he appeared in flesh to
die for us: And therefore here in all reason it must be conceived to denote the
revolution of several Ages more, from that first coming of his till the second
Appearing in astonishing Glory; as Oecumenius justly calls it.

How many Ages we cannot tell; and some of those who thought heretofore they
could tell, committed so gross an error in their account, that it has taught
posterity to be more cautious in determining any thing about it. They I mean
who fancied the World should continue just six thousand years, following the
Computation of the Greek Translators of the Bible, brought this period to an
end many Ages ago. Lactantius for instance tells us (and it is above thirteen
hundred years since he died) that post breve tempus L. VII. Divin. Instit. C.
14.
, after a short time they expected the conclusion of all things. And although
they varied in their account, and could not agree in the exact sum of the
years that were still to come, yet Omnis expectatio non amplius, quam
ducentorum videtur annorum Ib. Cap. 25.
, in this they seemed all to consent that they would not exceed two hundred
years. But St. Ambrose lived to confute these conjectures; and says that
according to his reckoning this period of six thousand years was out in his
days. And should we follow the Computation of the Hebrews, perhaps we should
not come nearer to the mark if we still depended on such expectations: but
after these six thousand years are indeed expired, there may be a great number
for any thing we know still to come before the end of all things. Which
notwithstanding should be no discouragement to us, as long as it is sure and
certain He will come: the time being set, and He who has prefixed it being so
qualified, that no doubt He will show our Savior in all his Glory, (...)
Theophylact. and Oecumenius.
, in the most convenient and peculiar season, which is set apart and destined
for it. For as there was a fullness of time (iv. Gal. 4.) when it was resolved
our Savior should first appear, after they had waited many Ages for him: so
there is no doubt the like time set for his last appearing, and the
consummation of all things; though it may be long before it be fulfilled. He
who so faithfully performed His promise of the one, will never fail us in the
other; because He remains the same Almighty and Unchangeable Lord and Governor
of all things; whose will none can resist, and whose purpose none can frustrate
or divert, but it shall certainly (...), (as St. Chrysostom expounds it) in
due season take effect.

And that is the chief thing I intend here to note; the description of the
Person, who will exhibit and show Christ Jesus again to the World in the most
magnificent Glory; viz. God the Father Almighty. Six of whose Attributes or
Properties are here mentioned by the Apostle to confirm this Faith in Timothy,
and to work it in us; that He will not fail in his times to bring our Savior
again out of his holy place, and make Him appear in such a manner as they
preached.

The grounds of their preaching it was that (first of all) our Savior had made
them a solemn promise before He left them, that He would return and take them
up to the same place whither He was going, xiv. Joh. 2, 3. I go to prepare a
place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also. And (2.) the
Holy Angels likewise had added their Testimony since He went to Heaven, to the
truth of this promise. For as they were looking after Him when they saw Him
ascend, two of them stood by them and said, This same Jesus which you saw taken
up into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him going into
Heaven, i. Act. 11. And (3.) after this the Holy Ghost came, which was the
fulfilling of a promise something like to this, xvi. Joh. 16. A little while
and ye shall see me, and again a little while and ye shall not see me, because
I go to my Father. This was the Deputy of our Savior (as Tertullian speaks)
and the testimony of his Presence; by whom he visited them, and came again to
see them ( v. 22.) according to his word: And the other promises they concluded
would be as certainly made good as this was. But (lastly) St. Paul had a
greater reason still to preach this, because he had received an express warrant
and command from our Lord Christ himself, since He went to the Throne of his
Glory, to declare that He would come again in all that pomp and royal Majesty
which the Apostle describes in 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16, 17. For what he there delivers
about this matter, He assures the Thessalonians was (...), by the word of the
Lord. Other things (as Theophylact notes) he spoke by the Holy Ghost, but this
he learnt from Christ Himself, and heard from his own mouth. Either when our
Lord first appeared to him and gave him a Commission to preach what he had
seen; or at some other time when He further appeared unto him, (xxvi. Act. 16,
17, etc.) or else, as Oecumenius (...), etc.
conjectures, when he was caught up into the third Heavens, and into Paradise;
where he heard many things which he was not permitted, or could not utter;
though thus far he was able to inform us, that the glory wherein our Lord
reigned would one day be visibly revealed.

Now see upon what solid reasons and sure foundations the Apostle persuades
Timothy to believe that God the Father will perform this promise of our Lord
and Savior; whom it is apparent He sent, and has therefore highly exalted,
because he never said nor did any thing but what He commanded Him.

I. First, He tells him that there will no doubt be such a glorious appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ, because He who will show him in his splendour is
(...), The BLESSED One. As much as to say, so full a Good, that He wants
nothing at all to complete and perfect his Happiness. And therefore (1.) cannot
be tempted out of any envy (with which none but penurious beings are capable to
be infected) to deny us this exceeding great favor. But rather (2.) will be
moved by his plenitude and his bountiful nature to communicate it to us,
according to our Saviors promise. Especially (3.) since He has already
advanced him to the highest bliss and happiness; and can so easily without any
damage to himself, make all others blessed, who are faithful to him. And (4.)
is unchangeable also (which Theodoret (...), etc.
thinks is included in this word) both in his nature and in his purpose;
because being most blessed in himself, He cannot alter for any thing that is
better.

They that have but a little may be loath to give; and they who have any defect
may be unwilling that any should approach too nigh their Greatness: For wanting
something themselves they may be best pleased when they see that others do so
too; and they may find that convenience in breaking, which they could not have
done in keeping their word. But He that wants nothing, nor is liable to any
diminution of what he has (being in full perfect possession of all happiness,
pleasure and bliss) can never be unwilling to impart good things to others; nor
desirous they should be less happy, than their natures are capable to be; nor
tempted to go back with his word, when he has engaged himself to do them good.
No, rather quite contrary; He takes a pleasure in filling others out of his
exuberant goodness, and cannot be inclined to be more forward to make very
gracious Promises than he is to make them good to those who patiently expect
the performance.

Thus we cannot but believe when we reflect upon his Blessedness. Especially
when we consider withal that he is (...), (which is the second thing.)

II. The only POTENTATE. This signifies His absolute Power, as the other did
his good will, to make such a public show of Jesus Christ, attended with the
pomp of all the Heavenly Host, to judge the World. Which power of his, is
denoted by that word [only] to be independent, originally inherent in himself,
and not derived from any other: for which cause there can be no defect in it,
nor can it ever grow less than it is.

There are several other Potentates, it is true, both in Heaven and in Earth;
but whatsoever power, might, or authority there is in them, it is derived
entirely from him, as the source and fountain of it. They have nothing but what
springs out of him, and holds of him; who the Apostle therefore pronounces has
the Empire or supreme Authority over the World alone to himself; because
whatsoever others have, it is not natural but arbitrary and at pleasure; his
essential and of himself. It has no higher cause, and therefore is inseparable
from him; and can never be either wholly destroyed, or in the least impaired
and weakened. No, He continues always as He ever was, the Rock of our strength,
and of our Salvation: (as the Psalmist speaks, lxij. Psalm.) on whom our Souls
may build a most sure hope; which stands on such a bottom as no power
whatsoever can shake. For He being so very great, so absolute a Potentate,
there wants nothing but his own will to the effecting any thing (even so great
a thing as this, the appearing of Jesus Christ), and of that we are secured by
the foregoing consideration, that He is the BLESSED.

III. To which the Apostle further adds that He is KING of KINGS, and LORD of
LORDS; whereby we are to understand the Dominion, which by His supreme Power
and Authority He exercises over the whole World, over Angels of highest degree,
and Men of greatest rank, as well as over other inferior Creatures. They are
all so much below him, and so perfectly subject to his pleasure, that the
strongest and most mighty opposers that can be imagined, have no power to do
any thing to hinder this glorious appearance. A force like that of the Persian,
Assyrian, and Egyptian Kings, (who were all wont to speak in this lofty style)
is not so considerable to him as so many flies would be to them: No, nor if we
should suppose a power that could claim a just title to the Government of the
Universe; would it be able to withstand the will of Him to whom alone this
great Name of KING of KINGS does properly appertain. Nay more than this, should
all the Hosts of Heaven combine together in a confederacy to join with all the
forces on Earth, assembled in one body under their several Princes and
Chieftains, they could not by all their resistance defeat his Decree which he
has passed for the Coming of our Lord.

And yet we are not to make any such supposal, because they all obey his
Commandment, and are obedient to the voice of his Word. And as for those
Creatures (be they never such Principalities and Powers in high places, vi.
Ephesians. 12.) which will not now obey Him, they shall not be able at that time to
gainsay his Sovereign will: But they shall attend, whether they will or no,
upon this Royal Person, Christ Jesus. The good Angels, those Celestial Lords,
(whether Thrones or Dominions, or whatever other name of authority there is
above) and all inferior Governors, the Gods upon Earth, (Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and Judges of the World) together with those evil Angels who are
called the Rulers of the darkness of this World; they shall all appear either
with or before our Savior; according as the GREAT KING shall appoint, who has
promised to show him; for He is the supreme Lord and Ruler of them all.

IV. And such a supereminent King (as the Apostle goes on) is He who ONLY HAS
IMMORTALITY: that is, lives for ever to make good what he has promised, which
cannot be said of any but of himself. Earthly Kings are as weak and mortal as
their subjects: And so all their promises (though they intend never so
seriously to perform them, and have power for the present to do it) may fail
and come to naught, because they themselves may fail and return unto their
dust. And in that very day, says the Psalm. cxlvi. 4. their thoughts perish;
that is, all their designs, counsels and purposes, with all the promises and
great hopes that depend upon them, die together with those that made them. But
that Great King, the Lord of Lords, who has immortality, and who only has it;
that is, of Himself, and not from any ones gift and favor (being the Lord as I
said of Angels as well as of our spirits, which (...), etc. have not
Immortality, but partake of it, by the grace of Him who alone by nature is
immortal Theophylact and Oecumenius.
) He I say may be confided in and relied upon: Because, He neither wanting
power, nor being subject to death or alteration, none of his counsels and
purposes can be defeated. No promise of His can fall to the ground in process
of time; because He lives then in all succeeding Ages, as much as He did at
that moment when He passed it.

And besides this, it is very considerable, that having immortality of Himself,
(which the Apostle means as I noted just now, when he says He only has it) He
can grant this benefit to us, even to our Bodies, as he has done to the
Angels, and to our blessed Lord and Savior. Who says concerning himself, i.
Rev. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, ( i.e. am alive from the dead) and
behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; ( i.e. there is nothing more certain) and
have the keys of hell and of death. Power, that is, to open the graves of
others, and promote them to Immortality with my self.

And there is no reason to fear lest our Savior should not come and appear to
do this; though it may be a great way off, and many Centuries of years have
passed since He gave us his word for it: Because God the Father Almighty, the
blessed and only Potentate, who authorized Him to make this promise, and has
since that raised him from the dead, is immortal, and has an indefectible life
in himself, of his own nature. His will, as I have said, does not alter, and
his power cannot be impaired, or suffer any decay; and therefore He can and
will continue and perpetuate the Kingdom He has given to our blessed Mediator
Christ Jesus; and keep him in full power and authority till that great day: And
when the fullness of time is come, bring Him again upon the stage of the World
(if I may so speak) and show Him openly as the great Lord of all; whom He has
honored already with his own high title of KING OF KINGS, and LORD OF LORDS,
xix. Revel. 16. All this is as easy for Him to do, as it was at first to raise
him out of his grave, and then advance him to the Throne of his Glory; where he
now sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

And there is the greater reason to believe that He will both perpetuate the
Kingdom of Christ to the worlds end, and conclude it with the glorious
exaltation of all his subjects, when he shall appear again; (it being no more
difficult than it was to carry him to heaven) because as the Apostle further
notes:

V. HE DWELLS IN LIGHT INACCESSIBLE; which no man, that is, can enter into, or
approach. This signifies the inconceivable brightness of the Divine Majesty;
both as to His Essence which cannot by us be comprehended; and as to the place
where He more eminently manifests Himself in an amazing splendour. He is the
Great King who lives above in the highest Heavens, as in His Palace; where he
represents Himself in a Glory so shining and dazeling (called in Scripture his
Majesty) that it is not for such as we (till there be a mavelous change
wrought in us) to come nigh it.

Nor is it so beseeming that He should descend Himself from thence in that most
Glorious MAJESTY to judge the World, and to transform all those who shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that better world, and the resurrection from the
dead. And therefore we may be confident our Blessed Savior, who long ago was
ordained to be the person, will, according to his word, come as His
Commissioner to do it in his stead. It is not so agreeable to His state and
greatness (if I may so express it) to come Himself out of His Orb of Light to
fetch us to his house and dewlling place: But since He has appointed a day of
recompenses, we may be sure He will send his Son in the glory of the Father, as
he tells us, ix. Luke 26. (that is, in a Majesty like that I now spoke of) and
in the glory of his holy Angels, (who use to attend him) to meet us and conduct
us safely thither.

Or we may conceive of this expression, after this manner: GOD (the Father,
that is, the Son and the Holy Ghost) is in that high and holy place, the
Sanctuary above; into which no man has yet entered, save only the great
High Priest of our Salvation, the Lord Jesus. And yet GOD has made us a
promise by him, before He went to heaven, that we also shall live with Him, and
be there where He is. From whence we may conclude, that this great High Priest
will certainly come in his Royal Majesty, out of that place into which He is
gone; to bless us, by bringing us to that region of Light and Glory, which He
himself only as yet inherits; and which is not any way accessible, but only by
his means. In whose power, we may be satisfied, it is to promote us thither,
being in such favor with the Divine Majesty, and sitting at His right hand:
who inhabits, or possesses this glorious place, as His own proper Dwelling, and
therefore can dispose of a Mansion in it, to whom He pleases.

VI. And indeed the Apostle bids us remember, (which is the last thing) that no
man has SEEN GOD, nor CAN SEE HIM; is capable, that is, to be in his glorious
presence. Which signifies partly the same with the former; and also may suggest
among other things the faithfulness of Him, who has promised to show us this
Appearing of Christ Jesus; of GOD, that is, the Father Almighty. Who we see
here plainly is the person of whom the Apostle has, all this time, been
speaking (as St. Ambrose and St. Chrysostom also, if his gloss be well
weighed, understand him) not of our Savior: who has been seen already and
shall be seen again at his second appearing. And you know, He has promised to
the pure in heart that they shall SEE GOD, v. Mat. 8. A favor which in this
state no man has enjoyed or can enjoy, as St. Paul here tells us. It is not
for such as we to see God; and therefore there must be a time, when, according
to his faithful promise, Christ Jesus shall appear again; to change us, and put
us in such a condition, that He may bring us to that sight of Him, which no man
in this World can have.

Either we must remain for ever without the sight of Him; (and then God would
not be true, who has said by His Son that we shall see him) or we must be
carried up from hence unto His heavenly Palace; and then our Lord must appear
to fit us for it, and make us capable of such a blessedness, and to transport
us thither.

For how we should otherways be conveyed to a place so much above us, but by
the coming of our Lord, to lift us up, and promote us to it, we cannot
understand: Since this is the way that He has described; and our Lord Jesus is
to have the honor of doing all the good to his faithful servants, which GOD in
his infinite goodness designs to bestow upon them.

This I take to be intimated in these words [Whom no man has seen, nor can
see] which declare still more fully than was said before, the super-eminent
excellence and perfection of the Divine Nature, and the astonishing brightness
of his Majesty. Which, whilst we are here, we cannot reach, or attain any
considerable sight of; and therefore Christ Jesus, who has promised we shall
see Him, will appear again to fit us for conversation with Him.

And indeed, since God has already fulfilled his promise of the first
appearance of His Son; and sent Him, born of a Woman, to bring the glad tidings
of Salvation to us (by which he did, in one sense, make us see God; that is,
understand His Mind, Counsels and Will, i. Joh. 18.): and since another promise
likewise of his coming to destroy his Crucifiers (when every eye, he says,
should see him, i. Rev. 8. that is, his power and glory at Gods right hand,
should be abundantly thereby manifested to the world) is punctually and exactly
made good: What reason have we to doubt of the certainty of his other
appearing, which is still behind; when we shall behold him personally present
with us, to bring us nearer into the very presence of God?

We have the same word passed for it, which they had for the other: he has the
same Will, the same Power, the same Empire and Sovereign Dominion; And
therefore why should we not have the same confidence, and expect it with as
much and full assurance, as Holy men in old times waited for the first
Consolation of Israel, or pious Christians waited for deliverance from their
Adversaries?

There is so little cause that our Faith should think it self less assured than
theirs, that we may rather look for this second appearing of our Lord and
Savior, with much greater confidence than they could do for the first: Because
we have the advantage of seeing all those old Prophecies which foretold his
Manifestation in our flesh, actually fulfilled; and the Lord has shown since
that, how upright He is, and that there is no unrighteousness in Him. We may
depend not only (as the Apostle has here told us) upon His Goodness and
perfect Happiness, upon his Power, upon his absolute Dominion over all
Creatures whatsoever, upon his Immortality, upon his transcendent Glory and
Majesty, and upon his Faithfulness and Truth: but I may add, upon the evident
Demonstrations he has already given in the most remarkable instances, that His
Mercies are sure; and that he keeps Truth for ever, xiii. Acts 34. cxlvi.
Psalm. 6.

For this Blessed and only Potentate, this King of kings, and Lord of lords,
who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto, whom no man has seen or can see, has done great things for us already,
whereof we are glad. He has sent his Son after good men had long expected Him;
He sent Him to do for them more than they expected (1 Cor. ij. 9.); He raised
him up out of his Grave, and made him Lord of all; He has given him power to
raise up us to eternal life (as appears by the gift of the Holy Ghost, which
wrought in his Apostles, and enabled them to raise the dead, and do many other
wonders); His Judgments also have already been made manifest; Revel. vi. 10.
xi. 15. xv. 4.
He has in part avenged the blood of his servants, and the Kingdoms of this
world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. And therefore we
may with a steadfast Faith look for another appearing of our Savior, when he
will come in person to exercise this power himself (wherewith we see he is
invested) so far, as to change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body (which then he will show to the world) according to the
working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself, iii. Phil.
20, 21.

CHAP. V. Containing the Use we should make of what has been delivered in the
foregoing Chapter.
I Cannot think fit to pass on to what I further intend, without some short
Reflection upon so weighty a subject as this of which I have been treating. And
therefore let us here pause a while, and consider how mightily All this should
move us to worship and adore this Blessed Potentate God the Father Almighty; to
acknowledge with the humblest submission, His Supreme Authority; to reverence,
admire, and praise His most glorious Perfections, who has given us such a sure
ground of faith and hope in Him. For so S. Paul here concludes this
incomparable description of him -- to whom be honor and power everlasting.
Amen.

Which is not said to exclude the other two Persons in the holy and undivided
Trinity, from receiving our worship and service (no more than the giving
eternal glory to our Savior in the next Epistle, 2 Timothy iv. 18. and in other
places, takes it away from the Father), but only to remember us of a peculiar
prerogative, which the Holy Scripture always ascribes to the Father Almighty, of
being the Fountain and Beginning of all So Epiphanius observes, that the
Scripture shows (...), etc. Haeres. LXIX. Number. 54. and Nazianz. Orat. xxix. p.
489, etc.
; to whom it properly and peculiarly belongs to show this appearing of Jesus
Christ. And therefore the Apostle invites us, from the consideration of His
most excellent Majesty and absolute Dominion, to acknowledge and confess Him,
to acknowledge and praise Him; First, As worthy of all HONOR, worship,
veneration and service. Because (Secondly) He has all POWER and authority over
us and over all Creatures; an independent uncontrollable Power. And that
(Thirdly) EVERLASTINGLY to be celebrated, not only by us, but by all that shall
come after us to the worlds end. Nay, to be praised and magnified by Saints and
Angels in Heaven to Eternal Ages.

To this we should every one of us, together with the Apostle, most heartily
say AMEN: Let be so. We give our consent unfeignedly to it; and wish from the
bottom of our souls, that all men would honor and submit unto this blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords. What though No man
ever saw him? Nay, what though No man can see Him? Yet Glory, Honor and Power
is to be ascribed to Him, because we see his works of Wonder every where. The
Heavens and the Earth declare the greatness of his glory; and from all things
that we behold, we learn his rich Goodness, his infinite Power, his immortal
Bliss; and that He is such a Potentate, as the greatest Kings and Princes upon
earth, nay the highest Thrones and Principalities in Heaven, ought to worship
and obey with the greatest reverence. And much more is this due from us, poor
and inferior creatures: especially since He has shown Himself so gracious to
us in our Savior (the most excellent demonstration of his blessed Nature and
mighty Love) and has promised He shall appear once more in greater glory than
ever; and has taught us to believe, by all the Notions we have of Him, that He
will never fail to make that promise good.

And as we ought to Honor God the Father of all; so this naturally moves us
(out of a particular obligation) to honor and obey our Lord Jesus Christ, as
the Person whom this Great Majesty will show in wonderful honor and glory at
the great day.

This is the very reason (you must mark) wherewith the Apostle backs his Charge
to Timothy to keep the Commandment he gave him, without spot, unrebukable,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, v. 14. because the blessed and
only Potentate will certainly, in his own time, show the glory wherein He
lives, by his appearing again in Royal Majesty in the sight of all the World.
It concerns us therefore, as well as it did Timothy, to have an exceeding great
regard to this most glorious Person, whom God will so highly honor; and to
take care that we behave our selves so, as to be unreprovable at that day. We
must observe His Commandments, that is, as exactly as we can; and endeavor to
render our selves as a beautiful body, without any spot and blemish; and
thereby be found acceptable in His sight, at His appearing.

And if you would know what Commandments they were which He would have Timothy,
in consideration of this appearing of Christ, and the certainty thereof, to
keep without spot; you need but look back to the eleventh and twelfth verses,
and there you may find them. Follow after righteousness, godliness, faith,
love, patience, meekness: Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal
life, whereunto thou art also called, etc. That is, Shun Covetousness, and all
the vices that issue from it, ever rendering to every man what is his due: Have
God always before thine eyes, and put thy trust and confidence in him; Deceive
no man that relies on thy word; exercise mercy and charity to all; suffer
wrongs rather than do them; and suffer them with a patient humble mind; bridle
anger, repress all Choleric motions; and use such gentleness to others, as
thou would desire thy self in the like cases. And for this end, contend
earnestly for the Christian faith; that is, suffer not thy faith in Christ to
be shaken, much less overthrown by any persecution, pain, or death it self. As
thou have begun to show thy self a good Christian, so continue. Remember thy
Calling and Profession; and resolve to quit all thou have, rather than fall
short of Eternal Life. And this I give thee in charge ( v. 13.) as thou will
answer it before God, who raises even the dead; and before our Lord Jesus
Christ, who constantly professed the truth before Pontius Pilate; that thou
keep these things inviolable, and endeavor to be found pure and holy when
Christ shall appear again: As certainly He will; for we have his word for it,
and God the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords,
etc. is able, and lives for ever to make it good.

These two Uses, you see, the Apostle plainly directs us to make of the
Doctrine here delivered. And there is a Third, which he teaches us in the place
I am now treating of; when he describes all good Christians who keep the faith,
by the Name of those who LOVE this APPEARING of Christ Jesus.

All they who observe the Commandments of our Lord and Savior with seriousness
and care, ought to set their hearts upon this glorious appearing which they
expect; as the most goodly sight, the most blessed spectacle that eyes can
behold. This is the very Character, you see, that St. Paul gives of the
faithful; and so it has ever since been esteemed by all those who understood
our Religion. Which disposes and inclines all those that heartily embrace it,
and live according to it, to have a great affection for that happy day, which
so many pious souls, through so many Ages, have most passionately longed to
see. So Andreas Caesariensis has most excellently expressed the sense of all
right Christians, when he sets this down for the Contents of the last Chapter
of the Revelation (according to the old division Chap. lxxii.
) (...), etc. How the Church, and that Spirit which is in it, wishes for and
desires the glorious appearing of Christ. Which will bring with it so
transcendent a bliss, that they have little faith or little goodness, who do
not only wait for it, but rejoice in hope of it before it come. For when the
Apostle calls this appearing of Christ his Revelation (says an ancient Writer
in Oecumenius In 2 These. i. 7.
) (...), etc. He bids them look for the greatest things, and please themselves
in the very thoughts of his coming, before they receive the recompense of the
reward. For as his appearing will be infinitely affrighting to the wicked, and
they have reason to dread it beforehand; so it will be no less comfortable to
the godly, who ought now to entertain themselves with delightful hopes of it,
and fetch great contentment and consolation from it; because they shall then
see and hear such things as will ravish their hearts with joy unconceivable.

That Is the chiefest thing of all, and which is principally by me intended in
these Papers. Unto which therefore, without any further evidence that might be
produced of the certainty of this appearing, I shall apply my self in the
remaining Third Part of this Discourse.

CHAP. VI. Of the means to excite that LOVE in our hearts, which we ought to
have for Christ's APPEARING.
I Have passed over the other two with the greater speed, because I intend to
take the more pains in this; by endeavoring to show, and to express as lively
as I can, what the LOVE is which we should bear to this Appearing, if we hope
to partake in the comforts of it. And how to do this better, than by describing
the original and progress of this passion, I cannot devise. And therefore I
shall use that Method for the conveying this Appearing of Christ into your
minds under such a notion and character, as shall not fail to stir up in your
heart the devoutest affection for it.

I.
Let it then in the first place be remembered, that there cannot be the least
beginning of this love, unless we look upon the appearing of our Savior as a
GOOD, and that of the greatest size. For else it will be so far from touching
us with any inclinations toward it, that it will excite either our hatred, or
our contempt of it. It is the GOOD which we discern in any thing, that charms
our souls, and attracts our desires. Though an object be never so near us, and
present it self to our very hands, and would thrust it self upon us; yet if we
see no good in it, we either hate it for disturbing our quiet, or at least are
perfectly cold to it, as feeling no power it has to stir up any passion for
it. Nay, though we do perceive a thing to be good for us, and defirable to be
enjoyed; yet if it stand at such a great distance, and seem so very far off, as
the Appearing of Jesus Christ for any thing we know may be, it will not
sensibly affect our hearts, nor move us to bear much regard to it, unless it
have the face of a very great happiness, and promise us exceeding much
contentment.

This Appearing therefore of our Lord, is called by this Apostle in another
place, li. Tit. 13. that BLESSED HOPE; to express the incomparable happiness
and bliss, which it will bring along with it. He would have us look upon it as
a thing that far more imports us, than all our present enjoyments, or all that
is possible to be here enjoyed. For there is nothing in this world that is
worthy to be spoken of with such an Emphasis, as to be called that blessed
thing, that happy possession. This is a peculiar respect, belonging only to the
appearing of Christ, which is the sum of all a Christians Hopes; and those
Hopes the great treasure of his soul.

When we so esteem it and look upon it with such a regard, as it is presented
to us in the glass of Gods Word; immediately we shall feel our hearts begin to
draw toward it. This is the first business of a devout Christian, who would
love the appearing of his Savior, to persuade his heart to have a respect to
it, far above all other things. That blessed day, all pious hearts who have any
hope of his favor, should think of and look for as the brightest that ever
shone. The Coronation of a King, the Triumph of a Conqueror, the public
applause in the Olympic Games, the most famous Shows that have ever been, or
can be made, are all (they must remember) but as so many little Puppet-plays,
in comparison with that grand spectacle. When all the world shall be in a gaze,
when Angels as well as men shall wonder and admire; when the Sun shall blush to
see it self outshone and overcome in brightness; when the hosts of blessed
Spirits shall be the only Stars, and our great Lord the only Sun that appears
in the firmament; when the righteous themselves shall shine in the same
splendour, by the reflection of his rays upon them.

Thus we must discourse with our selves continually, if we would be sensible of
our happiness (as St. Chrysostom Tom. V. Orat. 1. in Pentecost. p. 608.
advises those who would understand their high birth and nobility) We must look
unto Heaven, to the very Throne, the Royal Throne, for there sits, says He, the
first-Fruit of mankind. Who will come again, will certainly come again, leading
all his Hosts along with Him: the Legions of Angels, the several Squadrons of
Archangels, the Societies of the Martyrs, the Quires of the Righteous, the
Tribes of the Prophets and Apostles; and in the midst of these immaterial
Camps, the King Himself will appear (...), in a certain unutterable and
inexpressible glory.

O Dark House, or cave of Earth (will every one who believes this heartily, be
apt to say), How willingly would I leave thee; if I might be transported to
meet our blessed Lord thus royally encamped in the air! O poor world! How come
I so far to value thee, as to suffer thee to captivate this heart? How glad
should I rather be to see thee no more; if I might but behold him, whom my soul
loves, appear? Nay, it ought not to grieve me to see this earth, and all
things in it in a flame; if that celestial glory would but show it self. There
is nothing here so dear, which I should not choose to part withal most
cheerfully for the sake of so great a Blessedness.

Come my Friends and my Relations (the dearest goods in this world) let us set
our hearts on this; and desire to meet together with our Lord. Let our hearts
be united in this love, as much as they are in all things else. There is
nothing we enjoy of such esteem, but we ought to be content to see it vanish
and disappear before that illustrious sight. Happy will that time be which
shall eclipse all that beauty, which now presents it self unto us, with so much
address. Blessed will be the day that shall put out the luster of the whole
world; which now so strangely dazzles our eyes. A great deal better will that
moment be which shall dissolve, if God think good, all our stately Palaces,
than that which reared them and built them up.

Away, away you trifling Vanities. Why do you thus bewitch our eyes and inchant
our ears, and draw aside our thoughts with your flattering inticements? Trouble
us no more you false or unsatisfying glories. But leave our minds free to think
of that great and solemn day, when you must all be benighted; not by the want
but by an excess of light and brightness.

Awake, awake, and open thine eyes upon us, O thou sweet morning of our
happiness! Arise, shine forth, O thou Sun of Righteousness, and make us blessed
with a sight of thy glory! Nay, it would content us more, than if we had all
the world; if we might but see the clouds break; if we could but behold the
shadows of the night beginning to haste away; if thou, Lord, would but
dissipate these dark vapors that now incompass us, and cause the light of
Divine Faith, as the day star to shine continually in our hearts.

II.
But hitherto we have only laid the foundation of Love. Which supposes
moreover, that we have some sympathy (as I may call it) with that which we
apprehend to be so Good for us; and that we take our selves to be very much
concerned in it. For there are some things that are excellent in themselves; to
which notwithstanding we find little or no inclination; because they are not
suitable to our dispositions, necessities and desires. The greatest Perfections
and merits oftimes meet with more Admirers than they do Vassals: and we see
those every day who bow other hearts to their service, but find us inflexible
to their attractions. As we have not an appetite to all sorts of meats, even
those which we judge to be wholesome and good; so we have not an inclination to
all persons and things, even those which we hold to be well deserving. We
praise many things which we do not love. We allow diverse objects our
approbation, which we cannot much affect. And that which in reason we needs
must commend, yet does not always command our hearts, and draw them to its
embraces.

The Loadstone, as is commonly observed, which draws Iron to it, finds Lead and
Copper to have no perception of its touches: and that face, as I said before,
which bewitches some eyes, leaves others insensible of its beauty.

The Love then which we contract with any Good, arises from the convenience
that is between us and it. We perceive an agreeableness in it, either to our
needs or to our nature, and thence affection springs. The likeness and
resemblance that there is between two beings, is not the only cause of their
readiness to embrace each the other: but the correspondence also and proportion
which the one bears to the others necessities, is a sufficient ground of it. A
man that languishes under a dangerous sickness, may conceive a great affection
for an incomparable and very compassionate Physician, though there be no
similitude between them; because he apprehends that sufficiency in him, which
is able to supply the great defects and wants that are at present in himself.
But when these two, correspondence and similitude (which several have such
power over the affections) shall both meet together in one thing; so that what
we want is that to which by nature we incline; it cannot fail to produce a love
exceeding all other, in entire union, ardency and perpetuity. For how can we
refuse to yield to that Good (or what would we have more than that) which our
hearts feel at once, to bear a great resemblance to them, and to answer all or
most of their needs? a Good which is what we are, and what we would be too: a
Good wherein we see the image of our selves, in that perfection to which we
desire to be advanced?

All they therefore who would be truly disposed to love the appearing of our
Lord, must have a deep apprehension of the meanness and vileness of this
present state. They must be possessed with a serious sense of their many
imperfections, and great weakness in the best condition that this world
affords; of the poverty and emptiness of all earthly enjoyments; yea, and of
the scantiness and narrowness of all those Divine participations which their
Souls are here capable to be blessed withal. And then the Appearing of our Lord
will seem a Good so suitable to them, that they cannot choose but have the same
affection for it, that a crazy and diseased person has to the most skilful
Physician. In hope that He will perfect their nature, cure the disorders under
which they labor, supply their defects, fill their appetites, nay enlarge
their capacities, and raise them to a greater pitch of true goodness and bliss.

Let us suppose such persons to be so much in the favor of God as to have a
liberal share even in the blessings of this World, as well as of those which
are more peculiarly in the gift of our Savior Christ: yet it is impossible,
one would think, they should be so much pleased in the highest Dignities that
can be conferred on them; in the rarest Delicates that the bounty of Nature, or
curiosity of Art can provide for them; in the society of the choicest and
dearest Friends; or (I may add) in their own secret joy, though descending from
heaven to them; as not to think still that it is far more desirable to see the
Lord Jesus come to promote them and all their pious Relations and Friends to an
incomparably better condition in his Celestial Kingdom.

It is their interest to have Him appear again; and besides, they have such a
likeness and resemblance to Him, that the bent and inclination of their Souls
cannot but make them long after the sight of Him, as a good more delightful and
agreeable than any other. For there is another Coming of Christ, before that
which we expect, Quo per totum tempus in Ecclesia sua venit, etc. (as St.
Austin speaks L. xx. de Civ. Dei, Cap. v.
) by which He comes, through all the time between his first appearing and the
last, in His Church; that is his members, particulatim atque paulatim, working
in every one of them by little and little; according to his promise, xiv. Joh.
21, 23. that if any man keep His Commandments, He will look upon it as such a
testimony of his love, that He will love that man, and the Father will love
him; and we will come (says He) unto him, and make our abode with him. Now
when we heartily entertain Him, and He is so truly settled there, that we are
made partakers of his Blessed nature and disposition, and all the lineaments of
Him (if I may so speak) are drawn upon our hearts: We shall find them inclined
to wish for the day, when he will complete his work, and fill up the whole
image of Himself, to the very life; and not only make us glad with the light of
His countenance, but make us look perfectly like Him, and entirely assimilate
us to His own most Blessed nature.

Do you not see how the holy Scriptures represent this Appearing of Jesus as
the most lovely of all other things; and therefore apt to draw our hearts with
an irresistible force toward it? It is expressed there, I observe, under the
character of that which is wont to touch the Soul with such an agreeable
stroke, that it ravishes it from it self; I mean Beauty. For as that is nothing
else, according to Plato, but the splendour and glittering of that which is
good; so this appearing is set forth as exceeding bright, splendid and
glorious, and as that which will make us so also: to the end we may be affected
with it, as the most beautiful sight that ever was. Read ij. Tit. 13. xiij.
Mat. 43. And St. Luke, I told you before, mentions a threefold glory wherein He
will appear, His own, His Fathers, and His holy Angels, ix. 26. which is said,
I believe, to make this day appear the more illustrious and amiable in our eyes.

The only visage of Scipio, we read, made him Master of some barbarous Nations;
he piercing further into their hearts by his countenance, than by his sword.
And Heliogabalus as bad as he was, was no sooner shown by his Mother to the
Soldiers, but, from Priest of the Sun he became Emperor of the World. Why
then should not the beauty of that day, when the Prince of all the Kings of the
Earth shall appear in the most glorious splendour, attended by the greatest
Principalities of Heaven, with all their shining Hosts, in admirable order,
captivate the hearts of all those that love Him, since there is none so
powerful, did they but behold His glory (as the Apostles did) and look upon Him
as the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, to draw those to
his Religion who love Him not? How can they refuse to yield to do Him homage,
and suffer themselves to be carried after Him as the Conqueror of all Souls;
and above all desire to wait upon Him at his appearing; which they discern will
be so glorious and render them so amiable, that they will become (as I doubt
not to show) a considerable addition to his Triumphs?

The hearts of all the faithful cannot choose but leap for joy, at the very
thought of so great a Good, though widely distant from them; and wish it would
come nearer to make them happy by its presence with them. They are apt to sigh
and say, when they deeply ponder these things, with the Prophet David, in
another case, ci. Psalm. 2.

O when will thou come unto me! It is a long time, O Lord, since thou did
promise to come. We have waited for thee and for thy salvation, more than they
that wait for the morning; I say, more than they that wait for the morning. May
I not pray thee to hasten thy desired coming? O when will thou display thy
self, and show thy glory more openly before us? O when will thou be pleased to
impress thine own image more fairly on us? When shall those little touches that
we have received of thee, be perfected, and figured into a more exact
resemblance of thy beauty?

We cannot refrain, but we must long to have all our defects supplied out of
thy fullness; to have all spots wiped off our souls, to be rendered clear as the
Sun, free as the Air, and as unstained as the pure influences of heaven. For
how should we think, O blessed Lord, that we bear any love to thee, if we can
be content to remain (as we are) so much unlike thee? There is none can see
thee, and not ardently love thee. There is none ever beheld thy face, that was
not impatient to be conformed to thee. None have tasted thy sweetness, who
could be satisfied till they came to the fountain of it.

Therefore suffer us, Good Lord, to beg some more of thee, since thou have
given us so much. Yea, suffer us to ask when thou will come and give us all,
that so we may ask no more of thee. O how joyful will that time be, which shall
make us so complete, that all our business will be to praise and thank thee!
How comfortable will thy appearing be, which shall make us appear with thee?

O come, Dear Savior, that we may come to thee. Come, that we may so come to
thee, as to be for ever with thee.

CHAP. VII. Two further steps in this Love of Christ's appearing.
III.
NOW when we feel our souls thus touched with any thing that seems very good
and convenient for us; the first approaches of it beget a complacence in the
heart, and give it a sense of no small joy and pleasure. For when the Image,
you may observe, of any good that imprinted it self, is on the mind or
imagination, it instantly endeavors to proceed further, and creeps into the
heart, the will and affections; which cannot but turn themselves toward it, to
feel what this is which shows so fairly, and comes so kindly to salute them.
Now when the heart thus looks about to see what it is that courts it; you shall
find, if you mark it, that at the very first greeting it is entertained with a
certain delight and pleasure; which this newcome guest brings along with it, to
invite us to it.

For if you examine things strictly, and with such a curious eye, as some have
done; you will perceive that this Image which imprints it self upon us, is of
the same nature with light or any shining body. It casts, as I may say, its
bright rays round about the soul; it disperses it self, by a kind of
illumination, into the will and affections, that they may be sensible how
amiable it is: Which when they are, the Light is not more pleasant to the eyes,
than this is to the heart. It rejoices in this good which presents it self to
its enjoyment, as a man does in the welcome approach of an ancient Friend; whom
he is glad to see, but much more glad to feel in his arms.

And such is the contentment that the belief of Christ's appearing gives to all
those who fix their thoughts upon it. It chears and refreshes their spirits. It
smooths their minds, and makes them so calm and still, that the Halcyon days
are but fabulous shadows of that rest and peace which then they feel in
themselves. Their heart is entirely delighted and satisfied with this belief.
It is so transported beyond it self with this comfortable persuasion, that it
can easily overlook all other joys, when it lifts up it self in the
contemplation of this incomparable blessedness. No music can then be so sweet
to the ear, as the sound of the trump of God. No beauty so fair to the eye, as
that glory which shall be revealed. No company so inviting and welcome to the
heart, as that great Assembly of Christ, with all his holy Angels.

And hark, O my soul, do they not call upon thee to cast a look that way, that
thou may behold them in their surpassing glory. Listen a while, and hear if
they do not say, We are preparing our selves, and making ready to come for
thee, and for all those that love His appearing. O hearken again, my soul, what
is it they say to thee? Turn thy self about, and lift up thine eyes toward
Heaven, that thou may know what it is that is promised to thee.

Will thy Lord indeed come again in power and great glory? Will He once more
leave his heavenly place, and descend to call us up to himself? Shall we see
Him who loves us so much, and be transformed at the sight of Him? O welcome
news! When did thou meet with any tidings like to this? which sheds such a
sudden and transcendent joy and gladness abroad in thy heart, and prevents my
forward thoughts, which were going to exhort thee to rejoice? What had thou
lost, if thou had turned away thine eyes from this blissful sight? How great
an happiness had thou been deprived of, if thine heart had not opened, when
the report of His coming knocked at its door?

But, O my soul, how sweet then will this appearing it self be, the hope of
which is so delicious? How will that sight intrance us, the news of which at
this distance is so comfortable to us? Into what raptures will it cast us,
which now inspires such joy into our hearts? What a bright day will that be,
which through all the clouds wherein we are wrapped, spreads round about us such
a cheerful light? If the representation of our Lord in the holy Sacrament of
His body and blood, and that but in His sufferings and low estate, give such
satisfaction to the heart; What will the sight of Himself do to us, and that
when he appears in his glorious Majesty, as the Lord of Heaven and Earth?

O sweet Jesus, come, and let us see what that Majesty and Glory is! come and
draw aside the veil, do away the shadows, and present thy self as the King of
Glory before our eyes. They have long looked for thee. They would gladly know
what it is to behold thee in thy glory. O how gladly would they understand what
the meaning is of thy coming in the Clouds of Heaven? The brightness of them,
we believe, is infinitely beyond all that eye ever saw. The thoughts of it
revive our hearts, and make our faces shine. Our souls are drawn out, and run
to meet thee, by the joy we have conceived at the promise of thy coming. Though
we have not seen thee, yet we love thee; and though we now see thee not, 1 Pet.
i. 8.
yet believing we rejoice (O that we could say) with joy unspeakable and full
of glory.

O blessed Lord, do not deny to complete our joys, by hastening thy coming to
let us see thee. Come and fill our eyes, which cannot here be satisfied with
seeing. Come and show us thy glory; that we may say, it suffices. And let our
hearts, in the mean time, rejoice in nothing so much, as in the hope of thy
glory. Let them always prefer this above their chiefest joy; and never wish for
any thing with so much fervor, as for thy coming.

IV.
Now from this pleasant sense which is excited in us by the appearance of any
Good to us, there naturally follows, not only a desire but, a vehement motion,
and as it were an effusion of the heart, toward that which is so agreeable,
and promises it so much satisfaction. Complacence, you must know, is but the
beginning of love. For by that delicious pleasure which the heart feels, when
any good approaches, it is invited further; and even forced to pour forth it
self upon that fair thing which presents it self so sweetly to it; and this is
properly Love.

As soon as ever we discover any thing that is suitable to us, we feel our
hearts instantly struck with a secret joy, and are marvellously delighted in
it. And this delectable touch is no sooner perceived, but it sweetly, yet
strongly draws us to go toward that thing, which at first sight gave us such a
pleasure; and will yield, we hope, a far greater, when we approach so near it,
as to get possession of it. Complacence or delight then, is but the first
stirring or motion, which a good thing causes in our heart. This pleasing
motion and agitation of the Spirits, is attended presently with a melting and
as it were effusion of the heart; whereby we run out to meet that beloved
object, and entertain it into our souls; and in this, as I said, properly
consists the very being of Love. Which is so manifest in an heart duly affected
toward the appearing of our blessed Lord; that there cannot be a greater proof
of the truth of this description. For it feels so great a pleasure in the
lively belief of his coming, that it is drawn thereby quite out of it self; and
cannot choose but resign up it self entirely to that glorious Prince, that He
may make it appear together with Him. It easily dissolves in that heavenly
warmth, and losing all its power to contain it self in its former bounds, flows
to Him the Lord of Life, as to its proper place. It is lifted up toward
heaven, and would fain be there where He is, from whom this pleasure comes. For
with Him is the fountain of Life; and therefore where should a devout soul set
its affections but on those things which are above, (as S. Paul speaks, 3 Col.
i. 3, 4.) where Christ sits at the right hand of God? Which when they
mightily affect the heart, it feels as if it were dissolving, into that life
which is hid with Christ in God.

That future life or bliss is safe indeed, because it is in the custody of
Christ, and in a glorious place where God dwells in light inaccessible. But who
can abstain from desiring, it should be no longer hid and reserved, but made
manifest and shown, as it will be at the appearing of Christ? For so the
Apostle adds immediately (as if He would answer their Question who might ask
when shall this Life be discovered?) When Christ who is our Life ( i.e. the
cause of it, who will give us this life) shall appear, then shall we also
appear with Him in glory.

O what a joyful word is this! what should hinder an heart, that is possessed
with a full belief of it, from running thither with all speed; whither it is
called by so great a joy, as sent from thence into it? Into whose arms should
it leap but only His, the expectation of whose appearing creates that
exultation? There is none in heaven it can desire but Him, with whom its life
is hid; and whom is there on earth that it can desire besides Him?

Come, says such a soul to it self, and lift up thy head: Thy Lord I hear is
coming; let us arise and go and meet Him. Let us leave this earth, and ascend
up toward heaven; where He is, who is our Life. Let us raise up our dull
thoughts thitherward; and fix our minds as often as we can, on the glory that
shall be revealed.

Let us stir up our selves, and with the most ardent desires and affections of
our heart, get as near Him as ever we are able. let us go, O my Soul, and at
least make a present of our very heart to Him; beseeching Him most earnestly to
possess Himself entirely of it. Let us invite Him to prevent His appearing; and
to come a little beforehand to manifest Himself unto us, and to take up His
abode with us.

O blessed Jesus, let us say, who art our Life; be entreated to come hither
(now that we cannot come up to thee) and live in us. Show thy self in this
soul, and let not me live any longer, but do thou live in me: let the life I
live in the flesh be by thy faith, O thou Son of God. Thou have loved me, and
given thy self for me: O love me so much (I again beseech thee) as to live in
me. I would begin that life which is hid with thee, in resigning my self to
thee, that thy will may be done in me. Never did I feel such complacence in
following mine own, as I have since I was inclined to follow after thee; who
wilt lead me, I see, to immortal glory.

Blessed be that day which made me sensible of such happiness. Blessed be the
day which directed mine eyes to look for thy appearing. What can I wish for
more than to be blessed with the sight of it; and till it come, to have my
heart always in love with it? I am going toward it by these desires; and I
will excite my self to go the faster, because that blissful sight is still
making nearer approaches.

What do we mean, my soul, to hang thus toward this earth? Why do we stay here
when we see Jesus preparing Himself to make another journey to us? Why do we
not advance toward Him; as if we were desirous to have Him come, and to let us
see Him? Why do we not with all speed make our selves ready to receive Him?
What is it that makes us so slow in our motions toward Him; who when He
appears will come as swift as the lightning unto us. Up, up, O my soul, let not
thy Lord find thee, when He comes, posting after these worldly vanities,
pursuing of thy sinful pleasures; but onward in thy way, gone very far in
devout affections, ardent desires, and holy hopes, to meet His Glorious Majesty.

CHAP. VIII. The Progress of this Love to Christ's Appearing in three steps more.
V.
AND yet this Love cannot content it self with inward motions and aspirations
of the Soul toward the appearing of our Lord; but constantly excites all such
actions as are requisite for the attaining of so great a Good. If we esteem any
thing highly, and feel it exceeding agreeable to our hearts desire, we do not
willingly rest in the pleasing passions it raises up in our hearts; but they
carry us out in earnest endeavors to be owners of it. And the influence it
has upon us is so powerful, and it does so strongly draw us after it; that it
will not suffer any thing to put a stop to the current of our affections, when
they are issuing out unto it.

There are certain imperfect motions in our hearts, which we are apt to call
Love, that by no means deserve that name; being only a good liking of that,
which we do not yet truly love. They are called in the Schools, Velleities,
wishes and wouldings, as we speak; half a will which we feel for diverse
excellent things, but never come to any effect. The reason is, because the
appearance of some extreme great difficulty, or the force of some contrary
desire, either holds the soul in her course (as she is moving toward them) and
beats her affections back again; or else turns the stream of them quite another
way.

Love therefore is a generous vigor in the heart, which incites and
strengthens it to fair and noble actions, for the effecting its desires; though
opposed by never so many enemies. It is called by some the fire wherewith the
soul is clothed, which forces its way through all resistances. A certain ardor
in us, which inspires us to worthy though difficult undertakings. An Heroic
passion, which makes us think nothing impossible, that is needful to be done,
for the compassing the end at which it aims.

Thus then must our souls be carried, with such strong affections, toward the
appearing of Christ, if we heartily love it. We must omit nothing that we know
is required of us, for the obtaining the blessings which it will bring unto us.
We must bid all things stand aside that would impede us; and tell them they
must pretend to no interest at all in us, when we are in pursuit of so great a
good. The love of which will soon reconcile us to the hardest duties; and
endear to us the most self-denying courses. It will alter the countenance of
sufferings, and make all the troubles of this life cast a kinder aspect on us.
Nay, it will enable us to look death in the face with a cheerful heart. For it
will present it to us in another shape; and make the Grave, that house of
darkness, seem like the beautiful gate of the Temple of God.

Whatsoever our Lord declares to be his pleasure, this will bid us do it;
though we be undone by that means in all our temporal concerns. And when they
tempt us to murmur and repine, to cry and lament at our parting with them: Love
will bid us be of good comfort; because this is the way to have a fair
reception by our Lord, when He shall see we have quitted all for His sake. We
cannot indeed keep them always if we would; yet such is his love, our faith
tells us, that if we consent to forsake them beforehand upon his account, He
will not suffer us to be losers by it: And therefore our love both to Him and
to our selves, prompts us not to stick at any thing which will be pleasing to
Him, though for the present it be harsh to us. It teaches us to reason as St.
Peter does, 2 Pet. iij. 11, 12. Seeing all these things must be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness;
Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of the Lord?

What manner of persons? Truly, such as are preparing a room in their hearts
for their Lord. Such as hope then to complete their Espousals to Christ. And
therefore must be holy and without blame before Him in love, (1. Ephesians. 4.) and
study nothing so much as to be found acceptable in his sight (who is the Lord
of their hearts, and their very life); and to be nobly entertained by Him, when
He shall come again to receive His loving subjects up unto Himself. We have our
conversation in heaven (says St. Paul) from whence we expect the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto His glorious body, according to the working whereby He can subdue all
things unto Himself. For in all reason they that expect such a sight should fit
themselves for it by a conversation suitable to the dignity to which they shall
be then preferred. So Oecumenius I remember expounds these words of St. Paul to
Timothy, when he answers the Question, who is it that loves his appearing, in
this manner, (...), He that does things worthy of excellent recompenses.

Which if we love, it will not fail to raise us unto a heavenly life. If we
wait for Him to come from Heaven, it will lift up our hearts, and carry them
thither. We shall disburden them of all carnal affections, and throw off the
load of the cares of this world, that we may be light and airy, ready to fly up
above, when He calls us, to be with Him. We shall labor to cleanse and purify
our souls as He is pure; to adorn them with His Graces; and, in one word, to
put on the Lord Jesus, that He may see Himself in us, when He comes.

And will thou come then, O blessed Savior, (are such souls apt to say) may we
confidently look for thee from Heaven to be our Savior? Why do we question it,
sine we have thy faithful word for it; who haste promised that we shall see
thee as thou art, and be for ever with thee? O astonishing love! what riches of
grace is this? Was it not enough that thou condescendedst once to come and save
us; but that thou determinest to come again? Can thou not satisfy thy love
unless we be where thou art? And will thou leave thy seat in heaven to come and
fetch us, rather than leave us here upon the earth?

O Love, what is like unto thee? Thou have a mighty power! who can understand
the wonders that thou do? O make it great in us, good Lord, as well as in thy
self. Cause it to do marvels in our hearts, as it has done in thine. Let our
souls be unsatisfied, till they come to thee. Call forth all their powers, as
thou have done their desires, that they may restlesly move toward thee. Make
them unwearied in well-doing, steadfast, unmovable, and abundant in thy work;
that they may not miss of thee.

O most gracious Lord, suffer nothing in this world to discourage these hearts,
that have wholly given themselves to thee. Cease not still to excite and
quicken them; since they have been already touched and awakned by thine
Omnipotent love. But preserve such a flame alive in them, that they may
ardently follow thee. Inspire them with zealous resolution, never to desist in
their pursuit of that blessed Hope thou have set before them. Strengthen them
against all the power of their enemies; and let thy love burn with such fervor
in them, that none of the opposers of their holy desires may be able to stand
before it. Arm them, good Lord, with this invincible force of heavenly love,
which may make them noble conquerors, and prepare them for thy glorious
Triumph.

VI.
But true love cannot stay here neither; nor content it self with some
endeavors to enjoy that Good, which propounds it self to its affections; for
it ever tends to an Union with that lovely thing toward which it is moved.
When the Soul runs forth to see what it is that calls out its desires; the
intention of that motion is, to possess it self of that amiable object; if it
answer its first pretenses, and prove such as it promised. No sooner does any
thing appear beautiful and lovely to the mind or imagination, but presently the
heart sends messengers (as I may call the spirits that issue out of it) to
bring it home, and conduct it to take up its lodging there. This is the meaning
of that effusion of the Soul which I spoke of before; whereby it would dissolve
it self into that which it loves, and be so mingled as to become perfectly one
with it.

When an agreeable object, I told you, has imprinted its image on the mind, it
casts a certain light into the soul, and shines so comfortably on the
affections, that they are powerfully warmed and excited by it. Now when the
heart is full of this splendour, it does not satisfy it self with those rays
and emissions of light and heat, which are imparted to it; but strives to unite
it self to the very center of it, and would feel the spring from whence such
life and pleasure flows.

Just as Iron when it is impregnated with the virtue of the Loadstone, is not
contented with those effluxes it has received, but moves toward the body from
which they stream; so is it with an heart which receives this joyful news from
our Lord, that He will appear again in glory. It amuses not it self in those
delightful thoughts; it sits not down in those ravishing joys; nor thinks it
enough to be melted in the passion of love to Him, and to so great a
blessedness: But it seeks to knit it self to the very mind and spirit of
Christ, that it may feel how blessed He intends to make it. It studies, I mean,
to be changed and transformed more and more into His likeness; and by an entire
agreement of will with his will, to begin its transfiguration; and be prepared
for a perfect and eternal union with Him.

It is not sufficient to a heart that is in love with that great day, to live
in a constant expectation of it (which is excited by the Revelation He has
made of it in his Gospel, and is the light which he now sends from heaven into
us:) but it would gladly prevent, as I have already noted, that happy time; by
feeling Him appear every day more gloriously there. It longs to shine more
clearly in the light of his heavenly knowledge; to burn more brightly in the
ardors of his love; and by being more richly adorned with the Graces of His
Spirit, to be recommended to all in the beauty of His Holiness.

There is nothing can better explain all that has been hitherto said, than the
example of the Loadstone, which I just now mentioned. As soon as a piece of
Iron feels the power of it, we see how it turns it self toward it; and by its
quivering declares the complacence and pleasure (as we may call it) that it
takes in its touches. Then we behold how it creeps a little toward it; still
advancing and bearing it self more and more that way, till it come to join it
self with that thing, from whence it first received those inclinations. Here
you have all the parts of love, that have been already mentioned, most lively
represented. First, the mind apprehends, and is made sensible of some Good,
which communicates an image or picture of it self unto it. Then the heart is
secretly surprised with a certain delight, by which the agreeableness of that
image intices it from its self. And then it moves toward it, and goes to see
it. And at last, when it finds it to be what it appeared, it flies, as I may
say, into its embraces, and endeavors to knit it self so fast unto it, that
they may never hereafter be divided.

And just such like is the temper of that soul, which heartily loves our Lords
Appearing. Which it perceives to be a happiness so great, that it cannot be
satisfied with any entertainment it finds in this world, but presses forward to
the blessed sight of Him in all his glory. Nothing can quiet it, nor hinder its
motion, till it become one spirit with Him. All that it has as yet attained,
all the wisdom wherewith it is filled, all the joys of piety which it sometime
feels, are little and inconsiderable in comparison with what it desires to
feel. And therefore on it proceeds in a serious study to be more like Him; out
of a design never to cease its earnest endeavors, till it come to be for ever
with Him.

O thou great and most Magnetic Good (should every pious heart say) O thon
sovereign attractive of all souls; I feel my self wonderfully touched by thee.
Thou have put my spirit, which was foolishly wandering after other things, in a
settled motion unto thee. O what an inclination have thou awakned in my heart,
to be with thee! Thou have mightily stirred all the powers of my soul, which is
wholly turned about, to look most earnestly toward thee.

O cease not to shine perpetually into this cloudy mind, which is all in
darkness without thee. Cease not to invigorate this dull and sluggish spirit,
which is thus excited by thee. O spare not those mighty effluxes of thy love;
but draw me still after thee. I cannot be willing to stand at any distance from
thee; nor to stop my progress till I be closely united to thee. Therefore still
continue to make me feel thy power, till I be so happy as to move no more, but
to rest in thee.

Could not thou be pleased, O blessed Lord, with any thing less than an union
with such sinful flesh, as this of ours is? would it not suffice thee to look
down from heaven upon us, and show us a glympse of thy glory; but thou must
come also and dwell among us; and make thy self to be bone of our bone, and
flesh of our flesh, that we might be one with thee? How can I be contented
then, only with looking up unto thee? How should I be satisfied if I have
nothing more, but merely some glances from thee? O my most gracious Lord, give
me leave to imitate thy love. Suffer me to desire and seek to become what thou
art, by being perfectly transformed into thy likeness. And do not think it too
great a presumption, if I wish and long to be so united to thee, My Love, as to
be for ever with thee.

Let me have the happiness at least to sigh and mourn after thine Appearing.
Affect my heart so sensibly with it, that I may groan in spirit (if I can do no
better) for that blessed time, when I shall lose the sight of thy face no more,
when I shall lie under the warm beams of the light of thy countenance; when I
shall live in the very element of love; when I shall be so near thee, that I
shall feel my self to move in the very same Orb with thee, thou bright Sun of
Righteousness.

I seem now alas! to be a great way off from thee. I feel my self like the cold
earth, in the winter; which turns toward the Sun, and looks upon that glorious
Light of Heaven, that great lover of all the world, but alas! is very far
removed from its comfortable rays. O that I might be so happy as to approach
nearer to thee! O that I were fixed, and might never turn about any more from
thee! Let the time come, that there shall be no more night, but a perpetual day
with me. O hasten the time, when I my self shall shine like the Sun, in thy
Celestial glory.

VII.
Now in the mean time, till love come to a perfect union, as it is incessant in
its motion, so it grows more vehement in its desires and endeavors. For as
frequent agitations make the fire burn more fiercely, so does the stirring of
this passion make it break out with a brighter flame. The desire of union
increases the swiftness of its motion; and the more speed it makes, the nearer
it is like to come to its desired union. And, which is very considerable, the
more earnest and assiduous our motion is toward any Good, the greater hopes we
have that we shall enjoy it; and the greater our hopes are, the more are we
still pricked on and spurred forward in the pursuit of that which we would fain
enjoy.

A thing which is of exceeding great moment in this pious and devout love of
Christian people. For without a GOOD HOPE (which St. Paul says, our Lord, who
is our Hope, has given us, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 16. 1 Timothy i. 1.) our motion would
slacken, if not be extinguished. We should have no heart to prosecute our
design, but let it fall immediately; if it were not in hope of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie has promised, i. Tit. 2. As on the contrary by the
help of this sure and certain Hope, our diligence is doubled; and such oil
poured on our wheels, as makes them move not only more easily, but with greater
speed and quickness also.

All the lovers therefore of Christ's Appearing, are said to wait for it, to
expect it, and to look for the coming of that blessed Hope, as you shall see in
the conclusion of this Argument, from those well known places, iij. Phil. 20.
ij. Tit. 13. and many other. And if you examine the holy Scriptures carefully,
you shall find that this is comprehended in the love we ought to have for his
Appearing; being such a natural effect of love, that they are put indifferently
the one for the other. As may be seen by comparing these two places together, 1
Cor. ij. 9. with lxiv. Isa. 4. in the former of which the Apostle says, the
things which surpass our conception, are prepared by God for them that love
him; and in the other the Prophet says, He has prepared them for him that
waits for Him.

Just as the people of Israel praying without the Sanctuary (in the Court to
which they were confined) waited for the Priest when he should come from the
Altar of Incense, or rather for the High Priest on the day of Atonement to
return from the most holy place and the Ark of the Covenant, to bestow the
blessing on them: So do all good Souls, who are devoted sincerely to the
service of Christ, while they remain in this outward Court, (the Earth wherein
we dwell, which is at a great distance from the Heavens) look up to the holy
place, where Jesus the great High Priest of our profession is; iij. Heb. 1. and
iv. 15.
and wait for the time when He will come forth to bless them, saying, Come ye
blessed of my Father, xxv. Mat. 34.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world.

They cannot but frequently cast their eyes and turn their hearts that way, as
the place of their Rest, which He is gone before to prepare for them. They are
ever calling upon their Souls to follow hard after their dear Savior, as David
says (lxiij. Psalm. 8.) his heart did after the enjoyment of God in his
Sanctuary. For this they seek, as he there speaks, with thirsty desires, to see
his power and his glory, so as they have never yet seen him, nor can see him;
no not in their nearest approaches to him, while they live in these earthly
tabernacles. They wish therefore He would come and bless them with a clear and
full sight of Him. After this their desires grow daily more ardent; and they
endeavor to stir up stronger and more affectionate motions toward so great an
happiness. They are apt to cry out, saying, Draw us, and we will run after
thee; yea, we will fly; we will take the wings of an Eagle (in our passionate
desires) that we may mount up aloft, and get more and more above this world to
be with thee.

And this gives them good Hopes likewise, that they shall be with Him; insomuch
that they cannnot but say:

O blessed Jesus, thou have set our Souls into a longing for thee; and now they
cannot cease to desire to come to thee. Thou have made us believe the most
excellent surpassing glory, wherein thou shinest; and ever since we cannot
choose but look toward it, and wish to behold thee in that glory. If we be very
earnest for this sight, if our Souls sigh and say, xlij. Psalm. 2.
O when shall we come and appear before thee; we do but return thine own
breath, who have inspired us with these desires after thee.

And may we not hope to come thither where thou art, when thou thy self
attractest our souls to thee? Will thou not satisfy those longings, which not
we, but thou have raised in our hearts? Give us leave to remember thee of what
thou thy self have said, who did pronounce those BLESSED WHO HAVE NOT SEEN,
xx. Joh. 29.
AND YET HAVE BELIEVED. O let it be unto thy servants according to thy word.
For we are such believers, as thou have blessed. We never saw thee, and yet
believe thou came forth from God, xiij. Joh. 3.
and art gone to God; and art most high in the glory of the Father, ix. Romans 5.
God blessed for evermore. Do not our hearts cleave unto thee, though they have
only heard of thee? Are not our eyes continually toward thee, though they have
never yet beheld thee? Thou will not always sure absent thy self; but turn our
faith at last into a sight of thee.

For what is the BLESSEDNESS of which thou spakest, and have faithfully
promised to such believers? Is it not that they shall one day behold thy
glorious face, and reign with thee in thy glory? Is it not that thou will
manifest thy self unto them here; and at last appear again to take them to thy
self, that they may live where thou art? O dear Savior, as thou have made us
to BELIEVE in this manner; so make us likewise thus BLESSED. As we have
received thee, though we have not seen thee; so let this be the reward of our
receiving thee, that we may see thee. We will hope thou will make us thus
happy; as thou have made us thus faithful. We will expect till thou make us
see what thou have promised, as thou have made us do what thou have commanded.
We will rejoice in hope of thy glory; and do thou make our joy to be full: yea,
bring us unto thee, and bid us enter into the joy of thee our Lord.

CHAP. IX. This Love to the Appearing of our Lord further described in three
other fruits or marks of it.
VIII.
AND now can any Soul choose but think of that perpetually, which it most dearly
loves? Does not every Good use to present it self continually to the mind that
is enamored of it, and remember us of its beauty? There is no question to be
made of it. The very ardency of our affection for it, does more imprint and
engrave it on our mind; and when, by any participation of it, we feel how good
it is, we press it harder, and sink it deeper into our hearts. There is no man,
for instance, who has settled his love upon an agreeable person, but He finds
the image of that friend always before his eyes. It accompanies him every
where, and cleaves inseparably to his thoughts. It is a great part of his
pleasure to entertain himself with the shadow of that in which he has lodged
his heart.

And therefore if we love the appearing of our Lord, we shall solace our selves
often with the kind. In the multitude, especially or tumult of our thoughts
within us (as the Psalmist speaks xciv. 19.) the comforts of it will delight
our souls. We shall be daily calling upon them, and exhorting them to look
toward it; and to fix their thoughts and affections upon it. We shall be
inclined to say, as the voice is in the Song of Songs, Come my fair one, come
away.

O my chiefest Good, what shall I desire or wish for so much, as for thy
coming? What is it that I ever saw, which should detain my eyes from thy
incomparable beauty? Or where can I expect to satisfy their hunger, but only
with the filling sight of thee, at thy appearing? The spacious Heavens hope to
be filled with the Majesty of thy Glory. The Sun is but a weak image of thy
brightness, and will be content to go out to make room for thee when thou
appearest. All the Stars of light are ready to resign their places, and leave
the sky to be illuminated by thee alone. Whatsoever is lovely and surprises us
with its beauty here, confesses it is but thy shadow, and that when thou
breakest forth it must disappear.

Fix my mind therefore upon thy glory; and let it henceforth employ my busy
thoughts. Possess thy self, O Lord of life and glory, entirely of this heart,
which has been too long estranged from thee. Impress such a lively sense of
thee and of thy glory there; that I may sooner forget my self than thee and thy
appearing. Make it my greatest pleasure to sit hours and days and years, to
think of thy so much desired coming. When I meet with my dearest Relations and
Friends, let nothing entertain us with such delight, as to think of being
caught up together in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.

Let us love to speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and to talk of thy power: to
utter abundantly the memory of thy great goodness, and to sing of thy
righteousness. Let us wish with united hearts to see thy power and glory; and
to behold thee coming, according to thy faithful promise, out of thy heavenly
Sanctuary. Let it be our sweetest joy to inspire each others hearts with these
holy hopes; and to stir up one another to love and to good works. And when thou
come, O Lord, may every one of us be found so doing.

IX.
These are some of the pantings of an heart, which loves and bears in mind the
appearing of Christ. For to say the truth, Love is the original and source of
all the passions that we feel in our hearts. They all flow from this as from
their springhead. They are but several motions which have their rise from
Love. Or, if you will so conceive it, nothing but different figures and shapes
wherein it appears. It is love which fears, and love which grieves, and love
which hopes, and love which rejoices: there would be none of these, were it not
for some good which we love; to which these and all the rest of their kindred,
owe their birth and nourishment. When this is hindered in its designs, it
breeds anger, or impatience, or fear, or sadness, or some such like commotion:
And when this succeeds and prospers in the pursuance of its ends; there arises
hope, and contentment, and joy and gladness, as the natural issue of it.

They that love then Christ's appearing, will fear nothing so much as to lose
the blessedness which He will bring along with Him. Nothing will excite such a
displeasure in their hearts, as that evil which would rob and defraud them of
his favor at that happy day. And what is there that can give them such a touch
of sadness, as the thought that they are so far distant from their Dearest
Lord? Or what can create such joy, such exultation of spirit, as to hope they
shall one day see Him, so as never to part from Him any more? In one word, all
the passions of their Souls will run this way, and be concerned for nothing so
highly as this, that they may be presented faultless before the presence of his
glory with exceeding joy.

True indeed, O blessed Savior, (does such an heart meditate in it self) I
have had a thousand fears in my breast. I have dreaded every small danger in
this world, as if it would prove my utter ruin. The terrors that have
affrighted me, are as innumerable as the things I have fancied to be my
happiness. But now all these are willing to be gone, that they may make way for
one greater fear; lest I should not enter with thee, when thou appearest, into
thy rest. O prevent so intolerable a mischief! Whatsoever I lose, I shall
account my self a gainer; if I lose not the blessing which thou will give us.
Take all if thou please, I am content; so thou will give me a share in thy
glory, when thou come.

I have been too long pestered with a world of sensual passions. Sometimes
sadness has oppressed me; and then anger has set me all on fire. Now vain
joys have swelled my heart and puffed me up; and again they have given place
to grief, and sorrow has shrunk up my soul, and dried up my spirit. Fears and
Hopes have tossed me up and down, as in a tempestuous Sea. A small matter has
created me much trouble; and I have longed for things, which promised much, but
gave me little satisfaction. What a comfort is it, but to expect the day, which
will settle and compose these tumults, in perpetual peace and quiet! I feel the
thoughts of it already appeasing my spirit, and bringing a ealm into my breast.
And if the brightness of thy appearing did but always shine in my mind, it
would dispel all the clouds and scatter the darkness, wherein all this
confusion reigns. O let the splendour of that day irradiate my soul, even at
this distance from it; and leave no space void of its light and comfort. Yea,
let it eclipse all other joys; and by its glistering beauty, cause the small
contentments of this world, to seem but as so many Glowworms, which shine only
in the night. I am sensible how short the sweetest enjoyments of this life are
of that celestial happiness. The society of my Savior and of the inhabitants
above, O how much is it to be preferred, even before the delightful company of
those that most deserve my love! Who can do me no greater service, than by the
innocent passion I have for them, to transport me with far greater, to that
blessed country; where I shall enjoy them without fear, and love them without
danger. And O that all the fears I at any time have of losing the Dearest
Creature in this world, may presently expire into a greater fear of heing
separated from my Lord. Let all my hopes and joys also about that, conclude in
better hopes and joyful expectations of living together in the joy of our
Fathers house.

But as for other things, I discharge and renounce you, all you frivolous
sinful delights. I am not afraid of any evil that man, or other creature can do
unto me; while my trust and my joy is in the Lord. Come troubles, come
reproaches, come loss of Goods; I am not angry at it; so Jesus will but come:
and they will also excite me to fasten mine eyes more steadfastly on Him and his
appearing. This is my hope, this is my joy, this is the support and the
satisfaction of my heart. This is the thing I am resolved to entertain my
thoughts withal: and if I may but have this, let all the rest, O blessed
Jesus, be even as thou please.

X.
I have but one thing more to add, which is; that the Love which deserves this
Character, is a settled constant affection; an habit and temper of the soul
which always abides. Not a sudden fit of passion; but a fixed inclination, and
rooted disposition to seek such a good as it desires. And so the word here used
by St. Paul signifies, not barely they that love, but they that have loved his
appearing. For (...) being in the time perfectly past, denotes that this has
been the steadfast bent of their hearts to look for Christ, and prepare
themselves in this manner for his coming.

The Image of any lovely person, when it first presents it self before us, is
wont to come in a posture of humility and submission; and seems to crave to be
admitted into our hearts. It invites us with so much sweetness and respect; as
if it would be beholden to us, for our kind acceptance of it into our favor.
But when it is once passionately entertained, and has possessed it self of our
hearts; we find it changes its behavior, and grows so imperious, that it
requires what before it seemed to entreat. It becomes absolute master of our
hearts; and placing it self there as the Governor of all our affections, will
no more be denied in any of its demands.

And such is the progress of the love of Christ, and his appearing in pious
souls. He comes and entreats us at the first, or rather beseeches us that we
would be so sensible of his kindness, as to let Him have a room in our hearts;
and to receive from His hands so great a good, as He offers to bless us
withal. We feel thereupon only some inclinations to Him, and good affections
for Him; but do not come presently to a full resolution to surrender our selves
entirely to Him. Nay it is too manifest, that we are off and on (as the phrase
is) and seem as if we could choose whether we will love Him or no. But when He
has once got within us, when we perceive how gracious the Lord is, and have
opened our hearts to let Him dwell there; then He exercises an absolute Empire
over us. He will have none of His commands refused or disputed. A ready and
cheerful compliance with His will, is the fruit of His Authority: and nothing
can have a room there, but what shall ask Him leave. He rules and reigns over
us in so sovereign a manner, that He carries us whither He pleases. And more
than that, it pleases us to be ruled by Him; and it is the most perfect
liberty, to be under the uncontrollable power of his Love. All the world cannot
hinder Him from being obeyed; but every signification of his will and pleasure
to us, becomes a Law as strong as Fate, which cannot be resisted. Let him ask
what he will, it is sufficient that he is pleased; and that he loves us so
much, as to think of appearing again to make us perfectly like himself.

That Is a Good incomparably great, which needs nothing to procure our love to
it, but only to be known: And when it is loved, needs nothing to secure it, but
not to slip out of our mind. Or rather we cannot forget, what we have once so
dearly loved. The pleasures of that passion are its preservation. Its activity
and force, will not let it dye or fall asleep.

O come, come, says a soul possessed with this Love, for I cannot wish for any
thing like thy appearing. It is impossible I should refrain from desiring that
joyful day. I cannot live, but I must long for thy coming. O when will thou
come, my blessed Redeemer? when will thou come? when shall we see that welcome
morn, that shall bring the news of thine approach? It cannot but be most
welcome sure to all those that have waited for it with so much patience, and
cried out so often, make no long tarrying, O my Lord. The brightness of thy
face, I know, can throw no scorching flames into those eyes that look for thee.
That sweet Sun will arise with a smiling countenance upon all such hearts. They
can never fear an evil day, when the Bridegroom comes, most gloriously decked,
to complete his love to them. And therefore I cannot but say again (and let all
them that love thee, join their desires with me, and say continually) come,
come, O blessed Jesus. Come, while our hearts are warm with love to thee. Come,
while these passionate sighs are calling for thee. Come, now that these souls
stand open, with outstretched arms to receive thee.

What greater felicity can we wish, than to pass away in such aspirations
toward thee? What gentler or sweeter breath, than these holy desires, can waft
our souls into the air to meet thee? Who can fancy any thing more desirable,
than to evaporate, all together, in ecstasies of devout affections to thee?
Happy were it for us, if our hearts were scrued up to such a pitch of love,
that we needed no other instrument but that, to crack those strings that tie
our souls to our bodies. Happy were it for us, if in such a fiery chariot, we
might be transported unto thy heavenly mansions. We can conceive no greater
pleasure than this, to expire in such ardent flames into thy bosom, there to
rest for ever in thy love.

CHAP. X. All this shown to be the sense of the Holy Scriptures.
THus have I put an end to the third enquiry about the nature of this Love,
which St. Paul supposes good Christians feel in their souls to the appearing of
Christ. In satisfying of which, I have not followed mine own fancy, but the
common sentiments of all those hearts, who have so much good nature, as to know
what this passion means. And there has been nothing said, but what may be
fully justified by the Holy Scriptures; if we diligently observe in what terms
they speak of the passion and fervent desire, which all pious Believers have
for the coming of our Lord.

I.
For which, they are, first, said to LOOK, or to expect it; with such a
greediness as men do that, of which they are extremely desirous. So those words
(...) and (...) signify, which are used in the 1 Cor. 1.7. iij. Phil. 20. ij.
Tit. 13. ix. Heb. 28. where they are said to look for the Revelation of Jesus
Christ; to have their conversation in Heaven, from whence they look for the
Savior; to be looking for that blessed Hope, the coming of Christ; who will
appear the second time to them that look for him: with that earnestness, that
is, and concernment, which one has for the greatest good in the world. Or with
such a longing (as I have explained it before) as the children of Israel had to
see their High Priest return out of the most holy place; into which he went on
the day of expiation, to make reconciliation for their sins. For if he came out
alive, it was a token that God had accepted him; and with the greatest joy they
received the blessing which then he brought and pronounced to them in his name.

There is a manifest allusion to this, in the last of those places now
mentioned; Heb. ix. where the Apostle says verse. 26. that when Christ appeared
in this world, it was to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Which
bloody sacrifice, as you read, verse. 24. He carried not into the holy places
made with hands (which were only figures of the true) but into Heaven it self,
now to appear in the presence of God for us: that is, by virtue of this
Sacrifice to perfect the expiation of our sins, and obtain for us the Divine
Blessing. Now he being thus offered (verse. 28.) to bear the sins of many (as a
public Sacrifice, that is, for the whole body of mankind; not a particular,
for one or a few persons) unto them that look for him, he shall appear
(visibly) the second time without sin (as having made a complete expiation) to
give salvation to his people, who expect his coming out of Heaven to bless them.

II.
Expect it did I say? yea, this Apostle calls it a most earnest expectation. So
the (...) of the creature, viij. Romans 19. is expounded by Oecumenius (...).
to be its exceeding intense and vehement desire and expectance of the
revelation of the Sons of God; that is, says he, of the conclusion of all,
when it shall be clearly seen who are the sons of God, and who the sons of the
Devil. Which is a Good to be wished for so much above all other, that the
Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, the Air, the Sun, the Moon, all the visible
Creation; together with all that is invisible, the Angels, Archangels, Powers,
Principalities, Dominions; all these expect our perfection. They are the words
of Theodoret who (with other of the Ancients) looks upon the whole Creation as
brought in here, expecting our future happiness, by such a figure (...). Oecum.
as the Prophets use, when they introduce the Woods rejoicing, the Mountains
leaping, the Floods clapping their hands; to express the exceeding great joy
that should be among mankind at the first coming of our Lord. But because it is
controverted what the Apostle means by the Creature, and this is not a fit
place to discuss it, I shall pass by this expression; and not mention the sighs
and the groans, which there follow, as the natural effect of an exceeding great
desire to see the day of redemption come.

III.
Let us rather consider, that the glory which shall be revealed, at the coming
of Christ out of this holy place to give salvation to his faithful worshippers,
is the cause, that, as St. Paul speaks in this place (which I have taken for
the rise of this Discourse) they look for it, as a thing that has very
strongly engaged their hearts, and is the object of their dearest affection.
They declare by the fixing of their eyes upon it, how much they love it; that
is, esteem it, are inclined to it, and think long till they enjoy it. For
whatsoever touches us so nearly, we are wont to expect it with some impatience.

IV.
But as the greatness of this Good is such, as will make those that believe it
earnestly long for it: so it is able to quiet and still their souls by the mere
hope of its enjoyment; though it stay long before it come. And therefore, (4.)
they are said to WAIT for his Son from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. i. 10. (...) to tarry,
to stay till he come. Which implies both longing and patient abiding till he
please to send so great a Blessing.

V.
Nay, fifthly, St. James exhorts them to be PATIENT with long-suffering to the
coming of the Lord, V. 7. For so the word (...), there used, imports; a patient
abiding, though he stay long and we suffer much before he come. We could not
suffer and endure what we must on some occasions, if we did not expect him: (as
Oecumenius notes out of the ancient Greek Expositors In 1 Th. i. 10. (...).
) And our sufferings would not be very valuable, if we were not content to
expect him long, as he likewise observes upon another place in that Epistle.
For if it were manifest, says he, In 1 Th. v. 1.
that the day of the Lord, or the consummation of all things, would be within
three years, and it could not be otherwise, all would despise dangers and make
nothing of them: (...); and what great virtue would this be, when they knew
that within so short a space, they should receive their full reward? The virtue
of a Christian is to suffer long, as well as to suffer much, waiting with long
patience, as the Husbandman does for the precious fruit of the Earth.

VI.
And yet it is not such a patience we are to exercise, but St. Peter gives us
leave to HASTEN it; which is a sixth word whereby the holy writings express
this pious affection unto, and vehement desire of the appearing of Christ
Jesus. 2 Pet. iij. 12. Looking for, (...).
and HASTING unto, the coming of the day of God. In the Greek it is not hasting
unto the coming, but hasting the coming (and so we render it in the margin)
that is, in our wishes, most ardent longings and gaspings for it. For so that
phrase is observed to be used by good Authors; in which (...) signifies I wish
thy good: so heartily, that is, that I would make it fly hither, if I were
able, as swift as my desires.

VII.
This declares the highest passion they had for it: looking upon themselves as
imperfectly happy, till they and their Savior met together at his coming. Only
they had a perfect hope of it, which was an exceeding great comfort to them. So
St. Peter also expresses it (which is the next word) Hope to the end; or rather
(as the translation in the margin renders the Greek (...)) HOPE PERFECTLY. And
with very good reason; because of the grace that is to be brought unto you at
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. i. 13. There are great favors to be
then bestowed, most ample rewards to be distributed; which may justly make us
value the hope of them, more than all the present possessions of this world;
and rejoice before we have them, that he has given us such solid; and firm
grounds of hope one day to receive them. Which whosoever understands, as he
ought to live upon that hope, and support himself with a perfect trust in him
that lives for ever to make good his promise: So he cannot but desire and pray
continually to see it accomplished.

VIII.
Which is the last thing, they cry unto our Savior and call upon him;
beseeching with fervent desires that he would come. So some understand those
words xxij. Rev. 17. to be the voice of Christian people, not inviting
strangers to come and embrace their Religion, but earnestly inviting our
Savior Christ to come to perfect their happiness. In this they all agreed, the
SPIRIT (that is, prophetical persons, endowed with the most eminent gifts of
the Holy Ghost) and the BRIDE (that is, the whole body of the Church) with one
consent say, COME. And they exhort all others who should read this, and receive
Christianity, to join with them in these prayers; for so it follows, Let him
that hears say, COME. And let every soul (that is their conclusion) who
thirsts after divine knowledge, especially of future things, come and read this
Prophecy; and partake of that refreshment, that water of Life, which is here
freely offered to him.

But if that verse should have another meaning; yet it is certain that St. John
himself (who was a fit pattern to all those who believed his Book) concludes
all his Visions with a Prayer to Christ that he would hasten his coming. For
when our Lord had said (v. 20.) Surely I COME quickly, He answers AMEN to this
promise: and echoes back his own words to him, Even so, (let it be so) COME
LORD JESUS. Thy word, is all our wishes. There is nothing so desirable, as
that thou would come, and fulfill thy gracious Word.

It will be very fit then for us, who are come a great deal nearer to the day
of the Lord, to descend down into our selves and see; what passions we have
like to these, which were of old in Christian breasts. Let us call our selves
to a strict account, and examine whether we be in the number of those thirsty
souls; that have this hearty affection for the appearing of Christ. It is safe
for us to feel the pulse of our souls; and by these tokens make a judgment of
them, whether they beat Heavenward or no. What is it, may every one say to
himself, what is it that I most admire, and holds the principal place in my
esteem? On what is it, that I have fixed my mind, and set mine heart? What is
the chiefest Loadstone of my affections, and whither does the main current of
them run? To what is it that my actions are addressed? What is my Hope, and the
strength and support of my heart? If I might have my wish, what would I now
see? The whole world fall down at my feet, to worship me; or all these things
vanish and disappear before the Glory of the Lord Jesus, that we might go, and
fall down, and worship His Majesty? What am I content to suffer and endure for
this, though I stay long before I enjoy it? Has patience had its perfect work;
and do I rejoice, though in tribulation, in hope of this Glory? Is this my
satisfaction also, in the greatest fullness of worldly goods; and are mine eyes,
even then, ever toward the Lord? Am I still looking up unto Jesus; sighing for
him and saying, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly? I can appeal to thee, that thou
know there is nothing I so much long for, as that thou would come. O
come, make haste to come; and satisfy the desires of thy Church, which have
long cried, Come Lord Jesus.

Let us not deceive our selves; this great Apostle has pronounced a curse upon
every one that loves not the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. xvj. 20. And he that loves Him,
loves his appearing: and he that loves his appearing, sets his thoughts, his
heart, his design so much upon it, as to contrive by all means (whatsoever
become of him here) that, when Jesus who is our life shall appear, he may
appear with him in his glory. Riches, Greatness, Pleasures, Fame, Long-life,
and all the train that waits upon them, are but as so many big names; loud, but
empty, sounds which signify nothing to him; in comparison with these exceeding
great things, the COMING, the APPEARING, the KINGDOM and the GLORY of Christ
Jesus. The sweetest Friend in this world, to whom he has conceived the most
passionate love, will not hinder him from seeking these: but rather by that
love he will be excited to remember with what inexpressible affection he ought
to pursue such divine enjoyments; not only for his own soul, but for his second
self. The best wish he can make for both is, that they may be carried with the
same eager desires and hasty speed, to perfect their love in the incomparably
greater joys and blessedness of Christ's heavenly kingdom.

So great they are, that, having now finished all that was at first propounded
to be considered on this subject, this Love will not be content that I should
here make an end. It being such a masterly affection, and governing the soul so
absolutely, as has been related, will not suffer us to lay that presently out
of our thoughts, which it has once planted very deep in our hearts. It is one
of its greatest pleasures, to think very much of that Good, whose company it
does not yet enjoy: and, when it is far distant of it self, to make it present
by a constant image of it in the Mind.

And therefore it cannot be any wonder, if we bear a true love to the appearing
of Christ, that it will not permit us to be willing to cease our Meditations,
on so delightful an argument. It does but act according to its nature, if it
require us again to take another view of it; and spend a few more thoughts upon
so bright and glorious an object. And happy were it for us, if it were nothing
else but mere Love, that made me resume this Discourse and begin it again; and
that made those who read it to be willing or rather desirous to know further,
what are the causes of this heavenly affection, to the appearing of our Lord.

For that is it, wherein I intend to employ the remainder of my thoughts, upon
this subject. Love is a passion that is very desirous to feel it self; and to
be satisfied of its own sincerity, by the strength, and force, and restlesness
of its motion. It fills the heart also with such a secret joy, that it would
fain know the very spring of all its delectable motions; and be led to the rise
of every one of its desires and inclinations. Both the strangeness and the
variety of its surprising pleasures are so great, that our hearts cannot but be
invited thereby to the very bottom of it; to see from whence it flows, as we
perceive whither it tends. And therefore, as I have touched upon the general
cause and reason of this passion of love in the foregoing part of this small
Treatise: so it is not fit to deny it, in the following part, a brief
consideration of the particular reasons, why it should be set upon the
appearing of Christ.

And they may be reduced to these two Heads.

First, The great affection that all good souls have for our blessed Savior
himself: And,

Secondly, The natural affection we all bear to our own good and welfare.

Which when we have considered, we shall be ashamed that we do not with greater
fervor say, with respect to this, in our daily prayers, THY KINGDOM COME: And
be mightily excited to call upon our souls more frequently, to meditate on that
blessed hope, and to look, with much affection, for the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Who will be so much honored
thereby himself, and then confer such upon us, as should make us long for the
accomplishment of both.

CHAP. XI. Reasons for our Love to this Appearing, drawn from the respect we
ought to have to our Lord himself.
AS for the first of these, the affection that is due to our blessed Savior,
it ought to be strong, you will easily confess, that death it self should not
be an equal match for it: That which conquers all things, should it self be
conquered by this; and the king of terrors should yield all his force, and
yield himself a Captive to the love of the King of Love.

For since there is so great a power in hearty and unfeigned love, to beget
love in those to whom it is expressed; and since the love whereby our Lord
attracts our affection, does so vastly exceed all other: it is a prodigious
obstinacy or negligence that the dullest and heaviest souls are not drawn by so
big a Loadstone.

Do we not feel, as I have said elsewhere, some motions of kindness in our
hearts for the most contemptible creatures; when they constantly fawn upon us,
and follow us, and lie down by us, and will by no means leave us, but take our
part if any body assault us? Are we not much pleased with this affection they
have to us, and concerned for their safety, and ready to reward them with
tokens of our love to them? We must be infidels then, or very inconsiderate and
regardless of our blessed Savior; or else find our hearts put into the
greatest passion, when we read and seriously weigh the strange expressions,
which our Savior has made, of the most endearing love to us.

When we remember Low he neglected himself, to serve us; how he endured hunger
and thirst, that we might be satisfied; how he gave the people the very bread
out of his mouth, and forgot to feed himself, that he might nourish them; when
we see how he addresses himself unto us; how he wooes and courts us (to speak
in our own language) with the greatest kindness to come to him; how solicitous
he is for our happiness; how he sighed for us; how he groaned in spirit to see
men so obstinate; how he sweat; how he bled; how he gave his very life for us;
and was content to be exposed to the greatest shame, rather than we should
perish; what heart can be so insensible as not to be mightily affected with it,
and to think of returning back his love, and that in some proportion to the
wonderful greatness of it?

But then, alas! it must be confessed that, we find, when our passion is
stirred up, and our hearts begin to burn within us, we have little or nothing
there, that is worthy of him. A present we would fain make to him, but have
none fit to be offered to so great a Majesty. Nay, so void many times and empty
are our hearts, of all that is good, that we may well be ashamed to let him see
them. Our thoughts are so dull, and the resentments we have of his kindness so
feeble and weak, that we our selves in whom they are, can scarce feel them. And
at the best our affections are so small and so short, that we cannot but blush
to come furnished with no better oblation to him.

What shall we do in this case? How shall we behave our selves with some due
regard to his incomprehensible love? Love him we must; but love him as he is
worthy, and as we would, we are not able. We cannot choose but bring him our
hearts, and yet we are sensible they are not worth the bringing.

We shall find our selves naturally inclined, in these circumstances, to do
just as a grateful Poor man does; who being unable himself to requite a Friends
courtesies, rejoices to hear that so very great a Person will take that care
upon him. Or as the Divine Psalmist does, who finding his own thoughts too
short and low, calls upon the Angels, who excel in strength, to set forth the
praises of him, whose name is highly exalted above all blessing and praise.
That is, since we our selves cannot requite the benefits our Lord has done us,
nor worthily magnify his goodness toward us; we ought in all reason to be
exceeding desirous that God, the Father of glory (as St. Paul calls him) would
be pleased to reward his love, and make his praise glorious. Since there is
nothing here whereby we can considerably honor him; we must needs wish the day
would come, when the Blessed and only Potentate will show the respect he bears
unto him.

As it is a joy to think that he is gone to the Father and there is recompensed
for his sufferings: so it is a matter of greater gladness, if we have any love
for him, to remember that at his appearing (which he, who is able, will in due
time show) he shall still be more magnified. This therefore all serious
Christians cannot but much desire to see. For this they cannot but long
extremely; and call with earnest expectation for the coming of that joyful day.
That, since they cannot laud and praise him enough now, the whole world may
then be gathered together, in one general assembly, all Angels, and all Men,
and with joint consent bow themselves before him, and humbly acknowledge him to
be the LORD OF ALL.

And here I shall take the liberty, for the clearer understanding of this, to
give a distinct account, in a few considerations, of that which, we may justly
conceive, will accrue to our blessed Savior by his glorious Appearing.

I.
And first of all, there is no doubt but, at his second appearing, our Lord
will be publicly honored; and thereby have an amends made him, for the open
shame and the public disgrace, to which he was here exposed. No Varlet was
ever used so basely, as the world treated him; when he first came to visit us
in much humility. No man was ever the subject of so much scorn, of so many
sorrows, and of so great pains as he endured. Would it not then be acceptable
to you, to see his honor every where vindicated; his credit, as I may say,
repaired; and his glory made no less notorious, than his reproaches were?

Who would not wish to see that sweet face (which by rude hands was so
contemptuously blinded and buffeted) appear in an unveiled brightness; looking
with the fairest, the most beautiful and gracious eyes upon us? How is it
possible to refrain from desiring to see that countenance which was spit upon,
and all bespawled by the filthy mouths of wicked men; shining with rays
brighter than the Sun, and glistring in the Glory and Majesty of God the
Father? Are you not impatient to behold that Head, which was environed with
Thorns, show it self with a royal Crown upon it? Would you not fain see him as
much admired, as he was despised; as highly praised and extolled, as he was
vilely mocked and flouted?

O that I might behold that time arrive (is every devout lover of the Lord
Jesus apt to say) O that I might be blessed with a sight of that Glory and
Honor, wherewith, we believe, thou art already crowned! Thou wast sorely
wounded and grossly abused, O dear Savior, by those whom thou came to heal
and to save. They barbarously smote and besmeared thy holy face; they nailed
thee to a Cross; they pierced thy hands and thy feet; they thrust a spear into
thy side and left thee all in gore; they condemned thee as the foulest
Malefactor; and crucified thy Name and Reputation, as well as thy self. And,
which is worse, how have thine own followers grieved thee, and pricked thy very
heart, by their base ingratitude to thee; who wast pleased to be thus vilely
used for their sake?

And what reparation, are the best among us able to make thee? What does it
amount unto, that such poor wretches as we can do for thee? How mean and
inconsiderable is all the honor and all the praise that we, little and
worthless things, can pretend to give thee?

O thou God of love, thou Father of mercies, we must address our desires to
thee; and beseech thee, that thou would be pleased to do it for us. Thou, who
art the Blessed and only Potentate; who have already appointed him to be heir
of all things; who have given him a more excellent inheritance than the Angels;
and when thou broughtest him into the world, did command them all to worship
him; finish I beseech thee, according to the riches of thy glory, the
recompenses thou have begun to make him. Let me and all men else see how Thou
love him, and what honor thou have conferred on him.

Behold how this soul sighs out its desires to thee, that thou would
vouchsafe to hasten his Appearing; and to show him to the world in the glory
which thou have given him. Let us all behold him as highly exalted, as he was
lowly depressed and abased. Let us SEE HIM AS HE IS, the Prince of Life, the
King of Glory. O perfect that which concerns him. Let him come, and receive
our universal acknowledgements. Let all Kings fall down before him, and all
nations serve him. Let them all call him blessed, and Heaven and Earth be
filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.

II.
They may well pray after this manner, and speak of his perfecting, that which
is begun; because ( secondly) till the day of his glorious appearing, it is
most certain, his conquests will not be completed over all his enemies. The
very greatest of them will remain unsubdued, till he come then to tread them
under his feet. Which cannot but dispose us to love that time above all other;
because it will make him perfectly victorious.

He is sat down, says the Apostle, at Gods right hand (x. Heb. 12, 13.) from
thenceforth EXPECTING till his enemies be made his footstool. Though he be
highly advanced, that is, above all creatures, yet all his enemies do not
presently fall down before him: but he must stay sometime before, not only all
the adverse Empires on earth submit themselves to him but, the Principalities
also in the Air, and Death it self; which is the last enemy, says St. Paul,
which shall be destroyed, and put under his feet. He rules and reigns indeed;
but still he has many opposers of his Kingdom. He waits likewise for their
utter subversion and looks for their total ruin; but still they spoil and
commit many wastes within his territories. The Devil tyrannizes and rages in a
number of places; and Death (as I must show anon) devours all.

How can we choose then, but wait for that, of which he himself is in
expectation? Where is our love to him, if we can cease to wish that all those
foes who despise or refuse his Government, were perfectly brought in subjection
to him? Is there any thing more desirable, to those who pray seriously his
Kingdom may come, than to see those put under his feet, who now proudly trample
upon his sovereign Authority? What more joyful sight can there be to them, than
to behold the Devil, who now insults so insolently in his Dominions, despoiled
of all his power; and thrust down into the eternal Prisons and Chains of
Darkness, to which he is reserved? To say nothing yet, of the glory it will be
to him, to overcome Death it self, to which even all his subjects are forced at
present to submit.

O blessed Savior (should all Christian souls say, with one consent) it
afflicts us to hear thine enemies roar in the midst of thy Congregation; to see
them thus triumph and set up their banners. And far more grievous it is to
think, that we have ever been in the number of them; and given the least
countenance and support to this hellish Kingdom. The remembrance of it is
bitter to us, that there was a time (wretches that we were) when we were drawn
aside to join our selves to this wicked faction; and abett the Apostate spirits
in their rebellion against thee, their sovereign Creator.

But blessed be thy Goodness, thou have overcome our disobedient hearts; and
restored us to an happy accord with thee. We thank thee for it with all our
souls; and wish we might likewise see all Nations fall down before thee and
worship thee. What a joy would it be to see all the kingdoms of the earth,
become the kingdoms of thee, O Christ? What greater pleasure can our hearts
desire? which are not able to express the satisfaction it would give them, to
behold the kingdom of darkness, which is shaken already, falling flat upon the
ground.

Overturn it, overturn it, O thou most Mighty, utterly overturn it. O come, and
do that which we endeavor but cannot do. Come, and let us see thee vindicate
thy self, from the affronts of all thine insolent enemies. Let us see all the
Legions of Evil-Spirits, haled as Captives at the wheels of thy triumphant
Chariot. Let us see all the Powers of the Air flying away at thy presence, to
hide themselves in the pit of Hell for ever.

O thou who have subdued us unto thee, subdue them likewise and bring them
under thee. Thou who did wrest us out of their hands, wrest from them all
their power, and leave them none to get any more into their hands. As thou have
conquered; so we would gladly see thee triumph. As thou have overcome; so we
would fain see thee carried in magnificent and royal state, as the most
victorious LORD OF HOSTS.

Haste thee therefore, O sweet Savior, to receive our Ovations. Come, that all
the world may give thee, the acclamations which thou deservest. Why is thy
Chariot so long in coming? Why stay the wheels of thy Chariot? O that it would
please thee to come, while our souls are peeping out of their windows to look
for thee: while they call, and cry, and sigh after thee: while they are full
charged, with shouts and praises to bestow upon thee.

III.
There is very great reason, you cannot but see, that they should be thus
desirous of his appearing; because, it is manifest by what has been now said,
it will bring along with it some addition of Glory to our Dearest Lord.

If we had a Friend who was elected to be a King, should we not often call for
the day that would place him on his Throne? Or if he were seated there, but had
some rebellious Subjects still in arms, in a corner of his Country; should we
not be in some pain, till we saw his conquering banners return with their
spoils? Or if that were done, and a time then prefixed for a solemn meeting of
all the Estates of his Realm, in the midst of which he intended to sit himself
with the greatest Pomp; should we not think it long till we saw him shine
there, and receive the homage of so many illustrious Persons?

Tell your selves then, with what ardors you should wait for the coming of your
Lord. Who, though he be now Crowned, yet does not for the present see all his
enemies sudued; nor appears, as yet, in the grand assembly not only of the
Angels and mighty men, but of all people whatsoever, who shall be gathered
before his Majesty.

It is true indeed, he being inthroned in the Heavens, sits there in royal
Honor and Glory. But St. Luke tells us (as you heard before ix. 26.) that he
will appear in the end of the world, not only in his own glory, but in the
glory of his Father also: As if that were something more, than what he has
already received at his right hand. That is, he will come from thence to judge
the quick and the dead. Which will be an exceeding great glory, such an high
honor as was never conferred upon any person whatsoever; to have all judgment
committed unto him, and sustain the very place of the Supreme Lord and
Governor of the World, to whom Men and Angels are accountable for their
actions. This is a thing that is still behind: and there are, it seems, some
royal Majestic robes belonging to this high Office, which he has not yet put
on.

O how much should we desire to have Him clothed with them? How earnestly
should we look, to behold him decked with that Majesty, and arrayed in his most
glorious attire? It should not be enough to us, to believe that he reigns; but
we should long to see the last exercise, and the greatest proof of his Kingly
Authority: which is to judge the world in righteousness, and to reward all men
according to their works.

O God, should every true Christian say, who, according to thy faithful word,
have glorified thy Son Jesus, and committed all Judgment to him; hasten the
day, when thou will complete the glory thou have given him, and gather all
nations before him. Cloth him in the Glorious Robes of thy Majesty; and let
him appear in his Meridian brightness. Send him forth of thy Sanctuary; and let
him outshine the Sun in his strength.

O that he would shine forth, and shoot his rays as far as this earth. Let
them not be confined to the highest Heavens; but let the air and these
inferior regions be all gilded with the splendour of his beams.

O blessed Jesus, that we might behold thy light breaking out, to banish all
this smoke and disperse these vapors, wherein we are enclosed. Let the Troops
of thy holy Angels come, and expel those evil Spirits which have possessed
themselves of these aerial places. Let thy glorious throne be set there, where
they have so long ruled.

Arise, and show thy self, O thou Judge of the World. Let them all know that
they are subject to thy tribunal. And sentence them to their proper
habitations; that after thy appearing they may disappear, and never break loose
to infest or trouble us any more.

Then will thy faithful servants shout aloud for joy, and triumph in thy
praise. They will sing a new Song before thy Throne, and magnify thee in some
such words as these.

Who in the Heavens can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the Sons of the
mighty can be likened unto the Lord? lxxxix. Psalm. 6. xv. Rev. 3, 4.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy
Name? For thou only art holy: All Nations are come to worship before thee; for
thy judgments are made manifest.

IV.
And upon this account we should be the more desirous to see that great day;
because till then he will want the glory of having us and all his faithful
Subjects, attend upon him in his heavenly Kingdom. It is a very small glory
indeed, you may be apt to think, that he can receive from such poor things as
we are. Who must acknowledge that we are unworthy, utterly unworthy of the
favor to approach unto him; and if we should be so vain as to think otherwise,
deserve to be banished for ever from his blessed presence. But when we remember
how great his love is, and what he has promised to do for us, we must likewise
confess, to the glory of his Grace, that he can and will raise us so much above
our selves; that it shall be an honor to him to have such subjects, who by his
Almighty Power are so nobly preferred. The magnificence and greatness of his
Kingdom, will appear in the greatness and splendour of all his Friends and
followers. It shall be seen in them, what he is, and how highly God the Father
has exalted him; whom he gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church: which is his body, i. Ephesians. 22, 23.
the fullness of him that fills all in all.

Certain it is he cannot be perfect (as he is the Head of the Church) without
all his members. In which regard several, both of the Greek and Latin Fathers,
V.S. Chrysostom. Oecumenium, S. Hieron.
think that his Body, the Church, is called his FULLNESS; because he will not be
absolutely completed and consummated, till all his members be knit together in
one body, and joined to him, in such a glory as is befitting those that are so
nearly related to him: who is able to communicate to them out of his fullness,
what excellencies he pleases. This, says St. Chrysostom, is the hope of our
calling; (which the Apostle speaks of before) the riches of the glory of the
inheritance; the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe.

For whom he has such an affection, and loves us with so great tenderness;
that he does not think himself entirely happy, unless we be promoted to be with
him where he is, and to reign with him for ever. So much is his heart set upon
our advancement, that he accounts himself to be but in part glorious; till we
be numbered among his Saints in glory everlasting.

Then will he shine in greater splendour and majesty than ever; according to
those words of St. Paul in another place, 2 Thessalonians. i. 10. where he says, He
shall come to be GLORIFIED in his Saints, and to be ADMIRED in all them that
believe. For first of all (as Oecumenius has collected the sense of the
ancient Fathers about this business) it will be a glory to him, that he has so
many Saints, to whom he will distribute his goods, and make illustrious with
him. For as his riches, says he, is our salvation, so it will be a glory to
him. And secondly, He will be glorified also by his Saints, when they shall
behold him sitting (...), etc. in his Fathers Glory, the God and the Judge of
all. And thirdly, We may add that the Saints will procure him glory from the
spiritual powers, when they shall see what a recompense of reward he has
vouchsafed to his servants. Who as they shall give occasion to his being
glorified, so to his being admired also: because it will be a most wonderful
and amazing sight to see those, who were thought so vile and abject in this
present life that they were persecuted and murdered, accounted worthy then of
such and so great good things as he will bestow upon them.

And truly, as our Lord will be thus magnified and admired at that day; so this
ought now to be very wonderful in our eyes. Who have little consideration, if
we be not exceedingly in love with his appearing; when self-love so strongly
inclines and prompts our affection to it. Can we find in our hearts to turn
away our eyes from that, or cease to long for it with ardent desire; which
Nature it self calls for, as the greatest Good? Here our own interest combines
with his, to make us wish for that blessed day; which shall make him more
illustrious, by the brightness of our glory. Here two great Seas meet and run
into one; to make our souls swell and rise up in bigger expectations of his
happiness.

Come, should your heart and mine say, come, O blessed Jesus; and at once make
us and thy self entirely glorious. Arise, O thou Sun of Righteousness, and shed
thy beams so plentifully upon us, that we may shine with thee, as the Sun in
the Kingdom of the Father.

Great are the things which are spoken of thy coming; when the exceeding
greatness of thy power shall appear, to usward who believe. O come, and
complete thine own fullness; by filling us, out of thine exuberant Goodness,
with all the blessings of thine heavenly Inheritance. Do not want that
happiness any longer; which will make us happy too, together with thee. Delay
not to put on those Kingly Robes; wherein when thou appearest, we shall be
promoted to reign as Kings with thee for ever.

How will our ravished spirits then rejoice, in that great salvation! How will
they triumph, to see every knee bow to thine exalted Name! Nay, to see thee
admired in us; cxlviij. Psalm. 14.
when thou shall exalt the honor of thy people, the praise of all thy Saints.

O come, that the greatness of thy Glory and Majesty may appear in thy Saints;
and thy wonderful power and love in all those that believe.

And till thou come, lot all thy Saints be joyful in glory. cxlix. 4, 5.
Let them sing aloud in perfect quiet and repose. Yea, let the high praises of
our God be in their mouth; who has given us hope of victory over all our
enemies. Let them never cease to praise him; who takes pleasure in his people,
and will beautify them with his Salvation.

Praise him, who has promised to come, and visit us in greater love than ever.
praise him who is the head over all things to the Church; and will prefent it
to himself a glorious Church, v. Ephesians. 27.
not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing. Let his name be always engraven
upon our hearts; who has comforted us with the blessed hope, of seeing him in
all his glory. Let the memory of his transcendent love be ever most dear unto
us; who intends to lift us up, to sit with him in Heavenly places. Let us never
forget to rejoice in his holy Name; with whom we expect to rejoice in the
highest happiness of endless Life.

And, O blessed Jesus, that we may be so happy now, as to long for that day, on
thy account, as well as our own. May it delight us to think, how thou will be
admired and highly praised, in our exaltation. Make us so much in love with
thee, as to desire to see our selves raised unto honor; because it will make
thee also appear in greater glory.

CHAP. XII. Other Reasons why we should love his appearing, drawn from the love
we have to our selves.
THus I have made a fair way, to introduce the second thing which I propounded,
for the completing of this Discourse. Wherein I am to show, how the natural
Affection we all bear to our selves, should powerfully dispose us to love the
Appearing of our Lord Jesus. And this will admit of no less than these TEN
Considerations: which will instantly, at the very first hearing, win our assent
to the truth of them. For,

I.
First, We cannot but passionately desire, if we have any belief of this
Appearing, to see so great an honor, as will then be done to our Nature. So
great, that no soul, who is possessed with a lively sense of it, can be tempted
any longer to envy the greatness of the noblest Persons; no, not the high
dignity of the blessed Angels. The brightest of the Cherubins should not be so
grievous to us, as to hurt our eyes; nor the flames of the Seraphims touch us
with the least spark of indignation, to see our selves so much excelled by
them: But we should rather wish they were more glorious and illustrious;
because the greater they are, the greater will the advancement of our nature
be, which, at the appearing of Christ, will shine in a place so far above the
highest of them.

Those heavenly Creatures indeed are so splendid; that we poor mortals, even
the holiest of us, were wont to be afraid at their appearance. They are too
glittering for our weak eyes to behold: too full of luster, for us, who dwell
in these caves of darkness, to converse withal. Whence it was, that some pious
people, in ancient times, presently concluded they should dye, if they saw an
Angel: imagining that his business, when he appeared, was to fetch their souls
from their bodies; in which while they lived, they were not fit for such
Society. And other excellent persons were so amazed at the glory of these
celestial Ministers, that they thought of paying them no less than religious
honor; and prepared themselves to fall down before them and worship them as
Gods.

O what an happiness then will it be, to see our Natures so improved and
exalted; that we shall be able to entertain their company, without any
trembling at all: and instead of those paralytick fears, be only struck with a
delightful sense of the most harmonious joys? What a glory will it be unto us,
what a joy, to find our selves made equal to those, whom we took for Gods? To
behold our selves as bright as those celestial fires; which were wont to dazzle
the eyes of the greatest souls, and possess them with an apprehension, that
they were Divine Beings?

But especially we ought to consider, what an honor, what a satisfaction it
will be, to behold, not so few as one, or two, or a thousand of those beautiful
Creatures but, the whole Heavenly Court, (whom we were ready to adore) come all
with bended knees, and humbly prostrate themselves in the most profound
adorations, at the feet of our ever blessed Savior, Christ Jesus. Into what a
rapture will it cast us, to behold our Nature so advanced; that all the Gods
shall approach and worship this same Jesus, who was so debased and abused? A
most glorious and delightful sight it will be, to behold him in the head of all
those Heavenly Hosts: to see all the air filled, with the several Legions of
Holy Angels: to behold every Troop in that glorious Camp, paying their respect
to our far more glorious Lord; and with their shouts and joyful acclamations
following him, as their General and chief Commander: And all the Powers of
Darkness likewise crouching at his feet, quaking at his Majestic Presence,
disarmed of all their weapons, and confessing themselves the Captives and
Slaves of this victorious Prince, Christ Jesus.

O my ambitious desires, where are you? What is become of you, O my aspiring
thoughts? You that used to be ever climbing aloft, and perpetually heaving up
my heart; whither are you gone, or into what dullness are you now sunk down?
What is the matter that you lie asleep; when so fair an object presents it
self, to awaken and rouse you up? What ailes you, that I do not feel you stir;
who were wont, with less temptations, to be all on fire?

Is there any thing we can reasonably thirst after with so much ardor, as to
have all the world behold us made the companions of Angelical Natures? What is
there that you can fancy a higher glory, than to see this flesh of ours taking
place of the Heavenly Spirits? To behold all the Armies of Heaven and Earth,
waiting upon the supreme Judge of the World, the Man Christ Jesus?

Get up then, get up, and pray perpetually that this most blessed time may
come. Rouse up your selves, and in your most passionate wishes, fly beforehand
thitherward. Let this be the But at which you shoot, the mark at which you
always aim, O my winged thoughts, and hasty desires. Let this be the end of
all your labors, O my busy and restless powers. And content your selves in
any conditino, till this most happy state shall come. Live upon this joyful
hope. Cheer up your selves with these most comfortable expectations. They
cannot be utterly miserable, no, they must needs be very happy whatsoever their
troubles be, who look for such an incomparable glory.

Rejoice therefore, and more than that, make your boast in this perpetually;
that one day Angels themselves, who are out of the reach of our present
calamities, shall not excel you: But if there be any difference, it shall be
only such as was between the men of Judah and the men of Israel ( at the
bringing back of King David to his Throne) that you shall be able to call this
great Son of David BONF OF YOUR BONE, AND FLESH OF YOUR FLESH, when the highest
Angels can challenge no such interest in him.

O most blessed Hope! the staff of our Life; the stay and the strength of our
Hearts! The security of the happy, and the sanctuary of the afflicted! that
which preserves our joys from becoming sour, and which sweetens the
bitterness of all our miseries! Our Rest, our Peace, our highest Satisfaction!

It is enough that I am owner of such a glorious Hope. Be thou ever in mine
eye; be thou ever in my heart. I will walk, and labor all the days of my life
in this holy Hope. And I will lie down at last in hope; that Thou who now
sendest down thy Angels to minister unto us, wilt call us up unto thy self, and
make us to sit with thee in those Heavenly Regions.

O come, come Lord Jesus, that we may be all so happy. And till thou come,
descend sometimes into this heart, which loves thee and longs for thee: and
lift it up unto thee, in more ardent desires, earnest endeavors, and holy
hopes: to see thy glory, and to appear in glory together with thee.

II.
It will be very strange, if we believe in Christ, and be not possessed with
these desires; when we attend to the secret inclinations there are in every one
of our hearts, to wish we might be blessed with the sight of him, who is so
lovely, and who has loved us so much; whom hitherto our eyes have never seen.

For did any body ever hear of a most excellently accomplished person, full of
the most obliging kindness to him, and that had infinitely merited of him, and
designed all the honor in the world for him; and not feel a most passionate
longing desire burning in him, to behold the face of this Great man, who had an
heart so tender, so noble, and so graciously affected toward him?

This is our case; who live in these remote places and ages of the world, and
have heard indeed, with the hearing of the ear, of Christ Jesus our Dearest
Savior; and of his incomparable love; and of the honor he has done us, and
still intends to do us: But have not yet been so happy, as to have our eyes
entertained, much less satisfied, with the blissful sight of him; as theirs
were who lived near him, and conversed with him at his first appearing. If we
had any hope therefore of his appearing again, though in less splendour than I
have told you, we could not but look up unto Heaven, where he lives, with
earnest expectations, and say; When will he come, when will he come, and
manifest himself visibly unto us? Because, as yet, we know nothing of him but
by the report of those, who had the honor to be EYEWITNESSES OF HIS MAJESTY.

We have been told by them that they saw this amiable and gracious person, and
clearly discerned that he was God manifested in the flesh. They have assured us
that he was born of a spotless Virgin; that his name was Jesus; that he was
acknowledged the Son of God, by voices from Heaven, and by the descent of the
Holy Ghost in a visible manner upon his head; and yet that he was contented to
become poor and mean, that he might enrich us; to suffer his hands, and his
feet, and his heart to be pierced, that he might heal our wounds: yea, we have
heard that he descended into the lowermost parts of the Earth for our
Salvation; and that he rose from the dead again after three days; and that he
ascended up on high, and now sits at the right hand of the Father; and will
come again to judge the world, and to take up his faithful Servants unto
himself.

And most comfortable news all this is, which has arrived at our ears; and we
must needs with all thankfulness dutifully acknowledge, that we are
marvellously beholden to the Almighty Goodness, which has taken such care to
persuade and fully assure us of its truth. But still every pious heart that
sincerely and ardently loves Him is apt to say;

When will he come again; that then we may see, as now we believe the certain
truth of all this; which we have heard of him with our ears? When shall we be
satisfied by such evidence as the Apostles, and other of his Attendants had;
who beheld his person, and saw his glory, as the only begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth? May not we also hope to be as they were, eyewitnesses
of his Majesty?

O when will his holy Angels descend unto us, and say, as they did to them;
Come, and see that he is risen? When shall we hear a voice from Heaven, saying;
come up hither, and behold my beloved Son, in whom I am ever well pleased? When
will the trump of the Archangel sound; and proclaim in all our ears, that he is
Judge of quick and dead? O how many days must we stay and wait, before we rise
again, to ascend up to him where he is? How long will it be, before we leave
this earth, to behold him exalted at the right hand of the Majesty on high?

O most gracious Savior, who have done such great things for us; Come, and let
us see that thou art alive, and still love us! Come, and put us out of all
doubt, that thou live for evermore! Let us behold those bright, those loving
eyes, which wept so often, and with so much kindness over us! Let us see that
sweet, and now most glorious face; which sweat as it had been drops of blood
for our sake! Stretch forth those hands, that were wounded in our service; O
stretch them out, to lay hold on us, and lift us up to the vision of thee! Do
not long defer, before thou let us enjoy, what we now believe. Make no long
tarrying, O blessed Lord, but turn the faith of thy servants into sight. And by
thy second appearing, be pleased to make us as sure, as thou did those, who
then lived, by thy first.

We are persuaded that the fame of those things which we wait for, is nothing
comparable to the sight of them. We cannot but think that all present reports
fall far short, infinitely short of future enjoyment. Thy type, the great
Solomon, O Lord, puts us in mind of thee; and makes us more desirous to see
thee. We would fain go, like the Queen of Sheba, from these furthermost parts
of the earth; that we may stand before thee in thy heavenly Jerusalem. Not the
half, we believe, of thy Magnificence has been related to us. No, not the
shadow of thy glory and Majesty has been brought to these far distant
climates; where we hear little or nothing of thee.

Nay, we believe we cannot now understand thy greatness, if it should be all
related to us. If we should see thee as thou art, in thy royal apparel, on the
Throne of thy Glory, with all thy Heavenly Attendants and noble Ministers round
about thee; there would be no more spirit left within us. We should faint away
under the weight of that sight; unless thou, O Lord, would disburden us of
this flesh, and make us become all Spirit.

And that is the happiness indeed, which we desire; and groan in Spirit till we
enjoy. There is no greater good we can wish, than to be caught up from this
earth; and have eyes bestowed upon us, bright and strong enough to behold thy
Majesty. We cannot but long for this; that we may stand in thy presence, and be
satisfied with thee: that we may see thee, who have loved us, and given thy
self for us: thee whose love has won our hearts, and conducted us thus far in
our way toward thee: thee who art our hope; and with whom our life is hid:
That we may see thee, O Lord, in the height of thy glory, and thy face may
shine upon us, and our eyes sparkle for joy with the light of thy Countenance:
Of which we are the more desirous, because we never yet had the favor to see
thee, who art so dear unto us.

O favor us therefore so much, most gracious Lord, as to come and gratify our
desires, with that unknown, that long looked for sight of thee.

III.
And there is still a greater reason to desire it, and to be in love with his
appearing; because then we hope to be perfected and consummated in Love.

This is an affection, you have heard, so pleasurable; that we are enticed
thereby, or rather sweetly forced to strain our souls to the utmost expression
of it. When we have found an object worthy of this passion, the delight it
gives us invites, nay compels, our hearts to the most abundant effusion of it;
that so we may not want the highest degree of delight and joy.

But alas! Love in this world, though exceeding sweet, is not, as we usually
speak, all Honey; but there is some bitterness mingled together with it. The
heart that is struck with it receives a wound (which cannot be perfectly healed
till it enjoys its desires) and that you know is not without the company of
anguish and pain.

1. For we find that when men admit into their hearts the love of any mortal
creature like themselves, the soul which before was whole, unbroken and entire,
is as it were separated and torn by this passion, both from it self and all
other objects; save only that which has engaged its affection. Now all men
know that no heart can be thus parted and divided, without a sense of grief and
smart, attending on such a divulsion and rending of it from it self: till it
feel that soul, which it loves as another self, effectually joined to it.

And then (2.) we find that after it has obtained well assured hopes of this;
yet those eager desires and longings that are in this passion, still carry
their sting in them; and make the heart but ill at ease until they be
accomplished. Both which it were easy to apply to that devout affection,
wherewith pious souls are touched toward our blessed Savior; which is very
unquiet and full of trouble, till they know and feel that he loves them.

3. But I shall rather observe (which is peculiar to this holy love) that the
wounds, as I may call them, which are made in any heart by the wonderful
kindness of our Savior, who loved us so much as to dye for us, are wont very
often to be a torment to it; because it can love him no more, and does not feel
such vehement transports of affection to him, as it desires, and he has
merited.

And then (4.) though we are fully persuaded that we do sincerely and heartily
love him; yet this proves a great trouble to us, here in this present state,
that we fancy him sometimes to be a stranger to us; and he seems to treat us,
as if he were suspicious of our Love.

And (5.) when we have the greatest sense of his most tender mercies, and he
sheds abroad his love in our hearts; This creates a new grief, because he stays
no longer with us, and we cannot call him back, as often as we please, to give us
those delicious tastes of his infinite Love.

But (6.) there is nothing so considerable in this matter, as that we cannot
enjoy those gracious visits from our Lord (of which we are so desirous, and
which fill the heart with the greatest love to him and delight in him (but they
conclude in sighs and groans, and leave us much unsatisfied, while we are in
this mortal body. That very love which God himself excites, those Heavenly
impressions which his own hand makes upon our hearts, the greatest ardors of
divine affection wherewith we are inspired from above; are not without their
pangs of trouble in all those, who with earnest intention of mind and most
hearty desires, give up themselves to follow them, and seriously endeavor to
comply with them.

For while a devout soul (that is in a lively manner touched by him) stretches
its wings, as I may say, and spreads it self with great affection that it may
mount up in vehement love unto him; It presently feels how unable it is to
answer those divine motions, and sees, to its sorrow, that its wings are not
grown large enough, to bear it so high, as it then aspires. There is a powerful
spirit indeed, which stimulates it to fly aloft, where he is; but while it
endeavors to obey its inspirations, it is strongly dragged and pulled down by
the earthly tabernacle, to these inferior enjoyments. It is born away with
violent and swift desires; and at the same time sinks below, and sadly flaggs
for want of power.

Like the Bird that is not yet fully fledged, which would fain fly when it
hears the Mother call; but finding its wings too weak, is forced to fall into
some hedge or tree, and there is content to hop up and down, and please it self
in its little chirpings among the branches: so does the devout soul feel it
self when it is very desirous to correspond with the heavenly motions that are
stirring in it; and when it thinks it hears the Father of Spirits, saying, Come
up hither. It fails in the attempt; and can only make some small, but feeble,
essays toward its celestial country. It is soon tired and grows weary; and
while it pants and breaths after high and excellent things, cannot reach them
or come nigh them: but faints away and spends it self in sighs, which are so
much the sadder; because it sees the spacious Heavens before its eyes, and yet
must be content to drop down and sit still upon the Earth.

Yea, the very stretching of her wings puts the soul to pain, when she cannot
fly. The straining of her self is very uneasy; when she can only groan, but
not raise up her self to the pitch that she desires. She suffers a kind of
torment between these two; the strength of her affections, and the weakness of
her ability; the sharpness of her sight, and the dullness of her enjoyment.

O miserable Creature that I am, what shall I do? (is the dejected soul in this
case apt to say.) Pardon me, Dear Lord, if my great love to thee make me call
my self miserable; when I know that I am very happy. It is my desire to be
nearer to thee, which makes me deplore, not only my distance from thee but, the
feebleness of my soul in its endeavors to approach thee.

O what a change have a few moments made in me! I thought just now I was going
up to Heaven; and alas! here I lie at this present sighing upon the ground. The
Divine breath, methought, was carrying me above; and I, unable to accompany it,
am still here below. I felt as if I was all life and spirit a little while ago;
and now I am almost dead. I seemed as if I should have quite forgot this world;
and now I can scarce think of any thing else.

O how sweet would it be, but to remember the tastes that I had of thy
transcendent love! whereas now, alas! I can scarce relish any thing that is
good. What shall I do with my self? Or what shall I desire for this poor soul,
which is thus sadly burdened, and pressed down by the corruptible body?

My heart is with Jesus; but, O how little do I enjoy of him? I am not my self,
I am become another thing than I was before; and yet how little is there of
Jesus in me? How wide is the distance still, between me and my dearest Lord?
How do I long to be exactly like him, but how short, O how vastly short am I of
him? And how like a stranger does he sometime seem? How do I lose, in this
blind and dark estate, the sight and sense of his most precious love? I know my
heart loves him; but what a grief is it, that my love is so weak, so dull, so
little worthy of him?

O blessed Jesus, what a favor is it, that thou will be pleased to cast, at
any time, a gracious look, upon such a cold and senseless heart, as this of
mine? With what thanks ought I to receive, the smallest testimony of thine
inestimable love? Which is so sweet, that it makes us sigh because we can enjoy
no more of it. Ah! that this vessel should be so narrow and strait, as to
contain so little of thy love! Ah the dullness of this heart, which entertains
thee so poorly; that it is no wonder thou make so short a stay, so exceeding
short a stay with me! How sad is it to think of this heavy clog, which will
never let me follow thee far; when I have the strongest attractions from thee?

Fain would my soul climb up unto thee; but when I have got a little way, down
I come, and have lost that glorious sight I had of thee. And if thou art
pleased to lift me up as high as Heaven; how soon is the mind weighed down
again, while it museth upon those celestial things? O the constant joys which
I hoped to have! how are they vanished? O the satisfaction which began to be in
this heart; which now lies grovelling in the dust, filled with nothing but
sighings after thee!

And blessed be thy Goodness, that it does sigh after thee. I thank thee that I
feel such love, such vehement desire there, as makes it long for more of thee.
I will never cease to sigh after thee. I will still long for that time, when
thou, Lord, wilt be pleased to appear, and make all sighing fly away, by a
constant sight and enjoyment of thee. For this I will groan, that I may be so
happy as to see thee; and that thou will make me as strong, as sometime thou
make me desirous, to accompany thee. I will pray for this, that thou would
come, and heal those wounds which love has made; by making me perfect in thy
love.

O come therefore, Dearest Lord, and turn my desires into enjoyment, my
sickness into health, my weakness into strength, these flutterings of my soul
into a flight: into a flight, I say, from this earth into the air; where I may
no sooner wish to be with thee, but I may feel my soul snatched away, and leap
for joy to find it self in thy embraces.

Come, O my Lord, come thou lover of Souls, and let me not languish in these
longings any more. Come, and leave no place for any fears, that I shall lose
thy company. Come, and give me the full satisfaction I promise my self, in thy
sweetest society. I am content to suffer one pain, that I may thereby put an
end to all. Death is no longer dreadful to me; when I think it will bring me
something nearer to thee. Thou may rend my soul when thou please from this
flesh; that it may be torn no more, as it uses to be, when it is pulled back by
other things, and would gladly follow thee.

O join me perfectly, most perfectly to thee; that I may love thee as much, as
the most enlarged spirit is capable to love thee. Happy should I be, if I could
do nothing else but love thee, and feel that thou love me. O hasten the day,
when my time shall be divided between these two sweetest employments; of
expressing my most ardent love to thee, and rejoicing in the full satisfaction
of thy love to me.

CHAP. XIII. Two other Reasons why, if we love our selves, we must needs love
this Appearing.
IV.
SO we ought to wish, if we seriously believe there will be such a day, because
we naturally love Life and Immortality, which till then cannot be perfectly
bestowed on us. Our Lord indeed has brought these to light, and given us an
assured hope that none of those who believe in him shall perish: But as the
everlasting Life he puts us in possession of when we depart from hence (I shall
show in the next Chapter) is not presently completed; so it is out of all
question that we must stay till the last day before he perform his so
frequently repeated promise, vi. Joh. 40.54, etc.
of raising our bodies out of the dust, and making them incorruptible, that they
may live for ever.

Which is a thing we so much desire, that we are prone to please our selves
with the mere shadow of it; studying, when we dye, to make our memory survive
our ashes. We would fain record our Names in the Legend of fame, by the
performance of some remarkable exploit. Or by some memorable work, we contrive
that the world may speak of us, when we are gone down into silence. And for
fear it should not, we teach Marble-stones, and Pillars to tell what we were;
and by this means we fancy, we shall live as long as the world shall last.

But alas! this is no better than an imaginary life; which we cannot secure
neither: but must leave the World without any assurance of that, for which we
are so solicitous, and employ such serious pains. No man's Name can be so loudly
sounded by the trumpet of fame; but it may chance that succeeding ages shall
not hear the least whisper of him. Or if they do, it may fare with him as it
does with Hercules and Bacchus, who were as great Soldiers and Conquerers, it
is likely, as Alexander and Caesar, and yet now their notable achievements do
but serve to fill up the number of Fables. Epitaphs, and Escutchions, Books and
Monuments, do all dye as well as men. Our Names in all likelihood will at last
be buried and perish, as well as our selves. For this world is the place, where
death reigns and plays the Rex; not only over us, but over all the relics
that we leave behind us.

What should we wish for then, what should be the ardent desire of all Nations,
if they were believers, but the time of our Lords appearing: when this
mortality, as the Apostle speaks, shall be swallowed up of life; and we shall
receive from his hands Laurels and Crowns, that are incorruptible and never
fade away; a Name that shall never dye; a Glory, that shall live and continue
in its splendour, as long as God himself? For as this is the time wherein Death
has dominion; so that will be the time of abolishing its Kingdom, and putting
an end to all its tyranny, by setting up Life and Immortality in its stead.

O welcome time, says the heavenly minded soul, when this great devourer of
the world shall have nothing left to feed upon; unless it be the Grave, which
shall dye eternally, and never be heard of more! O what a joyful name is this
of Life, and of life for evermore! How sweetly does, even the word, IMMORTALITY
sound, in this land of death and destruction? What is it that makes our hearts
so cold, and to feel so few desires to see the Prince of Life appear? To see
Him, who shall raise up that in glory and power, which was put into the earth
in dishonor and weakness; and shall turn this natural, this corruptible body,
into one that is spiritual and incorruptible?

Are we afraid this world will be burnt up by the brightness of his appearing?
Do we pity our Palaces and costly Furniture, which we think are then in danger
to be consumed? Are we concerned for our Money and Jewels, our ancient Demesne
and places of pleasure, our Pictures and Statues, with such like things, which
we strive to perpetuate to all posterity? Will all these, do we fear, be in a
flame? and serve for no other use than those great Fires do, wherewith we
honor the Coronations and Victories of Kings, or any other such like noble
spectacle?

Let it be so; I see no cause to be troubled at it: when I remember that
together with these, the Graves and the Sepulchers, the Tombs and such like
Monuments of Deaths conquests, the Vaults and the Charnel-houses, with every
other Trophee that sin has erected, shall be cast into this huge Bonfire;
which shall be made, we conceive, by the conflagration of this Globe of earth,
to adorn our Saviors Triumph.

Why should we dread, O my soul, to behold such Flames as these? Let us look
and fix our eyes upon them as most cheerful blazes. Let us warm our hearts, at
the very thoughts of such fires. And though they should prove to be this worlds
Funeral; yet let us rejoice in them as accompanying our most happy
Resurrection.

O Death, I fear none of thy threatenings. O Grave, I am not astonished any
longer at thy darkness. I see the fatal day is coming, which shall put an end
to both your dominions. And till then, I yield my self your subject, and intend
not to struggle against your power. But I fear it not: because, unless you can
prevent that day, or prevail against my Savior, as well as over me, I am safe
enough.

It is not much you can rob me of at present. The pleasures we enjoy in this
crazy body, are not so considerable, that we should mightily lament the loss of
them. Our Friends indeed have taken such fast hold of our hearts, that we
cannot easily consent to leave them: but setting them aside, what is it that
you can take away, which I am loath to part withal? And they, I consider, shall
at last triumph together with me, over your now prevailing power. We shall only
part, to meet again, and see you swallowed up in victory. And we shall be
revived in bodies far more glorious, with hearts full of more vigorous love. In
which we shall live with endless pleasure; without any fears of being severed
any more. Amen.

I wish thou would come, O blessed Jesus, and carry us all to a place of
secure and peaceful love: where we might sit together, and chaunt thy praises
for ever.

V.
We cannot but be inclined to such meditations, and bear an affectionate love
to our Lords appearing, unless we be in love with Sin; which at that time (we
should further consider) shall quite cease, and not have so much as the least
shadow of it remaining.

Are not all pious souls very much afflicted, to think that God is every where
so much dishonored? Is it not exceeding grievous to them, to see his most high
authority daily affronted, without any remedy for it? and that Image he has
placed of himself in man, after such a lamentable manner, and without any
remorse, continually mangled? Nay, is it not a considerable part of their
trouble, that they are afraid lest, through the violence of temptations, or the
weakness of their nature, or the inadvertency of their minds, by sudden
surprises, they should add to the number of those disorders which are already
so prodigiously increased? What is there then, for which they can more
reasonably wish; than that they may be delivered out of this fearful danger,
and the Heavens may be secured from this rude violence?

A blessing to be desired and expected not only upon their own account, but in
respect to our blessed Lord and Savior also, who is now, we read, in the most
holy place above, there presenting himself, with his precious blood, before God
for us. Which he must continue to do, till the time of his Appearing be
fulfilled; when he shall come out from thence without sin (ix. Heb. 28.) as
having discharged all his Office in that heavenly Sanctuary. While he stays
therefore in that place, the care of all the people lies upon his shoulders:
there is a daily charge he is to attend; that he may cure and expiate the sins
of men. This is the constant employment of his high and Royal Priesthood, and
it cannot cease till he come out again, on the day of his appearing: which, it
is manifest, will free both him and the world from this great burden of
transgressions.

Then there shall never be any more objects of his pity and compassion. He
shall have no sense then of our infirmities; no feeling of our pains, our grief
and our anguish. Then he will cease to be afflicted with us, and be put to no
further trouble about us: But be all delight, all joy, all complacence and
pleasure in his members; who will be so well, as to call for none of his care
any more for ever.

And shall not the thoughts of this blessed time be our joy and pleasure too?
We have very much reason to suspect our faith, if we can find such contentment
here, that we would not have it make too much haste: For nothing is so sad to
pious hearts, as that it seems to be so far off, and comes so slowly to them.
They groan and sigh here under many weaknesses. They complain most heavily, and
mourn under the weight of many imperfections. From which they would fain be
delivered; that they may turn their sighs, into songs of praise to the
triumphant Captain of their salvation, Christ Jesus.

Nay, should we suppose there will be a time, before the end of all things,
when righteousness will more universally prevail; which is the best sense that
can be made of the Saints reigning upon the earth with Christ a thousand years
(which some are persuaded is still to come:) Yet such and so many are the
weaknesses that will hang upon us, and so great are the dangers to which they
will make us subject, while we dwell in these earthly Tabernacles, that Good
men would but be the more desirous our Lord would appear, to perfect what they
saw so happily begun, in their entire reformation to a better state.

O what a long time am I like to stay, cries such an oppressed soul, before I
be eased of this burden, which is too heavy for me? How many days and years
more must I spend, under the load and pressure of this flesh and blood? Give me
patience, Dear Lord, to wait for that day, which shall free me from it. Make me
able to support my self in contentment, with the hopes that the time of
release, at last will come.

I am so far from being unwilling that thou should come; that I beseech thee
to make me willing to stay, till thou can come. Only give me leave sometime
to sigh and say, when will thou come! O when will thou come! Suffer me to wish
most passionately that thou would appear: Be not angry with me, if in the
agonies of my soul I desire thou would haste thine appearing.

And in the mean time, increase my belief that thou, O compassionate Savior,
pitiest my weaknesses, and art not insensible of all my miseries: that so I may
more comfortably hope, thou will come and ease me and thy self, both together.
Bear up my sinking spirit, till I be so happy: and by thine almighty power
support me under the weight of all the fears and all the doubts that are apt to
trouble me. And let not the dullness of my mind, or the heaviness of my heart,
the distraction of my thoughts, or the deadness of my affections in thy most
delightsome service, utterly deject me. But raise me up with a cheerful hope of
thy salvation, to a pitch of joy and gladness, under all the burdens that
oppress me.

I am forced indeed to sigh, when I think of the many temptations to which, on
every side, I am exposed. And more sad it is to think that they, at any time,
have shaken, though not overthrown me. O the childish follies of a mind, which
does so much as listen to the treacherous allurements, which would steal away
my heart from its happiness! O the intolerable weakness of an heart, which does
so much as waver in its resolved choice, of so reasonable a service as that of
thine, wherein I am engaged!

Pardon me, Good Lord, that I call it intolerable. For I know I ought to bear
it in hope of greater strength and of eternal settlement: and that I ought to
rejoice I am not overcome, by all the temptation, wherewith I have been
assaulted. Blessed be thy Almighty Grace, that I have stood hitherto so
steadfast, so unmovable in my duty: and that I have thy word for it, thou will
never leave me nor forsake me. It is only my love to thee, which makes me
complain, though not of the inconstancy yet, of the weakness of my love. The
coldness of my affections, the listlessness of my devotions, my aptness to be
tired and soon weary of the divinest pleasure and satisfaction, the unevenness
of my temper, the sudden discomposures I feel in my spirit, are the things that
often trouble me.

But I ought to remember that I am now in a body full of disorders: and that my
life is a warfare which I ought patiently to accomplish. And I have great
reason to bless thy name, O thou most glorious Conqueror of the Devil and sin,
by whose gracious aids, my will stands firm, and does not yield or in the
least consent to displease thy Majesty. By thy power I have and shall do
valiantly. Thou shall still tread down all mine enemies. My soul shall make her
boast in thee, O Lord, and be glad in thy salvation. For I am continually with
thee: who have holden me by my right hand. Thou shall guide me with thy
counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

Thus will I always hope in thee, if thou will but be pleased mercifully to
bear with my incurable infirmities; to relieve my fainting spirit in this
tedious pilgrimage; and to permit me to sigh sometime and say, O when will this
long contest be ended! when will this war which my passions raise in my breast
be concluded; and suffer me to live in tranquillity and enjoy the sweetest
pleasures of perfect peace! Yea when shall all thine enemies throughout the
world be disarmed! and there be no more rebellions against thy most sacred
Authority and thy sovereign will!

O come sweet Jesus, come, thou Lord of peace; get thy self and us the Victory:
that we may be more than Conquerors, and triumph in thy praise. Come, and bring
this troubled spirit into thy serene and undisturbed regions above. Come, and
give it the wings of an Angel, that I may flee away and be at rest. That I may
flee away from all the follies, and from all the sorrows of this sinful life;
and be at rest with thee, my Dearest Lord.

At rest in that peaceful place, in that Paradise above; where is no dangerous
Fruit to invite, no temping Eve to solicit, no subtle Serpent to deceive: But
we shall all live like so many Gods indeed, perfectly wise and perfectly good;
inviting one another only to praise and love thee, with our united strength.
Thee, who art the first and the last; the beginner of our Faith, and the
finisher of our Hope; the Guide of our Pilgrimage, through the troublesome
wilderness of this World; and the eternal rest of our wearied souls in that
heavenly country, which overflows with pleasures for evermore.

CHAP. XIV. Two Reasons more, to induce us to raise our thoughts and affections
to the Appearing of our Lord.
VI.
AND the very first step we shall take toward our heavenly Rest, will be so
surprising, and advance us so far above our present imperfections; that it must
needs, if we seriously consider it, make this Appearing of his extremely
desirable. Because all good men shall have the favor then to be snatched from
this earth, and carried up into the air, to meet our Lord Jesus there; when he
appears in his glory.

And who is there that understands himself, who would not wish to be thus
translated; rather than to stay here, though it were to see our Lord come to
reign with his Saints a thousand years upon the earth? Which Judaical conceit
(as St. Hierom truly calls it) was embraced by many great men in ancient times,
as a piece of the most Orthodox faith. So Justin Martyr esteemed it; and
Irenaeus, with many others, were very zealous for it. And if they had thought
more of spiritual delights, which the Saints should have in that Sabbath (as
they termed it) by the presence of our Lord, St. Austin, L. xx. deliv. Dei, c.
7.
for his part, acknowledges it would have been a tolerable opinion, to which he
himself was sometimes inclined. For all good men, as I said before, would be
glad to see righteousness planted more universally in the earth, and prevailing
over vice and wickedness, before the dissolution of all things. And yet, even
then (should we suppose them to be so happy here) they would be far more glad
to behold our Lord appear in his glory to take them quite away from this earth.
Where, as long as they continue, they must needs be dull and heavy, cloudy and
dark, and enjoy but little of him; till they quit this gross body of flesh and
blood, and go up into a purer state of light, and vigorous life.

Which St. Paul has given us hope we shall enter into, at the appearing of our
Lord. Who will descend from Heaven with great acclamations (you heard before
from 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16.) to raise the dead and judge the World. And then his
Saints are not to remain any longer here, but a sudden change being made in
them (1 Cor. xv. 52.) both they who are then alive and all those who are newly
raised from the dead, shall be CAUGHT UP TO MEET THE LORD IN THE AIR, v. 17.
There he will show himself; and not upon this earth. Thither they shall be
carried up unto him; and not he come down hither unto them.

And if you well observe it, the Apostle teaches you to believe, that this
ascent of the Saints unto him, will bein a very glorious manner. Just as he
comes from Heaven, shall they go up thither; For St. Paul says we shall be
caught up IN THE CLOUDS, as so many triumphal chariots sent to fetch us from
this earth and transport us to himself. Who when he stood before his Judges to
receive his sentence from them, thus describes his own coming to judge them,
xxvj. Matthew. 64. Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right
hand of power, and coming in the CLOVDS of Heaven. Though now, that is, I am
arraigned and condemned by you, as if I were the vilest of men; you shall one
day see that I am the Son of God, by whom you shall be judged; for with
amazement you shall behold me clothed with Divine Majesty, and coming as the
Vicegerent of the supreme Lord of all to call you to an account. For every one
knows that clouds are called the Chariot of God, civ. Psalm. 3. and therefore
his coming in the CLOVDS of Heaven can signify nothing else but his appearing
in the glory and with the Authority of his Father; as Lord of the world, that
has conquered all his enemies, and is come to pronounce the sentence of God
upon them.

In such a splendid manner, with the like pomp and state, shall we be carried
up to him; as so many Princes going to wait upon him, and to receive the honor
he will delight to confer upon us in the sight of all the world. Nay, it will
be part of our honor to be conveyed to him, just as Elias, yea he himself
ascended into Heaven. For a Chariot of Fire appeared for the transportation of
the one (2 Kings ij. 11.) and a cloud, which is the same, received the other
out of the Apostles sight, i. Act. 9.

O blessed Day, O happy Appearing, does an heavenly minded Christian often
think with himself, when a sight of my Savior will draw me up to him, to be
where he is! O most glorious, most beautiful Spectacle, when his beams which
fall upon me shall make me ascend from this earth, as the Vapors do before the
rays of the Sun! O the joy that will fill my heart, when I shall see those
gilded Chariots sent from my Savior, to fetch me unto himself!

How shall I sing when I am uncooped, and let out of this Cage (wherein I am
now confined) to accompany the free people of the air, in their heavenly
melodies? What a pleasure will it be to look behind me, as I fly up unto Jesus,
and see what a poor spot this Earth is; of which I shall then have taken my
leave for ever? O how glad shall I be, that I am to return no more to a place
so dull, so dark, and so full of miseries? How happy shall I think my self,
that I am gone quite away from this vile Orb; which will not seem then to my
exalted soul so big as a pins-head? Nay, how joyful will it make me to find,
that I am at last ascended up so high; as to have lost the sight of this little
Globe, and of all the Kingdoms and Empires that it contains?

O my Gracious Lord, pardon me if I be sometime apt to think, that thou stayest
too long before thou come, to call me up unto those heavenly places. This
flesh is too unweildly a load, when I think of that aerial state. It has made
me groan, ever since thou made me believe, that thou will bestow a lighter
garment upon my soul. Heretofore, indeed, I fancied nothing more than a body
fresh and plump, a tall and proper stature, a fair face and beautiful features;
and I was prone to envy those who dwelt in such fine and goodly Palaces: But
ever since the time that I heard of going into the air, to meet with thee, my
Lord; all the love they excite in my heart, makes such habitations seem no
better than stately Prisons. I have looked upon my self and sweetest Friends, in
our most healthy estate; and sighed to think that we were in Chains and
Fetters. Nay, the best of these houses, I tell them, at certain seasons are but
painted Sepulchers; wherein the mind lies dead and buried.

It is thou therefore, O most blessed Lord, who have made me to wish so
earnestly for thine appearing. I owe these longings to the discovery which thou
have made to me, of another and better world, whither thou intendest to
transport me. And if I have a mind to begin my journey thither presently, if I
would fain feel my wings so grown that they might be able to bear me up above
this earth, if my soul sometimes would willingly be released from these chains,
and have the freedom to leave this flesh, and if I wish withal that this flesh
may be changed, and turned into a kind of spiritual being; I must ascribe it
unto thee, who have begot these desires in me; by telling me of a building of
God eternal in the Heavens, when this earthly tabernacle is dissolved.

Thou have revealed these things to me, that I might desire them; and who can
desire them, and not wish withal that he might presently enjoy them? Let it not
displease thee therefore, I beseech thee again, O my Dearest Lord; if I say
sometimes, I am weary of being here. Do not esteem me impatient, if, in the
agonies and pangs of Love, I long to come up higher, and get as near as may be
to thy self. Suffer me to pray thee, that these walls of flesh may not long
immure me, and exclude me from thy face. At least open a window for my gasping
soul; that I may look into the purer air; and please my self in the thoughts of
the flight which I shall one day take, to see thee and enjoy thee in unclouded
Bliss.

VII.
But there is something beyond all this, to draw our affections from all things
here, and to make us love and long for the coming of our Lord: And that is, the
CROWN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, which the Apostle tells us, in this very place, shall
then be given to all those, who are thus piously disposed for it.

I cannot tell you how much is contained in these two words; unless I should
make another Treatise little less than this. For a CROWN denotes the highest
degree of honor; and RIGHTEOUSNESS signifies, in the holy language, not only
freedom from all pain and punishment, but the enjoyment of the greatest
felicity, that the most bounteous goodness of God will bestow upon his faithful
servants. No less than such a glory and happiness, as our Lord himself has
received, for a reward of his labors. For we see Jesus (says the Apostle ij.
Heb. 9.) who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of
death, CROWNED with glory and honor. So St. John saw him in a vision (as he
tells us xiv. Rev. 14.) sitting upon a white ( i. e. a bright and shining)
cloud, having on his head A GOLDEN CROWN.

And thus our Lord has caused it to be proclaimed, in the Gospel of his Grace,
it shall be done to all those whom God delights to honor. He has shown in our
blessed Savior, what he will bestow upon his constant followers. And in what
he has done for him, he has shown also that he is upright, and that there is
no unrighteousness in him. They may depend upon his word, and be confident he
will not fail their expectation; but crown their faith and patience with
immortal glory.

I say their patience, because he will have them wait long, and stay a great
while before they receive this Crown; which cannot be set upon their heads till
the day of his Appearing. He will take up all pious Souls indeed into a state
of joy and bliss, surpassing all that we can now conceive, as soon as they
depart this life; but the perfection of it they must wait for till he have
gathered the whole body of the faithful to him, that he may crown them all
together. So the Ancients understand that place, xi. Heb. 39, 40. as may be
seen in Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact and others. And so the last named
Writer discourses at large upon the xxiij. Luke 43. according to the doctrine
of St. Chrysostom, whom he constantly follows. Who pronounces that the soul
lies (...) In 1 Cor. xv. 19.
uncrowned, till the resurrection of the dead; which is the time when we shall
all receive according to what we have done in the body, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil. Which was not his opinion alone, or the sense of some few
others; but the current doctrine of the ancient Fathers. Who look upon that
invisible place and state, wherein the souls of good men are before the
Resurrection, as so much inferior to that wherein they shall be afterward,
that they have bestowed very different names upon them; expressing the
imperfect, though very happy, condition in which we must remain, till our Lord
will be pleased to appear for our consummation. It will not be amiss to mention
the descriptions they give of both.

The place and state before the Resurrection they call, Paradise; the Bosom of
Abraham; the feast of the Patriarchs; the outward Altar; below the Altar; the
Porch of the Sanctuary; the Courts of the Lord; the Custody, and the storehouse
of Souls; secret receptacles; the hidden seats or Tabernacles of the godly;
convenient or due places; places meet for them, or worthy of them; the place of
refreshment, of Light, of Peace; a portion of the spiritual Rest; the rest of
security; a certain retiring place of everlasting Rest; the port of eternal
security; the bright, the fragrant, the royal Tabernacles; the earnest or
pledge of the Kingdom; the White raiment; a Chamber in the Palace Royal; an
Habitation with God; the Asylum or place of refuge; with other such like names;
which are so obvious, that none can fail to be acquainted with them, who read
the ancient Doctors of our Religion. Among whom St. Ambrose has adventured to
give us a very particular account of this state: which I shall set down,
because it will be very pleasing to those, who are desirous of some distinct
conception of the happiness we hope for, before the Resurrection, in the
celestial Tabernacles.

Where the joy of just souls, L. de Bone Mortis, c. xj.
says he, will be disposed per Ordines quosdam, by certain orders, ranks or
degrees. First, there is the joy that they have overcome the flesh; and were
not crooked by its inticements. Secondly, that at the rate of their industry
and innocence, they enjoy security, and are not entangled like the souls of the
wicked in errors and perturbations; and are neither tortured with the memory of
their vices, nor vexed with the rage of solicitude and cares. Thirdly, that
they are supported with the Divine Testimony, of their having observed the Law;
so that they are not in fear of the uncertain event of their deeds in the last
judgment. Fourthly, because they begin to understand their Rest and Ease, and
to foresee their future glory; and pleasing themselves with that consolation in
their dwelling places, they live at ease, with great tranquillity, environed
with the guards of Angels. And the Fifth Order or Rank, has the sweetness of a
most plentiful exultation or triumph, that they are escaped, out of the prison
of this corruptible body, into light and liberty; and possess the promised
inheritance. For there is an order of the rest, as there is of the
resurrection. We shall all rise, but every one in his order. Christ the
first fruits, then they that are Christ's, who believe his coming: and then is
the end. There shall be therefore a different order of dignity and glory, as
there will be an order of deserts. So that in the sixth Order, their
Countenance will begin to shine as the Sun, and to be compared to the lights of
the stars: but is such a brightness as cannot decay. And the seventh Order will
be, that they may exult with confidence and full assurance, and confide without
any doubting, and rejoice without trembling; making haste to see his
Countenance, to whom they have devoted the Obedience of a most diligent
service. From whence, by the remembrance of an innocent Conscience, they may
presume a glorious reward of a small labor: which they beginning to receive,
shall know that the sufferings of this present time are unworthy that so great
a glory of an eternal recompense should be compared with them.

This is the Order wherein he places just souls before our Lord come to bring
them into his heavenly Kingdom. And some body under the name of St. Austin has
more briefly expressed it thus. L. de salutaribus Documentis, c. xl. Tom. 4.
We believe that when our soul is freed from the bonds of the flesh, if we have
lived well and uprightly before God, the Quire of Angels will presently come to
meet us, and troops of all the Saints will run into our embraces; and bring us
to supplicate the true Judge. Then peace will incompass us, and deep security.
We shall fear no more the fiery darts of the Devil, nor any other enemy that
desires to cast our souls into danger. Not sword, not fire, not the cruel face
of the Tormentor, not hunger, not thirst, nor any sickness. The flesh shall no
longer be contrary to the spirit; nor shall we fear any danger: but having cast
off the burden of the flesh, the holy Spirit, (to whom we had before given a
mansion in our body) will give us a mansion in Heaven. And so we shall joyfully
and gladly expect the day of judgment; in which the souls of all men shall
receive rewards according to their deeds.

Now that place and state into which we shall be admitted then, they call the
Highest Heaven; the Inner Altar; above the Altar; the House of God; the Seat of
Christ; the Celestial Kingdom; the Heavenly Inheritance; the goods of the
Kingdom; the consummation of glory; the reward of immortality; the distribution
of royal donatives; perfect joy; the expected reward; the end of all good; the
entire reward of deserts; the time of Crowns; the kingdom of fruition; the
perfect participation of good things; with other names of the like import;
which signify something much beyond what we shall enjoy before our Lords
appearing.

I shall conclude what they say of both these states, with the words of St.
Austin, Tract. xlix.
in his exposition upon St. John. All souls, says he, when they go out of this
world, have their different receptions: the good have joy, and the evil have
torment. But when there shall be a resurrection, the joy of the good shall be
more ample, and the torment of the bad more grievous. The holy Patriarchs are
received in peace, and so are Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and the good
Faithful: but all these are still in the end to receive that which God has
promised. For even the resurrection of the flesh is promised, the consumption
of death, and eternal life with the Angels. This we shall all receive together:
But as for the Rest which is given presently after death, every man receives
it, if he be worthy of it, when he departs from hence. The Patriarchs received
it first, afterward the Prophets, and more lately the Apostles, and still more
lately the holy Martyrs, and every day the good Faithful, etc.

And with these more ancient words of Irenaeus; who discourses in this manner.
Since our Lord went away in the midst of the shadow of death, to that place
where the souls of the dead are; and afterward was raised corporally; and after
his resurrection was taken up into Heaven; It is manifest that the souls of his
Disciples also (for whom the Lord wrought these things) shall go into the
invisible place appointed to them by God; and shall stay there till the
Resurrection, expecting the Resurrection: Afterward receiving their bodies, and
rising again perfectly, that is corporally, as our Lord also rose again, so
they shall come to the sight of God. For no Disciple is above his Master; but
every one that is perfect shall be as his Master. As our Lord therefore did not
straightway, flying from hence, depart to Heaven, but expecting the time of the
Resurrection appointed of the Father (which was fore-signified in Jonas) after
three days rising again, was taken up into Heaven: even so we also ought to
wait with patience the time appointed by God for our Resurrection, foretold by
the Prophets; and so rising again be taken up, as many of us as the Lord shall
account worthy of it.

And whosoever shall be thought worthy of that world (as our Lord speaks) and
of the resurrection of the dead, they will be filled, no doubt, with
inconceivable joy, to meet so many pious souls, and so many Friends, who will
be all assembled at that time to receive the reward, they have so long waited
for. For if all the Faithful be one body (as St. In xi. Heb. 40.
Chrysostom, or the Author of the Commentary on the Hebrews *, under his name,
speaks) it will be a greater pleasure to this body to be Crowned all together,
than if it should be done by parts. For the righteous even in this are
admirable, that they rejoice in the good of their Brethren, as well as their
own: and therefore this will be according to their hearts desire, that they
shall be Crowned with their fellow members; For it is a great satisfaction to
be glorified together.

Of which since we have so sure an expectation, and the just (as St. Ambrose
speaks in the place forementioned) have such a recompense, that they shall see
the face of God, and behold that light which inlightens every man; what should
we all do from hence forward, but, as he says, put on this resolution, and
study that our souls may draw near to God, that our prayer may draw near to
him, that our desire may cleave unto him, and we may never be separated from
him? Even while we remain here, let us be fast knit to God, by meditating, by
reading, by seeking, and endeavor to know him as we are able. For we know here
but in part; because all things here are imperfect, there in their perfection.
Here we are little Children; there we shall be strong men. We see here, says
St. Paul, as in a glass darkly; but there face to face. There with open face we
shall behold the glory of God; which here our souls being involved in flesh and
blood, and sullied with their spots, cannot behold sincere. For who, says he,
can see my face and live? How should we? since our eyes cannot endure so much
as the rays of the Sun; which would put them out if we should fix them on so
great a light. How can we behold then the shining Countenance of our Creator,
while we are wrapped up in the rags of this flesh?

We must stay for so glorious a sight till that happy day, when we shall be
unclothed, or rather clothed upon, with the garments of celestial light. That Is
the time and not till then, when he designs to do us the great honor, of
setting the Crown of righteousness upon our heads. Now is the time of toils (as
he speaks in another place) of agonies, of combats, of conflicts, of strife
for Victory: then is the time of refreshments, of crowns, of retributions, of
rewards, of resurrection, and of the restitution of all things. Which ought to
make all serious Believers, look for that day with carnest longings; and lift
up their heads above this visible world, as men desirous to receive this
glorious Diadem. In comparison with which, the most goodly fillets that ever
bound any Imperial brow, are not worthy so much as to be named.

O that glorious Crown, purer than the finest Gold! (is a pious heart inclined
to say) that Crown of righteousness and of life! which my Lord has so dearly
purchased for me, with his precious blood! how do I covet it; how desirous am
I, how do I long to be partaker of it? My head beats and aches, and cannot be at
rest, till this Crown, by his royal hand, be set upon it. It is in pain, till
in stead of these clouds wherewith it is surrounded; it be encompassed in a
circle of purer and brighter thoughts. It is sorely oppressed till these vain
dreams, and frivolous imaginations, which gather about it, fly away; and it be
infolded in a wreath of nobler contemplations. O how heavy is it, till this
giddiness of mind, wherein I am whirled, be exchanged for a steady Orb of
light; wherein my soul, I hope, one day shall be unmoveably centred?

I long to have these ashes blown away; wherein the sparks of divinity lie
raked up, in our eclipsed nature. O when will that sweet breath come, that
shall make them shine; and set them free to fly to their element above? When
shall those flashes of light, which sometime break forth, be blown up into a
clearer and more constant flame? Can one believe, and not wish to find himself
in the House of God, in the midst of the heavenly Ministers, surrounded with
such glorious sights, as eye never saw, nor heart can possibly conceive? I am
not able to refrain from saying, O when shall I see my mind incircled in the
rays of divine light? When shall it beam forth in such heavenly thoughts, and
make my heart burn and sparkle with such ardors of love; that they shall cast a
glory round about my head?

This is the Crown, which my soul desires to wear. This is the Garland I would
win; the glorious Diadem, wherewith my restless mind would be adorned. It is
not Silver and Gold, Pearls and Pretious-stones, or any such like things (whose
rich names I borrow to express my present thoughts) that I wish and desire: But
the brightness of the knowledge of God to fold it self about my head; and that
I may sit environed in a Ring of admiring thoughts; of pure, undisturbed, never
ending thoughts of thee, and of thy mavelous kindness toward me.

Which happiness till my mind enjoy, the pain that I feel will not cease;
unless thou, Lord, wilt be pleased to assuage it, by comfortable hopes and
joyful expectations of such an eternal weight of glory. Even when I have left
this world, and am come to those light some Tabernacles, which thou have
prepared for those that truly love thee; I shall long to know more of thee; and
desire still to be nearer to thee; and look to see thee come out of thy Royal
Palace, to Crown the faith and hope of thine obedient Servants.

And in the mean time may I be so happy, as to be disposed into the Order of
those, who perpetually talk of thy love, and sing thy praises, and rejoice with
perfect confidence and full assurance, and are ever lifting up their heads to
see thee, and often saying one to another, when will he come, when will he
appear in the highest and most exalted glory? O blessed day I when mixed with
the Quire of Saints, we shall fly in their company to meet the Spouse; and say
every one of us, I have found him, whom my soul loves; I have found him, the
sight of whom I shall lose no more; but endued with the glory of immortality
and the splendour of incorruption, shall live for ever with the Lord.

O happy state of Saints; Ex L. de Viro perfecto sub nom. S. Hieron. Tom. iv.
when they shall have flesh without earth, a body without sense of pain, a soul
without fear, life without death, age without time, light without night, and
blessedness without end! Christianity will never let us be satiated with these
delectable thoughts. This is its refreshment, this is its delight, this is its
pleasure and joy; in mind and heart to go to the Seat of God; and there to take
its place, and seize on its share in that Seat; not by its own presumption, but
by the promise of God. Who has already exalted our Lord Christ in that blessed
place; and by our relation to him, we challenge a right to be so happy. For he
is the Head of his body the Church; He is the head of all principality and
power: From whom all the body, by joints and bands, ii. Col. 19.
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase
of God.

CHAP. XV. Three Considerations more to draw our Affections to the Appearing of
our Lord.
VIII.
I Have already said so much of the Happiness we expect, when our Lord shall
come again, that here I might put an end to this Discourse: if it would not be
more profitable distinctly to consider, that after we are caught up from this
earth to meet the Lord in the air, and he has done us honor in the sight of
all the world; we shall all (as I have already suggested) march with him unto
Heaven, in goodly array, and comely order, with those Crowns of Glory, which he
has given us, upon our heads. This should mightily move us to love his
Appearing; that we shall then appear together with him: and not abide in the
Air, though encompassed with so much glory; but be carried up with him, far
higher, into the purest sky.

When our minds are made all Light, we shall see a vast way before us; and
behold the Palace where God himself dwells, inviting us unto it. Thither our
Lord will have us attend upon him and accompany him; when he has finished the
judgment of the great day. Where the Holy Books inform us we shall be
sumptuously treated; with no less kindness, magnificence and joy, than a King,
we may conceive, would entertain his only Son, when he brought home his beloved
Bride, whom he had long ago espoused to himself: For whose reception he
prepares the most Royal Supper, a glorious Marriage Feast, to welcome her unto
his house.

And will not this make every faithful soul, who is a holy member of that Body
the Church, whom our Lord is pleased to own for his Bride, still more desirous,
if not impatient, of the coming of the celestial Bridegroom; to perfect his
love, and complete the promises wherein he stands engaged, by the gracious
covenant he made with us when he contracted us to himself? What is there that
we all so much covet as the excess of joy, and the highest pitch of pleasure?
And where are these to be found in so much purity, in such fullness, and so
perpetual, as in his most blessed Presence? Which should force us to burst out
with the greatest earnestness, when we think of that Heavenly Feast which he
has prepared for us, into such expressions as those of David.

As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul, after thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even the living God; O when shall I come and
appear before God? I have small satisfaction, alas! in these dull, and short
delights, which I find on earth. What taste is there in this green trash? And
there is little other fruit that grows in the garden of this world, but what is
sour and harsh, and sets my teeth on edge. It is too far from thy beams, to
bring forth any thing very sweet. Nothing can be ripened at this distance from
thee, to satisfy a font and yield it all the contentment it desires.

Bring me therefore into thy Paradise above, O conduct me into thy Eden, the
Garden of thy delights. Lead me to those fruits, which are brought to maturity
by the constant presence of the Sun of righteousness. Let me feast on those
pleasures, which are all pleasure: and enter into the joy, which is fullness of
joy for evermore.

And till thou think me meet for such entertainments; may it please thy
love, but to give me some tastes of their incomparable sweetness! May I relish
no joys so much as those! May I always have the remembrance of them fresh upon
my soul! And may I be so happy as to be preserved, by the savor of them, from
the sinful allurements of all other pleasures!

Hence, hence all you beggarly delights, which would have me forget my
happiness. Stand aside you Images of true joy, and hinder not my prospect of
that heavenly Paradise. Lend me your help, or else get you gone, and trouble me
no more. Assist my benighted thoughts, and represent that blissful place to
them; or else I desire not your company. I have eaten of all your dainties; but
still am empty and void of satisfaction. I know what you have to say, the very
utmost you can offer me; therefore follow me with no further importunities: For
my heart is set on that fair, that delicious place, where the Great Lord keeps
his Court, and entertains his Friends with endless pleasures.

O holy City of God, what glorious things are spoken of thee! How free, how
sprightly, and how full of joy, are all thy happy Inhabitants! What heart is
there, that is so dull as not to long to dwell in that blessed place; where
every head wears a Crown of Life, and every hand carries a Palm of Victory?
Where every eye overflows with joy, and every tongue with Psalms of praise?
Where light shines in every face; and love smiles in every Countenance? Where
every heart is perfectly satisfied, in the fullness of its own bliss: and
satisfied again with the pleasure it has, to see the felicity of others?

It is too much trouble to me that I am not there; O let me not lose the
thought of it too! I sigh to think that I stand at such a distance from my
Fathers House; and shall I suffer a further remove, by turning away my eyes
from thence? Go, O my soul, go thither in thy thoughts and daily meditations.
Send a thousand wishes before thee thither; to tell thy Lord that thou art
coming to him.

Say, whom have I in Heaven but thee; who wentest thither to open it to all thy
faithful Followers? What have I on Earth, but my hope by following thee, to
arrive at last where thou art gone before me? Whither should I look, but unto
Heaven; now that thou, my Dearest Lord, art ascended thither, to prepare a
place for me? A place of rest, and secure peace; a place of joy, and constant
enjoyment; a place from whence I am loath my thoughts or my heart should
descend, to return to this poor earth again: for there they grow so dull, that
it is hard to lift them up, to look to thee.

O keep them with thee, keep them with thee; thou King of Heaven! Settle and
fix them there, where I my self expect to be; where thou also expectest me;
where they shall find ease for every grief, and joy in the midst of the
greatest tribulation. O fix them unmoveably in this quiet place, this eternal
Rest. And when they must attend the affairs of this lower life, may they only
look, not come, down to them; and still remain and stay with thee.

IX.
And when these things shall be fulfilled, the Apostle tells us, in the place
before named (1 Thessalonians. iv. 17.) that we shall be ALWAYS WITH THE LORD: who
passed his promise to his Disciples a little before he left the world, that he
would come again, and receive them to himself, that where he is, there they may
be also, xiv. John 3. Of which promise he was so mindful after he went to
Heaven, that he further informs St. Paul (who spoke this, by the word of the
Lord) that he will not part with us, when he has conducted us to his Fathers
house; but keep us ever with him there; in joys and pleasures that never fade
away.

A condition which we cannot but love and passionately long for, if we have any
love for him or for our selves. For there are none of our enjoyments here, but
must be frequently intermitted, and are too often interrupted: even the
enjoyment of our blessed Lord himself, and the sense he gives us of celestial
things, we find, to our sorrow, suffers this inconvenience. Neither are we
diverted from them only by the troubles of this life, or the violence of other
worldly temptations, which press too boldly and rudely upon us: but by the most
necessary occasions, and the most innocent fruitions; to which nature not only
inclines us, but requires our frequent attendance.

Of how much of our time does sleep possess it self, though we desire never so
earnestly to continue awake? How little do we live in the account of reason; if
we do but remember this Image of Death, which has us so many hours, every
night, in its arms? And yet besides this, eating and drinking, journeys and
visits, the businesses and cares of this life, which challenge some of our
thoughts, devour, no body knows how great, a portion of every day. To say
nothing of those hours, when we are fit for little or nothing; but are forced
to find, as we significantly speak, some pastime for the entertainment of our
wearied minds.

O blessed Jesus, how few are the minutes, that these souls, enclosed in flesh,
can spend in thy company? Into what a little room are the thoughts of thee, and
of thy unmeasurable love, most wretchedly crowded? How soon are we weary, and
how often are we forced away; when we have the greatest mind to thy sweet
Society? O the cares that not only divert, but sometimes oppress us! O the
multitude of troubles which are wont to disquiet us! the sicknesses and
infirmities of our bodies, which indispose us! besides the great weakness and
feebleness of these spirits, which are not able long to bear thee company!

It is but a wish, I see, that I may always stay with thee. I feel my self
pulled away, and cannot keep my soul above, even when thou have lifted it up
unto thee. And therefore I cannot but renew my desires, that thou would be
pleased to hasten thy coming. That Is the time I long to see, because I would be
ever with thee, and always behold thy face; and perpetually speak of thee; and
declare thy love without ceasing, in the height of love and devotion to thee.

O what a change will that day make in me; when I shall be all Life, and see
not so much as the image or shadow of death any more? When I shall neither
slumber nor sleep, much less be sick, or grow old and dye; but always wake, and
enjoy a perfect health, a vigorous youth, and immortal life? O the blessedness
of that change, when I shall be hungry no more; nor have my head disturbed with
the fumes and clouds of food! When all my journeys will be at an end; and I
shall never lose nor leave the company I love! When I shall neither be crossed by
others, nor vexed with the violence of my own passions! When I shall be no more
perplexed with cares, nor dampt with fears; but dwell secure, in assured joys,
for evermore!

Joys in the perfection of a glorified body; and of an exalted, enlarged
spirit! Joys to find my self in the company of thy Saints; and welcomed into
the noble society of Angels! Joy at the sight of my dearest Friends; the
greatest joys in thy presence, and in the light of thy countenance; from whom I
hope for all this joy!

O come, most blessed Savior, that we may all be nothing but joy, and love,
and peace, without any end. Come, and bring us to our beloved Rest; and where
can our souls find any rest, but in thy bosom? Come that we may rest from our
labors; and where can we lay down our selves in perfect repose, but only in
thy love? O come, and fill our hearts therewith; that we may hunger and thirst
no more. Come, that we may perfectly know what the new Wine of thy Kingdom is.
Come, that we may desire to feed on nothing else; but the sweetest comforts, of
seeing thy blessed face smileing on us. And that we may have no other business,
nothing else to do, but to enjoy thee in all that we see: not so much
employment besides, as to spend any time (as now we are forced to do) in
wishing to enjoy thee.

X.
And yet there is still a greater reason remaining, why we should love our
Lords appearing; because we shall be brought by that to the very top and
highest pitch of bliss: which is to SEE GOD ( Matthew. v. 8.) and to SEE HIM AS
HE IS, 1 John iij. 2. Not as the old Prophets saw him in visions and dreams;
nor as others saw him, in the Angels of his presence: But -- alas! who can tell
what this sight is? What tongue, unless touched, as the Apostles were, by the
Holy Ghost, can declare any thing of such a bliss? The day of Pentecost must
return again, if we expect to have any language to express, or thoughts to
conceive the meaning of these words. We must entreat some Angel to come, and
tell us, if he can, what it is to see God. Or rather we must confess, that, if
he should, we cannot understand such celestial language. It is above our reach;
and we do but babble, we do not speak, when we adventure to discourse of it.

Nay, when we depart this world, and shall be admitted into the blessed company
above, we may not be able to comprehend much of it; if the opinion of many of
the Ancient Fathers be true, that the Saints shall not enjoy that which is
properly meant by the Vision of God, till after the great day of our Lord. And
therefore it will be our best way now, to do as the Painter did; who being to
make a picture of Love, drew nothing on his Table but a Veil; which covered no
body knew what under the shadow of it. Not so much to show, as some have poorly
conceived, that Love is blind; as to declare that it is an ineffable thing, a
mysterious passion, not to be described by humane art. Such, I am sure, is this
Vision of God; and such is the love that it will beget. It is a secret never to
be known, but by the enjoyment of it: A mystery reserved in the holy Place, to
be beheld only by entering into it.

We have all a natural desire indeed, to pry into this, as well as all other
secrets. A strong appetite we find within us, to be admitted into an intimate
acquaintance with those things, which are closely locked up from us. We cannot
choose but long to go within the Veil; and would fain have the curtain drawn
aside, that the glorious face of the Divine Majesty may appear. But after all
our search and busy enquiry, we are able to say no more at present but this;

O happy Darkness! O blessed, O most glorious obscurity! For I do not know what
else to call thee: How joyful is it to think, that thou art more than we can
ask or think? What a pleasure is it to know, that thou surpassest all that can
now be known? How comfortable is it to believe that thou art hid from our eyes;
only because we are not capable to behold thy brightness?

Thou shamest indeed hereby our small understanding; but publishest thine own
most excellent Greatness. We are laid very low, when we hear thee speaking
thus, at present; but it lifts us up and highly exalts us, in our future hopes.
We have no means to comprehend this gracious promise; nor know we what to
think, when we read these words, you shall SEE GOD. We must confess our
weakness, which is absolutely puzzled, with so few and so plain words. If we
have any thing to boast of, it is only this advantageous ignorance. All that we
have to glory in is; that (such our hopes) we know not what to conceive of this
dark (so we must now speak) this unseen and hidden brightness.

But this we know, because thou, O God, have told us, that when this present
darkness is done away, and we shall see thee as thou art, WE SHALL BE LIKE
THEE. O most desirable sight, which will so happily transform us! O much wished
for day; which will set us in such a light, as will make us all bright and
shining too! Shining in the light of the wisdom of God; in the light of his
Purity; and of his Bliss and Immortality. In the light which makes the eyes of
Angels shine so brightly; and which preserves the youth of Saints. The light
which no man can approach unto; till thou, O God, who art that Light, shall
finish our hope, and bring us to see thee face to face.

And may we not be confident of this also (though we know so little) that when
thou, O blessed God, shall cause thy Son to appear, and shall show thy self
unto us, the very first glimpse of thy glory, at the greatest distance from
thee, will mightily attract our hearts unto thee? No arrow, sure, flies more
swiftly from the strongest bow, no bullet can be sent with greater violence
from the bended force of steel, than our souls shall then move, or rather shoot
themselves toward thee; that they may know what it is to see thee, and that
they may be like thee.

And till that joyful day shall come, shine thou, O blessed Light, perpetually
in these eyes. Strike through all the clouds that incompass me round about; and
by the bright hopes of thee, chase away all my gloomy thoughts, and put out the
false luster of this deceitful world. Shed, O thou blessed light, thy glorious
beams into this heart; and kindle there such holy flames as may consume all
sinful desires, and purify my soul as thou art pure. Let me burn continually
with an ardent love of thee; till thy bright day appear. Till not only these
walls of flesh be pulled down, which intercept thee from me: but my spirit fly
up in a lightsome body, that I may see thee.

That I may see thee, by whose power the Heavens and the Earth were made; thee
by whose Wisdom all things are governed; thee by whose infinite kindness
mankind was redeemed. What a joy will it be to me to see thee, who did
conduct me in my way; direct me at every turn; support me in every step; assist
me in all the various passages of my life; secure me from innumerable
temptations, preserve me from as many dangers; and at last broughtest me safe
to see thee, and rejoice with thee for ever.

CHAP. XVI. Of the mighty power and pleasure of Love, when it is settled in the
heart.
AND thus I am come to the end of this other part of my Discourse: Wherein the
reasons of placing our best affections on the appearing of Christ have been so
plainly deduced; that, as they cannot but be understood, so they cannot but
move those hearts, which do not quite turn away their minds from all
consideration of them. And that it should be hard to do, one would think, if we
have the least acquaintance with the Christian Religion. Which hereby most
strongly recommends it self unto us, that it gives us such great and glorious
hopes; and entertains our tiresome Pilgrimage with such delightful
contemplations, of the joys and pleasures we shall have in another world;
especially when we come to rest with our Lord for ever.

No man that is in his wits, would be without the comfort of this expectation.
It far exceeds all our present enjoyments: and is in it self so desirable,
that we may truly say, Faith does not beg to be admitted by us; but rather
commands us to open our hearts and let it in; if we would have any constant
pleasure, and settled peace and satisfaction there, which nothing but the
Christian belief can establish in us. And this is the misery of all those who
do not faithfully receive the Gospel; that as they shall miss of the greatest
blessings hereafter, so they want the highest comfort in the world at present:
Which is, to wait with assured hope for those good things, which our Lord will
give us at his appearing. By the expectance of which, we are not only a little
pleased while we employ our minds in such meditations as these; but they put us
into a state of pleasure and constant satisfaction, by drawing our hearts to
Heaven, and placing us out of the power, though not out of the reach, of all
worldly accidents.

For such is the condition of man, as the Disciples of Plato's School have well
expressed it, that there are two effusions and ecstasies, as we may call them,
of his soul; two sorts of inebriation (as some of them love to speak) whereby
he is dispossessed of himself. By the one (which is a Divine rapture) we are
carried out and placed above our selves: by the other (which is the witchery of
sense) we are hurried away, and thrust down into a condition below our selves.
Their meaning is, that man being of a middle nature, between Angels and Beasts;
by his intellectual part partaking of the nature of those heavenly beings, and
by his sensitive of the nature of the brutes; he may so apply himself either to
the one or to the other, that he come, in great measure, out of his middle
condition, and go either upward to the former, or downward to the later.

And this strange feat is wrought by nothing else, but by the power of Love;
which evidently intrances our souls, and transports us out of our selves:
either to the celestial natures if it be Divine, or to the brutish, if it be
founded only in the flesh. By exercising our minds in the actions of spiritual
life, and placing our affections on things above, we may deliver and
infranchise our selves from a servile base condition; and approach nearer to
the degree of Angels than of ordinary men. As on the contrary, by applying our
minds and hearts wholly to corporeal actions, and addressing all our services
to the things of this world, we may so inthrall our selves, and bring our souls
into such bondage; that we shall sink down into a vile estate, and become more
like beasts than men.

O strange power of Love! which makes such transformations! turning men either
into Angels or into the most sordid creatures. How careful should we be to
observe its motions? What diligence should we use, to watch whither it goes;
and to see that this mighty passion be directed to the most excellent good? And
if we do but open our eyes to receive the light of the glorious Gospel, and all
the beauties that it presents unto us, we cannot easily be deceived. There are
a world of noble enjoyments to which our Savior invites us; if we will
vouchsafe to look upon them, and not be so sottish, as to fasten our eyes only
on a few objects here before us. He has opened to us the Kingdom of Heaven;
and tells us he will show us all the glory of his Fathers house; if we will but
wait a while, till he be ready to come, and fetch us thither. Why should we not
believe him, and daily look up unto him; with hearts full of joy that we are
beloved of the Lord of life, and have a good hope to live together with him?
What a change would this work in us? And how happy should we be, to think of
the far more glorious change, which the sight of him will make; when by seeing
him, we shall become what he is?

O the joy that begins to spring up in my heart! O what ravishing words are
those, WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM; FOR WE SHALL SEE HIM AS HE IS? How sweetly they
enter into mine ears? How deliciously they spread and diffuse themselves all
over my mind; and strongly penetrate to my very heart? I am changed already. I
am not what I was; but quite another man: All light and joy, all spirit and
life, while I think of these things. And can I ever so forget them, as to be
allured and drawn away, from my self and my Savior, from my enjoyments and my
hopes, by any earthly pleasures?

What comparison is there between those two states I now described, that I
should be in danger of such temptations? Is there any need to ask, which is
most to be chosen? To suffer my heart to be touched with such a sense of Divine
pleasures, as to be ravished out of my self, and become more than man; or to
expose it so to the solicitations of sensible delights, as to be enticed by
them another way out of my self, and transformed into the nature of the beasts
that perish?

We are all desirous and forward enough to climb higher; and our ambition
tempts us to mount to as noble a station, as it is possible to reach: And
therefore let us ascend, O my soul, to the Lord Jesus; let us lift up our
thoughts still toward the holy place where he reigns; and look for the time of
his appearing, to make us reign with him for ever. This is the most pleasant
object we can behold; or rather is a coliection of innumerable pleasures, which
all here meet together: and therefore cannot but be of mighty power to ravish
our spirits, and ennoble our natures, by making them divine. Hither let us
vigorously and cheerfully bend our thoughts; let our hearts send many and many
a wish this way; and then it will be as impossible for any thing to hinder us
from being made heavenly, as it is to keep the stone from its center, or the
tenderest heart from becoming like to that which it dearly loves.

Here we see what God the Father Almighty will do for his Son Jesus; and what
our Lord Jesus will do for us, who depend upon his Love. We behold our selves
here ranked among the Heavenly host; changed into spirits; made perfect in
love; crowned with immortality; beautified with the light of Divine knowledge
and with unspotted purity of heart; brought into the presence of our Lord, and
unto the sight of God. On which incomparable happiness while we fix our eyes,
it must needs snatch us quite from all other things; and make us live out of
our selves. But it will be only to place us above our selves; and, by a most
desirable departure from what we are, to put us into so blessed a condition,
that we shall never wish to return to our selves any more.

And indeed the more or less our souls are drawn forth of themselves either
way, so much the harder or easier it is to go back into themselves again. For
if we be much ravished with these heavenly things, if we love the Appearing of
Christ exceedingly, and attentively fix our minds in expectation of it; we
shall have little mind to turn our hearts toward corporeal enjoyments, during
the sense and lively relish of those Divine pleasures, which have withdrawn us
from them. And when the inclinations and necessities of our earthly Nature call
us back again unto them, it will be with a remembrance of those celestial joys
still remaining; which will preserve our souls from immersing themselves in
things below them. Just as when a man's heart is engaged in the strictest bonds
of love, which have tied him fast to a very agreeable person, whatsoever
company he comes into, he will secretly steal out of it, to cast a glance upon
that beloved object: So will our mind be apt to look up toward Heaven (even
when we are in the charming society of that person) if the Lord and the glory
of his appearing be our chiefest love and highest delight. As on the contrary,
if we have but a slight touch and taste of these heavenly truths, we shall be
the easier diverted from them; and persuaded to yield up our selves to seek our
satisfaction in the cold enjoyment of these earthly delights.

And thus it is, in like manner, when men follow brutal pleasures; the more
strongly they are ravished with them and addict themselves to them; the more
they lose the use of their reason and understanding, and the more incapable
they grow, being so attentive to these delights, to receive any gust of nobler
enjoyments. Whereas, if our taste of these things be more superficial, and we
do not apply our minds with all their force unto them, nor dwell upon them; we
shall be the easier called off from them, and stand in need of fewer
importunities to quit their company, for better entertainments.

Which demonstrates how necessary it is, that we should endeavor to be well
acquainted with the coming of our Lord; to believe it with an unshaken faith;
to persuade our selves of it, as if we saw it; to set our hearts upon it, and
place our comforts in it; that so it may have the greater authority over us,
and command us irresistibly from all things beneath us, and force us to give
our selves entirely to our Lord Jesus.

CHAP. XVII. Of the means whereby this Love may be settled in our hearts; and
the Benefit thereof.
AND for the better effecting this which so nearly concerns us, we ought, as to
think frequently and seriously of it so, to use all the means that are in our
power, to represent our blessed Lord and his glorious Appearing, in the most
lively manner unto our hearts. Among which, I believe, you will find none more
effectual, than to frequent his society, in the Communion of his Body and of
his Blood. Where we not only meet with a fair occasion, both to imprint upon
our hearts a sense of his love, and to express all the love we have to him: but
have a most powerful instrument also put into our hands, to enkindle and stir
up the most hearty, vehement and burning Affection toward him.

For there he is set before our eyes in such a posture of love, as cannot but
wound any heart, that has the grace to consider what it sees. There we behold
him hanging for our sake upon a Cross; from whence his mighty love shoots the
most piercing darts into our breasts. We see him there in such flames as
offered him up entirely to do the will of God; and, if we come near them, will
touch us so sensibly, that we shall be disposed to make our selves also a
devout oblation to him. His Body broken, his Blood shed, his very Life
sacrificed for our safety, are there so evidently and distinctly set before our
eyes; that as it will be hard for us not to be tenderly affected with his
astonishing love to us, so we are hereby assured of his continued kindness,
till he bring us to eternal life.

We do not indeed behold him there as sitting on the throne of his glory; nor
as appearing again the second time to give us salvation: But yet it plainly
shows us what he underwent, to purchase for us as well as for himself that
glory wherein he is; and bids us rest satisfied he will do more for us, even
all that he has promised: of which, by these tokens and pledges of his love,
which he has left behind him when he departed this world, he does most
affectionately assure us. And by partaking of them, we become also one body
with him; and have communion with him in his death and passion, and all the
benefits he has thereby obtained for his Church. Among which this is the last
and the greatest, that we shall be with him where he is, and see the glory
which the Father has given him. We ought not to doubt of it, being thus
incorporate with him, and so united to him; that in him we already live, and
reign, and are glorious: and can no more fail of appearing at last with him in
his glory, than the Members can fail to be advanced, when the Head, to which
they are firmly and inseparably joined, is highly honored and dignified.

As a loving Wife therefore, married to an Husband most completely qualified,
but gone into a remote country, cannot but fix her thoughts very much upon his
coming, and often wish for the happy day which will bring them nearer, and make
them meet and live together; and, in the mean time, if she have his picture
exactly taken, cannot refrain from looking often on it, and pleasing her eyes
and her mind with the very shadow of that dear Person; or if she have any token
of his love left or sent her, whereby to remember him, is ever and anon taking
it into her hands, and imprinting her kisses on it: so it becomes all those to
do, who pretend any love to our Lord Jesus; who has endeared himself to us by
such incomparable loving kindness, and merited so highly of us, that it would
be exceeding strange if we should be either insensible of his favors, or let
them slip out of our minds, when (among the rest of the expressions of his
wonderful love) he has taken great care to preserve the remembrance of them
there.

Our gracious Lord, the Bridegroom of our souls, is gone a long journey, even
as far as Heaven. He has espoused us to himself, it is true, in great love,
most assured love; but has left us, for a time, here in this world, and
removed himself so far from us, that, though there be nothing so desirable as
his company, to those who are acquainted with him and have any affection for
him, yet they find the distance is so exceeding great between them, that they
cannot attain their much wished for enjoyment of him. And therefore every good
soul should look toward him and, sighing within it self, should often say,
When will he come, when will he come! and let me have the long desired sight of
him? When will he come, and finish what he has so graciously begun? O that he
would come, and take me to him! O that he would come, and satisfy this soul;
which is ready to dissolve, and sweetly melt into that blissful union with him!
And till he please to grant this desire, we should often fasten our expecting
eyes on the Picture he has left us of himself; drawn, as I may say, by his own
hand: which tells us he will certainly come, and requires us to rest assured he
will be as good as his word, and give us immortal life in the glory where he
is. We should frequent, I mean, the holy Sacrament of his body and blood; we
should love there to communicate with him and knit our selves to him; it should
be our greatest pleasure to solace our selves in that representation of him,
till he comes. We should affectionately receive into our hands those tokens and
pledges of his love, which he continually sends us by his Ministers; we should
take them into our mouths, yea let them into our hearts; and, embracing him in
those signs and seals of his grace toward us, should rejoice in his love; till
he himself appear, and lay our souls to rest in his bosom for ever.

If there were no other benefit we should receive by this means, than that
thereby our love will be mightily excited toward him, who has loved us so
dearly, it were sufficient to commend this duty to us. But we shall also grow
thereby more confident of his appearing again to perfect his love toward us;
and in the mean time be still receiving fresh tokens of the affection he now
has for us. For as the thoughts of his love has the greatest power over our
hearts: so we need not fear to say, that the love he sees in us, is of such
force and efficacy with him; that it strongly moves his tender compassions
toward us. If any man love me (says he himself xiv. Joh. 21, 23.) he shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. O,
what a word is this, I will love him? How it pierces into the heart! How it
stirs, and works; how it revives and refreshes there! Can there be any thing
greater than this, to be beloved of the Lord of Heaven, the Prince of Life, the
King of Glory? What will not he do for those whom he loves, when we see he did
not stick to dye for them, even before they loved him?

You know that when Lazarus was sick (as I think I have somewhere observed in
another Treatise) his Sisters sent this news to our Savior, saying; Lord,
behold he whom thou love is sick, xi. Joh. 3. This was a very short Letter:
And their grief perhaps would not permit them to write a longer. But they did
not fare the worse, because they were not more ceremonious in their addresses:
this alone did the business. O how great a power was there in these few words?
They say no more to move him, but only this, Lord, thou love him; and what
does not our Savior do, to show they were not mistaken? Up he rises; away he
goes to the place of his abode; there needed no more prayers to bring him
thither. And though there were many dangers in the way, as the story relates;
though to go thither, his Disciples thought was to cast himself into a shower of
stones (v. 8.) though the Jews, he knew very well, sought to take him and kill
him (x. 39.) yet love being as strong as death, carried him through all
impediments: He could not choose but go, when he heard this charming word, he
whom thou love is sick.

By which we may learn that to obtain the favor and grace, the help and
assistance, the comfort and the presence of our blessed Savior, we need no
long Petitions, no great address of words, no courtship, nor studied
complements. Let us be able only to tell him, that he loves us; and it is
enough. If we can but win his good affection, we need no more. We may then
remember to him his own dear love, more than ours. We may tell him, how much
good he has done us, and that is argument sufficient to move him to do more.

We may relate his graciousness and sweet disposition; when we can perceive in
our own hearts, but disgusts at our selves. We may say, O my Lord, I have seen
by many arguments the wonderful great good will thou bear to me. For thou
have instructed my ignorance, pitied my weaknesses, cured many of my diseases,
delivered me from the power of temptations; I cannot tell what thou have done
for me, O most merciful Savior, who art still going on, by innumerable ways,
to testify thou love me. And this humble devout acknowledgement, will
certainly invite a further effusion of his favors. For it is a pleasure to him
to do benefits; especially to those he loves. He rejoices over them to do them
good. He loves to accomplish his own good purposes, and delights, as much as
they can desire, to perfect what he has happily begun in them. And therefore
we may entreat him to give himself that pleasure; not to lose any of that joy,
which will so much please and rejoice us also; and make us his debtors, his
admirers, his adorers, and lovers to all eternity.

We may desire him, even that it would please him to come again, according to
his promise; because he loves us, and because he loves to finish his works of
love: and we may be confident he will, and bring his rewards with him. Though
he stay, we think, a great while (for certain reasons which he best knows)
before he come; as he stayed two days after he heard of Lazarus his sickness,
(notwithstanding the love he had for him, and his intentions to rescue him from
death:) yet we ought not to be discouraged, if we be sure he loves us; but
believe that he will appear at last, and that he will raise us up, though we
lie dead in our graves, and have lain so perhaps many years, and that he will
bid us come forth, and go along with him, whither his endless love will lead us.

CHAP. XVIII. A continuation of the former Argument, concerning the mighty
power of the Divine Love; and the Benefit we have by loving our Lords Appearing.
HAve we not great reason then to love him, and to love his appearing: since
that will be the best argument of his love to us; and his love, you see, will
prove such an assurance of all his blessings? What will move us, if this cannot
do it? Need there any thing more be said, to draw our affections toward him?
If there do, then let me assure you that love will even transform us into him.

There is nothing more discernible in this passion, than that it assimilates us
unto the Thing or Person which we love. Which should teach us indeed to have a
great care what and whom we love; but should excite us to love him, our Dearest
Lord, without any measure: Because nothing is so desirable as to be like to
him; and nothing can prepare us so surely for his glorious appearing. In that
which every man loves, in that he lives, says St. Austin upon those words of
the great Apostle St. Paul. [not I live, but Christ lives in me.] So great, so
mighty a thing is true love; that it carries the heart from the place where it
is, and translates it thither where it loves. If thou love thy self merely,
then thou live altogether in thy self: But if thy heart be set on any other
person or thing, then thou live in that which has engaged thy affection: And
if it be Jesus whom thou love in sincerity, it is certain that in him also
thou live.

Of so great importance it is, that we love aright: For he that loves ill,
lives ill; and he that loves well, cannot but live well too. But there is no
danger at all in loving our Lord and his appearing: and therefore we need not
stand to ask our selves whether we should love him or no; or how much we shall
love him; or with what passion and concernment we should set our hearts upon
his coming again, to take us into his glory. There is nothing to hinder us,
from loving here as much as ever we are able; no fear our affections should be
too far engaged, as they may be in other cases; all that caution is useless
here, which, when we are in pursuit of lesser enjoyments, is but necessary, to
put a check upon our hearts, and cool a little our love toward them. The more
we love him, the more we shall be like him; the more we love him, the more we
shall live in him. This love makes us divine and heavenly; it purifies us, and
makes us fit to live with him.

I must add also that, according to this rule, by loving his appearing, we
shall be formed to some likeness of it; as much as we are capable here to be
wrought and fashioned to an imitation of a thing so bright and full of glory.
It will raise our minds that is, to a noble pitch; and highly improve our
degenerate nature. It will invite him to manifest himself to us, and graciously
to shine upon us. It will possess us with a lively sense of him, and of the
glory wherein he lives. The light of his countenance will be lifted up on our
souls; and he will fill us with a stronger sense of life and immortality. It
will chase away the base fear of death; and kill all vicious affections in us.
We shall be purified, and refined from all our dross, by these holy fires.
There is no sin will be able to live in the same place with this heavenly love;
but will continually languish and decay, as this increases and grows stronger
in our souls. Our spirits thereby will become more cheerful, light and aerial.
They will ascend more easily toward those celestial places; and be less
inclined, though they feel its attractions, toward this lower world. O what a
Coronet of Glory, will this love place beforehand on our head! It is it self a
royal ornament, and a diadem of glory. It Is a participation of a Divine Nature,
an entrance upon the life of God, an Heaven upon earth, a pleasure whereby we
anticipate the joys of the other world: for if all love have a sweetness in it,
this Divine love sure cannot but entertain us with a transcendent satisfaction.

By this we have our conversation in Heaven; and it is there only to be ever
with the Lord (as much as our condition here will give us leave) for nothing
but love will make him familiar to our thoughts, and present him frequently to
the eye of our minds. Yea, this is the best glass we have, while we are here
below, wherein to see God. If there be any way to know the meaning of those
words, we must learn it of this Teacher; which alone can discover to us so
great a mystery. Nothing else can lead us into that secrecy, and reveal to us
what lies hid in that retirement, the Vision of God. Never hope for any key to
open a door into the Holy of Holies; unless it be this of heavenly love. If it
be possible to peep a little behind the veil; it is love only that enjoys so
singular a privilege. For God, you see, is love: and the Apostle tells us,
that when Faith and Hope shall be done away, it is charity alone that still
remains; as a thing of longer duration than this world, and whose proper place
is Heaven. This is one of the Cherubims of Glory, that inhabits the most holy
place, and attends upon the Majesty on high. This is of an Angelical Nature,
and is always there where God is. It waits upon him; it ministers to him; it
knows his mind; it is privy to his thoughts and designs; and makes us
understand more of him, than all the wit in the world can do beside.

There is nothing can lend wings to the soul, but only love: which raises us
above this world, and sets us in the presence of him that made it. And what a
sight does it give us there, of his boundless, bottomless Goodness? If it can
show us nothing else, it will not fail to let us see how gracious, how
wonderfully gracious the Lord is. With what kindness does love behold almighty
Providence, spreading it self in tender mercy over all its works? It is this
alone can make us feel how inclinable the Divine Nature is, to pour out its
Benefits. Nothing but love can make us know what an everlasting spring it is of
grace and bounty; and with what unwearied kindness it delights to communicate
its blessings to us. And what is there that we would see, which is comparable
to this? What can we desire to see, but more of this; even when we are made
perfect in love? And what thanks do we owe to God that we see so much? It ought
to stir up all that is within us, to bless his holy name. We ought to say;
every day will I bless thee, and praise thy name for ever and ever.

But for this also we must be beholden to love. For it is that which indites
all our Hymns, and meditates the Divine Praises. It puts the songs of joy into
our mouth; and fills our hearts with thanksgiving. Our tongues are tied without
this; or we do but babble, not speak, our Saviors praises.

It is love that bursts out into such effusions as these;

O praise the Lord of love, who humbled himself do dwell among us. Praise him
in the beauties of his holiness; praise him in his super-excellent wisdom. Let
all his works praise him; who came to us with his hands full of Miracles, and
every miracle full of mercy. O praise him in his almighty and most merciful
kindness; which made the lame to leap like a Kid, and the tongue of the dumb to
sing for joy: which opened the eyes of the blind to see his wonders; and the
ears of the deaf to hear the wisdom where by he spoke: which restored the sick
to health, and the dead to life: which published the Gospel to the poor, and
instructed the ignorant in the mysteries of the Kingdom of God.

O praise him, before whom the Devils fled, and confessed him to be the Lord.
Praise him in his incomparable love; which thought it not enough to do all
this, but also gave himself to dye for us. Let all Nations praise him, who are
the purchase of his blood. Let them mark every step of his dying love; from the
time he was betrayed and sold like a slave, till he finished his sufferings on
the Cross. O the greatness of that love, which endured such scorn, such
reproach, such a bitter agony and shameful death, even for all those who have
little sense of this wondrous love!

But let no Christian soul be insensible, how the hands which wrought so many
Miracles, and the feet which traveled up and down to do men good, were cruelly
nailed by them to an ignominious Gibbet. Let them remember how his head was
crowned with thorns, and his body clothed in a fools coat. How they spit in
his face, blinded his eyes, and then rudely buffeted him to make them sport. O
what love was that, which made him submit to be mocked and reviled, to be
accounted worse than a seditious murderer, and numbered among the greatest
transgressors! And above all, let it never be forgotten how he sweat in our
service, as it had been drops of blood; and at last bled to death, after three
hours shame and anguish on the Cross.

Praised be that incomparable Charity. Praised be his inimitable meekness and
humility. Let all the world extol and praise his Lamb-like patience and
innocence. Let them celebrate his admirable kindness in forgiving such
implacable enemies; and his entire confidence and faith in God, whereby he
offered up himself to him, and obtained an eternal redemption for us. O the
wonderful virtue of that sacrifice, which has taken away the sins of the
world! Praised be the tender mercies of our God, which have forgiven us so many
trespasses. Praised be his mercies, which have not only forgiven us; but
restored us to life and glory again, by the resurrection of Jesus from the
dead.

Let us rejoice and be glad in that great salvation. Let us bless the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by that resurrection of his from the
dead. Let us lift up our heads and look to Heaven our ancient Country, for
there he is exalted: And let us thank our God, who has set him at his own
right hand, and made him most glorious for ever.

See how all the Angels welcomed him thither; and falling at his feet, most
humbly worshipped his Majesty. See how they all now wait upon him, and
constantly attend his pleasure. And let us worship him too, with the devoutest
and most lowly reverence. Let us praise him in his Sanctuary: where he appears
before God for us; from whence he sends down the gracious influences of his
spirit on us; and commands his Angels to minister unto us. Let us praise him,
the glorious King of Angels and men. Who has conquered death; and triumphed
over all the powers of darkness; and opening the Kingdom of Heaven to all the
faithful, has promised that they shall reign in glory together with him.

Let all the Angelical Ministers praise him. Let the Apostles, Prophets and
Martyrs praise him. Let all those who are departed in the true faith and fear
of him, praise him. And let all the living, who partake of the daily fruit of
his bounteous love, continually praise him. Let them praise the name of the
Lord: for his name alone is excellent, his glory is above the Earth and Heaven.

Let them praise him in the greatness of his Power, in the Wisdom of his
Counsels, in the carefulness of his Providence, in the riches, the exceeding
riches of his Grace, in the stedfastness of his word, and the faithfulness of
all his promises. And let them all join together and beseech him to come again;
that he may both accomplish our hopes, and perfect his own praises.

O let him come that we may give him better praises, in one body for ever.

CHAP. XIX. More expressions of this devout affection, toward our Lords
Appearing; and the way whereby we may excite them.
THis is some of the language of Love; which wishes every knee would bow to
Jesus, and every tongue confess that he is the Lord; to the glory of God the
Father, who has thus highly exalted him. For its desires are unlimited; and
its kindness, like the fountain of it, is inexhaustible and infinite. It is the
brightest image of Jesus. There is nothing represents him so lively to the
world. He now appears most in those who love most; and who long and wait with
pure and ardent desires to see him come in all his glory. For they will keep
his commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until his appearing: which in his
times he will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings,
and Lord of lords, who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no
man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; to whom be honor
and power everlasting. Amen.

Why then, O my soul, do we not let this blessed guest be lodged in our heart?
Or why do we not entertain it so that it may stay with us; and we may feel it
stirring there in restless motions toward Jesus? What is the cause that we who
are made to love, should not let our love turn divine; and address it most
devoutly to him, who best deserves the Love of all the world? Or what may it
be, that keeps us from running with the whole current of our affections,
toward that heavenly Lover; who sues so earnestly to us for our hearty love?
Has he not loved us enough to make us love him? Was he a cold and indifferent
Lover, that could not touch the heart with a sense of his kindness? Was he
perfectly frozen and careless in our concerns, when the urgent wants of our
souls, called for his kind and compassionate relief? Or did he pretend a great
deal of kindness, and made long protestations of his love; but did just nothing
to merit our affection?

There need no answer to such questions; which serve only to reproach and
confound our insensibleness and negligence; who have nothing to say, why we do
not love him. For so apparent is his love, so confessedly great, so costly and
expensive, so tender and obliging; that as it had no example, nor can be ever
exactly imitated; so it must needs attract all those and fill them with the
greatest love, who do not turn away their eyes, and their ears, and their
hearts from this Lord of love.

Let us but listen a while to him, and we shall hear him say; was there any
love like unto my love? What is it that you would have had me done for you,
more than I have done (without your desire) to win your love? Has any man
greater love than this, that he lay down his life for his Friends?. But what
were you, for whom I died? Herein God commended his love toward you, in that
while you were yet sinners, I dyed for you. And what was the purchase I made by
that price, which I laid down for you? Who is it that has the keys of Hell and
death? To whom is all power given in Heaven and in Earth? Can any but I forgive
your sins; and open to you the Kingdom of Heaven; and restore you to the joys
of Paradise; nay, make you eat of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise
of God?

Where do you read of any King, who, at his Coronation, gave such royal gifts
to men? From whom do you expect the Crown of righteousness, and an eternal
inheritance; of which I gave the earnest so long ago? Can you think of any
thing comparable to the glory of my appearing? Or is there any doubt whether I
will come or no; or whether you shall appear with me in that celestial glory?
What would you have me do to satisfy and assure you, more than I have already
done; by my Word, and by my Blood, and by my Angels, and by my Holy Spirit;
which I have sent down from Heaven to bear witness to me, and to tell you that
I will certainly come again, and give you the Kingdom prepared for you, from
the foundation of the world? Believe it, I will as surely come again, as I
died; and rose from the dead; and visibly ascended into Heaven; and according
to my promise poured out the Holy Ghost upon my Apostles, and inspired them to
proclaim this in all tongues and languages; that I still live; and that,
because I live, you shall live also.

And is it possible for us to think we hear him speaking to us in this manner
(as he does in his blessed Gospel) and not be provoked to summon all the powers
of our soul, to offer up themselves in devout and hearty love to him? What has
the dearest friend, whom we love with so much passion; nay, even our tenderest
Parents done for us, in comparison with this love? Or what can the favor of
all the Princes on earth (should they unite all their powers to love and honor
us) bestow and heap upon us, worthy to be named together with this miraculous
love? It ought to call us from all vain delights. Our minds should continually
study to comprehend the breadth and length, the depth and height: and to know
the love of Christ; which passes knowledge. Our wills ought to be more
passionately bent toward him; and grow every day stronger in his love. Our
memories should be a most faithful Treasury of the manifold tokens of his Love.
Our tongues and our hearts should never cease to meditate and sing the praises
of his wondrous love.

For if we could speak to him (as we may conceive him speaking to us) and ask
him what he did before the world; he would tell us that, He loved. If we could
ask him what moved his Almighty Wisdom to make the world; he would tell you
that he loved. If we could further ask what he has done ever since; he would
still say, he loved. And what brought him down from Heaven (if we could ask
again) to be partaker of our miseries; he would tell you again that he loved.
And could we ask again why he would humble himself so low as to take the form a
servant, and dye a base, servile and ignominious death, the death of the Cross,
he would again tell you, that he loved. And if you could still go on to ask
what moved him to send the Holy Ghost and give such gifts to men; you would
still receive the same answer, because he loved. And could you beseech him not
to be angry and you would inquire again, what he has been doing since those
days, and what he now does; he would give you no new answer, but that he loves.
And if you should pray him once more to tell you what he loves; he would let
you know, it is nothing but love, abundance of love.

This is the thing he would win by his love. This is all that he asks and
desires at our hands; though he has obliged us so much. For this he solicites
and beseeches; having set his heart upon it, as the fruit of his incomparable
love. He entreats for this, as if it were for his life, that we would be at
last so sensible of all his kindness, as to let him have our unfeigned love.
For he being Love himself, loves nothing else but sincere and hearty love.

O blessed Jesus, should all our hearts then say, how much does thy love differ
from ours! Love brought thee down from Heaven to us; but how few of us (and how
slowly) does it carry up thither unto thee? Love made thee dye the most
shameful death; but it does not make us live the most glorious life. It made
thee endure the sorest pains; but, alas! it does not make mankind take the
pleasure of following thy steps to the greatest happiness. It made thee think
perpetually on such poor wretches as we are; but how seldom are our minds
fixed, or how small is the number whom love inclines to think, upon so glorious
a person as thy self?

It persuaded thee to come to us, when there was nothing to call thee but only
our great miseries; but it does not bring us all to thee, when we are moved by
the merits, and the precious promises of so great a love. Thy Preaching was
Love, thy Miracles were love, thy whole Life was love, thy Death was the most
singular love, thy last breath, in a manner, was love, one of thy last words
was love, even to the bitterest enemies, thy Sacraments are love, the
Holy Ghost the Comforter is love, thy Ambassadors were love, thou art, we see
All love; and yet, dull and stupid blocks that we are, we are nothing less than
this Divine love.

O sweet Savior, what will thou do with such vile, such wretched hearts, as
these of ours? Can thou endure so much as to look upon such souls, as are so
frozen before thy fires? Can thou shed one beam more upon such icy hearts,
that are so insensible of all thy flames? Is it possible that thou should be
so patient, as to bear with the prayers of those, whose breasts are so full of
love, so propense to this affection, so free to pour it out to every thing; and
yet allow so few or no drops of it unto thee, who deservest all the love we
have?

O Dearest Lord, if there be any room still left in thy heart for such as we
are, be pleased once more to cast thine eyes upon us most miserable sinners. If
thou can lend thine ears to the requests of such foolish, such obstinate
hearts, as have been so senslesly deaf to all thy gracious entreaties; hear the
sighs and the groans of all those penitent souls who cry unto thee and say,
Lord Jesus look upon us. Spare us, Good Lord, if it be but one dram of thy pity
and tenderest compassion. O spare us but the least touch more from thine
all-powerful hand; if thou art not weary of striking such rocky hearts, as now
petition thee for thy love. O mollify them, most gracious Lord, mollify them,
we beseech thee, with thy Dear love toward us. Now that they are a little
tender and yielding to thee, melt and dissolve them into the like love toward
thee. Enter into all our hearts; O that thou would enter, and fill them with
thy love. Overcome them with this powerful engine, thy mighty, thy wonderful
Love.

Thy love, I say, thy most stupendous love; for no word pleases me so much as
love. Give me leave therefore to repeat it over again, and to pray thee by thy
love, by thy dear and tender love, that thou will not pass by this heart of
mine (among all the rest) which now at last would fain be replenished with thy
love. I lie here in the humblest devotion prostrate at thy feet, and, gasping
there before thee, my soul pants and says; O Love, inspire me: O Love, breath
thy soul and life into me. As thou have overcome, so possess this heart
entirely, and vouchsafe to dwell in me.

And do thou, my incomprehensibly loving Savior, make me ever thus to sigh and
groan, out of the very center of mine heart, after thee. Make me always to be
saying thus to thee; O my life, my joy, my hope, my all, do not despise this
languishing soul, which entreats thee to dwell in it, by thy surpassing love.
Draw me after thee, and touch me so, that I may look upon nothing so much as
thy love. Turn my heart about; and bend it wholly to thy love. Make me to speak
of nothing, with such delight, as of thy love: to breath nothing, to study
nothing, to desire, to do nothing, but only love.

Let no day, at least, pass without some serious meditations of thy love. Let
no Sun shine, but what shows me thee and thy love, shining brighter by far upon
me. Let no night close mine eyes, but do thou shut up a sense of thy self and
thy love in my breast. Let no friend come to visit me, but give him thy love to
bring along with him; and let him present thy self unto me. Let the sight of
him, enkindle thy love in me. Let the embraces of him, knit me in faster
affection to thee. Let the remembrance of him and his kindness, recall to mind
thy infinitely greater love to me. Let every motion of my heart toward him,
rest at last in the love of thee: who art the hope and the satisfaction both of
him and me.

Still may I therefore think of thee more frequently. Still may I desire thee
more passionately. Still may I obey the more universally. May the following
acts of love and virtue, still outstrip the former: and one conquest of my
self, make way for a nobler. May thine Almighty love still grow and prevail;
till there be no affection that dare appear, no passion that dare presume to
show its head, against the sovereign power of thy love in mine heart.

And now, O my Lord, I know not how to leave thee, until I hear thee say, Thou
love me. Prostrate still will I here lie at thy feet, for I cannot have the
heart to rise up again; unless thou will speak that kind, that gracious word,
and tell me, that thou do not cease to love me. Nay, I dye unless thou love
me. I shall make my grave here in this very place; and expire with these words
in my mouth; LORD WHETHER I LIVE OR DYE IT MATTERS NOT; LET ME BUT KNOW THAT
THOU LOVE ME.

And may I be so bold as to conclude thou have some love to me, because I feel
my heart beat thus passionately toward thee, and my soul thirsts and cries
thus after thee? Will it not be too great a presumption to think thou have not
forsaken me, because I cannot forsake my request; but above all things long and
labor to be beloved of thee? Is this love thou have wrought in my heart to
thee, an encouragement to hope thou love me? Truly then, my Lord, I am well
satisfied. Then I know thou bear a favor to me. For my soul follows hard
after thee; it cleaves unto thee; it loves thy memory; and delights it self in
thy Commandments.

It says continually, nothing but more of thy love; nothing, but abundance of
thy love. I open my heart unto thy exuberant love. I expose my self to the
power of thy transcendent love. I choose and desire the pleasures of thy love;
above all the delights, wherewith the world can entertain me. Above the admired
heaps of wealth, and the dazzling heights of honor. Above the loudest praises
of fame, and the bewitching applause of numerous spectators. Above the charms
of beauty, and the more enticing delights of curious knowledge. Nay, above the
solid joys of health, and the most necessary refreshments of nature. Above
all, that even thine own bounty can give, to those that love thee.

O let me but love thee; make me but always thus to love thee; always despise
all other delights, compared with those of loving thee; do but fill my heart
with that love and with those delights: and I am perfectly satisfied. I am at
rest now I have given my self to thee entirely. And if I had a thousand hearts,
they should be devoted to thy service, with the most affectionate love to thee.

But yet, alas! when I think of thy wondrous love, I am apt to conclude again
that I did amiss to say, I was satisfied. All this, upon better thoughts, seems
a great deal too little; and I am as short, me thinks, of thy love, as if I
loved thee not at all. For what have I given thee, when I have paid thee all my
acknowledgements? What have I bestowed on thee, when I have given thee my self,
and absolutely offered all my affections to thee? What is my heart, what are a
thousand such hearts as this worth; that I should think such a present will be
of any esteem with thee? If all my life were nothing else, but the most
affectionate, the most cheerful obedience to thee; what requital should I have
made thee for all thy love to me?

Alas! I have so little ability to do any thing worthy of thee; that I have not
the skill how to speak, as becomes me, of my duty to thee. What do I talk of
acknowledgements to thee? That Is as if I could number or value thy favors. And
it is a worse absurdity to speak of giving thee my affections (as if I were not
a debtor to thee) and of bestowing my heart on thee; For that is as if I had any
thing I received not from thee. But it is worst of all (I am ashamed of it) to
mention a requital of thy favors; for that is as if they were so small or so
few, as to admit of any return like a recompense unto thee.

No, No, I am nothing at all. I have nothing, I can do just nothing, but what
is thine more than mine; if it be worth any thing. I here most solemnly protest
that I think my self indebted to thee, for all I have. I my self am thine; my
love is thine; my prayers and desires are thine; my praises and thanksgivings
are thine; so is my Faith and my Hope, my comforts and my joys, they are all
thine. I cannot so much as confess my debts and obligations; but it is from
thee. I cannot be sensible of my faults; but I contract a new debt to thee.
That I can so much as see and say, I am nothing, I owe it unto thee.

What shall I do therefore? How shall I express my self to thee? Or in what
manner shall I approach thee? All that I can think of is only this; still to
cast down my self in the humblest devotion before thee, and all thawed and
dissolved with thy love to pour out my heart unto thee, saying; LORD, WORK
THINE OWN GOOD PLEASVRE IN ME. Make me what thou thy self best likest and
love. And when thou have loved and obliged me as much as thou please here;
complete thine own benefits and crown them with as great a glory, as thine own
great love can bestow hereafter.

CHAP. XX. The Conclusion.
AND here I think it is best to put a period to this discourse; which is
already come to a competent length. For where can I leave you better than in
the arms of our Lord; entirely resolved into his will, and wishing to be united
to him, and made one spirit with him, as much as he pleases? And yet how hard
is it to cease to desire that happiness, in its utmost perfection? How can we
choose but ask him leave, at least to repete that wish over again? The very
thoughts of it make the ravished soul, thrust it self with the more ardent
affection into the bosom of his love. They stir it up to ply him with new
petitions, that he will draw it more strongly after him, and knit it more
closely to him; that he will inspire it with more of his love, and, by
perfecting his likeness in it, inseparably unite it to himself.

O blessed Jesus, surely thou will appear: I believe in due time thou will
appear. I am fully persuaded thou will not fail to make good thy word; of
coming to fetch us to thy self, and making us exceedingly more happy than now,
in our most enlarged thoughts, we can conceive. I see, me thinks, the sky
cleave, and the day break, and the Archangel, thy Harbinger, begin to look
forth and thrust his head out of the clouds: which makes my heart leap for joy;
as if it would leave this world, and instantly go to meet thee, my infinitely
Dearer Savior.

For what splendour is there in Gold, Greg. Nyssen. Orat. V. in Beatitud.
that I should desire it? What brightness in precious stones? What ornament in
the most sumptuous apparel, compared with that Good which our hope in thee
supposes, and sets before us? When thou who reignest over all creatures, shall
reveal thy self to mankind, sitting most magnificently upon a lofty Throne;
when innumerable millions of Angels shall be seen about thee; and when the
Kingdom of Heaven, which now is such a secret, shall be set wide open before
all our eyes.

O let the thoughts of the Trump of God, which shall then sound, awaken my soul
more powerfully, to lift up it self to look for thee; and for that glorious
sight, thou will bless us withal, at thy appearing! O let the faith that is in
thy heart grow daily more active, and work in me a most vigorous love of thee!
And let my love be enlarged, till this heart be stretched to its utmost
capacity; and thou, the infinite Good, still fill and overflow it. For I am
afraid thou should come and find me unprepared for thee. I would not for all
the world be found unready to meet thee; and unfit for the blessings thou will
bring along with thee.

If an heart that desires thee most passionately be of any worth; if thou can
have any kind thoughts of a mind that prefers thee and thy love, above all
other things; if to love thine appearing, far more than the most glorious
condition wherein a man can possibly appear in mortal flesh, can find any grace
in thine eyes; behold then a soul that is able to say, through thy great
goodness, that it most earnestly longs for thee. See here an heart that desires
to be like thee; that had rather dye than displease thee: and that will welcome
thy coming with more joy, than a sick man, wearied with the restlessness of a
long night, does the morning light; or a Traveller does his much desired home;
or a Virgin espoused does her long absent Bridegroom, the dearly beloved of her
soul.

It is thou, who have begot in me these longings. I have received all thou
see in me from thy gracious hands; which have made me, and fashioned me; and
made me unsatisfied in any thing, but thee, and thy love. O let not these pious
longings also be unsatisfied. Let me not want the pleasures from which I have
turned mine eyes away here; and those pleasures too, which I look for so
earnestly, and promise my self at thine appearing.

But let the same reason which moved thee to give me so much, incline thee to
give me more. Let that mighty love which has wrought in me desires, bring me
to the enjoyment. And after thou have pleased thy bounty, in making me receive
as much as thou will in this present state; let it be thy pleasure to receive
me to thee in a better: and by giving me all I would have, in the sight I
expect of thee, to leave no desires remaining in me. Amen and Amen.

THE END.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, and Printed for Richard Royston at
the Angel in Amen-corner.
1. THE Christian Sacrifice: a Treatise showing the Necessity, End and Manner
of receiving the holy Communion: together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the Principal Festivals in memory of our
Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Third Edition Corrected. in Twelves.

2. The Devout Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to God: Or a
Book of Devotions for Families and particular persons in most of the concerns
of Humane life. The second Edition, in Twelves.

3. An Advice to a Friend. The second Edition, in Twelves.

4. The Witnesses to Christianity; or, The Certainty of our Faith and Hope: In
a Discourse upon 1 S. John v. 7, 8. In two Parts, in Octavo, new.

5. A Sermon Preached before the King on St. Stephen's day, Printed by His
Majesty's special command. in Quarto.

Angliae Speculum: a Glass that flatters not; Presented to a Country
Congregation at the late Solemn Fast, April 24. 1678. In a Parallel between the
Kingdom of Israel and England. Wherein the whole Nation is desired to behold
and consider our Sin, and our Danger. By a dutiful Son of this Church. in
Quarto.

The true Intellectual System of the Universe: The first Part; wherein, all the
Reason and Philosophy of Atheism is Confuted, and its Impossibility
Demonstrated. By R. Cudworth, D. D. in Folio.

A Sermon Preached before the King, Feb. 10th 1677/8. By Z. Cradock, D. D.
Preacher to the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty. in Quarto.

XXXI Sermons Preached to the Parishioners of Standford-Rivers in Essex, upon
several Subjects and Occasions. By Charles Gibbes, D. D. Rectour of that
Church, and Prebendary of St. Peter's at Westminster. in Quarto new.

The Jesuits Loyalty, manifested in three several Treatises lately written by
them against the Oath of Allegiance: with a Preface, showing the Pernicious
Consequence of their Principles as to Civil Government. Also Three other
Treatises concerning the Reasons of the Penal Laws. viz. I. The Execution of
Justice in England, not for Religion, but for Treason. II. Important
Considerations, by the Secular Priests. III. The Jesuits Reasons Unreasonable.
in Quarto.


