A Consolatory DISCOURSE, Persuading to a Cheerful Trust in God in these Times
of Trouble and Danger.

By Simon Patrick Rector of St. Paul Covent Garden.

LONDON, Printed by J. Hayes for S. Thomson, at the Sign of the Bishops Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

THe face of things is now so calamitous, and there is so much sadness
discovers it self in the looks of all those who are serious and affected with
our present miseries, that it seems as great a deed of charity to send some
comfort to them, as to call the careless would to Repentance. There has not a
week of sat passed, but we are told in the Bills of Mortality, that some are
dead of Grief. The weight of many men's sorrows is so great, that it sinks them
to their Graves. And they that are not yet so heavily oppressed, yet groan
under their burdens; and we hear every day of some or other that are ready to
faint by reason of the anguish of their spirits. We have some hopes indeed that
the number is not very great who are so sorely distressed; but yet there is a
General damp I observe upon the better sort of souls; and there are many things
concur to cast a cloud over their faces. Some are very heavy for the loss of
their friends, and others for the fear of that loss. It afflicts some to see
such a decay of Trade, and others begin to have apprehensions of Poverty, and
think it is possible they may fall into Want. We see men startled very much to
find the Burials swelled to such an height the Week that is passed; and again
it affrights them to think of the sum that this Week current may mount them
unto. Most men are possessed with a fear of Death, which now surrounds them on
all sides; and others that have been free from those terrors, yet are in some
dread of that kind of Death that domineers among us. In so much that they are
very numerous, methinks, whose very aspects beg for some consolation. We can
cast our eyes no where but we behold some or other imploring our help; and
craving something that may brighten their countenances, by reviving and
cheering their drooping spirits.

That is the errand of this little Paper; which it came into my mind upon these
considerations to send after a former Sheet; That all those who truly repent
them of their sins, and apply their thoughts and endeavors to amend their
lives, may not make their lives a burden to them by fears, or cares, or grief,
or any other of those troublesome passions which we are apt to be haunted
withal.

Now though there be many particular supports which are easy to be produced
for men's relief, under every one of those evils which are the cause of their
complaints? yet this discourse being confined to so small a compass as a Sheet,
it will be best to direct you to one remedy for all Diseases. Especially
considering that one Medicine will be better remembered then a great many; that
the application and use of it also will be more easy; and that the mind being
fixed in one point, it will be the less subject to distraction by a multitude
of thoughts. And when I cast mine eye upon the Holy Books to find that which
may be most proper for every man's case; I can see nothing so much spoken of,
nothing so much magnified and applauded for a present Cure of all troubles, as
Trusting in God. Our Fathers trusted in thee (says the Prophet in that
mournful Psalm 22.4, 5.) they trusted and thou did deliver them. They cried
unto thee and were delivered: they trusted in thee and were not confounded.
Here you have the practice and Experience of Ancient times, which are a
direction to us in like cases. You have here so approved a Remedy, and which
this Divine Writer thought so safe, that he resolved to take no other course in
a time of such Contagion as this is. For having observed that he who flies to
the Most High as his Sanctuary, abides under the shadow of the Almighty, he
determines to seek for no other comfort or security, but thus concludes with
himself; I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress; my God, in
him I will trust, Psalm. 91. 1, 2.

Let us see then of what this famous and so much tried Remedy may consist. Let
us search of what an Antidote so powerful is compounded. If it be such an
Universal Medicine, it concerns us very much to be well acquainted with it;
that we may not mistake in the making of it, either by leaving out or putting
in of any thing which may spoil its efficacy. And to say the truth it is a
very plain and simple thing which will not torture your wits to comprehend.
This is the beginning of your comfort, that there is nothing in it but what is
vulgarly known, if it were but as well followed and put in use. It is only to
behave our selves toward God as we do to one of our Good Neighbors, of whose
skill and fidelity we have assurance; and the business is done.

I. First then if an honest man give us his word for the performance of any
thing we desire of him; on this we rely as our security, demanding no other;
from whence we are said to trust that person. Which directs us if we will place
our confidence in God, to be thoroughly persuaded of the truth of all that he
has promised, resting assured that it shall certainly be fulfilled. Is there
nothing that God has given us his word for? Does he not stand at all engaged
to us? Can we find nothing upon record that he has said for our comfort and
support in this world of sorrows? Turn over the leaves of that Book which is
deservedly called the Book of God, and you will see that he has tied himself
unto us for the performance of several things that highly import us, not only
by his word but by his Oath. He has testified his singular care of the
happiness of the world. He has shown the great desire he has that his
creatures should live in good comfort, and not be miserable, in that he has
not only said but sworn that he will do them good. He has assured us in a more
solemn manner then could be desired, that he will provide for us; that he will
give us a competency of these worldly goods; that he will never leave us nor
forsake us; that he will be our support and comforter in all afflictions; that
he will strengthen us on a bed of languishing, and make all our bed in our
sickness; that he will lay no more upon us then we shall be able to bear; and
that all things shall work together for good to those that love him. Of which
promises you must no more doubt then if it were in your own power to bestow
these blessings on your selves. And is all this nothing think you to cheer a
man's heart? Is there no virtue in these words (if steadfastly believed) to raise
up your sinking spirits? Will it give you no joy to think that you are so sure
to be under the care of God? You would have had him promised you perhaps that
you shall never be sick: or that you shall not be sick of any contagious
disease; or that you shall have long life; or come to great riches and honors,
without which you cannot be content. Poor Fools! He has promised you far
nobler enjoyments, and would not have you set your hearts on things of so low
concernment. Besides those that I have mentioned, there are three most
remarkable things which he has passed his word and faith for, which if you
believe, I shall soon give you satisfaction in the lesser matters of which you
are so desirous. First, he has promised forgiveness of sins if you heartily
amend. An inestimable favor; and which imports us more then to be well, to be
rich or to en joy all the pleasures on earth. For they are in truth no
pleasures, whenever a man thinks of Damnation at the last. Secondly, he has
promised the gift of the Holy Ghost to help and sustein us; to comfort and
cheer us; to guide and conduct us in our way to the third thing that he has
assured us of. And that is Eternal life to reward our Piety, our fidelity, our
Patience and Adherence to him. This St. John has see a mark upon as the most
illustrious of all other, saying, This is the promise that he has promised us
even eternal life. 1 Epist. 2.25. As if he would have us fix our eyes on this
above all other things; and have us to think that if God has not said so much
concerning temporal enjoyments as we desire, the reason is because his word is
a thing which it is fit his Majesty should pass in matters of more moment, and
of which there might be greater doubt. And truly these things which I have
named are such that if we can believe them upon his word, we may well trust him
for all the rest without his word. For who can think that he who will give us
heaven, will deny us any thing that is fit for us upon the earth? or who can be
such an Idiot as to imagine that he who is so liberal as to bestow eternal
life, will be sparing of a long life to us here if he judge it most convenient?
And that will bring me to the second thing, which is

II. To direct you to place a confidence in God that he will give you
whatsoever is best for you though it be not promised. It is a great
imperfection and robs men of much comfort, not to be able to rely on God unless
they have his word for every thing. Is not the Nature of God think you as great
a security to us as that can be? Truly they that understand things, judge it to
be rather greater; because it is that which gives credit to his word. Why do
you believe, I beseech you, what God says? Is it not because you know his
Truth and Goodness to be so unspotted that he cannot possibly deceive you? Let
us then be of good cheer. From hence we may derive our comfort as well as from
any thing else. Nay this is the very Original and fountain of all our
consolation and support, that God is of such a Nature that he delights in the
welfare and contentment of his Creatures. From this we may fetch as much joy as
we please. We need not doubt to conclude from hence that we shall have all that
is good for us though there were not one word said of it. And he is neither
good nor wise that will desire more, and not rest himself contented in this
persuasion. Let us have recourse if you please to our dealings one with
another; for by them I told you we should best understand what it is to trust
in God. Do we never repose a confidence in an excellent person unless he give
us his word or his bond? Are there not some men of whom we have such an high
opinion that we readily deposite our money, our jewels, our Deeds or any thing
else in their hands, and never so much as ask them to give us their promise
that they will safely keep them for us? Why do we think it strange then to
depend on God in this manner? Why do we not think that we have assurance enough
from the absolute perfection of Gods Nature that it shall go well with us? what
is the matter that we cannot be satisfied without he pass his word; and that we
are not confident in himself that we shall want no good thing? In my poor
judgment this is rather to trust in God then the Other. I mean he is more
properly said to trust in God who persuades himself that he is so good as to
give him all things needful, though not particularly promised; then he that
relies only on his word. For this latter is rather to be called Faith then
Trust. Between which two there seems to be this difference, that faith has
respect only to the word of God; to what he says and expresses: but Trust goes
further and has respect also to God himself. It looks not only at what he is
engaged to do; but at what he is inclined to do for us. Conclude therefore with
the Psalmist and pronounce it in a joyful and triumphant manner (84.11, 12,)
The Lord God is a Sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory; and no
good thing, will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord God of
hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee. He does not envy any of his
blessings to us. He is as free of his favors as the Sun is of his beams. He is
no more backward and unwilling to do us any good, then that great Lamp of
heaven (which is as it were his Visible Image) is to impart its light and heat
to the world. And therefore he is in a blessed Condition that trusts in God. He
has united himself by that means to the very fountain and source of all good
things; and so cannot fail to enjoy in every condition that which is most
profitable for him. Be it health, be it riches, be it long life, which we think
is best for us; if God think so too, we may resolve his bounty will not let us
want it but certainly bestow it upon us. I shall stay till anon to ask you if
you can find no comfort in this persuasion; and now proceed to tell you in the
third place, that in order to your full content,

III. You must in this confidence commit your selves to his good providence
that he may dispose of you as he pleases. If you verily believe that God will
have a care of you, then you cannot choose but yield up your self and all you
have to his wise goodness, desiring that every thing may be as he, not as you
will. For does not he that trusts in another, whether in his word, or his
Virtue, leave any thing with him and deposite it in his hands? Does he not rest
assured that it will be safe; that he will dispose of it as shall be most
fitting; or that he will improve it for his benefit? Do we not see that he
cease to trouble himself any further, when he has once secured his goods in
this man's keeping? that he casts away all care, that he his not possessed with
fears, but says as we must do of God, I know whom I have trusted? you do
vainly then pretend to trust in the Father of Mercies; and as vainly hope for
any contentment, if you do not thus resign up your selves and all your
concernments unto him, being fully satisfied that he will do what is most
conducing to your good. This is the confidence that he expects we will repose
in him if we take him for our friend. And whatsoever men of fancy may persuade
themselves, this is a nobler degree of trust in God then to have the particular
confidence (which they so eagerly aspire unto) that he will do this or that.
This in truth puts the most honor upon him, when we relinquish our own
particular desires and refer all to his will. This is the most certain mark of
our believing him to be what he is, when we dare thus leave our selves entirely
to him, that he may do as he pleases with us. The times are now very sickly; we
are all in great danger; and know not to what remedies we should fly. Death
has fetch away so many round about us, that we may fear he will come for us
next. If we will now act the part of good Christians, or if we will have any
constant comfort, we must all say as David does, What time I am afraid, I will
trust in thee. Let us now refer all to God, who knows best what use he has for
his Creatures; and where it is most fit to bestow them, either in this world or
in the other. Let us be confident he will dispose us there where it is most
necessary and best for us to be. And in this confidence we shall find abundant
satisfaction, both in this and all other things that trouble us. It will keep
us in perfect peace, thus to stay our minds on him. Nay, I think fit to add,
that if there be any way to have that which we are naturally inclined to with
(be it health, or plenty or any thing else) this is it. For does not a person
that is perfectly and without any conditions intruded by us, think himself more
engaged and concerned to dispose of what we leave with him not only to our
advantage, but as near as may be to our hearts desire? Do not think then that
God is so unkind, that he loves to cross us in that which we are inclined to
ask, after we have submitted it wholly to him. Believe that he will deal very
tenderly with those who have such an high esteem of him, that they ask nothing
but that he will do as seems good in his eyes. He has a greater care of these
men's good then any others. He is more engaged to them (if we may speak in our
common phrase) and they shall see he will deal very well with them. He is much
pleased that they leave all to his wisdom, and therefore will not fall to let
them fare the better for not interposing their own particular desires. But if
we will be taking upon us to prescribe to him what course he shall take; if we
behave our selves as if we should be undone unless things go in that one way
which we determine, and therefore are always sollicitously entreating him for
this and that which we fancy nearly concerns our worldly estate; then we
disoblige him very much. It is a sign we would take things out of his
management if we could; and be glad to have the ordering of affairs in our own
power. It shows that we are loath to trust him, and that we suspect his wisdom
and goodness; or at least that we have no such feeling of them, but that we had
rather rely upon our own skill and love to our selves. Now how can this choose
but render our condition as unsecure as it will make it uncomfortable? we can
never have any settled peace unless we quietly commit our selves to God; nor can
we hope for any safety at all, which is furthest off from those who so little
esteem his will that they prefer their own before it. Away therefore with all
your cares (if you would be happy) and cast them upon him, for he cares for
you. 1 Pet. 5.7. Throw them entirely upon him, for it is his business to govern
the world and not yours. Let him see you rest your selves with as composed a
spirit on his Providence, as if it was in your own hands to do what you list.
This is the only way to please him, and you will never sure be pleased your
selves unless you think that be is so too.

IV. And now having thus cast your care upon him, it must be your care to walk
uprightly before him; for from such persons (you heard) he will withhold no
good thing. It is no part of your work indeed to busy your thoughts about
future events; but there is something else that lies upon you, which is to do
what God at present bids you, that so you may be always qualified for his
favors. This is not only a necessary concomitant of our trusting in God, but a
part of it. We must commit our souls (or lives) to him in well doing, as into
the hands of a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. ^. 19. We must trust in the Lord and
do good; so shall we dwell in the land, and verily we shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3.
Great heed must be taken that you leave not out this Ingredient (as I may call
it) of doing good, when you are forming your trust in God; for the Remedy will
be quite spoiled if this be wanting. For have you not seen that to trust in God
is to take his word, to believe that he says true whatsoever it be that he
speaks? Now how solemnly has he told you that his face is against them that do
evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth? that the way of the
ungodly shall be turned upside down? that the wicked shall fall into mischief?
And therefore must you not be persuaded that there is no way to be happy in
this world or in the other, but by following of his counsels and obeying his
commands? If you trust God, you must necessarily govern your selves by this
belief. If you give any credit to him, you must observe those rules whereby he
would have you to live. And you must resolve that he has no confidence in God,
who hopes for his blessing in those ways which he has said shall not prosper.
No, he confides in his own bold fancy and presumptuous thoughts. He contradicts
God, and gives him the lie. He says in effect that he will not trust his word,
which has expressly told us, that he who walks uprightly shall be saved; but
be that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once, Prove. 28.18. You must live
soberly, righteously and godly in the world, if you will have any comfort. You
must walk with God if you will be under his shadow. When you run away from him,
you flee from your shield, and lose your confidence of his protection. In evil
ways you are insecure, and there the Angel of death is most like to meet you.
But let all those that put their trust in God rejoice, let them ever shout for
joy. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him
as with a shield, Psalm. 5.11, 12. Where the righteous (you may observe) and
they that put their trust in God are the very same men, and the only persons
that can rejoice and expect that he will defend them from all that will prove
hurtful to them.

Thus I have briefly shown you of what this Ancient and Divine Remedy does
consist. All that remains is to reflect and consider if there be nor both great
cause thus to trust in God; and also such great comfort in so doing, that a man
may shout for joy, as you heard the Psalmist just now express it.

As for the Cause; there are so many grounds of our confidence as there are
Perfections in God. His Goodness is so great, that he delights in our
happiness. His Wisdom is so great, that he cannot mistake nor make any choice
of that for us which is pernicious. His Power is so great, that as nothing can
come to pass without his leave, so nothing can be hindered which his Wisdom and
Goodness will have done. He is Faithful and just also, and cannot but make
good his Word. And besides he is so immutable, that he always governs the
World by the same eternal Rules, and gives us thereby the same hopes in him
that good men have ever had.

Why do we not rejoice in God then as well as they? What comfort would you have
that is not here to be found? Are good hopes in the Immortal, only Wise God,
nothing worth? Or can they give but a feeble support to those that are owners
of them? If they can do any thing, you see plainly there is great cause for
them, and greater then for many other things. They are secured so many ways,
that it is manifest God would not have us want the comfort of them. The Power
of God (for example sake) may make you fear him, and there is great reason for
it; but it will not produce love to him. On the other side, the Goodness of God
will make you love him; but it does not so easily produce fear. These
affections grow (as it were) on single roots; and that which bears the one does
not bear the other. But as for Trust in God, that grows upon them both. The
Power of God will make us confide him as well as his Goodness. And besides; the
Wisdom, the Justice, the Faithfulness, and the Eternity of God, give strength
and force unto our confidence. All these are apt to beget in us assurance of
good from him; so that if that be of any moment to our support and consolation,
we cannot well be without them.

And verily it is of exceeding great consequence. The comfort that it gives is
infinite and cannot be limited. It extends it self to all things, to every case
and condition of life. There is no evil which threatens us in this world, but
it can help and arm us against the assaults of it. It cuts off all the matter
of our trouble. We need not fear any thing. We need not be careful for any
thing. We need not torment our selves with restless desires. And there is no
cause that we should be wounded with any grief and sorrow. We have nothing left
us to do but only to rejoice always, because we are in his hands who
exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth; and
protests that in these things he delights, Ier. 9.24. In this we way glory and
make our boast. This may justly fill us with joy and gladness, which are the
only passions that this Trust leaves in possession of the heart. We may say
continually let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the prosperity of
his servants. There is nothing can fall out in which we may not rest
exceedingly satisfied. We may welcome any thing with a pleasant countenance,
because it is the appointment of our loving Father, to whose care we have lest
the ordering of all that belongs to us. It is impossible any thing should come
to us, unless the goodness of God be first consulted. No Plague (for instance)
can smite us, but Almighty Power must first give way. There cannot the least
thing which we call evil so much as touch us, but infinite Wisdom must content
unto it. And who would be troubled if these shall bid poverty, or sickness, or
the loss of friends, or death it self go to him? Where is his wit that would
bid them stay away, when God comnands them to come? Will any man that is
advised take it ill, that that is done which the infinite Wisdom and Goodness
appoints? Will he desire any thing should be other ways then as that shall
direct? What contentment could a man take in a place, if it were possible to
stay in it, against the will and pleasure of heaven? Or to what purpose is it
to wish to remain any longer here, when the Sovereign of the World would remove
us to another and a better Country? No, we should say cheerfully, The will of
the Lord be done. It is the Lord, let him do as seems good in his sight. Now
Lord, will thy servants depart in peace: We will come, now that thou call
us. Thou art good and thou do good; and therefore we will readily follow
thee, though thou leadest us to the grave.

I know indeed that there are many who would be glad if I could say something
else unto them: And who would rejeyce more, then I doubt they will do in this
discourse, if I could give them ground to believe that they shall certainly be
preserved, by confidence in God, from the infection that is abroad. This is the
thing which they look for. They are much in love with life, and so they would
think themselves happy if they could be assured they shall not lose it. They
would fain have us to put this confidence into their minds, by putting it into
the nature of Trust in God. It is worth little they imagine, if this persuasion
be not intermixed with it. And if the 91 Psalm be not thus expounded, they can
take but small comfort in the reading of it.

But as I am loath to deceive any body, so I would not willingly have men
deceive themselves, by misunderstanding that and other places of Holy Writ. I
would not have them be more Bold then truly confident, the effect of which will
be this, that they must needs be extremely troubled and confounded when they
find themselves confuted by Death. Some indeed of these Bold Believers may
escape, and so they would without this confidence; but others of them may dye,
and then consider what an amazement it will be to meet with a disappointment.
For, I beseech you, have not all ages taught us that good men dye as well as
others by pestilential breaths? not so many indeed as of the rest, because
there are not so many of them to die. They are but thinly scattered in the
world, and therefore at no time can there as many fall of them as of the bad.
But yet I say, do not some of them feel this stroke of God? Will we condemn all
those for wicked, or such as had no trust in God, who have perished in this
great mortality? It is no good sign that you shall be safe, if you be so
uncharitable. And yet one of these two you must say, either that you cannot
have this absolute confidence of being preserved; or that all those wanted this
faith in God whose lives are not preserved. If you will not condemn them, then
you must condemn these arrogant pretenses and high confidences which limit God
to men's own desires.

But what then shall we say to the Psalmists words? Do not they tell us that a
man that trusts in God shall see ten thousand fall about him and he escape,
Psalm 91.7.

I answer, they do not promise us infallibly that we shall be secure when
others die; but only encourage us to trust in God upon the experiment which he
has made of the succesfulness of this course. This will be better understood
if the occasion of this Psalm be marked. Many of the Hebrews indeed think it
was penned by Moses as the foregoing Psalm was, upon the occasion of the
Plagues in the Wilderness; but it is more probable that it was written by
David, when the Angel of the Lord slew 70000 in a short space; and coming to
Jerusalem was diverted from his execution by the repentance and supplications
of him and of the Elders (1 Chronicles. 21.16.) who fled to God for refuge. Now upon
this remarkable success of their obedient faith in God, which kept Jerusalem
from the stroke, when a thousand fell on one side and ten thousand on the
other; David proclaims this to all succeeding times as the only remedy against
infection, to take sanctuary in God, nothing doubting of his protection, if
there be the same reason for it that then there was. Or rather we shall find
(upon a strict examination of his words) that this Psalm is an incitement to
his own soul to depend on God only in time to come upon the like occasions. For
thus I conceive they are to be expounded. I will say of the Lord (i.e. to
himself) he is my refuge, my fortress, my God, in him I will trust. He shall
deliver thee (speaking still to his own soul) from the snare of the fouler, and
from the noisome pestilence. i.e. from all unseen dangers that are most
unavoidable. And then (after many such like expressions) as if he had heard the
charge that God gave the Angels of him that no hurt should come to him, he
concludes in a pious rapture, (v. 14, 15, 16.) with the words of God to them,
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him on high because he has known my name, etc. with long life will I satisfy
him, and show him my salvation. But all this is to be understood as spoken in
the heat of a divine inspiration, by which God gave him a particular assurance
that he would preserve him (being of so great use to his people, and also a
tipe of the Messiah) from all the dangers that evil men or evil Angels might
design to bring him into. As for our selves we have no such inspiration (nor
are these words spoken to us all) and therefore can have no such assurance, but
must content our selves with the knowledge of these three things.

1. That there is no remedy in the whole world so powerful as this for our
preservation, if it will consist with the wisdom of Gods government to grant
it. And (2.) that such a remarkable repentance as that of David and all the
Elders or Nobles, would be very likely to obtain such a favor as the removal
of Gods heavy stroke. And (3.) that trust in God has a natural efficacy in it
for the preservation of particular persons, and will most ordinarily protect
them. For (as you have heard) it expels fear, it rejoices the heart, and it
calms all the passions; then which Physicians know nothing more necessary and
effectual for men's safety in these times of Contagion. We may well then
conclude that this Antidote will do great wonders by the blessing of God, who
we see succeeds other means that are of an inferior nature.

And therefore let us put our selves into the hands of God, and be assured,
that if we be not saved from the destroying Angel, there was great reason that
we should die; which it was not fit for any indulgence of heaven to overrule.
Let us think this comfort enough, that we have committed our selves to him, who
will do nothing, but what we would do if we saw so much as he. And indeed I do
not see what greater comfort an assurance of deliverance would give us, then we
may have in an humble submission of all to Gods will and pleasure. We should
have no privilege above others, but only to know something beforehand which
they do not; for as to the thing it self, they may hare it (though they do not
foresee it) as well as we. Now what great comfort is there merely in knowing
that we shall live some years longer in this World? Are such men assured also
that no other evil shall befall them? Shall they never lose their health, nor
their friends? Why are they not confident of this too? and that they shall die
of nothing but old Age; because it is said there; No evil shall befall thee;
and with long life will I satisfy him, v. 10 16. Or if they had assurance of
all this, where is the advantage they have of other men who pretend to no such
confidence? Is it such an happiness merely to live? Is not this a greater, to
know that we shall have what God sees good? To be assured we shall stay here as
long as he judges it will make for our happiness? And if this be the comfort,
then we are possessed of it without their particular assurances. We know that a
sparrow falls not to the ground without our Fathers providence. We are certain
that if he see it best we shall remain here longer, before we be removed to
another place And indeed that is the thing which men of higher confidences then
others should be first assured of; that such things shall make for their
greatest good, or else they can with no comfort expect them, about which, since
I observe they are so little thoughtfull, their confidence methinks is of no
value, but only speaks a natural desire of life to be very prevalent in them.
Nay, their ardent desires of arriving at this particular assurance of a longer
life, betrays too little faith of better things. If they were persuaded those
things are true which they read of in another world; what need they be so
sollicitous, or esteem it such a favor to have assurance of living in this; It
argues too much infidelity, that men are so infinitely fearful to leave their
present enjoyments which makes them bend their thoughts rather to persuade
themselves they shall continue here, then to be prepared for a departure to
their heavenly Country. And it is a mark also of a very low spirit, to take
more contentment in being assured of a longer life, then in looking upon their
lives as in the hands of a good God. For this is to rejoice in what God gives,
more then in himself; and to be pleased in one worldly blessing, more then in
the vast treasures of his Providence.

In those then let us think our selves to be rich and happy eough. Let us live
as if we had great possessions in his love and good will to us; Let us take our
selves to be so amply endowed there, that we desire nothing more. And for an
argument that you really think you have enough, let those that are able impart
of their worldly goods to them that are in need. This will both be an argument
that you trust in the living God, and not in uncertain riches; and also a great
means to secure you in this infectious season. For God has great use of such
men in the world; and they are most lively to be preserved for the good of the
Poor who want such Benefactors. And I heartily wish that all they who are now
fled, had left a large portion of their charity behind them, for I verily
believe it would have been a more effectual means to preserve them, then the
change of place, or any other that they can use. But they are out of the reach
of this Paper; and it will now hold no more but only these words of David,
Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at all times ye people; pour out your heart before
him. God is a refuge for us.

Sept. 1. 1665.
FINIS.

