AN APPENDIX TO THE THIRD PART OF THE Friendly Debate, BEING A LETTER OF THE
CONFORMIST TO THE NONCONFORMIST: Together with a POSTSCRIPT.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for H. Eversden, under the Crown in West Smithfield. 1670

The PREFACE.
IF I was not swayed more by the love of Truth, than of my own Credit, I
should, for many reasons, have suppressed this following Letter. Which
discovers so many gross falsehoods in the reflections which have been made on
the Friendly Debate, that, whatsoever Censures may be passed on me, the Reader
may receive some profit from it. Which that I might not hinder by putting too
big a Book into his hands, I have cast away a great deal of what I had writ
about other untruths and absurd reasonings: hoping that this will be sufficient
to make those that peruse it wary and observant; and then they may detect the
rest themselves without my assistance. And truly the greatest difficulty I met
withal in this work, was to resolve what things I should single out as
Instances of the impertinencies, falsifyings, and misunderstandings, etc. of my
New Adversary. Which proved, I confess, a business so tedious, in such a great
number as lay before me; that to ease my self of too great a labor, I was
constrained at last to take them just as they came next to my thoughts. If it
chance by this means that I have left any thing untouched, which some desired
most of all should have been handled, there is no remedy: And it is better that
they should want complete satisfaction, than that all should be tired with the
length of my Discourse. Besides, I find that I my self have suffered by it; for
I have passed by sundry reflections wherein my private person was more
particularly concerned; which came not to mind till my Letter, I thought, was
swelled to too large a Bulk. This is some sign that I am not so melancholy as
my Adversary muses (for such men use to be more resentive than to forget the
injuries that are done them) and that I have no list to write a Book merely to
clear my self from false imputations. And indeed I found other matter to make
this Treatise larger than I intended: which was a Case that came to my hand
after I had considered the Apology. Whatsoever belonged to me in those Sheets,
I have also spent a few thoughts upon: But took not my self to be concerned in
his bold challenge to answer a Book, which I have not the least knowledge of,
and which another person, he tells me, is more particularly bound (I am sure is
better able) to reply unto, if he think it worthy his pains. I cannot tell
neither whether that person be engaged in honor to accept the challenge; no,
though he proclaim him a Coward, if he do not: For to answer some men (as one
well speaks) is but to comment upon their Gibberish for those that understand
it not, and thereby to bring their folly into more credit and request. I apply
not this to that Book, which, as I said, I am perfectly ignorant of; and may
deserve consideration: But to such vainglorious Challenges as I have seen from
mere Barbarians and Savages, who imagine roaring and being furious is far more
noble than speaking and reasoning. Mr. Vavasor Powel I remember made a
challenge June 11. 1652.
to any Minister or Scholar of ours to dispute Publicly, or Privately on this
Question (and another) Whether our mixed way, or their way of Separation was
nearest to the Word of God? But it was drawn up in such rude and Kitchen Latin
as never, I think, saw the light since the Goths sacked Rome; and as evidently
demonstrated that he thought his sufficiency to be greater than it was, and
that men take themselves sometimes to be true owners of things, of which they
are but mere Usurpers.

As for the Ecclesiastical Policy (which he also carps at) a work of equal
strength and beauty; it has an Author who needs no assistant to defend it
against the ablest Champion they can bring into the Field. Time will show the
truth of this; and therefore I shall say no more of it, lest those
commendations which that Author has in kindness bestowed on my poor
endeavors, should look in the eyes of our Enemies, like bartering with praises
for the return of others.

I have but one thing more to add, which was omitted in its proper place, but
fit to have been inserted, Page 118. of the following Book. There you will find
Mr. Baily affirms, That both Houses abjured Episcopacy (whatsoever some
pretended to the contrary) by the Oath and Covenant; which may be confirmed, I
must add, by their Declaration of the Fifth of August, 1645. sent to the Lords
States General of the United Provinces; who by their Ambassadors had, among
other things, propounded and offered from the King the calling of a National
Synod to correct and redress the Government of the Church by Bishops. One of
the Answers there given, why they could not admit of that Mediation, was, That
not only the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Members of both Houses of Parliament,
but also many thousands of others of his Majesty's Subjects of England and
Ireland stand bound by their late National Covenant to endeavor the
extirpation of the Church Government by Bishops in England and Ireland, and to
hinder the setting of it up again in the Kingdom of Scotland. This passage I
find the Commissioners of Scotland remember the Houses of, both in their Papers
of the 20. and 24. of October, 1646. about the disposing of the Kings Person;
and in their Answer upon the new Propositions of Peace, and the Four Bills,
signed 17. December, 1647. which I thought good here to mention, as a further
confutation of the Apologist; whose pretenses I now leave you to consider.

ERRATA.
PAge 44. line 18. read they presented. p. 45. l. 5. r. falsifies. p. 59. l. 9.
for of r. over. p. 77. l. 7. r. leaning. p. 80, l. 9. r. of it. p. 87. l. ult.
for his Petition, r. suspicion. p. 100. l. 12. r. in Ireland. p. 115. l. 13. r.
Land. But. p. 145. l. 10. for settling r. selling. p. 151. l. 15. dele same. p.
154. l. 22. r. charge King Edward 6.

AN APPENDIX TO THE THIRD PART OF THE Friendly Debate.
SIR,
I Have received the Book you sent me [An humble Apology for Non Conformists,
with modest and serious reflections on the Friendly Debate] and wish it had
come to my hands before as it came after the last Term, that so it might have
been considered by us when we discoursed together about Philagathus. This
Apologist or Catechist (I know not which to call him) should indeed have been
otherwise treated, because he is of another strain: And though he commits the
very same faults, yet not with the same confidence and braving that Philagathus
did; whose overdaring carried him in a ridiculous manner to catch a Tartar;
that is, in plain English, to lose himself.

N. C. Catechism begins: Alleging these words (wherewith Bishop Bramhal
concludes his Vindication of the Church of England) for a reason why an Answer
was not given sooner to my Book; viz. We little imagine with what difficulties
poor Exiles struggle, whose minds are more intent on what they should eat to
morrow than what they should write. It was very unadvisedly done, methinks, to
put us in mind at the very first dash how cruelly they used such excellent
persons in time past, who, as the Bishop there feelingly complains in the words
immediately following, were chased as Vagabonds into the merciless World to beg
relief of strangers See page 275 and his Pathetick Address to England, p. 277.
He shows himself also a very careless Writer, who in the very entrance of his
Work confesses that extreme rigor and severity against the men of the Church
of England, which afterward he denies; telling us, That scarce any man in
those days, who was able sober and peaceable, but might, if he had pleased,
have employment and a livelihood Humble Apol. p. 23. and 151.
But to use the Bishop as their Advocate in this case (as he speaks) that is to
make his heavy complaint a reason for their silence, is such an absurdity as
none could be guilty of but one whose wit is turned Vagabond, and gone a
wool-gathering. For suppose he be an Exile (which I do not believe) are the
rest of the Non-Conformists, and they who are best able to write a Book either
banished into a strange Land, or exposed to those hardships which the Bishop
there sighs under? One would think rather that this Apologist (for his part) is
in so good plight that he has time to be idle and trifle; or that he has not
yet lost that niceness and delicacy which I noted in this sort of men, who
complain of every little restraint as if it were the hugest oppression. They
are Exiles, forsooth, because some of them may not live within five miles of
their former Dwelling: They are banished, because they are confined to a
Country Town, and may not dwell in a Corporation. I can make no other meaning
of his application of those words to themselves; Unless you will have it, that
he had a mind to sport a a little as Luther sometimes did; who was wont to call
the place of his retirement, when the Pope thundered against him, by the name of
his Patmos Melch. Adam. pa. 121, etc.
though it was a good Castle where he lay obscured from his Enemies, was well
entertained by his Friends, had the liberty sometimes to gather Strawberries,
or to go a Hunting in the neighboring places; and which is best of all, had
there the happy leisure to translate the New Testament into the German Tongue.
And so indeed this Writer tells us ( p. 47.) that the Non-Conformists are
turned out to grass, and for that cause, the Circingle will not become them. By
which merriment you may see the Animal is in good case, and that you are like
to find wonderfully serious reflections on the Friendly Debate. But let it be
as he supposes, that they are poor Exiles, and that the Pasture into which they
are turned out, is but short; yet I hope they are not such Evil Beasts, slow
bellies Tit. 1.12.
as the Cretians were, that is (as some understand their Character) such great
feeders, but that they might have chopped a little Logic with me without
pinching their guts, and given an Answer to a Book that has so little reason
in it, if he may be believed, without indangering the defrauding of their
stomachs. The great work of eating might have gone on, and this not have been
neglected. For it would not have cost much more time to confute, than it did to
read a Book, in which, as he tells you Preface, p. 5.
the words are more than the matter, the Rhetoric far beyond the Logic, and
which has smitten them not so much with the Fist, as with the Palms of the
hands. I should think it would cost him a great deal more to reconcile these
words with those that follow in the end of his Preface, That I have made so
many hard and desperate thrusts at them (which it is not easy to do with the
Palm of ones hand) that it has forced them at last to draw in their defense.

O, may some say, but to what purpose had it been to draw sooner? Besides, that
they are Exiles, If an Answer had stolen forth without License, would it not
have been arrested for a seeming breach of a late Act about Printing? etc. This
is another solemn piece of impertinence (to say no worse) wherewith he closes
his Answer to the first Question of his Catechism, why a Reply came out no
sooner. May not I better ask, With what Authority this comes out now? Was there
a greater Privilege for unlicenced Books this last Michaelmas, than there was
in Hilary or Easter Term before? This very Apology confutes it self; and lets
you see how little you are to expect from this Undertaker who stumbles in such
a lubberly manner at his first setting out. For as that Bishop, now mentioned,
speaks in another case, It were strange if he should throw a good cast, who
soales his bowl upon an undersong Reply to S. W's Refutation, p. 1.


Philagathus (whose sober Answer stands but for a Cipher in this Man's account)
being a little more modest. He wants not his, It may bee's, Page 6. 29, 34, etc.
it is possible, for ought I know, and such like words which signify nothing,
but that he knew not what to say, and yet was big with an Apology. This
barrenness of weighty matter, made him serve us up the same insipid Coleworts
twice or thrice over. He begins his Preface and his Book too See Ans. to Quest.
2.
with the same complaint, that I have smitten them on the right cheek, and on
the left. And Bonners Beef and broth he sets before us three times at least
Page 42, 89, 131.
He is for Cookery too, Sauces, and garnishing of dishes Page 99.
. And tells vagrant stories very prodigally Page 38, 41, 62, 64, 65, 68, 74, 89,
100, 104.
out of their unwritten traditions, from whence they furnished so many brazen
Legends in the beginning of the late Tumults: News from Hell, News from Rome,
News from Court, News from Ipswich, Cathedral news from Canterbury, and many
more. All which I shall pass by at this present, because they are Peccadillo's
in compare with the other faults that he has committed.

He humbly conceives that every transgression of an humane Law, though but
Penal, is not so culpable or criminous, as is pretended. Truly, I conceive so
too, that all Offenses are not of equal guilt; but I must let him know, that as
I did not pretend every transgression of a Law to be so culpable as the
transgression of that I spoke of, so, I humbly conceive, he pretends to skill
in the nature of Laws but Penal, which he is utterly ignorant of. For both that
Law which I mentioned, and all those that he instances in, are more than Penal,
as is manifest to every one that has made the least search into these matters.
A Law that is but Penal, as every ordinary Casuist might have taught him
Instead of all, let him consult Dr. Sanderson de oblig. conscientiae Prael. 82.
, commands nothing; but only exacts a Penalty in case a man think fit to do, or
not to do some things therein expressed: As if a man be chosen Alderman of the
City of London, and refuse to hold the Place, he is by a Law among them to pay
a Fine to ^^em. Which is called a Law but Penal, because it does not require or
bind a man to serve this Office (he is at liberty whether he will or no) it
requires only the payment of such a Sum of Money if he think good not to serve.
So that here indeed to pay the Money does ordinarily satisfy the Law; because
a Lawmakers binds us only by declaring his will to Oblige us, and he declares
nothing as his will to oblige a man in this case, but the payment of a Fine.
Which is called a Penalty in a large sense, as it is something which a man
would not willingly undergo if it were left to his own choice, and is imposed
on him in stead of another burden which he refuses, viz. that of Government.
But what is this to the Law which I had occasion to mention? Which is not of
this sort, but a Law Mandatory, as I may call it; requiring them not to
inhabit in such and such places. Upon which account it is a Moral Law, to
regulate men's manners; and for that cause, it is a virtue to obey it, and a
vice to disobey it. Nor does the addition of a Penalty to it alter its nature.
For such Laws are a Rule of life given with an intention to oblige men to
obedience; there being few that know of themselves what is best and most
profitable for common life: And the Penalty is not to be undergone in stead of
the obedience, but is added to contain Subjects in their duty by the fear of
it, because even they who may know what is best will not otherwise do it. So
that in conclusion, such a Law with a Penalty lays a double obligation upon us
both ad poenam and ad culpam as they speak, to suffer the punishment, and to be
sinners if we disobey it. There is no doubt of the former, and it is as
unreasonable to question the latter; because the Law contains a Command, and
Sin is nothing but the transgression of a Command: which transgression is
greater or less according as the will of the Lawmakers is more or less to
oblige us; and that is to be known very much by the greatness or smalness of
the Penalty whereby it is enacted to move us to obedience. This he might have
learnt of Bishop Tailor, whom he quotes directly against his meaning. For that
Question which this man resolves Affirmatively [Is it not enough to satisfy
the Law to pay the Mulct or Penalty in such Cases? p. 3.] he answers
Negatively: And that within a few lines of that very place which this Apologist
alleges to a quite contrary sense. You may find it in his Holy Living, Chap.
3. Sect. 1. Rule 7. which begins thus, Do not believe thou have kept the Law
when thou have suffered the punishment, etc. Read the rest at your leisure; and
do not believe this man who abuses the Bishop, and wrests his words (as their
manner is) from their meaning: The Rule that he mentions being directed to
another purpose, and expressed in terms flatly against him. As long, says the
Bishop, as the Law is obligatory, so long our obedience is due, Ib. Rule the 4.
quoted by this Apol. p. 4.
etc. If obedience be due, then I hope it is not sufficient to suffer the
Penalty; and then this Writer shamefully perverts the sense of that Rule, or
else does not understand it; which is no more but this, that a fixed Custom
abrogates a Law, and makes our obedience no longer due to it. While the Law is
in force, we sin if we do not obey it; but a fixed Custom makes it not to be in
force, and then we are free from it. This is the sense of the Bishop; to which
nothing need be added, but that whilst the Lawgiver constantly declares his
will that it should oblige, no Custom can be pleaded, nor excuse be made for
doing contrary to it.

But you think perhaps that he may find some relief in Mr. Perkins whom he also
alleges. You may try if you please, but if you consult the place, you will see
he had some reason not to tell you where to find it. For first he recites his
words imperfectly, and does not let you know that Mr. Perkins declares, where
the Lawmakers intends obedience simply the Statutes are necessary to be kept.
And again, that he does not excuse men from all blame who break some of the
lesser local Statutes, but only says, Students may in some sort excuse
themselves from the sin of Perjury, though not from all fault, in breaking some
of the lesser local Statutes. They are his very words in his Second Book of
Cases of Conscience, Chap. 13. in the latter end. But to pass by this: That
part of his words which he cites, are so far from reaching his purpose, that
they are against him. For first, the Lawmakers intends obedience simply to the
Laws that they break, as is manifest to all. For secondly, they are not Laws
merely for Decency and Order (which Mr. Perkins speaks of) but for the
preservation of the being of Christian Society, which is destroyed by
separation and division. And therefore thirdly, the Penalty is not as
beneficial to the state of the Society as actual Obedience.

As for that which follows in the end of his Answer to this Question (which he
repeats again, p. 128.) it is altogether impertinent. For we do not charge them
with a bare omission of what our Governors command, but with a direct
opposition to it, and that to the great scandal of the People, and contempt of
the Royal Authority. All which things considered, I think in stead of making an
Apology for the Non-Conformists, he had better have followed the counsel of
Alcibiades to his Uncle when he found him busy about his Accounts; which was,
that he should study rather how to give no account at all.

Ordination by Presbyters, which follows a little after. The Friendly Debate
gave him no occasion to mention any thing of this nature, but he had a mind it
seems to give us a taste of his skill in this great Question; though it be so
small that I know not how to excuse his boldness in meddling with it. He
supposes that the Chorepiscopi (which he makes the same with our Rural Deans)
may lawfully Ordain. And next, that Suffragans were but such Presbyters; so
that he who was Ordained by them had not Episcopal Ordination. And then
thirdly, He would have you believe that Archbishop Usher and other Learned men
concurring in judgment with him, were of this opinion. Every one of which
propositions are notoriously false, as I will plainly show you by demonstrating
these three things. 1. That those called Chorepiscopi, Rural or Country Bishops
never had the Power of Ordination, being not of the Order of Bishops, but
Presbyters something advanced above the rest. 2. On the other side, that
Suffragans had the power of Ordination, being not mere Presbyters, but Bishops,
as those in the City were. And lastly, That the late Primate says nothing
contrary to this.

For the first: The Country Bishops, says the Council of Neocaesarea, About
the year 314.
Can. 13. were but of such a degree as the seventy Disciples, and appointed
after their Type: to whom the Ancients, every body knows, make Presbyters to be
the Successors, as Bishops are to the Apostles. And therefore that Council
calls them only Assistants to the Bishops, in that part of their Diocese which
was distant from the City. But that they had only a part of the Episcopal Power
committed to them, not the whole, we learn from the Council of Ancyra presently
after, Can. 13. which decreed that the Chorepiscopi, or Country Bishops ought
not to ordain either Ppesbyters or Deacons. (...).
To which purpose he that pleases may find many authorities in Justellus his
notes upon that place. And in the Council of Antioch, Can. 10. the same is
decreed again, that they should know their bounds or measures, and appoint
Readers, Subdeacons, and Catechists, but not dare to proceed further, nor to
make a Priest or Deacon, without the Bishop of the City to which both he and
his Region were subject. The same Canons were in the Roman Church, as appears
by the Body of the Decrees: v. part 1. Distinct. 63. c. 4.
The words of which being abbreviated by Sigebert he calls them Archdeacons.
But afterward the Council of Laodicea decreed, Can. 57. that this sort of
Officers should be abolished, and no Bishops should be appointed (...) in the
Villages, and in the Countries: and that they who had been already constituted
should do nothing without the consent of the Bishop of the City. But instead of
them there should be [(...)] Visitors, that should go about to find out what
was amiss, and correct men's manners. In like manner we find in the Body of the
Canon Law Distinct. 68. c. 5.
a Decree of Pope Damasus to this purpose, That the Chorepiscopi have been
prohibited as well by that See, as by the Bishops of the whole world. One
reason of which prohibition might be that they did not (...).
know their own bounds, as the Council of Antioch determined, but ventured to
appoint Church Officers, without the Bishops Consent. Upon which occasion St.
Basil wrote a particular Epistle to the Chorepiscopi, requiring that no
Minister Epist. 181. p. 959. Tom. 1. (...) Readers and such Ministers as those
Luke 4.10.
whatsoever, though of the lower rank, should be made without him, contrary to
the Canons. It is a sad thing, says he, to see how the Canons of the Fathers
are laid aside; insomuch that it is to be feared all will come to Confusion.
The Ancient Custom was this, That there should be a strict inquiry made into
the lives of those who were to be admitted to minister in the Church. The care
of this lay upon the Presbyters and Deacons, who were to report it to the
Chorepiscopi, and they having received a good testimony of them, certified it
to the Bishop, and so the Minister (...).
was admitted into Holy Orders: But now you Country Bishops would make me stand
for a Cipher, and take all this Authority to your selves: nay, you permit the
Presbyters and Deacons to put in whom they please, according as Kindred or
Affection inclines them, without regard to their worth. But let me, says he,
have a note of the Ministers of every Village; and if any have been brought in
by the Presbyters, let them be cast out again among the common people. And know
that he shall be but a Layman whoever he is that is received into the Ministry
without our consent.

By this it is apparent that Presbyters had not power so much as to make the
lowest Officers in the Church; and that the Chorepiscopi, though above the rest
of the Presbyters, in Office, yet were not so high as Bishops, but were a
middle sort of men between both. An image of whom was remaining in the late
Bohemian Church, as I learn from Comenius; who in his Book concerning the
Discipline and Order among them tells us, that beside the Seniors or Bishops,
For they had Episcopal Ordination after they had been made Presbyters, and
Epicopal Jurisdiction and Succession from the Bishops of the Waldenses.
and Ministers or Presbyters, they had certain Ecclesiastical Persons called
Conseniors, who were between the other two. For they were chosen out of the
Ministers, presented by them to the Bishop, and then solemnly ordained by him
to the Office of Conseniors by a new imposition of hands. But at the same time
these Conseniors promised Obedience to the Bishop; Ratio Discipl. and Ord.
Eccl. cap. 2. p. 37.
as the Ministers when they were Ordained promised Obedience to them as well as
to the Bishop. Ib. p. 33.
Their Office therefore was among other things (as we are told, Chap. 1. page
23, 24.) to keep good Order, to observe what was worthy of correction, to
inform the Bishop of it, to provide fit persons for the Ministry, to exercise
Discipline with the Bishop, and visit with him, or without him if he required
it, to examine those that were to be ordained Ministers or Deacons, to give
them testimonials to the Bishop, and in short, To supply the place of the
Bishop in businesses of lesser moment. So it appears by the Book, and by
Comenius his Annotations upon that Chapter. page 92. Minoribus in negotiis
Episcopi vices obirent.


Thus much may suffice for the Chorepiscopi who had not such a power as he
ascribes to them; and as the Suffragans, I shall now show you, were invested
withal; who were of the Order of Bishops as much as any other. Some have called
them Titular Bishops ordained to assist and aid the Bishop of the Diocese in
his Spiritual Function, and think they had their name from this, that by their
Suffrages Ecclesiastical Causes were judged. But the better to understand what
they were, you must know that all the Bishops of any Province were anciently
called by the Metropolitan his Suffragans; being to advise and assist him in
the common Affairs of the Church. So the word is often used in the Canon Law;
and in latter times in the Provincial Council of Salisburg An. 1420 Cap de
Officio Ordinarii.
. The Archbishop Everard speaks to all the Bishops as his Suffragans being
called together with him, in partem solicitudinis; into part of the care of the
people under his charge. Which are the words of our Linwood also, who says the
Bishops are called Suffragans, because they are bound to help and assist the
Archbishop Archiepiscopo suffragari and assistere tenentur. Annor. in cap. de
Constitutionibus.
. But since those times, they only have been called Suffragans who were indeed
ordained Bishops, but not possessed as yet of any See, and thence called
Titular Bishops: which kind of Bishops are no stranger, than those Ministers at
Geneva, whom they call Apostoli, who preach in the Country Churches, and
administer the Sacraments, but have no certain charge. Yet in England I must
tell you it was otherwise, as appears by the Statute of 26 Hen. VIII. chap. 14.
where provision is made for Suffragans which had been accustomed to be had
within this Realm, as it tells us both in the beginning and the middle of it.
And it is enacted that the Towns of Thetford, Ipswich, Colchester, Dover,
Guilford, Southampton, and twenty places more besides them, should be taken and
accepted for Sees of Bishops Suffragans to be made in this Realm, etc. For this
end every Archbishop or Bishop being disposed to have them for the more speedy
administration of Holy things, had the liberty given them to name and elect two
fit persons, and present them to the King: who thereupon had full power by the
Act to give to which of those two he pleased, the Style, Title, and Name of
Bishop of such of the Sees aforesaid as he thought most expedient: and he was
to be called Bishop Suffragan of the same See. After which the King was to
present him by his Letters Patents under the great Seal to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, or of York, signifying his Name, his Style, Title, and Dignity of
Bishopric; requiring him to Consecrate the said person so nominated and
presented, to the same Name, Title, Style, and Dignity of Bishop. For which
purpose either the Bishop that nominated him, or the Suffragan himself was to
provide two Bishops or Suffragans to consecrate him with the Archbishop, and to
bear their reasonable costs. This Statute though repealed in the first and
second of Philip and Mary Chap. 8.
, yet was revived among sundry other, in the first of Queen Elizabeth See chapter 1.
. And it is sufficiently manifest from thence that these persons had Episcopal
Ordination (being Consecrated by the Archbishop, and two Bishops more) as much
as any other. And therefore secondly, had Episcocal Power and Authority as much
as the Bishop of the Diocese, though being dependent on him, the Suffragan
could not use or execute any Jurisdiction, Power, or Authority but by his
Commission under his Seal; as the Statute likewise provides. Upon which score
Mr. Mason calls them Secondary De Minist. Angl. l. 1. c. 3.
Bishops; and further observes truly, that though in compare with others they
may seem to have nothing but a Title, because they had not their proper
Diocesses to themselves; yet if we speak absolutely, they had both the Title
and the thing signified by it. For they had for their Episcopal Seat some great
Town Oppidum illustre lege Parliamentaria illis designatum.
appointed to them by the Act of Parliament, in which, and some certain
adjacent places to which the Bishop of the Diocese limited them, they exercised
their Episcopal Function. From whence also they borrowed the name of Suffragan
of Bedford: Suffragan of Colchester, etc. So that none of those who were
Consecrated Bishops among us in England, whether Primary or Secondary (as his
words are) were merely Titular, but destinated all of them to the
administration of a certain place, according to the sixth Canon of the Council
of Chalcedon. Accordingly we find that such Suffragans being made, acted like
other Bishops in all things. For the Register of the Consecration of Archbishop
Parker tells us, that at the time of it, four Chairs were set for four Bishops;
one of which was John Hodgskin Suffragan Bishop of Bedford: who assisted also
in the Consecration of the Bishops of London, Ely, Lincoln, and diverse others:
which he could not have done had he not had Episcopal Power, and consequently
the Power of Ordaining Presbyters, as well as of Consecrating Bishops. And so
much this Apologist might have learnt from him whom he calls a Learned Prelate,
if he had read his Books with care: I mean Bishop Bramhall, who writes thus of
the Power of Suffragans Romphaea Printed 1659. p. 93
: The Office and the Benefice of a Bishop are two distinct things. Ordination
is an Act of the Key of Order, and a Bishop uninthroned may Ordain as well as a
Bishop inthroned. The Ordination of Suffragan Bishops who had no peculiar
Bishoprics was always admitted and reputed as good in the Catholic Church (if
the Suffragans had Episcopal Ordination) as the Ordination of the greatest
Bishops in the world. Nay, if he had but read their own Authors, he would not
have doubted that Suffragans were altogether (to speak in their style) as bad
as Bishops. For the Admonition to the Parliament puts them among the Titles and
Offices devised by Antichrist, and declares that though they take upon them
(which is most horrible) to rule Gods Church, yet they are plainly by Christ
forbidden, and utterly with speed to be removed. You may read more to the same
purpose in the Preface, as I find it cited in the Censure of the Pamphlet
called, Humble Motives for Association, An. 1601. p. 23, 25. In which year I
find this a part of the Secular Priests complaint against the Jesuits, that
they would not be subordinate in any manner to the Ordinary Prelates of
England, as Bishops and Suffragans: and that they withstood their endeavors to
have Bishops or Suffragans Dialogue between a Secular Priest, and a Lay
Gentleman, p. 73. 87, 90.
. By which you may see they were numbered among the Prelates to whom all Priests
were to be subject, which made those fiery Dissenters from our Church to
declaim so lowdly against them. And all this serves to convince our Apologist
of unskilfulness in these matters, who pronounces roundly that Mr. Gataker p.
13. of his Book.
never had any Episcopal Ordination, because he was Ordained by (a Suffragan of
one of those places mentioned in the Statute, viz.) the Suffragan of
Colchester. Suppose he were, As Mr. Clark tells us he was. Collect. of Lives of
ten Divines, p. 131.
he had notwithstanding Episcopal Ordination, as I have demonstrated; and as
good as if he had been Ordained by the greatest Bishop in the World. But he did
not understand I see by this what those Suffragans were, and contrary to what
became an humble and modest man, and the Title likewise of his Book, wrote
about things which he had not studied or considered. Which made him also
confound these with the Rural Deans, alleging the Primate of Armaghs judgment
concerning the power of Suffragans, to prove it to be his Judgment, that the
Chorepiscopi or Rural Deans might lawfully ordain. In which he has done him a
notorious injury; for there is not such a word in his Book, as that the Rural
Deans may lawfully ordain, But only that the number of Suffragans (which was
26) might well be conformed to the number of the several Rural Deanries, and
supplying the place of those who in the Ancient Church were called
Chorepiscopi, might every month assemble a Synod of the Rectors within the
Precinct, and conclude all matters brought before them by the major part of
voices. These are his words, which do not signify that Suffragans were the
same with Rural Deans, or Chorepiscopi, but that there might be as many of the
one, as there are of the other; and Suffragans do all that which those ancient
Officers did, though they had power to do a great deal more: For I have proved
a plain distinction between them. The Chorepiscopi were made by one single
Bishop, viz. the Bishop of the City to whom they belonged, as the Council of
Antioch tells us, Can. 10. But the Suffragans being real Bishops were made as
other Bishops are by three at the least, according to the fourth Canon of the
first Council at Nice. And so they had power to Ordain Presbyters, and join in
the Consecration of other Bishops, which the Chorepiscopi had not. Nor did our
Church ever acknowledge any such power residing in the Rural Deans, or any mere
Presbyters subject to the Jurisdiction of our Bishops, to ordain Priests. But
as Hadrianus Saravia tells the Ministers of Guernsey See Clavi Trabales, p. 142.
in his Letter to them, As many Ministers as were naturally of the Country
being not made Ministers of the Church by their Bishop or his Demissories, nor
any others according to the Order of the English Church, were not true and
lawful Ministers. Where by Demissories I think he means the Suffragans of the
Bishop of Winchester, to whose jurisdiction they belonged.

Apologist Page 13. out of Archbish. Spotswood.
alleges the story of the three Scots Bishops, who never had been ordained but
by Presbyters, and yet Bishop Bancrofts opinion was that they need not be
ordained again; which has often been alleged heretofore by others,
particularly by the Lancashire Ministers of the first Classis at Manchester, in
whom he might have found a great deal more than this amounts unto. For they fly
to a Letter of the late Primate of Ireland, with the Animadversions of Dr.
Bernard upon it The judgment of the late Archb. of Armagh, etc. 1658.
, in which this Story is cited, and the judgment of many other learned Divines;
but nothing at all to the business. For as the Gentlemen to whom the Lancashire
Ministers wrote their Letter well observe Excommunicatio excommunicata, p.
the Primate did not make void the Ordination by Presbyters, but it was with a
special restriction to such places, where Bishops could not be had: Which are
the very words also of Archbishop Bancroft in the case of the Scottish Bishops.
As for the Ordinations made by our Presbyters the Primate declared himself
against them in the very same Letter (which they craftily concealed) as you may
read p. 112. of Dr. Bernards Book. The words are these; You may easily judge
that the Ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from
those Bishops, unto whom they had sworn Canonical Obedience, cannot possibly by
me be excused from being Schismatical. Which I find cited again in another Book
of of his, called Clavi Trabales, p. 56. And both in that and the former Book
Judgment of the Archb. p. 122, etc. Clavi Tiab. p. 55.
he tells us the Primate thought their Ordination void upon another score.
Because at the imposition of hands, they neither used those ancient words,
Receive thou the Holy Ghost, etc. nor the next, Be thou a faithful dispenser,
etc. nor any other words to that sense (at least there is no order or direction
for it.) And they also wholly omitted those words at the solemn delivery of the
Bible inro the hands of the person ordained: Take thou Authority to preach the
Word of God, etc. So that there being no express transmission of Ministerial
Power, he was wont to say, that such Imposition of hands (by some called the
Seal of Ordination) without a Commission annexed, seemed to him to be as the
putting of a Seal to a Blank. And if a Bishop had been present and done no more
than they did, he thought the same quere might have been of the validity of
such Ordinations.

As for other Reformed Churches, their case is widely different from that of
these men, as he might have learnt from another Bishop, whom he cites now and
then to no purpose, viz. Bishop Bramhall Replication to the Bishop of
Chalcedon, p. 71, 72.
, who rells you, that he knew many learned persons among them who did
passionately affect Episcopacy, and some of them acknowledged to him that their
Church would never be rightly settled till it was new molded. And others, he
tells you, though they did not long for Episcopacy, yet they approve it, and
want it only out of invincible necessity. And that their principal learned men
were of this mind appears from hence; that Dr. Carlton, afterward Bishop of
Chichester, protesting in open Synod (which then sat at Dort) that Christ
instituted no parity, but made twelve Apostles the chief, and under them
seventy Disciples; that Bishops succeeded to the Twelve, and Presbyters of
inferior rank to the Seventy; and challenging the judgment of any learned men
that could speak to the contrary: Their answer was silence, which was
approbation enough. And after, says he, discoursing with diverse of the best
learned in the Synod, and telling them how necessary Bishops were to suppress
their Schisms then rising; their answer was, That they did much honor and
reverence the good order and discipline of the Church of England, and with all
their heart would be glad to have it established among them; but that could not
be hoped for in their State. Their hope was, that, seeing they could not do
what they desired, God would be merciful to them, if they did but what they
could. Upon which speech one well notes Answer to a Letter written at Oxford,
1647. p. 13, 14.
that if they hoped for mercy that might pardon what they did, then they
supposed they were not in the best estate; and that their necessity could not
totally excuse them from fault, for then in that particular there had been no
need to hope for mercy. Nor could they well think otherwise; since being
pressed they denied not but that Episcopacy was of Christ's own institution.

To this necessity Mr. Calvin himself has recourse, declaring that their
calling (being an extraordinary thing) ought not to be estimated by the common
Rule. It were to be wished indeed (says he in the same place Epist. ad Regem
Polo^iae, p. 142.
that there were a continual succession of Pastors, that the Function it self
might be delivered, as it were, from hand to hand; but the Pope having broken
the succession of such as preached the uncorrupted Doctrine of Christ, God
provided a remedy, exciting pious and learned men to reform the Church, and
committing to them an extraordinary Office. This says Melancthon Enarratis in
Evang. Joh. Cap. 1.
God did in ancient times, setting a greater value upon his Church, than upon
the ordinary Power in it. If indeed the ordinary power would have done their
duty, He is worthy, says Mr. Calvin, of any execration who will not submit
himself to that Hierarchy that submits it self to the Lord. And I protest
before God and in mine own Conscience, says Zanchy, that I hold them no better
than Schismatics that account or make it a part of Reformation of the Church
to have no Bishops Both these cited by Dr. Peter Moulin the Son; in whom you
may read a great deal more.
. Of this mind were the first Reformers, who, as the Augustane Confession
says, had no intention to deprive the Bishops of their Authority; but the
Bishops refusing to admit them into holy Orders unless they would swear not to
preach the pure Doctrine of the Gospel Cap. ult. de potest. Eccles.
; this compelled them, the public ordinary door being shut, to enter into holy
Orders in a private and extraordinary way. Yea, we have often testified, say
the Authors of it, our great desire to preserve the Ecclesiastical Polity, and
even those degrees in the Church which are but of Humane Authority. This we
declare again and again to be our mind: And this will and desire of ours shall
excuse us before God and all the World to all Posterity, that the overthrow of
the Authority of Bishops may not be imputed to us. It was mere necessity you
see which drove them to Ordination without Bishops, which sometimes makes that
lawful, which otherwise would be unlawful. They are the words of the Gloss
cited by Dr. Crakenthorp in this very business, who compares the Case of the
Reformers with that of Scipio Defens. Eccles. Anglicanae, Cap. 41. contra
Spalat. 1635.
, as others I find have done since in his very words, without naming him. There
being (as Valerius Max. tells us) a need of money to defray some necessary
Charges of the Commonwealth, Scipio demanded a supply out of the Public
Treasury: Which the Quaestors refusing to open, because the Law seemed against
it, He opened it himself by a private Key, and made the Law give way to utility
and necessity. The same was done in some Reformed Churches. The Apostles had
commended their Keys to Bishops; nor were they ever lawfully used, says he, by
any others than Bishops before that time. When the Roman Quaestors (he means
Bishops) denying to open the door, and admit any to the Office of Pastors,
unless they would engage not to preach the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, Some
great men, like Scipio, chose rather to lay hold on the Keys, and receive
Ordination from the hands of private persons, than that the Church should be
unfurnished and the People perish. They would not have gone out of the Rode if
they could have avoided it, as our Presbyterians did of their own accord. Who
ought therefore to acknowledge their error, to return into the regular course
from whence they voluntarily strayed, and not stand upon the justification of
their proceedings by the example of those who are nothing like them: But with
all their heart would have entertained such Bishops as our pretended Reformers
thrust out of possession, and joyfully received such Ordination as here they
rejected. But if they resolve still to continue to maintain what they have
done, I would wish them to get an abler Apologist than this man: and you, my
good Friend, I would advise to keep this old Saying in your mind, Remember not
to trust; no not those that pretend to learning, seriousness, humility, and
modesty. For you see by what has been said, that this person, who makes a show
of these qualities, is grossly mistaken (to speak no harsher word) and too
boldly endeavors to lead others into errors. I acknowledge indeed that there
are both learned and modest men among them; but they are the confident talkers
who generally carry the Bell away, and are cried up for all worth and
excellency. Do what I can, I must think there is too much truth in the censure
passed upon you by the Second fair warning to take heed of the Scottish
Discipline Printed at the Hague 1651 by Ri. Watson, p. 152.
; That you are not wont to prick any in the List of the Learned, but the best
read men in Synopsis's and Systems, in Common place Books and Centurists, or in
your own Reformed Fathers; whom you believe to be more proper than the
ancients, because standing (as they tell you) upon their shoulders: When, if
set on even ground, the longest arm they can make in true Learning and
Eloquence, will not reach half way up to their girdles.

Apologist be not so well versed in the Laws of the ancient Church, yet he has
good skill in the Laws and Customs of our own Land. So indeed any body would
think, that reads his Book, and relies upon his bare word; but he that has so
much distrust as to take the pains to examine what he says, will presently
discover that he writes as if he were as unacquainted with them as with the
Laws and Customs of Japan. The same heady forwardness possesses men now that
did in Gregory Nazianzen's days, when, as he tells us Orat. 9. p 150. (...),
etc.
all were wild to teach and talk about the Spirit of God, without the Spirit:
and therefore no wonder they venture to talk of our Laws, without any Law. Thus
this modest Apologist puts in their exception Page 20.
against our Church for committing the power of Excommunication to men that are
not in holy Orders. Which is notoriously false, and the contrary, I could show
him, has been acknowledged in their own Books. But he needed have looked no
further than to a Book published not many years ago, concerning the Practice in
the Ecclesiastical Courts. Where he might have been informed in express terms
Francisci Clark Praxis in Curiis Eccles. Titul. 20, an. 1666.
That the Judge of the Court having pronounced a man contumacious, and decreed
that he is to be excommunicated in punishment of his contumacy, next proceeds
to read the Excommunication, if he be in holy Orders; Otherwise, he delivers it
to be read by the Priest appointed by the Archbishop for this purpose: Which
Priest to this effect sits judicially with the Judge himself.
Of if he never heard of this Book, yet he has heard I am sure of the Third
Part of the Friendly Debate: Where, if he had been pleased to read a Book
before he had censured it, he might have found this bold Error corrected in
Philagathus; and so avoided it himself. But I see plainly, and am heartily
sorry for it, there are more of that man's evil humor; who love to talk of
things upon Record, out of their own drowsy imaginations. The general cry
against the continuation of the Friendly Debate was, that it was a breach of
the Act of Indemnity, or Oblivion; which was raised merely out of their own
brains, that are stuffed with words more than things, without consulting the Act
it self. But this cry Philagathus followed with open mouth, and now he has got
another to bear him company; who deserves in like manner to be chastized for
his bold folly. Especially since he mentions this so often; first in his
Preface, then at least five Page 34, 73, 106. 112, 150.
times in his Book, and in one place affirms my Book seems to be a continued
breach of the Act of Indemnity in the very design of it: And all this after I
had evidently demonstrated in the further Continuation (which he also mentions
p. 150.) that whatever it seems to him, this is a gross and impudent Calumny.
But I shall spare him, notwithstanding this boldness, and have, I assure him,
thrown away those apt illustrations of his Vanity, which offered themselves,
because he has more civility in him than the sober Answerer. I shall only
desire him to follow his own advice which he gives me on this occasion Pref. p.
8.
viz. To do justice upon himself, and execute his own Book in the flames, for
committing such crimes. For I must tell you there are a great many more of
them. He tells you confidently that the Notes, commonly called the Assemblies,
came out before the Assembly convened, p. 15. By which I see he is no better
skilled in Ordinances than in Laws. For the Ordinance for their convention
bears date June 12. 1643. requiring them to meet the next first of July: And
the Annotations came not out till two years after, in 1645 So it should be
Printed in the Friendly Debate, not 1646.
. But you may think perhaps they did not convene at the time appointed. Know
therefore, that on June 24. 1643. all Ministers were required by an Order to
pray on the next Fast for a blessing on the Assembly, who were to meet on
Saturday July 1. and that accordingly they did meet on that day, as Mr. Fuller
(quoted sometimes by this man) observes in his History: And not long after July
19. 1643.
I find presented an humble Petition for an extraordinary Fast, beseeching
among other things, that Justice might be executed on all delinquents; and
after this an Order Aug. 10. 1643.
that those of them who were Residents in the Associated Counties should be
desired to go down and stir up the People to rise in their defense. By which it
appears they not only convened, but began at least to be busy about that which
did not concern them long before those Notes saw the light. But let us pass by
this: And observe rather how he satisfies in the lame excuse he makes for their
not calling the Apostles always by the name of Saints. In the judgment of our
Church, says he, it is not necessary, as may hence be concluded, That in all
the Collects for the days set apart to commemorate the holy Apostles in, there
are but two wherein they are styled Saints. These are his words Page 43.
; but if you love truth, call to mind the Rule I gave you, and remember not to
trust. Even they who call one another frequently by the name of Saints have not
such a care, as one would expect, of common honesty, nor of their own fame
neither; but will assert such manifest untruths as lie open to every eye. Turn
to the Prayers for particular days in the Service Book, and you shall find that
they who told him this (for I charitably suppose he took it upon trust) made no
conscience of what they said. For those glorious persons, whose memories are
celebrated in our Church (and I hope always will be) are called no less than
nine times in the very body of the Collects by the names of Saints St. Steven,
St. John, St. Andrew, St. Paul, St. Mark, St. Philip and St. James, St. Peter
and St. James.
. Seven of which were Apostles, and the other an Evangelist, and the first
Martyr. And lest any one should imagine he made his observation by the old
Common Prayer Book, and thence may justify himself: you may understand that
there is no difference in this point, but only in two of the Collects: in one
of which in stead of St. John the Evangelist (as it is now) the words were the
blessed Apostle and Evangelist John; and in the other, instead of St. Philip
and St. James, it was, St. Philip and other Apostles. This may teach you to
suspect the reasonings of these men (which may very well be thought to be
exceeding careless) who are no more exact in reporting matters of Fact which
lie before their eyes. But as for their stories which they spread up and down,
and endeavor to propagate to posterity by stuffing their Books with them (as
this man does) there is the greatest cause to think that either they have no
truth at all in them, or are very much altered from their original. You ought
to let them pass for idle tales, unless you have better authority for them than
these men's Books, who you see are so bold as to report notorious falsehoods
which every body can confute. Their Traditions you should look upon as of no
more credit than the Popish Legends: It being so easy for men to forget the
very words they heard, and to place others in their room; so common to add or
leave out what is most material; so hard and often impossible to know all the
circumstances in a business, which very much alter the case; and lastly, there
being such a proneness in men to invent downright falsehoods, and to publish
them for their own advantage. I have now given you an instance of it, and I can
give you more. The three Covenanting Ministers, I find, in their answer to the
Queries of the Divines of Aberdeen, had the boldness to declare in Print, and
positively aver, that his Majesty's Commissioner rested satisfied with their
Covenant, according to their explication of it: by which report they hoped to
draw the people to a liking of it. But this was such a calumny that the
Commissioner thought it necessary to clear himself of it by a Manifest and
Declaration See his late Majesty's Large Declaration, 1638. p. 111, 112.
to the contrary. Which brought them to a confession that indeed they never
heard him say he was satisfied, but had only some probable reasons whereby they
were induced to believe that he was. And indeed men easily believe what they
have a mind unto. They believed, or at least gave it out even in the Pulpit
(says his Majesty) Ib: page 405, 406.
that we intended to bring in Popery into all our Kingdoms, or at least a
toleration of it: It was preached that the Service Book was framed at Rome, and
brought over by a Country man of theirs. They told the people that all England
was of their opinion. And some desired them publicly to give thanks to God for
the overthrow which the Hollanders had newly given the Spanish Fleet before
Dunkirk, assuring them that it was no less to be celebrated than the
deliverance in 88. all that Fleet being prepared at the Kings charge for their
ruin and subversion. A most horrible thing, that in the House of God, and in
that place of his House, which they called the Chair of Truth, men should
deliver such things as either they did not know to be true, or did know to be
false.

Scottish Presbyterians; they and we are not all of a mind. For they, for
instance, believed Ruling Elders to be Jure Divino, but I knew few in England,
says this Writer, if any, that held that Office so; save only in a large
sense, i. e. lawful and not contrary to Gods Word See p. 141.
. Goodly! he knew few or none; therefore there were none here in England that
held Lay Elders to be of Divine right. This is his reasoning (for he satisfies
a question by these words) and a rare one it is, built altogether upon his own
Ignorance. For we know not a few but many who were of this opinion. And if he
had not been negligent where he was concerned, and busy where he needed not
have meddled, he might have more easily known the mind of the English than of
the Scottish Presbyterians. He, being one of that Party, should have here known
one would think better than I, that the London Ministers and Elders met in a
Provincial Assembly, Novem. 2. 1646. put forth a Vindication of the
Presbyterial Government. In the very Title Page of which, they set this down
among the Contents of the Book, that the Ruling Elder is by Divine Right; and
that it is the will of Jesus Christ, that ALL SORTS of persons should give an
account of their Faith, to the Ministers and Elders before admission to the
Supper of the Lord. Which is more, I hope, than not being repugnant to Gods
Word. In like manner the Lancashire Ministers of the first Classis at
Manchester declared after this An. 1657. in the Book called Excommunicatio
Excomm. p. 46.
, that they could not consent to part with the Ruling Elder, unless they should
betray the truth of Christ, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. These are the places
they allege to prove the Divine Authority of this new Order of Ecclesiastical
Officers. By which you may see that I said they are Changelings with more
reason, than this Apologist had to excuse them from it: For I wrote from what I
knew, and He from what he knew not. But there is another thing which he
apologizes for after the same manner, in the very language of his predecessor
Philagathus, whom he was ashamed to own. The horrid Murder of his late Majesty,
says this Writer, was never undertaken (that I know of) to be justified by any
Minister in Print, but by J. G. that great Goliath and Champion of the
Arminians, p. 74. It is very likely that he is ignorant of this, as well as of
other matters: but he must excuse us if we know more of these men, and such as
were none of J. G.'s Disciples. There was one L.S. for instance, whom I have
read, who maintains that desperate Fact, in a Book called Natures Dowry, or The
Peoples Native Liberty Asserted. It was not Printed till the Year 1652. but
written (as he tells us in the Epistle) three year before (just upon the Kings
Murder) on occasion of a Question propounded to him by a Member of Parliament
and Committee of State. In the first Chapter he determines; Should any one (it
is easy to know whom he means) by a reserved and merciless obstinacy be shut
up and barricado'd against the Law, Counsel, and Prayers; I see not but a
people may warrantably go about to break such a one, seeing he will not be
bended by reason. But look farther and you will find this to be the Title of
the tenth Chapter, That Kings agreeable to the Law of God, may in some cases be
forcibly resisted by their Subjects, and likewise deposed. In some cases
indeed, he resolves, it may be the prudence of the people to pardon their
Prince, not observing his stipulation, but their promise is out of date, and
cannot bind them to further subjection. Nay, he says, A people whose Ancestors
have for themselves and their posterity either gratis, or upon inconvenient
Articles promised subjection and obeisance to any one and his Heirs, may
lawfully renounce the engagement and cast off the Yoke. And at the end of that
Chapter cites the Vote of Parliament at the beginning of the Wars to justify
his Doctrine, That if the King raised Forces against the Parliament, he
forfeited his Trust. But proceed further to the next Chapter, and you will find
he comes home to the business, and determines, That Kings may render themselves
obnoxious to the penalty of death, according to the Law of God, in some cases
to be inflicted by public Authority, in others by private men. This is the
Title of the Chapter. And immediately he betakes himself to that very Scripture
upon which Mr. J. Goodwin grounded his whole discourse: For the Chapter begins
thus. That Law, Genesis 9, 6. Who so sheds man's Blood, by man shall his Blood be
shed: reaches all the Sons of Noah, Princes themselves, though they be taller
than their Brethren by the head and shoulders. And he explains it thus; Whether
he shed it by himself, or by the Ministry of some other; whether a stranger or
a neighbor, whether alone, or with the help of others, he is a Son of Death:
no mortal is excused by his greatness. And adds, most ridiculously, Plato is
very Orthodox in this point; and concludes that Princes in some other cases are
liable to capital punishment to be inflicted by private men. As if a Prince
attempt to murder another, that person invaded may lawfully kill him in his own
defense, nay, is bound by the sixth Commandment to do it, rather than suffer
himself to be murdered. The rest of the Book is an answer (after a strange
fashion) to those places of Scripture which are brought (as he speaks) for the
impunity of Tyrants. I will mention but one of his desperate devices, which you
may find in the 18 Chapter to excuse David's sparing of Saul. It is not
impossible (you see the style wherein they deceived the people and put off
their Ware) that David's interest might insensibly biass him into a tender care
of the King. However, this he determines, That either David sinned in sparing
of Saul, or else his clemency was warranted by some precept, or permission,
which is not extant in Scripture; and which in all probability was peculiarly
given to David. Here is enough to show what Divines have come out of their
School, and how readily they can suppose a Divine Precept for any thing they
have a mind to, though there be not the least foot-step of it in Holy Writ. If
he be not satisfied, but has a list to stir further in this business (which he
had better never have touched) I will furnish him with more, whom I am
unwilling to mention. Let me only add that they were the Presbyterian
Principles, out of which the Independent Army drew their worst Conclusions. The
discourse of this man now named is bottomed upon this Maxim, that the People
are the Original of Power. A doctrine asserted in another Catechism Politic
Catechism, Licenced by Mr. White, May 20. 1643.
of yours, and Licenced by a known person, of the highest esteem (as I can
prove) among you. And this consequence is thence drawn from it, That whatsoever
the people have not expressly granted, they keep to themselves: The King must
produce his Grant, and not the people show their reservation, for all is
presumed to be reserved, which cannot be proved to be granted. Which being once
supposed, he is stark blind, I think, who sees not the unavoidable consequence
of all the mischief that insued. And to speak freely, he that considers, says
a History History of the English Scottified Presbytery, written in French,
1650. translated, 1659.
in those days, The terms to which the King was held, even when the
Presbyterians had the better end of the staff (as that he should not dispose of
the Militia, of the Officers of the Crown, of his Children, have no Negative
Vote, etc.) will conclude that he was only left to his choice, whether he would
be destroyed by his Enemies, or by his own proper Act. For if he condescended
not to these demands, being then in their hands that made them, the least he
could expect was to be deposed, and if he granted them, he deposed himself.
Nay, he that considers how all along they supposed they were his Superiors, to
whom he was accountable, will clearly discern, that it was upon the
Presbyterian Principles that the Independents built their conclusions. And if
it were lawful for them to wrest out of his hands, the Sword of the Militia,
and to use it against him, it was no less lawful, thought the other, to employ
the Sword of Justice against him. At least after they had taken from him his
Sword, his Revenues, his Servants, his Children, the liberty of his Person,
and, which is more, of his Conscience, they left the Independents but one step
further to go, which was to take away his life: and all that in which they
surpassed the others was, that they gave the last blow to him. All which I have
remembered, not to load any man with reproaches, but to make them all humble in
consideration of their past miscarriages (to say no worse) whereof I truly hope
many of them repent. The latter day is the scholar of the former: and no man is
too old to learn; especially the amendment of his faults. Which the more
ingenuously he confesses, and the less he defends, the more likely he is to
become a new man. I should have been glad to have seen something of this in
this Apologist, which would better have becomed him than to talk of Noli me
tangere's in my Book, and to hunt about for excuses of all things, nay, to
waste his time in impertinent reflections on others, in stead of acknowledging
or taking off the blame from themselves. J. G. he tells you, who justified the
Kings Murder, was the Great Goliath and Champion of the Arminians. What of all
that, I pray you? what affinity has Arminius his Doctrine with King-killing,
or what Antidote is there in Mr. Calvin's against it? I never heard the former
taxed with any thing of this nature, though there is a dangerous passage in the
last Chapter of Mr. Calvin's institutions Number. 31
; which many have observed, if the three orders of a Kingdom have such a power
of Kings as he thinks, it is possible, they may have. And yet I believe a man
may be a Calvinist (as they speak) and be a good subject, and of the contrary
persuasion, and be a bad: those things wherein they differ having nothing to do
with this matter. But he was resolved to have a fling at the Arminians (whom he
thinks to hit, I cannot tell: me he does not hurt, who belong to neither of
those parties) nay, he touches this difference I know not how often, in his
Apology; though I gave him no occasion for it: loving, lapwing-like, to make
the most pewing and crying when he is farthest from his nest. He should rather
have minded what I cited out of Mr. Calvin, whom I perceive he favors more
than the other, concerning the points in debate between us. I told you his
thoughts of Schism, and I could add a great deal more (out of other places of
his works) of the great dread he was in of this sin; of the dislike he
expressed that Bish. Hooper should contend so much about a Cap and a Surplice;
and of his opinion about Humane Traditions; but that I should then digress too
far out of the way, and prevent my self in that which remains of this Apology.

Preface, p, 11. where he says, I cannot but own my utter dislike of the
Principles and Practices of some high Conformists, or Hectors for Conformity;
namely, such as prefer the Romish Church before the Reformed transmarine
Churches; Arminius before St. Austin; who judge Aerius a greater Heretic than
Arius; who have more charity for those that deny the Deity of our Savior, than
for those that scruple the strict Jus Divinum. of Episcopacy; and who can with
more patience bear a dispute against the very being of a Deity, than about the
taking away of a Ceremony, etc. This is the language not of the bold blades,
but of a modest Presbyterian, of one that uses hard reasons and soft words, if
you will believe himself in the very leaf beforegoing Preface p 9.
. Whatsoever charity they have for us, their good words shall never be wanting
to themselves. They will call themselves humble and modest, whatsoever they say
or do: Though they blush not to defend themselves by injuring any body, nor
fear to cast reproaches on whomsoever, that for defense of the truth stand in
their way. For every part of this Charge is a vile slander, and some of it is
confuted, you shall see, by himself. Which that I may demonstrate, let me tell
you,

In the first place, that it is no Hectorism to assert the Divine Right of
Episcopacy in the strictest sense. This is no upstart opinion, broached by some
swaggering hot-brained men, who love to rant and vapor beyond other Folk
(which is the proper quality of a Hector) but has been anciently believed in
this Church, from the very beginning of the Reformation, and maintained by the
soberest men in it. I know they would have you to think otherwise, and have
endeavored to persuade the World that it is a novel Doctrine advanced of later
times by some proud and haughty Divines. Mr. Robert Baily made bold to say that
before Bishop Bancrofts time, the Bishops did unanimously deny Episcopacy to be
of Divine Right Reply to fair warning p. 49. Printed at Delf, 1649
. And the Letter to Dr. Samuel Turner, Printed 1647. will not allow it to be so
Ancient; but affirms ( p. 3.) that it is an opinion but lately countenanced in
England, and that by some of the more Lordly Clergy. He means, I think,
Archbishop Laud, as some since have explained it. But both the one and the
other of these, talked at random, out of their own imaginations, not from
Historical observation. Archbishop Whitgift, and Bishop Bilson, as the Answer
to that Letter suggests, were both of a contrary persuasion. And I can name a
Divine of their Opinion elder than either, and much reverenced even by the
Presbyterians, who was offered a Bishopric also, but refused it: And that is
Old Bernard Gilpin, who left the World that very year in which Bishop Whitgift
was advanced to the Sea of Canterbury, 1583. For when Mr. Cartwrights book was
newly come forth, a certain Cambridge man, who seemed a very great Scholar,
came to this famous Preacher, and dealt very earnestly with him about the
Discipline and Reformation of the Church. But Mr. Gilpins answer was, That he
could not allow that any Humane invention should take place in the Church in
stead of a Divine Institution. How, said the man, do you think that this Form
of Discipline is an Humane Invention? I am, said Mr. Gilpin, altogether of that
mind; And as many as diligently turn over the Writings of the Fathers will be
of my opinion. O but the later men, replied the Disciplinarian, see many things
which those ancient Fathers saw not; and the present Church seems better
provided of many ingenious and industrious men. At which Mr. Gilpin, says my
Author Life of Bernard Gilpin, Edit. 4. 1636. p. 106, 107, etc.
seemed somewhat moved, and answered; I, for my part, do not hold the virtues
of the later men to be compared to the Infirmities of the Fathers. Which words
he used on purpose, because he perceived this young man had a strong conceit of
I know not what rare virtues in himself; which opinion the good old man was
desirous to root out of him.

But there is an Authority ancienter than all these, viz. The Form and Order of
making and consecrating Bishops, etc. confirmed by Act of Parliament. In which
three things are considerable; The very first words of the Preface are, That,
it is evident to all men reading the holy Scriptures and ancient Authors, that
from the Apostles time, there have been these Orders in Christ's Church,
Bishops, Priests; and Deacons. Then secondly, the Prayer after the Letany at
the Consecration of a Bishop, begins in this manner: Almighty God, giver of all
good things, which by thy holy Spirit have appointed diverse Orders of Ministers
in thy Church, etc. (which must needs be understood of those before named) And,
lastly, the first question to the person to be Consecrated is, Are you
persuaded that you be called to this Ministration according to the will of our
Lord Jesus Christ? To which the Answer is, I am so persuaded. Put now all these
together and you will not be able to conceive (as the Answer to the Letter page
12, 13.
observes) how these words should fall from any men not possessed with this
Tenet, that Episcopacy is of Divine Right, in the strictest sense. For if God
by his holy Spirit has appointed diverse Orders of Ministers in the Church; and
we may find evidently by Scripture and ancient Writers that there are three
Orders, whereof Bishops the highest; and this is made the ground of praying for
the Bishop to be Consecrated; and he must profess he is persuaded that he is
called to that Ministration according to Christ's will, then Episcopacy (in the
opinion of those who composed and confirmed this Book) is in such a manner
according to Christ's Will, that it is grounded in Scripture, and appointed by
the Spirit of God; and all this has not been said only of late, nor
countenanced only by some few, and those of the more Lordly Clergy.

2. For which cause, no man ought to be disgraced with any odious name, much
less be called an Hector, who is now of the same Persuasion. The most
illustrious persons that have been in our Church, men far from that boisterous
humor, have declared themselves for this Doctrine, and doubted not but they
could maintain it. I need instance in no more than two: Bishop Andrews, whose
mind is well known from his three Letters to Peter du Moulin, 1618. Translated
and Printed, 1647.
to which I refer you: and the late Bishop Sanderson, whom the best of you have
spoken of with honor and reverence. He declares his opinion to be that
Episcopal Government is not to be derived merely from Apostolical Practice or
Institution, but that it is originally founded in the Person and Office of the
Messiah, our blessed Lord Christ Postscript to Episcopacy not prejudicial to
Regal Power.
, who being sent by his Father, afterward sent his Apostles to execute the same
Apostolical, Episcopal, Pastoral Office, for the Ordering and Governing of his
Church till his coming again: and so the same Office to continue in them and
their Successors to the end of the World. But suppose all our Churchmen had
been silent, or that they are of no esteem with our Adversaries, yet since this
Opinion of the Divine Right of Episcopacy has been asserted by other Divines
whom they respect, it ought not to have been reproached. Bucer declares in his
Book of the Kingdom of Christ (as I find him cited above 60 years ago Regiment
of the Church by Mr. Tho. Bell, chap. 9.
just as our Book of Consecration does, that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost
that one, to whom the name of Bishop was peculiarly attributed) should take the
care of the Churches, and preside over all the Presbyters. And nearer still to
the very words of our Book, in his Treatise of the power and use of the
Ministry, as he is alleged by Saravia. These Orders of Ministers have been
perpetual in the Church, and were presently in the beginning appointed by the
Holy Ghost, of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. He that will see more to this
purpose may read Bishop Mortons Episcopacy Asserted, Chap. 5. Sect. 4. Nay,
this is the Language of Antiquity; and they may as well call St. Gregory of
Nazianzum a Hector as any of us: For he sticks not to tell his Auditors in
plain words, that he held his Office by the Law of Christ. You may find the
passage in his seventeenth Oration page 271.
where, after he had exhorted all the People to obedience, he turns his speech
more particularly to the Rulers and Magistrates, asking them if they will give
him leave to speak freely: As truly, says he, I think I may, since the Law of
Christ has made you subject to my Power, and to my Tribunal.

3. This you may think is very high: but I must let you know they who seem to
lay their claim lower, and speak in a more humble style (as some love to call
it) differ but in a verbal nicety: in the different manner of expressing the
same thing, rather than in their different judgment upon the substance of the
matter. So that excellent Bishop, lately mentioned (Dr. Sanderson) has clearly
resolved Episcopacy not prejudicial to Regal Power, p. 12, 13.
. For sometimes this term Divine Right imports a Divine Precept (which is the
first and most proper signification) when it appears by some clear express,
and peremptory Command of God in his Word, to be the Will of God that the thing
so commanded should be perpetually and universally observed. And that the
Government of the Church by Bishops is of Divine Right in this stricter sense
is an Opinion, says he, at least of great probability, and such as may more
easily and on better grounds be defended than confuted. But they that choose to
speak otherwise, understand by Divine Right, an Authority for a thing from the
Institution, Example, or Approbation either of Christ, or of his Apostles, etc.
which is a secondary meaning of the term, but not much distant from the former.
For the Observation of the Lords Day depends on this Divine Right; and there is
as much to show (as he says p. 19.) if not more, for such a Divine Right of
Episcopacy, as for the Divine Right of that day. So that whosoever they be that
either wave the term Divine Right, or else so expound it as not of necessity to
import any more than an Apostolical Institution; Yet the Apostles Authority Ib.
page 39, 40.
in the Institution of Episcopacy, being warranted by the Example, and (as they
doubt not) by the direction of their Master Jesus Christ, they worthily esteem
to be so reverend and obligatory; as that they would not for a world have any
hand in, or willingly and deliberately contribute the least assistance toward
the extirpation of that Government; but rather hold themselves obliged in their
Consciences, to the utmost of their power, to endeavor the preservation and
continuance of it in these Churches, and do heartily wish the restitution and
establishment of the same wheresoever it is not, etc,

Now that Episcopacy is of such institution, and so of Divine Right, he further
adds v. Ib. p. 18.
, is in truth a part of the established Doctrine of the Church of England, and
has been constantly and uniformly maintained by our best Writers [mark these
words] and by all the Sober, Orderly, and Orthodox Sons of the Church.

This is sufficient to show that there ought to be no such distinction made, as
we find in this man, between high and low Conformists: since all have spoken to
the same effect, and yet were no Swashbucklers, but, in this great persons
opinion, the Sober, Orderly, and Orthodox Sons of the Church.

4. But let us suppose there is some difference, yet they that have spoken the
highest words of Episcopacy never thought Aerius a greater Heretic than Arius,
nor had more Charity for those that deny our Savior's Deity, than for those
that scruple the strict Jus Divinum of Episcopacy. No, this is a suggestion
from the Father of lies, the Calumniator of the Brethren, and seem to me to be
the words of one whose tongue is set on fire of Hell. For though our best
Divines have called it the Heresy of Arius Doctor Crackenthorp, Defens. Eccl.
Anglicanae, p. 241, 242
, to affirm that there ought to be no imparity in the Church, or distinction
between Bishops and Presbyters; and determined that this imparity was
instituted and approved by the Apostles; yet they have declared withal, that
they who think as Aerius did, are so far from being in a worse case than Arius
was, that they are not in so bad. Let but obstinacy and perverseness be
wanting, it will be no Heresy; and if it be Heresy (being about a point of
Discipline) it will not be among those which St. Peter calls damnable Heresies
Bishop Andrews 3. Letter, p. 56, 57.
. These are the words of one who was as vehement an Assertor of the Divine
Right of Episcopacy, as any has been (and there are none among us but will
subscribe to them) who is so far, you see, from making Aerius a greater
Heretic than Arius, that his words plainly make him less.

5. But these perhaps are such Hectorly Divines, you may think, that they mind
not what they say: so belike, if it be true which he says just before, that
they prefer Arminius before St. Austin. A very strange humor! that these high
Episcopal men should set a Presbyterian Divine above a great Bishop. But
suppose, upon other scores, they should be so fantastical, yet this part of
his accusation will contradict the calumny next before it, namely, that they
prefer the Romish Church before the Reformed Transmarine Churches. How can that
be, when the Arminians are among those Reformed Churches, for whom it seems
they have such a great affection; and when the Pope himself, as every one knows
that understands these matters, is against the Divine Right of Bishops? nay
declared, when time was Letter to his Legate in the Council of Trent. See p.
646. Engl. Edit. 1629.
that the opinion which makes them hold by that Title, is false and erroneous?
But not to leave the least speck of his dirt sticking on us (which he blushes
not to throw in our faces once more, p. 34.) you may know that the very same
Bishop newly mentioned wipes it all off himself, by clearing and excusing the
Reformed Churches beyond the Seas from sinning against the Divine Right, though
they had no Bishops whom he thought to be of Divine Right in the strictest
sense. I said no such thing (as his words are) Bishop Andrews Letter to du
Moulin, Ib.
but only this, that your Churches wanted something that is of Divine Right.
Wanted, not by your fault, but by the iniquity of the times; for that your
France had not your Kings so propitious at the Reformation of your Church, as
our England had. In like manner the late Primate of Ireland, Bishop Bramhall
excuses those in the Reformed Churches, who, as I told you, either had a
desire, or but an esteem of Episcopacy, though they could not enjoy it. And as
for a third sort who were so far from either of those, that they condemned it
as an Antichristian Innovation, and a rag of Popery, whereby they became
guilty, he thought, of most gross Schism materially, he says thus much may be
alleged to mitigate their fault; That they do it ignorantly Replication to the
Bishop of Chalcedon, p. 71, 72.
, as they have been mis-taught, and misinformed; and I hope that many of them
are free from obstinacy, and hold the truth implicitly in the preparation of
their minds, because ready to receive it when God shall reveal it to them. Nay,
Dr. Heylin himself (whom this man thinks so fierce) makes an Apology for their
Ministers not being Ordained by Bishops at the first Reformation; there being
he thinks a necessity for it; as you may read in his History of Episcopacy, p.
164. And lastly, a famous person now alive this Apologist cites afterward
against his own self. Master Thorndike I mean, who he acknowledges page 10.
, has a charity for the Churches beyond the Seas, though wanting Bishops, whom
he doubts not to be of Divine Right. But he might have had recourse to a better
place of his works for this purpose, than that which he has produced. For he
handles this question at large in his Book of the Rights of the Church p. 194,
198.
, where he excuses their necessity, and concludes at last out of the abundance
of his Charity, that some excuse is to be made for those who have created this
necessity to themselves by their own false persuasion. Let this man therefore
do open penance for his sin in laying such foul things to the charge of the men
of the high Prelacy, as he in scorn calls them, p. 35. And let him forbear if
he can to say hereafter, That there is just cause to fear that some among us
have a greater Charity for the Church of Rome, than the Presbyterians page 34.
: And to intimate that the high Conformists are warping from the Doctrine of
the Church of England, and lean more to that of Trent: p 80, 81.
For these are only old Calumnies now revived; I wish it be not to serve the
Good Old Cause. We were told before the War that the Bishops were leaned toward
Popery, nay, were driving fast toward Popery. And no sooner was it begun, but
our neighbors were born in hand, that we had a company of half Papish Bishops
Dialogue between an Englishman and a Neatherlander, written in Low Dutch, and
translated into English, 1643. p. 7.
; nay that they were altogether Papists, one and the same brood with the
Jesuits p. 8. 16.
, and intended to bring Popery into England: all which they affirmed was as
clear as the bright noonday page 10.
For to this end (says this impudent Libel) they had stripped all the Assemblies
of their faithfullest Preachers, and used many other means to banish wholly all
saving knowledge out of the Kingdom, that so they might the better draw the
people to Popery. From which considerations, the Author desires the Lords and
Inhabitants of the United Netherlands In the Dedicatory Epistle.
not to assist the King; for if he prevailed, the Government would be altered;
Religion suppressed, the Bishops restored and put in force their Popish Canons.
And all this I must tell you, was writ by a Presbyterian (a modest Gentleman no
doubt, otherwise called a shameless liar) as appears by this passage, p. 37.
where he says, Our whole Nation is by the coming in of the Scots (before the
War) yet more confirmed that they were led by Gods Spirit. -- What was the
woeful issue of those suggestions we all know, though there was nothing of truth
in them; as appeared by the stout opposition against the common enemy which
some of those very men made, who (besides their other sufferings) had layen as
deep under the suspicion of being Popishly affected, as any other of their
Brethren whosoever See Bishop Sandersons preface to 1. Volume of Sermon. Sect 17.
. And what they now intend that begin again to buzze the same tale in the
peoples ears, we are not so doltish as not to understand, and, when opportunity
shall serve, they will more openly declare. Then you may hear the complaints
renewed (which he remembers out of Mr. Fuller his Church History) of Popery,
Arminianism, Socinianism, and what not? You may hear an Accusation against a
Minister (as the same Historian tells us there was on his own knowledge) Book
the 11. page 224.
merely for using the Gloria Patri, though in all things else he conformed to
the Directory.

6. In which case truly, there might have been some color to charge the
Accusers as more zealous for their Directory than for our Saviors Deity: But
to impeach any of us as more concerned for the Divine Right of Bishops than for
the Divine Nature of our Lord the great Bishop of our souls, is a bold-fac'd
calumny, for which there is no pretense at all. And yet he thinks he has not
said enough: for he tells you further, that these High Conformists or Hectors
can with more patience hear a Dispute against the very being of a Deity, than
about the taking away of a Ceremony. Which is the very highest strain of
railing that the wit of a modest Presbyterian can invent. But to what pitch the
more impudent may reach, who can tell? They may say that these Conformists are
perfect Atheists, since they are already, it seems, such Fools as to bear more
meekly with those who go about to Dethrone the object of all worship, than with
those who only pluck away a Ceremony of it, Dull Asses! how should their
Ceremonies stand, if the very sense of a Deity fall down? If he can find me any
such Beasts as these, I shall easily believe the worst that he or his Accomplices
can say of them. But the truth is, he is only disgorging his stomach all this
while, and now, as I said, is come to the last strain, which brings up the
foulest stuff of all. For the highest words that the highest Sons, or Fathers
of this Church (to use his phrase) have spoken concerning Ceremonies are these
Bishop Bramhall (...) his Romphaea, chap. 11. p. 234.
: That they are advancements of Order, Decency, Modesty, and Gravity in the
Service of God; expressions of those heavenly desires and dispositions, which
we ought to bring along with us to Gods House; adjuments of Attention and
Devotion: furtherances of Edification; visible Instructors; helps of Memory;
exercises of Faith; the shell that preserves the kernel of Religion from
contempt; the leaves that defend the blossoms and the fruit. But the very same
person who wrote all this immediately adds, that if they grow over thick and
rank, they hinder the fruit from coming to maturity, and then the Gardener
plucks them off. When Ceremonies become burdensome by excessive superfluity, or
unlawful Ceremonies are obtruded, or the substance of Divine Worship is placed
in Circumstances, or the Service of God is more respected for Humane Ornaments,
than for the Divine Ordinance; it is high time to pare away excesses, and
reduce things to the ancient mean. So our Church has done; between whom and
the Roman Church there is as wide a difference in this regard, as between the
hearty expressions of a faithful friend, and the mimical gestures of a fawning
flatterer: or between the unaffected comeliness of a grave Matron, and the
fantastical paintings and patchings, and powdering of a garish Curtesan. And
whereas this man would have you believe that there are those who are so
enamoured of these few Ceremonies, that they even dote upon them; nay, have set
their hearts upon them more than upon Almighty God himself. Another great
Prelate Bishop Sandersons Preface to the first Volume of Sermon. sect. 12. An.
1657.
has declared, That he knew no true Son of the Church of England, that doteth
upon any Ceremony: whatsoever opinion they have of the decency or expediency of
some of them. Nor does this Gentleman, I have reason to believe, know such an
one at this day. For they have been told a thousand times over (as that Bishop
proceeds) Ib. sect. 13.
in the Sermons and Writings of private men (as well as in the Public
Declaration of our Church) that we place no necessity at all in these things,
but hold them to be merely indifferent. 2. That when for Decency, Order, or
Uniformity sake any constitutions are made, there is the same necessity of
obeying such constitutions, as of obeying other Laws made for the good of the
Commonwealth concerning any other indifferent thing. And 3. That this
necessity, whether of the one or of the other, arises not properly from the
Authority of the immediate Lawgiver, but from the Ordinance of God who has
commanded us to obey the Ordinances of men for his sake. And, to add no more,
4. That such necessity of Obedience notwithstanding, the things remain in the
same indifferency as before; every way as to their Nature, and even in respect
of us, thus far, That there is a liberty left for men upon extraordinary and
other just occasions, sometimes to do otherwise than the constitution requires,
when there is no scandal nor contempt in the case. A liberty which we dare not
either take our selves, or allow to others in things properly and absolutely
necessary. Upon which very account (I mean the consideration of the
indifferency of the things in themselves) and upon this alone it was that those
who did most sadly resent the voting down of Liturgy, Festivals, and the
Ceremonies of the Church, did yet so far yield to the sway of the times, as to
forbear the use thereof in public Worship. Which is a direct answer to that
which this Apologist talks of, about our omission of things required by Law in
the late times. p. 128. And he may find more full satisfaction, if he be
disposed, in the same Bishops seventh Sermon to the people First Volume of
Sermons in Folio. page 390.
; where he shows, that since the obligation to those does not spring from the
things themselves, nor immediately and by its proper virtue from the
constitution of the Magistrate, but by consequence only, and by virtue of that
Law of God which commands to obey them; thereby a liberty is left in cases
extraordinary, and of some pressing necessity, not otherwise well to be
avoided, to do sometimes otherwise: these two things provided. First, that a
man be driven thereto by a true real, and not by a pretended necessity only:
and secondly, that in the manner of doing he use such Godly discretion as
neither to show the least contempt of the Law in himself, nor to give ill
example to others to despise Government, or Governors.

7. This is the sum of what our Churchmen, high and low (as he is pleased to
distinguish them) have declared about Ceremonies. O but, says the Apologist,
why then will you not consent to a change, nay, a laying aside all those
Ceremonies, since you do not make them necessary in themselves? Let them be
removed whether nocent or innocent, as they have been out of other Reformed
Churches. page 18. This he is at again, page 131. and propounds this as a good
means to keep the people from grieving and vexing the Magistrate by the breach
of his Laws: Remove the Law, says he, and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, p. 133. very right; nor is there any obedience. He has found
out a rare way for the Magistrate to ease himself wholly of his Office, by
letting the people do as they will, and govern him. For when they please to
scruple any other Laws, he must repeal them too, according to this wise advice,
unless he will be vexed and grieved with the clamours and disobedience of his
people, who will not be contented unless, in effect, they make Laws for
themselves. King James indeed in his Proclamation in the first year of his
Reign, March 5. admonishes all men hereafter, not to expect, nor attempt so
much as any further change in the common and public Form of Gods Service, from
that which was then established. For which he there gives such substantial
reasons, that my Lord Bacon Cahala, page 42.
makes it his request to the Duke of Buckingham to read that excellent
Proclamation, as he calls it; And if at any time there should be the least
motion made for innovation, to put the King in mind to read it himself; for it
is most dangerous in a state to give ear to the least alteration in Government.
But it is all one for that; no matter what the King said, or any one else, they
have been ever since, and are not merely for alterations, but for abolishings
and removals, or else there will be no peace. I am heartily sorry for it; since
even those whom they call the most moderate Prelates, have declared the removal
of that which is well settled to be so dangerous, as that it is not safe to
remove an inconvenience, the remedy of which may open a gap to let in others
that may prove greater and more grievous. Not only Bishop Sanderson Episcopacy
not prejudicial, etc. p 99. 100.
, but Bishop Hall likewise is of the mind, that (...), is a sure Rule: Let the
ancient customs stand: Every novelty carries his Petition in the face of it
Bishop Hall's Sermon^ 2 Sund^^ Lent, 1641* p. 80.
. It was a good question of the Church in the Canticles, Why should I be as one
that turns aside to the flocks of the Companions? It is the great and glorious
style of God, that in him is no shadow of changing: Surely those well settled
Churches and States come nearest to his perfection, that alter least. But if
with Lipsius you say; what if for the better? I must answer, that in every
change there is a kind of hazard: It is a wise word therefore of our Hooker,
that a tolerable Sore is better than a dangerous Remedy. And if any one say
these words are not to be extended to Ceremonies, let him consult a Letter of
his to Mr. Struthers One of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
, whom he desires to consider how far it is safe for a particular Church to
depart from the ancient Universal. Surely no Kingdom can think it a slight
matter, what the Church diffused through all times and places has either done
or taught. For Doctrines or Manners there is no question; and why should it be
more safe to leave it in the Holy Institutions that concern the outward form of
Gods Service? Novelty is a thing full of envy and suspicion; and why less in
matters of Rite than Doctrine? True it is, every Nation has her own Rites,
Gestures, Customs, and yet there are some wherein there has been an Universal
Agreement. As every face has its own favor, its own lines distinct from all
others, yet is there a certain common habitude of countenance, and disposition
of the forehead, eyes, cheeks, lips, common to all. So as they that under
pretense of difference shall go about to raise an immunity from such
Ceremonies, do no other than argue, that because there is a diversity of
proportion of faces, we may well want a brow or a chin. He instances in the
ancient custom of Solemn Festivities, and of kneeling at the Holy Sacrament. By
all which it appears that one may be against a removal of the Ceremonies, and
yet be no Hector, no more than He, or Bishop Sanderson, or Mr. Hooker See ^^e
Preface to his fifth part of Eccles. Pol.
were. And these men, I must tell you, have the least reason to complain (or
give such Characters as this Apologist has done) of those, whom they call
rigid or stiff, Fathers or Sons of the Church of England (they are his own
words, p. 34.) who were so unyielding themselves in every thing which they had
a mind to have established. Nay, some of whom heretofore were so fierce for
their own inventions, that every nicety seemed as if it were a Fundamental:
and, if King James may be believed Basilicon Doron cited in second Fair
Warning, cap. 1. p. 8.
the smallest questions about their Ecclesiastical Discipline raised as great
Disputes, as if the Holy Trinity were called in question.

need to spend any more time about it; for the bare reciting of it, will
proclaim it to be a Libel, and an infamous one too; unless you can believe,
that the chiefest Sons of the Church (as they profess themselves) dissent from
its Doctrine, transgress its Laws about Rites and Ceremonies, look upon the
Archbishops Grindal, Whitgift, and Abbot, as Puritans, and would unbishop some
of the present Bishops for Presbyterians. Who would think that a Book fraught
with such language as this, should be commended for a sober, modest Reply, by
some of chief note among them? Such men would have made excellent Parasites,
altogether as good as that Cynaethus, who, when he had spent all other ways of
Flattery, praised his Master for his Tissick, and said, he cought very
musically. Their Favorites may say and write what they please, and still
maintain the Reputation of godly men; nay, that which in us would be thought a
Crime, is commended in one of themselves, as I have formerly shown you. That
very Person who accuses another of writing Pasquils, is not afraid to call
several of the Bishops (as this man in effect does some of our Priests)
Amaziah-like Priests, Tyrants, rufling, ceremonious, and violent Ringleaders
Anatome of Dr. G. 1660.
. He declaims also against the Cathedral Service, reproaches the Dignified
Clergy, and that after he had confessed in other parts of his Book, the Act of
Indemnity had enjoined him silence Antidote against Antisobrius, Oct 30. 1660.
p. 15. 22, 25.
. That which is bred in the bore, as we say, will not out of the flesh. This
sort of men have ever been wont to revile, and so they cannot forbear it even
when they know they should not, and that it is their interest to give good
words. And if you will give me leave to speak my judgment freely, I think there
is also in this very Writer, a great deal of that Hectorly swaggering quality,
which he unjustly charges others withal. Witness that notable Vapor, and High
Rant, page 28. where he tells you, the chief Quarrel of the high Hierarchists
against the Presbyterian Ministers should in reason have been nothing but this,
that they (who would have thought it?) were the first in bringing the King
back. Which he joins with a new cluster of calumnies against many of the
Bishops, and conforming Clergy: affirming ( page 29.) that their own interest,
it may be suspected, had a considerable influence into their Loyalty; and that
they seem to express more and greater zeal against the Presbyterians than
against the Regicides, etc. Who would not think, that reads this, that they
were the men (who but they?) who kept life and heat in the Kings Cause, and
that the Episcopal men, many of them, were cold and indifferent? or that they
were the sincere, the well-affected to his Majesty, and the others led by their
own interest to follow the Presbyterian zeal for him? Nay, that they were the
first movers toward the Kings Return, even before those that were always in
motion, and never ceased their restless endeavors for it? O most glorious
Apologist! He may tell us next, as the men of Judah said, The King is near of
kin to us, for that is as true, as that they were the first in bringing him
back. If he will stand to this, and not have it pass for a boast, but for a
serious Truth; I will produce him the words of some of the heads of his party
(which I had rather spare) that make it unlawful to attempt it. Whereby it will
appear that they at least were not for bringing him in again, till they were
forced to it, by those who would not let them keep him out.

And now that he is in his Throne, methinks it is no great sign of the
contentment they take in the change, that the Conventicles, which are so
frequent and numerous on other days, are observed to be so few, if any, upon
the day of this Kings Return, or upon the day of the former Kings Death. Look
about you, and consider all the private Meetings you know of on the Lords Day;
How many did you ever know or hear of that will vouchsafe at the appointed
times to bewail the horrid Murder of the Father, or to thank God for the happy
Restoration of the Son? For my part, I have constantly observed, that those
which come within my knowledge, do not assemble on those days at all; and many
others have made the same Observation as well as my self.

As for the other thing, the Conformists expressing more and greater Zeal
against the Presbyterians than against the Regicides, and more frequently and
more fiercely arraigning and condemning the Covenant, than the Engagement; the
same Answer may serve which Bishop Sanderson gave to those who complained that
the Visitation Sermons were more against the Puritans, than the Papists Preface
to 1 Vol. of Sermon. Sect. 7. 8. 1657.
. First, we say it is not altogether true: the Regicides have their share in
the Public Sermons (of which I suppose he speaks) as well as their Fellows, as
often as the Text gives occasion, or the file of their Discourse leads the
Preachers to it. And on those Days I mentioned, it is the General Complaint of
your people that the Preachers speak too much against those King-killers and
those Principles which led them to commit that Sin without Blushing. But,
Secondly, admitting it to be true to a tittle, either our men are excusable in
what they blame them for, or they that blame them inexcusable, who do the very
same thing. Do they not usually (says he) in their Sermons fall bitterly upon
the Papists and Arminians, but seldom meddle with the Socinians, scarce ever
name the Turks? I have been told often of their Declamations against the
observing of Christmas, that great superstitious thing, but I remember not to
have heard of much spoken against Perjury and Sacrilege, and some other Sins
wherewith our times abound. Nay, did not their Zeal even against Popery it self
seem to abate, when they had got most of the Pulpits into their Possession; at
leastwise in comparison of the Zeal they showed against Episcopacy, the
Liturgy, Festivals, and Ceremonies in use among us? These they cried down with
all the Noise they could, and with all the Strength they had: But why I beseech
you so zealous against them, which were (at the worst they could fancy them)
but lesser Sins and Errors in comparison with those greater which now were
little talked of? I doubt not but they had some reasons, wherewith to satisfy
themselves for their so doing; and be they what they will, if they will serve
to excuse them, they will serve as well to justify our men, should they do as
they are charged. The best thing, I think, that can be alleged by a rational
man for such a proceeding is this. That where people are more in danger to be
seduced by a less Error or Sin (as it is conceived) than a greater, there more
Pains and Zeal may be bestowed to keep them from that than from the other, that
is in it self more dangerous. Thus our Savior reproved the Scribes and
Pharisees more frequently and with greater sharpness than he did the Sadducees,
though in themselves, and in respect of their Matter, the Errors of the
Sadducees were worse than those of the other; because the Pharisees by reason
of their outside Holiness were grown into better esteem with the people than
the Sadducees were, and the generality of the Jews were better principled
against the gross Errors of the Sadducees, than the insnaring Doctrines of the
hypocritical Pharisees.

All this is very good, and is the very Plea, which those may justly put in for
themselves who express more and greater zeal against the Presbyterians than
against the Regicides; and arraign the Covenant more frequently than the
Engagement: there is more and greater need of it; the people being in more
danger to be misled by the one than by the other; and having a greater
abhorrence of those Crimes which are black and ugly, than of those which are
gilded over with specious pretenses.

Hectorism he is guilty of; he makes a large boast of their great indulgence
and charity toward Episcopal men when they had power, page 23. and desires me
to Catechize my self why I charged them with rigor and severity without
remembering their kindness to the Archbishop of Armagh, and many others, p. 151.
I have obeyed him; and for this once shall tell him what my answer is (being
ready if he long for it to tell him my mind in all the rest of those
Questions.) If I had named their particular kindnesses to the Episcopal party,
I must have remembered how that great person, as Dr. Bernard tells us Clavi
Trabales, p. 50.
, was forced to fly from London to Oxford; what roughness he met withal from
the Army then in field against the King, to the loss of some of his Books, and
principal Manuscripts never recovered; how that maintenance was taken from him
which had been settled on him by the King when he had lost all Ireland; and
that at length being necessitated to return to London, he was Silenced a long
time from Preaching, unless in a private house; and when with much ado he was
permitted to Preach at Lincoln's Inn, it was that Honorable Society which gave
him a competent maintenance. Well, but the English Bishops, says the
Apologist, had two hundred pound per annum allowed them by an Ordinance.
Allowed? Voted he should have said, and that is true; by the same token that
they could never get it. Hear Bishop Hall, who had a larger portion than that
voted him, but, as he himself complains Specialties of his Life writ by himself,
, was never the better for it. Nay, the Committee for Sequestrations at London,
says he, sent to the Committee in the Country an express inhibition to pay any
such Allowance; telling them that neither they nor any other Committee had
power to allow him any thing at all. Nor could he get the fifth part which they
said should be allowed his Wife. And, which is worse, they were not ashamed
after they had sequestered the Profits of his Bishopric, sold all his Goods,
and Personal Estate (not leaving so much as his Childrens Pictures out of their
curious Inventory) As he tells us there, p. 57.
to come to him for Assessments and monthly Payments for that Estate which they
had taken away; and took distress from him upon his most just denial. Nay, they
vehemently required him to find the wonted Arms of his Predecessors, when they
had left him nothing, and a little before came and disarmed him. All this was
over and above the many insolent affronts put upon him all this while, which
you may read there if you please, page 62. which made that meek man conclude in
these pathetical words May 29. 1647.
: This has been my measure; wherefore I know not: Lord, thou know, who only
can remedy and end, and forgive or avenge this horrible oppression.

O but Bishop Morton, adds the Apologist, did get a thousand pound. Right; but
when did he get it, and by what means? This Gentleman might seasonably ask
himself a cross question, Why he is pleased to remember this kindness, and not
withal the rigor that preceded it? It would not have cost him or his Printer
much pains to tell us, his barbarous usage in the Tumults at Westminster, when
some cried, pull him out of his Coach; others, nay, he is a good man; others
again, but for all that he is a Bishop. Which made him often say that he
believed he should not have escaped alive, if a leading man among the rabble
had not cried out, Let him go and hang himself Doctor Barwick in his Life, p.
103.
. Wonderful civility to such a reverend person! which was attended with ringing
of Bells and making Bonfires upon their imprisonment, and with scattering
abroad (as Bishop Hall tells us, p. 50.) scurrilous Pamphlets throughout the
Kingdom, and in Foreign parts, which blazoned their infamy, and exaggerated
their treasonable practices. He might have remembered also that after this first
imprisonment (which, I gather from Bishop Hall, was from New-years-Eve till
Whitsontide) Bishop Morton was committed Prisoner again for six months more to
their Sergeant. And what do you think it was for? Only for Baptizing the Child
of a Noble Person, according to the order of the Book of Common Prayer Ib. page
107.
. From whence this Gentleman may learn that which it seems he never knew before
(as you find page 24.) one that suffered for the use of the Liturgy. By these
and such like means the good Bishop was reduced to great straights, and
thereupon sued for some maintenance, and by the importunity of his Friends
(which, I must tell you, and nothing else, brought the Primate into
Lincoln's Inn) got the thousand pound this Apologist speaks of: not out of the
Revenues of his Bishopric, but out of the Treasury of Goldsmiths-Hall, after
all his Lands and Revenues were sold. Before this he had no allowance, and
could not live upon a Vote for an annual maintenance, which making no mention
by whom nor whence it should be paid Ib. page 124.
, was as good as no Vote at all. All which considered and many other things of
like nature, Dr. Sanderson did not stick to write (and I hope he was no
Slanderer) that in those days, They exercised an arbitrary Sovereignty without
either Justice or Mercy Episcopacy not prejudicial, etc. p. 51.
.

But was there not a fifth part, as the Apologist goes on, allowed for the
maintenance of the Wife and Children of those Ministers that were ejected? No
truly; it was only Voted, but seldom allowed. Bishop Hall's Wife, as you heard,
could not obtain it; and others also not only went without that allowance, but
had better been without the Vote too; which cost them dear, and proved the
greatest cruelty. For they spent what they had left for a feeble support, in
suing for that which they could never get; and sometimes that which was lent by
their Friends was thrown away, by this means, after that which was taken from
them. Hear the History of the English and Scotch Presbytery, chap. 25 Written
in French by a Divine of the Reformed Church, translated 1659.
. There is indeed, says he, an Ordinance of Parliament, that the Wives and
Children of ejected Ministers should have the fifth part of the Revenues of
their Benefices, but it is very ill observed, for the new incumbents refuse to
obey the Ordinance, constraining them to plead before Judges, their
Adversaries; who instead of speedy relieving. them, delay them with length of
time, and make them consume in Suits that which they borrowed to plead their
cause. By this expense and delays these poor desolate persons are constrained
to desist their prosecution; and many being ejected out of small Benefices,
dare not present their Petitions for the fifths, because the expenses will
amount higher than the Principal. You may read the rest there if you please, or
if you suspect this Author of partiality, you may look into that Historian
which this Apologist sometimes cites, Mr. Fuller I mean, who was none of the
rigid Sons of the Church, I dare say, in his opinion: And he will inform you
more distinctly Book 11. p. 228, etc.
, that though the Parliament ordered in the year 1644. that their Commissioners
in the Country should appoint means (not exceeding a fifth part) to the Wives
and Children of Sequestered persons, yet Clergymen not being expressed by name,
they that enjoyed the Sequestrations refused to contribute to them. The
complaints of this begat a new Order of the House of Commons, Die Jovis 11.
November. 1647. that the Wives and Children of Clergymen should be comprehended
within the Ordinance that allowed the fifth part for Wives and Children, etc.
But Covetousness, as he observes, found many little holes to wriggle out at.
For if a Minister had a Wife without Children, or Children without a Wife, or
but one Child, they denied them payment. Six other evasions besides these be
there relates, to which I refer the Reader, by which the intention of the
Parliament was deluded, and most of the poor souls who were in want received no
benefit of that Ordinance: But rather, as I said, a great deal of mischief;
while they were shuffled off with litigious and crafty tricks, and oppressed
with charges, when they came to demand that small Alms which was granted them
out of their Husbands Estates. What shall I say more? Mr. Bridges himself
confesses their rigor to the poor Episcopal Clergy; for when the Converted
Gentleman complains that many Learned, Religious, and Orthodox Divines were
plundered, etc. While their Wives and Children begging their Bread are left to
the mercy of those merciless times; He denies not a word of it, but answers
roundly thus, There shall be Judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy. 2
Jam. 1.3. and a little after he repeats it again. believe it, Sir, you have
been bloudily merciless, and the just God is now making Inquisition Annotations
on Loyal Convert. published by Authority. 1644. p. 17.
. Nay, it was not the kindness of the Presbyterian Ministers that the
Independent Brethren were suffered; but they sadly complain of it: as you may
read in the Petition of the London Ministers to the House of Commons September.
18, 1644.
, grounded upon the first Remonstrance of the Houses, [wherein they declared it
was far from their purpose or desire to let loose the golden Reins of
Discipline and Government in the Church, to leave private persons or particular
Congregations to take up what Form of Service they please] and upon the
Covenant, wherein they engaged themselves to be not only for a full
Reformation, but an Uniformity in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government. This was received with great Acceptance, and the next year December.
18, 1645
the same Ministers agreed upon a Letter to the Assembly against Toleration, in
the body of which they expressly call them, Reasons against the Toleration of
Independency in this Church. The Common Prayer then you may be sure could not
be tolerated by their good will, whatever this man says; nor were Dr. Gunning
and the rest suffered at London and Oxford, till their Power was out of Doors.
Whilst the Covenant was in Credit, it was severely forbid, and the King
himself, had it been in their power, should not have had the privilege to use
it. This Covenant also, though he would have us believe the contrary, was pressed
with great Rigor. Look into our Church, says Bishop Bramhall, Replication to
Bishop of Chalcedon. p. 40.
and see how many of our principal Divines have lost their Dignities and
Benefices, only because they would not take a Schismatical Covenant, without
any other relation to the Wars. I have read of a thousand imprisoned and
sequestered upon this score, and near an hundred Fellows of Colleges in one
Week banished Cambridge for refusing it. Nay, the Houses were so impartial
(they are the express words of Mr. Pryn) Fresh Discovery, etc. 1646. Sect. 3.
in the prescription of it, that such Members of the Lords or Commons that did
but scruple the taking of it, were suspended the Houses till they did conform.
Upon which ground he shows how unequal it was that any man should be
priviledg'd and exempted from it. And therefore I do not believe, that many of
the Episcopal Persuasion were suffered to enjoy places in the Churches,
Colleges, and Schools without ever taking the Covenant (as this Apologist
affirms, p. 23.) unless he means, after it was laid aside, and the Sectaries
(as they then spoke) not only obstinately refused it, but openly oppugned and
derided it, nay, framed an Anticovenant against it in their private
Congregations Mr. Pryn. ib.
. But it is no wonder he should write thus confidently, when Mr. R. Baily had
the face to write, notwithstanding all this, that the Covenant was so far from
being urged by fear of unjust suffering, that to this day it could never be
obtained from the Parliament of England to enjoin that Covenant upon any by the
penalty of a twopence Review of the Fair Warning. p. 80.
. No indeed, what need that? when the terms were, take it, or lose your
Benefice. Just such another vapor he made (for these men are much given to it)
in another place, affirming in a Sermon at the Hague, that not any thing had
hitherto been objected against the Covenant. What could be more impudently
spoken, when the Reasons of the University of Oxford had been published against
it several years before; and testified the bold falsehood of what he says also
in his Epistle before the Review (where he would qualify the business a
little) that to this day no man has showed any error in the matter of that
Covenant? And indeed show what we will, it is all one, they will not regard it.
They still retain, I see by this man, a wonderful affection for the Covenant,
and cannot endure it should bear any blame. It was not, says he, the Cause of
the War. Why so? the Battle at Edgehil being fought before the Covenant came
into England, p. 22. what of all that? The Covenant might notwithstanding be a
great cause of the War, and I will prove it had a great hand in it. All the
stirs in Scotland were by the means of it; they entering into it without the
Kings consent; obtruding Large Declaration, p. 75, 199.
it with threatening, beating, tearing of Clothes; turning men out of their
Livings, Excommunicating, Processing those that would not subscribe it; and
binding themselves to a mutual assistance against all persons whatsoever. Upon
which the Kings Commissioner desired that they would add [Except the King and
his Successors] but they refused it, and in their explication of the Covenant,
which came out afterward, would add no such thing, but only that they would
defend his Person and Authority in the Preservation and Defense of true
Religion Ib. p. 108, 109.
. In that form it marched into England What use the Ar^^y made of the clause,
the Remonstrance about the Titary at the Isle of Wight will tell you.
, whither the Spirit of it was come before, and had raised those Arms which
might have been soon laid aside again, had it not been for the Covenant. For
without the assistance of the Scots, the Parliament of England knew not how to
carry on the War, and without the Covenant came along with them, or marched
before them, they would not jog, or stir a foot: As appears by this Relation,
which I find in the Second Fair Warning By Rich. Watson, 1651. p. 178, 179.
, sent from one well acquainted with the Affairs of his own Country. When the
Commissioners, says he, came down into Scotland from the Parliament of
England, and a Letter they brought was read in the Assembly there, they
received no other Answer but this: Gentlemen, we are sorry for your case; but
whereas your Letter says you fight for Defense of the Reformed Religion, you
must not think us blind, that we see not your fighting to be for civil disputes
of the Law, which we are not acquainted withal. Go home, and reconcile with the
King: He is a gracious Prince, and will receive you to his Favor.
You cannot say it is for the Reformed Religion, since you have not begun to
reform your Church. You had thriven better if you had done as we did, begun at
the Church. A few days after this, new Addresses being made, their Friends in
the Assembly made this proposition, Will you join in Covenant with us to reform
Doctrine and Discipline conform to this of Scotland? and ye shall have a better
answer. The Reply was, thanks, and that they would represent their desires to
the Parliament from whom they had no instructions for such an agreement. Nay,
said the Assembly again, this will be loss of time, and the danger is great,
the Parliament nor being able with all their forces to stand two months before
the King; we will rather therefore draw up the Solemn League and Covenant here,
and send up with you some Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Ministers that shall see it
subscribed: which was accordingly done. The Covenant was cried up, the Scots
came into England, and what did they come for? It was, says the Preface to Mr.
Knox his History to fight the Battles of the Lord, i. e. to pull down
Episcopacy and to set up Presbytery in its room, according to the Covenant:
which League and Covenant, says Mr. Rutherford, was the first foundation of
the ruin of the Malignant party in England See Toleration Discussed, p. 117.
, but not of Episcopacy, this Gentleman would have you believe; for it was
declared in the Assembly that the Covenant did not bind against a Primitive
Episcopacy, page 31. What they mean by a Primitive Episcopacy I will not stand
to enquire; but this is well known, that the Three Ministers in their first
answer to the Divines of Aberdeen, positively affirmed, That Episcopacy was not
abjured by their Confession nor their Covenant See Large Declara ion, p. 117.
; which was averred by many other Covenanters to those who otherways scrupled
to enter into their Covenant. And I know that some declared the same in
England; and yet notwithstanding nothing would satisfy but the extirpation of
Episcopal power, and they labored tooth and nail to settle the Government by
Presbyters alone. This the people thought was the great end of the Covenant,
and there is no doubt but the scope of the first contrivers of it was to
destroy Episcopacy root and branch. This was their first work after the War was
begun, to send a Commissioner to the English Parliament, 1642. to move them to
cast out Bishops, [not a word of limiting them] and others to the King at
Oxford to sign all propositions; which because he would not do, they resolve to
assist their Brethren against him, under the name of the Common Enemy Second
Fair Wa ning, p. 185.
. But before they came, they told the Commissioners of Parliament, as I showed
you, they must covenant to reform Doctrine and Discipline conform to Scotland.
And accordingly, the same Author informs me that, their Covenant came into
England with such a clause as this, We shall reform our Church in Doctrine and
Discipline conform to the Church of Scotland Ib. p 383*
of which the Independent Brethren cheated them, making that be razed out, and
those words inserted which we now read in it. However the abolition of the
Office of Bishops was their great demand of the King, as Mr. R. Baily expressly
affirms: adding that the unhappy Prelates had found it to be their great demand
from the beginning of our troubles unto this day Review of fair Warning, 1649
chap. 12. p. 76.
And he plainly affirms that to deny them this satisfaction, was to conclude
that the King himself and all his Family, and three Kingdoms should perish. Why
so I beseech you? It could not be otherwise, notwithstanding all their fine
words in the beginning, for they had sworn to root them out; and could not
break their Covenant to save three Kingdoms. And therefore at last Mr. Baily
persuades himself, the King did consent to abolish Name and Thing not only for
three years but for ever. Strange! when his Majesty had so often clearly
protested that he could not with a good Conscience consent to it. Did they
force him at last to do it against his Conscience, or did they give him such
satisfaction that he saw at last he might safely do it? Alas! we dull souls do
not understand the mysteries which they can find in words. His Majesty
consented to lay aside Bishops for three years, till he and his Parliament
should agree upon some settled Order for the Church. Now this, says he, was
tantamount to for ever: it being supposed (mark the juggling) that they can
never agree to admit Episcopacy again. Why so? For all and every one (says he)
Ib. chap. last, p. 8^.
in both Houses having abjured Episcopacy by solemn Oath and Covenant (observe
that) the Parliament could not agree with the King to erect the fallen Chairs of
the Bishops; so there remained no other, but that either his Majesty should
come over to their Judgment, or by his not agreeing with them, yet really to
agree in the perpetual abolition of Episcopacy, since he had granted to lay
aside Bishops till he and his Houses had agreed upon a settled Order in the
Church. This was an admirable contrivance, especially if you call to mind, as
the Answer tells him, how there was something else agreed, viz. that twenty
Divines of his Majesty's nomination being added to the Assembly should have a
free consultation and debate about the settlement of Church Government after
those three years or sooner, if differences could be composed. A very free
Debate this was like to be, in which all Reasons that could be given for
Episcopacy were shut out of doors, and concluded by an Oath to be put to
silence. But why should I trouble my self any farther? The wider indeed the
hole grows in the mil-stone, the clearer a man may see through it; but this
man's Sophistry is visible enough already: nor needs there more words to show
that this modest Braggadocio vaunts himself ridiculously in the merits of his
party; and that Mr. Vicars and such like were not the only men that reviled and
calumniated. They that pretend to humility, modesty, and seriousness cannot
forbear it.

Preface he accuses me of railing, and in his Book ( p. 2.) of reviling;
without taking notice of one word that I have said in answer to these
calumnies. They are resolved I see to be confident, and to have their saying,
do, or say we what we can. For he tells you also of my jeering, scoffing, false
accusation, and mocking; lightness and drollery; p 90. 92, 137.
but not a syllable to make good the charge. No, that was a hard thing, but
very easy to say that I write sometime, what might better become some
Ecclesiastical Hudibras, or a Doctor of the Stage, than p. 35.
etc. Just thus Mr. R. Baily was pleased to answer that excellent Bishop, which
this man commends, Dr. Bramhall. Concerning the 8th. Chapter of whose Fair
Warning, he says, it much better beseemed a Mercurius Aulicus than either a
Warner or a Prelate Review, p. 48.
. He charges him also with gathering together an heap of Calumnies, etc.
though, as the Reply tells him, that heap was nothing else but a faithful
Collection of Historical Narrations, which require not the credulity of the
simple, but the search of diligent people, if they distrust them. The same I
say for my self; they must be beholden to a new light, which no body can see
but themselves, to make Historical truth to be a slander. They are fain to call
it so, because they cannot tell how to answer it otherways, and they will not
lay their hands on their mouths. If better were within, better would come out:
they are fain to throw out such words, because they want a substantial Apology.
The same Mr. Baily, I remember charges, the strength of one of the Bishops
Reasons to be black Atheism and much worse than Pagan Skepticism Ib. 89.
. By which you may see it is their manner to censure boldly, and tumble out
frightful words, without regard to Truth. For if you would know what Doctrine
it is, which he calls by the name of Brutish and Atheistical Maxims (that is
another of his civil words, p. 90) it is this. That it is not lawful for
Subjects to plant that which they apprehend to be true Religion by force of
Arms: nor to take up Arms against their Prince merely for Religion. This was
all the Bishop had said, and not without great reason. But they are Brutes or
Atheists, divested of all Reason or Religion, who prefer not their
Enthusiastical Heats before the most sober and wise Resolutions. They, as the
Bishop speaks in the end of that Treatise, are more ridiculously partial than
the men of China; for they talk as if they only had two eyes and all the rest
of the world were stark blind.

Old Nonconformists: who being silenced forbore to preach, and justified their
silence against the Brownists, who accused them for their submission to the
Ecclesiastical Censures. His Answer is, That the Number of the ejected
Ministers then, was not comparable to what it is now. p. 6. Which is just like
the Exposition, which they sometime gave of that Scripture. Romans 13.1. I
conceive, says one, Natures Dowry. 1652. p. 31.
that those Christians who lived under the Heathenish Emperors, but wanted
strength to defend themselves, were by that precept, [let every soul be subject
to the higher powers] obliged to sit still, and to endeavor nothing against
those that had the sword in their hands. For it would have discovered them to
be of unruly Spirits, in that they proceeded wholly according to passion, and
not according to sober judgment. So that there was nothing of Christian Virtue
in their subjection, but only of humane Prudence; and no great store of that
was necessary, for they had been arrand fools if they had made a stir when they
knew they could do nothing. It is not want of will, it seems, but want of
strength that keeps these men from breaking those Laws that restrain them. The
old Nonconformists, he would have you think, would have done as they do now,
had they been as numerous: Then they would have entered into strong
Combinations, and slighted that Authority to which they submitted. But weigh
their Reasons, which I alleged In the Continuation. Edit. 1. 345.
and shall not now repeat, and you will see he casts a blot on them as well as
us; for they are such as will shut up the mouths of a great many as well as a
few. But how few were they in those days, do you think, that were ejected? He
tells you usually not one to one hundred, to what it is in our days. Ib. It is
notably guessed by instinct, for, I dare say, he has no Author to warrant his
Assertion; and for once (as the forenamed Bishop speaks in another case) his
instinct has deceived him. According to the computation of Philagathus, there
should not at this rate be five and twenty in all the Kingdom; whereas the
Humble Supplication in King James his time An. 1609. p. 26. 31.
talks of sharpness and rigor for the silencing and removing of no mean number
of the worthiest Pastors in the Land: insomuch that the ordinary means of
Conversion from blindness and infidelity was interrupted and crossed, in that
so many worthy Lights had been by the Prelates removed from shining in the
Church. Nay, one would think by their words, that all who were good for any
thing were silenced, for they say, p. 25. in an indefinite manner, The faithful
Ministers of the Gospel are in all disgracive and unworthy sort discarded, and
removed from being any longer the Lords Sentinels and Watchmen. Which they
repeat again, p. 28. And the Defense of the Ministers Reasons for refusal of
Subscription Preface, 1607.
tells you of so many turned out from that high and heavenly calling, that for
any means of maintenance left to many of them, they may seek their bread. Here
is such a many, that being divided into two parts, rich and poor, one of them
makes a many; and therefore the whole was a great many, not a few, as this man
affirms. Nay, by that time the War was begun, there was none of the best sort
of Ministers left, if we will believe the Dialogue I mentioned; Between a
Netherlander and Englishman.
which says, the Bishops had stripped all the Assemblies of their faithfullest
Preachers. In this style they were wont to speak then, as they do now; though I
have reason to think that some of these faithfullest Preachers and Watchmen
stood more upon their Credit, than any thing else when they refused
Subscription. For I find it recorded above 60 years ago by Mr. Tho. Bell
Regiment of the church. Chap. 5.
, that he discoursing with a Preacher about the Canons just then made, 1604.
(against which he could alledg nothing of moment) was told by him that he would
neither lose his living, nor yet conform to those Orders. And when he demanded
how that could be, was answered, that he would have one to do it, but not do it
himself. And again, being told he might as lawfully do it himself, as procure
another to do it, uttered these words, How can I do that against which I have
so often preached? which, says Mr. Bell, I told him savoured of the Spirit of
the proud Pharisee, not of the humble Publican. I thought indeed before that
all their Proceedings had been out of mere Conscience, which now I perceive to
be of Pride in a great many of them: through which manner of dealing the
simpler sort become disobedient, and are deeply drowned in Error; and our
Church pitifully turmoiled with Schisms and dissension. Honest Bernard Gilpin
See his Life. p. 132. 133.
was of another mind; who being called to subscription in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, though dissatisfied in two points of the Articles of
smaller consequence, yet, subscribed to them, least, thought he with himself,
if I shall refuse, I shall be a means to make many others to refuse, and so
consequently hinder the course of the word of God.

But perhaps you desire to know the precise Number which were then ejected; and
if you give Credit to one of your own Authors, this man is much out of the way,
for the Altar of Damascus affirms, that there were either silenced or deprived
upon the account of not conforming three hundred preaching Ministers. Dr.
Heylyn indeed informs me that it does not appear upon the Rolls that the^e were
above nine and forty deprived upon all occasions, till the death of Archbishop
Bancroft, and so the whole Number of the silenced and deprived might not be so
great as they pretended. You must conclude one of these two things; either that
they loved then when occasion served to make a Mountain of a Molehill; or now
they are desirous to do the just contrary, and depress their Number to little
or nothing. And in like manner now he tells us the people dissatisfied with the
Liturgy or Ceremonies are ten if not an hundred to one to what they were
formerly; and yet then they talked of many thousands Humble Supplication. p. 36.
of the most loyal and best affected Subjects that joined with them in their
Affection to the desired Reformation. That is, they talk boldly and at random
out of their own imaginations, as if they wrote to simple Idiots that believe
every word without chewing. Otherwise this Apologist would not have told us
that Mr. Hildersham was silenced but in some Dioceses, etc. p. 7. whereas Mr.
Clark tells us expressly that he was not only silenced, but deprived for
refusing of Subscription, 1605. and was not allowed to preach till 1608. and
within less then a year silenced again, and continued so a long time. Nay, was
judicially admonished in the High Commission, (22 April 1613) and enjoined that
saving the Catechizing of his own family, he should not at any time hereafter
preach, catechize, or use any part of the Office or Function of a Minister
either privately or publicly until he was restored, etc. And that it was not
till 1625 that he was licensed to preach in some Dioceses. How it was with
others, I have not had occasion to observe, and now have not leisure to
examine; but have cause from this to suspect that he does not report these
matters clearly and with sincerity.

It is no schism, nor a breach of the unity of the Church, because they take
occasion to meet for a time only; till a door be opened for them in the
Church, by the removal of some supposed or real corruption in the public
Worship. As if there were no breach in a garment when it is rent, because it
may be sowed together again. But yet this the Apologist thinks, makes the
Separation of the Non conformists from the Church of England, not total and
perpetual, p. 11. which he repeats again, p. 128. and calls it a temporary and
partial withdrawing. A very sorry employment this is, for a Divine (as I take
him to be) to spend his time in sowing a few fig leaves together to cover the
shame of a sinful disobedience to their Governors, and the great breach they
have made in the unity of the Church. For it may be demonstrated from his own
words that this is a mere shift and frivolous excuse. He confesses a
Separation; only he adds that it is but temporary. The cause of this
temporary Separation is a supposed or real corruption in the public Worship. I
ask now, Is this corruption such (whether real or supposed) that it is a just
cause for a Separation? If it be not, they ought not to withdraw themselves for
a time. If it be, they may withdraw themselves from us always. And so they will
according to these Principles: for if this corruption be not removed, they must
always continue separated, or else it is no sufficient reason for separating
now. Do what they can, they are not like the old Nonconformists; for they did
not withdraw themselves into separate bodies, no not for a time. If they had
upon his Principles, they must have died Separatists (there being no removal of
what they wished taken out of the way) as these men are like to do, unless they
repent and alter their practices, in stead of desiring an alteration in the
Public Worship. Besides, he is very ignorant of the state of our affairs, who
does not know it has been the manner of this Sect to proceed from evil to
worse since the very beginning of it: which makes me think it past doubt that
they will settle in a downright Separation. At the first they only disliked
some Ceremonies, See the Visitation speech at Lisnegarvy, p. 5.
and could pretty well digest conformity in the rest. In a little time they
manifested a dislike of Episcopal Government, being better affected to the
device of Mr. Calvin: and together with that, they distasted also our Common
prayer. From a dislike Some proceeded to think them unlawful, and then fell
into a contempt of Bishops and the Prayers, bitterly railing against them. From
hence they advanced to open disobedience to all the Orders of the Church, and
at last renounced it, and rent themselves from it, esteeming themselves the
only Brethren and Congregation of the Faithful. Some there were indeed that
did not go thus far; and being silenced or deprived for not conforming to the
Ceremonies, would not separate from the Church, nor refused to join with our
Assemblies. This Apologist would have us think that he and his Brethren are the
followers of those: and yet confesses they are gone a large step beyond them,
having separated for a time. And the same reason which has carried them thus
far, will advance them further, and make that time so long, that it will prove
always. They will teach next, that Gods people must be Separatists Protestation
protested, 1641.
. In order to which we must be, that part of the kingdom which is the world,
and not the Church of Christ Groans for Liberty, 1646
. And still they will have a further journey to go, and never rest till they be
uppermost, and have set Jesus Christ, that is themselves, upon his throne. What
ground any man can have to hope any better, I cannot imagine: they being so
bent to defend their present unwarrantable practices, that they will fly to
any refuge, though never so dangerous; nay, take sanctuary in shadows, and
think they are safe, rather then yield the cause. An instance of which you have
in this Writer, who immediately after that which was now noted, alleges the
words of a Romish Doctor mentioned by Bishop Bramhal, to excuse them from
Schism, p. 12. But let any man consult the place, and he will find presently
they are nothing to the business. For the Bishop is there speaking Vindic. of
the Church of Engl. p. 7.
only concerning clashings between Bishops and Churches, long and resolutely
maintained, which he shows may be so managed as not to be Schism. But he
expressly determines a little after, p. 23. that it is schism to separate from
other Christians without sufficient ground in the participation of the same
Sacraments, or in the use of the same Divine Offices and Liturgies of the
Church, and public Worship and Service of Almighty God, or of the same common
Rites and Ceremonies, etc. The very same he declares elsewhere, that they who
break the unity of the Church for difference in in different rites, are guilty
of Schism Replic. to Bishop of Chalcedon, p. 79, 80.
and that most of the Schisms in the Church of Christ have been about the
Canons of the Church, and not the substantials of Religion. Among other
instances, he mentions the Schisms raised in our Church about a Surpless, sign
of the Cross, etc. If therefore this Apologist would have done like a man, he
should have shown that we obtrude sinful Rites as a condition of Communion with
us, and so by this Bishops confession are guilty of making the Schism our
selves. And he should, in order to this, have clearly answered all that has
been said in defense of our Church; and especially the Arguments of their
Forefathers the old Nonconformists, who proved against the Brownists that
there was no such corruption in our Church, as was a sufficient ground of
separation from it. Here was the very point, if he durst have touched it, or
come near it. Which since he has not done, but spent his time in impertinent
things, I must leave him to the favorable censure of S. Austin, mentioned
somewhere by the same Bishop in another case; They cannot do better in a bad
cause; but who constrained them to have a bad cause?

is as mute as a fish. There is no question, for instance, but we may use the
words of Scripture by way of accommodation: no body denies it; and that which
he cites to this purpose out of one of our Bishops, I observed long before he
told me of it, (p. 54, 87.) But then we ought to say that we use them so; and
not talk as if that were the genuine sense of the Divine Writ, never
acquainting the people with any other. And you ought not to pretend to more
then other men, who can do this as well as your selves; unless you had the very
same spirit and power which the Apostles had. Nor is it the Question whether
men's affections are raised with Novelty and Variety (p. 59.) but whether those
be the best affections which are raised by that means, or those which are
raised by serious consideration and laying to heart of the same things in the
same words. All that he alleges out of Mr. Hollingworth, p. 56. is to no
purpose; for I have proved that the Non conformists pretend to more; even the
very same that Mr. Baily did in his Answer Review chap. 12. p. 75.
to Bishop Bramhal's Fair warning, who would have the people endeavor to
attain a readiness to pray in their family out of their own heart, ^
in the words which Gods Spirit dytes to them. But as that Bishop said
elsewhere, this man does not seek the Question in earnest, but as he who sought
for the Hare under the Leads, because he must seek her as well where she was
not, as where she was. Else he would not have asked the Question, Whether Non
conformist Ministers seek after Visions and Revelations, p. 68. That is not the
point: but whether Mr. W. B. have not taught the people to do so. He might have
added, if he had pleased, Whether they have not pretended to them. And an
History in one of our Chronicles would have taught him to answer affirmatively.
For there was a Physician in Oxford, one Rich: Haidock of New-Colledg, who
pretended to preach in his sleep, in such sort, that though he was called upon
a loud, or stirred, or pulled by hands or feet, he would make no show of
hearing or feeling. His fame was spread abroad by the name of the sleeping
Preacher; so that he was brought to Court, and one night his Majesty See Sir
Ri: Baker in the 3d year of K. James
being present to attend the event, the Gentleman began to pray, and then took
a Text, made his Division, applied it to his purpose, which was to inveigh
against the Pope, the Cross in Baptism, and the Canons then newly made. And yet
all this was a mere cheat, as he confessed afterward to the King; who pardoned
him on condition that he should openly in all places acknowledge his offense,
because many, says the Historian, were brought to believe that his nightly
preaching was either by inspiration or by vision. This may serve to requite his
impertinent tale, for which there was no occasion, about a Ministers praying
that they might have godly dreams.

Again; they are not accused for being time-servers now, (as he supposes, p.
89.) but heretofore. And in this, that excellent person Bishop Sanderson (with
whom he may engage, if he please, now he is dead) will bear me out, that it is
no false accusation. I will recite his words, and briefly prove the truth of
them where it is needful. Before the beginning of the Long Parliament, and the
unhappy divisions which followed thereupon, there were few (says he) either of
the Ministers that scrupled to use the Cross, or of the people that took
offense at it Preface to Clavi Trabales Aug. 10. 1661.
. Which words as to the Ministers, on whom the people depended, may be
justified from the Registers of Subscription, in which we find the most
eminent men of your way subscribed libenter and ex animo, freely and heartily,
to the three Articles mentioned in the 36 Canon. Among the rest, Mr. Calamy
(whom our Apologist mentions with the titles of Discreet, honest, pious Mr.
Calamy, p. 92.) Nov. 9. 1637. and Mr. Jenkyn, Jan. 2. 1640. And if you look as
far back as 1627, you will find Mr. Hugh Peter's himself subscribing to the
very height. As for the Archbishops and Bishops, he says, I acknowledge their
Offices and Jurisdictions, and cannot see but there would a fearful Ataxy
follow without the present Government, whereof I so approve, that I have and
willingly do submit to it and them, and have and will press the same upon
others Subscription before the Bishop of London, Aug. 17. the original whereof
found under his hand in the Archbishops Study by Mr Pryn, and published in his
Fresh discovery, 1646. Sect. 8.
. As for the Ceremonies, he says, I shall diligently and daily practice them,
neither have I ever been accused of neglect therein where I have formerly
exercised my Ministry, but do give to them my full approbation and allowance.
Lastly, for the Book of Common Prayer, the Liturgy of the Church, and what is
in them contained, (finding them agreeable unto the Word of God) I have used as
other Ministers have done, and am resolved so to do, etc. And to these, I
subscribe with my heart and hand. What it was that altered his mind or his
practice afterward, I have nothing to do with: but so it was, (as the Bishop
proceeds) that when after the beginning of the Parliament all things were let
loose in the Church, the greatest part of the Clergy (to their shame be it
spoken) many for fear of loosing their Livings, more in hope to get other men's
Livings, and some possibly out of their simplicity beguiled with the specious
name of Reformation, in a short space became either such perfect time-servers
as to cry down, or such tame complyers with the stronger side, as to lay down,
ere they needed, the use of the whole Liturgy, and of all the Rites and
Ceremonies therein prescribed. But the Cross above all was anathematized and
bitterly inveighed against, as it is even at this day by the Managers of the
Presbyterian interest, etc. who having engaged to plead in the behalf of other
men's tender Consciences, do wisely consider withal, that it will not be so much
for their own credit now to become time-servers with the Laws, ^
as it was some years past for their profit, to become time-servers against the
Laws.

If he desire any more on this subject, let him call for it, and I shall not be
sparing of my pains to serve him. But let him be sure, if he make a new
Catechism, to put his Questions better. For in this he eats up the true
Question (as was said long ago) in stead of answering the Quaere; as the Cuckoe
is said to suck up the Sparrows egg, and lay another of her own in the room. I
did not charge them with holding it unlawful to keep Festival days, (as he
states it, p. 43, 44.) but with not keeping ours, since they cannot deny it to
be lawful, and keep others of their own. Nor found fault with the saying Well
through mercy (p. 103.) but their using new distinguishing forms of speech.
Nor, with their not condemning Sacrilege as a sin, but their not speaking and
writing against it when there was such occasion for it. This I have told him
already in the Third Part of the Debate, if he would have vouchsafed to peruse
it, before he said any thing of it: and I shall now tell him once more, that
they were wittily compared by a great person Bishop Bramhal Schism guarded, p.
112.
whom he commends, to the two Sicilian Gluttons, who blew their noses in the
dishes, that they might devour the meat alone: that is, they cried down the
Bishops revenues as dangerous, and nourishers of pride and laziness, because
they gaped after them themselves. No body questions this, but they would have
had them applied to their maintenance. That which they are charged withal is,
that after all that gaping, they shut their mouths, and would not open them to
declare against the alienation of the Church Lands, which was then in hand.
Yes, (says this Writer, p. 15.) the Assembly did dare to condemn Sacrilege as
a sin against the second Commandment in their larger Catechism, for which they
cite two Scriptures. I told you as much; but this is not the business: nay,
more then this, I have showed you they believed not only Sacriledg to be a
sin; but the alienation of our Church Lands, as things then stood, to be
Sacriledg Third part of Debate, p. 207.
. And yet they did not plainly declare against that fact; much less made such
declarations as they did against other sins in the Pulpit, and is they require
us to make in the like case, or else think us negligent. None of them did like
Mr. Vdal whom I mentioned, or like Mr. Bernard Gilpin in the last year of King
Edward Sermon at Court 1552, first Sunday after Epiphany.
or like Archbishop Whitgift, whose affectionate Speech on this subject to
Queen Elizabeth, mixed with great humility and reverence, is recorded by a
worthy Gentleman, Mr. Isaac Walton, in the Life of our incomparable Hooker Page
70, 71, 72, etc.
. The truth is, men of the greatest temper, wisdom and piety have noted this
inequality of zeal in this party about such like matters as this, long before I
was born: and therefore it ought not to be censured as such a piece of
uncharitableness in me to mention it. Dr. Jackson, for instance, in his
Treatise of Justifying faith Chap. 15. paragr. 9.
, tells us, that the first ground of his dislike unto the chief sollicitors of
Reformation in our Church, (though he always reverenced their excellent Parts
and good Labors) was the difformity of their Zeal. For had it been uniform,
says he, no question but it would have moved them to lay down their lives for
the redressing KNOWN ENORMITIES is the Common wealth; as much more material,
and more nearly concerning the advancement of the Gospel, then those doubtful
Controversies of Formalities, about which they strove, as death it self is more
terrible then deprivation. The principal Authors and Abettors of which
Enormities, notwithstanding were emboldned by these Encomiasts, ^
in whose language every Cormo^ant that would countenance their Cause, was a
sanctified person, and a son of God. He may call this railing perhaps the next
time he writes; if not, he must excuse me from it, who have writ nothing
severer then this.

But it may be further added, that the Catechism he mentions, did not come
forth till the business was too far gone; and whatsoever had been said then,
would but have been to shut the Stable-door, when the Steed was stolen. For the
Ordinance for abolishing Archbishops and Bishops, and settling their Lands and
Possessions upon Trustees for the use of the Commonwealth, was made October. 9.
1646. And that for settling their Lands, November 16 following: whereas the
larger Catechism was not printed till October 22. 1647, and then no more then
six hundred Copies only for the use of the Houses and the Assembly, to the end
they might advise thereupon. More then this, the Scriptures were added
afterward, and came not forth with the first Edition: and lastly, they make
mention also there of Perjury; and yet there was no Preaching against it, till
the Covenant came to be broken, though it was a sin before that time wherewith
the Land abounded. As for the Authors of the Annotations, I know them not; and
what he alleges concerning the additions to them 1651, it is nothing to the
point. It was then too late, and the case was altered. The rest of the
maintenance of the Clergy was in danger, the very Tithes being envied to them;
which made it high time to say something to keep themselves from being undone,
after they had ruined the Bishops.

Phocion's in chipping Demosthenes, to pare off all in his Book that is not to
the purpose. Should I undertake it, his Apology would remain a very slender
tool, not worth a straw.

For setting aside his calumnies; his unjust complaints of railing, jeering,
and what not? his falsities boldly asserted, his mistakes of the Question; his
impertinent allegation of Authorities; his idle stories, frivolous
observations, uncharitable surmises, and odious insinuations; his
mis-representing of my words, his cropping or enlarging them; his false glosses
and commentaries, and such like things; I can find very little that looks like
so much as an endeavor of a direct Answer. If you be not weary, I pray observe
a few things on some of those Heads. What a frivolous observation is that out
of the Rhemish Testament, about the retaining of old words; which you may read
in him, if you will, (p. 42.) for I shall not stand to recite it? There being
nothing plainer, then that neither they nor we refuse to use the words Amen,
Fasting, Charity, the blessed Sacrament, Alleluja, and others there mentioned,
and yet are in no danger to believe as the Church of Rome does; nor should we,
though we should use the words Altar, Oblation and Sacrifice, as well as Lent,
Palm sunday and Christmas. And what do you think of the tale of the Citizen or
Countryman (he knows not which) who being asked his opinion of a Sermon, said it
ran or sounded thus, as if he had said, A pudding, a pie, a pudding-pye; a
pudding for me, a pie for thee, a pudding-pye for me and thee? p. 65. This is
the man that makes serious reflections upon the Debate; just like the serious
prayer of one of their present Preachers, who in the presence of a numerous
Auditory, used these words to God; which sound more like that Ryme then any
Sermon that ever I heard. Thou art the hope of our help, and the help of our
hope; thou art our hope when we have no help, and thou art our help when we
have no hope; yea, thou art our hope and our help, when we have neither hope
nor help, but are helpless and hopeless. I should not have mentioned this, but
that there are so many witnesses of it; and to show you what may be done, if
they will have us proceed in this way of writing.

No, by no means, I know you will say, let us have no more of this stuff. I am
very well pleased with the motion: and wish likewise they would not ground
their replies upon hear says, when they may believe their eyes. Let him not
give any credit to him, whosoever he be, that says, See page 101. of his Book.
I dealt disingenuously with Mr. Bridge in my quotations of him, but look into
his Book, and make it apparent to me that I have wrested his words, and I will
confess it, and make him the best amends I am able. It is as easy, I should
think, for a Scholar to sit in his Study and read Books, as to gad up and down
to hear and tell idle stories. But let not the Books he reads be cited
impertinently, as the very Articles of the Church of England are by him. An
instance you have (and it is the first that comes to hand, but the rest are
like it) p. 87. For I never thought that the Fathers looked for no more then
transitory promises: But that it was not by virtue of the Covenant made with
Moses, that they looked for more, I did and do affirm. A great many of the
Worthies mentioned, Heb. 11. lived before the Law was given, and the rest that
followed them built their expectation on the same ground which they did. But we
may well pass by such vain allegations out of the Articles, since the very
Scriptures which he cites confute all that he says. If coming to Christ, for
instance, and believing in him be all one, which is apparent indeed from John
7.37, 38. (cited by him, p. 79.) then believing in Christ is more then relying
on him for pardon of sins; for to come to Christ, is to become one of his
Disciples, and to undertake to be of his Religion. This is have cleared
sufficiently in the last Debate; and shown withal, that obedience to the Law of
God is a condition of our Justification. No, says this Gentleman, out of I
know not what Author, p. 78. It is not the condition of the Covenant so
properly as of those persons that enter into Covenant. Which is a monstrous
absurd. Answer to this Question: no better then to affirm and deny the same
thing in the same breath. For if it be the same condition and qualification of
those persons that enter into the Covenant, then it is the condition of their
Justification, which they obtain by entering into Covenant with God so
qualified. As for the words themselves, without relation to the Question, they
are right enough, if they be understood not to deny our obedience to be a
condition required in or by the Covenant, though it be not so proper to say a
Condition of the Covenant. For how comes our obedience to be a necessary
condition or qualification of the persons entering into Covenant, but by the
Covenant? That requires it, and does not promise Justification without it; and
therefore is a Condition in the Covenant of Grace.

But I have neither list nor leisure to trace his steps in these things; which
I would wish him not to meddle withal, till he know where the very pinch of the
Controversy lies, and then we may end it one way or other in a few words.

Let him forbear also his odious insinuations, as that I think the Papists good
subjects, p. 67, suggest the N. C. laid aside the Lords Prayer, because of
that Petition, Forgive us our trespasses, etc. p. 39. and that they dislike the
Common Prayer only, or chiefly because taken out of the Mass Book. There are
no such things said or intimated in my Book. And yet he himself dare not say
that he knows no N.C. that refuse to join in it solely or chiefly on that
account, but that he knows scarce one intelligent N. C. Very likely. He may
know, notwithstanding, multitudes of silly ones; and here and there one whom he
takes to be intelligent. But this is nothing to what this intelligent
Nonconformist suggests concerning the Meetings of Dr. Gunning, and others in
the late times, for Common Prayer; as if they were as much Conventicles as any
now, p. 68. Whereas they were according to the Common Law, and not against it:
unless he will maintain that Ordinances were Law, as much as Acts of
Parliament. If that still lie at the bottom of their hearts, let them speak
out. But who can believe that the High Conformists have not all, and always been
so constant and firm to the Government of King and Parliament, as they ought?
Or is it likely that that Dr. Heylin was ill affected to Kingly Authority, or
disrespectful to Superiors? So he would have you think, because of one passage
in a Book of that Doctors (as you may see, p. 81, 82.) from whom he takes a
measure of the rest. If he had known more, he would, I doubt not, have been so
kind as to bestow it upon us: but this single speech was all he had in his
Budget. If you pease therefore, I will furnish him with some other as bold
speeches (let him make what he can of them) concerning the actions of those
times, as any in Dr. Heylin. Who should have expressed his mind in less
offensive terms; having no meaning, I verily believe, to charge the King, who
was then very young, with any guilt, but only those greedy persons, who had
possessed him with no better Principles. This is certain, that the best
Preachers in those days, who spoke most against Non-residence, took the
boldness also to tell the King openly in their Sermons at Court, that unless he
provided some remedy, Cormorants would devour wholly the livings appointed for
the Ministry Mr. Gilpins Sermon, 1552. p. 267, 268 etc.
the most part of which were either robbed of the best part, or else clean
taken away; by means of which, none had any heart to put their Children to
School, any further then to learn to write, to make them Apprentices, or
Lawyers; the two wells of Learning, Oxford and Cambridge were dried up,
students decayed, of which scarce an hundred left of a thousand; and if in
seven years more they should decay so fast, would be almost none at all, but
the Devil might make a triumph, whilst there were none Learned to whom to
commit the Flock, In short, his Majesty was told, that if his Grace (as they
spoke in those days) did not speedily resist those ravening Wolves, there was
entering into England more blind ignorance, Superstition and Infidelity, then
ever was under the Romish Bishop, and his Realm would become more barbarous
then Scythia. Which lest God Almighty, said the Preacher, lay to your Graces
charge, for suffering the Sword given you to rust in the sheath, bestir your
self now in your Heavenly Fathers business. There was as plain Language used in
Queen Elizabeth's days, in the Book called the Ladened Ass, said to be
delivered to her at Greenwich July 27. 1581.
, where Mr. Gilpins Sermon was preached. It makes express mention of that which
Dr. Heylin touches upon, how the mighty Hunters had caught one of the most
ancient and stateliest Bishoprics in the Land; Durham, I mean, which they had
quite strangled, says the Book See p. 54.
, dismembered and dissolved. In later times Dr. Sanderson has spoken the same
sense, who was a man unexceptionable, both for loyalty and regard to his
Superiors. He not only acknowledges, that the business of the Reformation
under King Edward the sixth was carried on with a mixture of private ends, and
other such humane frailties and affections as are incident usually unto the
interprising of great affairs; but complains of such Sacriledges then acted,
and that under the name of Reformation (though he hopes without his knowledge,
at most through the malicious suggestions and cunning insinuations of some
about him) as have cast very soul blemishes upon our very Religion, especially
in the eyes of our Adversaries, who are apt to impute the faults of the persons
to their Profession. All which notwithstanding, and a great deal more which he
there Episcopacy not prejudicial to R^gal power p. 81, 85, 92, 93.
makes bold to say, was not a casting dirt upon the Reformation, or upon the
King, or upon any persons in Authority; but an honest confession, that they who
had the managery of affairs in their respective times, were made of the same
clay with other men, subject to infirmities and passions, and to be by assed
with partial affections, etc. so that we have far greates cause to bless God,
that in their then Reformation, in very many things, they did not a great deal
worse, then to blame them that is some few things they did not a little better
then they have done. If the offend the Apologist, he may read the same
complaints in Mr. Calvin, and in other of the Reformers, which I shall direct
him unto, if he be not acquainted with them already, and do desire it. At
present I shall trouble my self no further about it: this being sufficient to
show the wickedness of that suspicion which he says some may from hence
entertain concerning these Conformists; that if the King and Parliament should
put forth their hand now and touch all they have, they would (unless fear
restrained them) curse them to their faces, p. 82. This was one of the
charitable thoughts of Philagathus also: whom this man imitates in other
surmises, as if he was led by the same evil spirit, which suggested such
groundless imaginations to him. He will not say, I am an Human; but it may be
suspected, he tells you, that there is something of the Amalakites ambition
^^me; and that I am moved to write, because there is some Mordecai in the gate
or the Parish that will not bow to me, p. 92. They will you see be the
Mordecai's, the select people of God, and we must be, at least endued with the
qualities of the people devoted to destruction. And I remember indeed, in the
late times, that they compared the Episcopal Clergy to Haman and his Sons, and
told us in these words, Beast wounded p. 4.
We will keep a day of thanksgiving, in remembrance of deliverance from the
Bishops, as the Jews did after Haman and his Sons were hanged: which will be a
greater blessing then the deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason. But if I,
from my part, was now upon the Ladder ready to be turned off, and was to make a
plain and full confession of my faults, as I hoped for Mercy; I could not
charge my self with the least private grudge to any man whatsoever: and should
protest that I never had any desire that any man, either in the Parish where I
live, or out of it, should stoop or bow to me; no, nor give me more respect
then it pleased himself to afford me. This childish ambition (which he
suspects) is the furthest from my heart of all other things. I understand it
not; nor had it the least finger in my Book, which was writ only out of a
desire of Unity, Peace, good Order, and increase of true Piety. I have read in
a Sermon of a great Divine of our own, preached fifty years ago Dr. Sanderson's
first Sermon ad Clerum, p. 24. in fol.
, that it is to be considered whether it be enough for one of that profession,
which he supposes me to be, not to meddle with these things; and whether he be
not bound in Conscience, especially in case he live among a people distracted
in opinion, to declare himself expressly, either for them or against them, etc.
Others may resolve in this case as they see cause: I have satisfied my self
that I have done as became an honest man. But I did not think to have said so
much about this matter, nor is it to any great purpose I see to labor to clear
our selves of their vile suspicions; say what we will, many of them stop their
ears, or drown our words with their loud cries against us. We must have naughty
intentions, and they must be the very best of men: the most loyally affected to
his Sacred Majesty (who would have thought it?) more then the very Bishops
themselves, as this Author would insinuate. For they would not be offended (as
the Bishops you may think would) if the Statute of King Edward the Sixth was
revived, whereby all Citations in the Courts Spiritual should issue out in the
Kings Name, and with his Seal. And it would not displease them to have a
Vicar General in SPIRITV ALIBVS, as he assures you, p. 33. But he must give us
leave to think (as that Bishop now named speaks, who has demonstrated that
Processes in the Bishops name, no way entrench upon the Kings Authority A
Calumny long ago cast upon the Bishops, in the humble Supplication for
Toleration, 1609. p. 10, 17. Revived in the late times, confuted by Bishop
Sanderson.
, that their meaning herein is rather to do the Bishops hurt then the King
service; and that their affections (so far as by what is visible we are able to
judge thereof) are much what alike the same toward both. This you may read in
his Book concerning Episcopacy not being prejudicial to Regal power, p. 3, 4.
And what he says of the one, I may say of the other motion, which is of the
same strain; and then made to Queen Elizabeth, when Martin Mar-prelates Book
came out; not to greaten her power, but to depress the Bishops. So the Book
called the Ladened Ass tells us, that there were Suitors then to her, for a
greater Authority (if they could have got it) then Cromwels General Vicarship
over the Bishops and Clergy Page 12, 45.
: and that the very same men, who c^ntrived this, were the favorers of the
Admonition, the frame of Discipline, the Mar-all-Libels, and other new Monsters
which then were yearly bred and brought forth. And truly, there is some reason
to think that such men as this would be no more displeased with a new Martin
Mar-prelate, then with a new Vicar General. For he is not ashamed to approve of
such vile Books as Ladensium Autocatacrisis, to which he sends us for
information concerning the greatest Enemies of our Church and Religion, those
who bring in new and strange Doctrines, i. e. plain Popery, p. 80. A Book writ
by that haughty and violent spirit, which so often calls the excellent Bishop
Bishop Bramhal
, mentioned by this Apologist in the entrance of his Work, by the scornful name
of Dr. Bramble Review of fair warning, in the very Frontispiece of the Book.
: and which puts Bishop Andrews and Bishop Hall among that Faction (as he
speaks) whose avowed Popery was manifest from their Books. And therefore the
Author of it justly defended that Censure which was given of him and his Book
long ago, by a Reverend person now alive, who says, the man had seen some
Visions in Trophenius's Den, Raptures, and Embryo's of his own adled brain; and
out he came to vent them, like Esops Ass, j^tting in Purple. He was high set in
pursuit of fame; and scorning to cope with a PIGMEE, he challenges no less men
then my Lords Grace of Canterbury, and all the Learned Divines of England; and
much grieved he was, that my Lord himself would not vouchsafe him the honor to
confute him: as if a Sky-towring-Eagle, or Gyre Falcon, should have stoopt to a
Kite or Carrion Dr. Creighton's Letter to Mr. R. Watson. 1650
.

Apologist never seriously considered that Book; as I am sure he has not duly
noted and weighed mine: For if he had, he would have repeated my words more
sincerely, and not misrepresented them so often as he has done; at least, not
have put me in the number of those that are Enemies of our Church, dissent from
its Articles, and bring in new and strange Doctrines. So he would have it
thought; else why does he oppose my words and the eleventh Article of our
Religion the one against the other? p. 85. The comfort of it is, there is no
clashing at all between them, but only in his own brains; which understand
not, it seems, that good Works may be necessary to our justification, and yet
no cause of it. But thus he deals with me in other things: what I said of
Lawn-sleeves, and the Black Cap and White ( first part, p. 81) he translates to
Surplesses, and makes an idle discourse about them, p. 47. He makes you believe
I said that afternoon-Sermons were wholly superfluous, p. 61. when I only told
you that they might be used or not, as they should be found to be to
Edification. The same perverse representation he makes of what I said about
experiences, p. 70. Preaching of Obedience, p. 77. Doing good out of fear of
threatenings, p. 84. Pious discourses also, p. 96. which were not by me
disgraced, but their rash censures condemned. If I did not begin to be tired
with following him in his rambles, I could present you with a great many more
Monsters of his own making; just like that which a Cheat promised to show his
credulous spectators (they are the words of one whom he and I have often
mentioned) an Horse whose Head stood in the place of his Tail; and when all
came to all, he himself had tied the Horse to the Manger the wrong way.
Besides, barely to show these misrepresentations, would be a very dull
business, and endanger the tiring you quite; and to make them appear
ridiculous, would much offend his seriousness. For which reason, I shall let
these (and a great many other things in his Book) alone, till he give me a
further occasion.

But I entreat him, as he loves himself, to hold his hand till he has learnt a
little more Logic, and knows better how to draw consequences. At least, let
him forbear to draw any out of my Books, till he has diligently weighed every
word, and the occasion of it. For his manner is to make very silly ones, and
then confute them, as you may read in his Preface, and p. 107, 108. Mr. Hughes,
Mr. Vicars did thus and thus heretofore, therefore the N.C. are all thus and
thus now. It this, says he, good Logic, and solid reasoning? I say no; it is
childish and ridiculous: but it is his own, not mine; who produced such men's
sayings to other purposes. And I perceive it is his manner to draw Universals
from Particulars. For presently after, asking Whether the N. C. shortly look to
shut Heaven, and turn the waters into blood? He tells you Mr. Parker of N.
England (whose words I cited) says no: and so all the N. C. must be concluded
to be of his mind. In like manner the Church of Scotland, he tells you, had as
few Heresies, as any other, p. 139. Therefore; What? Then the N. C. were not
the cause of the strange and new Doctrines,, Opinions, Phanatical words and
Phrases in Preaching and Writing. For this is part of his Answer to the
Question, Whether they be so or no. In time they may improve this way of
arguing very much, as some did in the late times, when they told us Reformed
Presbytery, 1645. p. 19.
; the Romans and Athenians, whilst they were Free-states, bred ten to one more
virtuous and illustrious men, then other Governments, or even they themselves
at other times. You know the Consequence. And you may know also what horrid
Doctrines were broached in Scotland, more then any where else, destructive to
all Government: and that all the Sectaries in England were the Spawn of those
who stood disaffected to our Church; nay, that Hacket himself and his mad
Companions (though disclaimed by them when they saw their end) sprung out of
their society; frequented their Sermons, and were their Associates, before they
entered into those Frantic courses, as I can prove from good Authority. As
also, that they are justly compared to the Pharisees, though that Sect were
great sticklers for Ceremonies, and their Traditions: as they for their own
Inventions. But for the present, let him read Dr. Sandersons Sermon lately
printed. And not trouble us with his Arguments for less Uniformity then there
is among us, upon this ground, that we have not a present Uniformity in all
things: which is a thing that is not to be here expected. Yet this pitiful
reasoning he repeats again and again: like to that of Dr. Busby's reading
Logic sometimes to his Scholars, to prepare them for the University:
therefore, the N. C. may read a whole Circle of Philosophy, to keep Youths from
going to the University, and to make the Education there unnecessary, p. 123.
For there lies the point: and he needed not have referred us to what some able
men told him about the Oath, and the words of it at Oxford. For it is in print
among the University-Statutes Statuta selecta Anno 1661. Tit. 9. Sect. 6.
: at the end of which Book there is an explication of the Oath which is taken
to observe the Statutes. And this in the first place it admonishes us of, That
the genuine sense of the words of the Statute, are to be taken from the mind
and intention, not of him that swears, but of him that gives the Oath Ib. p.
163.
. Now it will be found, I take it, that they who give that Oath, intend not to
prohibit the setting up of another University, wherein to take Degrees (which
is not in the power of him that swears) but the keeping Schools for
University-Learning, with intention to perfect Scholars there, and on purpose
to keep them from the Universities.

Artenorius to the Author of Argenis Parce labori: non ignorant se errare, etc.
cited by Dr. Creighton in his Le^^er before mentioned.
(applied by a Reverend person to the like case) Spare your pains, good Sir,
they know they are wrong as well as you can tell them: but all the earth shall
not make them confess an error, or amend it. But suppose it be otherwise, as I
hope it is with some, and heartily wish it may be with all; yet my labor may be
spared, if all that pretend to be wise and honest, would but be humble (and
truly he that is not so, is neither of those) and make that their business
which certainly is their duty. They are the words of Bishop Sanderson Preface
to Clavi Trabales 1661. p. antepea.
, who thus proceeds: That is to say, if they would study quietness more and
Parties less; bear a just reverence to Antiquity, and to their betters; allow
as favorable a construction to things established, as they are capable of;
suspect their own judgment wherein it differs from the public; submit to
reason, and yield when they are convinced; obey cheerfully where they may, and
where they dare not, suffer without noise, a little saying and writing would
serve the turn. But when men are once grown to this, to make it their glory to
head or hold up a Party; to study ways how to evade, when they are called to
obey; to resolve to err, because they have erred; and to hold their
conclusions ^^ despite of all Premises; to prefer their private opinions before
wiser men's judgments, and their reputation with the Vulgar before obedience to
Superiors: In a word, to suffer themselves to be swayed with Passions, ^
Parties, or Interests; all the writing and saying in the World, as to such men
(until it shall please God to put their hearts into another Frame) is to no
more purpose, then if a man should go about to fill a Sieve with water, or to
wash a Blackamore white. And so fare you well.

Jan. 13. 1669.
A Postscript.
I Had no sooner run over this Apologetical Catechism, and made a few
Reflections on it, but I received a Case of Conscience from you, wherein I am
also concerned. A very weighty one it is, and as weightily and solidly
resolved, if the Casuist may be his own Judge; who seems to have no low opinion
of his own performance, but rather thinks we may chance to be beholden to him
for a new invention. Here, says he, p. 6. is that very MEAN indeed, for ought
I know, which is wanting. A great Discovery! And for ought I know, may any body
reply, that which is not wanting, but is the very dangerous Extreme into which
the people are as apt to run, as he is to follow those with whom I have already
had to deal. It would be no great matter indeed if he imitated them only in
their phrase, and not in their weak reasonings and frivolous observations; but
he is too forward to that also: and is a notable instance of the truth of my
Lord Bacon's observation, that there is little dry light Letter to Mr. Mathews,
p. 69.
in the world; but it is all moist, being infused and steeped in affections,
blood and humors. The Reason of men is made to stoop to their interest, and
they judge according to the current of their inclinations and desires.

Continuation Page 128, 129. edit. 1
of our Debate, and judged it very unbecoming such frail understandings as
ours, to go about to unfold the secrets of high Providence, and assign the
causes and reasons of those particular calamities which befall their neighbors.
Nay, common prudence I thought would have taught any considering man to forbear
the making such observations, as may be employed to any purpose, even against
those that make them: insomuch that they who have served themselves by such
arguments, when it comes to their own turn to suffer* can by no means endure to
hear of them. And yet, behold, a grave Casuist come forth, who not only
spells, but thinks he can read the meaning of Divine Providence toward the late
Lord Chancellor of England, who is not suffered now to live in it. He has
picked it out of his own Letter left at his departure out of the Realm, in which
he acknowledges that his Credit had been very little since that Session of
Parliament which was at Oxford. What of all that? Why, he was the Contriver of
that Act, says the interpreter of Providence, which banished Others from their
houses; after which his Authority dwindled so much, that at last he was forced
to leave his own house. As much as to say, if you will have the sense of this
Privy Counselor of Heaven in plain words, God punishes him now for all that
he did against them. No, perpaps you will say, against God: for so the words
run in his Prayer for him which immediately follows, Do not thou, O God, for
all he has done against thee, etc. But I suppose you understand the meaning of
their words, and their opinion of themselves better, then not to know that what
is done against them, is, as they construe it, done against God: and so
whatever Calamity befalls any man after he has opposed them, it is the hand of
God avenging the quarrel of his people. Thus Mr. Baily, I remember, in that
Book which I have often had occasion to mention, talks of strange punishments
which God from heaven visibly inflicted Review, chap. 1. p. 2^.
upon Mr. Corbet, the Author of a Book called Lysimachus Nicanor, and Mr.
Maxwel who wrote another called Issachar's burden: both against them, their
Discipline and proceedings. And what were those visible Judgments? Nothing but
this; the Former, as I learn from the Second Fair Warning, was murdered by the
Irish; and the Later (being Archbishop of Towmond) was stripped stark naked, and
left desperately wounded, but by Gods mercy recovered, and afterward died a
natural death. Had the like befaln any couple of his Brethren, (as that learned
Writer adds) he would have been forward to write with their blood some red
letters in the Calendar, and made them pass currantly for two Martyrs of the
Discipline. But these things befalling two persons who exposed their evil
principles and practices to the view of the world, they were black marks of
Gods displeasure, brands of infamy wherewith they were stigmatized from heaven
for writing against his chosen. So we must believe, if we did not know very
well, that the hand of heaven (to use his words once more) is not guided by the
mouth, nor Gods judgments discerned always by the eye of the Disciplinarian
Brethren: who we have little reason to think are well seen in the Mysteries of
Providence, when we find them stone-blinde in the most common and ordinary
matters. For who is there that sees not, how by this wretched way of
discoursing the worst Cause may be justified, and the best that is may be
condemned? If all things that fall out one after the other, must be thought to
have the same connection, which the effect has with the cause; Popery will
prove it self the true Christianity, unless you can show that you have the sole
privilege to expound Gods Providence, and that nobody else may intermeddle in
it. The Tenth Argument of Bellarmine Tom. 2. l. de Reliquit. and Imag. cap. 12.
for Image Worship is drawn merely from the unfortunate ends and ill successes
of the Iconomachi, (those that set themselves against Images) and the felicity
of those who defended them. First of all, in the time of Leo Isaurus, after the
Images of the Saints were burnt in Constantinople, there ensued a Pestilence in
which died three hundred thousand people. The same Emperor and his Successors
lost Italy, and could never recover it. In the times also of Constantinus
Copronymus, another enemy of Images, entire Cities were overthrown by
Earthquakes; a grievous Pestilence raged, so that there was scarce room to bury
the dead. And that there might be no doubt, says the Cardinal, for what cause
these things happened, there were at the same time little Crosses to be seen on
the garments of men, and the Priests vestments, as if they had been drawn with
oil. There was such an horrible Cold also, that the Pontick Sea was frozen for
an hundred miles together, and the Ice was thirty Cubits thick; upon which a
Snow fell twenty Cubits in depth: and when a Thaw came, great pieces of this
Ice like Mountains or Islands swam up and down with great violence; and some
dashing against the walls of Constantinople, broke down a part of them, and
overturned the adjoining houses. And yet the calamities were not completed,
but a great Drought followed all this, so that Fountains, Wells and Rivers were
dried up. Whereby all might understand, says this Roman Diviner, that God was
angry at their impiety against him and against his Saints. For lastly
Constantine himself, that obstinate Emperor, died wretchedly; when on the
contrary, they that with the Pope of Rome stood up for Images and defended
them, were promoted to Kingdom and Empire, lived prosperously and reigned
happily. What an heap of Observations are here to countenance that which you so
much abhor? Who can choose but take notice how God declared himself from heaven
by all these Prodigies to be an enemy of those who were enemies of Images? When
do you read of so many and so great misfortunes and dreadful Calamities in any
age, as these upon the haters of Images; which point, as it were with the
finger, to you that they ought to be worshipped? If you like not this kind of
arguing, I pray let it alone your selves. Let us not hear any more of the sad
things which befall any particular men, as if they were upon the score of
opposing or punishing Nonconformists. Nor tell us of any more Prodigies and
Signs of Gods displeasure against the Realm, which have appeared since you
were pulled down, like to those Images; much less expound those terrible
Judgments which have justly befaln us (though not equal to those now
mentioned) to be punishments for any thing done against you, and arguments that
you are approved by heaven, and we rejected. After this manner the very
Heathens defended their Idols, as the Papists do their Images. All things went
ill with those who despised them; Augustus, Vespasian, Titus had prosperous
Successes and fortunate Reigns; but the poor Christians, the great enemies of
their Gods, were dragged continually by the Hangman to be butchered, suffered
the most exquisite torments, and for three hundred years together were most
miserably harased, and barbarously used. And thus Parsons I remember disputes
against all the Protestants from the unhappie success of those Princes which
have in any sort opposed themselves to the Sea of Rome, as you may read at
large in his Apologetical Epistle An. 1601 sect. 7.
; none of which I shall now stand to transcribe.

Cases of Conscience, as to make Observations upon Providence. For first, he
does not fairly and heartily represent that which I said, but accuses me of
such Resolutions in matters of Conscience, as never came into my thoughts. I am
beholden to him, I confess, for some good words, and for his favorable opinion
of me; but I could have been well content to have wanted them, on condition he
would not have said, that I am so unkind, and so unconscionably untender, as to
account that no man who transgresses an Act of Parliament can be a good
Christian In the later end of the first page.
; nor asked, Whether indeed I think that every transgression of a Realm is no
less then a deadly sin? There was no occasion for this Question, or for that
Censure: unless he be of the opinion that all sins are equal, so that what a
man says concerning the open breach, and contempt of one Law, is to be applied
to all transgressions whatsoever of any Law. I never said that no man can be a
good Christian that transgresses an Act of Parliament, nor that every
transgression of a Statute is a deadly sin. These are inventions of his own,
upon occasion only of a single instance which I gave of Defiance to a Law
wherein some men live (mark my words Friendly Debate, p. 3. Edit. 1.
. From whence he draws an universal proposition, that he might the better
conclude me to be a man of no great depth P. 3 of his Case.
, that looks not to the bottom of a business which lies before him. That may
very well be true; for it is no easy matter: But I will try a little how far I
can see into this Case concerning the transgression of humane Laws: which, as I
take it, depends upon this single point, Whether humane Laws bind the
Conscience? that is, whether we sin, if we be not obedient to them? In the
resolving of which he that finds no di^ficulty, may well suspect that he does
not fully understand it. For if, on the one side, we say that Conscience is not
concerned; I beseech you what is? Nothing but our common discretion to keep our
selves out of the reach of the Princes Sword; whose anger and power we may
dread, but whose commands we need not care a straw for. And if on the other
side, we say that Conscience is concerned and obliged by their Laws, then there
may follow great perplexities, when any thing is commanded that proves a common
and an intolerable grievance. More difficulties I need not mention of this
nature; there being no dispute about commands to do sinful things: but
immediately apply my discourse to the Question. And for all that which was last
said, since there is no greater mischief then disobedience to Laws, and nothing
can so certainly secure obedience, as a sense of duty; we must determine that a
man is bound to make a conscience of observing the Laws of his Governors,
which are not contrary to the Laws of God. So the holy Scripture it self
teaches us to speak, when it requires us, and makes it necessary, to be subject
for conscience sake, and not only for wrath, Romans 13.5. that is, out of a
sense that we cannot be innocent, and preserve a good conscience before God,
unless we be observant of their Laws, where we are not pre-ingaged by a higher
Authority then theirs. The very same is included in those words, which require
our submission to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. which
if we do not yield, it is manifest, the disobedience is a violation of a
General precept of God exacting our obedience to them. Insomuch that to set a
man's self in opposition to their Laws, is by interpretation to oppose the
Almighty: according to that of the Apostle, Whosoever resists the Power,
resists the ordinance of God.

Law is of greater or lesser concernment, and as a man's transgression of it, is
with modesty, or with a high hand: nor are we considering when, and in what
cases, a Law may cease to oblige, and quite alters its nature: but whether
while it does oblige, and is in force, it lays a tie on the Conscience or no,
and whether all Laws do so or no. And to this we say, Yes; [Laws while they are
obligatory do bind the Conscience] because the Scripture says so: and we say
so indefinitely, because that is the Scripture Language also. But stay a little;
this Gentleman cannot believe that. The Scripture says the Magistrate is Gods
minister to us for good, Romans 13.4. Very true; and the Apostle makes that an
argument why we should be obedient to him, because it is much for our profit
and benefit. But this Casuist turns the words quite another way, and makes them
an outlet to disobedience: by taking that to include an Exception to the
General precept of subjection, which is in truth Nothing but a Reason to
enforce it. To countenance which interpretation, he tears a little patch out of
Bishop Taylor's Rule of Conscience, and would draw him into confederacy with
him: who accommodates indeed those words of the Apostle to the illustration of
a particular case, but never intended any such use of them as this man makes;
as is apparent from the entire Body of his discourse, and shall be touched
afterward. Now let us hear this man's Exception. If the Magistrate, says he,
command that which is for the peoples Good and welfare, they are bound in
conscience to obey him: otherwise they are not bound in conscience, but for
wrath sake; that is, because they dare not do as they would and as they may.
Very well: But who shall judge of that; I mean, whether a Law be for the
Public good, or no? His Answer is ready at his tongues end, (for he need not
go deep for it) The Magistrate must judge what is for the Public good as to
the MAKING of the Law: and we must judge as to our OBEDIENCE to it. Then which
it is hard to write any thing more inconsiderate or dangerous, and it declares
to me, that he did not understand or mind the meaning of the words which he
wrote. For what do we mean by a Law? Does not the very form or essence of it
(as the Casuists speak) consist in the Precept or the Command of the Lawgiver?
If so; then that which we call a Law is not merely the signification of his
mind and judgment, that he thinks such a thing to be good or bad for us: but
a declaration of his will and pleasure that we should do that good or avoid
that evil which he commands us to do or avoid: And, God having given him this
authority to command us, this declaration carries with it an obligatory virtue
to bind us to the execution of his will, under the pain of sin. Nor is it of
any moment, as to the obligation, whether there be a punishment threatened or
not by him to the disobedient. For the punishment is necessary only by
consequence, and upon supposition that the people may be negligent and
refractory to the will of the Lawgiver, unless they be moved to comply with
that which he thinks necessary to be observed, by fear of punishment. To make a
Law then is to declare to us his will to lay such an obligation upon us. When
this is done, we are no longer free whether we will do accordingly or no. If we
be, the very nature of a Law is taken away, and every man is left to his own
will. That which we call a Law, is but only the Princes opinion concerning
that which he judges to be for the Public good; and so he is turned into a
private person, and made like one of his subjects; for they obey not his
judgment and pleasure, but their own. And if he punish them for disobeying
his, that is only a sign that he is stronger then they, who suffer unjustly
for doing well, not for doing ill.

reason for this wonderful decision; which he has as ready as he had his
Answer. Because, says he, God has made every man judge of his own actions.
What then? That you must seek by looking back, if perchance you may find some
Consequent of which this is the cause. The Question, you remember, was, Who
shall judge what Laws are for the Peoples Weal, i. e. the Common Good of them
all? Why, the Magistrate may judge thus far, as to make Laws; but the People
themselves must judge, as to their obedience, i. e. they are not bound to do
any thing he bids them, unless they think it is for their welfare. Why so?
Because, says he, every man is made by God the Judge of his own Actions. I
cannot for my life see how that follows from this, though I have put his
reasoning into the plainest form that ever I could. Which is this: God has
made every man judge of his own Actions, therefore he has made him judge what
Laws are for the Peoples Weal, before he obey them. If he can show me the
necessary connection of these two, and that the former infers the latter, I
shall acknowledge that he is a deep man, and much beyond my reach. But they
seem to me so widely distant, that one can never pass from the one to the other
by the longest train of Consequences. That you may think indeed is the fault of
the shortness of my Discourse, which will not bring me within view of this
Truth: For he reckons me to be such a pitiful Gamester, that I am not
reflective (as he speaks Page 3.
) upon more removes than one of those many I ought to see. It may be so, and I
am not unsensible of my own weakness; yet I have done my endeavor to
comprehend him, and to fathom the bottom of his deep Discourse, which seems to
me shorter and more imperfect than he thinks mine. For he does not reflect on
that which is just next to what he has said and lies close to it; whilst he
rambles to that which lies so far off that no removes will bring him to it. Let
him try, if he please: And begin with this Principle, God has made every man
judge of his own Actions; which may be put into these more intelligible words,
God has made every man to determine whether that which he does be conformable
to his Rule, which is the Law or Will of his Creator. Now what is next to this?
Therefore, according to this Casuist, He has made every man to determine what
Laws are for the Public Good before he obey them. Does this follow the other?
No such matter. The immediate Consequent of that Principle is this, therefore
he has made him to determine, whether that which Humane Laws enjoin be not
cross to his Rule, the Law of God. Now whither will this carry us, or what lies
next to it? This; I take it, That if what Humane Laws enjoin be not controlled
by that higher Law, he is determined by his very Rule of life to be obedient in
that Point. Whether it be for the Public Good or no that he should do it, is
another thing, out of the compass of his Judgment; God having made another
Judge of that, viz. his Prince, the Governor and Ruler of all. Who by the vety
making a Law determines what is for the Public Good, and obliges us, as has
been said already, to comply with it by virtue of Gods Law which requires our
subjection to him. This is implied in the very term of making a Law: And
therefore it is not sense to say, He shall judge what is good as to the making
a Law, and we as to obedience; for he does not only judge, but enjoin when he
makes a Law. Which leaves us no liberty but that which he cannot take away
(because given us by him, that gave him his Authority) to judge whether his
Will and Gods do not clash together. When this is known and determined, we have
no more to do, unless we will place our selves in the Throne, and become
Sovereigns, by determining otherwise concerning the Public Welfare than the
Proper Judge of it does. Which in this Nation would be the more insolent and
unsufferable, Because there is nothing determined here to be for the Peoples
good, and passes into a Law for them, but by the advice, desire, and consent of
those whom the People themselves choose to represent them, and to consider and
judge what is most conducing to their Welfare. This is plain reason; and
whatsoever inconveniences may ensue from hence, they shall be considered
afterward: And should there be no way found to avoid them, they will appear not
to be so great, as to resolve in general terms, as this man does, that they who
are to obey, and to follow Public Orders and Decrees, are to judge themselves
what is for the Public Good. Mark I pray you, whither these Casuists drive.
Other Non-conformists have absolved the People from all Laws about Church
matters: And here now is one started up to teach them how to free themselves,
if they please, from all Civil Laws and Statutes of the Realm. None shall bind
but such as they think good: That is, every man is made a King and Governor
himself. The danger of which determination I shall a little lay before you.

Kings themselves find it necessary to have their Council to deliberate and
advise them to that which will promote it, which they declare to their People
by their Laws. And if they did not, the Public Welfare would be but little
regarded, though we supposed every man better able to anderstand it than he is.

For (secondly) when men do know what is conducing to it, they will not
presently do it, if their present private Interest incline them otherways. From
which two grounds Plato I remember derives the necessity of Laws. There are few
private persons that know what is most profitable for Common Life, and of those
that know, fewer can or will do it, unless the will of a Superior Power be
signified to them and oblige them to it. It is not hard indeed to know what
will please themselves, and may make for their own private utility: But what
will make for the General Good, that is difficult for them to comprehend, and
more difficult to bring them to do it, because they are not inclined to prefer
the good of all before that of their own Private Persons. No, Mortal Nature
Plato L. 9. de Legibus, p. 875, 880. (...), etc.
has a violent Propension to covet and draw all to its particular self; always
flying, after a brutish manner, that which it feels grievous, and pursuing that
which is pleasant and delightful. For which reason Law is needful to bound,
direct, and govern him; since of himself he will not mind the Public Good. If
indeed men were of such a nature, says he, that they understood the Common
Good, and had such a portion of Divinity in them, that they would always follow
it, they would stand in need of no Law: For that would be better than any Law
or Order whatsoever. But since it is rare to find such men; we must make the
World as good as we can, by making them subject to a better and more
disinteressed reason than their own, which is the Public Order and Law (...).
. And whosoever he be that makes every man judge of what is for the Peoples
Weal, that man takes away the principal Power of the Magistrate. For he
supposes the People able to judge of that; and if they be, there is no need of
any Law; and consequently of no Lawgiver.

But thirdly, they are so far from being able to judge what is for the Public
good, that the wisest and best Princes with their Councils find it very
difficult; and in many Cases are a long time considering about it before they
come to a resolution. And that, though they have the help of those who have
been long versed in affairs of this nature, and it is their business on which
they attend; they have nothing else to mind unless they please, and information
comes to them from all parts, which every private man cannot have; but as he
has something else to do, so he can know but a few of those things which are
to be considered in the case. Good and evil, gain and loss, advantage and
disadvantage (as that excellent Bishop Replic. to Bish. of Chalcedon. p. 235,
236
I have so often cited may teach him) ought not to be weighed or esteemed from
the consideration of one or two Circumstances or Emergents. All Charges,
Damages, and Reprises must first be cast up and deducted before one can give a
right estimate of benefit or loss. If a Merchant reckon only the Price which
his Commodity cost him beyond the Sea, without accounting Customs, Freight,
and other Charges, he will impoverish himself, when he thinks he has sold it
to good profit. If the benefit also be only Temporal, and the loss Spiritual
(which few think of) as to gain Gold and lose Faith, which is more precious
than Gold that perishes, it is no benefit, whatever a man imagines, but loss
and damage. The English Church and the English Kingdom are one and the same
Society of men, differing not Really, but Rationally one from another, in
respect of some distinct Relations. And that which is truly good for the
Kingdom of England cannot be ill for the Church of England* nor that which is
truly good for the English Church be ill for the English Kingdom. But yet,
alas! how hard is it to comprehend what is good for both, and how few can
attain it? When so many men are to be considered in different relations, and
there are so many things and circumstances that must be considered to make them
happy in both those relations; and when their good and happiness depend not
upon what is done for them in one, but in both, nor in a respect to a few
Circumstances, but to all: any of which if they be wanting, it is not good, but
evil. I need not mention the Rule for this, which is commonly known: but ask
now, what shall be done when there are so many things to be considered, which
will cost so much time and pains to weigh, before we can know what will make
for the Public Good? Shall a Private man (whom we now suppose to have the
liberty which this Casuist gives) judge without considering or attending to all
those things which the Supreme Magistrate had a regard to in making his Law?
This is very hard, that a Public Decree, standing on such good grounds, should
be thrown down by one that knows them not. And how ill will the Public Good be
provided for at this rate, by those that know little what belongs to it? Or
shall we suppose every Private man to be of quicker dispatch than their
Governors, able to run over all things that are to be considered with more
speed than they can do? That Is very unlikely, if you reflect upon all that has
been said; and that they have not those advantages of knowing neither what is
to be considered, as Public persons have. Or, in conclusion, must the Prince
be content to wait till his Subjects have found means to know all that he does,
and till they have considered it, and till they be satisfied that his Law is
for the Public Good, before he expect any obedience from them? What then shall
become of the Public Good all that time which they take to think of the
business? And who knows how long it will be before they are informed and have
considered all things? And what if they be so scrupulous as never to be
satisfied, because for any thing they know there is more to be considered than
they have yet heard of? Besides; there are some Laws which require speed and
Expedition in the execution: Must all these stand suspended, no body knows how
long, till the Subjects be agreed they are for the Public Good? Must the
Equity, Fitness, and Profitableness be sifted by every man if he please; and
after all, if he do not like it, may it be rejected? The Prince is in an ill
case who has such Subjects; and he is not in very good whose Divines begin but
to instill such Doctrine into them.

For (fourthly) grant the Subjects such power, and in a little time no Law
shall be observed, unless it be by the duller sort of People: The subtle, the
fine, and the Conceited will be under no Obligation. Such as the
Lacedaemonians, who could not tell to twenty (...), etc. Plato in Hippia Majori.
as we say, may prove much addicted to Laws (as Plato tells us they were above
all the Graecians) but they who have more skill, and especially such as can
tell how numerous their Party is, will easily absolve themselves, if it be
against their private interest to obey them. For such is the passionate love
men bear to their own private Concerns, that they will be very prone to
conclude a thing to be a public mischief, which is only a particular burden to
their dear selves. Let the Parliament, for instance, grant his Majesty a Tax,
and it will be poorly paid at this race, and many times not without force: He
must take it from his Subjects by violence, and be accounted an Oppressor, if
they judge it not to be for the Common Good. And it will be very hard for those
that love money not to be of that judgment. Their Covetousness will suggest to
them, that he stands in no need of it, having a great Revenue; or that it is
not for a good End; or that the Proportion is too great for those ends that are
pretended; and an hundred such like things too long to remember. Nay, what
should hinder if he exact it of a poor people, as they may vote themselves, but
that they take Arms also for the Public Good, and the ease of the Subjects, as
they did in Richard the Second's time? The Parliament at Northampton granted
the King a great Subsidy of Head-money, at which some of the Rabble took great
distaste, and said it was an Oppression, and tended to their utter undoing.
Presently the rest pricked up their ears at the new truth, and the glorious
discovery which was made of the peoples right to preserve themselves. They were
ashamed of their old ignorance, and resolved to prove good Scholars of those
Masters who taught them not to suffer any thing to be done to the Peoples hurt.
Their Lords and the Lawyers they learnt were Tyrants who must not be endured:
And therefore to their Arms they betook themselves to root them out. And who
could blame them, since they were Judges of their own Actions, and must
determine what is for the Peoples Weal? Thus they did also in after times, when
Henry the Seventh had an aid granted him by Parliament, in the beginning of his
third year, toward the Relief of the Duke of Britain, assaulted by the French
King. And although the King did not enter into the War but by the advice of the
Three Estates, who willingly contributed to it, yet the Northern men raised a
Rebellion under color of the money imposed, and murdered the Earl of
Northumberland, whom the King had employed in that Collection: As you may find
in our Historians, and in a Dialogue Printed at Middleburgh, 1628.
between a Counselor of State and a Justice of Peace, said to be writ by Sir
Walter Rawleigh. In his thirteenth year also, as you may there find ( p. 50.) a
new Subsidy being granted, the Cornish men took Arms, as the Northern men of
the Bishopric had done before. And indeed, thus the Tumults in Scotland began:
They must take care of the peoples good, whatsoever became of the Laws. And
though the Law construe all Levying of War (as that Dialogue observes, p. 36)
without the Kings Commission, and all Forces raised to be intended for the
death and destruction of the King, not attending the sequel; and it is judged
so upon reason (says he) for every unlawful and ill action is supposed to be
accompanied with an ill intent: Yet the Public Security was pretended, and
upon this score a new Government by Tables (as they called them) erected
expressly against the Kings Commandment, a Covenant entered into, and a seditious
Band annexed to it, several Troops raised, and at last an Army formed, for the
peace and comfort of all the people They were their own words
. By all which you see plainly that this Principle leads to downright
Rebellion, if the Subjects think good to follow it; they being Judges as well
of that which they are to do, as of that which they are not to do. But let us,
if you please, content our selves with some lesser instances of its mischievous
consequence. A Priest of the Roman Church thinks, notwithstanding the Laws
which prohibit him, that it is for the Peoples Weal for him to come hither and
draw the Kings Subjects to a dependence on the Pope. Does he sin in this, or
does he not? If he do, then this Principle is naught: For he is Judge of his
own Actions as well as you. Why should he not? Since every man is made by God
the Judge of them. From whence he may conclude, with this Casuist, that he is
not tied to obey any Law which he thinks is not for the Peoples good. The very
same Pretense the People will have, should they molest or drive away those
strangers that live among them, though the Law should not only permit, but
invite them to transplant themselves hither, because they eat the bread out of
the Natives mouths. And this was the very case in 9th year of Hen. 8. 1517.
when there was a great heart-burning against Aliens in the City, especially
among the Artificers, who were much grieved that so many strangers were
permitted to resort hither. And one John Lincoln, a Broker, busied himself so
far in the matter (which afterward brought him to the Gallows) that about
Palm Sunday he came to Dr. Standish, who was to preach at the Spittle on Monday
in Easter Week, and desired him he would declare the great mischief that was
like to come to the Realm by the liberty which Strangers enjoyed: and he
offered him a Bill to read, which he refused. But he prevailed with him that
was to preach on the Tuesday to accept it, and publish it: The Contents of
which was, the grief which many found by Strangers who took away the living
from Artificers, etc. When he had read it, he began his Sermon with this
Sentence, The Heaven is the Lords, but the Earth he has given to the Children
of men. From whence he showed by as plain consequence as this in our Casuist,
that this Land is given to English men, and therefore as Birds defend their
Nests, so ought Englishmen to cherish and maintain themselves in their Land,
and to grieve and hurt Aliens, for respect of their Commonwealth. I will not
trouble you with the rest of the Story Which you may find in the Survey of
Lond^^ by J. Stow, p. 152, etc.
nor with the Uses or Application which the People made of this goodly Sermon:
Only this you may know in general, that they bestirred themselves lustily for
respect of their Commonwealth. That was the word then, as now it is in this
Casuist, the Peoples Weal: of which he teaches them to take a tender care. And
it will be no hard matter to improve their understanding of their own good, and
their affection to it so far, as to make them digest this new truth: mentioned
by his late Majesty in his Large Declaration Pa. 407. out of the Protestation.
22. Sept. 1638
That what Subjects do of their own heads is much better than what they do in
obedience to Authority; the one savouring of constraint, but the other being
voluntary and cheerful obedience. Why not? Since at the same time they may be
taught that all power is originally in them, and came from them: who entrusted
particular persons with it. Which is the surest proof (they will easily
believe) that it is to be employed for their good (for they would not have
entrusted it with any body to other purposes) and consequently they must retain
the power still to hinder those persons from doing otherwise; and in order to
that must judge whether they do so or no. This indeed is for the People to
command the Magistrate, not to obey him: But it is that Authority which they
may fairly assume to themselves from this man's dangerous Maxim. For if People
are to submit in all things that are for their good, and no further; then they
appeal back to themselves. And this appeal, they may well think, supposes power
originally in themselves; some of which they have reserved, as supreme and
above all Laws; and why they should not take all back when they judge it is not
employed for their good, who can tell? For they are to obey no Laws but those
which are for their good, unless it be for fear of wrath; and when they combine
together they need not fear that, but can make themselves dreadful, and give
what Laws they please to their Governors.

a man must not resist; that is express, and rather than resist he must suffer,
p. 4. But this is to steal a Goose, and stick a Feather. Why must he, when he
is already persuaded that he need not unless he be forced? It is resolved just
before, that if the Magistrate command any thing for the Peoples hurt, there
lies no Obligation upon Conscience to be obedient, and they are made judges of
what is for their hurt. If then he require them not to resist, and they find
this is to their hurt, they are not bound in Conscience not to resist, but only
for wrath. And that is not to be feared when the multitude is agreed not to
suffer themselves to be injured. But they must avoid contempt and scandal. And
so they will in their own opinion, even when they are contemptuous and
scandalous. They are Judges of all their own actions for the public good; and
they may resolve that which we call contempt and scandal, to be for the honor
of the Nation, for the making their Prince glorious, by rescuing him out of the
hands of those evil Counselors, who procure Laws for their own private
interest, and not the peoples good. In short, this Principle, if it be pursued,
will prove the very same with that (in the perverse meaning of it) so much
cried up when all our mischiefs began, The welfare of the people is the Supreme
Law: for the right understanding of which Maxim, I refer you to the last
Lecture of Dr. Sanderson, about the Obligation of Conscience. Who has
uprightly determined elsewhere Pralect. 9. N. 9.
, that we ought to obey a Law, made by a just Authority, not only when it may
be supposed to be made with an ill intention, but when it is unprofitable for
the Public, nay, something noxious and hurtful: provided the thing it commands
may be done without sin. The Reason is, because every man ought to mind what
belongs to his part and duty, and not trouble himself about other men's: and our
duty is to obey, not to command and ordain. Besides, I may add, though the
Magistrate ought not to ordain any thing but what is for the peoples good, yet
when he does otherwise, it will be more for their good to obey him, then to
refuse obedience. They ought still to look upon him as Gods Minister for their
good, because they receive a great many benefits by Government and Order, be it
what it will) though in that particular he do amiss; and so to submit to his
command. For the mischief of not obeying, is greater then the hurt that is done
the people by obedience. It is in effect to turn all things upside down; to
reduce the King to the condition of a private man, by making every body a Judge
of his Laws whether they shall be obeyed or no. The very truth is, such
Casuists as these have quite unhinged the people from their dependence on their
Governors, and subjection to them: And I may say of them, as the secular
Priests did of the Jesuits in another matter Dialogue between Secular Priests
and L^y Gentlemen, 1601. page 67.
: They have not only much impeached the due estimation, honor and reverent
respect which the people carried toward their Superiors, but they have
exceedingly impaired (by their tricks, shifts and evasions) the natural sincere
condition of our people: which is there most decayed, where they have had
conversation and dealing. Many of modest and temperate constitution, are become
imperious, brazen-faced and furious: They that were lowly and humble, are
become peremptory, rash in their judgment, and disdainful. The simple and
sincere are grown cunning and double dealers, full of equivocation in their
words, and dissembling in their behavior.

Sanderson) determines that we should be obedient, though the thing required of
us be something hurtful to the Public, does he not imply that, if it be
extremely hurtful, we are not obliged? To this I will answer before I end; when
I have first told you, that it does not follow from what has been said
concerning an obligation upon Conscience to yield obedience to Laws, that every
transgression of a Law is of so deep a dye as some is. He asks my opinion, you
know, about this, in the beginning of his Case: And therefore I think good
briefly to direct him to a better medium then any that he has propounded to
find out the several degrees of sin against Humane Laws; and what Laws are of
such moment, that a man cannot be accounted a good Christian, or a good Subject
that lives in defiance of them. For this end, look back to what was said
concerning the nature of a Law, which will lead you to a right understanding in
this matter. It is a Declaration of the will of a Prince concerning those
things which he judges needful to be done, or avoided by his Subjects. The more
needful then he judges any thing to be done or avoided, for the Public good
and safety, etc. and the more it appears his will is set upon it; the more his
Law is to be reverenced, and the greater the offense is, if it be broken,
especially openly, and with an high hand. Now you may know this, partly by the
matter it self, as all wise men have determined; if it be a matter of Justice,
Charity, Piety, Religion or Peace. Partly, by the manner and form of commanding
and forbidding; partly by the greatness of the penalty threatened in case of
disobedience, and (lastly) very much by the Preface to his Law: in which, if he
be pleased to expound the reasons and the necessity of it, and they appear to
be great and weighty, his mind and will is thereby, without all doubt
declared, that a more then ordinary regard be had to that Law of his. Apply now
all this, if you please, to the Law which has moved this dispute, and you will
find that I had reason to say what I did, and that they have no reason to
equal the breach of other Laws (which they mention) with the breach of that. An
Act of the seventeenth of our present Sovereign made at Oxford, required such
persons as had not, and should not perform some things therein named, not to
come within five Miles of any Corporation, etc. The breach of which Law I hold
to be a grievous sin; and when a man lives in it, and in defiance of it keeps
Conventicles, I said his piety and honesty might justly be called in question.
My Reason is, because it is plain to me by those indications now named, that
the Lawgiver judges it to be a matter of great consequence, and that he is
much concerned it should be observed. For first the Preface to it is solemn,
and lets us know that both Religion, and the Civil Peace and tranquillity
depends upon it; and that they are removed from Corporations, because if they
were there, they might take an opportunity the better to distill the Poisonous
Principles of Schism and Rebellion into the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects,
to the great danger of the Church and Kingdom. This is the reason and ground of
the Act, which is as great as well can be; and therefore the penalty is great;
forty pound for every offense: and (as I remember) imprisonment for six months,
without Bail or Mainprize (if two Justices of Peace please) unless upon or
before such commitment they shall swear and subscribe the Oath and Declaration
mentioned in the Act. Compare now this with the other about burying in Linen,
and about Wagons which they make such a talk of, and you will find neither
the Penalties (five pound in one Act, and forty shillings in the other) nor the
Reasons given in the Prefaces any thing near so considerable as those now
mentioned. Which is a sign that the Lawgiver does not judge them of equal
moment and necessity; and consequently that the transgression of these Laws is
not so heinous, nor so much against his will, as the transgression of the
other. The Penalties also for offenses against these are ordered to be so
employed, that they may do as much good to the Public, as the offenses do
hurt, setting aside contempt of Authority, which I cannot excuse.

be mistaken in his judgment, as some think there was an error in that which
was enacted about Wagons? And if he be, why should we observe such a Law? I
Answer, I am not bound absolutely to be of the Law-giver's opinion, that all
such things are for the Public good which he decrees: I am only to follow his
will, and do what he enjoins when I can without sin. And this I take my self
bound to, even when I conceive it were better for the Public, if it were
otherwise ordained. What? will you say again, when there is an intolerable
inconvenience, and a very grievous evil to the subjects by obeying? That Is the
thing I know you would be resolved in. And truly the Moral Divines and Lawyers
say no. It is to be supposed, when that case happens, that it not being the
intention of a Prince to make his Subjects miserable, he would not have made
that Law, if he could have foreseen such a mischief. And therefore it ceases of
it self to be a Law, and looses its Obligation. But then in the reducing this
to practice, they tell you there are these cautions to be observed. First,
Obedience is never to be denied, but when the Law is against the Public good.
If it be still consistent with the Public interest, though it be to the damage
of some particular persons, they may not break the Law. Again, it must be
practiced then only when the Mischief to the Public is not small, but so
great, that in the judgment of the best and most prudent persons, it be a
sufficient cause of disannulling a Law: and does outweigh the evil of material
disobedience. And (thirdly) this mischief likewise must be certain and
notorious, not only in our fancy. The security of which is, when it is
declared so by the voice of all men (at least of all the wise and good) and not
only by a party, whose particular interest is concerned to vote it to be
unsupportable. And yet in case the truly wise and good on all sides think it
so, they ought not (fourthly) to disobey the Law with the scandal and offense
of other men. It must be done so modestly, humbly, and with fear, that the rest
of Mankind be not taught hereby to slight all Laws upon little pretenses, and
trifling regards. And (lastly) to secure all, we must, if we have time and
opportunity, ask leave of the Lawgiver, whose leave is to be presumed in such
cases, only in time of a sudden danger. And having done thus; if we should be
mistaken, and judge that a public mischief which is not, yet the guilt of our
disobedience will not be deadly, but such as will easily find pardon both with
God and man. To this purpose you may read more in that Doctor (Bishop Tailor)
out of whom this Casuist quotes a line or two, relating to this matter only,
separated from all the rest of his discourse. Which gives me occasion to note
his disingenuity; for besides all the Cautions which the Bishop Rule of
Conscience, Book 3. R. 3. N. 10. etc.
there gives, I observe (since I writ all this) that he expressly determines
point blank against this man's decision of his Case. For this is his Maxim,
Rule 7. That a Law should oblige the Conscience, does not depend upon the
acceptance of the Law by the people. Which, supposing that which has been
already said, is a certain Rule he tells you, and there is no doubt in it.

first Christians (as I shall not now stand to show you) and our first
Reformers of Christianity in this Kingdom. Who, I must let you know, used no
such distinctions, as these men do now; but said expressly the same that I do.
That we must submit to all manner of Ordinances of men for the Lords sake, so
long as they ordeyne nothing contrary to the express Word of God. And be that
resysteth shall receyve to himself dampnation; for as much as he resysteth the
Ordinance of God. They are the words of a Book called, the Destruction of
small Vices, written in Edward the Sixth's days, as far as I can guess. Tyndal
also taught the people thus Obedience of a Christian man, fol. 26
: Whosoever keeps the Law of the Prince, whether it be for fear or vainglory,
or profit, though no man reward him, God will bless him abundantly, and send
him worldly prosperity; as thou read, Deuteronomy. 28. what good blessings
accompanied the keeping of the Law, ^
and as we see the Turks far exceed us Christian men in worldly prosperity, for
their just keeping of their temporal Laws. And in another nameless Book, called
the sum of the Holy Scripture Printed by John Day with privilege 1547. chap.
26.
, I find this Declaration, That the very Christen yeldeth himself willingly
under the Governaunce of the Swerd, and Temporal Justice; he pays tailles, he
honors the Puissaunce and worldly highness; he serves, he healpeth; he does
all that ever he may do, to the intent that the same Puissaunce may prosper, and
be kept in honor and feared: albeit, that the same Puissaunce to him is
neither nedeful nor profitable. ^
And if he should not do so, be were no Christen, but should sin against the
Rule of Charity. For he should give evil ensample to other, that they should
not honor the Temporal Puissaunce, but despise it. And this despising of the
Temporal Puissaunce, brings dissension, and (mark this) makes sensual
persons profitable unto nothing.

Amyraldus, late Professor at Saumur. For you are much concerned in it, being
given with a particular respect to our affairs, in an address to our present
Sovereign Paraphr. in Psalm Epist. Dedic. 1662. page 1.
. There are three things, says he, by which the course of our life is
governed, and, as we may say, steered in this Sea of worldly affairs. By the
Law of Nature; by the Laws of our Country; and by the Study of propagating
Religion. To this last we should yield all, if the other two do not openly
gainsay it. Where either the Law of Nature, or the Political Laws do command
any thing, which is inconsistent with our Study of promoting Religion; we must
diligently consider, what God commands us in that matter, that so we may
exactly distinguish between his Will and our own; between what he requires, and
what we are moved unto only by our own zeal. What God commands is to be done,
though our Parents or Magistrates command the contrary. But whatsoever is
commanded by them, which is not contrary to the express Precepts of Religion
Disertis Religionis praceptis non adversum.
, that we are to look upon as commanded and given us in charge by God himself
(because God is the Author of their Power, as he is the Author of Nature) whose
Commands, and not our own voluntary Zeal, we are to make the Rule of our life.
And therefore we are not here to have more regard, either to the danger which
we may fancy the Church is in, ^
or to the hope which we have conceived to our selves of advancing the Glory of
God, then to that Will of the most high God, which is manifested to us either
in Nature, or in Civil Laws. For God has affection enough to his own Glory,
and kindness enough to his Church, and Power and Wisdom sufficient,
notwithstanding all the dangers that I see, to advance his Kingdom, and support
his Church: although I contain my self within the bounds and limits which
Nature and Civil Government prescribes.

This is the resolution of that excellent person, by whose Principles I wish
heartily you would all govern your selves: otherwise the most glorious
profession that you can make, will not persuade us you have the same spirit of
Christian Piety. You have read perhaps, or heard how the Devil one day appeared
to St. Martin, as he was at prayer; all glittering and shining in a most
Majestic state: telling him that he was Christ, who being shortly to come down
upon Earth, gave him a visit first. This he repeated again, says the story,
Sulpitius Severus in vita ejus, cap. 25.
and bid him not be faithless, but believe. So I will, replied the good man,
but not till I see him in that habit and form wherein he suffered, bearing the
Marks of his Cross. The Application is easy; and in short but this. If you
would be acknowledged for the faithful Disciple of the Lord Jesus, let us see
you in that garb wherein they always appeared; taking up the Cross patiently,
humbly and lowly, meek and gentle, quiet and peaceable; submissive to
Government, and obedient to Laws: Till then, we suspend our belief. Farewell.

FINIS.
Books printed for Henry Eversden, under the Crown-Tavern in West-Smithfield.
THe Divine History of the Genesis of the World, explicated and illustrated; or
a Philosophical Comment on the first Chapter of Genesis, and trial of
Philosophy both Ancient and Modern by that most infallible Rule. Anonymus, in
quarto.

2. (...): Or, a Being filled with the Spirit: As also the Divinity or Godhead
of the Holy Ghost asserted, and the Arguments brought against it thoroughly
examined and answered, etc. By John Goodwin late of Coleman-street, London,
quarto.

3. Theodulia: Or, a Just defense of Hearing the Sermons and other teaching of
the present Ministers of England: By John Tombs B.D.

4. A serious examination of the Independants Catechism, and therein of the
chief Principles of Nonconformity to, and separation from the Church of
England, in two Parts. To which is added, an Appendix of the Authority of
Kings, and obedience of Subjects: By Benj. Camfield, Rector of Whitwell in
Derbyshire.

5. The Pen's Dexterity Completed: Or Mr. Rich's Shorthand perfectly taught,
which in his lifetime was never done by any thing in Print: Allowed by both
Universities Oxford and Cambridge.

FINIS.

