Imprimatur.

Joannes Battely RRmo Patri ac Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a sacris
domesticis.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Maii 17. 1686.
A SERMON PREACHED ON Saint MARK's Day MDCLXXXVI.

IN THE PARISH CHURCH of St Paul's Covent Garden.

BY SIMON PATRICK Rector there.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
1686.

A SERMON PREACHED On St MARK's Day, 1686.
EPHESIANS. iv. 14. beginning. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, etc.
THese Words, which are part of the Epistle for this Day, contain a principal
reason, why God furnished his Church with such variety of Gifts, and so many
Ministers of the Gospel of his Grace, as you read of in the foregoing Verses.

Where the Apostle observes ( ver. 8.) that after our Blessed Lord was raised
from the lower parts of the Earth, and ascended up into Heaven, He gave gifts
unto men, and filled all things, ver. 10.

And some (he proceeds to show) were made Apostles: who were the chief
Ministers of Christ, the Witnesses of his Resurrection, the great Luminaries of
the World, by the laying on of whose hands the Holy Ghost was given unto others.

And next to them he placed Prophets: who were inspired persons, that had an
excellent faculty of expounding the old Scriptures, which prophesied of Christ,
and foretold the things that they now preached: and did also, in some cases,
foretell, like the Prophets in ancient time, what was to come to pass hereafter
in the Church of Christ.

After whom followed Evangelists; of which Rank was St. Mark, whose Memory is
this Day celebrated. They were men who accompanied the Apostles, and went about
with them in their travels; to be sent by them, as they were by Christ, either
to preach the Gospel where they could not go themselves, or to confirm and
strengthen those in the Faith whom they had already converted. Thus St. Mark
attended upon St. Peter, whose Disciple he was; as not only Eusebius and St.
Hierom, but Irenaeus himself, who was more ancient, assure us. He is thought to
be the person mentioned by St. Peter in the latter end of his first Epistle, v.
13. where he calls him, Marcus my Son. And is said, by the Authors before
mentioned, to have written his Gospel at the request of the Converts of St.
Peter: from whom, they say, he went to Alexandria, and there founded a Church;
of which he himself was the first Bishop.

Now after all these ( Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists) last of all there
were Pastors and Teachers. Who were Apostolical men; settled and fixed in those
Churches which had been gathered by the Apostles, to be their constant
Governors and Instructers, when the Apostles could no longer stay with them.

All these were endued with Divine Gifts, according to the measure that Christ
pleased to bestow upon them; as you read ver. 7. And he bestowed these Gifts on
them for three ends, which are named, ver. 12. First, for the perfecting of the
Saints. That is, to complete those who were already called into the state of
Christianity; to supply their defects, and to make up what was wanting: which
is the meaning of the Greek word (...). Secondly, For the work of the Ministry,
that they might bring others into the Church; who were not yet made Christians:
which seems to be the proper work of the Ministry, as it stands here
distinguished from the former, and from what follows. Which was, Thirdly, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ: the building up the whole Church together
in knowledge and piety; till they all came into the Unity of the Faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God; and grew to be such perfect men, as not to be
carried about any more like children, with every wind of Doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive.

This, in short, is the coherence of my Text: in which I shall observe to you
these three things,

I. That this Apostolical Church of Ephesus was disturbed with variety of
Doctrines, and with Controversies in Religion.

II. That it was a childish thing to be unsettled by this variety, or
contrariety of Doctrines.

III. That God did not leave his Church without the means of being settled and
steadfast in the true Faith of Christ, notwithstanding those Blasts of contrary
Doctrines, and notwithstanding the cunning and craft wherewith they were
managed.

I.
First, I say, these words suppose that the Church to which the Apostle writes,
was disturbed by variety of Doctrine, and by Controversies in matters of
Religion. For when he says, that henceforth they should not be tossed to and
fro, etc. it suggests that they had been wavering and unsettled; apt to be
moved away from the Faith of the Gospel, by the impetuous assaults that were
made upon them by some cunning Deceivers.

I call them impetuous; because these Doctrines which were different from, or
contrary unto the Faith of the Gospel, were pressed with such earnestness, that
the Apostle compares them to a Blast of Wind: and not barely to a Blast, but to
a Storm or Tempest. Which is the meaning of the word (...), tossed to and fro,
as a Ship is in a furious Storm: for so (...), from whence it is derived,
literally imports; signifying here, that the false Teachers who disturbed the
Church were very vehement or rather violent; making up in confidence what they
wanted in truth.

Such were the Jewish Deceivers; whom the Apostle (in the iii. Philip. 2.)
compares to Dogs, who impudently assaulted the faithful, and endeavored to
rend and tear the Church all in pieces. Such were the Philosophical Pretenders;
by whom the Colossians were in danger to be forcibly carried away from the
Faith, and made a prey to a Company of Thieves and Robbers, 2 Coloss. 8. Beware
lest any man spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit.

Which last word, as well as my Text, gives you the reason why I said the
Church was troubled with the impetuous assaults of some Deceivers. For they
added much craft, subtilty, and juggling, to their violence, and zealous
confidence. Which is compared here (in the latter part of this Verse) to that
sleight of hand, wherewith cunning Gamesters cogg the Die: and is further
illustrated by a second word, importing such subtilty as we have no one English
word to express, and therefore render it by two, cunning craftiness: and that,
thirdly, so artificially managed, that it was according to a method of deceit,
(or an orderly proceeding in their Cheats) as the last words are in the Greek,
which we translate, Whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

I note these things very briefly, only to show what manner of men they were,
who troubled the Church of Christ in the Apostles days. They were bold, and
they were crafty; confident, and cunning; busy and boisterous, and withal very
subtle and insinuating. So busy they were, that as a Storm of Wind troubles
the whole Sea, upon which it falls; so these men disturbed the Church of Christ
every where, throughout the World. For I think I may safely affirm, That there
was not so much as one Church, mentioned in the Holy Writings, but was
disturbed, if not in danger to be overturned, by these Blasts of strange
Doctrine; which, like a Tempest, raged in all places, where the Gospel was
preached.

No body can be ignorant how the Church of Jerusalem (the very Mother Church)
was troubled by men that pressed a very dangerous error upon them. For they
who taught, Except men were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could
not be saved, came from Judaea, as you read xv. Act. 1.

In the Church of Rome it self, there were those who taught that men must be
justified by the works of the Law: as appears from St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans.

In the Corinthian Church, there were those who denied even the Doctrine of the
Resurrection: and thereby went about to subvert the Christian Faith.

The Churches of Galatia were so infected with Judaical Errors, that they were
almost removed from him that called them unto the Grace of Christ, into another
Gospel, i. Gal. 6.

The Philippians, as I said before, had Dogs among them, Evil-workers, who were
of the Concision, as the Apostle Sarcastically calls them, iii. Philip. 2.

The Colossians stood in need of a caution against vain Philosophy; and such
false reasonings, as under a color of humility seduced men unto the
Worshipping of Angels, ii. Coloss. 8, 18. And so I might lead you through all
the rest, till we come to the seven famous Churches of Asia: unto whom our Lord
Christ himself directed particular Letters after he went to Heaven. From which
we learn that there were such impudent Deceivers among them, as pretended to
the Gift of Prophecy, and yet seduced Christ's Servants to Idolatry, ii. Revel.
20. In short, there were depths of Satan (v. 24.) profound Mysteries of
Diabolical deceit, to overthrow the Faith of Christ.

And if it were thus immediately after our Savior's Ascension to Heaven, and
while the Apostles were alive, who were full of the Holy Ghost; no wonder that
the Church was afterward infested with diverse Heresies: as appears by the first
four General Councils, wherein they were condemned. Particularly this Church of
Ephesus, and those in Asia depending on it; whom S. Paul forewarns of this,
when he took his leave of them, and told them they should see his face no more,
that after his departure grievous Wolves would enter in among them, not sparing
the Flock: also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to
draw Disciples after them, xx. Act. 29, 30. And therefore it ought still to be
the less wonder to any of us, if the condition of the Church be the same now,
at this great distance from the Apostolical times: since men were so bold, as
in the very face of the Apostles, at least as soon as their Backs were turned
on any place, to contradict their Doctrine, and teach another Gospel.

From which we may evidently draw these three Conclusions.

I. First, There is no cause to forsake that Church of which we are Members, or
so much as to have the worse opinion of it, because there are contentions in it
about matters of Religion.

They that have had a principal hand in raising Disputes, and making Divisions
upon them, are the men that object this to us, and make it an Argument against
us. But without any reason; for when they have said all that they can, we have
as much Unity of Faith among us, as they had in the first Churches planted by
the Apostles themselves. In which there were several Winds of Doctrine
stirring, and many Errors; which made as great a disturbance then (if not
greater) than has been made among us.

Who in the main Articles of Faith are all of one mind: And our Differences are
in lesser and secondary things, which belong not to the Primitive Doctrines of
the Christian Religion. Which whosoever opposes, we own him not, but look upon
him as in a Faction against the Church: Which is not thereby broken, nor the
Unity of its Faith destroyed. For though some men have preached strange
Doctrines, and drawn Disciples after them, (which is no more than they did in
the Apostles days) yet they have not prevailed against this Church, nor
overturned its Faith. But as boisterous Waves (to keep to the Metaphor in the
Text) beating against a Rock, dissolve into Froth; so have these Blasts of
contrary Doctrine made a vain and fruitless disturbance among us. Some looser
parts of the people have been carried away (to their own shame, not ours) while
the main Body of our Church, like an unmovable Rock, still persists in firm
Unity: in as great Unity, as was anciently in any of the Apostolical Churches;
and that is abundantly sufficient.

II. Secondly, We may further conclude, from what has been said, that if we
knew where to find an Infallible Guide and Judge, it would not put an end to
Controversies, nor hinder errors from springing up and pestering the Church of
Christ. For when there was such an Authority, it could not do this, which is
desired.

All allow the Apostles to have been Infallible; and yet you see there were
various winds of Doctrine, and some of them very dangerous; in the Churches
which they planted: Whereby those Churches were divided into Parties; which by
the Apostolical Authority could not be perfectly united.

St. Paul, for instance, interposes his Authority with the Church of Corinth,
in his first Epistle, for the making up all divisions which he heard were among
them, 1 Cor. i. 10, 11, etc. And yet notwithstanding, it appears by his second
Epistle (xi. 2, 3, 4, 13, 14.) that they still continued; so that their minds
were in danger to be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. And the
Epistle of Clemens to that Church, not long after, informs us; that these
divisions and contentions, grew into a kind of Sedition one against another.

More than this, the Author of our faith Christ Jesus, though he spoke with the
highest Authority, yet did not by this put an end to the disputes that were
between the Pharisees and Saducees, and other Sects among the Jews. No, it was
so far from having this effect, that the Church of the Jews, who were
instructed by this Infallible Teacher, fell into the most damnable error; not
only rejecting him, but putting him to death.

Yes, will some say, because they did not own his Infallibility. True. But can
any other Teacher, though he could justly pretend to this Prerogative, hope to
prevail with men, when the Savior of the world could not? Will any man or
Church expect to be universaly acknowlledged, and make an end of all
differences; when the Son of God could not meet with such regard and acceptance
in the world? Is it possible for any men's Infallibility (could we suppose it)
to be better attested, than the Lord Christ's was? Can the Disciples convince
men, more than their Master did? If that be a hopeless thing, then there will
be Controversies: even about this Infallibility. Which leads to the Third thing.

III. It appears plainly from hence, that God never intended all errors should
be kept out of the Church, by an Infallible Authority. No, directly contrary,
St. Paul says 1 Cor. xi. 19. There must be heresies, that they who are
approved may be made manifest. That is, God thinks it just, that men should be
permitted to follow their own foolish conceits; when they will not be guided by
the plain directions of his holy Gospel. By which means, sincere and upright
men are discovered; and all men are tried whether they will obey the truth, or
turn aside unto unrighteousness.

There must be a trial made of men: and therefore such order must not be taken,
as to make it impossible there should be any heresies. No, God has left it
more than possible there should; for there must be Heresies, that there may be
approbation made of Believers, whether they will sincerly adhere to the plain
truths of Christian Religion, or part with them for pleasing and gainful errors.

Besides, if God had intended to prevent this, by establishing an Infallible
Guide to whom all should resort; He would have declared this intention the most
plainly of all other things. And have told us also where to find such an
Authority; and not have left this to be controverted and disputed, which was
intended to be the end of Controversies.

More especially, if any one particular Church was to have this authority over
all other Churches, it would have been most needful, that this should have been
so clearly taught, as to have put it out of all doubt. For we can see no
reason, not so much as that of convenience, why one Church should have it, and
all others want it: but in reason every Church should have it, if it were to be
had; that men might not be put to the trouble of going far for Infallible
direction.

And as for that Church which now pretends to it; there is the clearest
evidence, that no Church anciently thought it to have more Authority than other
Churches: who looked upon themselves as her equals.

I speak of the Church of Rome; whose Determinations, and Traditions in matters
of Doctrine were rejected, by St. Cyprian, Firmilianus, and the rest of the
African Bishops: who write to the Pope (as every one knows who reads St.
Cyprian's Epistles) not as their Superior, but as their good Brother, their
Colleague, their fellow Priest: rebuking him with much sharpness; taxing him for
pretending vainly V. Epist. LXXII, LXXV. Edit. Oxon.
to Apostolical Authority where he had none; and for not conforming himself to
the rule of Truth and Peace delivered by the Apostle; and in downright terms
affirming, that every Bishop in the administration of his Church, has power to
act according to his own judgment; and that none could impose Laws upon another.

And as for matters of Ceremony, all the Bishops of the East refused to submit
to him; challenging as much Authority from St. John, as the Roman Bishop did
from St. Peter* This is notorious in the famous Question about Easter: and
sufficient to show the truth of what Aeneas Sylvius could not but confess,
before he came to be a Pope; that little respect was had to the Roman Church,
before the Council of Nice.

And that Council expressly decreed, the ancient Customs should be every where
observed. By which Antioch and Alexandria claimed the same Authority over the
Churches subject to their Jurisdiction, that the Roman Bishop did within his
Diocese. And thus it continued for many years after: nor do the greater part,
by far, of the Christian World at this day, own any such Authority over them,
as the Bishop of Rome now challenges.

Let us not therefore be shaken, by this Wind of doctrine, no more than by any
other wherewith this Church has been troubled. For there is no such Infallible
Authority left in the Church, for the deciding all Controversies; much less can
that Church lay the sole Claim to that Authority there is left in it; or if it
could justly pretend to the highest, it would not be able to do what a far more
miraculous Authority could not effect: and there are other means of unity and
peace, prescribed by God; which if men will not embrace, there must be discords
and dissentions whereby the integrity or falseness of every man's heart will be
discovered.

What Means those are, you shall see anon, when I have spoken a few words of
the Second Observation; which now follows.

II.
It is a childish thing to be unsettled in Religion, because of this difference
or contrariety of Doctrine, wherewith the Church is at any time troubled. So
the Apostle might well call it, because there being (as I have lately shown
you) a form of wholesome words left by them in every Church which they planted,
a Summary of Sound Doctrine, called the Faith once delivered to the Saints;
there could be no reason that any men, who had this deposited with them, should
be unresolved what to believe, and unsettled by the Preaching of other
Doctrine: but their instability proceeded merely from the weakness of their
understanding, and the strength of their passions.

These two things are remarkable in little Children: as their understandings
are weak, so their passions are strong, and their desires violent. From whence
it comes to pass that they are not only credulous; but fickle, and newfangled
(as we speak) delighting in that to day, which they throw away to morrow. These
make them rash, and hasty; apt to quarrel one with another about little
differences: and dispose them to be taken with empty shows and pageantry; with
things that affect the senses, and have a glistering appearance, though void of
all inward goodness, and solid worth and usefulness.

In short, while we are Children in understanding, we are naturally
injudicious, and consequently inconstant. We do not judge aright of things that
differ; and so are carried uncertainly to and fro, as the Apostle here speaks,
from one thing to another; and, many times, from better to worse: especially
when we meet with confident people, who easily impose upon us.

This is a very dangerous estate; and therefore it highly concerns us to get
out of it, by growing in knowledge and wisdom: imitating little Children only
in our endeavors to be without guile; but laboring, as the Apostle speaks, in
understanding to be men, and to have a thorough knowledge of the truth as it is
in Christ Jesus.

This St. Peter prescribes as a remedy against unstedfastness, in the
conclusion of his second Epistle; Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these
things, beware lest ye also being carried away by the error of the wicked,
fall from your stedfastness: but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Who, it is most certain, has not left us in
doubt what to believe, and what to hold and retain with a firm resolution; nor
exposed us, without any help for it, to be carried away by the error of the
wicked: but abundantly provided us with all things necessary for the knowledge
of the Truth; and for our improvement therein, unto a state of steadfast belief.
Which is the third thing.

III.
We are not left by God without the means of being settled in the Faith;
notwithstanding the Blasts of contrary Doctrine, which may be in the Church,
and notwithstanding the cunning and craftiness whereby they may be managed. For
it is the very Scope of the Apostle in this place, to convince the Ephesians,
that God had taken such care and made such provision, that they might not
henceforth be children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, etc. There was a remedy then against this lightness and inconstancy;
it was possible to discern truth from falsehood, the Christian Faith from the
vain Doctrines which troubled the Church: and if they did not continue
Children, they might continue steadfast in that Faith, and not be moved from it,
by the violent Blasts of contrary persuasions.

God did not think fit, as you have heard, to lay such a restraint upon men's
Spirits, that none should be able to contradict the truth preached by the
Apostles: but permitted false Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, for the trial and exercise of the
faithful; whom he furnished with sufficient means to preserve themselves in a
settled constant belief.

What those means were, I shall briefly lay before you; as I find them partly
here, and partly in other places of the Apostolical Writings; and shall treat
of them with a particular respect to our selves, that we may be established in
the truth of his holy Gospel.

First, Nothing is to be admitted without good Proof.

Secondly, In the Proof we make of Doctrines, the holy Scriptures must be the
Rule whereby we judge.

Thirdly, In the use of this Rule, we must take direction of our Spiritual
Guides and Governors.

And Lastly, We must live in the sincere practice of all other Duties of
Christian Piety.

First, The first Direction is that of this Apostle St. Paul to the
Thessalonians, 1 v. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Which
is the same with that of St. John, 1 iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit;
but try the Spirits, whether they are of God: because many false Prophets are
gone out into the World. From whence it is likely Dionysius of Alexandria
formed that Precept, which he calls an Apostolical voice, (...), Be ye skilful
Bankers, able to distinguish between good and bad Silver Eusebius. L. VII. Hist.
Eccles. Cap. 7.
.

Children indeed having not the faculty of discerning, take all upon trust: but
it is a shame, if being arrived at the state of Manhood, we do not prove, and
try, and examine (as the word signifies) every thing that is offered to our
belief; which we ought not to receive, merely because confident men would
impose it upon us by their Authority. And if it will not abide a proof, nor
stand a trial; we may be certain it is deceitful Ware, which they would put off
in the dark, and not have brought into the light.

Now in this proof, we must be very serious: for nothing can be examined
thoroughly without an attentive mind. Which we must awaken to ponder and
consider every thing, in the use of the best reason we have: and whatsoever
appears upon examination and proof, to be agreeable to the Faith once delivered
to the Saints, that we must hold fast; and not suffer our selves to be carried
from it, by any importunities of contrary affections. For as we must receive
nothing without good reason; so we ought not lightly to forsake that, which we
have good reason to believe.

When I speak of Reason, I do not mean bare natural Reason, without the
guidance of God's Grace. For which we must heartily pray; and He no doubt will
readily vouchsafe, unto all those who seriously seek for it, with a desire to
be led by it in the ways of truth and holiness. For having given us his Son,
and by him revealed his mind and will unto us; it is infidelity to think that
he will not guide us by his Grace, to understand his mind and will, in all
things necessary to our salvation. Far be such a thought from our hearts: which
ought to rest satisfied, that he will give us his Grace to direct us, as freely
as he has given us his Son Christ to inlighten and instruct us. He is as
little sparing of his Grace, as the visible Sun is of its Beams: which shine
into the eyes of all those, who do not by wilful winking shut it out; and
thereby make themselves, not the Sun, guilty of their blindness.

If we love darkness rather than light; or will not be at the pains to open our
eyes and let it in; but instead thereof give up our selves to be led about by
others, as they shall please to conduct us; it is but just with God to deprive
us of the power of judging aright, and not to let us see when we would, because
we would not when we might.

He has given us the use of Reason; which if we will blindly resign to any
pretended Authority, what is it but to shut our eyes when we should open them,
or suffer our selves to be hood-winked, when we should look about us that we be
not deceived? We can give no account of this to God: who did not give us this
talent, that we should give it away to others; but that we should faithfully
employ and improve it our selves. He never intended that we should let others
judge for us; but requires us to examine and judge our selves whether there be
reason to receive that which is propounded to us by others.

This is so great a Truth, that they who receive things without examination,
upon mere trust, yet have some reason for what they do. For no man trusts
another, till he has reason to think he is an honest man, and will not deceive
him. He does not take his bare word for it, that he will not deceive him; but
has some ground or other to think he will be as good as his word. Insomuch
that they who seem least to trust to their own reason, do really trust it in
the weightiest matter; when they trust it to choose one for them, whom they may
trust.

They of the Roman Church, I mean, who would have us give up our Reason, to
their Authority; do not pretend to persuade us to submit to that Authority,
without some reason for it. And to be persuaded by reason, as has been long
ago said, that to their Authority we ought to submit our Reason, is still to
follow Reason, and not to quit it, and blindly resign it. And if we must follow
Reason in that, why not in all things whatsoever? Why is it not as good a Judge
of any thing, as of their Authority? What reason can be given for using our
Reason in this single affair, and relinquishing it ever after? Is it not the
same Reason still? Was it not given us for our constant Safe Conduct? By what
reason then do we trust others to choose our Religion for us; without examining
whether what they say be true or no; but taking it barely upon their word?

How do they know that to be true, which they propound to us? May not we know
it by the same means? and rely not merely upon their Authority, but upon the
same reason that they do? For they say what they deliver to us, either with
reason or without. If with reason, we ought to judge whether it be a good
reason or no: for why should not we judge as well as they, since God has
entrusted us with a faculty whereby to judge.

If without reason, we ought not to follow an Authority, which presses things
to be believed upon no ground: but to look upon those as the most sincere and
faithful Directors, who would have us to examine and prove, consider and ponder
all things well, before we receive them; and who offer to us their assistance
therein, that we may see with our own eyes, what God himself has delivered to
us in his holy Word. Which brings me to the next thing.

Secondly, In this proof which we make of every thing propounded to us, the
Scriptures ought to be the Rule, whereby we judge.

We have no other, I have formerly shown you; and they are abundantly
sufficient for us, and so authentic; that our Blessed Lord himself, and his
Apostles after him, constantly appealed to them for the proof of their
Doctrine. And as they referred all men to the old Scriptures, saying no other
thing but what the Prophets and Moses did say should come (xxvi. Act. 22.) so
we can send them no whither else for their information, but to the same
Scriptures, and to the New Testament; according to which if any men do not
speak, they are not to be received. Nay, St. Austine ventured to imitate St.
Paul, and to say L. III. contra liter. Petiliani cap. 6.
, Let him be accursed whosoever he be, (I will not say we, who are not worthy
to be compared with him that said, THOUGH WE, but though he be an Angel from
Heaven) who declares to you any thing of Christ, or of his Church, or of any
other matter that belongs to our Faith and Life, besides that which ye have
received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures.

Unto which the same St. Paul sends Timothy himself, for his instruction, in
both his Epistles to him. Where he commands him to give attendance to reading,
viz. of the holy Scriptures: which he had known from a Child, and which were
able, he tells him, to make him wise to salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus. They being given by inspiration of God, that even a man of God
(like the ancient Prophets) might be perfected, and thoroughly furnished unto
all good works; for every part of his employment, 2 Timothy iii. 15, 16.

Which place I have explained not long ago, and now mention it again; because
the Apostle directs him to these holy Writings, as a means to preserve him in
the true Christian belief, ver. 14. But continue thou in the things, which thou
have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them,
and that from a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, etc. What we have
learned out of the holy Scriptures, we have an assurance of; we know from whom
they come; and are certain we are taught by God, when we read these holy Books:
but cannot be assured of any other Tradition, which is not contained here; and
therefore ought to continue steadfast in our adherence to the Scriptures; and
both to suspect those who would draw us from this hold, and stick to those
Guides who bid us stick to this, and prove all things by it. For it is evident
they have no mind to deceive us; but do, in effect, bid us believe God, and
follow his directions, and rely upon his Authority: who cannot mislead us; and
will not suffer us to be misled, if we continue in the things which we have
learnt out of the holy Scriptures.

For taking them to be our Rule, we shall neither admit any thing which is
contrary to that Rule; nor shall we take any thing to be an essential part of
the Christian Faith, which is not there delivered unto us. For it is not
consistent with the notions we have of God's infinite Goodness and Wisdom, to
believe He would give us a Rule which is defective in necessary things. No, He
has abundantly provided here for our Instruction, in all such matters: and as
we ought to refuse that which contradicts any part of these holy Books; so we
ought not to think it necessary that we should entertain any thing, which they
do not teach us.

And teach us plainly and evidently; for in all necessary things they are very
clear and perspicuous; Else they could not be a Rule unto us, but we must seek
for some other. The Apostle's Creed, for instance, (which the Ancients called
the immovable Rule of Faith, a short Summary of Christian Belief, beyond
which, as they speak, we ought not to seek for Faith) together with the Nice
Creed, and Athanasius's, which expound the Apostles, ought thoroughly to be
received and believed: for that they may be proved by most certain warrants of
holy Scripture. But whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of
Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation.

This is the Doctrine of our Church, in its sixth and eighth Articles: unto
which let us strictly keep, if we would not be carried to and fro uncertainly
with the blasts of vain Doctrines, which have no certain Warrants in the holy
Scriptures, and therefore are not to be received; or are contrary to them, and
therefore are to be rejected. Here we must fix; and believe that here we are
safe. For the Scriptures want nothing to complete us in Christian wisdom; which
they do not wrap up in obscurity, but, as far as is needful, give us a clear
understanding of the Doctrines of Faith. And make us understand withal, if we
please to consider them, that having laid our foundation well in a firm belief
of those great and necessary things, which out of the Scriptures are summed up
in the Creeds before named; we need not trouble our selves about other matters,
which are not so evident: but make it our whole business in this world, to
raise the solid Superstructure of a holy Life, upon the Foundation of Faith in
Christ.

This is the Second thing; the holy Scriptures are the Rule, whereby we must
prove all things: from which if we do not depart, we cannot be led into any
dangerous errors. Provided,

Thirdly, that in the use and application of this Rule, we take the direction
of our Spiritual Guides and Governors.

In some things, as I said, there is difficulty: and where there is none, the
cunning of deceivers may so perplex things and entangle our understandings,
that we may not know what to think. In which case, especially, we ought to seek
for the assistance of those, that are better able to judge than our selves.
Which is the very means of stability and constancy, which the Apostle here
recommends in my Text. For having shown, how God appointed several orders of
men in the Church, not only Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, but also
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. he lets them know
that by these means God expected, that they should not be henceforth children,
tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind of Doctrine. For this
purpose were Pastors and Teachers, more particularly settled in the Church; that
they might be Instruments of settling others. After the Apostles, and Prophets
and Evangelists, had revealed the mind and will of God to men; Pastors and
Teachers were left in every Church, to help them both to understand what the
other great men had revealed; and to detect the forgeries of false Apostles,
who went about to supplant the Christian Doctrine.

These Gifts, as the Apostle here calls them, were bestowed last of all; being
intended to remain after the other ceased. And accordingly you are blessed with
them, in this Age; as they were in the beginning: and they are placed over you
for the same end, that they were at first; that you may advise with them, as
persons whose business it is to study the holy Scriptures, and to guide God's
people by them in the way of truth. For this they are better qualified than any
other persons; and therefore ought to be consulted by the people. Who must not
be so bold as to lean merely to their own understanding; but listen also unto
them: not indeed as infallible; but as men of the best understanding, both by
their Office, and by their Study, pains and experience: whereby they are
enabled to discover the frauds and sophistry of Deceivers, and to open, better
than any else can do, the true meaning of the holy Scriptures.

Their Guidance therefore the Apostle to the Hebrews also commends, as a remedy
against their instability in Religion, xiii. 7, 8, 9. Remember them that have
the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow,
etc. Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: for it is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace, not with meats, which have not
profited them that have been occupied therein. Where one mark is given them,
whereby to know what Guides to follow: Such as established their hearts in true
grace and goodness, not those that troubled them with unprofitable Disputes
about meats and drink, and such like things; which were pressed by Judaical
Teachers, but made those who observed them not one jot the better; if they did
not make them worse, by taking off their hearts from more substantial Duties.

And truly there is the same mark of distinction at this day. All men follow
some Guides or other: but they alone ought to be followed, who lead men, not by
their own authority, but by the direction of the holy Scriptures; whose main
study it is to understand the Scriptures themselves, and then to make others
understand them; who do not hide those Books from the people, but exhort them
to look into them and read them seriously, and to learn therein, above all
things, to be godly and virtuous, to mortify all evil affections and passions,
to purify themselves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God.

Such Guides you are bound in Conscience to advise withal; and not lightly to
forsake their Conduct. For if they of the contrary persuasion follow their
Guides with an implicit Faith, and a kind of blind obedience, being scarce
permitted to use their Reason; how can our people answer it to God, if they
will not take heed to those who bid them open their eyes, and see, and examine
and prove what they offer to them, by the Rule of the holy Scriptures; in the
use of the most impartial and unbiassed Reason, which God has bestowed upon
them, and wherewith they can assist them?

It is not easy to apprehend how great a sin they are guilty of, who neglect
such guidance. And I must take the freedom to tell you, That to listen to other
pretended Guides, neglecting those of the Church of England, under whom ye have
been bred, whose conversation you know, by whom you have been long instructed,
and had sufficient proof of their abilities, is an inexcusable sin, and an
unaccountable folly. For in all reason you ought to have a greater reverence to
the Priests of our Church, than to those of any other Communion: who cannot be
presumed to know better than ours do, nor to have more concern and care to
guide you aright than ours have.

And therefore as none of you, I hope, will be carried away from the Faith of
this Church, by any wind of Doctrine, whatsoever: so you will not, I trust, so
much as entertain a doubt of the truth here believed, without consulting with
the Pastors and Teachers of it; who are able to preserve you from falling, by
Gods grace, and blessing upon your and their honest endeavors. You ought to
make a great conscience of this: if you chance to be staggered by any
objection, repair to those whom God has appointed to settle your minds, and
preserve you upright. Nay if there were nothing of Conscience in it; yet it is
but a due respect to them, under whose ministry you have many years lived, not
to forsake them upon any suggestions whatsoever, without hearing what they can
answer to them: nor to think them less able and willing to direct you, than any
other persons; or less honest and careful in the directions they give, that
neither you nor they may do amiss. Besides the weakness and levity, nay the
folly and wickedness, it is a rude contempt of those, whom you have the
greatest reason to esteem (and will be so judged at the dreadful day of our
Lord) to hearken to the voice of strangers, and give a perfect credit to them;
without so much as consulting the judgment of those, with whom you have been
long acquainted.

Be not guilty, I beseech you, of such unmanly, and unmannerly behavior. Do
not so much as admit the beginning of a doubt about your Religion, without
acquainting some of them with it, that they may resolve you: and, as St. Peter
speaks (1 v. 12.) exhort and testify to you, that this is the true grace of
God, wherein ye stand.

And in which you will always stand, if you observe one thing more: which in
truth is the greatest of all.

Fourthly, Live in the sincere practice of all other duties of Christian piety.
For to do what we know to be the will of God, is the surest way to be preserved
by him both in truth and in holiness. A godly life is the greatest security
against all Impostures. We shall never doubt of the truth of our belief, when
we feel it has effected the design of Faith; by bringing forth the fruit of
it, in all manner of virtue and godliness of living.

About which there is no doubt nor question, no dispute nor controversy: for
all the parts of an holy life, are as plainly set down in the holy Scriptures,
as that part of it now mentioned, We beseech you, Brethren, know (that is,
love) them, which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you: and esteem them very highly in love, for their works sake, and be at peace
among your selves 1 These. v. 11, 12. All the rest, I say, are as express, and
clear, and evident as this: whether they be our duties toward God, or toward
man (whether superiors, equals or inferiors) or whether they concern the
right Government of our selves, in all Temperance, Soberness, Chastity,
Self-denial, Contentedness, and Contempt of this present World.

Without which (I mean contempt of this present World) all the advice that can
be given will signify little, to secure us in the true Religion. If this one
thing be wanting, we are liable to be deceived, and none can help us. We shall
turn like Weather-cocks by every wind of Doctrine, if our interest lie that
way: and it will not be in the power of any man, by the clearest and most solid
demonstrations, to fix and settle us. For the love of this present World, of
riches, honors and preferments, dazles the eyes of men's minds, blinds their
judgment, bribes their affections, corrupts their consciences, and carries them
into the foulest dotages.

Religion and the things of the other world, cannot be of any great price, in
his account, who admires and over-values the things of this present life. Which
will easily persuade him (as I had occasion to show you lately) when he cannot
keep both, to let go his Faith, that he may preserve these. And therefore if we
will stick fast to our Religion; we must not cleave too close to this present
World. We must not frame too high an opinion in our minds of any thing here;
nor set our hearts and affections on it: but learn to want as well as to
abound; to be satisfied with a little; and, as the Apostle speaks, having food
and raiment, therewith to be content; remembering that godliness, with
contentment, is great gain. 1 Timothy vi. 6, 8.

Such lessons if we learnt and faithfully practiced, (and there is no man that
need be ignorant of them or defective in them, unless he will) they would
preserve and keep our minds from being drawn away, by plausible and gainful
errors. Nay, more than that, they would put an end to all controversies, and
disputes; better than an Infallible Judge could do. For when there was one in
the world, there were still Sects and Factions, as I have already shown you:
But if we would submit to the power of the Gospel, and of God's holy Spirit, so
far as to become obedient to the plain commands which he lays upon us; that is,
to be made truly meek and lowly in heart, humble and peaceable, tenderhearted
and Charitable, holy and heavenly-minded*; having no designs for this world,
but all for the other; not intending to serve any earthly ends by our Religion,
but only to secure our Souls everlasting salvation; being sincere lovers of
truth, desirous to know the whole will of God, ready to embrace it, though
never so cross to our present interests, conscientiously resolved to do it,
whatsoever we deny or lose on that account; this temper of mind wouldbe a far
better expedient, and more available for the healing of all Divisions, and for
the making Peace and Unity in the Christian World, than infallibility of
Judgment would be, could we tell where to find it.

This is the way of God; wherein if we will not walk, there must be Heresies,
and contention, and strife: nay, there will be, as St. James's words are, every
evil work; and no remedy can be found for it.

Whereas in this way, I will be bold to go a little further and say, that God
has taken care every particular Christian may be infallible; as far as is
needful for him.

Much Discourse and Dispute there has been and is about Infallibility. And
some, you know, argue there must be such a thing, because of the care which we
all believe Christ has of his Church: in which it would be convenient there
should be an Infallible Judge, and therefore they conclude there is one. But if
Convenience were the measure, and our Understanding the Measurers, we might
rather conclude that God has made every particular Christian infallible:
because that is far more convenient, than for every Christian to go a great way
to one Infallible Judge; and then not be able to know certainly where to find
him: because they that speak of such a Judge are not agreed whether he be a
single Person, or whether this Infallibility do not lie in more than in one,
nay whether it be not in a many; but there is as great difference about this,
as any thing else whatsoever.

All that we can truly resolve therefore in this matter is, That such is the
Grace of God, such his Care of his Church, that He has made every truly pious
Christian infallible, though not in all things, yet in the main thing; if he go
on to the end in a course of piety. That is, with respect to his Journies end
he is infallible, though not with respect to every step he takes thither. He
may err in many things, he may sometimes go wrong; yet if it be his constant
design and watchful endeavor, to govern himself faithfully in all his actions,
by the Rule of God's Word, and to follow all the Directions therein, he shall
infallibly come to Heaven.

Let no men make you believe the contrary, though you do not believe every
thing that they tell you is necessary. For God has promised to guide the meek
in judgment, and to teach them his way. His secret is with them that fear him;
and his Covenant is to make them know it, XXV. Psalm. 9, 14. They shall
certainly understand all things needful; and be preserved from damnably erring
in their judgment. God is faithful, and will keep them from falling into the
error of the wicked: because they feared him greatly; doing his will sincerely
as far as they knew it; and being ready and desirous to believe and obey it in
all other things, if they could have known them to be his Will.

Therefore let us neither decline this way; nor distrust it. Let us look upon
this as the way of peace; and let us think our selves safe in it. Let all
carnal, let all worldly, let all diabolical lusts and passions be mortified,
and we shall not fail to know the truth: nay, all our differences will be at an
end; or, if any remain, they will not be destructive either to Charity, or that
blessed Unity, which all good Christians desire to see in the Church of Christ.

If all will not take this course; yet they who do shall stand as unmovable as
a Rock, though there be never such strong Winds and violent Gusts of Doctrine
abroad, that would blow them about. For it is only Chaff, and Straws, and such
like light or loose things, which are carried about with the Wind: Solid and
well built Houses stand firm and unshaken. And so will all they who are deeply
grounded in holiness and humility. They will be steadfast and unmovable, and
never be persuaded to follow any other Doctrines, than those they have received
in this Church, though pressed with never so much earnestness; because no
Doctrines whatsoever can make them better than they are, and, by the Grace of
God, intend to be.

And this truly is a plain Direction whereby to judge of those Doctrines, which
trouble the Church. Do they tend to make men at all the better, if they do
believe them? Will their hearts be more purged from all bad affections? Will
they become more holy, more humble, more meek, more modest, more dead to this
World, more kind, loving and charitable to all men, by entertaining those
Doctrines, which are superadded to the Christian Faith, into which we were
baptized? Or on the contrary, Do they not give men's vices greater liberty? Do
they not puff them up, as all windy knowledge does? Will they not dispose us to
be more highly conceited of our selves, more arrogant, more angry, more
impatient of contradiction, more uncharitable and censorious, more loose in our
conversation, more unpeaceable and ungovernable? If we find these to be the
Fruits of such Doctrines, we are assured thereby that they are not the true
Christian Doctrines; which have the quite contrary effects, and make men of
another Spirit.

To conclude, There is one piece of Christian piety, wherewith all our works
must be begun, continued and ended; and that is earnest Prayer to God: whom we
must constantly beseech to pour the Grace of his holy Spirit upon us; that we
may not fail to follow all these Directions, and that they may be effectual for
our preservation.

To him let us address our selves with all humility and fervent affection;
imploring his gracious presence with us at all times; to inlighten our minds,
to guide us in judgment according to his promise, to give us understanding in
his holy Word, to bestow upon us a spirit of discerning, that we may clearly
perceive the difference of things, and not take evil for good, falsehood for
truth; but the way of lying may be removed from us, and he may grant us his Law
graciously.

But above all things let us beseech him, to give us honest and good hearts,
unbiassed by any carnal or worldly affections. Let us pray with David in the
Psalm now mentioned, cxix. 36. that he would incline our heart unto his
testimonies, and not unto covetousness: turn away our eyes from beholding
vanity, and quicken us in his way. For where the love of the World prevails,
any gainful error may easily find entertainment.

And whenever we find our selves begin to be unsettled in the belief of that,
which upon the most serious and deliberate consideration, we have judged to be
the truth; whenever the resolution we took upon that judgment, begins to
waver and shake; let us remember that we are under a temptation; and that every
temptation is a deceit, and would put a cheat upon us, (for every man is
tempted, says St. James, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed)
and thereupon let us apply our selves to God with the greater diligence and
earnestness, for his Grace to purify our hearts; that we may not be seduced by
any bad affections; but building up our selves in our most holy Faith, praying
in the Holy Ghost, we may keep our selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord* Jesus* Christ unto eternal life, S. Jude 20, 21.

Finally, the Church it self has put a Prayer into our mouths, in the Collect
for this Day: in which let us not cease to make our humble and hearty requests
to Him; saying,

O Almighty God, who have instructed thy holy Church with the heavenly Doctrine
of thy Evangelist St. Mark, Give us Grace, that being not like Children carried
away with every Blast of vain Doctrine, we may be established in the truth of
thy holy Gospel, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

