Christ's Counsel TO HIS CHURCH.

IN TWO SERMONS Preached at the Two Last Fasts, ONE APRIL xi. MDCLXXIX.

THE OTHER DECEMBER xxii. MDCLXXX.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. DEAN of PETERBVRGH, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred
Majesty. 1681.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM EARL of BEDFORD, Knight of the Most Noble
Order of the GARTER, etc.
My very good LORD and PATRON.
MY LORD,
BEing desired by some in my Parish to print the Sermon I preached on the last
Fast Day, I found it necessary to prefix to it the Sermon I preached the Fast
before; because this depends on that: and have presumed to prefix Your
Lordships Name to both; because it is by Your Favor and Patronage, that I
preached either the one or the other in that Place.

The matter of them is suitable to the occasion: For in the First I have
chiefly pressed the General Remedy of all the evils under which we labor; in
the Second one Particular Remedy; and in both exposed the wickedness of Popery.
But I have shown withal, that all we say against it, will not keep it out:
unless we will so duly prize our own Religion, as to live according to it.
Which being in the general allowed, even by those who continue to live quite
contrary, I see no reason why any Body should quarrel with what I have said,
about one particular Duty of our Religion: unless they think that we have
nothing to answer for, upon the account of our contempt of Christ's Ministers,
and of that Order which He has appointed in His Church; which seems to me such
a dangerous sin, that I could not think I discharged a good Conscience, if at
such a time and such an occasion, I took no notice of it.

Wherein I do not plead our own Cause, as some are wont to object to such
Discourses, but the Cause of Christ and of His Religion: which now lies a
bleeding, and we fear a dying, by the wounds we give it our selves, through the
subtle Contrivance of our Romish Adversaries. Whose Plots have been many and
horrid; but their first and greatest strength (as appears by the directions
given to their Emissaries) lay in this, To bring the whole Ministry of the
Church of England into contempt; and to divide the People from their
established Pastors, into a great many little Bodies, under no Government but
what they themselves pleased. And it is apparent, that by the same Popish
artifice, this poisonous conceit is industriously infused into the peoples
mind; that we are looking toward Rome, if we do but tell them, that they ought
not to form opinions as they think good, but guide themselves in their judgment
by our direction.

But I hope the better sort are not ignorant, by this time, of their devices:
and that though there be some in the Ministry who are not so fit as they should
be, to direct and guide their Flocks; yet they will consider, that the men who
most complain of it are such, as will be guided by none at all; no not by those
whose ability and honesty cannot be suspected. And it is a very great Truth
also, that their intemperate Speeches against the Clergy, is the thing that
has frighted the weaker sort of them into such an apprehension of danger from
those men; as has made them guilty of the follies which have done great injury
to us all.

This, My Lord, is the grief of all good Men among us, who consider the state
we are in; and desine the safety, or have any love for the honor, of our
Religion. For we seem now to be in such a condition as Gregory Nyssen describes
in his days: when things were come to such a pass, that the people neither
understood themselves, from their own inward sense, what was fit for them, nor
would believe those that rightly informed them. No, says he Tom. 2. p. 745.
(...).
, We are exceeding angry at our Teachers, and very hardly bear their
admonitions: their counsels are a grievance; and their instruction in good
things, we nauseate, as sick men do the medicines which their Physicians
exhibit to them. If a reproof be given, we take it heavily; if we hear a
rougher word, we fall into a rage; if we be thrust out of the Church, we
blaspheme. This is not the disposition of Learners, nor the obedience of
Disciples: but the ambitious contention of seditious and rebellious people. For
a Scholar, who desires to learn any common Art or Science, ought to be like a
little Child: much more ought he to be like a sucking Infant, who would be
instructed in Christian piety; because our Lord has honored that Age, as apt
to receive impressions, with his commendation.

Now no Child rises up against the Characters and the Lineaments, that his
Master makes for him in Wax; nor devises new Elements, by a frantic License
innovating about making Letters; but exercises his hand after his Masters Copy,
and both in word and deed imitates what his Director delivers to him, etc. But
a Christian does not thus; though he has heard, That except ye be converted
and become like little Children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
but when the Priest severely corrects his error, openly contradicts; and
mutters between his teeth; and going round the Streets, and the places of
public concourse, rails and reviles; and (as it follows a little after) sits
judging even me the Bishop in the Chair of the Scorner.

Now what can the end of such things be, but utter confusion? Which necessarily
follows, when the unity that ought to be between the Pastors and people is
quite dissolved; or the people (some upon one account, some upon another) lose
all their respect for them, and love to them for their works sake.

There has been much speech, Your Lordship knows, of a Prophecy (as it is
called) of Bishop Usher, late Primate of Armagh; which has very much startled
many, and made them fear dreadful things: Though the certainty of it has not
been so publicly attested, as that which I have been bold to set down in the
first of these Sermons. Where Your Lordship will find something that looks like
a sad Prediction; which an excellent Divine and holy Man of this Church
published long ago, in a Book of his upon the Creed. Which I wish were
diligently heeded and laid to heart: because it directs to the way, whereby the
threatening may be avoided; pointing to the very sin that deserves the Judgment
he denounces. Which if it be slighted, when we are told of it; it will be one
of the worst signs that can be, his Prognostication will prove true and be
fulfilled.

But they who are appointed to stand on the Watchtower, and give notice of
danger, have delivered their own Souls; when they have faithfully declared the
mind of Christ in this matter. Which was the greatest motive I had both to
preach and to print these Sermons; which I am sure will be acceptable to Your
Lordship: not only because you have a due respect to Gods Ministers; but
because I present them as a token of my gratitude, and of the honor I have for
Your Lordship, being

My LORD, Your most humble Servant, S. PATRICK.

A SERMON PREACHED ON THE FAST DAY, APRIL xi. MDCLXXIX.
REVEL. II. 16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and I will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth.


WHAT our Savior had said unto the Jews before his death, (in the Second
Lesson for this Morning Prayer) xiii. Luke 3, 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish; He says here (in effect) after his ascension to Heaven, unto
the Gentile Christians, Repent, or else I will come quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of any mouth.

This is a Lesson for all Nations, and for all Ages: in which the Church of
England is as much concerned now, as the Church of Pergamus was then. Though
this Letter was not particularly directed unto us, no more than to the rest of
the Christian World; yet the next words tell us, that our Lord expects every
body should take notice of it, consider it, and take warning by it, as much as
if it had been addressed to them by name, ver. 17. He that has an ear to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. We all herein read our
own doom; and ought to understand the words as if our Lord had enlarged them in
such a general Admonition, as he gives in another case about watching, xiii.
Mark ult. And what I say unto the Church of Pergamus, I say unto all, Repent.

Repent, or else I will come quickly, and will fight against them with the
sword of my mouth.

In which words you may easily discern, An Exhortation to a most necessary
Duty, which is, To repent: and a Commination in case the Exhortation be not
obeyed; which is, A denunciation of war against such obstinate Offenders, who
provoke him to sharpen against them, the sword of his mouth.

The Exhortation is so frequently pressed, and as frequently explained, that I
cannot think it fit to spend the time in telling you what it is to repent. For
you all know well enough, that it is such a godly sorrow for what we have done
amiss, as makes us not only afflict our selves for our sins, but utterly
renounce and forsake them.

If you know your Baptismal Vow (as who is there that can be unacquainted with
it, unless he affect a stupid and brutish ignorance) it is easy to understand
that nothing less than this can pass with God for Repentance.

If we had never broken that Vow, there would have been no need of Repentance;
which is the repairing of that breach, and the making it up again. And how
shall we make all whole; but only by observing that Vow better, which we have
violated and broken? No man of sense can think, there is any other way of being
reconciled to God after we have offended him; but only by becoming more dutiful
to him: Performing, that is, those engagements which we always had to him, and
from which we can never be absolved; because, beside our natural obligation, we
have tied and bound our selves by a solemn and most sacred Vow, to be his
faithful Servants. When we do not keep this Vow we sin, and bring a heavy guilt
upon our selves. From which sin and guilt, if we would be freed, we must
Repent: that is, keep our Vow better; forsaking the Devil, and all his works;
heartily believing God's holy Word; and obediently keeping his Commandments. If
we be truly sorrowful and afflicted that we have not done thus; in which
Repentance begins: we must resolve and seriously endeavor to make this our
business hereafter; in which Repentance ends and is completed.

I shall say no more in so plain a business; which has been urged upon you a
thousand times: not by one alone, but by all God's Ministers that ever you
heard preach about it. And what Theme is there more common, that comes oftener
into the Pulpits? I wish the perpetual sound of it without due regard, have not
made it become so ineffectual, that now men turn a deaf ear to such Discourses,
as beaten and thredbare Subjects, to which they need not give any attendance.
But if any man have an ear still open; let him hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches, here in this Book. Let him hear, at least, what a desperate
course he runs, if he continue to neglect a Duty which is so well known, that
he thinks he need not hear of it any more. For our Savior threatens such as
would not repent, that he would come unto them quickly, and fight against them
with the sword of his mouth.

The first Motive you know to a change, is commonly an apprehension of the
danger of that course, wherein a man is at present engaged. This is apt to put
a stop unto him in his way, and bring him to a stand. The very first sight of
it, when it smites his Soul, is wont to repress the violence and heat wherewith
he pursues his sinful desires. A new scene of thoughts begin to appear in his
mind: and he is led to consider with himself, Whither am I going? What mischief
is this which threatens me? Whither will this course carry me? and what will be
the end of these things? And if the danger be very great and pressing; and his
apprehension of it also be great and proportionable to the danger; this strikes
the greater fear and dread into his Soul. And fear of what will ensue, disposes
him to a change and alteration of his course of life; that he may escape those
miseries which he sees he is drawing upon himself. Especially if he be
persuaded (as you have often heard) that no terrors or affrightments, no
entreaties or prayers, no cries or tears, no sadness or affliction of Spirit, no
outward humiliation or abasements, no purposes, no promises will prevail for
his deliverance from that danger; without an effectual reformation and
forsaking those wicked ways, that necessarily lead to death and destruction.

And it is no hard matter, one would think, for men to convince themselves of
this Truth. For suppose you were in a journey, and you should be told of, nay
should see, a great Pit or Precipice, to which, and no whither else, that Road
did directly lead; would you think of any other means to avoid it, but only by
turning into another path? Though you should quiver and tremble like a Leaf
when it is shaken with the Wind; though you should conceive the greatest
horror, and offer never so many Prayers and Vows; nay though you turned your
faces about, and looked the contrary way; yet if still you should proceed and
go forward in that Road, you would most certainly hurl your selves (though you
turned your backs of it, and were loath to see it) into inevitable ruin. This
is exactly the case of every Sinner; who, besides that his way is uneasy and
rugged, putting him to a great deal of pain, and costing him may a fall, has
the Pit of Hell, a bottomless Pit of destruction, which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, set evidently before his eyes: Nay, is manifestly destroying his
Body, his Estate, his Reputation; and which is more, is linked in a wicked
society with those, that by their riot and luxury, profaneness and irreligion,
neglect of all things but their sottish pleasures, are bringing the Country
wherein they live to utter ruin; putting, as I may say, an ancient Kingdom and
famous Church into most lamentable confusion; in the midst of which they are
all like to perish. It is a foolish thing for any of them to imagine they can
avoid it, because perhaps they sometimes dread it, and shiver at the thoughts
of it; because they cry to Heaven when they see the danger, to deliver them
from it; or at every step, suppose, fall down on their faces, and humble
themselves, beseeching God to rescue them from this ruin: nay, put on
Sackcloth (though alas! who is there now that is so religious?) and roll
themselves in dust and ashes. If when they get up again, they still go on, and
will not forsake their evil way, Heaven it self cannot preserve them from
destruction, having appointed that fearful end for such obstinate, refractory
Sinners; who will not be saved, unless he make the Fire not to burn, and the
Sea not to drown: that is, alter the very nature of things, for the sake of
those that deserve so ill of him.

Hoping therefore that, every one of you being convinced of this, the
representation of the danger of impenitency will, at least, move you to design
and begin a change of your lives, I shall treat of that at this time; which is
the second part of my Text: wherein our Blessed Lord threatens, that unless the
Church of Pergamus repented, he would come quickly to her, and fight against
them with the sword of his mouth.

Which words contain in them these IV. Considerations, to stir us up to
repentance.

I. First, That if men do not amend their lives, especially after many
warnings, clear convictions, and a change wrought in their minds and judgments,
it turns the greatest kindness of God into anger and displeasure. II. That it
wearies the very patience and longsuffering of God: to which we are more
indebted than we imagine; and should it forsake us, our condition is left very
woeful. III. To such persons the most gracious God becomes an enemy. IV. And
accordingly they must expect nothing but the execution of all his threatenings
against them.
How all these arise out of the words, will appear in the handling of them.

I.
First, I say, That not to amend after God has often called and persuaded us
to it, nay convinced us of the necessity of it, turns his greatest kindness
into anger and displeasure. If there be no change wrought in your lives, you
shall find a sad change in his proceedings, and the methods of his Providence
toward you. This I gather from that Phrase, I will come unto thee.

Come unto thee? What better News can there be than this (would one think) if
he read no further? What more welcome Guest can we have than God himself? who
is wont in these terms to express his tender love and kindness toward Sinners.
This is the thing that we pray for and entreat, That the Lord would be pleased
to be so gracious as to come to our souls. And it is very true; this is the
first signification of the Phrase, which declares his Grace and favor, whereby
he is moved to begin a kind Treaty with us: suing unto us and beseeching us
that he may have our affections; and that we will not dispose of them to any
one else but him, that loves us with so much tenderness.

But then behold! what obstinate impenitency does. It puts a stop to these
proceedings, and turns the course of Divine Providence another way. It changes
all this love and good will, into anger, displeasure and jealousy. His coming
now signifies quite another thing; His appearing is dreadful; His presence is
frightful, and astonishing: for He comes on another business; not to bless, but
to curse; not to bestow favors, but to punish and execute vengeance.

There is a double coming of God our Savior: One with Offers and Tenders of
Mercy; the other with a Rod in his hand to chastise our contempt and abuse of
the mercy offered. They that will not receive him in the former way, shall be
forced to receive him in the latter. Though they may refuse and reject his
Grace; they shall not be able to defend themselves from the effects of his
heavy displeasure.

The very name of our Blessed Savior, if you observe it, was (...), He that
comes, xi. Matt. 3. And what did he come for? He himself tells you what his
first business was, x. John 10. I am come that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly. But when (as he complains) men would not
come unto him, that they might have life, v. John 40. when He came unto his
own, and his own received him not, i. John 11. Then you hear of another sadder
coming of his, i. Revel. 7. Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall
see him, (even they that shut their eyes before, and in their blind rage
pierced him, and wounded him to death as a Malefactor) and all the kindreds of
the earth shall wail because of him.

His coming at the first is to invite us to come unto him, xi. Matthew. 28. where
you may read how he expects that all those Souls which groan under their sins,
and complain of the heavy load of them, all those who sigh that they have
committed them, should be weary of them and throw off the burden; take another
course, and come to submit themselves to the yoke of his holy Laws. But if they
will not be persuaded to this, all their entreaties will never persuade him to
save them. His heart will be turned against them; and He would have us mark how
much he is displeased at them, what a change and wonderful alteration there is
in his design upon them. For Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
holy ones, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and
of all their hard speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him, Jude
14, 15.

And thus the word visit in Scripture is differently used: Sometimes for Gods
bringing his blessings to those, to whom he is said to come; and sometimes for
his laying his stripes on the back of those Fools, that were insensible of his
love. I need not name the places, some of which I alleged the last Day of
Fasting and Prayer: And I make mention of all this only to this purpose, That
you may see what the effect of impenitency is. If you will not change, God
will. Not himself indeed, for He was always thus resolved, but his dealings
with you: which you shall not find so favorable to you as they have been. He
will not always wait to be so gracious as he is at present; for He is not
insensible of all the affronts, that impudent Sinners put upon Him. He will
take another course, since they will not; and meet them, as you shall hear
presently, after another manner than he was wont to do: making them know what
it is to abuse the goodness of their gracious God.

You would have him indeed, to change his Laws for your sakes; nay to change
Himself, and go back with his Word: to love those sins which he cannot but
hate, and pardon that, which he has told you he will punish: a change which is
impossible to be made. But another change, every man that goes on still in his
trespasses, shall find to his cost: a change which he would by no means suffer,
but which God has purposed and decreed and will not repent; which is, that He
will not always strive with men in so much love, but make Himself known to them
in another way, in tokens of his anger and wrath.

And that now would lead me to the Second thing: only before we leave this, let
us a little seriously consider it. Have you so much reason to love your sins,
that rather than change your lives, you care not though God turn his loving
kindness into displeasure? After your sins have turned the World upside down,
and made it such a confused and uncomfortable place as we now find it, do you
not care though they reach up unto Heaven, and make still a greater alteration
there, to our utter destruction? Is it of no concernment, in what manner God
comes to visit you? Is it all one whether he clothe himself with wrath and put
on vengeance, or come as a Friend, and make affectionate addresses to your
Souls? Would you have Him that used to knock at the door of your hearts,
desiring to come in, and entertain you with festival joys; break in upon you
with a dreadful violence, and fill you with the terrors of the Lord, with an
amazed Conscience, with benumming fears, with ghastly apprehensions of the
wrath to come, with the beginnings of Hell fire; and that not to turn but to
torment you?

Or can you be content that He should come against this sinful Nation, to break
down what He has built up, and to pluck up that which he has planted, as
Jeremiah speaks of his Country, xlv. 4.? Or would it be as welcome a sound as
any other to hear such a Cry as that in the Prophet Joel, ii. 1. The day of the
Lord comes, it is nigh at hand, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of
clouds and of thick darkness? wherein he will come to lash us with the severest
scourge of all other, for the abuse of the light of his glorious Gospel, for
the despisal of his Messengers, and our slighting all his benefits, and
continuing incorrigible under his Judgments.

O do not presume that you shall never see such a dismal time, because he has
not yet made you so miserable. Do not put away far from you this evil day; nor
imagine you shall always hear nothing but his kind invitations and his loving
entreaties, his good motions and his gracious promises: if you will not be
persuaded by them to turn unto Him, He will turn away from you and set himself
against you; He will not always strive in vain with you, but resolve at last
(though much against his first design) to abandon such stiffnecked Sinners, and
pronounce such a Sentence on them as that in the Prophet, i. Isai. 24. Ah, I
will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. And that is
the next Consideration.

II.
A continued course of sin, does in conclusion weary the patience and tire the
long-suffering of our most merciful and indulgent Lord and Master. For He says
here in my Text, I will come unto thee QUICKLY. There is a time when he will
bear no longer, but bring the Controversy to a speedy issue; in the ruin and
destruction of those that oppose him.

Now though there are many signs mentioned in Scripture of an approaching
ruin, yet I shall name but two. The first is, When Men have been not only
often rebuked for their sins, but convinced of their guilt and danger, and have
had their hearts set against them, and yet will not amend. For which we have
the known Maxim of the Wise Man, xxix. Prove. 1. He that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. This
is a mortal mark upon that person: A token of a plague of the heart so
incurable, that nothing is to be expected but a sudden death. Which will seize
on such men, if not presently, yet on a sudden, as to them; in a moment, when
they look not for it; but think themselves in peace and safety. Thus it was in
the days of Noah; and thus it was at our Saviors coming to destroy his
Crucifiers; and thus we see it oftimes with our eyes, or hear of it with our
ears, that the confident and the merry Sinner is in an instant cut off, and
goes down into the Pit.

But secondly, The condition of impenitent persons is never more dangerous,
than when they remain unreformed, after many punishments have been inflicted on
them, by diverse strokes of the Rod of God. Which seems to be supposed in those
words of our Savior, in his Letter to the last of these Churches, iii. Rev.
19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent.
As if he had said, When I would do good to men's souls, as long as I have any
hope of them, I correct and afflict them; that I may reduce them to obedience.
It concerns you therefore highly to stir up your selves to repent in good
earnest of those sins, for which you have smarted much already: for there are
no means to be used after these, but you must perish, if they do not prevail
upon your hearts. And this reason the Prophet Isaiah gives of the utter
desolation which was coming upon Israel, ix. Isai. 13, 14. For the people
turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts.
Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in
one day. To which many places might be added out of the Prophet Jeremiah; but
one shall suffice, vii. Jer. 27, 28. Therefore thou shall speak these words
unto them, but they will not hearken to thee: thou shall also call upon them,
but they will not answer thee. But thou shall say unto them, This is a Nation
that obeys not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receives correction:
truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth. That is to say, It is to no
purpose to speak to them any more. Thou may preach and bestow thy labor
upon them; but there will be no fruit of it. And therefore all that I have
further to command thee, is to pronounce this Judgment upon them; that they are
a people, who will not be moved to their duty, either by my word, or by my
correction; and therefore I give them over, as having no hope they will ever be
reclaimed. Cut off thy hair, O Jerusalem (in token of mourning, that is,) and
cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the Lord has
rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. So it follows there, ver.
29. to the terror of future Generations, who should read this doleful Sentence
upon those who had once been very dear to God; but were now, by reason of their
obstinate wickedness, become good for nothing but to be made examples to all
posterity, of his sorest displeasure.

And now, my Brethren, what do you think, when you bring these things nearer
home? Are neither of these signs and tokens of speedy vengeance, to be found
upon the Sinners of this Nation? Or rather do we not see both these marks of
our Lords coming quickly to reckon with us, for our abuse of his long patience
and forbearance of us? Have you not been often reproved, and felt the light of
God pierce into your very hearts? Has He not made you see the evil of your
ways; and so powerfully bowed and inclined your wills toward Him, as to make
you resolve to become better men? Has he not also humbled this Nation by his
mighty hand; and sent more Plagues than one to call us to repentance? First, He
made us sigh and groan under the miseries of a war; and then under those of a
sore Pestilence, which quickly, and as in a moment, smote down thousands of us,
and laid them in their Graves. After which a dreadful Fire quickly followed,
which was attended with that most disgraceful attempt, which our Enemies made
upon our Ships, the Bulwarks of this Land: and with many calamities since of
another sort, which have almost dissolved the Bonds of Society; and destroyed
that mutual confidence which ought to be between our Prince and his people; and
endangered our Religion and Liberties; and brought us into such a condition,
that we scarce know which way to extricate our selves out of those
perplexities, in which our sins have entangled us.

What should every one of us then do, who still survive the War, the Plague,
and all the rest of Gods Judgments, but speed our repentance and amendment of
life? You may think, perhaps, that the danger is now over, after so many
punishments: but in truth there is greater danger than ever, if you still go on
to provoke the Lord to jealousy. For what should He do with a people, but cast
them off, who will not be turned, no not by such a mighty hand and outstretched
arm, from their wicked courses? What our Savior says concerning those whom
Pilate slew together with their Sacrifices, and on whom the Tower in Siloam
fell, [ Suppose ye, that those Galilaeans were Sinners above all the
Galilaeans, because they suffered such things; or those eighteen the greatest
Sinners in Jerusalem, because the Tower fell on them, and killed them, etc.
xiii. Luke 1, 2, 3.] the same may I say to you with a small alteration: Think
you that those men who were slain in the late wars, were Sinners above all the
people of England, because they were cut off, and left you alive? I tell you
nay, but except ye repent, ye shall also perish. Or those eighty or ninety
thousand that fell by the Plague, think you that they were Sinners above all
men that dwelt in London and Westminster? I tell you nay; but except ye repent,
ye shall also perish. The time will come, when you shall also be called to an
account for your impenitency; if you still go on in it: and who knows how near
that time may be? In all likelihood, it will come the more speedily, if we take
no warning neither by Gods Word, nor by his Rod. Therefore I beseech you
quickly, before it be too late, to hearken to that voice, which says, Return,
return, O ye backsliding Children. If ever you mean to return, return now unto
me, says the Lord: and if you will put away your abominations out of my sight,
then shall you be settled in peace and prosperity.

Consider that Parable which St. Luke there adds, and read a description of
your own condition, verse. 6, 7, 8. You are a people planted as in a Garden of
God; whose Gospel is not only come to you, but has stayed long with you. He
has taken great care of you; and has dressed and pruned you, that you might
bring forth the fruit, which the knowledge of Christ ought to produce. Many
showers of his Grace have fallen upon you; and you have long felt the warm
beams of the Sun of righteousness, to make you fruitful. And therefore, think
also with your selves, that He has come many years seeking fruit; and
expecting to see some good grow out of all this care and cost of his love. But
alas! what has He found when He came to visit you? May He not complain, as He
does there, I have come these three years (or rather, one three year after
another, many times told over) seeking fruit, and find none? Is it not a wonder
then that He has not pronounced the Sentence upon us, which there follows; Cut
them down, why cumber they the ground? Is it not the greater wonder, seeing so
many others have had this heavy doom passed upon them? O admire at the patient
and long-suffering kindness of God, which has interposed on your behalf, and
moved Him to let you alone both that year, and this year also. First, In that
year; I mean that fatal year of cutting down, and casting out of the Vineyard:
when so many thousands perished in the late dreadful mortality. And now I may
add in this year also, this remarkable year; when the Axe was in a manner,
laid to the root of the Tree: Our Enemies, I mean, had laid a deep Design,
strongly grounded, and closely carried on, to cut us off and destroy both root
and branch; and, for any thing we know, in one day. For that there now is, and
has been for diverse years last past, a horrid and treasonable Plot and
Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the
murdering of his Majesty's Sacred Person, and for subverting the Protestant
Religion, and the ancient and established Government of this Kingdom; is become
now, in effect, the sense of the whole Nation: the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled having declared, in a Resolve of theirs, nemine
contradicente (upon March 25. last past) that they are fully satisfied, by the
proofs they have heard, of the truth of it.

And considering their industrious endeavors to conceal it, even now that it
is discovered, (whereas in reason, they should be the most zealous of all other
men, were they innocent, to have it thoroughly examined) their strong
Confederacies and steadfast Combinations, their many Oaths of secrecy, and
obstinate resolution to stick to the Design and to each other; it is a wonder
that it has not been effected, and that sudden destruction has not come upon
us, as pain upon a Woman in travail.

But let us not content our selves merely with admiration of his amazing
Providence over us, which has prolonged a while (we know not for how long or
short a time) the season of Grace unto us; let us not presume to abuse this
patience (for so we are to esteem it, not a perfect deliverance) nor be so
foolish as to imagine that it will last always: but think with our selves
rather, that the Lord of the Vineyard may, it is possible, have resolved, after
this year, or in some short space, after this new Husbandry of his, and such
extraordinary pains and care to save us, that we shall be cut down indeed, if
we will not bring forth fruit worthy of the Gospel. And therefore, looking upon
this as the day, wherein you may know and improve the things belonging to your
peace, be zealous, as our Lord exhorts, and repent: be quick and speedy, active
and diligent in this weighty business, now in this your day, lest you never
have such an opportunity again, but miserably perish in your sins.

Consider, I beseech you; do you not pray to God continually (if you have any
sense of Religion) that He would quickly dissipate all our fears; by laying
more and more open, and then utterly defeating all the wicked contrivances of
our enemies against us? Do you not think that He stays very long, before He
bring to light the very bottom of the Plot; and make their Treasons so visible
to all the World, that none may be able to gainsay it? Do you not think there
is reason to tremble (when you seriously reflect upon it) to see in what a
lamentable, unsettled and naked condition we are; in danger to be overrun with
Foreign Enemies, should they make an attempt upon us? Are you not all therefore
ready to say, Lord, make have to help us! make no tarrying, O our God! O my
Beloved, say the same to your selves; for there is the stop. Labor and prevail
with your own Souls, that they would make haste, that they would make no
tarrying: but instantly turn to God, in works meet for repentance; that so both
his present Judgments may be removed, and worse prevented.

I know nothing that can hinder the entertainment of this reasonable motion,
unless it be this, That men see there is not always such a speedy course taken
with Sinners, and therefore they presume God will still bear with them. For
they themselves have lived and sinned many years, and have escaped many
dangers: and though they have been affrighted sometimes with such Sermons as
this, yet they were worse scared than hurt. Still all things are as they were;
they are very well and prosperous, they have all that their hearts desire: and
therefore there hearts grow hard, and they suppose they are in no sudden danger.

In Answer to this, I shall say nothing but what is contained in the Third
Consideration here in my Text; which is,

III.
That all impenitent persons, as they oppose God so they, have God for their
Enemy: and He will set himself in opposition to them. For He tells this Church,
That if they will not repent, He will fight against them. Which denotes, that
He would become their Adversary, and look upon them as Rebels, nay as
irreconcilable Enemies: who will never submit to His Divine Government; which
is concerned therefore to destroy them. So that these impenitent Wretches, who
go on resolvedly in their sins, notwithstanding all that He can do to reclaim
them, gain but little by the patience and lenity of God toward them; and it is
but a small comfort that He does not presently strike them: seeing it is
certain, as the Psalmist expresses it, that He is bending his Bow, whetting his
Sword, and preparing for them the instruments of death.

Of this I need not say much, nor will the time permit it. It is sufficient to
know, That sometimes the deferring of Execution is a piece of hostility; and
makes the blow heavier when it comes. They are but treasuring and heaping up to
themselves wrath, against the day of wrath, (as the Apostle speaks, ii. Romans 4,
5.) who will not be led by the goodness of God, no, nor His Judgments to
repentance; but proceed to add sin to sin, till a most terrible vengeance
break out upon them. Which may be deferred perhaps from time to time, but with
no other design than a great Prince has, who is so powerful that He can have
the better of his Enemies when he will; and therefore forbears to fall upon
them not because he means to spare them, but only because he waits for an
opportunity, when he may do the more terrible execution, and take the severest
revenge on those whom he intends to ruin. What do sinful men mean then to
provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are they stronger than He? Will you not fear
Him, because He does not instantly smite? Shall your hearts be set in you to do
evil, because Judgment is not always speedily executed against an evil work?
Will you dare to offend Him, as if He could not, or presume upon Him, as if He
would not punish? Let me tell you, He is the more to be feared and dreaded, if
you understood your selves, for this forbearance. He delays to strike, not
because He cannot; but because He can when He pleases: not because He will not;
but because He will do it at such a time, when it will most serve the Wisdom of
His Providence. We are ignorant of all the reasons, why God does not do with
all, as He does with some. We know not for what causes they are, that He does
not come so quickly to reckon with one wicked man, as with another. It is
enough to affright us out of our wicked ways, to know that He looks upon such
persons as His Enemies; and that He will take the fittest season to come and
wound the head of his Enemies, the scalp of him that goes on still in his
trespasses. For that is the last Consideration.

IV.
That such persons as will not repent, being so often admonished, so patiently
born withal, so lovingly chastised and corrected; must expect nothing but the
execution of all our Lords threatenings against obstinate Sinners. So He says,
I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. For the understanding of
which Phrase, you must look back to the first Chapter of this Book, verse. 16.
where Christ is represented as having a sharp sword, and that two-edged, going
out of his mouth. The mouth it not the proper place for a sword to be in, which
uses to be girded to the thigh, or, when it is unsheathed, to be taken into the
hand. By this Phrase therefore is described the gracious method of our Lord
Christ; who threatens before He strikes. His sword at first is only in his
mouth; that is, He declares his vengeance which He will take against the
rebellious; and makes Proclamation that He will come and destroy them, if they
do not repent. But if these threatenings and denunciations of vengeance do not
prevail; if, notwithstanding all his declarations, they contemn His authority,
and will not stand in awe of Him as their Lord and their Judge: He will proceed
to do as He has said, and fight against them, as He tells us here in my Text,
with this sword, which before He threatened should come upon them to cut them
off. Now no man fights with a sword, but it is in his hand: and therefore these
words can signify nothing less, than that the punishments He had threatened and
solemnly denounced should fall upon hardened Sinners; and that He would execute
what He had resolved and make good his word, if they took no heed to the
warnings He had given them.

Know then, all ye that go on fearlesly in your evil ways, notwithstanding all
that we can say from God unto you; that you shall not always hear the mere
thunder of terrible words, the sound and noise of wrath and damnation
hereafter, of blood and war, of plagues and tumults and subversions of Churches
and Kingdoms here (that is, the sword will not always be in his mouth) but you
shall feel in the conclusion the strokes of his heavy displeasure; and He will
make you know by dismal effects, that His words are not light and vain, which
vanish into Air; but they remain in everlasting force, and shall all be
fulfilled.

Now this Sword being two-edged, which cuts on both sides, his fighting with
it, may denote the execution of his threatenings both upon the Bodies and upon
the Souls of his Enemies: whom He punishes oftimes in their outward, as well as
in their spiritual estate.

I.
For the first of these, Those words are very terrible, which you meet withal
in our Saviors Letter to the next Church, ver. 21, 22, 23. of this Chapter, I
gave her space to repent of her fornication, but she repented not. Behold, I
will cast her into a Bed, and them that commit Adultery with her into great
tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. And I will kill her Children
with death, and all the Churches shall know that I am He which searches the
reins and hearts, and I will give unto every one of you, according to your
works. Which if we apply to our selves, we cannot deny but that we have been
already in great tribulation; and what further punishments the righteous Lord
has reserved for us, except we repent, we are not able certainly to tell: but
this is sure, that it is not likely there should be any peace to such a wicked
people. Our sins are so crying, that they will not suffer us to be quiet, but
give us further disturbance, till they have utterly confounded us: unless we
will part with these troublers of our Israel, and become more obedient
Christians. There have been innumerable Sermons preached, and Books printed to
demonstrate this truth, That all those sins which are now so rife among us,
sloth and negligence, luxury and excess, whoredom and adultery, perfidiousness
and dishonesty, infidelity or indifference in Religion, contempt of all
Government Civil and Spiritual, etc. naturally tend unto (and can end in
nothing else but) the subversion of those Families, and that Kingdom and Church
wherein they reign: besides that the Divine Justice is concerned to punish
them, and will be avenged, as the Prophet speaks, of such a Nation as this. And
who is there that does not see, there are instruments of Divine Justice ready
at hand, bloody instruments, that offer themselves to be employed and are
prepared to do the execution, if our repentance do not move Him, by some
miraculous Providence, to prevent it? The Papists I mean, the sworn Enemies of
our peace and settlement; who, as they want no will so, have behaved themselves
as if they thought they did not want power to destroy us. Men of as wicked
principles, as the Father of mischief can invent: of no Faith, no Justice, no
Charity, no Moderation (if they be spirited by them, who now rule in that
Church) but inflamed with a false zeal for God and Religion; which will let
them stick at no Cruelty, no Butchery, no Treachery or treasonable attempt, to
compass their desired end. We may say of them as David does of his enemies, v.
Psalm. 9. There is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is very
wickedness: their throat is an open Sepulcher, though they flatter with their
tongue. And xxxviii. 19. Our enemies are lively, and strong: they that hate us
wrongfully, are many in number. So many, and so industrious and desperately
bent to seek our ruin, that if the Lord had not been on our side, they had
swallowed us up quick; when their wrath was kindled against us. And we may be
sure it is not quenched, but rather more incensed by this disappointment: So
that we had need, with serious repentance, earnestly beseech Him, in the words
of David elsewhere, xvii. Psalm. 13. Arise, O Lord, disappoint them and cast
them down: deliver my soul from the wicked, which is a Sword of thine.

Which words teach us, That the wicked are one kind of Sword, which my Text may
speak of, wherewith the Lord fights against impenitent Sinners: whom He
punishes very often by other Sinners like themselves. And there is no sort of
punishment that does such dreadful execution, as the fierceness of man; if the
Lord do not restrain it. We have reason therefore to cry, in the words of
Jeremiah, (which we may apply to this business) O Sword of the Lord, how long
will it be e're thou be quiet? Put up thy self into thy Scabbard; rest and be
still, xlvii. 6. Let us see no more wars, no more bloodshed, no more sheathing
our Swords in one another Bowels. But then we must add, as it there follows,
How can it be quiet, if the Lord have given it a charge against us; and if here
He has appointed it? If He resolve this way to punish us, there is no way to
escape it (but by repentance) and we cannot imagine how sore a punishment it
may prove: for the tender mercies of the wicked (says Solomon, xii. Prove. 10.)
are cruel. Which was never more verified of any sort of wicked men, than of
those Jesuited Zealots, who are now enraged against us, and hate us, as David
speaks, xxv. Psalm. 19. with cruel hatred.

We cannot tell yet how they intended to have treated us now, but we know what
they intended, and what they did in former times. Particularly in the Year
1588. when Don Pedro de Valdez, a great Commander in the Spanish Invasion,
confessed to the Lords of the Council (who examined him after he was taken,
What meant those Whips of Cord and Wire wherewith their Ships were stored) that
they intended, if they had prevailed, to have whipped us Heretics to death. This
he answered in a bold manner; and being further asked what they would have done
with our young Children, replied as boldly, All above seven years old should
have gone the same way with their Fathers: the rest should have lived; only we
would have branded them in the Forehead with the Letter L, signifying Lutheran;
and reserved them for perpetual bondage. This the Relator (Dr Sharp) takes God
to witness, he received from two of the greatest Lords of the Council after his
Examination: with a Commandment to publish it to the Queens Army which lay at
Tilbury, in his next Sermon.

It may be objected indeed that this was only an insolent rant of one of those
huffing Foreigners; who intended, as he professed, not only to subdue our
Nation, but to root it wholly out: and there cannot be, you may fancy, any so
barbarous among our selves, that design such a total destruction of us they
call Heretics. To which I have nothing to say but this, That the ordinary
Discourse of Papists here in former times, has been as bloody and cruel as can
be imagined: and we have little reason to think they have less venom now, that
they have more power by the increase of their numbers. For I find these words
in an Exposition upon 2 Thessalonians. ii. printed fifty years ago, John Squire, Sermon.
V. Page 138.
by a famous Preacher in the City of London, Know we not their common
threatenings? What they whisper among the Common People, what they will do when
their day does come? (Christ grant that their day may never come.) When it
shall come, do they not whisper that they will no more hew down the branches,
but tear up the very roots of the reformation, rooting out every Professor
thereof? Which agrees too plainly with what we read in a late Traitors Letters
concerning their hopes now to extirpate that pestilent Heresy (as they miscal
our holy Religion) which has spread it self through these Northern Parts of
the World. Nor have their practices been unsuitable, as the Irish Rebellion
alone sufficiently testifies; wherein three hundred thousand souls were sent to
the other World, as not fit to live in this; for no other cause but their
Religion: and it is manifest they then intended to have left none remaining in
that Country but themselves; if they could have satisfied their blood-thirsty
desires.

Which things I remember for no other end, but to awaken you to a serious
repentance of those sins, which have brought us near the brink of the like
destruction: lest the Lord deliver us, at last, into the hands of these
Tormentors. Whose tyranny is so insupportable, that should they prevail, the
Posterity of them who now wish for that woeful day, would sadly repent of it in
future times; and curse the memory of those who brought them into such slavery.
Let them but read the complaints and hearken to the groans of their Forefathers
under the Roman bondage, before the Reformation of Religion; and they may be
convinced of their folly, or madness rather, in desiring and endeavoring to
return unto it. All the World sighed for deliverance from it, particularly
France and Germany, and Poland, as we find in the public Acts of those
Countries: who said of the Bishop of Rome's tyranny, as St. Peter did of the
burden of Jewish Ceremonies, that it was a yoke which neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear. And among all the authentic Records (to use the
words of him that set out the Review of the Council of Trent in our language)
which there are of the Popes Usurpation, there are not to be found more woeful
Tragedies of his tyranny, than such as were acted upon our Stage. No higher
Trophies erected to his ambition, than here in England. No more rare examples
of devout, abused patience, than among us. Till extreme necessity made us
despair into courage and fortitude; when the avarice and exactions of Rome
having left us nothing else, at last robbed us of our patience. All our
Histories are full of proofs of this; which may ease me of the labor of
relating any of them: nor is this a place so proper for it.

II.
Let me pass rather to the second thing, and turn toward you the other edge of
this Sword which my Text speaks of: which is the executing his threatenings
against the souls of the impenitent; and sending upon them spiritual judgments.
Which if we have any sense and feeling, we must think are the most grievous of
all other: And here I might represent to you, what a dismal thing it would be,
if you should have your eyes put out once more; and be buried again in the
darkness of ignorance and Popish Superstition; being robbed of your reason, and
made to believe the groffest absurdities: and having no liberty left to examine
any thing, be forced to follow blindly, whithersoever your blind Guides will
lead you. For this is the least you can expect, if our inveterate enemies
prevail over us. Suppose they should be so kind as not to kill us, nor torment
us, nor so much as imprison us; yet they will undoubtedly exercise the greatest
severity against our Religion; and endeavor to destroy that, though they
should spare us. The holy Scriptures must be imprisoned; your understandings
and spirits inthralled; the Worship of God profaned and corrupted, the
Idolatry of the Mass erected; the very Doctrine of repentance poisoned; and all
other ways of serving God, but according to their Superstition, absolutely
prohibited.

We may suffer our selves to be abused, if we please, with fair words and
plausible speeches, wherewith they deceive the hearts of the simple: but
whatsoever they say, and petition for themselves, when they are under Hatches;
they are resolved, when they have power, to give no toleration to any Religion
but their own. Thus Ribadeneir a (the famous Writer of the life of Ignatius the
Founder of the Jesuits) labors to prove at large in his Book of a Christian
Prince; That it is impossible for Catholics to unite with Heretics in a firm
bond of Society, and to agree to live together in a peaceable, quiet Body of a
Commonwealth (which is worthy our notice and remembrance, and so are his
Reasons.) For how can one carry a Serpent in his bosom, says he, and not be
ulcerated by his bitings? or touch Pitch, and not be defiled? etc. Or are there
more innate and inbred enmities between the Wolves and the Lambs, than there
ought to be between Catholics and Heretics? No, says he, the Council of
Toledo determines, That no King hereafter should reign, but before he ascended
the Throne, he should swear, among other things, that he would permit no man
who was not a Catholic to live in his Kingdom, etc. And if this be not
sufficient to show what these Fathers would be at, (who now are the ruling men
in that Church) I might cite others, who make it equally dangerous to have two
Religions in a Kingdom, and to have a Wife and a Whore in one and the same
Family.

Sometimes indeed they confess the iniquity of the times (as they speak) may be
such, that a Prince of their Religion may be forced to tolerate ours; and
solemnly do it by compact and agreement. But then they say again, That he being
compelled unwillingly to fall into a guilt, must not willingly fall into
another, by confirming what he has done, when he has power to break the
agreement. And they have devised several ways to free such a Prince from his
obligation, when he thinks fit to null what in words he seemed to establish:
but I shall not trouble you with them; nor should I have said any thing at all
of this, had it not seemed to me necessary to inform you, That whatsoever they
may seem to give you with one hand, they have devices artificially and
cunningly to take away with the other. Whereby they justify what Father Deza
said in a Sermon of his in praise of their Founder Ignatius. Who was the mighty
Angel, he told them, that St John saw in the x. Rev. 1. who came down from
Heaven clothed with a Cloud, and a Rainbow was upon his head, and his face was
as the Sun, etc. And enquiring why he was represented as clothed with a Cloud,
makes this answer; that it signifies that he hides and conceals his generous
and sublime counsels and designs: and represents also the Government of our
Society, which manifest their effects, but hide their rules and their modes or
manner of acting. As of old, says he, a Cloud covered the Tabernacle of the
Lord, and the Glory of the Lord entered into it: so God who has built this
Tabernacle on Earth (he means the Society of the Jesuits) has with the same
wisdom ordained, for the preserving the honor of so holy a thing, ut ejus
gubernandi ratio adeo secreta esset, that the reason and manner of its
Government should be so secret, that no man should be able to know it.

Which I think you see verified to the full at this day. We feel the effects of
their Counsels, but we see not the secret Springs by which they move. They are
covered with a Cloud indeed, and cast a mist before peoples eyes, by a number
of cunning distinctions, crafty evasions, and secret reservations: wherein they
instruct their Proselytes, that they may be able to do the most villainous
things; and yet not be seen, but lie concealed from the eyes of the world, even
when they are caught, and many evidences are produced of their wickedness. O my
Soul, will every one here be apt to say (with good old Jacob) come not thou
into their secret, unto their Assembly, my Honor, be not thou united, xlix.
Genesis 6. But it is not enough to pray against their artifices; we must take a
more effectual course, by true repentance, to engage the wisdom of Heaven on
our side, to defeat their most crafty and subtle contrivances. Else we may be
cozened and gulled out of our Religion, if by outward force they cannot prevail
against us, and return in time to our old blind devotion: according to the
observation of St Stephen, that when the Israelites would not obey Moses, then
in their hearts they turned back again into Egypt; and then God turned and gave
them up to worship the Host of Heaven.

But suppose none of these things should befall us; but we should keep our
Religion: what shall we be the better for it, if we do not repent? Nay, how
much the worse shall we grow, by the abuse of his abundant Grace, and so many
remarkable deliverances from our Enemies, which we have received? There are
other spiritual evils, that He has threatened to inflict upon the impenitent;
and are the sorest wounds, the sharpest punishments, that He can give with this
Sword of his mouth. They are such as these, the withdrawing of his Grace, the
taking away his holy Spirit; and consequently ceasing to move their hearts unto
repentance; denying them the helps they have had, and putting no such stops to
them in their evil courses, as sometimes they have found: but removing those
things which might excite and stir them up to amendment; and on the contrary
permitting such as may confirm them in their contumacy, whereby they become
hardened, and sealed up unto condemnation; to be punished with everlasting
destruction, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
Angels, to take vengeance on all those that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of Christ.

These are sad and dismal things, which should stir up every one of our drowsy
hearts, to mark and observe and lay hold upon every good motion of God's good
Spirit in our hearts unto repentance: lest it depart away from us, and by
degrees leave us insensible, utterly insensible of the things belonging to our
peace. Which, one would think, should be so dear to us (though we look no
further than this present World) that we should readily consent to any thing
that will procure it; and set our selves against that which obstructs it, and
will finally undo us. And that we all confess is our heinous sins; For all the
power of the Devil and of Men, though never so violently bent against us,
cannot destroy us; unless we continue still in the Plot, as I may call it,
wherein we are engaged too deeply against our selves; by our wilful persisting
in profaneness, filthiness, contempt of Religion, and of that Authority which
supports it; and such like sins: which have brought us into that low, that weak
and contemptible condition; in which our enemies could never have hoped to have
seen us, unless they had first debauched us.

That has been their great craft, as it was Balaam's; to whose devices my Text
has a particular respect. He saw clearly there was no way to prevail against
Israel, but by engaging them in Idolatry and Irreligion: and that there was no
way to engage them in that, but by enticing them to Fornication. So the
Samaritans excellently gloss upon his Story Apud Hotting. Smegma Orientale, p.
444.
: who introduce Balaam telling the Princes of Midian, That the holy Angels
surrounded Israel, and the King of Heaven and Earth was with them: so that
neither Magic, nor any thing else, could prevail against them; unless they
admitted some infidelity, or committed some grievous sin. Then, said he, the
Creator will be angry with them, so that they shall perish, and not one of them
remain. For the accomplishment of which, he advised them to send the most
beautiful Women in their Country among them, every one of them with the Idol
which She worshipped, in her hands: and that She should offer her self to be
theirs, if they would eat of her Meat, drink of her Drink, and worship her God.
This was eating things offered to Idols, mentioned before my Text; whereby many
of them perished; and the rest were saved, who severely punished these
enormities, and thereby showed their hatred and detestation of the wickedness
of their Brethren.

After which pattern Christ expected the Church of Pergamus should be severe
against all those among them, who were seduced from the Christian purity in
Doctrine and in Manners, by the like artifice of the Devils Agents. Whereby he
knew he should put them out of Christ's favor; and if they continued in those
wicked courses, quite unchurch them, and bring them again under his vassalage.
This is the Repentance, which Christ here calls for in my Text: and which He
requires of all Governors and those in Authority Civil or Spiritual; that they
should not be slack in punishing sin, and suppressing all false Doctrine, and
especially those lewd opinions which lead men to all manner of looseness and
wickedness.

For, if you observe it, the Church of Pergamus had: been steadfast in the Faith
in the time of persecution, and when Antipas his faithful Martyr suffered, were
a commendable people in many things (as we likewise in this Church, at least
our Forefathers, may be commended for this, that in the days of Fire and
Faggot, many chose to dye rather than to change their Religion.) But there were
a few things which Christ had against them. First, Because they had those among
them, who held the Doctrine of Balaam, etc. and Secondly, Those who held the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans: who were another sort of filthy people; giving
themselves over unto promiscuous lusts of uncleanness. When He says, They had
such among them, He means they connived at them, and did not eject them: For it
was not their fault, that those men held such opinions; but that they suffered
them without the censure of the Church. And then immediately He adds, Repent,
or else I will come against thee quickly, etc. As much as to say, You must
suffer these men no longer among you; (that was their repentance, at that time)
or if you do, I will not endure it; but will come and punish you for this
indifference in Religion.

Now I leave you all to judge, whether the Factors of the evil one, have not
taken this very course to unchurch us; and we by our negligence be not in the
way to unchurch our selves. They have infused poisonous principles into men's
minds, and taught them, for instance, to decry Marriage, as a foolish slavery,
to think Fornication an innocent thing; and so to give up themselves to commit
all uncleanness with greediness: that so, forgetting all respect to our
Religion, they may in the issue make them Romanists, and proselyte them to
their Idolatrous Services; that is, make them ten times more the Children of
the Devil, than they were befoee. And what other way is there to be saved from
the destruction which these and other vices will bring upon us, but (that which
we are not willing to take) for every man to repent of his own wickedness and
turn to God: and then for those who have authority, to set themselves with all
their might to punish and to root out such wickednesses, with all the
principles that lead unto them, together with the Abettors and Supporters of
them?

And here it may be fit to observe, That a few things, if very destructive to
Religion, may provoke the Divine severity against a Church. For they were no
more, that Christ charges this Church of Pergamus withal; and yet, if they did
not amend, He threatens to come and fight against them with the Sword of his
mouth: What will become of us then, whom He has so many things to charge
withal; if we go on still to provoke Him with them to jealousy? I doubt we
cannot clear our selves from such filthinesses, as are here mentioned; nor from
foul Doctines leading to them, which too many have entertained; nor from
coldness and indifference in Religion, if not plain infidelity; nor from a
disposition of heart in some to turn back to Rome, the spiritual Egypt, again;
nor from conniving at the defection which so many have made from Christ's true
Religion here established, and not endeavoring to suppress all those that seek
to destroy it. And which is still more, we are foully guilty of slighting that
Authority, which should call men to an account for all their wickedness; and
not only reprove and rebuke, but censure and chastise, and exercise Christ's
Discipline upon notorious Offenders. This is a thing not only laughed at and
despised; but hated and scorned: nay, the Ministers of Christ themselves are
but lightly esteemed. For which, if there were nothing else, we may be sure
Christ will reckon with us.

Reckon with us, did I say? He has done it in part already; and yet we are not
cured of this malignant humor: which makes me fear the saddest part of the
reckoning is still behind. Take the Prognostication in the words of a great
Doctor of this Church Dr Jackson on the Creed, Book II. Chap. 9.
: who thus denounced God's Judgments against this Nation, a good while before
the late Wars, upon this very account, That he saw the people running headlong
into this great sin; which is marvellously increased since that time.

Questionless, says he, this open, malapert, scoffing disobedience, to all
Ecclesiastical Power, now openly professed by the meanest, and countenanced by
many great ones of the Laity, is the sin which (to all that know Gods
Judgments, or have been observant to look into the days of our visitation)
cries loudest in the Almighties ears (more loud by much than the Prayers of
Friars, Monks and Jesuits do) for Gods vengeance upon this land. For vengeance
to be executed by no other than our sword, inveterate, malicious enemies; by no
other grievances, than by the doubled grievances of the long-enraged Romanists
iron-yoke: which is now prepared for us, ten times more heavy and irksome than
that was, which our Forefathers have born.

I pray God this do not prove a true Prediction. If it do, we cannot say but we
were forewarned; and that Gods Watchmen discharged themselves, and told us
beforehand of the danger. Which we had better prevent, by becoming more
obedient to their godly admonitions; by submitting to their just censures; by
esteeming them very highly for their works sake; and giving them all due
encouragement to do their duties sincerely. And though some be negligent, and
idle, or ignorant, let not either the baseness or the leudness of any of their
persons, tempt you to despise their office: For that is the reason (in that
Doctors opinion) why God sends no better men in many places. God knows, says
he, for whose fake it is; but we may at fear it is especially for the
infidelity and disloyalty of this people toward Him, and for their
disobedience to his Messengers; that He sends them such idle, foolish and lewd
Pastors, as they have in many places.

Because the Laity of this Land are so prone and headstrong to cast off Christ's
yoke, and to deny due obedience to his faithful Ministers; He therefore sets
such Watchmen over them in many places, as they shall have no lust to obey, in
any thing that they shall propose to them; but harden their hearts in
infidelity and disobedience. Which, I have shown you already, is one of the
most fearful Judgments, that God can inflict upon us; and which we ought to
dread, more than the enraged Romanists iron-yoke; which, he says, is prepared
for us.

It has been preparing many years; and it seems now to have been very near to
be clapped, when we thought not of it, upon our necks. It is a Miracle of Gods
mercy that it was not: But let not that make us too confident, that it shall
never be laid upon us; nor fancy it is quite broken in pieces, because we are
slipped from under it at present. For if our shameful disobedience to the Gospel,
and contempt of its Ministers still continue, (notwithstanding that they are
acknowledged to be much better now in most places, than when that Doctor wrote)
I fear we do but feed our selves with vain hopes of an absolute deliverance. Or
suppose He will not let them be the Instruments of that punishment, which our
sins deserve (because they of that Church are so exceeding wicked; so void,
that is, of all faith, truth and honesty; so perfidious, malicious and cruel:
and all under a color and pretense of Religion; which warrants all these
things, and makes them the more abominable) yet assure your selves He will find
some other way, to execute the Judgments He has threatened to the impenitent.
There is some likelihood He will take them in their own craftiness: but let not
the hope of that tempt you to be secure; for He will destroy us too, in our
impudent disobedience, and hardness of heart; which will not be moved by any
thing to come to repentance: No, not when we our selves acknowledge that we
expect mercy and deliverance from Him, upon no other terms. For so we
constantly pray, in the Collect for deliverance from our enemies: where we
first acknowledge that to Him it justly belongs to punish Sinners, and to be
merciful to them that truly repent: and then desire Him to deliver us from the
hand of our enemies; to abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound
their devices. Unless we repent, we here confess that we have no reason to
expect his salvation; but rather such punishments, as He justly inflicts upon
such Sinners, as will notwithstanding go on still in those trespasses, whereby
they see, they are in danger to perish inevitably.

Let me once more therefore beseech you, as you love your souls, as you love
your Religion, your Lives, your Liberties, and all that is dear to you; examine
and search and try your selves by the infallible test of God's most holy Word:
lay your hearts to that Rule while you have it; and resolve by God's gracious
assistance, to bring them to a sincere conformity with it.

Especially let all good men (whatsoever the rest are pleased to do) apply
their endeavors to purify themselves more perfectly, to walk more
circumspectly, to shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Generation; and to cry mightily unto God for his sparing mercy. It is possible
they may be saved, though He punish others. Nay, by their importunate cries
unto Him, and sollicitous prayers, day and night, for this poor Church and
Kingdom, they may obtain some respite of his Judgments, and prevail for the
putting them off till a further time: if they cannot quite avert them.

Ahab's humiliation, you know, procured this favor: And therefore if all, both
King and people, did this day imitate him, so far as with great sorrow and
affliction of Spirit to acknowledge their offenses, earnestly beg pardon, cry
for mercy with strong and constant importunity, and reform some notorious sins
(though not all of which we are guilty) it might prove a prolonging of our
tranquillity. Nay, it is possible, as I said, that, though others continue
still insensible and negligent yet, if all good people would make it their
business every day to grow better, and to pray to God incessantly, that He
would at least forbear us, and have patience with us, expecting still longer,
if we will bring forth fruit worthy of his Gospel; it is likely they might
obtain this mercy, of enjoying truth and peace in our days.

Let me speak to you therefore in the words of a pious and learned man, before
the late wars.

All ye that fear God, and tremble under the expectation of his wrath, give Him
no rest, stand up in the breach, make a strong assault, as I may say, upon
Heaven with your Prayers; give not over till you have received a gracious
answer: till the sins of our Nation be pardoned, his imminent Judgments
averted, his ancient favors recovered; till He have rebuked Satan, and trodden
Him under our feet; till He have frustrated the bloody hopes and desires of the
enemies of his Truth; till He build up the breaches, raise the ruins, and bind
up the wounds of his Sion: Saying with Daniel, O Lord God, we have sinned and
committed iniquity, etc. yet compassion and forgiveness is with Thee, O Lord:
and therefore we beseech Thee, hear the Prayers of thy Servants, and their
Supplications; and cause thy face to shine upon this Church, for thy Names
sake. O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord consider, and do it: defer not, for
thy own sake, O our God: for thy Name is called upon us, and we are thy people.

THE END.
A SERMON PREACHED On the Late FAST, DECEMBER. xxii. 1680. Afternoon.
Rev. III. beginning of the third Verse. Remember therefore how thou have
received and heard, and hold fast, and repent.


THE sad and calamitous condition of this, once most happy, Church and Kingdom,
is so great and so visible, that it can be no longer dissembled: but we must
confess with the Prophet Isaiah (in the first Lesson for this Morning Prayer,
i. 5.) that the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, etc. which has
moved his Majesty (by the desire of his Parliament) to cause it to be
proclaimed to all his people; that we may be awakened to look about us, and see
how we may prevent the dreadful Judgments which are now impending over us.

That which has occasioned this deplorable state of things is (as we are told
in the Proclamation which called us hither) the impious and horrid Conspiracies
of a Popish Party; who have not only plotted and intended the destruction of
our Sovereign, the subversion of the Government and Religion established among
us; but still obstinately prosecute their intentions, notwithstanding Gods most
wonderful discovery of their wickedness.

And one of the ways whereby they carry on this design, being (as we are there
also informed) by fomenting divisions among our selves; these are no less to be
bewailed by us than any other thing whatsoever: both as a calamity, and as one
of those sins, those most grievous and many sins; which must be acknowledged to
be the main cause of all our dangers.

And they are so great, that, in humane reason, they can by no other means be
remedied, than by the special hand of Heaven. Which we come therefore here to
implore, in a particular blessing upon the consultations and endeavors of the
great Council of the Kingdom; and in defeating the wicked counsels and devices
of our enemies; and uniting the hearts of all his Majesty's loyal Protestant
Subjects.

But these great Blessings we cannot reasonably hope to obtain, no not by our
Fasting and Humiliation and Prayers; unless we endeavor a true reconciliation
with God: by being unfeignedly penitent; and resolving to forsake those sins,
which we our selves confess have brought us into such distresses and
perplexities, as nothing else can remedy.

Now in order unto this, As I excited you, on the last Day of solemn Fasting
and Prayer, to a serious and speedy Repentance; by such Arguments as I found in
those words of our Savior, to another of the seven Churches of Asia, ii. 16.
Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and fight against thee with the
sword of my mouth: so at this time I shall direct you a little in the way and
method of repentance; and point at some things of which you are to repent: from
these words which I have read out of our Savior's Letter, to the Church of
Sardis; with whom we of this Church have too manifest a resemblance.

For as our blessed Lord complains ( ver. 1.) we have a name that we live, i.
e. are good Christians: but alas! in deed and truth are dead; for we produce
not the fruits of Christian virtue. There is a great deal of bustle and stir
about Religion, for which we seem to be mightily concerned: but the inward life
and power of it is generally wanting, which we do not love to be troubled
withal. Nay, we can scarce say so much of our people as God does of Judah in
the first Lesson for Evening Prayer (lviii. Isai. 2.) They seek me daily, and
delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness and forsook not the
Ordinances of their God, etc. (which alas! we have most openly deserted) though
this was far short, we find in that Chapter, of making them an acceptable
Nation to him. At the best we must confess we are fallen asleep and grown very
slothful, as our Savior here supposes ( ver. 2.) them of Sardis to have been:
and there is so great and universal a decay of true piety and goodness among
us; that we are in apparent danger to lose the small remainders of it.
Something good there is still left in this Church, as there was in that: but
far from that entire and complete obedience, which our Lord expects from us; as
will appear by considering what is to be done by us, for our recovery to a
better condition.

And there are three things which our Lord here requires of them in my Text:
and are incumbent upon every one of us, as our necessary Duty, if we would be
saved from our present danger.

First, To remember what they had received and heard. Secondly, To hold it
fast. Thirdly, To repent; of their forgetfulness, I suppose, their looseness
and indifferency in their Religion.
I shall treat of them all in the order wherein they stand: and consider them,
both with respect to the condition of that Church, to whom they were first
delivered; and then with respect to ours, who have no less need of such
admonitions.

I.
The first of them supposes, That they had been taught some Doctrine: which they
had received and entertained with belief; and had heard it also often since
inculcated and pressed (so I understand the words) by those Pastors who were
set over them by the Apostle, or those who first delivered the Truth unto them.
Which was nothing else but the Christian Religion; of which I must not here
speak at large; but only tell you, It is that way of serving God, which is
prescribed by Christ and his Apostles, in the Books of the New Testament.
Wherein we now read, what they then received by word of mouth from the
Apostles; and understand fully what we must believe and do to be saved.

Now as there is no cause to which God more frequently ascribes the sins, and
particularly the Idolatry of the Children of Israel; than their forgetfulness
of Him, and of his Law, and of what He had done for them: so this very thing
(stupid forgetfulness and neglect of what Christ and his Apostles delivered, by
Signs and wonders and mighty deeds) introduced that deadness in Religion, of
which our Savior complains in the beginning of this Chapter; and He foresaw
would bring in all the corruptions which afterward followed in the Church, and
began very early to appear in the Christian World. For there arose false
Apostles and false Prophets, nay direct Antichrists (as this very Apostle Sr
John tells us) men who denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
that brought in damnable Heresies, slighted the authority of the Apostles,
turned the Grace of God into lasciviousness; nay, brought back the old
Idolatry, as you read in the foregoing Chapter of this Book, verse. 14.20.

And though this Church of Sardis is not charged with so deep a degree of
Apostasy, as those of Pergamus and Thyatira; yet there was great danger of
falling into it, unless they took this advice of our Savior, to remember
(better than they had done) what they had received and heard. Which is the very
same with that, which God himself had given of old to the Israelites, to
prevent their defection from Him, (in many places of the Book of Deuteronomy,
viii. 1, 2, 18, etc.) and which his Prophets were wont to give, in after times,
as the first step to their recovery, when they had revolted from God their
Savior, xlvi. Isai. 8, 9. vi. Mic. 5. Who here calls upon his Church in like
manner, to bring to remembrance, and think again and again, till they had fixed
it in their mind, what they had received; and with what affection also they had
embraced the Gospel of God's Grace (for that may be implied in the Particle
(...) how you have received and heard) as the only means to preserve them from
lapsing farther into a worse condition, and losing that good which was still
remaining, but ready to dye among them. This the Apostles afterward endeavored
with great care and diligence, and promised as we read in St. Peter (2. i. 12,
13, 15.) to endeavor that after their decease, they might have those things in
remembrance always, which they had been taught: But for want of the like
diligence and watchfulness in the people (who did not take such heed as they
ought to have done to these admonitions) the Christian Religion, in process of
time, was so adulterated, that a great part of the Church fell into that
lamentable apostasy, which is foretold and described in this Book of the
Revelation: and which we see now fulfilled too plainly in the Church of Rome
and those of its Communion.

Which have so far degenerated from the primitive Christianity (such is the
mischief of not reflecting perpetually, upon what was first delivered and
received) that their Religion looks more like the old Paganism, revived in a
new shape; than that good old way of worshipping God, which our Savior taught,
when He came to destroy the works of the Devil. And they were still plunging
themselves further into such gross Superstitions, as endangered the very Being
of Christianity, (by magnifying the Blessed Virgin and St. Francis to such a
degree, that they were regarded more than Christ himself) that a Reformation
became absolutely necessary; and was generally desired, as it were easy to
show, by men of the greatest note, in these parts of Christendom, for choice
learning and piety.

Nay, in that very Council, which they themselves packt to hinder the
Reformation (that of Trent I mean) Ten several Kingdoms and States, desired
both by their Ambassadors and Prelates, That the Cup in the holy Communion
might be restored to the people: from whom it had been sacrilegiously taken; to
the manifest violation of the Christian Religion, which had instituted it in
both kinds. And many pressed for Divine Service in a known tongue; the want of
which was another palpable corruption, and shameless abuse in the Roman Church.
Which many desired might be reformed in other Particulars: but nothing could be
obtained from them who were resolved to baffle all these pious endeavors. In
order to which, they took such a course, that there were more Italian Bishops
in that Council, who would vote as they were directed (sometime more by twenty,
sometime by an hundred) than there was of all the World beside. So that, in
effect, all these Parts of Christendom would have reformed, had not Italy
opposed it; and craftily combined by all manner of artifices to hinder these
honest intentions.

Which, blessed be God, prevailed notwithstanding in this Church: and were so
zealously and yet so prudently prosecuted, that we were happily purged, by the
singular Grace of God to us, from all those corruptions, which had infected the
Body of Religion; without the loss of any part of that Truth, which was
anciently and at first received. For when we reformed, we did not set up a new
Religion, as they falsely and foolishly accuse us; but only cast out their
novel errors, and reduced all things to the ancient Standard or Rule of Faith,
and Worship, which was once delivered to the Saints; that is, to the Church of
Christ. As will appear by applying all this to our selves, and remembering you,
as briefly as I can, what it is, that we received, and have often since heard,
to be the true Doctrine of Christianity, as it stands reformed from the
corruptions and abuses of the Roman Church.

1. Which is no other than that, which the Church of Sardis and all the rest at
first received; The fundamental Principle of our Religion being this, That all
things necessary to be believed and done for the obtaining salvation, are
contained and plainly enough expressed in the holy Scriptures. A Compendium of
which, as to matters of Faith, is drawn up in the Apostles Creed (as it is
explained by the famous Council of Nice) which comprehends all things that are
necessary to be believed, in order to eternal life.

2. Yet we acknowledge that it is not sufficient, as you have often heard, to
believe: but though our sincere profession of Faith, according to what is
revealed in the holy Scriptures, and comprehended in the Creed, do enter us
into the state of Justification; yet the fruits of Faith in a godly life, are
absolutely necessary to continue us in it. For that very Faith which justifies
us, does imply and include in it a purpose, and is accompanied with a promise
of holy obedience: Which if it be not performed, we cannot be accepted with
God, nor claim the promise of eternal life.

This is another Principle, which we have received.

3. And among the rest of the duties which are required of us by our Faith, the
holy Scriptures teach us this, as plainly as any whatsoever; That Christian
People ought to have a great regard to their Pastors; the Guides and Conductors
of their Souls in the way to Heaven: whose spiritual authority over them is to
be reverenced; though not as infallible, yet as most valuable; not to be
followed blindfold, but fit to be consulted on all occasions, and most to be
relied on in dubious cases.

There is no principle of the Reformation more undoubted than this; That a
Pilot is not more necessary in a Ship, or a Shepherd to watch over the Flock,
than such spiritual Shepherds and Guides are to teach, direct and govern
Christ's Church; and that among other means and helps which Christian people
should use to understand the Scriptures, the direction of their Guides is the
chief. To whom it belongs, as to receive men into the Church by Baptism, so,
after they are thus born again, to breed them up in their Religion, as their
spiritual Parents; to expound and interpret to them the holy Writings; and out
of them to instruct the ignorant, convince Gainsayers, correct the peoples
mistakes, reprove their sins, stir them up to all the Duties of a holy life,
satisfy the scrupulous, censure the contumacious, absolve the penitent, and
administer comfort to dejected Spirits.

The people indeed ought to examine, whether the things they deliver out of the
Scripture be so or no (as the Beroeans did and are commended for it, xvii.
Acts) and conscientiously to discern between truth and falsehood, between the
right faith and rule of life propounded to them by their Pastors, and the
poisoned Doctrine of Heretics and Deceivers: But they must not judge alone,
without their direction and guidance; nor hastily conclude their Teachers to be
in the wrong; nor rashly dissent from them and refuse to follow their
direction; but rather suspect themselves, and enquire further when they think
they ought not to assent to them; and in the issue, if the things they deliver
be not plainly against the holy Scriptures, to suspect their own judgments,
rather than contradict those, whom God, without all doubt, has appointed to be
their Instructors and Guides.

By which principle we have quite shut out the Roman tyranny on one hand; who
would lead the people blindfold, whereas we endeavor to make them see, and
require them to open their eyes, and show them that we do not mislead them: and
avoided also, on the other hand, the wild frantic liberty of those, who will
not be led at all; but go alone, and guide themselves by their own private
judgment. As by the other principle also (of sticking to the Scriptures in all
things necessary to salvation) we have cut off all the fond Traditions of the
Roman Church (which they have equalled with the Scriptures) and yet have
retained many things of ancient observation, which were not absolutely
necessary, but not sinful; for peace and decency sake. Because we would not
seem to have undertaken the work of Reformation, out of any desire of novelty:
but merely to discharge our duty to God; in avoiding all things contrary to his
Word, and doing all according to it. Which made our Reformers, for the
preservation, as much as was possible, of peace and unity (which the holy
Scriptures so much commend and enjoin) to take great care, not to depart any
further from any practice of the Church; than it had departed from Christ the
Founder of it, and from the holy Scriptures whereby it ought to have governed
it self.

Thus I have, in as few words as I could, told you what it is that we have
received. From whence we may learn, both how happy we should have been, had we
always stuck to it, and never deviated from it; (so happy, that we should
neither have had the Divisions that are among us, nor any thing else which we
come this day to bewail) And also how foully the Roman Church has prevaricated
and departed from the simplicity of the Christian Religion; First, By adding
many other Articles of Faith, to those which were at first received; and
Secondly, By forbidding the people to look into the holy Scriptures, which
contain the foundation and rule of Christian belief.

Let me touch a little upon these two; leaving the consideration of our own
condition till afterward.

First, I say, It is apparent they have highly offended God, and abused his
people, by making a new Creed, and that contrary to a known Decree of the third
General Council (that at Ephesus) which they pretend to reverence. For It
ordained that it should not be lawful for any person to bring forth, write or
compose, any other Faith than that which was defined by the holy Fathers,
gathered together in the Holy Ghost, at the City of Nice: and that whosoever
should dare to compose or offer another Faith, or propound it, to such as were
desirous to be converted to the knowledge of the Truth, either from among the
Gentiles, or the Jews, or from any Heretics; they should, if they were Bishops
or Clergymen, be deposed from their Office; if Laymen, be anathematized. And
yet they of Rome have not feared to violate this Decree, by making a new Faith;
not in words merely, but in sense: about the adoration of Images, of Saints, of
the Eucharist; and concerning the Authority of the Pope, the Doctrine of
Purgatory; and the rest of the Articles of the new Creed, presumptuously made
by the Council of Trent.

Some of which are of such dangerous practice, that learned men among
themselves ( Gerson, Espencaeus, and others) have confessed it, among the
vulgar, to be no less than Idololatrical: and others doubt not to add that it
is no better among the learned. And others again are so far from being Articles
of Faith, that for ought we can find in the Scriptures (or true Antiquity) they
are not so much as probable opinions. For instance, the Authority of the Pope,
and the Monarchy (as now they fear not to call it) which he pretends to over
the whole Church; is founded merely in pride and ambition; and as it was
acquired, so it has been supported and enlarged (and is still maintained) by
rebellion, treason, murdering of Princes, wars, dispensing with perjuries and
incestuous marriages, spoils and robberies of Churches and Kingdoms, worldly
craft and policy, force and falsehood, forgery, lying, dissimulation and gross
hypocrisy; as may easily be made good in every particular, to the satisfaction
of all those, who have not their eyes blinded by the God of this World. Who by
such villainies has mightily disgraced Christianity: which for many Ages was
wholly unacquainted with any such Faith.

And there are also common opinions that pass among them uncontradicted, as
strongly believed as any Article of Faith; which, notwithstanding their seeming
zeal for good works, utterly overthrow any necessity of them. For it is the
avowed Doctrine of the greatest Teachers in that Church, That though a man live
and dye without the practice of any Christian Virtue, and with the habit of
many damnable sins unmortified; yet if he have sorrow for sin, and join
Confession with it, and receive absolution in the last moment of his life, he
shall certainly be saved. And accordingly we see, that if the lewdest persons
among us will but be reconciled to the Roman Church on their deathbed; they
abuse them with the hope of salvation: telling them there is no salvation in
our Church, though they were never so good; but in theirs there is, though they
are never so bad. Which is a clear demonstration, That all their discourse
about good Works is a mere show; and that Faith alone among them is thought
sufficient to do the business; and that it is their Priests, not Ours, who
teach men to rely upon a naked Faith, and presume to be saved by it.

The cause of all which is their neglect of the rule of Faith, the holy
Scriptures; which are so much against them, that they dare not trust the people
with them.

Secondly, That Is the second thing I noted, as a manifest declaration of the
corruption of the Roman Church; that they will by no means consent the people
should look into those Books, which contain the Doctrine at first received: but
upon the severest penalties, forbid (without a special License obtained) their
perusal of them; as if these were the most suspected or dangerous of all other
Books; or as if it were reason the people should believe the Church, without
knowing what the Church ought to believe.

There is not a more evident token of their guilt than this. For that it is
done on purpose to keep the people in ignorance, not to preserve them within
the bounds of sobriety (which may be done by other means) is apparent from
hence: that even those select portions of Scripture, which they have chosen to
be read in the Church publicly; they will not let the people hear in a
language which they understand. For which no reason can be alleged, but that
now mentioned, they are loath the people should be acquainted with any thing,
that may enlighten their eyes to see the errors of that Church. For Latin
Prayers indeed, wherein they speak to God, they have this excuse, That God
understands all languages: but for Latin Chapters of the Bible, wherein God
speaks to men, there is nothing to be said; the end of speaking to others being
that we may be understood. Why then should God be as a Barbarian to his people,
speaking to them in an unknown tongue? And why should those things which in
other cases would be held ridiculous, and contrary to common sense; be esteemed
good and convenient in Religion? Without all doubt such things as these are the
sport of the Devil: who hereby has exposed Christianity to scorn, and both
kept the people from being instructed by God their Savior, and delivered them
up to be most grossly abused by evil men.

For this mischief is not single, but has bred and brought forth another; they
having set up the device of entertaining the people with Images, which they
call the Books of the Ignorant (and are the means of keeping them in ignorance)
instead of the holy Scriptures, which are able to make men wise to salvation.

For all which the holy and reverend Name of the Church, and its infallibility,
is used for a color. By which they mean only the Roman Church: which being but
a particular Church, not the universal, is become Judge in her own Cause: and
maintains she does well, nay cannot err; because she says she cannot do
otherwise. There is no man, who will take the liberty to consider, that can
think this the way of salvation. No, it is the manifest method of perishing
without remedy; for any thing that the people of that Church can know. For
they, being taught simply to believe in the Church of Rome, and to depend
wholly upon its authority, without any other enquiry, can never be satisfied
whether this Church, wherein they believe, teaches the true and pure Doctrine
of Christ Jesus, the Lord and Spouse of the Church. For they are deprived of
all means to find this out; being forbidden to look into the holy Scriptures,
where Christ has delivered his mind unto us. All the Faith therefore of the
poor people of the Roman Church, is no other than a humane Faith; being
grounded wholly on the authority of men: and of all humane Testimony they rely
upon the most uncertain, viz. that which they give of themselves. For they
believe their Church to be good, merely because She says so: that is, make her
judge in her own case, which is like to produce the most partial Judgment of
all other.

But it is time to leave the consideration of their faults in this thing: and,
as the duty of this Day requires, to reflect seriously and impartially upon our
own. Which we shall the better do, when I have a little opened the second
general part of my Text; wherein we shall see how happy we of this Church might
have been; if we had held fast that which we have received.

II.
For that follows, you see, in the Charge given to the Church of Sardis,
Remember what thou have received and heard, and HOLD FAST; or keep to it;
observe it and take care to do accordingly: For that is the end of calling
things to mind; that we may not depart from them, if they be of consequence to
our happiness.

Such was the Doctrine at first delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and (to
apply it wholly to our selves) such is that which we have received; being the
very same, as you have heard, with that at first delivered. Which we ought
therefore to keep most sacredly, and to stick to it steadfastly; never, in the
least, warping from it; nor turning aside, either to the right hand or to the
left, from the principles and rules of a Religion, which is so well grounded;
that it stands upon the undoubted word of God our Savior.

For, as I have shown you, the Religion which we have received and heard, is no
other than what the holy Scriptures (which all acknowledge to be the word of
Truth) teach us to believe and practice.

And is a Religion so sincere, that it teaches the people to read the holy
Scriptures; because it is not afraid they should therein read its condemnation:
And for that end propounds the Scriptures to them in their own Language;
because it is not in the least ashamed of any thing it bids them believe, nor
unwilling to be laid to that rule of righteousness, and examined by it.

A Religion also which, in reading the holy Scriptures, bids the people content
themselves with that which they find there clearly and evidently delivered (for
that it assures them is sufficient for their salvation:) leaving things obscure
for the exercise of the learned; and things not drawn from thence, but from
uncertain Traditions, or private Inspiration, to superstitious and fantastical
Persons.

A Religion which does not make Faith consist in ignorance, but in knowledge:
and yet to keep this knowledge within the bounds of sobriety, directs and
enjoins all private persons to take heed to the public Ministry of the Church;
and all public Ministers to study the Scriptures diligently, and to teach
nothing to be religiously held and believed (as one of our ancient Canons is
1571. Tit. Concionatores.
) but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and which
the Catholick-Fathers, and the ancient Bishops have collected out of that very
Doctrine.

It is a Religion also, which does not teach us to rely upon Faith alone; but
presses the necessity of good works, far more than the Roman Church does,
whatsoever they falsely pretend: only it teaches that God rewards all the good
we do, out of his own free mercy, without any desert.

And therefore, instead of framing and fashioning Wood and Stone into the
Images of men, and setting them up for the people to worship; it exhorts men,
by all means possible, to study to frame themselves after the Image of God in
righteousness and true holiness: and to conform themselves to those excellent
patterns of Virtue which the Saints have left us for imitation.

Instead also of worshipping the Sacrament, it teaches us to worship the Lord
Jesus Christ, in the holy and reverend use of the Sacrament: not using it to
make Jesus Christ, but to honor Him; not to make His Body descend from Heaven
to us, but to lift up our hearts to Him in Heaven; not to turn the Bread and
Wine into the natural Body and Blood of Christ, but into the spiritual
nourishment of our Souls. For it does not think that Christ and the Devil both
entered into Judas together; or that our Savior did eat Himself; or has
ordered matters so, that He may be carried away by a Mouse, and eaten by his
greatest enemies.

It teaches none of these or any such like absurd and incredible things; nor
does it entrench upon any man's civil Rights. But though it bid men reverence
and obey their spiritual Pastors, yet does not place any of them above Kings,
nor exempt them from their jurisdiction; much less ascribe a power to them of
deposing them from their Thrones, giving away their Kingdoms, and exposing them
to be murdered (which the proud Bishop of Rome challenges) but humbly and
meekly declares, as St Paul does, That every Soul (even the greatest Apostle,
as St. Chrysostom interprets him) must be subject to the higher Powers.

What shall I say more? It is a Religion which acknowledges no other supreme
Head of the Church, but Jesus Christ; no other rule of Faith, but his Word; no
propitiatory Sacrifice, but his Death; no Purgatory, but his Blood; nor any
merits, but his obedience to God in all things.

A Religion therefore, which has little of outward pomp and show; but much of
inward substance, life and power: which ordains few Ceremonies, but ministers
abundant instructions and consolations: which attributes little to distinction
of meats, but prescribes fasting and abstinence from all meats whatsoever; and
that for an exercise of humility and other Christian Virtues, without any
opinion of merit or satifaction.

And it may be added, That it is a Religion to which the very Papists
themselves are indebted several ways, for their ease from many burdens. For it
is our Religion, which has quite spoiled the Trade that was driven by
Indulgences; which was so shamelesly exercised before the Reformation, that
Sellers of Pardons went, like Pedlars, from house to house; and for half a
Crown offered to let any man have a remission of all his sins, and the delivery
of a Soul out of Purgatory. Which was the thing that first stirred up the just
indignation of Luther; to whose honest zeal they are beholden for deliverance
from that imposture. They are not abused neither as formerly with new lying
Miracles and Apparitions: which are seldom pretended now (thanks be to our
Religion for it) in comparison with the many illusions of this kind in former
times. They are free also from being perpetually pillaged by diverse grievous
exactions, which their Forefathers in this Kingdom (I could show you)
complained of as insupportable. Nor do their people run with Offerings from one
Image to another, so fast as they did before our Religion let them see their
follies. To say nothing of their Crusado's and other things, which it is not
easy for the Pope himself now to gull them withal. Which is to be put entirely
upon the account of our Religion: which has opened many of their eyes to see
more errors among them, than they are willing to confess.

Have we not reason then to hold fast such a Religion as this, so as neither to
part with it, nor to depart from it? If truth had the same power over the will
that it has over the understanding; we could never suffer our selves to be
guilty of either. Nay, the Papists themselves would condemn their own madness,
for endeavoring to disturb this Religion; and to bring back that authority
hither, which made such Fools of them.

But alas! it is too notorious how little hold our Religion has taken on our
hearts. There being so many who have revolted if not openly, yet in their
hearts and affections (we have too much reason to fear) unto the Romish
delusion. And others (I am afraid the most) who have retained what they
received, only in part: but let go a great deal of it; to the open disgrace,
manifest damage, and almost undoing of our Religion.

Which is the thing I must now admonish you of; in the last part of my
Discourse upon these words: wherein our Savior calls upon the Church of Sardis
to REPENT, of their not holding fast (that is) what they had received. And so
must I now call upon you with all earnestness; it being the particular business
of this Day, and the only thing that can save us from perishing in the Pit
which is dug for us by our Romish Adversaries, who have been long plotting
(and now have almost effected) our destruction. Yet I shall not expatiate
through the whole Doctrine of repentance: but confine my self only to such
things, as relate to what has been already spoken.

III.
You are not now to learn what it is to repent; but only what it is you should
repent of: that is, be heartily sorry for, and amend.

And this also is soon known; if, in obedience to this admonition, you will but
reflect upon what you have received and heard: and then consider what
conformity your practice holds therewith. And here let me deal as plainly with
you, as becomes my Office, and the solemn business of this Day, and the present
distress of this Church and Kingdom: which should awaken all men of sense to
examine themselves upon these three Heads.

First, What esteem is remaining among us of the holy Scriptures; in which are
contained, as you have heard, all our Religion.

Secondly, What fruits our Faith has brought forth: which the holy Scriptures
tell us God expects from us; and are so necessary that we cannot be saved
without them.

Thirdly, more particularly, What the behavior of the people of this Church
has been, and is, toward the Pastors and Guides of their souls: with whom God
has principally entrusted his holy Oracles.

If all the Members of this Church, would thoroughly examine themselves upon
these Heads, they would find, I fear, too much matter for Repentance.

I.
For the first of these, I shall omit the disrespect (to use no harder word) of
one whole Sect of men to the holy Scriptures (which they have in a manner laid
aside, and only accommodated the Phrases of it, to that which they call the
light within them) and touch upon such things only as are common to all Parties
among us. In which,

1. We cannot but fear (and with grief of heart it ought to be spoken and
considered) there are great numbers who have no value for the holy Scriptures
at all: but have quite forsaken even Christianity it self, which is therein
delivered; some the very belief of it, and others the profession. This is one
of the fearful sins of this Age; which cries for vengeance against us: and has
encouraged this Plot to bring in Popery (that is, Idolatry and Tyranny) among
us. Which durst never have shown their heads here again, if they had not been
emboldned by our Irreligion. And though now we seem to be stirred up to oppose
them; yet no Religion will be found an unequal match for some Religion: which
though a very bad one, is better than none at all.

2. And secondly, It cannot be denied that abundance of those, who still,
blessed be God, believe the holy Scriptures, yet have lost that high esteem and
affection which our pious Ancestors had for them. Or if they have any, it does
not appear by their diligent reading of them; which many have laid aside. Time
was, when they were read and studied with great care and fervent desire, in the
beginning of the Reformation; when every Body that could read, had them in
their hands; and some had a great deal of them by heart, as the Jew now
generally have the principal things in the Old Testament. But alas! this ardour
soon remitted: and now is in a manner extinct.

Musculus, I remember, complains heavily of it, in his Preface to the Book of
Genesis, many years ago; and we are not grown better, but much worse, I fear,
since his days. And what other cause, says he, can we give for it, but this;
That the greatest part of those who seemed to have given up themselves to the
Truth of God, busied themselves in the Scriptures; not that they might be
better by framing their lives according to that rule; but that they might be
able to dispute, and to carp at the old errors and superstitions? And so some
ran into all manner of wickedness; others lickt up their old vomit; others
leaving the manifest Truth turned to new Sects, which sprang up; and others
became neutral, and fell into perfect indifference: whereby they were disposed
to receive any Religion; which the great men of this World should be pleased to
set up, by their Authority.

Which sad Complaint, with much more that there follows, I wish we had no cause
to renew in this Church: and had not lost our first love to our Savior, and to
his holy Word. Which being disgraced by the means forementioned, better people
have been infected with such a negligence; that few read the holy Scriptures,
as they were wont heretofore to do: but live, as if they believed the Papists
say true, That the reading of the Scriptures is the cause of all the mischiefs
that are befallen us. Nay, the public reading of them in the Church, is not so
reverently regarded as formerly it was, and as it ought to be. For there are
those that never mind what is read; but look upon that as a vacant time to gaze
about them; or to whisper and discourse what they please one with another. In
times past, good people were wont to bring their Bibles along with them hither:
but that now is worn out of use, or so little practiced, that it looks as if
they were as much ashamed of it, as to appear in an old fashion, which is held
ridiculous.

Let such things therefore be amended, I beseech you, if you mean to save your
Religion from being destroyed by our Romish Adversaries: whom we have highly
gratified by these things, and invited to plot our ruin. Let all men among us
become serious Believers; and show that they are, by reverencing and reading
the holy Scriptures; by frequenting the holy Assemblies, and there duly
attending to them; by growing truly more knowing in the ground and foundation
of our Religion; and taking such care to be acquainted with the Scriptures;
that this may not be our condemnation, that they lay open before us, and were
put into our hands, in a language we could understand; and yet we despised
them, or would not mind them.

II.
The mischief of which is apparent; For if we proceed to examine our selves
upon the second Head, we shall find a most lamentable account either of our
ignorance, or negligence, or wilful disobedience. For who does not see, that
the Fruits of Faith are so much wanting, that we are in danger to perish;
merely because there is so little integrity, so little common honesty remaining
among us; but so much falseness, lewdness, filthiness, and sottish debauchery,
as have made men so beyond measure dull and stupid, that it has given our
Adversaries hope, they were disposed to receive any Religion. Nay, they who are
better inclined, have been too careless in the Divine Service; too frozen in
their Devotion; and not solicitous enough in the mortifying their unruly
affections and passions, in bridling their tongues, and adding to their Faith
all those Graces, about which St. Peter requires us to give all diligence, 2
Pet. i. 5, etc. And yet the Grace of the Gospel teaches us so plainly how to
walk and to please God; that it is a wonder every Body does not look upon a
holy life, as the most necessary part of Christianity. For nothing is there so
earnestly pressed as this, which is most lacking among us: who live (as it
follows there in St. Peter, ver. 9.) like blind men, or (which is all one) that
cannot see afar off, (nothing at a distance, but merely that which is held
before their eyes) having forgotten that they were purged from their old sins:
do not reflect, that is, upon what was done at their Baptism; but (as if they
were not able to look so far back) wallow in their filthiness which then they
solemnly renounced.

But this is too large a Subject for a particular Discourse; and therefore I
must leave it to your own private examination and search; whether you have not
relied too much (contrary to what you have received and heard and professed)
upon a naked Faith, and the merits of our Savior; without that care which He
requires, to make your Faith work by love to God and to your Neighbors. And
here there are as many sins to be repented of, as there are Christian Duties to
be practiced; if we have been negligent in any of them. And if we will not
amend, but still continue to be barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ; with what reason do we expect that He should be pleased with
an idle Faith, which does us no good? and not rather look for that doom, which
was pronounced upon the empty Fig Tree; Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground?

III.
For the preventing of which dreadful Sentence, I must call you to repentance,
for one most dangerous sin, contrary to our Faith and Christian Profession:
which I fear too many will find themselves guilty of, if they will but be at
the pains to examine the state of their souls, upon the third Head, viz. The
demeanor of the people, toward their spiritual Pastors and Guides, in the way
to salvation. Toward whom there are a great many pious persons, it must be
thankfully acknowledged, who still preserve in their hearts and behavior, that
due regard, which Religion and reason require. But it must, on the other hand,
be bewailed, that there are vast numbers, among all sorts of men, who do not
only slight them; but have shaken off the yoke of obedience to them. Which is
the thing above all others, that has made the Papists so audacious; and will
certainly, if it be not amended, bring in Popery at last among us.

Be not offended, I beseech you, if in a time when plain dealing is so
necessary, and in a matter of such great consequence (as I apprehend it) I be
so bold as to tell you; that there are those who oppose themselves so
senselesly, as well as arrogantly, to all spiritual Authority; that this
Doctrine of obedience to it they call Popery. Which is a foul reproach to the
Reformation; an Apostasy from its Principles; and a casting off the direction
of the holy Scriptures: which require such obedience as we preach. For we do
not bid men follow any Guides, but such as take God for their Guide: that is,
guide themselves and the people, by the Word of God. If we did go about to hide
that from the peoples eyes, and hinder them from reading it; it would be an
evident sign that we knew our selves to be reproved by the Scriptures; and that
instead of submitting to that Rule, we would make our own authority to be the
supreme Rule: which is the crime of the Roman Church. But there is no color
for any such charge to be laid against us; who exhort, who press the people to
be diligent in reading the holy Scriptures: only we desire them, as the
Scriptures themselves do, that they would take along with them the assistance
and direction of those, whom Christ has appointed to guide their judgment.

Without which direction men may easily see, if they please to read them, what
a high crime it is to despise; and much more to revile and rail at their
Authority. And yet some have proceeded thus far in their opposition to them:
nay, deny they have any Authority at all.

The woeful effects of which we see, as in other things so, in the Divisions
that are among us; which have opened a Gap for Popery, and we all fear will
bring it in. But we will not see, as we ought to do, that all those Divisions
have sprung from this other Cause; and still are maintained and widened, by the
general contempt of those, whose Guidance ought to be religiously observed:
which if we will not regard, as God commands us, we shall inevitably run our
selves out of our Religion. For our Divisions (which this Day we come to
lament) we all confess will do the business, if they be not cured. And of all
the ways of Cure which are now thought of, we seem resolved to wave the
principal, if not the only way, of Gods own prescribing. The method of which I
shall faithfully and plainly lay before you: that thereby you may judge what is
like to become of us, if it be neglected.

We all grant, I believe, that the right means to avoid or to remedy
Contentions and Divisions in the Church, are as clearly set down in the holy
Scriptures, as any Rule of life whatsoever. For otherwise, they would be
extremely defective in that thing, which is most necessary, for the
preservation of the Religion which they teach.

1. Now if you search the holy Scriptures, with never so little diligence, you
cannot but observe there is a Duty frequently inculcated of reverence and
obedience to Christ's Ministers: which if the people will not pay, (according to
the evident meaning of such places, as I shall mention anon) it is impossible
that the Society of the Church should be kept in unity; but must necessarily
break in pieces, and be dissolved.

2. We must add indeed, That the Ministers of Christ ought also to take special
care, to be such wise and faithful Stewards in Christ's household; that the
people may be inclined with the greater forwardness to obey their directions.
For which end their Duty is no less plainly and amply set down in the holy
Scriptures; and such extraordinary caution is given by Saint Paul about the
admission of persons into holy Orders; that were his directions sincerely
followed, and did the people, as He enjoins, adhere unto them in hearty love
and esteem of them for their works sake; there would be a mavelous increase
of Christian knowledge and goodness, without that strife and contention which
now blasts them both.

3. But if Princes do not make such good choice, as they ought, of spiritual
Governors; or if those spiritual Governors, by their negligence, ordain worse
inferior Ministers: yet the Authority of ordering or reforming things, does
not, by devolution, come to the people; nor will this justify their
disobedience to them. But their Christian Duty is as manifest in this Case as
in any other; which lies in these two things. First, They ought to fall the
more earnestly to their Prayers; both for their King; and for all in authority
under him, especially their spiritual Pastors. The Scripture enjoins both; and
the gross neglect of both, is one cause things are no better among us. What
other meaning is there of those words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2. I will
that supplications, etc. be made for all men; for Kings, and for all in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty? And why does the same Apostle frequently desire the Church would be
helping by Prayers for him, (who needed them less than we do) but to teach all
Christians how earnestly they should recommend those to Gods guidance, who are
to guide them? Read 2 Cor. i. 11. vi. Ephesians. 19. and other places.

And if they find that their prayers are ineffectual; there being no amendment
in those that should take care of them; their Duty (Secondly) is to examine
seriously, and lay to heart the cause why they cannot prevail: and a little
consideration will teach them, that, in all likelihood, it proceeds from their
own sins, who deserve no better Governors and Pastors. For (as the Prophet
speaks in the next Chapter to the second Lesson for Evening Prayer, lix. Isai.
1, 2.) The Lord's hand is not shortened, that He cannot save; neither his ear
heavy, that He cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and
your God; and your sins have hid his face from you, that He will not hear. And
for what sins do you think, it is more probable, that God is angry with us in
this Nation, and will not hear the prayers of this people; than their disesteem
of Christ's Ministers (even of the best of them) their contempt of their Office;
their proneness to disobedience; nay their scurrility and scoffing at all
spiritual Authority; and such like sins, expressly forbidden in Gods holy Word?
With which this Church, alas! abounds a great deal more, than with
supplications and prayers to God for them. All are more forward to find fault
(if not to rail and revile) than to beseech God of his infinite mercy, to give
them Pastors after his own heart: or to examine their own Consciences how they
have provoked God, by their unprofitableness, at least, under the best means of
Grace that He has bestowed upon them.

4. But let us suppose further, That the Governors and Pastors of the Church,
are not only negligent; but exceed the bounds of their Authority, as it seems
to the people, by enjoining things which they take to be unlawful: yet this
will not warrant their contempt of their Authority, and their casting off all
obedience to them. But two things are to be considered; Whether they be certain
the Commands of their Governors are unlawful; or they only fear they are. In
the first Case indeed, they ought not to be obeyed in such things; but by the
peoples care to obey in all others, which they judge to be lawful, they ought
to demonstrate that it is only respect to God, which makes them not comply in
things which seem to them to be apparently unlawful. And so unity in most
things being preserved, they will be the easier brought to see their errors,
on one side or other. But in the other case, when they are not certain the
things commanded are unlawful (which is the common cause of all our Divisions)
but only suspect them to be so; it seems to be reason that the people should
not disobey a certain Command of God (which requires them to submit to their
Governors) when they are not certain there is a cause for their refusal. The
most that can be allowed them is, humbly to desire those Laws may be altered;
or if the Rulers of the Church (who are the proper Judges of such matters)
cannot think it safe to make such alterations as are desired, then barely to
suspend their obedience, in what they fear is unlawful, till they can be better
satisfied; but fearing withal it may prove a sin not to obey, to use all means
for satisfaction: not absolutely denying obedience (much less reviling their
Injunctions, or making violent oppositions to them; which commonly ends in
wresting all authority out of their Pastors hands) but merely not doing for the
present what is enjoined; modestly entreating their forbearance in such
matters; or, if it cannot be obtained, peaceably and patiently submitting to
their censures. Which, sure, would not be heavy upon such humble, modest, and
truly conscientious Christians (if they should, God would judge such Governors
for their unreasonable severity) but there would rather be ways found out, to
make up the difference, without taking their Pastors power from them, and
governing themselves as they please. For God, I am confident, would enlighten
the one or the other; to see either their error in enjoining, or in not
obeying.

5. And this that I have said, is the least that can be meant in such places of
Scripture as these, 1 Thessalonians. v. 12, 13. We beseech you, Brethren, to know (that
is to love) them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you. And to esteem them highly in love for their works sake: and to be
at peace among your selves. (Which they could not fail to be, as long as they
kept close to their spiritual Instructors and Governors.) And xiii. Heb. 17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your souls, etc. And 1 Pet. v. 5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves
unto the Elders.

Where first observe the name given to the Pastors of the Church, viz. Elders:
which imports an Office and Authority in the language of all Nations: and here
in St. Peter implies so high an Authority in the Rulers of the Church, that the
Apostle supposes more danger of its growing too imperious, than of its being
slighted and disobeyed. For he requires the Elders to feed (that is govern, as
well as teach) the Flock of God, not as Lords of Gods heritage, but being
ensamples to the Flock, ver. 2, 3. Which Caution against domineering, and
Lording it (as we speak) had been idle; if the power of the Pastors, and the
obedience due and paid then to it, had not been so great, that it might easily
grow extravagant: such was the reverence they had to their Persons, and
deference to their Judgments, and submission to their Authority.

For the word submit you may observe further, is the very same whereby he
expresses (in the second Chapter, ver. 13.) the obedience he would have them
give to Kings and those in Authority under them. And therefore cannot signify
less, than that their directions ought to be followed, and the Flock ruled by
their Orders, in all things where God has not ordered otherways; and that they
should be afraid to offend them by disobedience, and much more by shaking off
subjection to them, and denying their Authority.

6. Which includes in it a power of ordaining and constituting the manner of
performing the Service of God according to His Word: which requires that all
things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. xiv. 40. The things themselves to
be done (which that place speaks of) are many of them specified in that very
Chapter; and the rest in other parts of the holy Scripture: but the decent
manner, form and order how they shall be done is no where particularly defined
there. And therefore, though by virtue of this Precept no Body has power to
form new Articles of Faith, new Objects of Worship, new Sacraments, etc.
(wherein the Church of Rome has abused her power) yet the substance of
Religion being thus prescribed in His Word, the order, disposition, form and
manner of doing the Duties of Religion, is left hereby to be determined by the
wisdom of the Governors of the Church, according to the general Rules of the
holy Scripture. Which they cannot indeed enact into Laws, binding by civil
penalties; yet no Christian Magistrate (to whom that power belongs) ever denied
them a directive power in making Rules for the Government of the Church, or at
any time made them without them; but always took their advice in such matters.
For who so well able to tell, as they, what is most consonant to the
Scriptures, profitable for their Flock, and agreeable to what has been
practiced in the Church of God. Which always taught (and it is as undoubted a
principle of the Reformation as any other) That where the holy Scriptures have
not given particular directions for the decent performance of the Duties, they
call for (as it was impossible they should for all Cases, Times and Countries)
there the Ministers of Christ, whom the holy Scriptures appoint to be the
Governors of His Church, are to draw up Orders and Rules, agreeable to the
general Rule, which the people ought to observe.

And it is very reasonable to interpret the place of the Apostle before
mentioned, in this manner, Let all things be done, first, (...), decently, or
honestly; after a comely beseeming fashion; with such Rites as will procure
veneration to holy things, at least secure the service of God from contempt,
and promote devotion in the people: and the way to have things done with such
gravity, as this word imports, is next to do them (...), according to order; or
by the deliberate appointment of those, who have authority to ordain such
Rites, as will become holy actions. An example of which we have in that very
Chapter, ver. 32. where even such as had extraordinary spiritual gists, are
required to submit to this Order. For the Spirits of the Prophets, he says,
are subject to the Prophets. That is, there was such a subordination in that
Order of men; that when one was prophesying, he was to cease, if a superior
Prophet commanded him silence.

Which, among other places of Scripture, might silence those, who question the
authority of the present Governors of our Church; because of their superiority
over other Ministers. Or it might be sufficient to make them modest in this
thing, to say only this; That Christ sure did not leave His Church without a
Government, (which had been to leave no Church) and that it is incredible the
whole Church, Pastors and people should agree to change His Government (without
any contradiction that we can find) into this which we have, if this be not it
which He left. And that I think has been as little (nay less) questioned, as
any Point of Christianity: which must needs weigh much with all considerate
minds.

7. Who likewise cannot but grant, that things being thus ordered and appointed
by the Authority of Christ's Ministers; those Constitutions, in all reason,
ought to be obeyed by those who are subject to them; and not left at liberty
whether the people will observe them or no.

This is most judiciously handled by Mr Calvin, in the Tenth Chapter of the
Fourth Book of his Institutions; which is well worth the reading by every Body:
particularly from the 27th Section to the end. Where he bids those who gainsay
this and make opposition to it, consider how they will approve their moroseness
to God. For us it is sufficient, that we have no such custom of contending,
neither the Churches of God.

8. If we be really desirous then to make peace and restore unity in the Church
(which is now so necessary that we are undone without it) this is the first
thing wherein we ought all to unite, in repenting of the breach which has been
made among us; by slighting our Guides; by casting off the Government of the
Rulers of the Church, and despising, nay reviling their Orders.

I know how difficult it is to persuade men to this, because they throw the
guilt off from themselves, and so confidently lay it all upon their Governors;
that it is now generally taken for granted, without any doubt, they are in
fault, not the people who ought to submit to them. But a very little humility
and modesty (not to say common fense) might teach us to make the favorable
presumption on the side of Authority: and dispose the people to think, it is
more likely that they are mistaken, than their Guides. Who ought indeed to have
nothing so much in their thoughts, as how to do service to Christ, honor to
his Religion, good to souls, by promoting sincere piety; and if they have been
negligent in this, deeply to humble themselves before God, and study to be
ensamples to the Flock of serious Repentance: But if they fail in this, I am
sure the people can never give a good account of their throwing off the yoke of
obedience to them, spurning at their Authority, and separating from Communion
with them. The mischievous effects of which, if nothing else, one would think,
should be sufficient to move them to Repentance.

That is, First, To be heartily sorry for the breach they have made; and
reflect upon it as the original of all our miseries. And then beseech God most
earnestly to forgive it; especially that open jesting, nay scoffing (which has
been so rife among us) at all spiritual Authority. Which, in the next place,
let every one of us seriously acknowledge, and resolve to reverence, so as to
be advised by them; and take great heed to their Counsels and Resolutions; to
weigh them considerately; and not lightly and hastily to depart from them; much
less rise up in opposition to them; but when you are forced by Gods Command (as
you think) to decline obedience in any particular injunction, to be the more
careful in observing the rest, against which you have no exception: and still
to reverence their Persons and their Authority, when you cannot observe their
Commands, to speak well of them, and peaceably to dissent from them; remembering
that if they be liable to mistake, you are much more: and therefore ought not
to be wise in your own conceit: but to think soberly of your selves, as you
ought to think.

9. This is the way of peace, which we have received from Christ and his
Apostles (and I might add all succeeding Pastors in the Church) of which I
thought good to remember you; and to call you to repentance for departing from
it; and to exhort all people to return into it: as the only means of our
preservation; and of making the preaching of the Gospel (if God pleases to
continue it) effectual for our reformation and amendment, in all other things
that are amiss among us. For as no Kingdom can stand without Religion; so no
Religion can stand long (no not this excellent Religion, which we have
received, and I have briefly described) without a due esteem of and regard to
its Ministers. In obedience to whom, even they who cannot comply with all
public Orders, will find more true comfort, and more favor also with God and
men, than in any other way whatsoever.

But here is the mischief, that it is the common error of Mankind, to seek
that for off, which (as the Lord told his people) is near at hand, within them,
even in their heart and in their mouth. if they would be but Doers of His Word,
and not Hearers only. They hunt up and down for remedies of their Distractions;
but will not mind the obvious Cure, which is laid before them by God himself in
his holy Scriptures. Where it shines clearly enough, if men's passions did not
eclipse it from them. Which are now so great and violent, that it is a singular
happiness, if any person, in this turbulent Age, can see the Divine Truth
himself, in Points of greatest moment. But to cause others to see it, is a
matter of such difficulty that there is small hope of it: whilst they suffer
their foul affections and passions (like a steam from a great many Dunghils) to
overcast the face of Heaven, whence light should come into their souls; and
evaporate that inward filth which is lodged in their hearts, in abusive
language, as it were on purpose to choke the good Spirit of God, which breathes
in others mouths, whose breasts God has inspired with his Grace.

10. But this must not discourage Gods Ministers, nor hinder them from
asserting their Authority: which is to rule the people, and not to be ruled by
them. To which course if we will not submit (when God himself so plainly
directs to it) all the ways which humane policy can invent, will prove
ineffectual; and never make a lasting union and peace among us: if they make
any at all. But after men's ill affections (which they will not root out) have
been laid asleep and suppressed for a time; they will awake and break out again
with the greater violence, and make worse disorders: till with the contempt of
the Ministers of Religion, our Religion it self be brought into such contempt;
that, as a punishment for our disobedience to just Authority, we fall under the
tyranny of those, who will use no moderation.

That Is the heavy Judgment (I told you in my last Fast-Sermon) threatened before
the late Wars, by a great and holy Divine of this Church (some of whose words I
have used now and then in this Discourse) for this sin of disobedience unto and
contempt of, all Ecclesiastical Authority. And whether this sin be not
increased and grown more audacious since that time (and consequently our danger
greater) I leave you to consider and judge. Only let me tell you, That they who
stand divided from us, complain of it as well as we, finding to their shame and
grief (as an eminent man among them expresses it Mr. Baxter Sacril. desert. p.
103. etc.
) that we are endangered by Divisions, principally because the self-conceited
part of the religious people, will not be ruled by their Pastors; but must have
their way, and will needs be Rulers of the Church and them. The effect of which
he tells them is this; You have made more Papists, than ever you or we are like
to recover. It is you that tempt them to use Fire and Eaggot; that will not be
ruled nor kept in concord, by the wisest and holiest and most self-denying
Ministers upon Earth.

Which is an ingenuous Confession of the guilt and the danger, we have all run
our selves into by this sin: and that though all the blame is now laid at the
door of the Rulers of this Church, yet it is so unjust a Charge; that were they
in all points such as those that accuse them, there would be no end of our
troubles and confusions; unless the people, even they that think themselves
most religious, will grow less conceited, and submit to be ruled by their
proper Governors. It has been said indeed, that they do follow such Guides,
as they think fit to lead them: but here is one that contradicts it; and
complains of their unruliness. And besides, I must add, that such Guides ought
not to be followed, as will not submit to be governed by their Superiors:
there being nothing, as I said before, so little disputed in the Christian
Religion, as the Authority which the Bishops exercise over the Presbyters in
the Church. And if they will not so much as give us leave to tell them of this,
without incurring their censure, nor patiently bear with those reproofs which
we think necessary; it is impossible they should repent of this sin, and then
our destruction is unavoidable.

This part of my Discourse indeed may seem unnecessary, in an audience where I
hope all of you are better affected: but it has its use even among such, as
hold fast what they have received and heard concerning this Duty. Who should
endeavor by their brotherly reproofs and prudent admonitions, to stop the
progress of this Disease, in those whom they find infected with it. Desire them
to consider things calmly, and to study this part of their Christian Duty. Pray
them not to be so passionately bent against the means of their safety: And that
they would at least hear, what Christ's Ministers can say for themselves and the
Authority he has left them. Tell them, it is impossible any wound should be
healed, while the inflammation continues: And that as when a house is on fire
they that speak and give the best advice cannot be heard, by reason of the
noise and cries of those who are gathered about it; so we shall never
understand one another as long as we are clamorous; nay have our minds
violently inflamed with rancour and hatred, even against those that would cure
us of it. The study of Gods truth requires a quiet and peaceable Spirit; which
deliberates and weighs things, without carping at persons: and does not
presently conclude we plead our own private interest, when we plead the Cause
of Christ's Ministers. Who do not merely bear testimony to themselves, as they
of the Church of Rome do; but appeal to the holy Scriptures, where these things
are as plainly delivered, as any part of Christian Religion.

God of his infinite mercy touch every heart in this Nation, with a sense of
them; that we may not shut our eyes against the things that belong to our
peace; nor while we endeavor an union, make the most dangerous rent that ever
was: But all so truly repent of this sin, that it may be a happy step to the
reforming all other, that have sprung from this. Then we need not fear any evil
that the Devil or man can plot against us: but while we walk in that godly
order, which Christ has appointed (the people being ruled by their Guides, and
their Guides ruled by God) may triumphantly say (as it is in one of the Psalms
appointed for this Day, xlvi.) We will not fear though the Earth be removed,
and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea (though tumults
and hurliburlies should arise, we will not be afraid, for) God is in the midst
of this Church, She shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right
early. Amen.

FINIS.

