FALSEHOOD UNMASKT, In ANSWER to a BOOK, CALLED, TRUTH UNVEILED Which vainly
pretends to justify the Charge of MR STANDISH, Against some Persons in the
Church OF ENGLAND.

By a Dutiful SON of that CHURCH.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes, and Richard Bentley at the Post Office in
Russel Street, in Covent Garden, 1676.

Imprimatur

Ab. Campion.
November. 3. 1676.
To the AVTHOR OF THE VINDICATION OF Mr. STANDISH'S SERMON, etc.
SIR,
BEing at this time not far from London, I have met with a little Pamphlet,
called The Truth unveiled, etc. (which you pretend to be a Vindication of Mr.
Standish's Sermon) a great deal sooner than otherwise I should have done. The
Pamphlet it self, does not seem to me to be worthy of any regard: but to your
self who seem to be much concerned for the safety of our Religion, there is a
great one due, and therefore in mere charity to you, I have once more set Pen
to Paper, briefly to demonstrate that you wrong your self exceedingly in
employing your time about works of this nature; for which you are not at all
fitted. You are a Person of Quality; I make no doubt, because I have your word
for it; but I must take the boldness to tell you; that whatsoever other
qualities you have, you are not qualified (to imitate a little your way of
writing) to pass a censure on Men, and on Books, as you have taken the liberty
to do,

You will be apt, it is like, by this blunt beginning, to make the same
judgment concerning me; but I trust I shall evidently show, it is no rashness
or presumption in me, to undertake this task; which is so easy, that it
requires no great abilities to make good this charge, viz, That there is a
notorious defect, either in your Will and Affections, or else in your Mind and
Judgment: either of which make you unmeet to meddle with these matters.

The former of these I dare not suspect, because you profess downright
Honesty, though no Arts; and in many passages speak very piously. Though I
cannot forbear to say thus much, that the constant affectation of little
strains of the lowest and poorest sort of witty reflections, is no good sign of
that serious inside Piety, whose Heart-bloud, you say, is now letting out by a
Generation of Men, for whom you cannot find a name bad enough. Who can read
without some disdain, such pitiful punns as you have made upon the names of
several persons: which I doubt you would not allow in another, while you take a
great liberty this way your self. You would call it, I have reason to think,
flurting and fleering, or lightness and vanity, if not jeering and abusiveness
in those whom you take to task; which you practice without any scruple, from
the beginning of the Book to the end. Mr. Bull comes first with his Horns, and
eager pushes page 33. having lately pusht apiece into the World. p. 37. Then
Mr. Baxter is described by the character of one, who has spoiled in his time
many good Bakings. And elsewhere Dr. Heylin, passes under the name of St.
George his Champion, and you doubt his Dragon too. And there is another, I am
confident you aim at, when, upon the mention of Dr. Owen, and Mr. Jenkins, you
tell us of the grovelling outeries that are made. Nor can I devise any other
reason, why you contracted the name of your Book in the entrance, with an etc.
(when it stands at length enough in the Title Page) but only to bring in the
far-fetcht conceit of the Oath, etc. Sure, Sir, this trifling is not to be a
practitioner of Piety in Baley's way, nor to watch over your actions according
to Brinsley's Rules, and as you direct us, p. 30. If it be, those Books, and
the rest you commend to our use, do not surpass so far as you would have the
world believe, the labors of the New Speaking Gentlemen. So you call the
Writers you oppose, though that excellent Man Dr. Hammond (after whom follows
Bishop Tailor) leads the Van, as you speak, and was the Forelorn Hope. Who
deserved sure to be treated with more Reverence, especially by a Person of
Quality, who ought not to have stooped to so low, so paultry, a way of writing,
nor to have comprehended so great a Divine, and so Holy a Man, under no better
Name, than that of a New-Speaking Gentleman.

But you do not deny, but there are abundance of excellent, useful, seasonable,
well-said things in his Practical Catechism. and therefore, notwithstanding
all this, I doubt not but you are (though I know not who you are, no more than
the Man in the Moon) a Pious, Serious, Honest Gentleman, or Person of greater
Quality) who intends to do service to Religion; though you are not well skilled
in the business you go about.

For that there is an exceeding great defect in your judgment, it is apparent
from hence, That pretending a Vindication of Mr. Standish his Sermon, you have
not writ one syllable to the purpose. For the Men whom he informs against, and
whose names I desired we might know, are such as impiously deny both our Lord,
and his Holy Spirit: who make Reason, Reason, Reason their only Trinity: who
preach up Natural, and Moral Religion, without the Grace of God, and Faith in
Christ: and in effect say, There is no such thing as supernatural Grace. That
is in plain terms, rank Socinians; or worse, (if worse can be) for the
Socinians do not advance Natural Religion against the Christian, nor deny all
Supernatural Grace. Now I did not, nor do believe that there is a man to be
named among our Clergy, who is guilty of these foul detestable Heresies. Yes,
say you (or you say nothing) since you call so loudly and importunately, for a
Bill of particulars, you shall have it. And the first Names you give in, are
Dr. Hammond and Bishop Tailor. Who must therefore be the Ringleaders of those
deceitful Workers, those false Apostles Mr. Standish speaks of; or else (to
speak mildly, in one of your own phrases) you have mist the Quishion. Choose you
which of these you will; it is certain you will be found, to be an incompetent
person to interpose your self in those differences; though I doubt not you are,
as in humility you style your self, p. 34, A well-meaning Scribler.

Do you really intend to charge those great Men with the crime of Socinianisme?
Is the Practical Catechism in effect but the Cracovian, in which Mr. Standish
feared we might live to see our Youth trained up? Has any one more effectually
established the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, than the ever memorable Dr.
Hammond, upon the 1 Epistle of S. John, the fifth Chapter, and the sixth Verse?
I believe I may answer for you, that you did not mean to impute any such
Heresies to either of them. And therefore it remains, if you acquit them, that
you condemn your self of the grossest impertinency, and heedlessness, in naming
these, as the Heads of that black Faction. For if you can lay things together,
you will see that this must be your meaning; or you did not mind what you wrote
about: but having something in your Head, concerning innovations in our
Religion, regarded not how you applied it. Look over the earnest request to Mr.
Standish; read the character of the Men, a List of whom I desire him to
communicate; and then apply it to Dr. Hammond, and Bishop Tailor, and you will
very hardly hold (to speak your own language again) from asking your self that
question, which you observe p. 29. Sir John Sucklin asked, when he found Sir
Toby Matthews in the Session of Poets, What do they here?

Perhaps, you will as earnestly reply, have I not alleged a strange passage
out of one of Bishop Tailors Prayers? What do you say to it? I say I have taken
notice of it my self, and do not know what he meant; but I am sure he was no
Socinian, and that there is no Socinianism in the words you quote, whatsoever
there be else; and therefore I know not what you meant to thrust them in here;
where they have nothing to do. There is no man of the Church of England, I
believe, that will answer for every word in that great Man's Writings: But no
more will any discreet Man of your way, answer for all the hard sayings that
are in Mr. Calvin's. I am sure I find in my small Reading, the greatest Men, who
have undertaken his defense, absolutely disclaiming their being bound to make
good every thing that he said; and therefore had it been more pertinent than it
is, you might have let it pass, and not have disturbed Dr. Tailors ashes (as
they speak) but suffered a person of his merit, to sleep in peace.

But some of those that follow, perhaps may be of the Racovian stamp; though
these two be found as innocent, as all you have said about them, is
impertinent. Let us try if you please, what you have to say to St. George
Champion, who next follows? If we should allow him to have been, as you doubt,
his Dragon too; we shall never find him spitting any such venom, as that
mentioned in Mr. Standish's Sermon. You your self cannot charge him with any
such thing; but detain your Reader only with along tedious reflection (in XVII.
Particulars) upon his Cyprianus Anglicus, or, The Life of our Great Archbishop
Laud, which still shows that you are beside the Cushion, and without question,
expert (as you say of him) that Readers should rest upon your Dictates, without
any searching whether you write to the purpose or no: or else you would never
have so determinately called your Book, a Vindication of Mr. Standish's his
Sermon, which in truth is far otherwise. It would have saved you a great deal
of needless pains, if you would but have minded the last words of my Request to
him (which are not mine, but the wise Son of Syrach's 11 Ecclus. 7.) Understand
first, and then rebuke. You would not have troubled us, if you had heeded this
good counsel, with a story of his Arminianisme, strutting through all the pages
of his Book; which is no more to the Vindication you undertake, than the
mysterious agency of Panzani and Con (which you talk or afterward) and that
which was a doing (I know not when) at Clerken; well, and behind Drury Lane.

Nor has the Ghost of Tilenus, whom you bring in next, any thing to say about
the business. It is only a dumb apparition; and we have nothing but your word
for it, that it makes very irregular glances, and would let out the hearts
blood of sundry truly Protestant Doctrines, All that follows it likewise is but
wind, against Parker, Hickringale, and sweet Mr. Sherlock (as you are pleased
in much civility to term him) whose Writings you say, contain not much more
than Sophistical Harangues, Perspicuous Calumnies, and Prodigious Drolleries.
What that much more is, you will not let us know; It is like that, as little as
you think it, it contains a confutation of your accusations. For one of those
persons whom you rank with them, Georgius Bull, I am acquainted withal, and
know him to be both an Holy* and a very Learned person, who has in his last
Book thrown off this charge of Socinianisme, with as much indignation, as you
can do the Writings of any of the New speaking Gentlemen. And there is no body
that knows him, but is assured, he most sincerely declares his inmost thoughts:
and would not for a world embrace any Doctrine, contrary to what has been
taught by the Catholic Church; with which he is certain the Church of England
is not at odds.

But why do I make so many words about this sort of Writers? Our Books of
Devotion will not down with you neither; but, upon this, that is no occasion,
fall under your lash. If they do but omit any thing, which you would have in
them, straitway you quarrel, and think it a sufficient reason for your
displeasure at them. The method and direction for private Devotion, is not for
your Tooth. And which is more, the Whole Duty of Man, is not secure from your
impotent assaults, p. 29. and 32. We must use no other Books but such as you
like; or else quit our Title to the name of the right Sons of the Church of
England. Instead of the excellent Book last named, we must buy the Practice of
Piety (though far more liable to exceptions in many wise men's judgments, than
any Book of Devotion you have mentioned) or else you will not be in a good
humor. What an imperious, dictating Spirit is this (which rules in Men of this
strain) who will not allow us so much as to speak out of their phrase? Is this
the Spirit of true genuine Calvinisme, which you so highly commend, p. 28? Are
those that carp at every thing, and can relish nothing, but what is of their
dressing, nor fancy any body, but those that are exactly of their own cut, the
rightest Sons and Fathers of the Church of England? --

Why (will you here, I fancy, interrupt me, and be apt to say) what have you to
object against what I have writ, That an Episcopal Calvinist is the rightest
Son, or Father of the Church of England, the best Protestant; and (if a good
man) the best Christian? p. 28. I answer, if you will not count me impertinent
for meddling with that, which was not my present business with you, I have very
much to object. And first I say, that no right Son, much less, Father of the
Church of England, will endure to be called, or thought, either a Calvinist, or
an Arminian: for our Church follows no particular man, though never so great;
neither Calvin, nor Luther, nor Arminius. None of these are the founders of its
Faith: which is not taught by Calvin's or any other Institutions; but by the
Holy Scriptures interpreted by the Church of Christ, in the best ages of it. Or
(to give it you in the words of an once Father of this Church) interpreted, not
according to the fancies, and most what presumptions of some one man,
delighting commonly to oppose and thwart the stream of antiquity; but according
to the sense and meaning of those times, that drew water nearer unto the
Wellhead; that is, to the Apostles, and their successors immediately.

Upon which score it is certain, that the Doctrine of this Church cannot be
Calvinian. For the first and purest ages, by which it is guided, you your self
are sensible was not so; only you think it sufficient to smile at those who
pretend their Authority, and say, It is little less than ridiculous to talk of
the Fathers before St. Austin's time, in reference to those questions. p. 25.
Why so, I beseech you? Because they lived, say you, before the Controversy was
started; and so did not, nor could intend to speak appositely to the points of
Original sin, the power of Grace, etc By which reason we must not appeal to
them in the points about Popery; for then the pretenses of St. Peter were not
on foot, etc. and then they could not intend to speak appositely to such
matters. I should think those great Lights of the Church, ought not to be thus
slighted, in a matter of such moment. And an indifferent person would, for your
reason, conclude the quite contiany; that they are the more to be heeded,
because they are the more likely to have delivered purely their sense without
any bias, when they were not engaged among themselves in the heats of
controversy; which too often pervert the understanding. And those Doctrines which
subvert Mr. Calvin's Systeme, were so certainly believed by them, that they made
no controversy of them: but with one consent rejected the Doctrine of Fate,
which was then no less rife among the Pagans (against whom they were careful no
doubt to write appositely) than the absolute irrespective Decrees are now among
Christians.

But besides this, I am also certain, that the Sons and Fathers of the Church
of England, have opposed this Doctrine long before Mr. Hoord appeared; who you
say, was the first that ventured to give our British world, new notions of
Gods love to Mankind. This is so palpable an untruth, that Bishop Hoopers Works
show these notions which you call New, are as Old as the Reformation, And a
Sermon Preached at St. Paul's Cross, PLACE="marg" See Mr. Bull.
on the 27 of October (as the Title Page informs me) Anno Reginae Elizabethae
26. by Samuel Harsnet, is such an illustrious testimony against you, that there
cannot be a greater. He was then but Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge; but
afterward promoted to be one of the Fathers of the Church, in King James his
time, and at last advanced to be one of our Primates; for he dyed* Archbishop
of York. I supose, Sir, a Person of your Reading, who undertakes to trace the
crooked muddy stream, as you call it, to its first weak ebullitions, cannot be
ignorant of the strong efforts (to use your own word) made by this Preacher;
Who expressly makes the Doctrine, which Mr. Hoord long after opposed, a daring
enemy risen up against our Israel. For he expressly calls it a Goliath, which was
grown huge and monstrous, reviling not the Host of the living God, but the Lord
of Hosts. And mentioning those words of St. Paul, [God would have all men to be
saved] tells that numerous Auditory the Genevian conceit has dealt with this
Gracious bounty of God, and this blessed saying [God would have all men to be
saved] as Hanun did with the Ambassadors of David. He cut off their Garments to
the Hips; and this has curtailed the Grace of God to the stumps: For it says,
it must not be meant that God would have every living soul to come to Heaven;
but one or two, perhaps, out of every order and occupation. But the Spirit of
St. Peter ( a great deal wiser than that of Geneva) says plainly, God would
not have any one perish, etc. I trust we shall have Grace to believe him; since
himself can better tell what himself would have, than the men of Geneva can.
What think you now after this downright Declaration (which I have transcribed a
small scrap of, out of that Sermon, on 33 Ezekiel. 11.) was Mr. Hoord the first
man that ventured to teach Gods love to Mankind, in a way quite opposite to
that of the Calvinians? Is not here a man that boldly tells the British world
in the greatest Assembly it had, that your beloved Doctrine is a stranger, nay
an enemy to our Church: strutting indeed about at that time, and bearing it
self high (as you speak of Dr. Heylins Arminianisme) so that Men trembled and
shak'd at it; but by him resolutely endeavored to be cast down, as a foreign
conceit, which ought not to be admitted here. We know very well, how it came to
spread and grow so huge and monstrous; but it was then no more the sense of the
Church of England, than Arianisme was the sense of the Church Catholic, when
all places were overrun with it. There were still more than one who had the
same resolution with Athanasius, to bear witness against it; as I could show
out of good Authors.

And I can see no cause why Bishop Mountague (whom, as becomes a true course
Calvinian, you call bare Mountague, and therefore the rest, by the way, need
not take it ill they are no better treated) should be quite struck out of the
number of those, from whom we may learn the notions of our Church in his days.
For I can find no State-Politicks in his Book (which you pretend for his
rejection) but as he assures us, the proper, true, and ancient tenants of the
Church of England; such as be, without any doubt or question, legitimate and
genuine, such as she, will both acknowledge and maintain for her own: So he
avows in his Epistle Dedicatory, to His late Majesty, before his Apello
Caesarem. And there is no reason to think him partial in this case; since Dr.
Francis White, then Dean of Carlisle (no mean Champion sure of our Church)
testified as much, after he had been authorized by King James, to read that
Book over duly, and give his judgment of it, which is this, as you may see in
his Approbation, or License of it for the Press, 1624. that having diligently
perused it, he found nothing therein but what is agreeable to the Public
Faith, Doctrine and Discipline established in the Church of England.

Now mark what this Writer says to those that informed against him. You would
make the world believe (as you, Sir, endeavor also to do) That the Church of
England Calvinizes: show me good warrant for it, and I yield, I may rather say
that the Church of England has opposed this Doctrine, because that many of the
Learned (your selves will not deny) in that Church, and most conformable unto
the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church, have mainly opposed it. You may find
this lively testimony against you, in the First Part, the Seventh Chapter:
toward the conclusion of which, he further adds, I am sure it has been
opposed in the Church of England; otherwise taught and professed in the
Schools, when I was an Auditor there. It has been prohibited to be enjoined,
and tendered, or maintained, as the authentical Doctrine of our Church, by
supreme authority; with sharp reproof, unto those that went about to have it
tendered, than when those conclusions or assertions of Lambeth (which you
mention) were upon sending down to the University of Cambridge.

This is sufficient sure to convince you of your error; or if it be not, let me
add, that Bishop Davenant himself (who you do but hope, reduced Mr. Hoord to a
sounder mind, for I can prove the contrary) in his Lent Sermon before the King,
and the last I think that he preached, declared his opinion to be, as for
Universal Redemption, so for Universal Grace within the Church. Which I doubt,
the Calvinians will-not allow; I am sure those that are called Arminians,
desire no more. You may find this, if you please, in Dr. Hammond's Letters to
Bishop Sanderson, concerning Gods Grace and Decrees, p. 27. and I hope you will
take his word in a matter of Fact, for a greater thing than this.

But if all this will not be regarded, yet I presume the Church it self will be
allowed to understand its own sense, which has directly, and in express words
(says the forenamed Bishop Mountague, in that Book, Licensed by the Kings
Authority) overthrown the ground of Calvinisme, in Teaching thus: that a
justified man, and therefore predestinate in your Doctrine, may fall from God,
and therefore become not the Child of God, p. 59. which he repeats again p. 73.
The Church holds, and teaches punctually (and that in the opinion, and with
the dislike of the Learned of your side) that Faith, true, justifying Faith,
once had, may be lost and recovered again: that a man endued with Gods Holy
Spirit, may lose that HOLY SPIRIT, have that Light put out, become like unto
SAVL and JVDAS, etc. How can the Church of England then be thought, even in
your own understanding, to be Calvinian; which teaches things so cross to Mr.
Calvin's Hypothesis, that they utterly overturn it? And it had been very happy
if they that endeavored to bend some other Articles of our Church to his
sense, had rather studied, as they ought to have done, to frame their sense in
all other things to this Article, which is directed so expressy against what he
teaches. This Church then would have been in a better condition than it is;
being now in danger to be destroyed by those, who were never quiet, till with
the Doctrine, they had brought in the Discipline too of Mr. Calvin among us.
Those are memorable words of Bishop Mountagues (whom if he had been yours, you
would have gone near, upon such an occasion, to have styled a Prophet) which we
meet with in the Fifth Chapter, of the First Part of his Appeal, where he
charges those that informed against him, with waving the Doctrine of our
Church, Preaching against it, Teaching contrary to what they had subscribed,
that so, says he, through FOREIGN DOCTRINE, being infused secretly, and
instilled cunningly, and pretended craftily to be the Churches; at length you
may wind in with FOREIGN DISCIPLINE also, and so fill Christendom, with Popes
in every Parish for the Church, and with popular Democracies and Democratical
Anarchies in the State. If you please to reflect upon our late confusions, and
compare them with this Prediction, perhaps you may hereafter love Bishop
Mountague better, as a person of some judgment and sagacity in other things,
as well as in this.

But I list not to trouble the Reader with any unpleasant reflections upon
those dismal times, I will rather upon this occasion, refresh him with a tale,
as King James called it, in the Conference at Hampton Court, p. 82. There was a
time, says he, when Mr. Knox writes to the Queen Regent of Scotland, telling
her, that she was Supreme head of the Church, and charged her, as she would
answer it before God's Tribunal, to take care of Christ's Evangel, and of
suppressing the Popish Prelates, who withstood the same. But how long, trow ye,
did this continue? even so long, till by her authority, the Popish Bishops were
repressed, he himself, and his adherents, were brought in, and well settled, and
thereby made strong enough to undertake the matters of Reformation themselves.
Then lo, they began to make small account of her Supremacy, nor would longer
rest on her Authority but took the Cause into their own hand, etc. I will apply
it thus, And then putting his Hand to his Hat, His Majesty said, My Lords, the
Bishops, I may thank you, that these Men thus plead for my Supremacy: they
think they cannot make their party good against you, but by appealing to it; as
if you, or some that adhere unto you, were not well affected toward it. But if
once you were out, and they in place, I know what would become of my Supremacy.
With the like reason I may apply it again to our present business; there are
certain men that ring perpetually in our ears, the Doctrine of the Church of
England, the Doctrine of the Church of England: as if they were the most afraid
of innovations in it, and were the most zealous assertors, and strongest
supporters of it. Whereas the truth is, they are beat from all other holds, and
hope to shelter themselves a little by appealing to it: as if some among us
were not well-affected toward it. But if once their opponents were out, and
they in their places, with a power to settle matters among us; I know what
would become of the Doctrine of the Church of England; which they would no more
value than an old Almanac quite out of date.

But I intend not to make a Book of this, and therefore have said enough to
demonstrate the First part of your assertion is not true that an Episcopal
Calvinist is the rightest Son or Father of the Church of England. As for the
Second, That he is, if a good man, the best Christian; I have far more to say,
than I am willing to Print. It is sufficient to tell you, that I have known
indeed sundry good men of that way, who I verily believe would have been much
better, if they had not been of it. And others I have known, who have stained
their gooodness, with such irregular actions, and sinister practices and
dealings, as I believe they would not have been guilty of, had not their
Principles betrayed them into them. And lastly, I am apt to think that you your
self would have been more charitable in your censures, more indifferent in your
judgment, concerning Men and things, more civil and courteous in your
treatment of those you oppose, less captious, less partial, and not so
peremptory as you are in many places of your Book, if you had not been a
Calvinian: but I will not dispute on which side (would to God we could use no
such word, but as we are one Body, so were indeed all One) the best Christians
are, nor which Principles are apt to make the best. Let us all sincerely
endeavor to excel in Virtue, and be glad that any can outstrip us, though
they be not in all things of our mind; which will be far better than contending
about precedence, or about any thing else whatsoever.

Here now we might fairly part; but that I believe you will be apt to think,
either I have nothing to say, or dare say nothing, of that about which you make
so many sad complaints, if I should wholly pass by the points of justification
by Faith, and the imputed Righteousness of Christ. With the same provision
therefore, that you will not accuse me for meddling with.that which did not
concern me, I will add a few words about those matters.

And I assure you, I abhor the man, as much as you can do, who shall teach me
otherwise, than our Church does, Artic. XI. that we are accounted righteous
before God, only for the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith,
and not for our own Works or Deservings. And therefore it is a most wholesome
Doctrine, and full af Comfort, that we are justified by Faith only. But I
verily think, there are: none that teach otherwise; but you have wholly
mistaken those Persons, whose Writings have given you the trouble of making
this Book. For though we are justified by Faith only, yet you acknowledge p.
37. that all Christian Virtues are connate with that Faith. Which grants all
that Mr. Bull contends for; whose position is, that the Faith which justifies
contains in it a sincere purpose of a new life. O but none of those virtues
(you add) pass into the cause of justification, No, nor is Faith it self any
cause of it; not so much as an instrumental cause; and therefore you ought not
to have quarrelled with Mr. Bull about this matter; who detests any such
thoughts as you impose on him, that our good Works are required casually, and
antecedently to our justification, p. 39. No such absurd Notion is to be found,
I will stand to it, in his Book; nor lies I am sure, in his Head. He is not so
weak, so unstudied a Divine, as to make any thing that we can do, the cause of
that, which God alone can bestow upon us. He does not so much as require good
Works antecedently to our entrance into the state or Justification; but only
the purpose of them: which you your self acknowledge to be included, together
with all Christian Virtues, in that Faith which justifies. And indeed Bishop
Davenant, whom you deservedly applaud, affirms, as he shows, that those
internal good Works are necessary to our justification, though not as efficient
or meritorious causes, yet as concurring or previous conditions.

There is but one clause which can bring you off, and excuse you in this
business, which you wisely insert, when you speak of Mr. Bulls Doctrine [ if at
least, say you, I can understand him.]I know not what you can do, but I am sure
you do not understand him. And therefore ought to have suspected also, that you
did not rightly understand Bishop Nicholson's Books; rather than have said so
confidently as you do, doubtless Mr. Bull imposes very far upon the Bishop,
when he says, the Bishop read, approved, commended his Book, and wished him to
publish it. This is very uncivil, and hardly to be reconciled with Christian
Charity, which teaches us to think no evil, to believe all things, and to hope
all things, when the contrary does not evidently appear. It would have been but
bare modesty in you, to have thought you did not apprehend the meaning of a
Writer, in matters of controversy about Faith; rather than have accused a
Divine (of no mean credit, I assure you in his Country) of falsifying so
impudently in a matter of Fact, which he avows to the world, and to the Bishop
himself (to whom he dedicates his Work) to be a most real Truth. When you
consider it, you will acknowledge, I hope, between God and your own Soul, this
was too rash and peremptory (to speak gently) and not becoming one of the best
sort of Christians.

Which if you, and I too, will both of us study to be, I think verily it is
best for us not to trouble our selves with nice disquisitions, about these
matters, wherein we find Divines cannot well agree, about the way, I mean, of
Faith's justifying us. It may suffice us, I should think, to know, what our
Liturgy teaches us plainly in both the Absolutions, that God pardons and
absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his Holy Gospel
(as it is in the Absolution pronounced every day) having promised forgiveness
of sins to all them that with hearty repentance, and true Faith turn to him; as
it is in that at the Holy Communion. Let us receive this glad tidings upon our
bended knees, and with most joyful hearts, thankfully devoted to his service;
and leave those that list to dispute about the particular act of Faith that
justifies; and how it is instrumental, as they speak, in the business of
Justification; and whether there be such a thing as a passive Instrument, and
what Repentance has to do in this matter. No body shall ever persuade me, but
we shall have the benefit of the Absolution, though we be not able to resolve
these questions, or though we never think of them, If we truly repent, and
unfeignedly believe Christ's Holy Gospel; or, which is the same, With hearty
Repentance, and true Faith turn to him.

And in like manner (to speak a word or two in the other point) we are
sufficiently instructed in our Litanie, as I understand it, to expect to be
delivered (from our sins, I suppose, and the punishment due to them) by the
whole Humiliation, and exaltation of our Lord Jesus Christ: when it teaches us
to pray, By the mystery of thy Holy Incarnation; by thy Holy Nativity and
Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation, by thine Agony and
Bloody sweat; by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious Death and Burial, by
thy Glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming of the Holy Ghost,
Good Lord deliver us. It is plain, that whosoever minds what he prays, trusts
to be delivered by Christ alone; who impetrated this Mercy for us, and bestows
it on us, by his Incarnation, Nativity, Circumcision, and all the rest now
mentioned. But what hand each of these has, distinct from the other, in
procuring our deliverance, and how each of them merits for us, and makes us to
be accounted righteous before God; and wherein the merit of his life differs,
from that of his Death and Passion, and is applied to us by his Resurrection,
Ascension, and coming of the Holy Ghost; we need not, I hope, very solicitously
enquire. For Justification is not a Blessing that belongs only to Scholars and
subtle Wits, but to the plainest Countreyman of us all; who pray, and hope to
be delivered, by all that Christ has done and suffered for us; whose
righteousness in both regards, was so pure and perfect that God in
consideration of it (or for its merits) was pleased Graciously to grant us
forgiveness of sins, and him a power to bestow it on all those that believe on
his name: which is as much as to say, that we are accounted righteous for the
sake of Christ's merits, or for the merits, if you will, of Christ's
righteousness; the effects and fruits of which we are made partakers of by
Faith. So the Church teaches us to understand Christ's imputed righteousness
(which all good Christians rejoice in.) For righteousness imputed, is our being
accounted righteous before God, though we are not so in our selves, and we are
accounted righteous before God, says the 11 Artic. only for the merits of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith; and not for our own works and
deserving.

If you will trouble your self with notions beyond this, you may; but do not
trouble others with them, who profess they cannot understand how the
Righteousness of Christ can be so accounted ours (which is the modern notion of
it) as if in him we had performed perfect obedience to God. He performed
perfect Obedience for us; (that we believe and hope to be saved by the merit of
it;) but we did not perform perfect obedience in him, (that is contrary, I have
been taught to the very principles of Christianity.) For if we did, then by
that perfect obedience performed in him, we become perfectly righteous; free,
that is, not only from all punishment, but from fault; and then we have no need
of pardon, nor of any inherent righteousness, and we have merited a reward.

For my part I believe the honest people of the Church of England, who devoutly
say the Litanie, never think of any such thing, but humbly address themselves
to God for mercy, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, who has
purchased pardon for penitent sinners, by the entire righteousness of his life
and death. They mean no more, when they pray to be delivered by his wonderful
condescension, in being incarnate for our sake (which was the beginning of his
humiliation) and by his bloody death and burial (in which it was finished) but
that they may be freed from the guilt of their sins, and the punishment due to
them, by the merits of these, and all other parts of his humiliation: which
they know, by his exaltation into the heavens, and the coming of the Holy
Ghost, was highly acceptable to God; being the fulsilling of all his Will, in
what he required for our redemption; and having obtained for our Savior, all
power in Heaven and Earth, to dispense the Blessings which he purchased. And
thus other Churches understand this business, the French for instance, who say;
We believe that our righteousness consists in remission of sins, etc. and
therefore casting away all opinion of our own virtues and merits, we rest only
in the obedience of Christ Jesus; which is imputed to us both, that all our
sins may be covered, and also that we may obtain Grace before God. Here they
plainly tell us, that their righteousness (which is procured by Christ's
obedience) consists in remission of sins; and therefore that obedience of his,
is imputed only in this sense; that for its sake we may obtain remission of
sins, and be accepted with God.

I beseech you, Sir, do not accuse me of Heterodoxy, if I do not jump with your
thoughts in these matters: for I protest I have no inclinations to fasten a
sense upon the Churches words out of my own head; but would most gladly receive
it from those that can inform me better about it. And I have a great respect
also, for all good men that are of a different mind in these matters: and
reverence Mr. Calvin very much, though I do not think my self bound to follow
his opinions. All I desire is, that neither you nor any body else would keep a
pudder and a stir, as if Christianity were in danger to be lost by I know not
what new notions; when Mr. Bull, and all that I have heard of his way, preach
the Grace of God, in such a manner as I have declared: which makes me confident
our Religion and the Church is safe, if they have no worse enemies than he. But
I much fear they are none of the Churches friends (though they may design its
good) who make such a noise, as if all our ancient, most fundamental Doctrines
were subverted. For the love of God, Sir, Let as hear no more of this from your
hand, if you bear any good will to it. Let us have no more discourses of
innovations in our Doctrines; no more Truths unveiled (though you think your
self never so well acquainted, with them) no more Vindications, nor mention of
Mr. Standish: who being the only person concerned, has as became an honest and
good man, acknowledged his error by silence. I pray, Sir, do not you therefore
revive that, which he thinks fit should dye, and be no more heard of. I dare
say for him, he will give you no thanks for your kind intentions to serve him;
and therefore do not study how to oblige him any further in this matter. He
honors several of those persons, I make no doubt, as true Sons of the Church
of England; whom you have loaded with the reproach of departing from its
Doctrine. You have done him a great deal of injury in endeavoring to make the
world believe, that he struck at Dr. Hammond, Bishop Tailor, or Bishop
Mountague either. Nothing I am confident was further from his thoughts, and he
wishes, I am of opinion, that he had been as far out of yours. For it was
untowardly done to bring him upon the stage again, right or wrong; when he had
no mind to persist in making a breach among us, as he had in an heat begun to
do.

But he will take it kindly, I am apt to think, if you will not seek to make
him any reparation for this wrong: but leave him to justify himself his own
way. He may well forgive you all that is past, for one considerable service you
have done him (and the only one that I can find) which is, that I hope you have
opened his eyes to see, that I was in the right when I told him (in my request
to him) what sort of men he would gratify by those passages in his Sermon. Even
such as accuse our late great Archbishop of Canterbury, for being an incourager
of the Romish Faction (as you do in express terms, p. 28.) i. e. betraying his
Trust, and this Church; which he so affectionately served, that it cost him his
life. It was not enough it seems, that they brought him in his life time, under
the Prophets affliction (as he complains to our late Martyred Sovereign in his
Epistle before his admirable Book against Fisher) between the mouth that speaks
wickedness, and the tongue that sets forth deceit, and slandered him as thick,
as if he were not their own Mothers Son: but he must still be persecuted with
the same calumnies, now that he is laid in his Grave.

But it is no wonder that Pen should do it, which bestows such commendations on
him, who reproaches, not only our Bishops, but the most famous persons of that
Order, which have been known in the Christian world, I mean the facetious and
candid Marvel (as you praise him, p. 34.) with whom honest Mr. Standish (as you
there truly term him) will not take it well to be joined in the very same
breath; as if he carried on the same design with that Gentleman. He is an
honester man, I dare say, than you would have him; and hates that which you
applaud with all his heart. What? do you really think a Son of the Church of
England can be in love with him, that laughs at the primitive times, and makes
a jest of the venerable Council of Nice, and drolls upon the Bishops assembled
there, as if they were a company of pitiful Dunces, whose understandings were
sequestered, and knew not what to believe, but as they were every day instructed
by their Chaplains. p. 58. Call you this Facetiousness? And is it Candor too,
when he tells us in his Rehearsal Transprosed, that the highest pinnacle of
Ecclesiastical Felicity, (for the Clergy still have most of his kindness) is to
assuage their lust, and wrack their malice. p. 10. And when in the conclusion
of his last work, we read, that the Bishops have induced His Majesty to more
severity, than all the Reigns since the Conquests will contain, if summed up
together? What? Not Queen Mary's Reign excepted? No, nor the late Reign of the
Presbyterians and Independents? Were the flames in Smithfield, and all the
Sequestration -- (I am loath to mention all the rest of the dreadful sufferings)
which our times have known, mere gentleness, in comparison with the present
rigors? When with so much lenity also, as was never known in any Reign, such
Books as these are suffered, to confute their own accusations?

Good God! how partial are the best sort of Christians grown (if you may be
believed) who can swallow all this glibly and merrily, with a great deal of
smuttiness to boot (which I have observed in the Rehearsal Transprosed) but
keck at Dr. Hammond, and the Whole Duty of Man. etc. which will by no means
down with them? What an odd kind of Conscience is this, which cries out, How
long O Lord, how long? (p. 35. as if you wondered at his forbearance) because
some men speak of justifying Faith in other terms than you would have them: and
can, not only suffer, but countenance him, who directly strikes at a main
Principle of Christianity; viz. That our Savior is the Eternal Son of God,
begotten before all worlds, of one substance with the Father. For he says the
Council of Nice imposed a NEW ARTICLE or Creed upon the Christian world: when
this was the very thing they stood upon, that they only declared the ancient
belief, which had always been from the beginning, concerning the Son of God.
What outcries would you have made, had any person of our Church been guilty of
such a fact? How profane, how impious would you have thought it, to call that
explication which they made of the ancient Faith, a gibberish of their own
imposing: a Cant, wherein they forced others to follow them? How often would you
have repeated, your facinus ante hoc inauditum? p. 35. and reiterated your Hen!
in the next pages, whereas you can read this in him, and be as calm as a Lamb;
nay, entertain him with the friendly complement of the facetious and candid
Marvel.

Well, I see by this what the care is, which some most zealously pretend to
have, least there should be the smallest innovation in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, which expressly declares in the 8 Article, that the Nicene
Creed (together with that of Athanasius, and the Apostles) ought to be thoroughly
received and believed; for they may be proved by most certain warrants of Holy
Scripture. And in the Second Article it asserts, in plain words, the Son to be
the very Eternal God, of one substance with the Father, etc. Such is the
gibberish of the Church of England (as he (and you too in effect call it:) for
which, if you were indeed as much concerned as you imagine, and did not deceive
your self with an unequal zeal; you would so reason upon this occasion (as you
fancy you do upon another) to beblur your paper with Tears more than Ink. For
you cannot pretend that any of those whom you trouble your self so much withal,
have affronted her Doctrine in so audacious a manner, as this Writer has done;
whom you can read, not only with dry Eyes, but with a merry Heart. There would
have been no end of your complaints, could you have found any thing so black in
our Books, we should have had our ears filled with clamours from all parts of
the Kingdom; and nothing sounded in them, but that Christianity was betrayed,
the name of our Lord blasphemed, etc. by an impious Innovator. You your self,
though now you be silent, would have joined with them, and said that he had
outdone all others in scurrility, calumny, and profaneness; as you accuse
others that deserve a better character; you would have sobb'd and sighed, and
sat down full of Marvel (you must give me leave to fancy, how you would have
spoken) and in deep astonishment that such a thing, such an inauditum facinus,
should be committed in our Israel.

And truly I am so astonished at it, and at your partiality, that I am able to
go no further; but must here break often abruptly: After I have told you, that I
am notwithstanding so charitable (looking upon you in an ill fit when you writ
this Book) that as you take me for an honest Country Gentleman, so I take you
for no less; which of us is mistaken, let the world judge, without giving it
any further trouble by either of our scriblings about this business. It had not
been troubled with mine, I assure you, but that I thought it was necessary you
should see, your Zeal cannot be so great for one way; but there are men in the
Church of England who will equal it, and are as much concerned, and can say as
much for the other way. And now that this is done, let us betake our selves to
our Prayers, which is the best employment, That God would enlighten all our
Eyes, to see the way of Truth and Righteousness, Amen.

October. 20. 1676.
FINIS.

