WARD MAYOR.
Cur. prima tent. die Jovis quarto die November. Annoque Regis CAROLI Secundi
Angl. etc. xxxij.

THis COURT does desire Master Dean of Peterburgh to Print his SERMON preached
at the Guild Hall Chapel on Sunday morning last.

WAGSTAFFE.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR AND THE ALDERMEN
OF THE City of LONDON

At Guild Hall Chapel, October. 31. 1680.

Being the XXI. Sunday after TRINITY.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. DEAN of PETERBVRGH, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for R. Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty,
1680.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir PATIENCE WARD Lord Mayor Of the CITY of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
IT is so hard, on some occasions, to be a thoroughly good Christian, and much
more to be such a Magistrate; that some have given over the endeavor of it,
out of a persuasion, that it is impossible. Which, as it proceeds from great
ignorance of the Christian Religion so, would be a great disparagement to it;
if our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, had not taken special care, not only
to breed in us a quite contrary opinion; but also to raise our minds to the
highest degree of confidence, that we shall be able, by the Divine assistance,
to surmount the greatest difficulties.

This I have endeavored, in as plain a manner as I could devise, to press in
this Sermon; which by the desire of that Honorable Court, where Your Lordship
presides, I now humbly present to Your and the public view. Which will do the
more good, I hope, not only because Your Lordship judged it very seasonable at
Your entrance upon Your Office, but because I was directed to this subject, not
so much by my own Prudence, as by a kind of Divine Providence: which I have often
observed on the like occasions.

For, having in the common course of my Sermons this year, at my own Parish,
Preached upon some part of the Epistle for the Day, I found there was no need
to go out of my way to meet with a fitting Argument; upon that Sunday when I
was appointed to preach to Your Lordship. And therefore I sought no further,
but applied my self to prosecute the first words, which occurred there: and
that, not with such matter as humane invention might have furnished me withal;
but such as the Apostle himself suggested, in the rest of the Epistle for that
day.

And indeed, they are matters of great and weighty importance; which, though
there be many of them, I have both comprehended in a little room, and also made
them not hard to be remembered; because I have considered them as relating all
to one and the same end; and as having, not only the same scope, but, such a
dependence also one upon another, that they cannot well be separated. I am sure
where they are all united, there the Divine Blessing will be; for they are the
complete Armor of God, that heavenly defense, which will certainly secure us
in our station; if we will but make use of it, with a mind to be and to do what
soever Christ would have us.

The first step toward which, is rightly to understand our duty; as should have
been pressed more largely, if I had had room enough; from those words, be girt
about with Truth. In which if we be defective, we shall miscarry, do what we
can; and the more Zealous we are, the more we shall be out of the way. But it
is not likely we shall be defective in any material part of Christian
Knowledge, if to our serious study of a right understanding and judgment in all
things, we add (according to the last Advice in this discourse) most earnest
prayer to God for his direction, guidance, and assistance; and can appeal to
Him, in such words as those of David (which are full of sincere affection) that
we are heartily resolved, to do whatsoever we know to be our duty; and that
there is nothing we long for so much in this world, as to know it entirely,
CXIX. Psalm. 34, 35. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I
shall observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go, in the path of thy
Commandments; for therein do I delight.

Which that Your Lordship may always do, and thereby acquit your self, in your
difficult charge, to the general satisfaction of all good men, is the hearty
prayer of

My LORD, Your most humble Servant, S. PATRICK.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR and ALDERMEN Of
the CITY of LONDON.
EPHESIANS. vi. 10. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might.
I Have chosen, you see, for your present instruction, Right Honorable and
well beloved, the beginning of the Epistle for this Day. In the first word of
which the Apostle signifies, that he was drawing to a conclusion of this
Letter, to the Christian Church at Ephesus. Finally, my Brethren, I have
nothing more to add, but this; all that remains is to exhort you, to be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

He had made his most earnest Prayer to God in the middle of this Epistle (iii.
14, etc.) that he would grant them, according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might by his spirit, in the inner man: that so they might be
able to perform all their Christian duty; which follows in the ensuing part of
the Epistle, till you come to my Text. In which he puts them in mind that it
was not sufficient to receive strength from Heaven, in their inner man: but
they must also be strong, or strengthen themselves; not indeed in themselves,
but in the Lord, in that heavenly strength which our blessed Savior gives us,
and in the power of his might, wherewith He will always assist our weakness.

There lies the security of Christians; from whom our Savior expects a
faithful obedience, both in their single, and in their relative capacity,
either as Men or Women, or as Husbands or Wives, as Parents or Children, as
Masters or Servants, (all whose duties the Apostle had just before most
punctually set down) because He requires no impossible thing; but such an
obedience as he strengthens us with might, by his spirit, to perform: if we
will but be careful and diligent to strengthen our selves in him, and in the
power of his might.

In which words we cannot but observe these two things.

First, A Christian duty incumbent upon them; which was to be strong, or to
strengthen themselves: For it is an Exhortation of the Apostle to the
Ephesians; whom he charges with this, as the very upshort of his foregoing
discourse.

Secondly, The ability they had to perform this duty, which is in, or by the
Lord: For there he tells them their strength lies; in him, and in the power of
his might; that is, in his mighty insuperable power.

The first of which supposes that they would need a great deal of courage and
resolution (for that is to be strong, in the Apostles language) to be able to
do their duty, in all relations, in all times, and in all conditions and
circumstances of life.

The second supposes, that their own natural courage, or mere Philosophical
Resolution, called Fortitude, would not be sufficient to carry them through all
difficulties: but upon some occasions their spirit would quail, unless they
were supported by a diviner sort of Virtue; which he calls being strong in the
Lord. By the Lord meaning our Blessed Savior; who bred in his Disciples souls
a new kind of valor, which men were not acquainted withal before; or of which
we read nothing in the Books of mere Philosophers. For as they do say little or
nothing of that trust and confidence, which all good men ought to repose in
God, and of a vigorous application of their mind to Him, for strength and
resolution to be truly virtuous: so they could say nothing, of such devoute
addresses to our Lord for it.

Who sending his Apostles into the world to propagate his Religion, which was
sure to meet with mighty opposition, furnished them with a suitable courage:
which they endeavored to infuse into all others; who by entertaining their
Doctrine, might have need of the like virtue. Which is this here in my text; of
a quite different sort from those now named: For it arises not from natural
heat, or from the mere soundness of our natural principles of reason, and the
honest resolution which we have firmly built thereupon: but from a far higher
original, the mighty, invincible power of the Lord Jesus, which was always in
their eye, and on which they steadfastly relied. As there was very great need;
having other kind of enemies to grapple withal, than mere natural men thought
of; not merely with flesh and blood, (as it follows after my text) that is,
with humane powers and their savage malice and cruelty: but with the Devil and
his Angels; who did all they could to dishearten them, and hinder their
spreading of this Religion* For which end they instigated both the Jewi^^
Rulers, and Heathen Kings and Princes, to persecute them with the greatest
rage, and the most Diabolical fury.

And the very same powers of Hell, we have reason to think, are now at work to
confound us and our Religion. The Reformation of which was little less
wonderful, in one regard, than the first publication of the Gospel. For it flew
like lightning; and, on a sudden, all these northern Countries purged
themselves, from the Romish pollutions, with a mavelous consent: as swiftly
and in as short a space of time, as the Gospel, at its first Preaching, ran
among the Gentiles; and excited them to free themselves from Pagan Idolatries.
And immediately the Devil set his Agents at work, to disgrace and spoil the
Reformation by Sects and Heresies; and to deter men from embracing it, by the
most dreadful punishments: just as when the Gospel broke out, he labored to
uphold his Authority by the like arts and instruments of deceit and cruelty.

And now the powers of darkness seem to be making their very last attempt in
these Countries; to overthrow that, which was so happily, and by such an
extraordinary hand of God established. And who knows but their fury may proceed
to such violence, as without an extraordinary courage, we shall not be able to
stand fast in the Faith, to quit our selves like men, and to be strong; as the
Apostle exhorts in the 1 Cor. xvi. 13?

We had best therefore fortify our selves beforehand with a good stock of this
Divine Virtue: which we shall have great use of upon other occasions (though by
the merciful Providence of God that trial of it should be prevented, for which
we humbly pray and hope) to enable us to do, as well as to suffer all things
that would hinder our doing the will of God. I am not able to say, to which of
these my Text most relates: whether to the words foregoing, or to those that
follow. But which way soever we take them, there will be little or no
difference: and it will be best to refer them to both. Because the power of
Christ is as necessary for us to enable us to discharge those Christian duties
before mentioned; as to withstand those trials which he tells the Ephesians in
the Verses following, would discourage and dishearten them in their obedience.

Now to the end, that we may be furnished with a sufficient strength for both;
I shall do these two things;

First, Show you wherein this duty consists, of being strong, or strengthening
our selves in the Lord, and in his mighty power.

Secondly, What our work is, or what we have to do, that we may be endued with
this mighty Virtue.

I. For the first of these; by the LORD being meant, as I said, our blessed
Savior, who laying down his life for us, is raised again, and made the Lord of
all (all power in Heaven and in Earth being given to him, as he himself told
his Apostles and afterward was proved by sensible effects) to be strong in him
consists in these three things.

1. First, To be possessed with a lively faith of the Power and Glory, which
our Lord now has at Gods right hand.

2. Secondly, To keep this Faith alive in our hearts, that it may make us on
all occasions repair to Him: representing Him always as actually present to us,
by the Power of his might to aid and succor us.

3. Thirdly, In this Faith to be steadfastly resolved to stick to him, and not
to stir from the duty He enjoins us: notwithstanding any thing that may oppose
us, to discourage, nay endanger us in the doing of it.

Of these we have such frequent occasion to treat, at some time or other, that
it may be sufficient now only to repeat them.

1. We must represent the Majesty and Power, wherein our Lord reigns at Gods
right hand, so strongly to our souls, that they be possessed with a pregnant
and lively sense of it; and be disposed thereby to depend upon him continually,
as an Almighty Savior.

2. And then this Faith, when it is settled in our hearts, we must actuate and
excite; that it may make us look upon Him as present with us, at all times, by
his Almighty Power; to aid and assist us, to support and comfort us; as well as
able at last Eternally to reward us.

3. And lastly, This Faith must settle in us a firm resolution and purpose to
adhere to his service, and resist all temptations to the contrary; till by his
Power we overcome them, and remain faithful to the very death, expecting from
him the Crown of Life.

This He expects from us, and this we must charge our selves withal; and be
faithful to it, and steadfast in it. For if we doubt not of His Power, why
should we not depend upon it; and, by the force of it, do that for which He
communicates it unto us? Has He not made us many precious Promises, that by
them we may be partakers of a Divine Nature? Has He not said, He will be with
us, and give his Holy Spirit to them that ask it, and never leave us nor
forsake us, but be our helper, and deliverer? Has He not bid us, not fear them
that can do no more but kill the body; but fear Him that can throw both Soul
and Body into Hell? and repeated it again; that we should fear this great Lord;
fear to offend Him, fear to lose His favor, and the glorious hope He has set
before us? Has He not bid us lay hold on this hope; and hold fast our
confidence and the rejoicing of our hope unto the end? Has He not bid us trust
to this, that stronger is He that is in us, than he that is in the world? than
the Devil, and all his partakers and instruments? who have no power to hurt us,
unless He consent to it; and in that case, the thing we account a hurt, shall
work together for our good?

We are not Christians, if we believe not this. And what is there more to be
believed, but that He has power to make good his word? And how can we question
that; when we remember that He is the LORD? whose power is no less large than
his desire: So that He cannot be inclined by his good will, to design or to
promise any kindness to his Servants; which He has not equal ability actually
to perform.

He does not merely wish us well; nor can He be suspected ever to find any
impotency in himself, whereby He should be disabled from expressing the love
which we think He bears us. And therefore He cannot be more forward, either to
conceive good intentions toward us, or to make us promises of the good He
intends; than He is ready and able to do, to the full, what He purposes and
what He promises.

The consideration of which power of his, is the great support of our Faith,
when we read any of his exceeding great and precious promises in the Holy
Scriptures: and should make us heartily depend upon them, and with a settled
resolution go about our duty, in an unshaken confidence of their performance.

To this Power of God it was that Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, had
respect, when God promised to give him an heir; though an impossible thing in
Nature. He staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but was strong in
Faith giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that what He had promised, He
was able also to perform, iv. Romans 20, 21. The object of his faith was the
promise of God; who, as He had never deceived him so, he knew could not be
worse than his word. But that which preserved him from staggering at such a
Promise as this, was his laying hold on the Power of God: which made him strong
in faith. And the Glory he gave to God, was his conceiving so highly and
magnificently of his Power, as nothing to doubt of what He had said; nor in the
least to imagine the thing He promised was beyond it: but to rest fully
persuaded that He was no less able to perform, than He was willing to promise
it.

The like strong Faith we ought to have in the power of our Lord Christ; from
whose Majesty we shall extremely derogate, if we think there is any thing too
hard for Him to do. But to think He cannot do what He has promised to do for
us, is to blemish Him with such a weakness, that there cannot be a greater
disparagement to Him. For though it be no discredit to one of us, not to be
able to do every thing, that another man can do: yet to put our Friends in hope
and expectation, by promises, of what we know is without the reach of our
abilities, is such a dishonor; that it reflects scorn and contempt in the face
of those who are guilty of it. And therefore if it could be conceived (which we
ought not in the least to admit) that our Blessed Lord has any weakness or
defect of Power in Him; yet so great a defect as this, to promise things which
He cannot make good to those that believe them and depend upon them, must need
be far removed from Him. And we being sure that the same Goodness and Love
which moved Him to make those promises of Grace and strength to us, will move
Him to employ his Power to communicate them; we ought to trust to this, and
with an assured Faith depend upon His powerful Goodness: and in that Faith
steadfastly and courageously perform most constant obedience to Him; who, we are
sure, cannot fail us.

II. But that we may not deceive our selves with a false dependence on Him, nor
vainly trust to his Almighty Power for our aid, let us always remember (which
will bring me to the second thing I propounded) that it is such a Faith in Him,
and dependence on Him, as makes us use all the means which He has appointed,
in conjunction with our trust in his might, for our preservation. Else it is
not a right Faith in the power of his Might, nor will derive the communications
of it into our souls: for He that bids us confide in that, requires us also to
do many other things; in the exercise of which, He tells us, we may be
confident his Power will give us the better. And if we believe as we ought, we
shall take his word as much for the one, as for the other.

According to which Doctrine, the Apostle (who could best explain his own mind)
immediately adds this injunction, in the words after my Text, Put on the whole
Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. It
was not enough it seems barely to confide in the invincible strength of the
Lord Jesus; but they must put their own hand to the work, and prepare
themselves for the encounter, and valiantly, when occasion was, enter into it
and sustain it. For opposition we must expect, as the Apostle shows verse. 12.
and great opposition, from very powerful, very subtle, very industrious, and
likewise invisible Enemies. For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places. Who among other ways they
have to trouble us, stir up the spirits of evil men to give us all the
disturbance, and do us all the mischief, that is in their power; and stir them
up to so high a degree of rage, that they persecute us many times with such
inhumane malice and cruelty, as flesh and blood could not invent; were it not
acted by a Diabolical fury.

This mighty and frightful opposition we are apt to make an Argument, why we
cannot hold out, but should despair of being able to do our duty. But the
Apostle, quite contrary, makes it an Argument why we should be strong, and
resolved, and watchful, and ready armed against all temptations, and able to
stand: because we have to do with such potent and crafty Enemies, who are so
much above us, in high places; from whence they can more easily assault us.

This he repeats again, verse. 13. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of
God; that is, because you have so many, so great and dangerous Enemies to
conflict withal, take unto you (to put it on, that is,) that Divine Armor
which God himself furnishes you withal, and let no part of it be wanting, but
be entirely at all times covered with it; that so you may be able to withstand
or to resist with constancy and patience, in the evil day; or the time when you
must endure many calamities for Christ's sake: And having done all to stand;
that is, having completed your resistance, by an unyielding resolution to
consent to nothing against your duty, you may remain as conquerours over all
those Enemies that assaulted you.

Stand therefore, verse. 14. he repeats it a third time, the more to imprint
their Duty in their mind; and to excite and encourage them unto it. He would
not have them doubt of getting the better; but be confident they should be able
to withstand all manner of opposition: provided they put on entirely that
complete Armor, which he was about to recommend to them from God himself.
Without that, their confidence even in Christ, and his mighty Power, would not
keep them in safety: but they were to trust in Him; employing those weapons
which He had given them for their defense and security.

Let me therefore briefly explain them, that you may see what you have to do,
if you would be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. In which it
is impossible, that any body should be able to direct you, so well as the
Apostle himself: and therefore I shall seek for no other means of attaining
this Divine strength; but those which he has set down in the remaining part of
the Epistle for this day.

1. And first, you must take care, to have your loins girt about with truth,
verse. 14. that is, with a true understanding of all things, that concern our
duty, safety and happiness. Which we can receive from no place so certainly,
and so amply, as from the Revelation our Lord has made of the mind of God to
us in his Gospel, which is called the word of truth: teaching us, both what is
true and false, and what is good and evil, so fully; that we want no necessary
Information, Direction, or encouragement in our Christian warfare. Only, we
must make it our business thoroughly to understand the mind of God, and to let
it sit close to our hearts: for that is to have it girt about us.

This will make us ready against all assaults, and they will find us better
prepared to receive them: we shall be the more at liberty, and have nothing
interpose to entangle our mind, and hinder us from doing our duty. For that was
the end of a Soldiers girding up his clothes about his loins; that he might be
the more nimble, and expedite in action; when he was not encumbered by his
garments, hanging loosely about his heels. Such will the clear knowledge of
things, especially of the Truth as it is in Jesus, render our minds. Which will
find themselves fit for any service, and able to perform it with ease and
freedom: when they are delivered by this illumination, from all vain opinions
about those things which we call Good and Evil in this world; from all false
principles; from causeless doubts and scruples; from confusion of thoughts, and
uncertainty of mind; which weaken and discourage the hearts of men, in any
encounter with their spiritual enemies. Whose great advantage lies in our
ignorance and folly, mistakes and false persuasions; which this Divine Light
shining in us will chase away; and let us see through all the thin pretenses
whereby we are tempted to commit any Sin, or to neglect our duty; and make the
vanity of them so transparent, that we shall never be cheated by them any more.

For Truth is great and will prevail; not indeed unless it be seated and rooted
in our minds; but if it have taken fast hold there, it has the Lord on its
side; whose mighty power resides there where his sacred Truth does: which being
the sense of his own mind, is something of himself residing in us.

There would not, for instance, be so many deserters, and revolters from their
Religion, so many cowardly and timorous spirits who will do nothing for it, so
many cold and indifferent persons who care not what becomes of it; if we
understood the truth of it better, and its principles did not hang loose in our
minds: but we had a lively sense of its excellency, purity, simplicity, and
Divine original. Which would preserve us also from doing any thing unbecoming
our Religion, while we make profession of it, and pretend to admire it, and
love it, and to endeavor to preserve it. For who could act contrary to its
principles, whose heart were affected deeply with this single truth; that he
who knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes?
It will go exceeding hard with that man, and he will lie under the severest
lashes of his own Conscience, as well as under the heavy displeasure of his
Lord and Master: who taught him the way of God in truth, if he would have taken
care, and set his heart, to walk in it. Which leads me to the next.

II. Unto this clear knowledge of the truth as it is in Christ, we must add the
Breast Plate of Righteousness. Which is nothing else, but integrity of heart,
and loyal Affection to our blessed Lord and Master Christ: a sincere and
unfeigned love to the business of Christianity; which we understand to be the
will of God.

For a Breast Plate you know is the defense of the region of the heart; and
Righteousness I take here to be as much as uprightness and sincerity in what we
pretend: and therefore both put together signify the unfeigned bent of our
will, the cordial consent of our heart and affection, to all that we know to be
the mind of Christ; aiming at nothing in the world, but to keep a good
Conscience; and thereby to preserve the love of God, and at last to obtain
favor with Him in the day of the Lord.

Which, besides that it is most highly esteemed by our blessed Savior, above
all knowledge and wisdom in the world, and may certainly depend upon His power
for the maintenance of that which is so dear unto Him; has many singular
advantages in it, to make us successful in our Christian warfare.

For a constant sense of our fidelity to our Lord, naturally gives us a
stronger confidence that He will be faithful unto us.

This makes us also as bold and fearless as Lions; when we have nothing within
to dismay us: but all the reason in the world to be secure and confident, that
we shall still attain our end; which is, to approve our selves to our Lord and
Master, whatsoever befalls us.

And on the other side, nothing more daunts all opposers, or strikes such a
terror into our Enemies: who are in dread of those alone, who fear nothing but
to lose their integrity.

If this be the sole thing we resolve to preserve, and upon no terms part
withal, we shall have this advantage also by it; that we shall the more clearly
discern what is the surest way to safety in dangerous times, if it may be had
together with innocence. Whereas they that bend every way, and sail with every
wind, where they think their worldly interest lies; are always blinded so much
by that, as never to see the rocks upon which they run, and are split at last.

Now the surest mark of this integrity, is an equal uniform zeal for all manner
of goodness and virtue, diffusing it self, like the spiritous blood from the
heart, through the whole body of our Christian duty; though never so cross to
our natural inclination, or worldly interest.

And (as this is the surest mark of it so) the surest way to preserve it, is to
give daily proofs of it to our selves, upon all such occasions as continually
present themselves: which will wonderfully encourage and animate us to go on,
when we meet, at any time, with more dangerous opposition. This will make us
undaunted, in case any hard service be put upon us, when we are not conscious
to our selves of any hypocrisy, or base design, or unworthy behavior, in
lesser trials of our Christian resolution, in the daily, common course of our
life: Or if at any time we have prevaricated, our Repentance for it has been
so sincere, that in those instances, especially wherein we did not keep our
Faith with God, we since have approved our selves better unto Him, and given
testimony of our renewed, settled purposes, by no means to displease Him.

This will arm us against the most terrible impressions that can be made upon
us by the enemy of mankind; against the sorest sufferings, of which the Apostle
here particularly speaks; even against Death it self, the last and greatest
Enemy we have to conflict withal, in whatsoever shape it shall approach us.

To be conscious then to our selves of no enormous crime, or to call to mind
how solicitously we have made our peace with God, and what full satisfaction we
have given, for any injury done to our neighbor; to have nothing then to aghast
us; nothing to fill us with pale fears; no guilt, unrepented of, to stare us in
the face and threaten us; will be as good a Breast Plate, as if we were
environed with a wall of Brass. Take a man that is just and upright, unmovable
from his honest purpose, that has settled a firm love to Goodness in his Soul;
and neither the rage of the People, nor the countenance of stern Tyrants,
commanding him wicked things, will shake his solid mind: but though the world
should be supposed to crack, and break in pieces, and fall about his ears, the
ruin of it will oppress a fearless person.

Thus an Ancient Poet could boast, inspired only with a natural sense, which he
had of the courage and strength, that true integrity and sincere love to
virtue, gives the heart of him in whom it dwells. He has inward peace and
tranquillity (as an upright Christian feels more lively than any other man can
do) which makes him less regard all outward accidents. Whereas, if a man's heart
correspond not with what he knows to be the truth; what contentment can he have
to suffer any thing for that, which does him no good? Who can doubt but the
covetous man will rather forsake the Truth, than his Riches; which he takes to
be infinitely more precious? and an ambitious man rather quit it than his
preferment; and an intemperate man abandon it, than forego his pleasure? For
they have corrupted his Soul, and thereby made it weak and feeble: and deprived
it of that Breast Plate, which a man that entirely loves the Truth, and follows
it, is armed withal.

In one word, if we have not sincerely practiced that which we understand to be
our duty, or if we have done it lamely and by halves: this will give us the
most grievous wound, when we reflect upon it, and so gall our Consciences; that
we shall find it to be the sharpest Enemy we have, in a day of trial.

III. But the Apostle further advises them, if they would be strong in the
Lord, to have their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
verse. 15. In which advice he supposes, that they who believed the Truth and
heartily loved it, would be desirous to propagate their belief, and persuade
others to entertain it. For all men are naturally inclined to endeavor to make
others of their opinion: and the more necessary they apprehend any thing to be,
with the greater earnestness they press to have it generally received.

But he would have them be sure, not to forfeit the reputation of true wisdom,
nor to lose their integrity (which he had spoken of before) by being turbulent
in this business: but dispose themselves to go (for that is the end of putting
on shoes) and endeavor to spread the Gospel, or Christianity among their
neighbors, after a peaceable manner.

Which are two counsels that contribute much to the securing our Christian
Resolution. For he that designs sincerely to promote Religion in others, will
not easily forsake it himself. And the more good any man does, the more he is
like to receive from the hand of the Lord. But we shall do little good, unless
we do it in a peaceable manner: with the spirit of meekness, and love, and
quietness; without which a man can neither be thorougly Religious himself, nor
make others so. For nothing more takes us all off from the business of true
Religion, than contentions and quarrels, though they be about Religion.
Therefore we must follow Peace, as well as that Purity, without which no Man
shall see the Lord: and be readily prepared rather to suffer any thing, than to
make a bustle and a stir about that which teaches us all to study to be quiet;
and is very much dishonored and endangered too by our unnatural and
unseasonable contentions.

For Soldiers, to whose warfare the Apostle here alludes, are never safe, but
when they all agree, and are in unity one with another, as well as with their
chief Commander: whose great lesson is this in the Christian discipline, be at
Peace among your selves, By Christian Love, Charity, and friendly Communion, we
shall be much stronger against all assaults, whether from the Devil, the Flesh,
or the World, than if we fight single against them, or, which is worse, be
divided, and at last, perhaps, fight one with another. For, to omit other
reasons, we shall invite more of the Divine power into our hearts, when we live
in Unity, and Peace, and brotherly accord, wherein He delights: but shall
weaken our selves extremely, and lie open and exposed to the common Adversary
(both to the Devil and all his instruments) when like quarrelsome Soldiers, we
fall out and are at fewds one with another. For where envying and strife is
(iii. Jam. 16.) there is confusion, and every evil work. The Devil gets in at
this breach above all others; and tempts men to the most dangerous sins and
most spiritual wickednesses. Which prove not only the ruin of particular souls,
but of whole Societies and Churches: and therefore the causes of such divisions
ought most carefully to be avoided; if we would stand fast like men, and be
strong in the evil day.

This is a point to be now most diligently studied, because it is of great
necessity to this Church and at this time. When we had need be all prepared, to
maintain, at least, the Truth which we profess: but cannot in all likelihood
secure, unless we strengthen our selves, by being knit together most heartily
and firmly in such Brotherly affection; that, though there be too many
Dissenters, God knows, who cannot or will not conform to the public Laws yet,
the peace be preserved, and not the least thing done to disturb the settlement
of this Church. Which, whatsoever defects any man may think it has, is so well
constituted; that as there is little hope to see a better, so if it be
disturbed, we shall find, to our cost, that we have changed for one infinitely
worse: though it be one of our own making and devising.

Let us consider that if the Apostles and others, thought themselves obliged to
propagate the Truth it self in a peaceable manner; even the most necessary and
essential Truths of the Gospel of Christ, which they Preached without any
disturbance to the public Government: much more ought we to be very careful
not to unsettle a Christian Church well established, nor to make a rupture in
it, about those things, which are now controverted. Which might be better
handled, and to more advantage, and hope of convincing one another, if we did
live in Unity, and in the same Communion, notwithstanding our differences; than
when we separate and divide one from another: For then we begin to look upon
each other as Enemies, and are not so apt to be moved by those Arguments; which
might be very effectual, if we continued knit together in the same Society.

But if this cannot be, yet whatsoever different persuasions we have about
Rites and Ceremonies, and such like things, I am sure, it is every man's
interest to be thus far a peaceable Dissenter; as to comply with the public
order so far as he is able with a safe Conscience; and where he cannot comply,
to be quiet, not to make a stir by contradiction and opposition; but merely to
omit, what he cannot do: Not reviling the Public Establishment, nor endeavor
to bring it into contempt, and to overthrow it.

For whosoever spends his zeal that way, and takes himself for a man of spirit,
does but abuse himself and the Gospel, in giving the name of courage to
hardness of heart; and calling that resolution, which is mere insensibility of
Gods Holy Laws, about Humility, Meekness, Patience, Peaceableness,
long-suffering, and such like Virtues. Which great things did we lay to heart,
we should be more quiet, and not make a quarrel about the small matters, which
now divide us: but rather bear with what is well settled, and not impious; than
go about to mend it by fierce oppositions. Which commonly produce bitter strife
and contention; and that is followed by worse disorders: which the Apostles to
avoid, connived at many things among the Jewish Christians, which they by no
means approved of, but desired to see reformed.

And after men have done all they can, if they be not able to endure some
things peaceably, which they do not like; they must seek for another kind of
world than this, and for more perfect Creatures than Men.

There will be defects in all humane constitutions; there will be variety of
apprehensions, even in those things which God himself has declared: after
never so many changes, we shall be as far from settlement as ever; if we will
not be quiet till all things be according to our mind. And therefore I take it
to be much better (as a wise man resolved many years ago) to be driven on shore
by a storm, though in a crazy vessel; than in a stronger to be still upon a
tempestuous sea, in the power of the winds, and in danger of Shipwracks.

As for us who have consented to be governed by the Laws of this Church, and
have submitted to its orders; there needs not many words, sure, to persuade us
to lay aside all our enmities, though never so small, at such a time as this:
together with all jealousies, suspicions and evil surmises; much more all
evil-speakings, and whatsoever is contrary to that love which ought to be
between us. We ought not, now especially, to be so much as cold toward one
another; because of any differences that may happen to be in our opinions: (or
which we fancy to be between us) but embrace each other with a fervent Charity;
as those who are linkt together by the same common faith, and engaged in the
same common cause, and must stand or fall together.

But in the prosecution of this weighty point I have been transported so far,
that I have left but little time for the remaining; which I must therefore pass
over the more briefly.

IV. The next is the Shield of Faith, v. 16. which the Apostle says, we must
above all things guard our selves withal. That is, we must continually
represent to our minds, by a strong and lively Faith, the great rewards which
Christ has promised to his valiant followers. These we must ever carry before
our eyes, as a Soldier did his shield; that by an actual present sense of
them, we may beat off all assaults either from pleasure or from pain, which are
made upon us to move us from our duty. For either of them may be understood by
the fiery darts of the wicked, which the Apostle here speaks of: the motions to
inordinate pleasure being sometimes no less hot and violent, than the grief and
pain which we feel by sore persecutions; which are more peculiarly called in
the Holy Scriptures by the name of the Fiery Trial. As those work very fiercely
upon fear, so do pleasures upon desire: and by this Faith we shall be able to
vanquish both. Witness the Confessors and Martyrs, who having first overcome
themselves; could not be moved from their stedfastness, when they saw a real
Fire before them, into which they were threatened to be thrown, if they did not
recant the profession of Christianity. This Shield of Faith was their security,
they being fully persuaded, that Christ our Lord, who is greater than all
Kings, having all power in Heaven and Earth, would raise them from the dead to
an immortal, and more glorious life; if they did not, to gain or save the best
thing in this world, break any of his Sacred Laws.

For this Faith was so potent, that it wrought in them a lively hope; which is
the next thing.

V. And take the Helmet of Salvation (verse. 17.) which in the 1 Thessalonians. v. 8. is
called the Hope of Salvation. This he compares to a Helmet (which you know is
the Armor of the head) because the blessed hope of immortal Glory hereafter,
and of Gods special favor, love and protection here, makes a Man erect
himself, and lift up his head, as we say, with confidence and boldness, in the
midst of the greatest terrors and dangers; knowing they shall not hurt him, but
rather bring Salvation to him. With this Hope therefore we must fill our
hearts; which is the fruit of Faith, when Faith works by love and makes us
faithful unto God. Then we may have a lively hope in him; and this Hope will
make us not only strong, and so full of courage, that we shall not quail or be
cast down by any dreadful appearance of dangers, but enable us to rejoice in
Hope of the Glory of God.

VI. To which he adds, The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, or
the Holy Scriptures. For they are the Treasury of those Sacred Promises, which
are the great support of our Souls; the Repository or Magazine (as I may call
them) wherein are laid up those Truths (spoken of in the beginning) which we
must oppose to all the temptations, which either assault our Faith and Hope, or
would seduce us from our Obedience. And therefore our business must be to study
the Holy Scriptures diligently, till we be well skilled in them, and have
learnt to wield this weapon aright; and thereby cut in sunder all objections,
as our Blessed Savior did, when the Devil tempted him in the Wilderness. And
by no means suffer any body to wrest this Sword out of our hand: for if they
do, they have so effectually disarmed us; that we may in time yield to any
thing. They may make us believe what they please; having our Faith in their
keeping: and likewise do what they please; persuading us the best service we
can do to God, is to be the greatest Enemies, disturbers and destroyers of
mankind.

VII. Lastly, All these will be the more effectual, if by ardent Prayer (as the
Apostle advises, verse. 18.) we call in the assistance of Heaven; Praying always
with all Prayer and supplication in the spirit, watching thereunto, with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints. For, as it is not enough to be
thus armed and appointed for the combat, unless God be present with us, (which
we ought to believe He will, as I told you at first, because he has said He
will) so it is not sufficient to rely upon his word and steadfastly believe it;
but He expects to be solicited for his aid, by our earnest Prayers and
Supplications.

This He has commanded, as much as for the other we have his promise. And our
very Prayers make us strong, by giving us a more lively sense of God (if they
be not cold and careless) and a more vigorous apprehension of his love, and of
our Heavenly Country; to which they lift up our minds. And besides, they derive
more strength from Him; when we faithfully importune Him, that he will enable
us to discharge all the duties of good Christians, in every condition. And they
entitle us also to his powerful protection, when we commend our selves entirely
to His Providence, and trust all we have with Him. Which likewise mightily
raises our spirits, and gives us a higher degree of strength, confidence, and
courage; when we think we have made Him our friend by thus intrusting Him, and
relying wholly upon Him, to make us happy in what way He himself pleases.

And if all Christians made a Conscience also, to Pray one for another, it
might still be of greater force, and avail more toward our Salvation. For so
the Apostle would have us, make supplication for all saints, that is,
Christians: that they also may be endued with the power of Christ, and get the
victory over their spiritual Enemies.

And these Prayers would be still more prevalent, did we all persevere, as he
says, in our Supplications; and Pray always, at all times of prayer; and that
in the spirit; very ardently, and with such fervent desires for spiritual aid
from Heaven, as we feel for those things, we most need for this mortal life.
And this also, with so great care and solicitude, that we watch for
opportunities of Prayer: and, when great dangers press us, take some time from
our sleep, or other occasion, for this Heavenly converse with God our Savior.

This is a thing wherein we are too defective; and so find our selves faint and
weak in the performance of the rest of the duties of Christian life: because we
languish in our Devotion, especially in our COMMON PRAYER; when we meet
together to Pray, not only for our selves, but for one another; for the King
particularly, the Royal Family, the great Council of the Kingdom, the Clergy,
and all People, of whatsoever order or condition they be. Whom if we did
commend to God with greater earnestness, and true fervor of affection, we
should find, I am confident, as happy effects of our Prayer, as we our selves
desire. We should either, for instance, prevail with God, to turn from us all
those evils, which we most righteously have deserved; or to enable us, so to
put our full trust and confidence in his mercy, as notwithstanding any
troubles, to serve him evermore in holiness, and pureness of living, to his
honor and glory.

To sum up all that has been said; The Apostle in this Discourse compares
Christians unto Soldiers: who being to conflict with their Enemies, took care,
as not to want weapons themselves so, not to leave any part of their bodies
uncovered and exposed to the weapons of their Adversaries. The middle of their
body they girt about with a Belt; upon their Breast they wore a Breast Plate;
upon their Head a Helmet; Greaves (as they are called in the story of Goliath)
upon their legs; a shield they carried in their left hand, and a sword in their
right; and being thus appointed they called upon their Gods for help and
succor. Such a complete Armor must we Christians put on, if we will conflict
successfully with our spiritual Enemies: who are of little force to do us any
harm; if they always find us armed with Truth in our mind, with Integrity to
our heart, with Purity and peaceableness in our affections, with Faith in Gods
promises, and hope of his Salvation (working both in mind and heart and
affections) with the word of God often in our hand, and with devout Prayers and
Supplications in our mouth (proceeding from our very heart and most intimate
desires) whereby we constantly implore both for our selves and our fellow
Christians, the gracious assistance of Him, who is the Captain of our
Salvation; and by these means got the victory, and won the Crown, which He now
wears at God's right hand.

And be you well assured, that in this way, by being trained up in Christian
knowledge, and sincere love to what you know to be your duty; by Faith, by Hope,
by reading and meditating in the Holy Scriptures, by ardent Prayer to the
Almighty (especially in sincere fellowship and communion one with another) you
shall prevail likewise: and get the better of every thing that opposes your
sincere resolution to do and suffer the whole will of Christ Jesus.

In Him therefore encourage your selves, and receive this word of Exhortation
which the Apostle here gives us, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. Fortify your selves with a firm belief, that he is able to send you
relief, and that He will not fail to succor you from above; if you resolutely
endeavor to do your duty, in the way that He has prescribed you.

The words seem to me, to be the very same with those of the Lord to Joshua
(when he was to enter into Canaan, and subdue that Country) which are repeated
thrice within the compass of a few Verses. i. Josh. 6. Be strong and of a good
courage; and verse. 7. only be thou strong and very courageous; and again verse.
9. Have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage: neither be thou
dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou go. From
which words you may take the truest interpretation of my Text; and look upon
Joshua and the Israelites, as a lively picture of the state of us Christians.
The Lord promised to be with him, whithersoever he went, and bad him nothing
doubt, but by his strength he should vanquish all the Canaanites. But for all
this he and the Israelites were to go up armed against them, and both to fight
according to such directions as He gave them, and to keep themselves from every
polluted thing, which He forbad them: and not depend merely on the arm of the
Almighty, to give them the victory. Even so must we strengthen our selves in
our Blessed Lord, and the power of his might; and think we hear Him say to us,
Have not I commanded you? be strong therefore, and of a good courage: be not
dismayed, I the Lord am with you, whithersoever you go, and whatsoever you do;
and by me you shall overcome all difficulties. But we must not so trust to this
Power of his, as to be remiss and negligent our selves; no, He will strengthen
and empower us, if we put on the whole Armor of God; and fight against our own
passions and evil desires, the worlds temptations and the Devils suggestions:
continually opposing to them, Faith, and Hope, and the word of God, and Prayer,
and an honest resolution not to yield by any means to their importunities; but
to be the more excited by their solicitations, to use our most earnest
endeavors to vanquish them. Then as David says to his Son Solomon (persuading
him to enter upon a great work, 1 Chronicles. xxviij. 20.) so may I say to every one
of you: Be strong and of a good courage and do it: fear not, neither be
dismayed: for the Lord God will be with thee, He will not fail thee nor forsake
thee, until thou have finished all the work for the service of the House of the
Lord.

It is for God and for His glory, that we fight resolutely against the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, and therefore why should we doubt of his aid, when by
the Victory He will be honored as well as our selves? We, not only may but,
ought to ask it, and to expect it with a humble confidence in his Almighty
Goodness: who has told us He will deny us nothing, which we beg in the Name of
the Lord Jesus. And what can we beg of Him more acceptable to Him, as well as
necessary for us, than this; that we may be able (in our place and station, and
in every condition) to do Him all faithful service? And when will his Name,
think you, be more prevalent, and obtain greater Salvation for us, than when
(according to his own particular order and last desire) we make mention of it,
and commemorate his love, in the Communion of his body and blood?

There we may offer up our Prayers and Meditations in the most acceptable and
prevailing manner. There also we may excite our Faith, and quicken our Hope,
and inflame our Charity, and knit our selves one to another in Brotherly love,
and engage to Him our Fidelity: and by all these means receive a greater
increase of strength and courage, to do and to endure whatsoever He would have
us.

And therefore let me admonish you of this, for a conclusion of this discourse
(in which I have delivered, or rather the Apostle taught us, many important
truths, but none perhaps of greater moment than this) that when the Apostle
advises us here to Pray with all Prayer and Supplication, this way of praying
and supplicating, by making a commemoration of Christ's Death and Passion in the
Holy Eucharist, where we represent to God how He offered himself a Sacrifice
for us, is certainly included. This is one sort of Prayer; and the chiefest
among Christian people: nay, the most proper to them of all other.

From whence we may safely conclude, that they who neglect this, lie more open
to temptations than other men. They have not put on the whole Armor of God;
but want a principal part of it, and that part which is most properly
Christian: and therefore must blame themselves that they are no better men; but
are so frequently overcome, and fall into sin, even against their resolutions
(perhaps) and notwithstanding their Prayers, and their looking up to the Lord
Jesus for help. There is a great thing still wanting; they do not use all the
means that He has appointed for the obtaining of his help. There is one manner
of address to Him, which they either live in a constant neglect of, or but
seldom apply themselves seriously to its solemn use. For if they did in good
earnest and with all their hearts, do this often in remembrance of Him, as He
has required; they would find their Christian resolution mightily fortified,
and their souls endued with much strength, to do all the rest of the will of
Christ.

Nay, they would at last do their duty, though in it self difficult, cheerfully
and triumphantly, saying with St. Paul, elsewhere (viij. Romans 35, etc.) Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulations, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these
things we are more than conquerours, through Him that loved us. To whom, with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both
now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

