A Discourse OF PROFITING BY SERMONS, AND Of going to HEAR, where men think
they can PROFIT most.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, B. Took, at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and F. Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1683.

A Discourse OF PROFITING by SERMONS.
AS there is nothing that all good men more desire, nothing that they more
heartily seek and endeavor, than a happy reunion of all those with us, who
have rent themselves from us (which we should reckon to be one of the highest
blessings that God can now bestow upon us) so there is little hope of seeing
those desires and endeavors satisfied, while the smallest Scruples seem a
sufficient cause to hinder many People from joining with us.

But among all the Reasons that I have heard alleged for leaving our Churches,
this seems to me to be the weakest and most ungrounded, That our Ministers are
unedifying Preachers; for they cannot profit by their Sermons. Which, I am
informed, is so commonly objected, and some lay such weight upon it, and it
carries with it such a show of Piety (it being a very commendable thing to
desire to be the better for every Sermon one hears) that it is thought to be
worth some body's pains, to try to remove this unjust Prejudice which too many
have entertained against the most instructive and useful Sermons, that,
perhaps, are preached any where in the Christian World.

This may seem too high a commendation; but it is the judgment of more
indifferent persons then we are, on either side: of strangers I mean, who have
seen the World; and having learnt our language and heard and read the Sermons
that are commonly preached and printed in this great City, affirm there are not
the like to be found in any Church whatsoever. God grant we be not deprived of
such singular helps by our contempt of them; and that our Candlestick be not
removed out of its place, because we withdraw our selves from the light which
it holds forth to us.

Of which we are in very great danger, if not knowing what it is truly to
profit by Sermons, we make no progress at all in the state of Christianity: but
deceive our own Souls in a vain opinion of our acquaintance with God, and our
blessed Savior, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, which have little or no
effect upon our hearts and lives.

I do not pronounce this to be the case of those who object to us, that we have
an unprofitable Ministry: but I doubt not to demonstrate, that the Sermons
which are generally preached by the Ministry in this City (to whose inhabitants
I principally write) are such that they may profit by them, if it be not their
own fault: and then leave them to judge of themselves as they see cause.

I suppose we are all agreed, or may easily agree, what it is to profit by
Sermons: for we agree that the Holy Scriptures contain all things necessary to
our Salvation; and therefore when they are rightly opened, and duly applied in
a Sermon, so that the Hearers improve either in Christian knowledge, or in
Faith, or in well-doing, then they profit by that Sermon. Now if any man do not
improve in these, by the help of the Sermons, which he may hear in our
Churches, and the fault lie in the Sermon; it must be either in the matter of
it, or in the manner: for none, I presume, will be so bold as to affirm, that
Gods Spirit does not accompany a Sermon, which wants nothing belonging to
either of these, the Preacher also being duly qualified. And, thanks be to
God, there are none that dare now complain of an Idle, Scandalous, Insufficient
Ministry about this City: but instead of that, they, that were wont to have
those words in their mouths, have taken up the complaint of an Vnedifying.
Whereby we have gained this great Point, That they have no color to pretend
the Person who preaches is unsanctified, and therefore God does not bless his
Ministry: but the fault must lie (if there be any) in the Sermon it self; and
that in the matter of which it consists, or in the manner of its delivery.

I.
And as for the former of these, I can scarce think that any Dissenter, when he
seriously considers, will except against our Sermons upon that account; they
being taken out of the Holy Scriptures (which are the foundation of our
Religion) and with such care to find out their true sense and proper meaning,
that perhaps they were never more clearly opened, and rightly applied, than
they are now a days in our Churches. I am sure, All that heavenly Truth which
was delivered to our first Parents when they were about to be expelled out of
Paradise; which God repeated in his Promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
which he shadowed and confirmed in the Law of Moses; illustrated by the Oracles
of the Prophets; and finally fulfilled in the Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of the Son of God; and dissused by the Preaching of
the Apostles and the Power of the Holy Ghost, all over the World; is there so
fully and distinctly taught, that we may safely say, the whole Counsel of Gods
Will is at one time or other faithfully declared among us.

And as that is declared completely; so little else is meddled withal: matters
of controversy being as rarely handled in our Pulpits, I believe, as in any
place of the World: unless it be those which the present State of things,
sometimes makes absolutely Necessary, to fortify the People against Popery,
and against Separation: yet even these are not so often treated of, as matters
of general concernment to all Parties of Christians whatsoever. For the great
drift of our Preachers seems to be, to instruct the People in the Truth, and to
make them good (particularly to give them right notions of God, which are the
very bottom of all Religion) knowing that Errors and Superstitions will fall of
themselves, without a particular confutation. For they are supported by nothing
but ignorance and naughty affections; which will uphold them against all the
Arguments whereby they can be assaulted; unless men's minds be informed and
possessed with such a right Sense of things, as alters their Wills and
Affections, and turns them to an unfeigned love of God and Goodness.

Which seems to me to be the aim and scope of the Sermons which are generally
preached by our Ministers: and which is so well performed, that we need not
fear to affirm, there is nothing necessary either to make men truly knowing in
the things of God; or to work belief in them; or to confirm them in the Faith;
or to direct them in their practice of what they know and believe; or to excite
them to follow those directions, and to live according to the Laws of the
Gospel; or to satisfy material Scruples; to resolve doubts and cases of
Conscience; to comfort disconsolate penitents, and awaken drowsy sinners, or
any thing of like Nature: but may be met withal in our Churches, so fully,
solidly, and judiciously handled, that men need go no whether else for
Edification; if that be the thing they truly desire, and sincerely seek and
endeavor.

For what truth can they learn any where else, which is not to be learnt, if
they will attend upon Gods service there, in our Churches? what Motives to
believe, or what Arguments to convince men of their Duty, which are not there
represented, and pressed? What Vice is there, which does not there receive just
Correction? What Virtue that is not there most strongly recommended? which of
the promises are not there applied to the Hearts of the faithful? and where can
men have better means of knowing the terror of the Lord, as the Apostle speaks
against all the impenitent and disobedient? And if men cannot profit where such
things as these are constantly managed, to as much advantage, as the skill of
the Preacher will enable him, I am sure the fault must lie somewhere else, than
in the matter of the Sermons.

II.
Yes, will some say, we allow the matter of them to be good enough: but the
manner of them is such, that we cannot reap the like benefit by them, that we
do by other men's preaching, who cannot conform to the Church of England. Which
if it be a just Exception, the fault must lie either in the composition of
them; or in their delivery after they are composed.

1. Now if the composition of them be faulty, it is because their Method is not
clear and perspicuous; or the Language not plain enough to convey the Sense of
them to the mind of the Hearers. Neither of which, I am confident can be truly
charged upon them. For never did men more endeavor orderly discourse, and aim
at plain, unaffected Speech, than they do now in the Church of England: where
good Sense, in the most easy and familiar Words, is now looked upon as the
principal Commendation of Sermons.

Some indeed, I have heard, find fault with our Sermons for not keeping the old
method (as they call it) of Doctrine, Reason, and Use: which is altogether
unjust as well as frivolous. For there is no man that balks that Method when it
is natural; but rather chooses it, because it has been common, and is easy and
useful. As for example, if any man among us, were to preach upon this text,
Corinth. XIII. 13. And now abides Faith, Hope and Charity; these three: but
the greatest of these is Charity; He would, without doubt not only observe
among other Doctrines, the pre-eminence of Charity: but also give the best
Reasons, he could think of, why it ought to be highest in our Esteem, and our
Affections too; because it is the very end of Faith and Hope; and because it
makes us like unto God, which Faith and hope do not. And after such like
things, he would likewise make that Use of this Doctrine, which the Apostle
himself does immediately in the very next words (Verse 1. Chapter XIV.)
pressing every one to follow after the Love of God and of their Neighbor: to
follow it earnestly and vigorously, and never cease their pursuit till they
feel their Hearts possessed with it: not contenting themselves merely with
believing, but being so affected with it, that they attain the end of their
Faith, which ought to Work by love. Nay, he would wish them to examine and
prove their Faith by this, whether it be likely to save them or no. For if it
leave them short of this Charity, it will leave them short of Heaven: for it is
Charity alone that has any place there. And who would forbear most pathetical
entreaties here, to be very serious in this search: there being so much
Pretense to Faith in the World, and so little Charity to be found there. To one
sort of Faith especially, which is the apprehension of Christ's Merits, and
application of them to themselves, which every Body makes bold withal, whilst
very few have any thing of that Charity which St. Paul describes in the Chapter
before named, of that long suffering and kind Charity; which envieth not, which
vanteth not it self, (or is not rash) is not puffed up, does not behave it self
unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil; (but
takes things in the best Sense, and puts the fairest Construction upon them) in
one Word, makes a Man inoffensive not only toward God but toward Men of all
sorts, high and low, rich and poor; that is, to the whole Church of God.

The like I might say of all other Subjects of the same nature, which lead him
that handles them into this Method. But sometime the matter to be treated of is
such, that there is no other Reason to be given of it but only the divine
Revelation, upon whose Testimony we receive it; as we do, that Jesus Christ is
the Eternal Son of God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds. The Uses of
which I never heard any Preacher amongst us fail to make, both for the
begetting Reverence toward him, Faith in him, and Obedience unto him.

But what need is there of so many Words about this method of Sermons, when the
ancient Doctors of Religion, it is munifest, did not mind it, nor any other?
But spoke to the Business before them, without observing any constant Rule at
all in their Discourses: and then it is apparent People profited by Sermons
much more than they do now, when they are most artificially contrived. And it
would be an inexcusable Sin in those that should leave our Church, did the
Ministers of it only open the Sense of the Epistle or the Gospel for the day
(or any other portion of Holy Scripture, as St. Chrysostom was wont to do)
without making particular Observations, or concluding all with distinct Uses
(as the manner now is) but only with a general Application, pressing what they
thought most material, or what the necessities of their People most required.

By which way of preaching if Men can receive no profit, they must lay the
Blame somewhere else than upon the Composition of the Sermon, or the manner of
its Delivery either, which is the next thing to be considered.

2. Now here two things are found fault withal: first, That our Preachers are
not vehement enough in the Delivery of their Sermons; secondly, That they read
them.

For the former of these, it is not true: where the matter in hand is of great
concernment, and requires more than ordinary earnestness. which ought in
reason, to be reserved for some certain Occasions, and not be spent upon all
things alike: for then it loses its effect at that time, when it would be most
seasonably and usefully employed.

But there is a great mistake in that which men call vehemence: which ofttimes
consists only in the strength of the voice: which neither all your Preachers,
nor all ours are endowed withal. And if they were, would be but noise; without
good Sense: which will move attentive minds, as much as a loud sound affects
men's Ears.

Add to this, that there is a natural heat also in some men's tempers, which
makes them speak vehemently; with such a warmth as has the appearance of much
Zeal: when they are nothing near so deeply affected with what they say, as some
men of more sedate and cool tempers are, whose Judgment operates more strongly
than their Passions. And these men surely may be very serviceable for
Illumination of the Mind; with such force of Argument as will certainly move
the affections vehemently by the help of serious Consideration: without which
if any affections be raised, they are little worth; and will not last, but
vanish as soon as that blast is over which stirred them up.

And this difference of temper is observable in your men, as well as in ours:
and therefore this can be no hindrance to Edification among us, no more than
among you.

As for reading of Sermons, it is not universally used: but there are those
among us whom God has blessed with such strength of Memory or readiness of
Conception, that they need not the help of any Notes at all in the Pulpit. And
others do not tie themselves to them, so as never to look off the Book; but
only assist their Memory by them sometimes. Whereby the Auditory is assured
that they hear nothing but what has been beforehand considered and digested:
and the Preacher himself also is secured that he shall not forget any thing of
Moment which he has prepared; and that no Expression slip from him on a sudden
which may prove indecent or imprudent. As for those whose weakness of Memory,
or their great Modesty and Fear of being out (as we speak) compells them to
keep their Eye constantly upon their Notes; as they and others have the
forenamed advantages by it, so no man can be in the least prejudiced by it, who
will but turn his Eyes another way and not look upon the Preacher. Then the
Sermon will sound as well as if it were all pronounced without Book: or if this
make it unprofitable, by the same reason the Holy Scriptures become
unprofitable, when they are read out of the Bible; and they also must be got
without Book, to make them edifying. Nay, this exception will lie also against
some of your own Preachers of great note, who read every word. I am sure they
did so heretofore, and this was then thought no hindrance to your profiting by
them: or if it were, you heard them when you could not profit by them, so as
you could by those that did not read. And so you may do now by our Preachers of
this kind, nay so you ought to do: when you have nothing to say against them,
but what they are equally chargeable withal whom you highly commend.

III.
But after all, I have some reason to fear that when men complain they cannot
profit by our Sermons, they mean nothing by profiting, but that their
affections are not moved in the hearing of them, so as they are by the Sermons
of Nonconformists. Unto which I have many things to say if this Paper would
contain them: but it will be sufficient to touch only upon these three.

1. That men have several Talents, both among you and among us: which are all
very profitable. Some for informing the Judgment; others for moving the
Affections; and others (which is most desirable) for both: you are not able to
say that all yours move you so as some do: and yet you make such account of
all, that it has ever been looked upon as a very disorderly thing among your
selves (and worse than that I shall prove by and by) for People to run from
their own Minister to hear some other (though of the same way) merely to have
the affections more moved. Because,

2. This alone is so far from profiting by Sermons, that it is very great
unprofitableness, to be moved by a Sermon, and do nothing thereupon, but only
commend it. That is, to be tickled and pleased a while, but not altered nor
changed a whit: or to be warmed perhaps a little for the present, and then left
as cold as a stone, without any spiritual life, or endeavor to be the better.

3. But the great thing of all is this, that affections raised merely by the
earnestness of the Preacher, at present in the hearing of a Sermon (and it is
well if the affections which some People speak of, be not motions which they
feel merely from the tone of the voice, as from a taking phrase, a similitude
or some such trifle) are nothing comparable to those, which we raise by Gods
blessing upon our own serious consideration, when we reflect upon what we have
heard, which sort of most excellent affections, the Sermons that are preached
in our Churches, cannot fail to produce, if you please but to attend to the
matter of them and press them upon your Hearts: Nay, your Judgments being well
informed, it would not be hard for you (if you would but take a little pains
with your selves) to excite such affections unto that which you know to be your
Duty, as would abide and remain; when the others that were excited in the
hearing of a Sermon, are gone, and quite vanished, and can never be recalled,
but by your own serious Meditation upon those Divine Truths, which entered into
your Mind, and would have touched, nay peirced your Hearts, if you would have
brought them thither, and held them close to your Consciences.

Which ought to be every Christians care more than I doubt it is, in order to
their profiting by Sermons; and that they may not be barren and unfruitful in
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

IV.
And now it is time for all those who are concerned in what has been said, to
apply it to the present case, and going down into themselves to enquire where
the fault must necessarily lie, if the Sermons preached by our Ministers have
proved unprofitable to them; which supposes, that they who object this against
coming to Church, have come heretofore, at least to the Sermon; but went away,
and came no more, because they reaped no benefit thereby. Else, how can they
pretend that our Sermons are unprofitable if they never heard them? Now I have
demonstrated, that the blame cannot be justly cast upon the Sermons, which in
themselves are every way fitted to do Men good: and therefore we must seek for
the cause of this Unprofitableness somewhere else; and where are we so likely
to find it as in those that heard the Sermons? Whom I beseech, in the Fear of
God, by whose Word we must one day be all judged, to consider with themselves
impartially, and to ask their Consciences such Questions as these.

1 Quest. Had you not some Prejudice in your Mind against the Person of the
Minister whom you came to hear, either upon the score of his Conformity, or of
his strictnoss in it, or some other account? If you had, and carried it along
with you, there is great Reason to think this made his Pains unprofitable to
you; because you could not hear him with that indifference which you would have
heard another man withal. But looking upon him perhaps as a Time-server, (as
the Language of some has been) a Formalist, or one who you presumed
beforehand had little or nothing of the Spirit in him, you minded not so much
what was said, as who said it; and disliked those things which out of another
Mouth you would have accepted. For if such Prejudices as these be not laid
aside, they bar the Heart so strongly against the most excellent Instructions,
that though an Angel from Heaven should deliver to us the most important
Truths, yet, we taking him for a Minister of Satan, it would stop our Ears
against him, and make his Message ineffectual.

2 Quest. Or might not this be the reason of your reaping no benefit, that you
came to Church but once or twice, and concluded too hastily there was no Good
to be got there; being willing also perhaps, to have this excuse for absenting
your self wholly from it: whereas if you had constantly attended our Ministry,
you might have found your selves so much improved thereby, as never to have
thought of leaving the Church upon this account, that you could not profit in
it. Make a Trial now (for it is not too late, I hope, if you can shake off all
Prejudices) and for some time continue diligent Auditors of the Minister of
your Parish; and that which at first may seem to you dull, or hard, or obscure,
will, after you are used to it, be clear, easy, and awakning: when you are
acquainted, that is, with his Method, his Style, his way of Reasoning and
Discourse, (as well as accustomed to his Voice) which you cannot be in an
instant, or at the first hearing. For the Scriptures themselves are obscure and
difficult, to the best of us, in abundance of places, till by Conversation with
them, we grow acquainted with their Phrase, manner of Speaking, Arguing and
Connection. And if God's Word had been generally used, as some among us have
treated his Ministers (rejecting them, I mean, because they did not presently
apprehend them) it had been thrown out of all men's hands long ago as an
unprofitable piece.

3 Quest. I desire such further, to examine seriously and recollect themselves,
Whether the thing that made them first forsake our Ministry, as unprofitable,
was not, That when they came to Church the Preacher happened to treat on some
Subject cross to their Opinion? Which hasty Persons (who consider not what
different Apprehensions men may have in many matters, and yet agree well enough
together) cannot brook; but presently fling away from those that contradict
them, as if they contradicted God himself. Whereas, if they would have had
Patience, they might have profited even by such Discourses; either by being
convinced of their Error, or more confirmed in that which they took for truth;
being able to answer the Arguments brought against it.

4 Quest. But (that which is worse than this) the Minister was perhaps upon
some distastful Subject when you chanced to go to Church, and happened to treat
of such matters as you love not to hear of, though more necessary, it may be,
than many others, for this very Reason, that because of their Ungratefulness
they are seldom handled. Will you not be angry nor lay aside this Paper and
read no further, if I give an Instance or two? Which I mentioned for no other
Reason, but because I know some have taken offense (as they call it) at such
Doctrines, and ought, if it be possible, to be better taught. Was he not
preaching, I mean, about Schism, or Disobedience to Governors? It is certain
there are such Sins, which are very heinous and dangerous every way: and
therefore, no faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, can, with a good Conscience,
balk the treating of them some time or other. And suppose he that treated of
them when you was at Church extended the Duties of Unity and of Obedience
further than you desire, might not you, for all that, have profited very much
by what was said upon those Subjects?

I believe sober Men among you have heard some of your own Ministers speak
harder Words of Conformity and Conformists than you would have had them, and
yet you did not for that Reason leave them, but still fancied you could profit
by them; even by what they said on that Subject of Conformity. And therefore
you would do well to search and try what account you can give of taking such
distaste at the established Ministry, as to forsake it upon their pressing some
things, which are most certainly Christian Duties, with greater strictness than
agreed with your present Inclinations.

And I the rather beseech you to consider such things as these; because it is a
common thing to hear Men and Women of your way to complain of their
Vnprofitableness under Ordinances, of the Deadness of their Heart in Duty, and
their Barrenness under the most powerful means of Grace: which arises perhaps
in those Minds that are well inclined merely from a natural Dullness or
Indisposition, which makes them unable to attend, or to remember, and keep in
mind, as they desire, what they have heard; and therefore moral Indispositions
(such as Prejudice, Passion, Disaffection to the way of Worship, or to any
Christian Doctrine) will much more make men unapt to receive any Impressions
from what is said to them; though in it self never so good, and fitted
powerfully to affect the Heart, were it but entertained with an honest Mind.

So that if you complain of Deadness and Unprofitableness under the Ministry of
our Church, it is no more than a great many of you do of the like Barrenness
under your own; but proceeding, it is to be feared, from a worse Cause; of
which in Reason you should suspect your selves to be guilty, rather than
conclude so suddenly as you do, our Ministry to be unedifying.

V.
The very same may be said to those who fancy, that though they can profit
something by our Ministry, yet they can profit more by others. They ought in
Conscience to examine whence this Conceit arises; whether it do not proceed
from Prejudice, from Disaffection, from Disgust at some Doctrine which they
love not should be touched, from their seldom attendance upon the established
Ministry, from their careless hearing when they were there, or from the hasty
Sentence they pronounced against it before a sufficient Trial. And withal, they
should consider what they mean by profiting; whether really and truly they are
not more earnestly pressed in our Congregations to be thoroughly good and
virtuous, to take a strict care to please God in Thought, Word, and Deed, than
they are in those where they imagine they profit more; because they are
entertained there, perchance, with more pleasing Subjects, than this of their
whole Christian Duty.

I only suggest this, as a thing to be most deeply pondered, and do not accuse
you to be guilty of such Falseness to your own Souls: but this I must say, That
if you do not grow more holy, harmless, and unreproveable in your common
Conversation, if your Passions be not better governed, if your Tongues be not
more strictly bridled, if you grow not more humble, less conceited of your
selves, less confident of your own Understandings, more fearful to offend God
by censuring, rash judging, disrespectful Behavior to your Betters and
Superiors, and such like things, you do but deceive your selves with an
Opinion of profiting more by the Nonconforming Ministry than by ours. Upon
which if you would attend with a Mind to improve in these great things, I am
well assured your profiting might appear to all men as well as to your selves;
who might be convinced, in a little time, there is no need to go any whither
else for such Edification. And if you go for any other, there will be no end of
seeking still for better entertainment of your Fancies, and itching Ears; which
will desire to be gratified with infinite variety.

The mischief of which, they of your own way have felt and complained of as
much as we; and the better any of them have been, the more careful have they
appeared in giving Cautions against this wanton humor, though pretending never
so much to Religion, and to growth in Grace, or Soul-saving knowledge. In the
days of your Forefathers, I am sure, they who could not in all things conform
to the Church of England, looked upon this as a dangerous principle, that men
must go where they can profit most. And because it is likely that the Opinion
of a grave and serious person, highly esteemed by all your Party formerly, may
prevail with you more than any of ours, give me leave to mind you what Mr.
Hildersham has resolved in several cases like to ours, particularly about
this, of Men's leaving their own Pastors to hear others.

VI.
1. And first, he resolves this, That it is the Ordinance of God every Pastor
should have his own Flock to attend, and every one of Gods People should have a
Pastor of his own to depend upon. From whence he concludes, that none of those
People may ordinarily and usually leave that Pastor, because then he does not
depend upon his Ministry; which he proves every one of them is bound to do.

2. And that you may not imagine he means any other Pastor than such as ours,
his second Resolution is this, that they who dwell next together should be of
the same Congregation: whence the Name of Paroichia, and Parish, first came.

3. Now thirdly, if it happen that he who is the settled Pastor of the place
where you dwell is a man whose Gifts are far inferior to some others; his
Resolution in this case is, That (he being a Man whose Gift is approved by Gods
Church, and who is conscionable in his Place, and of an unblameable Life) you
ought not to leave him at any time, with contempt of his Ministry. And then you
contemn his Ministry, when you speak, or think thus in your heart, Alas! he is
no Body; a good honest Man, but he has no Gifts; I cannot profit by him. (Mind
I beseech you these Words, which are none of mine, but Mr. Hildersham's, and I
doubt too common Language now among you) and mark the Reasons he gives (which I
shall contract) why you may not do this. First, A Man may be a true Minister
though his Gifts be far inseriour to many others: and consequently, secondly,
You are bound to love him, and reverence him, and thank God for him: and
thirdly, Doubtless you may profit by him, if the Fault be not in your selves.
The best Christian that is may profit by the meanest of Christ's Servants. And I
am persuaded, says he, There is never a Minister that is of the most excellent
Gifts, (if he have a godly Heart) but he can truly say he never heard any
faithful Minister in his Life that was so mean, but he could discern some Gift
in him that was wanting in himself, and could receive some profit by him.

Which is a thing worthy your consideration now; for there is none of your
Ministers dare say, that they cannot profit by the Sermons that are commonly
preached in our Churches; and therefore so may you, if you please to be
impartial, how meanly soever you may think of any of our Ministers; especially
if you observe this fourth thing, which the same Mr. Hildersham judiciously
adds, That,

4. The Fruit and Profit which is to be received from the Ministry, depends not
only nor chiefly upon the Gifts of the Man that preaches, but upon the Blessing
that God is pleased to give unto his own Ordinance. To which he applies those
Words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. III. 5, 6, 7, 8. Who is Paul? and who is Apollos?
but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every Man. I have
planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the Increase. So then, neither is he that
planted any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the Increase, etc.
And God does often give a greater Blessing to weaker than to stronger means: and
therefore consider, says he, the Fault may be rather in thy self than in the
Preacher, that thou can not profit. And indeed, how should thou profit by
his Ministry, if thou come with Prejudice, without any Reverence or Delight
unto it, and do scarce acknowledge God's Ordinance in it, nor ever seek to
God for his Blessing upon it; but look wholly at the Man who preaches?

To conclude this, he observes the great want of Judgment that appears in this
sort of Christians, in the choice they make of their Teachers, and the applause
they give unto them; which shows how necessary it is they should be confined
commonly to their own. For as some admire and follow another rather than their
own Pastor, because he can make more ostentation of Eloquence, Reading,
Learning, and such like humane Gifts than their own Pastor does, (upon which
account the Corinthians preferred sundry Teachers before St. Paul himself) so
there are those who leave their own Pastor and go to others, only for Varieties
sake. Though their own have never such excellent Gifts, yet can they not like
any one Man long; but having itching Ears, must have an heap of Teachers. And
some also prefer others before their own Pastor, only because they show more
Zeal (mark this) in their Voice and Gesture, and Phrase of Speech, and manner
of Delivery; though happily the Doctrine it self be nothing so wholesome, or
powerful, or fit to edify their Consciences, as the Doctrine of their own
Pastor is. And though these be the best of the three sorts now mentioned, and
pretend much Love and Zeal, yet we may wish them more Knowledge and Judgment.

I omit other things upon this Subject, which you may find in his LVIIIth
Lecture upon the IVth of St. John. Where he admits indeed that a man may some
time go from his own Parish Church to hear another whose gifts he more admires:
But then (like a judicious Divine) adds this notable observation, to correct
and regulate this liberty, that it may not prove an evil Humor; viz. He only
makes right use of the benefit of hearing such as have more excellent Gifts
than his own Pastor, as learns thereby to like his own Pastor the better, and
to profit more by him.

Mark it, I most earnestly entreat you, together with his Illustration of it,
by this Example; The excellent Gifts God has bestowed on others, in this case
may be fitly resembled unto Physic: which they use well, whose appetite is
thereby amended; and are made able to relish and like their ordinary food the
better. If after men have heard one of excellent Gifts, they begin to distaste
the Ministry of their ordinary Pastors, and can like of none, profit by none,
unless they have rare Gifts: they become at length like to those, who by
accustoming themselves to drink hot and strong Waters, bring their Stomachs to
that pass, that they can find no Relish or Virtue in any Drink or Water, be it
never so hot or strong. Believe it; they receive no true profit from the most
admired Preacher, who learn not by hearing him, to profit by any one that
delivers to them the wholesome Words of our Lord Jesus, and the Doctrine that
is according unto Godliness: though in the plainest manner imaginable, both for
Method and Language.

This I have chosen to write in his Words, because, there are some, I fear,
that would scarce endure such Doctrine from us: which may, at least, be more
reverently received, and duly considered (proceeding from a Person of such note
heretofore among Nonconformists) and beget so much Sobriety in you all, as to
make you think what manner of Spirit you are now of? How you come to differ so
much, from the best of your own way in former days? This is worth your serious
study, that you may not offend, as many hearers do, in a partial and factions
estimation they have the Ministers of the Gospel in.

They are his Words again, in another place. Lecture LXVI. Where he observes
this partiality arises from two Grounds. First, the respect they have to
difference of Judgment, that is among us, in smaller matters, which makes them
affect such only as are of their own Mind in every thing; with the dislike of
all others that are of a contrary persuasion. And secondly, from the respect
they have to the difference of Gifts which is among Preachers (of which I spoke
before) which moves them to admire some, whom they judge to be of excellent
gifts (though alas, their judgment is very small) but to despise and contemn
all others. And he has there these two remarkable reflections upon this Humor
which I beg of you to observe and remember.

First, that this factions Disposition of the Hearers of Gods Word, has in all
ages been the cause of much confusion in the Church of God, and greatly hindered
the fruit of the Gospel of Christ.

Note here. This way which you are in is not the means of profiting in
Religion, but of hindering the growth and increase of it.

The second is, that whereas they in whom this humor reigns are wont to glory
as if they had more Judgment, and could discern better of Gifts than other men
(saying, alas! poor People who esteem so highly of such a man's Gifts; If they
had any Judgment or understanding, they would count him no body) The Apostle
tells us, it is quite contrary, and that this argues rather they have very
little Judgment or Grace in them: yea this makes them incapable of profiting by
the Word. 1 Cor. III. 1.

O that there were an Heart in you, to ponder such profitable Instructions as
these! which were said on purpose to check that evil Disposition which began
then to appear among People inclinable to Nonconformity; and is since grown
the prevailing humor: insomuch, that some can settle no where, but ramble from
one Preacher to another, as their uncertain Fancy guides them, without becoming
one whit the better for any.

Yes, will some say; We might be persuaded to come and hear your Preachers, and
hear them constantly, but we ought not to be compelled to it; that is a thing
you can never justify. To which so much has been answered by others, that I
shall only tell you what that good Man before named says to it, in one of
those Lectures which was preached in Parliament-time, May 8. 1610. where he
takes occasion to stir up the People to pray earnestly for the States of the
Realm then assembled; that their principal care might be to take order about
two things; first, That an able and conscionable Ministry may be placed every
where; and secondly, that ALL People may be compelled to hear. For it is
certain (says he upon this second head) that where there is a good Ministry
established, the Magistrate may and ought to compel ALL Subjects to come and
hear, notwithstanding all pretense of their Consciences to the contrary.

VII.
To sum up all then that has been said in this Business. Be pleased to
consider, What makes a Sermon profitable; and, What must be done by the People
to profit by the Sermon.

A Sermon is then profitable when it informs the Mind and Judgment aright in
Divine Truth; when it instructs you in any part of the Christian Duty; when it
tends to strengthen or awaken your Faith, that you may more steadfastly adhere,
and earnestly apply your selves to what you know and believe certainly to be
Gods Mind and Will; when it works upon the Will and the Affections to submit
entirely to Gods Will, that you may bring forth the fruit of a holy Life; when
it corrects any of your Errors; stirs up your Sloth; incourages you to
Diligence, Cheerfulness, and Perseverance, and such like things.

But the best contrived Sermon in the World for all these ends, though it were
indicted by the Spirit of God it self; would have no efficacy at all in it, if
they that heard it, did not attend to it; and attend without Prejudice, without
Passion, without Partiality, without rash and hasty Judgment, without Pride and
conceit of themselves, and their own Knowledge and Righteousness: that is,
unless they consider and weigh what is delivered, though contrary to their
present sense, unless they will impartially give every thing that is offered to
their mind a due regard; and allot some time for its further Consideration,
when it is not to their liking etc. For want of which, multitudes did not
profit by our Saviors Sermons, but were rather more exasperated by them: and
at last finally hardened against him, and against the Holy Ghost, when it came
down from Heaven to convince them.

I doubt not they were ready enough then to lay the blame upon his Sermons,
which pressed them to many things, unto which they had no mind; being against
their Interest, or against some Opinion, or Affection, to which they were
deeply engaged: so that they did not profit by them. But for all this, you
believe the fault was wholly in themselves, who ought to have come better
prepared; with honest and good Hearts to hear his Word. And therefore have
reason to consider in your present case, that since the most profitable Sermons
that ever were made, can do no good, unless men be disposed to profit by them:
whether the unprofitableness you complain of under our Ministry, do not arise
rather for want of what you ought to do to make the most excellent Sermon
profitable, then from any defect in their Ministry.

Judge now I say, upon the whole: if you cannot profit by the public Ministry;
where is it most reasonable to think the cause of this unprofitableness lies?
whether to suspect the cause may lie in your selves; or to impute it to their
Sermons, and conclude them to be unedifying. Pronounce, I beseech you,
righteous Judgment, after you have well weighed the matter: and give such
things as I have here laid before you, a just and deliberate Consideration: so
as hereafter to resolve to lay aside all prejudice, and to be perfectly free to
hear with Patience and Candor, what can be said by any body; though against
your present persuasion. Let not your Passions rise at it; or if they do,
immediately suppress them, and require them not to meddle in this matter: but
to submit unto what shall appear to be reason, after you have weighed the
matter impartially.

If you cannot do this, you ought to think that you have not profited much, by
all the Sermons you have heard: and consequently suspect, you are in a wrong
way of growing wiser and better. And after you have brought your self to so
much liberty, I doubt not you will find that you are in a wrong way; and
therefore resolve to alter it, and come into the way of the Church. Where if
you do not meet presently with such advantages for your Spiritual growth, as
you are told you may receive, you have reason to conclude, as the forenamed Mr
Hildersham does to those, that said they could not find such Light, such Power,
such Comfort in the Word, as was spoken of. First, either you have not sought
it aright, not with earnestness, or not with a good Heart: or secondly, if you
have and do not find it at first; yet you shall hereafter, if you seek it here
with an honest heart.

VIII.
And the preaching of Gods holy Word among us, would be of greater efficacy
upon your Hearts; if when you come to partake of it, you would remember and
observe some Rules (delivered by the same Author in another place, Lecture
XXVI.) about the public Worship of God: which now, alas, are generally
neglected; and therefore had need to be pressed, for the disposing all men's
Hearts to profit by their attendance on it.

1. One is, that at your coming into the Congregation, and during the whole
time of your abode there, you would behave your selves reverently. For we may
not come into the place of Gods Worship, as we would into a dancing-School, or
Playhouse, laughing or toying etc. neither may we go out of it, as we would
out of such a one: but in our very coming in, and going out, and whole outward
carriage there, we ought to give some signification of the reverence that we
bear to this Place; and that we do indeed account it the House of God.

Which serious temper of Mind, and awful sense of Gods Presence, possessing the
Mind, would, no doubt, be an excellent preparation to receive benefit by the
whole Service of God, as well as by the Sermon. For which end,

2. Another Rule is, that we must all come to the beginning of Gods public
worship, and tarry till all be done. Yea, it is the Duty of Gods People, says
he, to be in Gods House before the beginning: For it becomes them to wait for
the Minister of God, and not to let him wait for them. The Reasons he gives for
this are two. First, there is Nothing done in our Assemblies, but all may
receive profit by it. For example, by the confession of Sins (and Absolution, I
may add) and all other Prayers used in the Congregation, a man may receive more
profit and comfort, than by any other. Which is the reason why the Apostles
(even after Christ's Ascension, when the typical Honor of the Temple was
abolished, etc.) were so delighted to go to the Temple to pray, at the times of
public Prayer. 1. Act. 111. etc.

And so he goes on to show how by hearing the Word read all may profit: and by
hearing it preached, even by the meanest Minister of Christ, if the fault be
not in themselves. How the singing of Psalms also furthers the fruit of the
Word in the Hearts of Believers: and much more benefit may the faithful receive
by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Nay, by being present at the
Administration of Baptism, all may receive profit: being put in mind thereby
of the Covenant God made with them in Baptism, etc. Lastly, by the blessing
pronounced by Gods Minister all may receive good; and therefore none ought to
absent himself from any part of the public Service of God.

For which his second Reason is very remarkable, that though we could receive
no profit by the Exercises used in our Assemblies, yet we must be present at
them all, to do our homage unto God; and show the reverent respect we have to
his Ordinances. For there is nothing done in Gods public Worship among us
(observe this) but it is done by the Instruction and Ordinance and Commandment
of the Lord. As he shows particularly, that it is his ordinance there should be
all sorts and kinds of Prayers used; yea, this is the chief duty to be
performed in our assemblies, 1 K. 11. 1. 2. that in our public assemblies the
Word of God should be read as well as preached: the Holy Communion administered,
etc. that is, all things should be done as they are now in our Common Prayer,
to which it is plain he has respect. And this he repeats again, Lecture XXVIII.

If thou wast sure thou could not profit, yet must thou come to do thy Homage
to God, and to show they reverence to his Ordinance.

3. Another of his general Rules is, that when we are present we ought to join
with the Congregation in all the parts of Gods Worship, and do as the
Congregation does. For it makes much for the comeliness and reverence of Gods
Worship, that all things be done in good order, without confusion. And it is a
principal part of this good order that should be in the Congregation; when they
all come together, and go together, pray together, sing together, kneel
together: in a word, when every part of Gods Worship is to be performed by the
Congregation, as if the whole Congregation were but one man.

And in several places he reproves with a great deal of Zeal, men's great
carelessness in this; particularly their neglect of kneeling in the Prayers:
having observed that men who will kneel at their own private prayers can never
be seen to kneel at the common and public Prayer.

His last general Rule is, that we ought to teach our Children and Servants to
show Reverence to the Sanctuary and public Worship of God. For God cannot
endure profaneness and contempt of Religion, no not in Children. And it stands
us all upon to use the utmost Authority we have to maintain the Reverence of
Gods Sanctuary: for the open contempt done by any, may bring Gods curse on us
all. And certainly, says he, among other causes of the Plague, and other
Judgments of God upon the Land, this is not the least, that Gods public
Worship is performed among us with so little Reverence and Devotion as it is.

I am tempted to transcribe a great deal more of these Lectures: because by
them you may see that if I had moved all that has been said about our Sermons,
I might (according to the Judgment of this devout and learned man) have
maintained that there wants not sufficient means of profiting in our
Congregations, if there were none: as long as the word of God is there read, by
which (together with the other holy duties) all may receive the greatest profit
and comfort, if they please. For it is of far greater excellence, authority and
certainty, than the Sermons of any Preacher in the World. First, because it
comes more immediately from God: and though it be translated by men, yet is
there in it far less mixture of humane Ignorance and Infirmity than in Sermons.
While the Word is read we are sure we hear God speaking to us, and that it is
the truth that we hear, but not always so, when men preach: for the best man is
subject to Error. (which by the way shows the great ignorance and profaneness
of this Age; wherein men make nothing of the reading of Gods Word, but take the
liberty to discourse and chat all the time while the first and second Lessons
are read to them.)

And secondly, the Word that is read, is the Foundation of all Sermons; and the
very touchstone whereby they are to be tried. To that which we hear read
simple and absolute Obedience is due, without any question made of the truth
and certainty of it: but so it is not to that which we hear preached, farther
than we find it agreeable to the written Word; for they of Beraea were
commended for examining by this even that which the Apostles themselves did
preach.

IX.
But I say no more of this: and shall only crave leave, with some earnestness,
to desire two things of every one who says he cannot profit by our Sermons.

1. The First is, that he would examine himself strictly upon this Question;
whether he thinks he could profit by such a Sermon as this; did he hear it
preached by one of your Ministers? Search to the very bottom of your Hearts,
and be not satisfied till you feel how they stand assected, and how they would
receive a discourse upon these Subjects; should you come occasionally (as you
now speak) into one of our Churches, and there sind the Preacher pressing these
things upon the Peoples Consciences? Especially if you heard him add to these
Rules, that for the reverence of Gods public worship, care should be taken
that the place where the Congregation assembleth, may be decent and comely. And
he should call this place, a Temple; and affirm that Gods public worship is no
where so well performed as in this Temple: and that it is a foul sin and
contempt done to Gods worship, that Parishioners either will not be at the
charge to maintain such as may keep the Church decently, or are altogether
careless to see it done: and that the true cause why now adays Men will be at
no cost with Gods House, is, because they have no delight in it; and that this
is a piece of irreligiousness, which is a just cause of grief to every godly
man, etc. Reflect, I say, upon your selves, and resolve, what you really think
you would judge of such a Sermon? How would it be accepted by you?

Would be apt to look upon it as altogether unprofitable? or at least, as a
needless discourse; which might as well, nay better, be spared, than preached
to the People?

If this be your mind, then consider with your selves, why such things out of
one man's mouth should relish well enough, or go down without disgust; which
coming out of another you presently dislike? Is it not manifest that you are
partial and disaffected? and that this is the reason you cannot profit by our
Sermons? Or if you could not like such discourses, either from Nonconformists,
or from our Ministers; then consider, whether you have not reason to think you
are very much mistaken in this business of profitable Sermons: when you imagine
such discourses as these to be unprofitable and superfluous, which in the
judgment of sober men of all sides, are not only very useful, but so necessary
to be taught the People; that for want of a sense of such things, they are in
danger to lose their Religion? For, as that good man said long ago (and I doubt
we are much improved in such impiety since that time) as Supersitition made the
Papists too careful, and too bountiful: so Profaneness and Atheism has made us
too void of all care, in beantifying the House of God.

2. But if you think that you should count such a Sermon profitable, then I
desire you, Secondly, to examine your selves and consider; whether you have
learnt so much out of the Holy Scriptures, as to observe all the foregoing
Rules duly and carefully? or so much, as to make them your study, and to think
how to bring your Heart into conformity with them? Do you, for instance,
reverence God's Sanctuary? and when you come into it, and while you are there,
give open signisications of it? Do you come at the beginning of Divine Service,
or only to some part of it, at the latter end, or the Sermon only? Do you stand
up, and do you kneel when the rest of the Congregation does? etc.

If you cannot say that you are so well acquainted with these, and the rest of
the foregoing Rules, as to endeavor to live by them; then in reason, you ought
to conclude, that the fault is some where else, and not in our Sermons, if you
cannot profit by them: For you do not profit by the Holy Scriptures themselves.

Where these things are so plainly taught, that a Man ought to think very
meanly of himself, and to look upon himself as a poor proficient in Religion;
who is not advanced thus far in his regard to the Duties, and the Solemnities
of God's Worship and Service.

And, if being admonished of these things, he do not humble himself; nay,
become vile in his own Eyes, for having thus long entertained an high opinion
of himself, though so deficient in the very rudiments and beginnings of
Religion; he is not likely to be much the better for any Sermon whatsoever:
because he will relish none but those only, which feed his vain conceit of
himself; and of his high seize, and intimate acquaintance with God, and
communion with him in his Ordinances; while he has not a due esteem of them,
nor makes a right improvement by them.

X.
But I hope these short Admonitions may put better inclinations, into those
Men's minds; who will seriously think of them: and particularly beget in them a
greater regard, than is usually given to the Holy Word of God, read in our
Churches. Which will dispose every one to profit better by all Sermons. (which
are but the Interpretation and Application of that Word) especially, if, with
due devotion of heart, they will join in the whole Service foregoing. By which
they may profit (I have shown) as much, if not more, as by Sermons; if they be
religiously disposed, and will come at the beginning of the Prayers, and with
all humble reverence attend upon every part of God's Worship.

For as he that is away from any part of the Sermon (says the same Person
again) shall profit the less by that which he does hear; so he that is away
from any part of the Divine Service, gets the less good by that at which he is
present. For there is no part of God's Service (not the Confession, not the
Prayers, not the Psalms, not the Blessing) but it concerns every one; and every
one may receive edification by it; and will lose much of the Benefit he might
have had, if he absent himself from it. A thing in which it seems, many of
them, who had most knowledge and were the forwardest Professors in those days,
did offend: which moved him to set out the sins of those Men in several
Respects and Considerations. Which it would be too long for me to mention; nor
is it needful, if this that I have discoursed already be laid to Heart. And if
Men will lay nothing close to their Consciences; all that can be said, or
wrote, or preached, will do them no good: but they will be only hearers, or
readers, not doers of the Word, deceiving their own Souls.

Wherefore laying aside (as S. Peter speaks, I. II. 1. 2.) all malice, and all
guile (or deceit) and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, as new
born babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word (or that rational sincere milk;
the pure food of your mind and understanding, and not of your fancy) that you
may grow thereby. As certainly you will, when you become of the same
disposition, with little Children: void of hatred, of guile, of wrath, of
dissimulation, and such like evil affections: and are of an humble, teachable,
and submissive Spirit. For if every one had but such an increase of grace, as
to hear meekly Gods Word, and to receive it with pure affection, they could not
easily fail, to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit.

So we pray in our Litany. And may it please God, as it there follows; to bring
into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived: for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.

FINIS.

