A COMMENTARY UPON THE Second Book of MOSES, CALLED EXODUS.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON, Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCVII.

A COMMENTARY UPON EXODUS.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY reason of the Distance of the Author from the Press, several Errata's have
happened, which the Reader is desired to Correct before he read the Book. He will
find them printed at the end.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE Second Book of MOSES, CALLED EXODUS.
CHAP. I.
THIS Book has its Name from the Principal Subject of it, viz. the Departure
of the Children of Israel out of Egypt. For so the Greek word (...) signifies,
going out, or, departing from one Place to another. It contains an History of
about an hundred forty and five years (some make it two or three years less)
from the Death of Joseph, to the Building of the Tabernacle. For it treats of
several Things which went before their Departure; and which followed after it:
but they all relate to that, and depend upon it.

Verse 1. Now these are the Names of the Children of Israel which came into
Egypt, etc.] Being to relate the Departure of the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, it was very proper first to set down, the Number of those who came into
it; and the Heads of them: Whereby it might the better appear also how God had
fulfilled his Promise to Abraham, of multiplying his Seed: Which Moses had
recorded in his first Book ( Genesis) where he shows this Promise was made at
that very time, when he declared, after a long Affliction in Egypt, he would
conduct his Posterity into Canaan, XV Genesis 5, 13, 18.

Ver. 2, 3, 4. Reuben, Simeon, etc.]. He does not set down their Names (in
these three Verses) according to their Birth: but first the Children of Leah;
then one of Rachels; and then those of his Handmaids; and last of all (in the
next Verses) Joseph; who was in Egypt before.

Ver. 5. And all the Souls.] i. e. Persons.

Who came out of the Loins.] In the Hebrew, out of the thigh, which signifies
that part whereby Mankind is propagated: as was observed upon XLVI Genesis 26. And
so the Author of the Tripartite History uses the word femur, when he speaks of
the Martyrdom of Benjamin (as Bochart observes, P. 2. Hierozoic. L. 5. cap.
15.) Alium rursum acutum Calamum in ejus femur; unde humana origo descendit,
jussit immitti.

For Joseph was in Egypt already.] In the Hebrew the Particle Vau (which we
commonly translate and, and here for) sometimes also signifies with. See IV
Genesis 20. And so it does in this place: which should be translated seventy
Souls, with Joseph; who was in Egypt already. For Joseph is not to be added to
the LXX, but reckoned among them; to make up that number: as appears from XLVI
Genesis

Ver. 6. And Joseph died. See Genesis 26.

And all his Brethren, and all that Generation.] All that came with Jacob into
Egypt.

Ver. 7. And the Children of Israel were fruitful, etc.] Here are several words
for the same thing; to show their extraordinary Increase, beyond what was usual
in that or any other Country. And because there are six words in all, to
express this great Increase, some of the Hebrews conclude they brought forth
six Children at a Birth. Which others of them gather from the second word here
used Jischretzu: which is a word whereby the Increase of Fishes is expressed in
I Genesis 20. So Theodorick Hacspan observes out of Baal-hatturim and Jalkut, and
thinks the Tradition is not to be rejected, because they bring frivolous
Conceits to support it. For Aristotle says ( L. VII. Histor. Animal. c. 4.)
the Egyptian Women were so fruitful, that some of them at four Births brought
Twenty Children. No wonder then, if some of the Israelites brought Six at a
time, by the extraordinary Blessing of God upon them. For Caspar Schottus names
the Wife of a Citizen in Florence, who had Two and fifty Children, and never
brought less than Three at a Birth, L. III. Phys. Curiosae, Cap. XXIX. where he
has collected a vast number of Examples of such strange fruitfulness.

But no Body has explained this Verse now more soberly and unexceptionably
than Abarbinel; who considers every one of the words here used, very
judiciously; and shows they are not multiplied in vain. For as the first word,

Were fruitful.] Signifies, he thinks, that none among them were barren; but
brought forth every year, as Trees are wont to do. So the next word,

And increased abundantly.] Signifies, that they commonly brought forth more
than One at a time, as creeping things do; to which this word alludes. And
because, when more than one are born at a Birth, they are frequently very weak,
and not long lived; Therefore he adds,

And multiplied.] Which signifies, that they grew up to be Men and Women; and
lived to have Children of their own. And those not feeble, but lusty and
strong; as the next words, he thinks, imports, waxed exceeding mighty: of which
more presently.

Now this vast Increase began at their first coming into Egypt, XLVII Genesis 27,
28. and so continued till the death of all that Generation, mentioned in the
foregoing Verse. When it began to be taken notice of by the Egyptians; who
thought it might prove dangerous to them. For the Israelites having multiplied
exceedingly, during the space of XVII years, that Jacob lived in Egypt; there
is no doubt they increased proportionably in the space of LIVE years more, which
Joseph lived after the death of his Father. And so in LXIV years more, from the
Death of Joseph to the Birth of Moses, must needs be grown so numerous, as to
fill the Country. So that in LXXX years more, they were increased to Six
hundred thousand Men besides Children, XII Exodus 37. And the next year their
Number being taken, they were found to be Six hundred and three thousand, five
hundred and fifty Men, from Twenty years old and upward; as we read I Numb. 45,
46. And therefore reckoning Women, Children, and Youths under the Age of
Twenty; we cannot but think they were three times as many: or perhaps Two
Millions. Which is not incredible, by a moderate Computation, if we consider
how many might spring from LXX Persons, in the space of Two hundred and fifteen
years (which the forenamed Sums make) as Bonfrerius, and several others from
him in our own Language, have been at the pains to demonstrate.

And waxed exceeding mighty.] This is commonly thought to signify, that they
were not only numerous, but robust and strong. And it may as well denote, that
their vast Numbers made them very Formidable to the Egyptians: who began, it
appears by the Sequel, to be jealous of their power, if they should have a will
to attempt any thing against them.

And the Land was filled with them.] i. e. The Land of Goshen; and perhaps some
other Parts of the lower Egypt.

Ver. 8. Now there arose up a New King over Egypt.] Some by a New King
understand a King of another Family, or Race (as Josephus interprets it) nay, a
Stranger, of another Nation: just as, New Gods are strange Gods, in Scripture
Language. Thus Sir John Marsham; and then it is no wonder, that he knew not
Joseph, as it here follows. But this is not certain: and the Conceit whereby
Eben Ezra justifies it (which is, that the word rose up implies as much) is
justly censured by Abarbinel as frivolous: it being the common word, which is
used every where, when a new King succeeds his Predecessor. It is most likely
therefore that Moses means no more, but that the King in whose time Joseph
died, being dead likewise (whom many take to have been Mephramuthosis) and
another after him, whom they call Thutmosis; the next Successor in the Throne
(Amenophis) either had heard nothing of Joseph; or did not mind what was said
of him. Our great Primate of Ireland gives a different account of the
Succession of the Egyptian Kings; and takes this King to have been Ramasses
Miamum: but still supposes him to have been of the old Line, and not a Stranger.

Who knew not Joseph.] There is no doubt that Joseph died, as he lived, in high
Esteem and great Reputation in that Country: and that his Memory continued
precious, as long as any of that Generation lasted. For Diodorus Siculus says
(L. I.) that the Egyptians above all other People, (...), were disposed to be
grateful to all those who had any way merited of them: looking upon the
requital of the kindness of Benefactors, to be one of the greatest Supports of
Humane Life. And something to the same purpose is noted by Clemens Alexandrinus
(L. 1. Strom. p. 303.) where having said that Barbarous Nations highly honored
(...), their Lawgivers and Instructers, whom they called Gods; he presently
adds that the Egyptians, (...) were very careful to Deifie such Persons. But if
this was their inclination, in times so ancient as these of Moses, we must not
think them all to have been so disposed; or that Time did not obliterate the
Memory of Benefits. For this Prince (whom Artapanus in Eusebius, L. IX. Praep.
Evang. c. 27. calls Palamanothes; so uncertain is his Name) not having seen
Joseph himself; nor having any knowledge perhaps of the Benefits his Country
had received by his means, did not treat his Kindred so kindly, as they had
been used, in former times. But this Phrase, he knew not, is commonly
interpreted he regarded not the Services which Joseph had done; of which, he is
supposed, not to have been ignorant. For words of Knowledge in Scripture,
include the Affections also. As God is said to know those whom he loves; and
not to know those whom he does not love, I Psalm. 6. VII Matthew. 23. Whence the
Jews have raised this Observation, That he who forgets the Benefits he has
received from other Men, at last forgets those he has received from God. For
he of whom it is said here, That he knew not Joseph; said not long after, I
know not the Lord, Ver. 2. But this is grounded upon a mistake; for it was
another Pharaoh, long after this King, who spoke those words.

Ver. 9. And he said unto his People.] He called a Council of the great Men of
the Nation; to whom he represented how necessary it was to lessen the Number,
and weaken the Power of the Israelites.

Behold, the People of the Children of Israel are mo, and mightier than we.]
This was not true (unless he meant that no part of Egypt of that bigness, had
so many People and so strong, as the Israelites in Goshen) but he said it to
awaken his People to consider how to Suppress them. And perhaps he was afraid
of their Power, or out of Popularity would in the beginning of his Reign give a
proof of his Care of his People, by Suppressing Foreigners.

Ver. 10. Come on.] The Hebrew word habah is sometime used in Petitions (LX
Psalm. ult.) but most commonly in Exhortations; when Men excite and stir up one
another, not to be slack in any business. See XI Genesis 3.

Let us deal wisely with them.] He would not go about to destroy them by Force,
being loath to lose so many Subjects; but was desirous to diminish them by
subtle Devices.

Lest they multiply.]. Grow still more numerous and mighty.

Lest when there falls out any War.] With the Arabians, Ethiopians, or other
neighboring Nations. For I see no reason to believe that he means the ancient
Egyptians (with whom the Israelites had lived in great Friendship, but now were
expelled by the Shepherd Kings) and the People of Thebais; who at length made
War with those Kings, who reigned in the lower Egypt. This is Sir J. Marsham's
Conjecture (in his Canon Chron. Sec. VIII.) which I thought good to mention,
though I do not follow it.

They join also to our Enemies, and sight against us.] As it was natural for
Men to do, who were under grievous Oppressions; and hoped thereby for Relief.

And so get them out of the Land.] They had heard the Israelites discourse, it
is likely, that they never meant always to stay there; their Fathers coming
only to Sojourn in Egypt: and the nearer the time approached, when God promised
to bring them from thence, the more, we may well think, they spoke of it. Which
raised this Jealousy, that in case of any War, they would join with their
Enemies; that by their Assistance they might be delivered.

Ver. 11. Therefore they did set over them Taskmasters, etc.] This was the
Result of the Council; that they should be brought low by laying heavy Taxes
upon them, to squeeze them of their Money; and by making them labor very hard,
whereby they thought to weaken their Bodies. For the Hebrew word Missim, coming
from Mas, which signifies Tribute, it may be reasonably thought, that these
Taskmasters (as we call them) exacted great Sums of Money of them, as well as
afflicted them with their burdens, i. e. hard Labors of all sorts, as the
Eastern Writers expound it.

And they built for Pharaoh.] They did not labor for themselves, but for the
King: who, it is likely, gave them no Wages; but used them as mere Slaves.

Treasure Cities.] Fortified Cities, wherein he had his Magazeens (as we now
speak) of all sort of Ammunition, and Stores of Corn, and public Provisions;
as well as Treasures of Money. For so we translate this word Miskenoth, 2 Chronicles. 16.4. XVII. 12. Storehouses: and XXXVI. 28. Storehouses for Corn, and
Wine and Oil. There was great Labor, no doubt, employed in building such
Cities; surrounded with Walls, and Towers, and deep Ditches, etc.

Pithom.] This is thought by Bochart to be the City which Herodotus calls (...)
( L. 2. c. 158.) but Herodotus there says it was (...), a City of Arabia. And
therefore Sir J. Marsham's Conjecture seems more reasonable, who takes it for
Pelusium: which was the most ancient fortified Place in Egypt, called by
Ezekiel XXX. 15. the strength of Egypt; and by Suidas, long after him, (...),
the Key of Egypt: because it was the Inlet from Syria into this Country. Which
was the reason, as Diadorus says, ( Lib. XV.) that they most of all fortified
(...), as his words are. And this agrees with the signification of Pithom, if
D. Chytraeus guess aright, which is as much as Pi and tehom, i. e. the Mouth of
the Deep: being seated near the Sea, at the Mouth of one of the Streams of
Nile. And thus I find it expounded in the Talmud Tit. Sota, in the Gemara, Cap.
I. Sect. 32.

And Rameses.] It is an ignorant Conceit of Benjamin Tudelensis that this City
is that called Ein-Alschemes, i. e. the Fountain of the Sun; in Greek
Heliopolis. (See his Itiner. p. 120. and L' Empereur's Annot. p. 223.) for this
City was in the upper Egypt; whereas Rameses was in the lower, in the Land of
Goshen: and gave name to the whole Country where the Israelites dwelt, XLVII
Genesis 11. And it is most likely, it was a Frontier Town, which lay in the
entrance of Egypt from Arabia, or some of the neighboring Countries. They that
take the Name of the King, who now reigned, to have been Ramesses, think this
City had its Name from him, and the other called Pithom (as Mercator thinks)
from the Name of his Queen.

Ver. 12. But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew.]
Here is a new word, different from all the former (Ver. 7.) to express their
extraordinary Increase; for so jiphrots signifies, breaking out; as Water does
which bursts out with a greater force, when it has been pent up. This, as St.
Austin observes, ( L. XVIII. de Civ. Dei, c. 6.) is to be ascribed to the
Divine Blessing; for naturally tiresome Labors would have dispirited them, and
made them less fruitful.

And they were grieved because of the Children of Israel.] It vexed them to see
this Device prove so unsuccesful, that it promoted what they thought to hinder.

Ver. 13. And the Egyptians; rather therefore.] The Egyptians resolved to take
a more severe Course with them.

Made the Children of Israel to serve with rigor.] Used them more tyrannically
and cruelly; without any Mercy: whereby their strength, in all likelihood,
would be broken, as the Hebrew word signifies. Some of the Jews think they beat
and scourged them sorely.

Ver. 14. And they made their Life bitter.] The Hebrews call all things bitter,
which extremely grieve and afflict the Soul, XXVII Genesis 34. III Lament. 15.
Whence Naomi bids her Daughters call her no more by that pleasant Name, but
call her Mara, i. e. bitter: because of the very great Afflictions she had
endured in a strange Country.

With hard Bondage.] Such Drudgery as if they had been mere Bondslaves.

In Mortar and in Brick.] (...), by making Clay into Bricks (as Philo well
interprets it, L. I. de Vita Mosis) or in working the Clay, and then turning it
into Bricks. And so Bochart expounds it, by the figure of (...), lateribus ex
luto conficiendis. There was great store of Clay in that place; Pelusium (one
of the Cities which they built) having its name from thence, both in the Greek
and in the Hebrew Languages. For Sin signifies the same with (...), Clay, or
Dirt.

And in all manner of Service in the Field, etc.] Not merely in Ploughing, etc.
but in digging Trenches, to convey the Water of Nile into their Ground (as
Philo expounds it) and in cleansing those Trenches that had been formerly made;
and in carrying Dung, as others add, into the Field; and such like nasty
Services. And all these, Moses adds, were rigorously exacted of them: i. e.
they did all they could to break their hearts, as we speak.

Ver. 15. And the King spoke to the Hebrew Midwives.] The former Device failing
him, or contributing little to his end; he betakes himself to one that, if it
were pursued, could not but prove effectual. Some will have these Midwives to
have been Egyptians, but called Hebrew, because the Women of that Nation made
use of their Assistance, when they were in Labor. But it is not likely, that
Hebrews had not Midwives of their Nation; or that Pharaoh would impose his
Midwives upon them, and let them have none else: for that would have too
plainly discovered his drift; whereas he intended to hide it, and to act
cunningly against them, Ver. 10.

The name of the one was Siphrah, etc.] We cannot well think there were only
two Midwives to serve the whole Nation: but these were the chief; who had the
rest under their government, and gave orders and directions to them. So Aben
Ezra; whom Abarbinel contradicts; but with slight reasons: to advance a subtle
rather than solid Conceit of his own; that every Woman in Egypt had two
Midwives, and those were the common Names of them, signifying what each of them
were to do for the Women in Travel. There are those among the Jews who have
fancied Jochebed the Mother of Moses to be one of those here named: and some of
them, who are pleased with seeming ignorant of Nothing, say she is the person
here called Siphrah; her Daughter Miriam being the other, called Puah: So the
Jerusalem Targum.

Ver. 16. When ye do the Office of a Midwife, etc.] Are called to their
Assistance in their Labor.

And see them upon the Stools.] The Hebrew word obanajim which we translate
Stools, is so obscure, that the LXX content themselves to translate this
Passage thus, When you see them delivered: which fully expresses the sense; and
must be supposed to be the meaning, if we take Stools for such Seats as were
purposely contrived for laboring Women to sit on, that the Midwives might the
better do their Office. For they could not tell whether they brought forth Male
or Female, till they were delivered: unless the Hebrew Doctors say true, who
constantly affirm, That Boys come into the World with their Faces downward, and
Girls with their Faces upward; whereby they might know what Sex a Child was of
before it was quite born. See Tit. Sota in the Gemara. Cap. 1. Sect. 33.

If it be a Son, then ye shall kill him]. The Egyptians feared the Men of
Israel only; without whom they could have no Children at all, but such as would
be half Egyptians; and in time be wholly ingrafted into that Nation.

But if it be a Daughter, then she shall live.] For as Clemens Alexandr. well
observes, ( L. I. Stromat. p. 343.) (...), Women are feeble and unfit for War,
therefore they had no fear of them, but reserved them to increase the Egyptian
breed.

Ver. 17. But the Midwives feared God, etc.] They that take them for Egyptians,
say these Midwives were Proselytes to the Jewish Religion. But such Faith in
God, as made them not fear a great King, is hardly to be expected from any but
those who had been always bred up in a deep sense of his Divine Majesty. Which
gave them such Courage, that, as Chytraeus expresses it in Herodotus his
Phrase (which is in a manner the same with St. Peter's, V Acts 29.) (...), they
made account the things of God were to be preferred before those of Men: and
therefore would not obey the King's Command, by doing contrary unto God's.

Ver. 18. And the King called for the Midwives.] Sent out a Summons to appear
before him.

And said unto them, Why have you done this thing, etc.] Their being questioned
for their Disobedience, made their Constancy the more remarkable.

Ver. 19. For they are lively, and are delivered ere the Midwives come in unto
them.] It does not appear that these Midwives told a lie, but only concealed
some of the Truth: which is not unlawful, but commendable, when it is to
preserve the Innocent. For many of the Hebrew Women might be such as they here
describe, though not every one of them. The Hebrew word chajoth signifies three
things; either vivaces, i. e. lively, or obstetrices, Midwives (as Kimchi tells
us) or animantia, living Creatures. The LXX follow the first notion, and so do
we, which is very proper. Aquila follows the second, who translates this
Passage thus, (...), they can do the Office of Midwives themselves, and are
brought to Bed before we can get to them. Thus the Vulgar also take it, They
have skill in Midwifry. And the Author of the Life of Moses, (as several other
Jews do) take it in the third sense, expounding it thus; They are like other
living Creatures, who do not need any Midwives to help their young ones into
the World. And so Rasi also, and Theodotion, who thus translates it (...),
which does not signify (as Gaulmyn observes) they bring forth living Children,
but ad instar animantium pariunt, they bring forth like Animals. Such lively
Women undoubtedly there have been, and are still in some Parts of the World.
For Varro reports ( L. II. de R. R. cap. 10.) that the Women of Illyricum, when
they found their Pangs coming, were wont to go a little aside from the Work
they were about, and presently were delivered of a Child, quem non peperisse,
sed invenisse putes, which one would think they had found, not brought forth
out of their Womb. Which place our Gataker mentioning in his Cinnus, p. 213.
says, it is credibly reported, by those who had lived there a great while,
that the Irish Women sometime rise from Table, and are delivered, and return to
the Company again before all be taken away.

Ver. 20. Therefore God dealt well with the Midwives, etc.] He rewarded their
Services; whereby the Children of Israel still more multiplied and waxed very
mighty.

Ver. 21. Because the Midwives feared God, he made them Houses.] These words
seem to declare, wherein God rewarded them; which was in making them Houses.
Some indeed (particularly Mr. Calvin) refer this to the Israelites; because the
word them is of the Masculine Gender: and therefore cannot, they think, be
meant of the Midwives; but must be interpreted, by this means the Children of
Israel were exceedingly increased. But, besides that this was said just before,
it is not unusual in Scripture, when the Speech is of Women, to use the
Masculine Gender. Thus Ruth (1. 8.) prays for her Daughters in Law in these
words, the LORD deal kindly with you, where in the Hebrew the Masculine Gender
is used, and not the Feminine. But we need go no further for an instance of
this than the very next Chapter to this, (II Exodus 17.) where Moses is said to
water their Flock, speaking of Jethro's Daughters, and the word for their is of
the Masculine Gender. It agrees also best with the whole story, to take it so
here; that God made the Midwives Houses, (so the Chaldee and the LXX understand
it) that is, gave them a numerous Offspring, out of which arose many Families,
which in Scripture Language are called Houses, XXX Genesis 30. When shall I make
my self an House? (the same Phrase with this) i. e. take care of my own Family,
XXV Deuteronomy. 9. IV Ruth 5. Or else the meaning may be, he increased their Estate,
and gave them great Riches: which the Psalmist may be thought to mean, when he
says, Except the Lord build the House, ( i. e. preserve and increase the
Estate of a Family) their labor is in vain that endeavor it. See also 2 Samuel
VII. 11. CXIII Psalm. 9. Some that take these Midwives to have been Egyptian
Women, proselyted to the Jewish Religion, think the sense may be, that they
married to Israelites, and God made their Families eminent in Israel.

Ver. 22. And Pharaoh charged all his People, saying, every Son, etc.] Not
being able to effect his end by the Midwives, he commanded every Body to inform
his Officers when any Hebrew Woman fell in Labor, and appointed Searchers
(it is likely) to examine whether they were delivered of Male or Female, and to
act according to what is here ordered. Some that understand the foregoing words
of the Israelites, make this the sense of the two last Verses: Because the
Midwives feared God, and thereby the Families of the Israelites were increased,
not diminished; Pharaoh took a new Course, and charged all his People to see
that done, which the Midwives refused. The Jews (in the Book called The Life of
Moses) say that many of their People, upon this Decree of Pharaoh, resolved not
to marry, or not to come near their Wives: and those who did, were forced to
have them brought to Bed alone, and throw their Children into the Fields, where
the Angels took care of them, etc. But this is confuted by what follows in the
next Chapter. And yet they are so fond of such Fables, that in one of their
Medraschim (or Books of Homilies) they say, God made Milk to come out of one
Stone, and Honey out of another, to Suckle them, while they lay hid in the
Earth. See Buxtorf of the Education of their Children, Synag. Judaic. Cap. VII.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. AND there went a Man of the House of Levi, etc.] We are told both the
Man's name, and the Woman's whom he married, VI Exodus 20. XXVI Numb. 59. Where
Amram, Grandson of Levi, is said to have been Moses his Father; and Jochabed,
Daughter of Levi, to have been his Mother. So Amram married his Father's Sister
(as the Text expressly tells us) Which Moses was so ingenuous as not to conceal,
though it might not be for his Credit in future Ages: when such Marriages were
forbidden by that Law which he gave them from God; though practiced before the
giving of his Law. See Seldom, L. V. de Jure N. and G. c. 9. The Jews also,
fancying his Mother Jochabed to have been born as soon as the Israelites came
into Egypt, make the Birth of Moses a Miracle: because she must be, by that
account, an Hundred and thirty years old, when he was born. But it may as well
be thought, that she was born to Levi in his old Age, by another Wife; and so
she was younger than her Nephew Amram, and but his half Sister. Which makes
their Marriage no more strange, than Abraham's Marriage with Sarah. Besides, it
is not certain she was his Father's Sister (in the strict sense of that word)
but might be only one of his Cosins, who in Scripture are frequently called
Sisters. And then when it is said, she was a Daughter of Levi, the meaning must
be, his Grandaughter, or the Child perhaps of one of his Grandaughters: who, in
these Writings, are commonly called Daughters. And so, all the Objections
against this Marriage vanish; and the first words of this Verse expound the
last. A Man of the House of Levi, took to Wife a Daughter of Levi: that is, one
of the same House, or Family. But see VI. 20.

Verse 2. And the Woman conceived, and bare a Son.] She had one before this,
viz. Aaron; who, it is probable, was born before this Persecution began; being
three years elder than Moses, VII. 7.

And when she saw him, that he was a goodly Child.] His goodly Aspect (which
seems to have been an early indication of his future Greatness) is taken notice
of by Strangers; particularly by Justin, out of Trogus an ancient Heathen
Historian, L. XXXVI. c. 2. where he says, That beside the Inheritance of his
Father's knowledge (whom he takes to have been Joseph) etiam formae pulchritudo
commendabat, the gracefulness of his Person recommended him to others. Insomuch
that the whole Fable of Adonis among the Heathen, was framed (as Huetius
conjectures) out of this Story of Moses. For Apollododorus relates ( L. III.)
how Venus, admiring the great Beauty of the Infant, took him away privily,
without the knowledge of the Gods, and hiding him in an Ark, delivered him to
Proserpina, etc. See Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. Cap. III. n. 3.

She hid him three Months.] R. Simeon, in Pirke Elieser, Cap. XLVIII. says,
she hid him in a Vault under ground. But in Sota they say (in the Gemara, Cap.
I. Sect. 38.) he being hid in a secret inner Room of their House, was in danger
to be detected by his crying: when some of the Egyptians came into the outer
Room, and brought a crying Child with them on purpose; supposing the Israelites
Infants would answer, if any were in the House. But there is no certainty of
this.

Ver. 3. And when she could no longer hide him.] Some discovery being made of
him, by some means or other, by their Neighbors; or the search after new born
Children being now more narrow and diligent; she thought he could be no longer
concealed, and therefore resolved to expose him, in the manner following.

She took for him an Ark of Bulrushes.] Or of Wicker; for Kimchi observes the
Hebrew word Gome signifies the lightest Wood. Patricides, an Arabian Writer,
says it was made of that which the Ancients call Papyrus: and so the LXX, and
Josephus and Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom. 1. p. 343.) (...)) which was a frutex
that grew peculiarly upon the Banks of Nile, as Salmasius shows in Solin. p.
1002, etc.

And daubed it with Slime and with Pitch.] Of this word Slime, see XI Genesis 3.
It is not improbable, that this was used within, and Pitch without, to keep the
Water from coming into the Ark. And so I find in the Gemara of that Title in
the Talmud called Sota (Cap. I. Sect. 29.) where this is said to have been an
ancient Tradition. Only they say, as many of the Rabbis do, that Chemar
signifies Plaster, not Bitumen: because the bad smell of that, they think,
would have been noisome to the Child. R. Solomon's opinion is, that it was
pitched both within and without; and plaistred within over the Pitch.

And she laid it in the flaggs by the Rivers brink.] That it might not be
carried away with the Stream; but she might come in the Night and suckle it.
Some think that the Ark, notwithstanding, was made below in the form of a Boat;
that, if it should chance to be carried from among the Flaggs upon the Shore,
it might swim in the River. For it is certain the Egyptians made Ships of the
forenamed reed, as we find in Pliny and Solinus, who both mention Papyraceae
Naves; and in Theophrastus, who mentions (...), speaking of Papyrus: as
Salmasius observes in his Plin. Exercit. p. 1003, 1115, 1116. Herodotus also
mentions (...), in his Euterpe, Cap. XCVI. See XVIII Isa. 2.

Ver. 4. And his Sister stood afar off, to wit what, etc.] By her Mothers order
no doubt; that she might not seem to be set there, on purpose to watch him. We
read of no other Sister he had but Miriam, XXVI Numb. 59. who therefore is
thought to be the Person.

Ver. 5. And the Daughter of Pharaoh.] Called Thermutis by Josephus ( L. II.
Antiq. c. 5.) but by Artapanus in Eusebius his Praepar. Evang. ( L. IX. c. 27.)
called Meris, or Merris. Which is her name (as Jacobus Capellus observes) in
the Fasti Siculi. The same Artapanus there says, she was married to Cenephres
King of the Country above Memphis: but had no Child by him. Clemens
Alexandrinus says the same, that she was not only a married Woman, but had been
long married, without being with Child, (...), but very desirous to have one,
L. I. Strom. p. 343.

Came down to wash her self at the River.] Not for Pleasure, but for
Purification: this being an ancient Rite of Religion in all Nations, to cleanse
themselves, by washing their Bodies, after any Defilement. Thus Philo seems to
understand it, in his Book of the Life of Moses: where, speaking of this
matter, he uses the word (...), which is proper to Sacred Cleansing. And it
seems far more probable, than that the scorching heat of the Weather, (caused
by an extraordinary hand of God) made her betake herself to the cool Streams
for her Refreshment (as the Tale is told in the Hebrew Book, called The Life of
Moses) or that the desire of Children carried her hither; the Waters of Nile
being thought to make Women fruitful. Clemens Alexandrinus seems to have put
both these together, Refreshment and Religion: when he says she came hither,
(...), L. I. Strom. p. 343. It is still a further fetch of Jonathan, who would
persuade us that at this time God had smote the Egyptians with a burning Ulcer;
which made their Flesh so hot, that they could not endure it, but run to the
River to cool their Bodies. And in Pirke Elieser, Cap. XLVIII. this Inflammation
is said to have seized on Pharaoh's Daughter, whom he calls Bathia. Which is
indeed the name of a Daughter of one Pharaoh, 1 Chronicles. IV. 18. but to make her
the Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt (as G. Vorstius observes they do, in
Schemoth Rabba, and Vaijra Rab.) is altogether senseless. And yet it is upon
that ground they make her a Proselyte also, and say in the Title of the Talmud
before mentioned, called Sota (Cap. I. of the Gemara, Sect. 40.) that she went
into the River to purge her self from the Idolatry of her Father's House: i. e.
to become a Proselyte, who was received (in following times) into the Jewish
Religion by Baptism.

And her Maidens walked along by the Rivers side.] While she washed her self, in
a private place, which, no doubt, was made by the King for that purpose. For it
is not to be imagined, that she washed herself publicly in the River; but in
some Enclosure, whereby she was separated from the sight of Company. For Zoan
(or Tanis) the Royal City, it is certain, lay near the River; and it is likely
the King's Gardens extended themselves to the very Banks of it: where
convenient Bathing-Houses were contrived for himself, and the Royal Family, to
bathe in the River when they pleased. Patricides seems to say, that the River
ran through the City, or by the side of it: for so the words are; The Ark was
put in the banks of the River Nile, where the water was shallowest, in the City
of Tzana, which was the Metropolis of that part of the Country. And to the same
purpose Elmacinus, another Arabian Writer, as Hottinger observes in his Smegma
Orientale, L. I. c. 8. p. 400.

And when she saw the Ark among the flaggs.] In such a Bathing-House, as I
suppose her to have now been, there were Latices through which she could see
what was done in the River, though no Body could see her. And she spying an
unusual Vessel among the slags, commanded it to be brought to her. Patricides
says, she heard the Child cry. And Chuskuni observes, it was more easy for
her who was in the River, to espy the Ark, than for her Maidens who walked
above upon the Banks.

She sent her Maid to fetch it.] The Hebrew word Amatha, which we translate
Maid, is much different from that for Maidens mentioned just before: signifying
one that waited immediately upon her, whom we call an Handmaid; the other
properly signifying only young Women; who were such, perhaps, as we now call
Ladies of Honor.

Ver. 6. And when she had opened it, she saw the Child.] And together with him
the SCHECHINAH or Divine Majesty, as Rabbi Jose says in Sota: which is
agreeable to their opinion, who make her to be now proselyted; but has no
other foundation.

And behold the Babe wept.] There is nothing strange in this, that a Babe
(which perhaps had been a good while without the Breast) should weep: but it is
remarkable, that Pharaoh's Daughter should not find it, till tears ran down its
Cheeks; because this helped to move her compassion toward it, as it here
follows.

And she had Compassion on him.] Resolved to preserve him, contrary to her
Father's Order.

And said, this is one of the Hebrew's Children.] None else, she thought, would
expose so goodly a Child: and she was confirmed in her opinion, when she found
he was Circumcised, as the same R. Jose conjectures. And the truth is, we have
no good reason to believe, that the Egyptians had, as yet, received
Circumcision.

Ver. 7. Then said his Sister to Pharaoh's Daughter, etc.] We cannot think his
Sister would be so imprudent as to step in immediately, upon the finding of the
Child, and ask if she should call a Hebrew Nurse for it: but staid some time
(that she might not seem to know any thing of him, but what she heard them say)
till they had tried other Nurses (as the Hebrew Doctors in Sota understand it,
Cap. I. Sect. 43.) whose Breasts the Child refusing to suck, she took the
opportunity to ask if she might see for a Nurse among the Hebrew Women.
Josephus says the very same.

Ver. 8. And Pharaoh's Daughter said unto her, Go.] It is likely that Miriam
addressed her self to her so discreetly, that it moved her easily to agree to
her Proposal. Though a singular Providence of God guided this whole business.

And the Maid went and called this Child's Mother.] Whose Breast the Child
readily taking (having been used to it) she was instantly accepted to be his
Nurse. So it follows in the next Verse.

Ver. 9. Take this Child away, and Nurse it for me, etc.] Thus by the wonderful
Providence of God, Jochabed had the pleasure of suckling her own Child; and was
also well paid for her pains.

Ver. 10. And the Child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh 's Daughter.]
The Hebrew Writers say, that when he was Two years old, he was taken from her:
which is not so likely, as that he continued with her till he was grown capable
to be instructed in true Religion, and to understand and remember whose true
Child he was; whereby he was disposed to behave himself accordingly, when he
came to live at Court.

And he became her Son.] She having no Child of her own, adopted him for her
Son, with the consent, no doubt, of Pharaoh: Not to succeed in the Throne, as
some have fancied; but to be the Heir of her private Estate. And accordingly
she gave him a Princely Education, and took care he should be instructed in all
the Wisdom of the Egyptians, as St. Stephen has remembered, VII Acts 22. and,
as Philo (in The Life of Moses) would have it believed, sent for the ablest
Masters out of Greece (as well as out of Assyria, and other Eastern Countries)
to teach him their Learning. Which is a piece of Jewish Vanity; for there was
no Learning among the Greeks in the days of Moses: who was ancienter, not only
than their Philosophers and Poets, but than most of their Gods, as Clemens
Alexandrinus demonstrates; (...), L. I. Strom. p. 323. And what Learning there
was now in Egypt is not certain; for there is no Evidence that the Wisdom St.
Stephen speaks of, comprehends the Knowledge of so many things, as some Learned
Men are pleased to ascribe to them in those days.

And she called his name Moses.] The reason of this Name is given in the
following words;

And she said, because I have drawn him out of the Water.] This Name seems to
be derived from the Hebrew word Mashah, which is never used in the Bible, but
for drawing out of the Water, 2 Samuel XXII. 17. XVIII Psalm. 17. LXIII Isa. 11.
And therefore there is no need to have recourse to any other Language for the
original of his Name; which Philo, Josephus, and Clemens Alexandrinus, will
have to be derived from the word (...), which in the Egyptian Tongue, they say,
signifies Water, and (...), which signifies saved. So that it is as much, as
saved from the Waters, or preserved from drowning. It may be said indeed, that
it is not likely she would give him a Name from any other Language than her
own: but it is to be considered, that the word Mashah (from whence this Name
most naturally flows, and to which she her self said she had respect) might
have the same signification in her Language, that it had in Hebrew; there being
a great affinity between these two Tongues. See XL Genesis 45. Clem. Alexandrinus
says, that the Name he had given him by his Parents at his Circumcision was
Joachim. Which he had, I suppose, out of some fabulous Book; for, in the same
place, he speaks of the Name was given him after he was translated to Heaven,
L. I. Strom. p. 343.

Ver. 11. And it came to pass in those days when Moses was grown.] When he was
not only arrived at Man's estate, but was full Forty years old, as St. Stephen
observes, (VII Acts 23.) and may be gathered from this History.

That he went out unto his Brethren, etc.] He had a motion from God (as St.
Stephen there seems to interpret it) to go, and acquaint himself with the
Condition of his Brethren; and to own himself, more than he had done hitherto,
to be one of them. The Jews tell many Tales what passed between him and Pharaoh
till this time; but there is no more credit to be given to them, than to what
Artapanus, an Heathen Historian, relates of his Military Exploits in a War with
the Ethiopians, against whom Cenephres sent him as General of his Forces:
Though this is remarkable, that his Name and several Passages of his Life
(mixed with some Fables) were known to other Nations, and by them magnified and
admired. As appears by what Eusebius has extracted out of Artapanus,
Eupolemus, Demetrius, and other Heathen Writers, L. IX. Praepar. Evang. c. 26,
27, etc.

And looked upon their burdens.] Which he did very often, (as Philo understands
it, L. I. de Vita Mosis) and not without great Grief and Heaviness; that he was
neither able to hinder their Oppression, nor to help them under it. But he
exhorted Pharaoh's Officers to moderate their Severity; and the Israelites to
be patient, in hope of Deliverance.

And he spied an Egyptian, smiting an Hebrew.] The Cause of it is reported (in
The Life of Moses, in Hebrew, and in Schalsch Hakkabalah) that this Egyptian
had broken the Hebrew's House, and bound him, and ravished his Wife, and now
endeavored to murder him. But this looks like a Tale: which is a little better
told by the Author of Schemoth Rabba, and others mentioned by Mr. Seldom, L.
II. de Synedr. c. 1. who say, that this Egyptian was one of the Taskmasters,
who called this Man out of his Bed in the Night, to go to work, and then took
his opportunity to slip into it, and lie with Selomith his Wife, who took him
for her Husband. The plainest account and most likely, is this of Philo (in the
place above mentioned) that some of Pharaoh's Officers, little differing from
the most furious Beasts, not at all mollified, but more exasperated by
Entreaties; one of them, of the most violent temper, fell in an outrageous
manner upon an Hebrew, because he did not do his work so fast as he would have
him, beating him most cruelly till he had almost killed him.

One of his Brethren.] All the Hebrews were his Brethren; but this Man, was of
his own Tribe, and one of the Children of Kohath, as the forenamed Authors take
it.

Ver. 12. And he looked this way and that way, etc.] Round about him; that he
might not run into danger himself, by delivering his Brother from it.

He slew the Egyptian.] Being stirred up to it, by a Divine motion: otherways
he could not have justified this Fact, to God and his own Conscience. And
therefore St. Stephen plainly makes this an Indication to the Children of
Israel, that God intended to deliver them by his means; and says, Moses thought
they would have so understood it, VII Acts 25. Nay, Maimonides himself gives
this account of it, ( Pars II. Cap. XLV. More Nevochim) where, he making this
the first Degree of Prophecy, when a Man is moved and animated by God to some
great and heroic Enterprise (either for the Preservation of the whole Church,
or the Deliverance of eminent Men from Oppression) he reckons Moses, among
others, as an Instance of it, in these words: Moses was endued with this Power,
when he grew up to be a Man; by the impulse of which he slew the Egyptian, and
checked him who unjustly strove with one of his Brethren, etc. The Hebrews
generally say that Moses did not kill this Man with a Sword, or any other
Weapon, but merely by the word of his Mouth, pronouncing him Dead in the Name
of God. Which Tradition is so old, that it is mentioned by Clemens
Alexandrinus, L. I. Strom. (...), etc. They that pretend to Secrets, say, that
he killed the Egyptian with his word alone, as Peter afterward, in the Acts,
killed Ananias and Sapphira.

And hid him in the Sand.] An inaccessible Desert lay on the West of Egypt, as
Diodorus Siculus observes; and there was another also on the East of it: so
that if this happened upon the Borders, there was Sand enough wherein to bury him.

Ver. 13. And when he went out the second day.] Having begun to Act by the
Divine Commission, he seems to have resolved every day to give proofs of his
Authority; and awaken the People to expect deliverance by his means. And
therefore went out, among them, this day, as he had done the day before.

Behold, Two Men of the Hebrews strove together.] He was surprised to find two
of his Brethren contending one with another; when they were so grievously
oppressed by the Egyptians.

And he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?] He
had no less Authority to admonish and reprove his Brethren, than to chastise
their Oppressors.

Ver. 14. And he said, Who made thee a Prince and a Judge over us?] It is plain
by this that he acted as one that had Authority; but this Man questioned from
whence he had it.

Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian?] It is not likely
the Man thought he had any such intention; but meant only to fright Moses from
meddling in his matters, by letting him know that what he had done already, was
not such a secret as he thought it.

And Moses feared.] He had not yet received a Commission from God to act
publicly as their Governor, and therefore durst not stay to answer a Charge
against him (which he thought might be possibly brought) for what he had done
privately. Some have troubled themselves to reconcile this with what the
Apostle says, XI Hebr. 27. that he feared not the wrath of the King; which
does not seem to agree with what is said here, that Moses feared. But there he
may very well be thought to speak, not of his flight out of Egypt, but of his
last departure with the whole body of the Israelites. Though if we should allow
Moses, and the Apostle, to speak of the same thing, there would be no
contradiction between them. For he might so fear, as to make him cautious, and
consult for his Safety; rather than basely either deny, or excuse what he had
done, or ask pardon for it; unto which no fear of the wrath of the King could
have moved him.

Ver. 15. Now when Pharaoh heard this thing.] Which was soon brought to his
ears, as Moses suspected: and aggravated extremely by the great Men of the
Court, as Philo represents it, L. I. de Vita Mosis.

He thought to slay him.] Not so much because he had killed the Man, as because
he pretended to assert the Liberty of the Israelites, and to be their
Deliverer. Demetrius bears witness to this Story, just according to what is
here related, in Eusebius's Praepar. Evang. L. IX. c. 29.

And Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh.] Wisely foreseeing the Danger, he
avoided it by flight into another Country, where he was out of his reach. For
though the time of Israel's Deliverance was not yet come, he was assured, that
God intended to work it by his hand: and therefore thought it prudent to
reserve himself till he received a further Commission from God. But though this
flight of Moses be here so plainly affirmed, yet the Jews are so sond of their
own Conceits, and so bold in their Invention, that they say he was not only
condemned to have his Head cut off, but brought to the Block; and when the
Executioner came to do his Office, his Sword would not enter; Moses his Neck
being, by a Miracle, turned into a Pilaster of Marble; and from thence called
his Son Eliezer, etc. So the Tale is told by the Author of Moses his Life. What
Pharaoh this was is not certain; but Eusebius calls him Orus (who succeeded
Amenophis, in whose time Moses was born) and he is said to have reigned Two and
forty years.

And dwelt in the Land of Midian.] Where some of Abraham's Posterity were
settled (XXV Genesis 2.) in a part of Arabia Petraea. And therefore Philo only
says, (...), he withdrew into the neighboring Arabia. Into which Country he
chose to flee, both because his escape was easy thither, and because they were
descended from the same Stock with himself; and continued still good People; or
at least had some good Governors, and Families among them, as appears by what
follows.

And he sat down by a Well.] To refresh himself; and expecting, it is likely, to
meet some Company there, at the time when the Flocks came to water.

Ver. 16. Now the Priest of Midian.] Or Prince, as it is in the Margin. For the
word Cohen indifferently signifies either Priest, or Prince: but most anciently
it signifies the latter (a Prince) For so it is used in the Book of Job XII.
19. He leads Cohenim (Princes) away spoiled. And in after times it continued
to have the same signification; David's Sons being called by this Name of
Cohenim, 2 Samuel VIII. 18. which in 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 17. is expounded, were chief
at the hand of the King. And so Ira is called, 2 Samuel XX. 26. Cohen, a chief
Ruler about David. And so I think it is to be taken here, for a Ruler or
Governor (See XLI Genesis 50.) not of the whole Country of Midian, but of some
Province of it. And it may be most truly rendered, a Prince ( i. e. one of the
Princes, or Rulers) of Midian. But in ancient time Princes executed the
Priesthood also, as Plato observes they did among the Egyptians; and the
Consuls and Emperors of Rome were ambitious of the same Dignity: by which
means the word Cohen came to signify both. Though where the Place or Territory
of which any Person was Cohen, is mentioned, there it always signifies him to
have been Prince or Civil Governor of that place. So S. Jarchi observes, The
word COHEN always denotes some Divine Ministry or Function, except where there
is an addition of some particular Principality to it, as COHEN of Midian, and
COHEN of On (referring to this place, and that I now mentioned in Genesis)
where it signifies a Prince, though the Priesthood might be joined with it. And
so Artapanus in Eusebius, L. IX. c. 27. relating Moses his Flight into Arabia,
says he came to Raguel, (...), the Ruler of those parts. And the Jews in their
German Translation of the Bible, call him Here, Lord of Midian. See our most
Learned Seldom, L. I. de Synedr. c. ult. p. 648. I shall only add, that it is
most likely that this Prince (or Priest) was a Worshipper of the true God, and
not an Idolater: for Moses, we may be confident, would not have married his
Daughter, if she had been bred in a false Religion.

Had seven Daughters, and they came and drew Water, etc.] He was but a small
Prince it appears by this; though it must be acknowledged it was a noble
Employment in old time (as I observed upon Genesis) to look after Sheep: and we
must not imagine, these young Women drew the Water themselves, but had Servants
to attend them and obey their Orders.

Ver. 17. And the Shepherds came and drove them away.] Some rude and idle
Shepherds would have made use of the Water, which they had drawn; and had the
benefit of their pains, without any labor of their own. This looks like an
Argument that their Father was not a Prince, for then, one would think, these
Shepherds should not have dared to contest with them. But it is as much an
Argument that he was not a Priest; for they were great Men also in those days.
And it seems probable to me, that these were the Shepherds of some other
greater Prince, in those Countries; who made thus bold with Jethro's Daughters
and their Servants. For one cannot think, as I said, that they alone looked
after his Flock, but were Overseers of those that did, like Rebekkah and
Rachel. See Genesis XXIX. 9.

But Moses stood up and helped them, etc.] This was an act (as Maimonides
suggests) of the same Heroic Spirit, mentioned before, Ver. 12. which still
rested on him, and moved him here, as it had done in Egypt. And thus Philo also
represents him as (...), transported by such an Enthusiasm when he spoke to the
Shepherds, that it after frighted them from their attempt. Though it is not
certain that he overcame them by Persuasions, but the whole Discourse seems
rather to imply that he forced them to desist: which he could not do alone, but
at the head of those Servants that belonged to these young Women: and it is not
improbable he had some Servants of his own, who attended him in his Flight.
Certain it is, that the Arabian's great Employment was feeding of Cattle, as
Philo there notes, ( L. I. de Vita Moses, (...), etc.) and that not only Men,
but Women, young Men and Virgins looked after them; and not those only of the
meaner sort, (...), but they that were of Noble Families.

Ver. 18. And when they came to Revel their Father. He is thought to be the
same with Jethro, III. 1. or was Jethro's Father; and so the Grandfather of
these young Women: which Drusius thinks most probable, Misaell. Centur. 2. c.
69.

He said, How is it you are come so soon to day?]. It seems Moses not only
valiantly defended and protected them; but so vigorously assisted them also in
all their Business, that they dispatched it sooner than they were wont to do.

Ver. 19. And they said, An Egyytian]. So they took Moses to be by his Speech
and his Habit; and perhaps he told them he came out of that Country.

Delivered us out of the hand of the Shepherds.] This justifies what I said (
Ver. 17.) that these Shepherd's belonged to some other Prince in those parts,
who were wont, it seems, to infest those that were weaker; and that Moses by
his extraordinary Courage drove them away.

And also drew water enough for us, etc.] They had drawn Water before ( ver.
16.) which the Shepherds took from them: and he now did it with greater
Expedition, and in great Plenty.

Ver. 20. And he said unto his Daughters, Where is he?] This is a form of
chiding, as Philo observes, or upbraiding for their Ingratitude; as appears by
what follows.

Why is it that you have left the Man?] Suffered him to remain in the Field. Ye
ought (as Philo explains it) to have invited him to my House; and if he had
declined it, to have entreated and urged him to it.

Call him, that he may eat Bread.] Go back (as he goes on) with all speed, and
pray him to come and refresh himself; and receive my Thanks, which are due to
him. This shows Moses had done them some considerable Service.

Ver. 21. And Moses was content to dwell with the Man.] After some Conversation
with him, Raguel liked Moses so well, that he offered him such terms as he
accepted, and became one of his Domestics.

And he gave Moses Zipporah his Daughter.] The Divine Writers do not relate all
the passages of a Story (as other Authors delight to do) but only the most
material. Therefore we are to suppose a great many things to have preceded
this: which was not accomplished presently after he was entertained into
Reuel's House, but after he had had much Experience of Moses his other Virtues,
as well as of his Valor. Though the Observation of Philo here is not to be
slighted, that (...) Men of a great Genius quickly show themselves, and are not
made known by length of time. And therefore, he thinks, that Revel being struck
first with admiration of his goodly Aspect, and then of his wise Discourse,
immediately gave him the most beautiful of all his Daughters to be his Wife:
not staying to enquire of any body what he was, for his own most excellent
Qualities sufficiently recommended him to his Affection, L. I. de Vita Moses,
p. 611.

Ver. 22. And she bare him a Son, and he called his Name Gershom, etc.] This
word Gershom signifies a desolate Stranger; which he made the Name of this
Child, because he was born, not only in a Foreign Country, remote from his own
People; but in a place where he had nothing but what he earned by his Labor.
For it is not to be thought, that in an hasty Flight he could bring any great
matter with him into Midian. Either this Son was born long after his Marriage,
or he did not marry till he had been long in this Country: For when he left it,
after 40 years stay in it, his Children were but young, as appears from IV. 20.

Ver. 23. And it came to pass, in process of time.] After many days (as it is
in the Hebrew) i. e. years: for this King reigned a long time. See Ver. 15.

The King of Egypt died.] That King from whom Moses fled, viz. Orus. After whom
Eusebius makes Acenceres to have reigned; and after him Achoris: both which
died before Moses returned into Egypt.

And the Children of Israel sighed by reason of the Bondage.] Their cruel
Servitude did not end with the Life of Orus; but the new King, who succeeded
him, was so far from giving them any ease, that he laid more heavy Burdens upon
them.

And they cried.] This signifies they lay under the most grievous Oppression;
which grew intolerable.

And their cry came up unto God.] A Cry that comes up unto God, signifies in
the Holy Language, the loudest and sorest Cry. See XIX Genesis 13.

By reason of the Bondage.] This may be referred both to their Cry, and its
coming up to God: who resolved speedily to free them from such unsupportable
Burdens.

Ver. 24. And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his Covenant, etc.]
There are four different words in these two last Verses (viz. heard; remembered;
looked upon them; had respect unto them) which, every one of them, signify
God's kind intentions toward them; but seem also to me to denote that the
Divine Providence determined to proceed gradually in the Deliverance of the
Children of Israel from their cruel Servitude. For when he says, God heard
their groaning; the meaning is, he favorably condescended to grant their
Petition; which was the first step to their Deliverance. And then,

He remembered his Covenant with Abraham, etc.] This gives the Reason of it,
because he was mindful of his ancient Promises to their Forefathers; which was
a further assurance of his Favor. And then he

Looked upon them.] i. e. Took notice of their Affliction and hard Labor (as
Maimonides explains it, More Nev. p. 1. c. 48.) which was another Motive to
relieve them. And in the last place,

God had respect to them.] Which imports that he determined to have mercy upon
them (and that includes all Blessings in it) For so this Phrase to respect
another signifies, as Bochartus has shown from many instances, particularly
XXV Psalm. 12. LXVI Isa. 2. Hierozoic. p. 1. L. II. c. 49.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. NOW Moses kept the Flock.] So Moses was taken from the Sheepfold (as
David was in after times) to be the Ruler of God's People, LXXVII Psalm. 70. For
as hunting of wild Beasts (says Philo) is proper to Men of a Martial Genius,
and fits Men to be Captains and Generals of Armies; so the feeding of Sheep is
(...), etc. the best Exercise and Preparation for a Kingdom, and the gentle
Government of Mankind. Clemens Alexandrinus has the same Notion, and the same
words, L. I. Strom. p. 345. God's Power also herein appeared the more
wonderful, that he delivered his People from the Egyptian Tyranny, by one that
was contemptible, or rather abominable to that Nation, viz. a Keeper of Sheep.

Of Jethro.] It is most likely that Revel mentioned in the foregoing Chapter,
Ver. 18. was now dead; to whom Jethro his Son succeeded in that Principality
where he Ruled: for it was now Forty years since Moses came first into Midian.

His Father in Law.] This shows that the Seven Daughters spoken of II. 16. were
the Children of Jethro and Revel their Grandfather: unless we will say, as a
great many do, that Jethro had two Names. Nay, they fancy he had three, being
called Hobab they think, IV Judge. 11. where Hobab is said to be the Father in
Law of Moses. But the word Son is there to be supplied (which in other places
is sometime to be understood) he seeming to be Jethro's Son, Brother to
Zipporah: And accordingly is said, X Numb. 29. to be Son of Raguel the
Midianite, i. e. of Jethro, as many understand it. See there.

And he led the Flock to the backside of the Desert.] Or as St. Hierom
understands it, ad interiora deserti, to the inner parts of the Desert (where
there was better Pasture, than in the place where he was before) to which he
was conducted, by the Providence of God, who intended here to reveal himself
more fully to him.

And came to the Mountain of God, even to Horeb.] Sheep delight to feed on
Mountains, as Bochart observes out of Theocritus and Virgil. Whence such
mountainous Places are often called in Homer (...), Sheep-walks; they being
wont to feed there, as Eustathius and Hesychius interpret it. See Hierozoic. p.
1. L. II. c. 46. And this is called the Mountain of God, because when Moses
wrote this Book there had been a Divine appearance upon Horeb; which St.
Stephen calls Sinai, VII Acts 30. For Horeb and Sinai seem to have been two
tops of one and the same Mountain: which it is plain by this was not far from
the Country of Midian. We understand also by St. Stephen's words, when this
fell out, viz. after he had dwelt Forty years in Midian: for so long, it is
certain, he continued there, VII Exodus 7. But how he employed all that time, we
are not told. No doubt, in something else than mere feeding Sheep. For, being
learned in all the Egyptian Wisdom, we may well think he both taught others,
and made also great improvements himself; in studying the Records of that, and
all other Neighboring Countries: and besides, received it is likely Divine
Revelations. There are those likewise, who think he now wrote the Book of Job,
to comfort the Israelites, by the example of his admirable Patience, under
their heavy Oppressions in Egypt: and the Book of Genesis also; that they might
the better understand what Promises had been made to their Noble Ancestors,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and that the Time drew near when they would be
fulfilled.

It is noted by Ludovicus Capellus in his Chronolog. Sacra, that the Number
Forty was much observed in the Administrations of Divine Providence: Moses
being XL years old when he fled into Midian, and staying there another XL
years, and then leaving the World in the end of the next XL years of his Age.
It was so many years before the Israelites got to Canaan, after they were
delivered out of Egypt. Forty days Moses continued with God in the Mount; both
the first and second time of his going up thither. So many days the Spies were
in searching out the Land: and the Israelites had just so many Mansions in the
Wilderness. Their first Judge governed just XL. years; and the next twice as
many. Deborah, Barak, Gideon, Eli all judged XL years: and so long David
reigned.

Ver. 2. And the Angel of the LORD appeared to him.] So St. Stephen also, VII
Acts 30. By which some understand the Eternal WORD, the Second Person in the
Blessed Trinity. But I think he is not called simply an Angel any where, but
with some addition, as the Angel of the Covenant: for it would be a dangerous
insinuation, that he was but a mere Creature. Yet I believe he is not here to
be excluded: for I take this to have been the Appearance of the SCHECHINAH;
which comprehended both the LORD himself, and the Angels that attended him, as
his Ministers. One of which now appeared so gloriously, that he showed God to
be present: and accordingly we find, in the following words, that he himself
spoke to Moses. And thus the LORD is said to have sent his Angel, when they
cried to him, and brought them out of Egypt, XX Numb. 16. Which Angel is called
Michael by Menachem; and the same which they also call Goel, who redeemed Jacob
from all evil, XLVIII Genesis 16.

In a flame of sire.] The Glory of the LORD (as the SCHECHINAH is frequently
called) appeared in a flaming manner like fire: exceeding bright, and with an
amazed splendour. So it appeared, though not so bright, when the first Promise
was made of their Deliverance, XV Genesis 17, 18.

Out of the midst of a Bush.] To show, say the Jews, in Pirke Eliezer, Cap. XL.
that God was present with them, in their great Affliction and Tribulation:
which was represented by this Bush of Thorns or Briers (for so the Hebrew word
signifies, such a Bush as pricks those that touch it) or, as the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, LXIII. 9. in all their affliction he was afflicted. And by his
Providence ordered things so, that their Affliction did not consume them, but
rather multiplied and increased them; for, as it there follows, the Angel of
his presence saved them. And thus Eusebius tells us (in the latter end of L. V.
Demonstr. Evang. c. 13.) some Christians understood it, (...), etc.

This Fire also in the Bush might be intended to show, that God would there
meet with the Israelites, and give them his Law in Fire and Lightning; and yet
not consume them. For this is the place where God, after they came out of
Egypt, delivered the Law to them: which thence was called Sinai (says the
forenamed Author in Pirke Elieser) from this Bush; which in Hebrew is Seen,
and signifies in Arabic a Thorn-bush: whereas before this it was called Horeb,
from its dryness and barrenness, as that word imports.

And behold the Bush burnt with sire, and the Bush was not consumed.] The
Heathens had either read, or heard of this wonder, as appears by Artapanus who
mentions it (in Eusebius, L. IX. Praepar. Evang. c. 27.) but he disguises it
and misreports it; saying it was a Fire which suddenly broke forth out of the
Earth, and flamed, (...), when there was no Matter, nor any kind of Wood in the
place to feed it. But in the next Chapter but one an ancient Tragaedian reports
it exactly, saying just as Moses does here, That the Bush burnt in a great
fire, and yet remained entire and green in the slame, which he calls (...), the
greatest Miracle. The meaning of which I have already explained, in the
foregoing Observation. There is a Story something like this in Dion Prusaeus,
Orat. XXXVI. where he says the Persians relate concerning Zoroaster, that the
Love of Wisdom and Virtue leading him to a Solitary Life, separate from
Company, upon a Mountain, he found it one day all in a flame, shining with
Celestial Fire: out of the midst of which he came without any harm, and
instituted certain Sacrifices to God, who then he made account appeared to him.
Which Joh. Henricus Vrsinus a good while ago endeavored to prove, was nothing
else but a corruption of this Apparition to Moses. And Huetius lately (in his
Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. Cap. V.) had made such a laborious comparison
between what is said of Moses and of Zoroaster, as is sufficient to make it
probable the ancient Persians derived their Religion from these Books of Moses.

Ver. 3. And Moses said, I will now turn aside.] It seems this glorious
Appearance, was not directly before him, but on one side of him, and some
distance from him.

And see this great sight.] This wonderful Appearance; or, as Philo translates
it, (...), this most stupendous and astonishing Sight or Vision.

Why the bush is not burnt.] A Fire which did not burn (that is, consume what
it laid hold on) was very amazing. Yet the Gentiles did not think such things
incredible, as appears out of Seneca in his Thyeste, where he speaks of a
Forest which appeared all on a flame, without fire: and out of Lucan, and
diverse other Authors, among the Pagans, produced by the Learned Huetius in his
Questiones Alnetanae, L. II. Cap. XII. n. 10.

Ver. 4. And when the LORD saw that he turned aside, etc.] It is plain by this,
that the LORD himself was here present: his Angels being but Attendants, as I
said, upon his Majesty. See XXII Genesis 11.15.

God called unto him out of the midst of the Bush.] He now calls him God, whom
just before he called LORD. Both which are sometimes put together, as
comprehending all the Divine Attributes. Maimonides, who makes Eleven Degrees
of Prophecy (or Divine Communications to Men) justly thinks this the very
highest of all, and it was peculiar to Moses, to hear God himself speaking to
him in a Vision, when he was entirely awake.

And said, Moses, Moses.] He repeats his Name, to excite his attention. And
some take it for a token of Familiarity. See XLVI Genesis 2. This is called by
Gregor. Nyssen ( de Vita Mosis, p. 172.) (...), etc. a Voice of that Light, or
Splendor: i. e. of the Divine Majesty which appeared to him.

And he said, here am I.] A common expression of readiness to hearken and to
obey.

Ver. 5. And he said, draw not nigh hither.] He commands him to keep his
distance, and not to approach nearer to him. This, and what follows, plainly
demonstrate what I said before, that this was an Appearance of the SCHECHINAH,
or Divine Majesty; to whom he could not pay too great a Reverence.

Put off thy shoes from off thy feet.] Many frivolous Reasons have been given
of this Precept, as may be seen in Braunius, L. I. c. 3. de Vestitu Sacerd.
Hebr. But the plain Reason is immediately added in the Text, because the place
where he stood was holy: into which it was irreverend to enter with their Shoes
on; because thereby it might be defiled with the dirt that adhered to them.
Certain it is, that in the Temple afterward, the Priests officiated barefoot;
and all the Eastern People came into their Holy Places in the same manner:
which Justin Martyr thinks they learnt from this Example of Moses. But Mr.
Mede's Opinion seems truer, That Moses did not give the first beginning to this
Rite; but it was derived from the Patriarchs before him, and transmitted to
future Times from that ancient general Tradition. For we find no Command in the
Law of Moses, for the Priests performing the Service of the Tabernacle without
Shoes; but it is certain they did so, from immemorial Custom: and so do the
Mahometans and other Nations at this day. See Mr. Mede, Book II. p. 442, etc.
and p. 516. And Huetius in his Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. Cap. XI. Sect. 2.

The place whereon thou stand is holy ground.] It was made holy by the
special Presence of God, which was now there, who is most holy, and makes every
thing relating unto him to be holy also. For thus the Tabernacle, the Temple,
and the Utensils thereof, with all things destined to the Divine Service, were
called holy.

Ver. 6. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy Father.] i. e. Of Amram: who it
seems was a very pious Man.

And the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.] Who were so
dear to him, that he made a Covenant with every one of them (which is the
reason he is distinctly called the God of each of them) as Maimonides observes,
More Nev. P. III. c. 51. from XXVI Lev. 42. And this Covenant was that he would
be their God after a peculiar manner. For otherwise, he was the God of Noah,
and of all the holy Patriarchs before him: but he is called the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob for a peculiar reason, because of the Promise made to these
three of the blessed Seed which should spring from them; in opposition to the
Pretensions of other Neighboring People; who (as the Learned Dr. Alix
observes) were their Rivals in that Hope. These words being as much as if he
had said, the God of Abraham, and not of Lot, as the Ammonites and Moabites
pretended: the God of Isaac, and not of Ishmael, as his Posterity pretended:
the God of Jacob, and not of Esau, as the Edomites boasted.

And Moses hid his face.] In token of Humility, Submission and Reverence. So
Elijah did in after times, 1 Kings XIX. 12. Nay, the Angels cover their faces
in the presence of God, VI Isa. 2.

For he was afraid to look upon God.] The Splendor of the Divine Majesty was
so great, that it dazzled his Eyes; and he was not able to behold it. For though
he stirred not a step further, after God prohibited him to come nearer, yet we
may suppose him to be now nearer to it, than he was at the first, ( Ver. 3.)
and it is Glory also was much increased.

Ver. 7. And the LORD said, I have surely seen the affliction, etc.] To see
signifies more than to observe and take notice; including in it such
Resolutions of Divine Providence, as would certainly produce their Deliverance.
For the doubling of the Expression ( seeing I have seen, as it is in the
Hebrew) denotes there was no doubt of it.

And have heard their cry.] Both this and the next Phrase, know their sorrows,
signify more than the simple words hear and know import, viz. such a regard to
their miserable Condition, as moved him to order speedy Relief to be given them.

Ver. 8. And I am come down to deliver them.] I now appear unto thee, for that
purpose.

Out of the hand of the Egyptians.] From their tyrannical Power.

And to bring them up out of that Land.] Where they are Strangers, and used as
Slaves.

Into a good Land.] A fruitful Country of their own.

And a large.] Where they shall not be pent up so as they are in Goshen. And if
it were considered according to the Extent of the Original Promise, it was
large and spacious indeed, even from the River of Egypt unto Euphrates, XV.
Genesis 18.

Unto a Land flowing with Milk and Honey.] By which Phrase the Poets express
the greatest Plenty; as Bochart shows out of Euripides, Horace, Ovid, etc.
Hierozoick. P. II. L. IV. c. 12. For abundance of Milk and Honey argue a
Country to be well watered, fruitful, full of fair Pastures and Flowers: from
whence the Flocks may fill their Duggs with Milk, and the Bees their Cells with
Honey. Aelian L. III. de Hist. Animal. c. 35. says, the Goats of Syria (which
includes this Country) afford such plenty of Milk, as is in no other Country.

Unto the place of the Canaanites, etc.] See concerning all these People here
mentioned, XV Genesis 19, etc.

Ver. 9. Now therefore behold, the Cry of the Children of Israel is come up to
me, etc.] This was said before, Ver. 7. but here repeated, as a reason of the
Commission he intended immediately to give to Moses, to go and Deliver them.

Ver. 10. Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, etc.] Leave
thy Flock; for I have another more weighty Business, wherein I will employ
thee. For thou shall go with my Authority to Pharaoh; and command him not only
to Release my People out of their Servitude, but to let them go also out of
Egypt. He had called them by the Name of his People, Ver. 7. and now mentions
it again, to encourage their hope, that he would take care of his own.

What Pharaoh this was (it being a common Name to all the Egyptian Kings) is
very much disputed. The common opinion is, that after Orus (in whose time Moses
sled into Midian, Acenceres (or Acherres) reigned Twelve years; and after him
Achoris reigned Seven years more; and then succeeded Cenchres, the worst of
them all, to whom Moses was now sent. But Clemens Alexandrinus tells us that
Apion (a great Enemy of the Jews, and who wrote against them) mentioning their
going out of Egypt (in his fourth Book of his History of Egypt) says, it was
in the the reign of Amosis. For which he quotes Ptolomaeus Mendesius an
Egyptian Priest, who wrote three Books about their Affairs, in which he says,
(...), L. I. Stromat. p. 320. But Tacitus calls him Bocchoris, or as some read
it, Occoris, L. V. Hist. c. 3.

That thou may bring forth my People, etc.] From this time we are to
consider God as the King of this People: Not in general only, as he is Lord of
the whole World; but in a proper and peculiar manner. For whatsoever Authority
or Power of Jurisdiction the Kings of other Nations did exercise over their
Subjects (as Power of Life and Death, of making Laws and Leagues, etc.) the
same Prerogative did the Lord of Heaven and Earth reserve to himself alone,
over the Children of Israel. Upon which ground, as Dr. Jackson well observes,
Moses was delegated to be his Ambassador to the King of Egypt; and constituted
(it appears by the whole Story) his Deputy or Viceroy over Israel.

Ver. 11. And Moses said unto God, who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh,
etc.] He modestly declines the Service, considering how mean a Person he was,
in comparison with Pharaoh; and how unable to do any thing for the Israelites.
He had felt some extraordinary motion in himself, Forty years ago; which he
took to be an Indication, that God would use him as an Instrument of their
Deliverance, (See Chap. II. v. 11, 12.) but at that time he was a far greater
Man than now; and had more interest at Court: the Princess who adopted him for
her Son being then perhaps alive, or having lest him what made him very
considerable. In short, he was then the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; but now a
poor Shepherd.

Ver. 12. And he said, Certainly I will be with thee.] In answer to his
Objection, God bids him depend on this; that he would preserve him by a special
Providence, from being hurt by Pharaoh. So Maimonides shows this Phrase (I will
be with thee) signifies in Scripture, More Nev. P. III. c. 18. And the
considence which God wrought in him of this, gave him Courage and Resolution:
which is also denoted by this Phrase, as he shows, P. II. c. 38. For all the
Prophets were endued with an extraordinary Fortitude and Magnanimity; which was
in Moses above all the rest: he encountering a great King, and all his Court
and People, barely with a Staff in his hand.

And this shall be a Token to thee that I have sent thee; when thou have
brought forth the People out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this Mountain.]
This could not be a Token to him now, but was afterward: when God by his Power
brought them to this very place, to worship him, according to this Promise,
upon this Mountain. In the mean time, there were many other Tokens God gave him
(as we find in this History) which were all confirmed by this at last.

Ver. 13. And they shall say unto me, What is his Name? What shall I say unto
them?] This does not argue that they knew not what the Name of their God was;
for they and their Fathers had been long acquainted with him: and they cried
unto him, and he heard them (II. 23, 24.) But Moses being the first that ever
spoke to Men in the Name of God, (none of the Patriarchs, either before the
Flood or after it, having said any such words as these, God has sent me to
you: the Lord commands me to bid you do so or so, as Maimon. observes in
several places of his More Nevoch. P. I. c. 63. P. II. c. 39.) is was natural
for the Israelites to ask him by what Name, or peculiar Attribute, God had made
himself known unto him, so as to authorize him to speak to them, as never any
Man before did. He had spoken unto Noah and unto Abraham, etc. but it was only
for their own Instruction; He never bid them deliver any Message unto others:
and yet it is observable, that upon particular occasions, he still made himself
known to them by different Names or Titles. As he says to Abraham, XV Genesis 7.
I am Jehovah, who brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees. But XVII. 1. he
says, I am Elshaddai. And to Isaac he says, I am the God of thy Father
Abraham, XXVI. 24. To Jacob he adds, I am the LORD God of thy Father Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, XXVIII. 13. And after this, I am the God of Bethel, XXXI.
13. No wonder then that Moses should think the People would expect, upon so
great an occasion, when he came to them as an Ambassador from Heaven, that the
God of their Fathers should speak to them in a New Style, beyond all that had
been known in former days.

Ver. 14. And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM.] That is, says Maimonides,
in the place abovenamed; He that necessarily Exists. He who so is, that he
must needs be. Or as some translate it, I will be what I will be; i. e. the
Eternal Immutable Being, (so Elmacinus interprets it, the Eternal that never
dies) who am faithful to my Promises; and will be to you, what I told your
Fathers I would be. Whatsoever I said in the days of Abraham, concerning the
giving the Land of Canaan, I will certainly perform; for I change not.

Thus shall thou say to the Children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.]
The former words were a Declaration of God's Nature to Moses; and in these he
bids him, in brief, only say to the Israelites that he was sent by him Who is.
That is (as was said before) necessarily Exists: always was, and ever will be.
Who alters not; but by whatsoever Name he makes himself known, is still the
very same God. Which was a Name not unknown to the Gentiles, as one would think
by the word EI; which was inscribed in the front of the Delphick Temple (as
Plutarch tells us) and was nothing else but the contraction of EIMI, which
signifies, I AM. Or if we take EI to be an entire word (as it is commonly
thought) signifying thou art, Ammonius rightly understood it to be (...), (as
Plutarch reports his word, in a Treatise on this Subject) the most absolutely
perfect Name and Compellation of God. For God, says he, in the other
Inscription on the Temple, speaks to us who approach him, saying to every one
KNOW THY SELF: and we are taught to answer to him again, in the words of this
Inscription, THOU ART: ascribing to him (...), etc. that true, undoubted, and
only Appellation which belongs to him alone. For he only is; we are not, etc.
Thus he declares this word, to express most perfectly the Divine Essence; which
is distinguished hereby from all false Gods. See Eusebius, L. XI. Praep. Evang.
c. 11. and in the two foregoing Chapters; where he takes a deal of pains to
show that Plato borrowed this Notion of (...), a Being that is always, but had
no beginning, from these words of Moses. And Numenius a Pythagoraean speaks it
more plainly, when he says, (...), that which is; is eternal and steadfast,
always the very same without variation. And no wonder these Men, if they met
with this Passage in Moses, were highly pleased with it; for St. Hilary himself
tells us, that he lighting upon these words (as he was musing about God and
Religion) before he was a Christian, was struck with admiration: there being
Nothing so proper to God as to be. And therefore he thought it worthy of God,
to say of himself, I AM THAT I AM, and HE THAT IS (so he translates the last
words) has sent me unto you; L. I. de Trinitate.

Ver. 15. And said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall thou say, etc.] For a
further Explication of what he had now said, and a further Satisfaction of
their Minds.

The LORD God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, etc.] The Name JEHOVAH (as
we pronounce it) seems to be in sense the same with Ehjeh, before mentioned.
Which, as it declares his Nature, so the word God added to it, expresses his
Favor, Care and Providence. And consequently he bids Moses tell the Children
of Israel, that He who is the Eternal, was the God of their Fathers, of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: To whom he had made many Promises that he would be
gracious to their Posterity. This was sufficient for them to know of him.

This is my Name for ever, and this is my Memorial, etc.] Some refer the first
words (this is my Name) unto the foregoing Verse, I AM: and the next, (this is
my Memorial) to those which immediately preceed, the LORD God of your Fathers:
which in truth include the whole, Jehovah being the same with I am. And the
meaning is, I will be for ever remembered, celebrated, praised and invoked, by
the Name of the LORD God of your Fathers, etc.

Ver. 16. Go, and gather the Elders of Israel together.] The word Elders in
these Books, sometime signify the Men of the great Sanhedrin, as they spoke in
after times (or the Judges in the Highest Court) XXI Deuteronomy. 2, etc. Sometimes
the Judges in the Lower Courts, XIX Deuteronomy. 12. XXII. 15. Sometimes it only
signifies the Heads of the Tribes, as here in this place: For now there were no
such Courts of Judicature constituted. See Seldom. Vxor. Hebr. L. I. Cap. XV.
Some indeed (particularly Corn. Bertram) think it reasonable to suppose that
the Israelites had Judges among them, all the time they dwelt in Egypt, though
not mentioned in Scripture; as they had, no doubt, a Form of Religion, though
we read nothing of it. And Moses, he thinks, is here ordered to send for these,
who were their Rulers, and administered Public Affairs among them. But there is
this Argument against it, that after this time, when Moses had brought them out
of Egypt, there were no such Judges among them, but Moses (as we find XVIII
Exodus.) judged all himself, to his exceeding great trouble. And therefore by
Elders we are here to understand only the Wisest and gravest Men of the Nation,
who were in greatest esteem among them (as Mr. Seldom afterward speaks, L. I.
de Synedr. Cap. XV. p. 523, etc.) or, as was said before, the Heads of their
Tribes. The famous H. Grotius confirms this, by a nice Observation, that both
here and Ver. 18. they are barely called Zikne, not Hazikne, because there was
not as yet, certum Collegium, sed sola qualitas denotatur (as he speaks L. de
Imp. Sum. Potest, circa Sacra, Cap. XI. n. 15.) a certain College or Society
of them, but their quality only is denoted. And no doubt the word always
signified Men of Dignity, or chief Rank among others, both among the
Israelites, and among the Egyptians; as I have observed on XXIV Genesis 2. L. 6.

And say unto them, The Lord God of your Fathers, etc.] See this explained,
Ver. 6.

Has appeared unto me.] Ver. 2, 4.

Saying, surely I have visited you.] So Joseph, when he died, assured them God
would do, L Genesis 24. where I observed to visit them, was to bring them out of
Egypt. And so it signifies here, as is evident from what God said to Moses when
he appeared to him, v. 8. I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the
Egyptians. Which was not yet actually done, but so absolutely decreed in the
Mind of God, that he might say he had already done it. Or the word Pakad may be
translated here, as it is elsewhere, I have remembered you, (1 Samuel XV. 2.) that
is, so as to resolve to deliver them. And then the next words may depend on
this,

And that which is done to you in Egypt.] For the word Seen is not in the
Original. But either way, it relates to what God says to Moses, Ver. 7, 9.

Ver. 17. And I have said.] Determined, or resolved.

I will bring you out of the affliction of Egypt, into the Land of the
Canaanites, etc.] See v. 9.

Ver. 18 And they shall hearken to thy voice.] A great encouragement to carry
this Message to the Elders of Israel: which God promises to incline their
hearts to receive and obey.

The LORD God of the Hebrews has met with us.] We have received a special
Command from the Eternal God, whom we, and our Forefathers, worship: who has
appeared to us.

And now let us go (we beseech thee) three days journey into the Wilderness.
They intended to go quite away; but at first are directed to demand only to go
as far as Mount Sinai: which was but three days Journey from Egypt, if they
went the nearest way to it. For this they were humble Petitioners; which is
employed in those words, We beseech thee.

That we may Sacrifice to the LORD our God.] When they delivered this Message
to Pharaoh ( V. 1.) they call it holding a Feast to him: which was to be made
upon the Sacrifices that they offered. For Ver. 3. of that Chapter, they speak
in the same Phrase, which is used here.

Ver. 19. And I am sure the King of Egypt will not let you go.] God understood
before hand the hardness of his heart; and that he would not yield; no not to
let them depart for three days, much less for altogether.

No not by a strong hand.] In the Margin, But by a strong hand; i. e. by
cutting off all the Firstborn in the Country: till which, he knew Pharaoh would
be obstinate.

Ver. 20. And I will stretch out my hand.] As the hand of God signifies his
Power, so the stretching it out, seems to signify the exciting of that Power
in mighty Deeds.

Smite Egypt with all my wonders.] The Hebrew word for wonders, comes from a
Root, which imports something singular, and not common. Such were all the
Plagues God sent upon Egypt, which made them the more wonderful.

After that he will let you go.] They grew so terrible, at last, that he was
afraid the next stroke would be upon his own Person: which made him content to
dismiss them.

Ver. 21. And I will give this People favor in the sight of the Egyptians,
etc.]. Dispose their hearts to be kind to them, so that they should readily
furnish them, with any thing they desired.

Ver. 22. But every Woman shall borrow.] The word Shaal is of a doubtful
meaning: for it signifying, in general, to ask or to pray, one may pray
another, either to give or to lend. And if the Israelites asked their Neighbors
to bestow such things upon them, as are here mentioned; and they out of a
desire to be rid of them, or hoping speedily to recover their Goods, granted
their Requests; no wrong was done to them. And if they borrowed them of the
Egyptians, it was by the Authority of God, whose the World is and the fullness
thereof: and who does no Man any wrong when he is pleased to transfer what he
enjoys, unto another. See more XI. 2. XII. 35.

Of her Neighbor and of her that sojourneth in her House.] By this it appears
that the Egyptians were intermixed with the Hebrews, in the Land of Goshen: and
so might the more easily go along with them when they left Egypt; as many of
them did, XII. 38.

Jewels of Silver, etc.] Rather, Vessels of Silver, etc. Which were of greater
use to them than Jewels; unless they pretended to deck up themselves, for the
Feast they were to keep. See more XI. 2. XII. 36.

And ye shall spoil the Egyptians.] Not by Rapine or Stealth, but by their own
Consent.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. BUT behold they will not believe me, nor hearken to my voice, etc.]
This seems directly to contradict what God had said unto him, III. 18. They
shall hearken to thy voice. Which Maimonides endeavors to reconcile, by
saying, that Moses was satisfied they would believe what he told them
concerning the Name of God who spoke to him; but not believe, without further
proof, that he was sent by him. P. I. More Nevoch. c. 63. But the plainest
Answer is, that God did not mean they would hearken to Moses immediately: but
that he would so convince them by undeniable signs and tokens, that they should
give credit to him, when he said he came from God to them: Such signs he now
asks, and God grants; that they might believe the LORD appeared to him, and
gave him Commission to deliver them.

Ver. 2. And the LORD said unto him, What is that in thy hand?] He asks this
question to make way for what follows; and to move his attention to it.

And he said, a Rod.] His Shepherd's Staff, it is most likely. For he takes
occasion from what was in his Hand to confirm his Faith; and he was now feeding
his Father in Law's Sheep, when God appeared unto him. The Jews have a world of
fabulous Stuff about this Rod; not worth the remembering.

Ver. 3. And he said, Cast it on the ground, etc.] As he was to do when he came
before Pharaoh (VII. 10.) that it might not be thought Moses his Hand
contributed any thing to the Change; but it might appear to be wrought by the
Power of God.

And it became a Serpent.] (...), (as Philo speaks) immediately it was
inlivened and crawled about. The word Nachash comprehends all sorts of
Serpents; and R. Eliezer takes it to have been a flying Serpent: but our Doctor
Lightfoot rather thinks it was a Crocodile: for which there is some reason. For
that which is here called Nachash (which most think signifies, a common Snake,
or Serpent) when he threw down his Staff before Pharaoh (VII. 10.) is called
Tannin: which signifies a Serpent of the largest Dimensions ((...), Philo here
calls it) and as I proved upon I Genesis 21. includes in it Crocodiles, which
Isaiah calls the crooked Serpent, XXVII. 1. Unto whose devouring Jaws Pharaoh
had exposed the Hebrew Infants, when he commanded them to be cast into the
River Nile, (I. 22.) which abounded with Crocodiles.

And Moses fled from before it.] It being a very frightful sight; enough to
dismay the most courageous Man on Earth: as God himself describes the Crocodile
in the Book of Job, XLI. 14, 25. His Teeth are terrible round about. When he
raises up himself the Mighty are asraid.

Ver. 4. And the LORD said unto Moses, put forth thy hand and take it by the
tail, etc.] This shows Moses his Faith to have been great, which overcame his
Fear. Most think this to have been an apt Representation of the Condition of
the Israelites in Egypt; and of their Deliverance there. R. Eliezer in his
Pirke, Cap. XL. has hinted the best Explication of it, if it have any such
meaning, when he says; As a Serpent bites and kills those on whom it seizes,
so did Pharaoh and his People bite and kill the Israelites: Or rather he should
have said; So shall the Egyptians be afflicted and tormented by the Rod which
Moses carries in his hand.

Ver. 5. That they may believe, that the LORD God of their Fathers, etc.] The
meaning is; Thou shall do thus before them, if they doubt whether I have
appeared to thee (as he feared they would, v. 1.) to convince them of it.

Ver. 6. And the LORD said furthermore unto him; Put now thy hand into thy
bosom, etc.] He did not ask for a new sign; but the LORD was graciously pleased
to grant him a further Confirmation of his Faith; or rather, of the Faith of
the Israelites.

And he put his hand into his bosom, and when he took it out, behold it was
leprous as Snow.] It was a wonderful thing that out of the same place should
come both the Disease and the Cure (as we read in the next Verse, that by
putting his hand into his bosom again, it became sound) and it was the greater
wonder, because the Leprosy was a Disease, that was very hard to be cured. R.
Elieser, in the place forenamed, does not give so good a reason for this sign,
as for the former: though it is not a bad one. For, he making a Question, Why
God should give them a sign by an unclean thing, and not by a clean, makes this
Answer to it; Because as a Leper is unclean, and makes others so, in like
manner Pharaoh and the impure Egyptians had defiled the Israelites: but God
showed by Moses's drawing his hand out of his bosom again pure and clean, that
he would deliver and purge the Israelites from the silthiness of the Egyptians.
I should think rather, that the Leprosy represented God's smiting the Egytians
with his Plagues; and the Cure of it, God's removal of those Plagues at Moses
his Prayer. But there is no end of such Conceits. Therefore I shall rarather
observe, that God commanding him to work all these wonders before Pharaoh, (
ver. 21.) it is very probable, this gave occasion to the fabulous Story which
was invented in future Ages; that Moses was a Leper, and the Israelites
infected with that, and other scabby Diseases. For so Josephus tells us ( L. I.
contra Apion.) the Tale was told in Manetho's History, and thence descended
unto others, that Moses was driven out of the Country, (...), (See Justin L.
XXXV. c. 2. Tacitus L. V. Histor. c. 3.) because he had the Leprosy. Which as
Manetho, perhaps, did not maliciously devise out of his own head, so those
Historians from whom he borrowed his Work, might have but an imperfect
Tradition of the Truth, derived from this Passage of Moses appearing with a
leprous Hand before Pharaoh: which was presently noised about the Country,
without the other part, of his being immediately cured. And thus Helladius
Besantinus, an Egyptian Writer in his Chresto-Mathia mentions one who said
Moses was called (...), because his Body (...), was marked with white leprous
spots. And unto this lie he calls Philo to be a Witness. The very same is
affirmed by Philemaeus Hephaestionis, as J. Meursius observes in his Notes upon
the forenamed Author.

Ver. 7. And he plucked it out of his bosom, and behold it was turned again as
his other flesh.] A manifest token (as Con. Pellicanus rightly takes it) that
God could, with as much ease, restore his oppressed People to perfect liberty.

Ver. 8. And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, nor hearken
to the voice of the first sign.] Here he gives the reason, why he was pleased
to add another sign to the former; that he might overcome the incredulity,
which he foresaw would be in many of them.

That they will believe the voice of the latter sign.] Yield their consent to
that which is plainly taught them by both these signs, viz. that God had
appeared to him, and ordered him to say what he did. And he says they would
believe; because it was rational to suppose they would: though he likewise
supposes in the next Verse, some might still remain incredulous; and therefore
he adds another.

Ver. 9. Thou shall take of the Water of the River, and pour it upon the dry
Land; and the Water shall become Blood.] This sign was not wrought now, when
God talked with him, as the two former were: for he was in the Desert, far from
the River here spoken of, and near no River at all. Therefore, in case the
Israelites did not believe upon the sight of the two former signs, this is
ordered to be wrought, when he came into Egypt, for their Conviction; by taking
the Water of Nilus, and turning it into Blood. Which might be well looked upon
as an Indication that God was able to spoil that Water, which was the great
Instrument of the fertility of that Country, and make their Land barren. And
also put them in mind that the cry of the innocent Blood of their Infants,
which had been drowned in that River, was come up to God.

There was a necessity that Moses should be instructed with all these Powers,
because with an unusual Commission: which would not have been credited, if he
had not brought such extraordinary proof of it. All the Prophets after him did
not work Miracles, which were necessary only when some great Change was to be
made in the World; as there was now at their bringing out of Egypt. After which
they were to be put into a new form and order, by a body of peculiar Laws, both
Civil and Religious: which when they were notoriously violated, God was pleased
by such wonders as Moses wrought, to turn their hearts back again; as he did in
the days of Elijah, 1 Kings XVIII. 37.

Ver. 10. And Moses said unto the LORD, O my Lord.] This is a Form of Speech,
whereby he declines this great Employment; and desires to be excused. The
Reason of which follows.

I am not Eloquent.] In the Hebrew, Am not a man of words; i. e. not a good
Speaker; or, not accustomed to make Speeches; or, as some take it, a Man of few
words: and therefore unfit to be sent to the Israelites; and much more to the
King of Egypt: to whom none but great Orators make Addresses. Clemens in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, makes this an Argument of Moses his Humility, and
says, he added these words (from I know not what Author) (...), I am a reek
from a Pot.

Neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken unto thy Servant.] This has
been always my Imperfection, that I could not speak fluently: nor do I find
that I am altered, since thou have been pleased to appear to me, and give me
this Commission.

But I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.] Cannot bring forth my words
readily; nor pronounce them well. The Jews think he had some impediment in his
Speech; so that he could not pronounce some Letters or Words exactly: at least,
not without such difficulty, that it was long before he could bring them forth.
But the LXX. understand these words slow of speech, as if he had but a weak,
small, or slender voice; speaking voce gracili and exili (as it may be
translated in Latin) which made him very unfit, he thought, to be an
Ambassador. And this does not disagree with what St. Stephen says, that he
was mighty in Words, as well as Deeds, VII Acts 22. for the sense of what he
spoke was great and weighty; though his pronunciation was not answerable to it.
Nor did his ill or weak pronunciation, nor his slowness in bringing forth his
words, hinder him from being an excellent Judge, and deciding Causes from
Morning to Night; as we read XVIII Exodus In the determination of which there
was no need of Oratory; but of a quick Apprehension, exact Judgment, and proper
Language; which he never wanted. One would think also, that by Use and Exercise
he grew prompt in the delivery of his Mind; for he made several very long
Speeches to the People: and especially an incomparable Discourse before his
departure out of the World, in the beginning of the Book of Deuteronomy. In the
latter end of which, his Song shows that he wanted no eloquent words, when he
pleased to use them.

Ver. 11. And the LORD said unto him, who has made man's mouth, etc.] Cannot I
who formed all the Organs of Speech, and made the rest of men's Senses, and when
I please deprive them of their use, take away this Impediment of which thou
complainest, and make thee to speak as roundly and gracefully, as any Man
living? The Author of the Life of Moses (who makes Pharaoh to have condemned
Moses for killing the Egyptian, etc. See II. 15.) fancies, that God puts him in
mind of his Deliverance at that time: As if he had said, Who taught thee to
make thy Defense, when thou wast Arraigned before Pharaoh? Who made the King
dumb that he could not urge and press thy Execution? Who made the Executioner
deaf that he could not hear the Sentence when pronounced? And who made them all
blind, that they could not see, when thou made thy escape? which is very
ingeniously invented; but we have no assurance of the truth of this Explication.

Ver. 12. Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth; and teach thee what
thou shall say.] Excuse thy self no longer; but obey the Commission I have
given thee: and I will both help thy Speech, and suggest to thy Mind what thou
shall deliver. This does not signify, as I take it, that if he had without
further disputing gone about his Business, God would have given him a better
Elocution: but that he would have made his words as powerful, as if they had
been pronounced, with the greatest advantage. Or the meaning may be, that he
should never want either words or thoughts, to instruct his Brother Aaron; whom
God always intended to send along with him.

Ver. 13. And he said, O my Lord.] The same form of Speech with that v. 10.

Send I pray thee by the hand of him, whom thou will send.] The Vulgar Latin
having translated the word SCHILO, XLIX Genesis 10. qui mittendus est, him that is
to be sent, it has inclined several great Men to think, that Moses here
desires God to send the MESSIAH. And several of the ancient Fathers ( Just.
Mart. Tertull. and S. Cyprian, etc.) were of this mind: as many later
Interpreters, both of the Roman and of the Reformed Church, have been.
Particularly Flacius Illyricus (in his Clavis upon the word MITTO) thus
explains this Passage, Manda id functionis, etc. commit this Office to the true
Messiah, or blessed Seed; whom thou have resolved to send: who will discharge
this Trust far better than I can do, etc. But there have been and are other
very considerable Persons, who think Moses means no more than this; Send a more
proper Person; one sitter for this Employment than I am. And the truth is, such
Speeches as these in Scripture, do not denote any certain Person or Thing; but
signify something indesinite, and in general. Examples of which we have in 1 Samuel XXIII. 13. 2 Samuel XV. 20. upon which Phrase [Vado quo vado] I go whither I
may, the same Flacius observes, that it denotes an uncertain motion. In like
manner Moses here determines his desire to no particular Person: but only
wishes God would send any Body rather than himself. And that he did not think
of the Messiah, there is this Argument; that he had no reason to believe he was
now born: and yet God's Promise was to send one immediately to relieve the
Israelites. Upon which Errand also, if he had prayed God to send him, it would
argue Moses to have been in the same Error with the present Jews, that the
Messiah was to be a Temporal Deliverer.

Ver. 14. And the Anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses.] These words
seem to import, that God was highly displeased with him; and consequently that
he had very much offended him. Yet some of the Fathers, particularly St. Hierom
and St. Basil, impute his backwardness to serve in this Employment, unto his
great Modesty, Humility, and a deep Sense of his own Infirmities: of which the
wisest and best Men are far more sensible than other Persons. And then this
Anger amounts to no more, than such a Displeasure as a Father has at his
Child, when he is too dissident, notwithstanding all that he has said and done
to breed in him a just confidence. And therefore no Punishment followed this
Anger (unless we think as R. Solomon does, that because of this backwardness
God preferred Aaron's Family above his, or that this was the Cause he would not
Cure his Imperfection of Speech) but only a Chiding: which we may suppose went
before the following Question, Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother? which
carries something of sharpness in it. And indeed this may be said in Moses his
Excuse, That the most Excellent Persons, are the least forward to embrace the
Offers of great Advancement. According to the observation of Plato, L. I. de
Republ. (which I find Eusebius also has noted out of him, L. XII. Praep.
Evang. c. 9.) that no Magistracy being designed for the Profit of him that
Governs, but of those that are Governed; I must needs conclude, says he,
(...), that no Man (who is considerate he means) will voluntarily take upon him
the Government of a People: but he must be hired to it; or he must be punished
if he will not undertake it. For he that will use his Power well, (...); never
does that which is best for himself, but for those whom he governs. Such an one
was Moses, who sought not his own Profit or Glory (as those that now seek for
great Places, by which they design a Benefit to themselves, and not to their
Neighbors) and therefore was not easily persuaded to accept of the high
Authority, which was offered to him.

Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother?] One would think by this, that Aaron was
now a principal Person, and of most eminent Quality in the Tribe of Levi: as
may be concluded also from his Marriage with the Sister of the Prince of the
Tribe of Judah, VI. 23. For it is but a fancy of R. Solomon's, that he is
therefore called the Levite, because the Levitical Order should have proceeded
from him, and the Priesthood been entailed on Moses his Family: but because of
Moses his backwardness to serve God in this present Employment, he in anger
quite changed his Intention, and advanced Aaron to the Priesthood.

I know that he can speak well.] Is Eloquent, and can deliver his Mind in
fluent words. There are two things which complete a Commander, as Pericles
speaks in Theucydides; (...) Wisdom and Eloquence; which do not often meet in
one Person: but God is pleased to distribute these Gifts, as he did to these
two Brethren. So Polydamas in Homer tells Hector; God's way is not to give all
Accomplishments to one Man; but some to one, and some to others. Iliad. IV. v.
730. (...)
(...), etc.
(...), etc.
which he expresses admirably again, Odyss. TH v. 168. (...)
(...).


Behold he comes forth to meet thee, etc.] By God's direction no doubt, who
suggested to him that Moses was coming by his order toward Egypt: which was
such comfortable News to him, that when he saw him (after such a long
Separation) it could not but be a very joyful Meeting. The fulfilling of this
Prediction, was a new sign unto Moses, that God would be with him.

Ver. 15. And thou shall speak unto him, and put words in his mouth.] Tell him
from me, what he is to speak.

And I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth.] Thou shall have Directions
from me what to say to him: and I will enable him to speak to the People and to
Pharaoh.

And will teach you what you shall do.] Instruct you in all your Proceedings.

Ver. 16. And he shall be thy spokesman to the People.] Acquaint them with what
thou have to deliver to them.

And he shall be, even he to thee.] He doubles the words, to denote that he
should need no other Assistant, but Aaron: who being his Brother, he might the
more securely rely on his fidelity.

Instead of a mouth.] To speak what thou can not so well deliver thy self.

And thou shall be to him, instead of God.] Deliver my Mind and Will to him.
The Chaldee translates the Hebrew word Elohim, in this place, a Prince, or a
Judge: who has the Power of Life and Death; (See Grotius in VII Acts 35. and
L. de Dieu VII. 1.) For Moses by God's order and appointment executed all those
Judgments upon Pharaoh, which Aaron pronounced. See Seldom L. I. de Synedr.
cap. ult. If Justin Martyr did not misapprehend Diodorus Siculus, he says the
Jews called Moses a God. For so he reports Diodorus his words ( Adhort. ad
Graecos, p. 10.) (...): which now are otherways in the Books of Diodorus (
Edit. Steph. p. 59.) where mentioning several Lawgivers, that pretended to
receive their Laws from God, or some good Angel, names Moses among the rest,
(...) who received his from the God called Jao: So they pronounced that Name
which we call Jehovah.

Ver. 17. And thou shall take this Rod in thy hand.] The Rod mentioned v. 2.
which is v. 20. called The Rod of God; because it was an Ensign of Divine
Authority and Power; by which all the wonders were wrought.

Wherewith thou shall do signs.] By stretching out so mean a thing as this Rod,
at God's Command, great Miracles followed: which demonstrated the Power of God,
and not of Man.

Ver. 18. And Moses went and returned. From Horeb, where he had all his
Converse with God, he returned to the Place where his Father in Law lived. See
v. 1.

To Jethro.] In the Hebrew his Name is written Jether. And the Tradition is, in
Semoth Rabba, that he was once a Gentile, and then his Name was Jether: but
being proselyted to the true Religion, there was a Letter added to his Name, as
there was to Abrahant's, and he was called Jethro. And Mr. Seldom observes he
is called a Proselyte in the Gemaru Babylon; and the first we sind mentioned in
Scripture, L. 2. de Jure N. and G. c. 2.

And said unto him, let me go, I pray thee.] He did not think it honest to
leave his Service, without his consent: especially since he entertained him,
and gave him his Daughter, when he was a Stranger to him.

And return unto my Brethren, which are in Egypt.] To his Kindred and
Countrymen, (who called one another Brethren) whom he had not seen many years.

And see whether they be yet alive.] He concealed his main design from Jethro;
not thinking it safe, perhaps, to trust him (who though a good Man, was not an
Hebrew) with his Commission: or, fearing he might discourage him from that
Undertaking, which he had already too much declined, but now was fully resolved
upon: and therefore loath to be again disheartened.

It may seem strange that Moses in so long a course of time, as Forty years,
should not have heard of the state of his Relations and Friends: But it is to
be considered, that as he was afraid, perhaps, it should be known where he was;
so intercourse with Nations, and very far distant, was not so easy then, as it
is now adays.

And Jethro said to Moses, go in peace.] He dismissed him kindly, and wished him a
prosperous Journey.

Ver. 19. And the LORD said to Moses in Midian.] Some translate it, the LORD
had said, etc. to show the Reason why he now desired to have leave to visit his
Friends in Egypt. However that be, it is plain, this was a distinct Appearance
of God to him from that in Horeb: for this was in Midian. Where God (who had
set him no precise time before) enjoins him to be gone presently; and assures
him, that there were none left in Egypt, who designed to be revenged of him for
the slaughter of the Egyptian. So it follows:

For all the men are dead which sought thy life.] This is an encouragement,
which God reserved as a Reward of his Obedience: having said nothing of it,
during the time of his Hesitancy and Reluctance.

Ver. 20. And Moses took his Wife and his Sons.] We read hitherto but of one
Son born to him: but it is plain he had another, from XVIII. 4. He carried his
whole Family with him, to let his Brethren see he was so confident of their
Deliverance, that he ventured not only himself, but his dearest Relations in
their Society.

And set them upon an Ass.] One Ass could not carry them all, with every thing
necessary for their removal: therefore the singular number (as is very usual)
is put for the plural. Though one Ass might perhaps carry her and two Children,
one of which, if not the other, was very small: See Drusius, Quaestiones per
Epistol. 86. and Simeon de Muis in his Varia Sacra: Asses are vile Creatures
here with us, but they were not so in those Countries: for the noblest Persons
anciently rode on them; as appears by a great many places of Holy Scripture,
XXII Genesis 1. XXII Numb. 21. 2 Samuel XIX. 6. and several others, which are
reckoned up by Bochart, P. I. L. II. Cap. XIII. Hierozoic.

And he returned to the Land of Egypt.] Set out, and began his Journey to that
Country.

And Moses took the Rod of God.] So called, because God ordered him to carry it
with him, ( v. 17.) and had appointed it to be the Instrument wherewith he
should work wonders.

In his hand.] As a sign of his Authority. So Conr. Pellicanus has not unfitly
explained it; he returned with the Rod of God, signo Apostolatus and ducatus, a
sign or token of his Embassy and Government.

Ver. 21. And the LORD said unto Moses, when thou go to return into Egypt.]
When thou art come thither,

See that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh.] The Signs mentioned in the
beginning of this Chapter, with which he was to begin.

Which I have put in thy hand.] Given thee power to do.

But I will harden his heart, etc.] The meaning is not, that God would harden
his heart at the first, as soon as Moses began to work his Signs: no more than
that he would, at the first, slay his Firstborn, as he threatens v. 23. But,
as at last he intended to slay his Firstborn, if he would not be humbled by
other Plagues; so in conclusion he resolved to harden his heart, after Pharaoh
had often hardened it himself. There are three distinct words used in this
Story, about this matter. The first is Chazak, the next is Rashah, and the
third is Cavad. Which seem to signify a gradual increase of his Obstinacy,
till at last it grew very grievous. For the last word (Cavad) intends and
increases the Sense, whether it be in good or evil qualities.

Ver. 22. And thou shall say unto Pharaoh.] In this God begins to fulfill his
Promise to Moses, that he would teach him what he should say, v. 12. and 15, 16.

Thus says the LORD.] This shows he came to Pharaoh in the Name and by the
Authority of God.

Israel is my Son, even my Firstborn.] Most dear to me, and beloved above all
People (as the Firstborn Son commonly is above the rest of the Children) God
having chosen and adopted them to be his peculiar People; on whom he bestowed
singular Privileges and Blessings. Thus God speaks of David, LXXXIX Psalm. 28.
And Eben-Ezra's interpretation of this Phrase is not improper; That Their
Ancestors from the beginning had been Worshippers of him the true God.

Ver. 23. And I say unto thee.] I command and require thee (so the word say
here signifies).

Let my Son go, that he may serve me.] Not to keep my People in thy Servitude
any longer; but to dismiss them that they may worship me, as my Servants ought
to do.

And if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy Son, even thy
Firstborn.] Not upon his first refusal (See v. 21.) but after a long course of
other Judgments, which would end, if he were not reformed by them, in this at
last. With which he therefore terrifies him, that he might prevent it.

Ver. 24. And it came to pass by the way.] To Egypt in the Inn where they took
up their Lodging at Night.

That the LORD met him.] The SCHECHINAH I suppose, appeared to him, from whence
an Angel was dispatched, to do as follows. And so both the LXX and the Chaldee
interpret it, The Angel of the LORD: because the LORD sent an Angel to Execute
what is here related.

And sought to kill him.] Appeared in such a manner, as if he intended to fall
upon him (with a drawn Sword perhaps, as he did to Balaam and David) which
threatening Posture could not but very much affright him, and put him into
disorder. Others imagine he inflicted a sudden Disease upon him; or made as if
he would strangle him. They that interpret this of killing his Child, as many
do (See Mr. Seldom, L. I. de Synedr. Cap. VI. p. 88.) seem to me to have no
reason on their side: there being no mention of a Child in the foregoing Story;
but only of his Sons. Therefore Chaskuni has rightly observed that this Verse
is connected with the last words of the 20th, (the three following coming by a
Parenthesis) and can refer to none but Moses. All the difficulty is to find,
why the Angel of the Lord should put him in fear of present death; when he was
going upon God's Message. The Resolution of which seems to be contained in the
following words.

Ver. 25. Then Zipporah.] His Wife presently apprehended what was the Cause of
Moses his danger, viz. because her Child (of which she is supposed to have been
not long ago delivered) was not Circumcised. And therefore she immediately
dispatched that work: her Husband being in such a Consternation, that he could
not do it himself; but (as Kimchi will have it) called to her to do it; or she
of her self went about it, having been the Cause that it was not done before.

Took a sharp Stone.] Or a sharp Knife made of a Flint: for such they used;
which Justin Martyr (in his Dialogue with Trypho) calls (...). And so the LXX:
and the Jews say that Knives were commonly used in this work.

And cut the foreskin of her Son.] But how come Moses to neglect this Duty?
Most say his Wife was unwilling to it: not because she abhorred this Rite, as
cruel and unnatural (for she was of a Race, which came from Abraham, who first
received this Command of Circumcising all his Children; and she understood, it
appears, how to do it readily, without indangering the Child, which had scarce
been possible, if she had been a Stranger to it) but because the Midianites
perhaps did not Circumcise so soon as the Israelites; but imitated their
Neighbors the Ishmaelites, who deferred it till their Children were Thirteen
years old, at which Age Ishmael was Circumcised (XVII Genesis 25.) or rather,
because they were about to take a Journey, when she thought it might be
omitted; till they came to be settled among the Israelites. And truly, this
seems to have been a good reason, to defer Circumcision beyond the Eighth day:
motion being dangerous, when the Child was sore. But such a Man as Moses should
have trusted God to take care of his Child; and not have been afraid of the
Consequence, if he had performed his Duty. And because he followed the tender
Inclination of his Wife, rather than a plain Precept (XVII Genesis 12, 13, etc.)
he fell into this great danger. Many other accounts are given of this, (for the
truth is, the whole matter is very obscure) but I see none more probable, than
what I have mentioned.

And cast it at his feet.] It is uncertain at whose seet she cast it: whether
at he Husband's, or the Child's, or the Angel's. The first seems most probable;
if the next words be spoken to Moses, as they seem to me to be.

And said, surely a bloody Husband art thou to me.] If the foregoing
Interpretation be true, these are not the words of an angry Woman; but spoken
with great affection: signifying that she had espoused him again; having saved
his Life by the Blood of her Son. Our famous Mr. Mede indeed, ( Discourse XIV.)
carries the Sense quite another way: because an Husband, he says, is never
called Chatan after the Marriage Solemnity was over. Which, if it be true,
makes nothing against what I have said; because she looked upon her self as a
second time espoused (or married) to him by this act: which had restored him to
her, when his Life was in danger. It must be granted that the word Chatan does
not signify only a Spouse; but sometime a Son in Law: but why Zipporah should
call her own Child by this Name, I do not see. Yet so Mr. Mede understands it;
and adds that the Rabbis tell us, it was the custom of the Hebrew Women to
call their Children, when they were Circumcised, by the Name of Chatan, (i. e.
Spouse) as if they were now espoused unto God. And indeed Aben-Ezra says so:
but I cannot find that this was an ancient Notion among them. If it were, his
Interpretation might be the more easily embraced, which is this: That these
were a solemn form of words used at Circumcision; signifying as much, as I
pronounce thee to be a Member of the Church by Circumcision. Thus Val.
Schindler also expounds it (in his Lexic. Pentaglot. p. 677.) a Child was
called Chatan upon the Day of his Circumcision, because then he was first
joined to the People of God, and as it were espoused unto God. And he thinks
the Targum countenances this Sense, when it thus expounds these words, by this
Blood of Circumcision a Spouse is given to us. Which may as well be understood
of Moses being given to her, as of the Child: for he was, as I said, restored
to her and to his Family, upon the Circumcision of the Child. So it follows in
the next Verse. They that have a mind to see the Sense of an eminent Writer of
our Church, concerning this Passage, may consult Hooker's Ecclesiastical
Polity, Book V. in the latter end of the LXII Section, where he thus far agrees
with me, that these words were spoken out of the flowing of abundance of
Commiseration and Love, with her hands laid under his feet. For so he thinks
these words, She cast it at his feet, import.

Ver. 26. So he let him go.] i. e. The Angel no longer threatened Moses with
death: but his Wife, to her great joy, saw him restored to her in safety. From
which in after times sprang the (...), which were so famous among the Greeks
and Egyptians, in the Feasts of Bacchus and Osiris: whose Stories Huetius has
lately shown were framed out of this of Moses. From whence also, as he probably
conjectures, they used Remedies for Diseases, in forma fascini, which they
hung, as Amulets, about their Childrens Necks, Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV.
Cap. IV. n. 3.

Then she said, or when she said, a bloody Husband thou art, etc.] i. e. As
soon as Zipporah had Circumcised the Child, and thrown the Foreskin at her
Husband's feet, and said these words, Moses was delivered from his danger. Or
(according to our Translation) as soon as her Husband was safe, she repeated
the foregoing words, saying, I have redeemed thy life, by circumcising thy Son.
They that make these words to have been spoken in a rage, because she was
forced to do what she did, suppose her to have had little kindness for her
Husband; and as little regard to Circumcision. I should rather Translate the
words, So she let him go; i. e. let Moses go to Egypt; and went back her self
to her Father: only repeating these words before she went, Remember me, how I
have saved thy Life, and made thee my Husband again (when Death was at hand) by
the Blood of thy Son, whom I have Circumcised. There is only this Exception to
it, that the Hebrew word for let him go is of the Masculine Gender: which is of
no great weight, because it is usual in this Language, when they speak of
Females (as I observed on I. 21.) and it is certain she returned to her Father;
but whether in this manner no Body can certainly determine. For we are not told
any where, upon what occasion she went back to Jethro (unless it be here
insinuated) as we find she did (XVIII. 2.) together with her Children. But it
is very probable, that she fearing some other danger, into which she and her
Children might fall by the way, or in Egypt: might desire Moses to send her
home again, till he had finished the work he went about: unto which he
consented.

Ver. 27. And the LORD said unto Aaron.] In Egypt, I suppose, he received this
order from God: but we do not know how; whether by an Apparition of the Divine
Majesty to him, or in a Dream or otherways.

Go into the Wilderness to meet Moses.] The Wilderness was a wide place:
therefore he directed him, no doubt, into what part he should go.

And he went and met him in the Mount of God.] He went almost to Midian; that
he might have the more time to hear what Moses's Commission was, before they
came to Egypt.

Ver. 28. And Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD, etc.] Mentioned III.
6, 7, 8, etc. and in this Chapter 14, 15, 16, etc.

And all the signs, etc.] See v. 2, 3, etc. which he told him to confirm his
belief, that God had spoken those words to him.

Ver. 29. And Moses and Aaron went.] Came into Egypt.

And gathered together all the Elders of the Children of Israel.] The chief
Persons in every Tribe, who bore a great sway among them. See III. 16.

Ver. 30. And Aaron spoke all the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses.]
According to what God had promised, v. 15, 16.

And did the signs.] The Signs are done by Moses, as the Words were spoken by
Aaron, v. 17.

In the sight of all the People.] Who came along with the Elders.

Ver. 31. And the People believed.] All the rest of the People also, (to whom
the Elders reported what they had heard and seen) believed that God had sent
Moses to be their Deliverer.

And when they heard that the LORD had visited, etc.] See III. 7, 16, 17.

Then they bowed their heads and worshipped.] Most humbly acknowledged the
Goodness of God, and his Faithfulness to his Word.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. AND afterward Moses and Aaron went in and told Pharaoh.] When they
had convinced the Elders of Israel of their Commission, they desired Audience
of Pharaoh. Which having obtained, they went to Court; taking some of the
Elders along with them, to attend them. Which is not a mere Conjecture, from
the decency of the thing, that they should go alone on such a Solemn Embassy;
but so they were commanded to do, III Exodus 18. and it will appear, from v. 3.
of this Chapter, that so they did.

I have observed before III. 10. that this Pharaoh is commonly thought to be
him called Cenchres.

Thus says the LORD God of Israel, Let my People go, etc.] These words contain
only the Substance of what they said: which was delivered, we may well suppose,
in a longer Oration. Wherein they declared they had received a Commission from
their God, the LORD of Heaven and Earth, to make this Address to him.

In all Nations there were some Persons, who pretending to greater Familiarity
with their Gods, than other Men, were highly reverenced, both by their own
Countrymen, and by Strangers. And therefore it is no wonder Pharaoh offered no
Violence to them, when they came to make this Demand; because their Persons
were held Sacred; as those of Ambassadors now are, who come from one Prince to
another. This is a better account, than that which some of the Jews (in
Schalsch-Hakkabah) give of it: who say, that when they came into Pharaoh's
Presence, they appeared in such Majesty, as daunted him: being like the Angels
of the Ministry; and raised to a taller Stature than they had before; and
having a splendor in their Countenances, like that of the Sun, etc. In which,
they seem to imitate the Story of St. Stephen, whose Face shined like that of
an Angel, when he appeared before their Council.

That they may hold a Feast unto me in the Wilderness.] In order to which, it
was necessary they should offer Sacrifice, ( v. 3.) which they could not do in
Egypt: and therefore desired to go into the Wilderness; where they might use
their own Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, without offense to the Egyptians.
Every word has its weight in it: For a Feast denotes an extraordinary Service;
and to me signifies such peculiar Rites of Worship, as should be prescribed and
instituted by the LORD, in whose Name they spoke: For which, the Wilderness was
most proper, because there was no Concourse of People likely to be in that
place, to disturb them in their Solemnity.

Ver. 2. And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD? etc.] These are not Atheistical
words; for he owned such Gods as the Egyptians worshipped: but slighted that
God whom Moses called JEHOVAH; to whom he says, he owed no Obedience, because
he did not know who they meant by him. He speaks also with too much Scorn; his
Pride and Passion not suffering him to ask seriously who Jehovah was.

I know not the LORD, etc.] Nor did he desire to know; being so transported
with Anger that he would not Examine their Commission; but only resolved he
would not obey it.

Ver. 3. And they said, the God of the Hebrews.] They give him no other account
(since he was so haughty and huffing) but that they came in the Name of him,
whom they and their Ancestors, had for many Generations worshipped. Whom they
had at first called ( v. 1.) the LORD God of Israel. (...), as Artapanus in
Eusebius expounds it, the Lord and Governor of the Universe.

Has met with us.] Appeared to us, and given us this Commission, when we
thought of no such thing. For they would not have him think that they sought
this Embassy; but were put upon it by the Divine Authority, which they durst
not disobey.

Let us go, we pray thee, three days Journey into the Desert.] These are the
very words in which God commanded Moses to deliver his Message, III. 18. And as
their Desire was moderate (to go but three days Journey) so it was very
modestly delivered; by humble entreaty; and with such a Reason as they thought
might move him to grant their Request.

And Sacrifice unto the LORD our God.] That he may be propitious to us.

Lest he fall upon us with the Pestilence, or with the Sword.] Send a Plague
among us (for our neglect of him) or some Foreign Enemy to infest us, and cut
us off. Whereby Pharaoh (they secretly suggest) would lose the benesit of their
Labors, more than by their going for a little time into the Wilderness. See
VIII. 27.

It is observable that they neither wrought any Miracle, nor threatened any
Punishment to Pharaoh, at their first Application to him; but only told him the
danger they themselves were in, if they did not obey their God: Which was a
very submissive way of treating with him. Artapanus indeed (in Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. L. IX. c. 27. and in Clem. Alex. L. I. Strom.) tells us of several
Miraculous things which Moses did at this Audience; whereby Pharaoh and his
Servants were astonished and frighted from doing them any hurt; nay, he asked
Moses the Name of his God, which he whispered in Pharaoh's ear. But he had all
this out of some such fabulous Author, as him I mentioned above, ( v. 1.) and
I mention him, only to show that the Heathen had the knowledge of this History,
and report it as a Truth; though with some mixture of Humane Invention.

Ver. 4. Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the People from their works?]
Instead of answering their Reasons, he tells them, That he looked upon them two,
as Disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom; and Hinderers of his Business.

Get you unto your Burdens.] This seems to be spoken unto the Elders, which
they had brought along with them.

Ver. 5. Behold the People of the Land now are many.] They are very numerous,
notwithstanding all their Labors: to what will they grow, if they have nothing
to do? Or, as some expound it, they will think of nothing but Sedition, now
they are so numerous, if they be suffered to cease from their Burdens. Cajetan
hence gathers, that the Law for throwing their Infants into the River, was
abolisht, as infamous; or he could not get it put in Execution.

And you make them rest from their Burdens.] Which was the Course he took to
make them less numerous. Perhaps this was the Sabbath Day; on which they had
been wont to rest, when they had their Liberty.

Ver. 6. And Pharaoh commanded the same day, the Taskmasters of the People,
and their Officers.] The Taskmasters were the chief Exactors of their Labors,
being Egyptians: who had Officers under them to execute their Orders, and to
give an account how they were obeyed: And it appears from v. 14, 15, etc. that
they were Israelites.

Ver. 7. Ye shall no more give the People straw to make brick, as heretofore,
etc.] Instead of easing them, he increased their Burdens, and made them
intolerable. What the use of Straw was in making Bricks, is variously
conjectured. Some think it was mixed with the Clay, to make the Bricks more
solid. Others, that they only heated their Kilns with it, to burn the Bricks.
Others, (who think they were not baked in a Kiln) imagine it served only to
cover them; that they might not be cracked by the violent heat of the Sun,
wherein they were baked. For so Vitruvius tells us, that the best Bricks were
made in the Spring and in the Autumn, ut uno tenore siccescant, that they might
dry by an equal heat: they that were made at the Solstice being suddenly
crusted over by the Sun, and left too moist within, L. II. de Architect. c. 3.

Ver. 8. And the tale of the Bricks, which they did make heretofore, you shall
lay upon them, etc.] It appears from v. 13, 14. that there was a certain
quantity exacted from them every day.

For they be idle, and therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and Sacrifice to
our God.] They have not work enough, to employ their Thoughts; which makes
their Mind wander after other things.

Ver. 9. Let there more work be laid upon the Men.] Or, make it heavy upon them
(as it is in the Margin).

That they may labor therein.] Have no time to think of any thing else.

And let them not regard vain words.] So he calls the Message of Moses and
Aaron; who, he pretends, were mere Deceivers, and fed their Hope with Lies,
(for so it is in the Hebrew, words of falsehood, or lying words) or, at least,
he resolved their words should not prove true; for he would not let the People
go.

Ver. 10. Thus says Pharaoh, I will not give you Straw.] The Taskmasters with
their Officers, proclaimed the King's Order, that every Body might take notice
of it.

Ver. 11. Go, get you Straw where you can find it, etc.] A heavy Sentence;
importing that whether they could find any or no, no abatement would be made of
the number of Bricks that was expected from them. This was to drive them to
Desperation, by demanding things impossible. And added (as Conradus Pellicanus
observes) to the Burdens on their Bodies, very sore Anguish of Mind. For it
tempted them to doubt of the Goodness of their God, who they thought had sent a
deliverer to them (IV. 31.) by whom they were now reduced into a more miserable
Condition.

Ver. 12. So the People were scattered abroad, throughout all the Land of
Egypt, etc.] Some part of them were forced to go, and pick up Straw, or for
want of it, Stuble (and sometime travel a great way for it) while the rest were
working in the Brick-kilns, without their help, which they were wont to have:
whereby they were disabled from making so many Bricks, as formerly they had
done.

Ver. 13. And the Task-master hasted them, etc.] Quickened them in their work;
when they saw they were likely to fall short of their wonted Task.

Ver. 14. And the Officers of the Children of Israel, etc.] By this it appears
(as I said v. 6.) that these Officers were Israelites. And from this place
Bonavent. Bertram concludes ( Lib. de Rep. Hebr. Cap. IV.) that there was a
Civil Government among the Israelites all the time they were in Egypt: and that
these Schoterim (as they are called in Hebrew) were Men of the greatest Note
among the Elders; who executed all their Decrees; and consequently of high
Authority among the People. For which reason Pharaoh's Taskmasters chose them,
to Oversee and Direct the Labors of their Brethren. But Mr. Seldom L. I. de
Synedr. Cap. XV. has made it appear, that there was no such Judicature among
them at this time; and when there was, this was the Name of those who executed
the Sentence of the Judges: being like to our Apparitors, and such like under
Officers. See p. 621, etc.

Were beaten.] With Sticks; or scourged with Rods.

Wherefore have yet not fulfilled your Task, both yesterday, etc.] They
punished the Officers, as if they had been negligent in not pressing the People
to their Duty. Yet it seems they forbore them one day, to see if they would
mend their Fault the next.

V. 15. Then the Officers of the Children of Israel came and cried unto
Pharaoh, saying, etc.] They had some hope this Oppression might proceed from
the Taskmasters, and not from the King himself: and therefore they represented
their Case to him, and petitioned for Relief. It is said indeed v. 6. that
Pharaoh laid this Command, both upon the Taskmasters and their Officers: but it
is not unlikely that he gave it immediately only to the Taskmasters, who were
his own Ministers, and by them to the Officers.

Ver. 16. Thy Servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine own People.] This
shows that they thought such Inhumane Usage was the effect of the Taskmasters
Cruelty.

Ver. 17. But he said, ye are idle, ye are idle, etc.] He soon made them
understand it was by his Decree, and not his Servants pleasure, that they were
thus used. And, which was worse, they saw he was sixed in his Resolution; being
void of all pity; and mocking at their Complaints. For nothing could be more
Sarcastical, than to tell them they were idle, when they sunk under their
Burdens.

Ver. 18. Go, therefore now and work, etc.] Do not spend your time in making
Complaints to me; but return immediately to your Labors, and continue at them,
till my Commands be executed: and expect no mitigation.

Ver. 19. And the Officers did see that they were in evil Case, etc.] By this
Answer they found themselves reduced to such Straits, that now they despaired
of all Relief: the King himself being set against them.

Ver. 20. And they met Moses and Aaron who stood in the way, as they came forth
from Pharaoh.] They had placed themselves there on purpose, to hear what
Success the Officers had in their Petition.

Ver. 21. And they said, the LORD look upon you and judge.] This seems to be an
Imprecation: or, at least, the Officers bid Moses and Aaron expect, that God
would take them to task (as we speak) for bringing his People into so bad a
Case.

Ye have made our Savor to be abhorred in the Eyes, etc.] Made us odious; as
this Phrase signifies, XXXIV Genesis 30.

To put a Sword into their hand to slay us.] Who may take an occasion from
hence, and make this a pretense, for the destroying our whole Nation.

Ver. 22. And Moses returned unto the LORD.] this plainly intimates, that the
LORD had appeared to Moses since he came to Egypt; as he did at Mount Horeb:
and that he appeared in some settled place, where he might upon all Occasions
resort to him.

And said, LORD, wherefore have thou so evil entreated this People? etc.] It
was to no purpose to answer the Officers who expostulated with him; for they
were too much exasperated, and thereby prejudiced against any thing he could
say. And therefore he chose rather to represent to God the Complaints they had
made to him: that he might be directed what Satisfaction to give them. For he
was not able of himself, to give an account, why the LORD should suffer their
Condition to grow worse, rather than better, since he delivered his Message to
Pharaoh: No, nor why he should send him on an Embassy, which was not at all
regarded.

Ver. 23. For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy Name, he has done Evil
to this People; neither have thou delivered thy People at all.] He might have
remembered that God told him more than once, that Pharaoh would not obey him at
the first, III. 19. IV. 21. But the bitter Reflections which the Officers of
the Children of Israel made upon his Conduct, had so disturbed his Mind, that
he forgot himself so far, as to ask the undecent Questions mentioned in the
foregoing Verse, and complains here that God had done Nothing to fulfill his
Promise of Deliverance to his People.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses.] The SCHECHINAH, I suppose, appeared to
him (See v. 12.) as it had done often before, since he was first sent upon this
Business, (IV. 22.) and graciously condescended to satisfy his two Complaints,
in the latter end of the foregoing Chapter. Where he complains, first of all,
that he had sent him about a fruitless Message: for, secondly, he had not at
all delivered his People. To the last of these he Answers in the first place,
here in this Verse; where he tells him,

Now thou shall see what I will do to Pharaoh.] That is, be patient and wait a
while; and thou shall see Pharaoh compelled to dismiss my People.

For with a strong hand shall he let them go, etc.] I will so terribly scourge
him, that he shall not only let them go, but thrust them out of Egypt; and be
glad to be rid of them.

Ver. 2. And God spoke unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD.] He also
answers here to his first Question [Why have thou sent me?] by telling him, I
am JEHOVAH; and have sent thee to make known this great Name, that is, my self;
who am constant to my word, and will faithfully perform all my Promises.

Ver. 3. And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the Name
of God Almighty.] Or, God All-sufficient, as the word El-shaddai may be
interpreted (See XVII Genesis 1.) God infinite in Power and Goodness: of which he
gave their Fathers abundant proofs, by delivering them in many and great
Straits.

But by my Name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.] This Name of four Letters, as
the Jews speak, is by the Ancients called the ineffable Name: For they would
never pronounce it. Not because they could not, as Drusius well observes ( L.
I. Observat. Cap. I.) Sed quod religione and (...) quadam ab eo efferendo
abstinerent, but because out of a Religious Reverence they abstained from it.
And this respect to it all the ancient Interpreters observe, even St. Hierom
himself: though in several of the ancient Fathers (as Irenaeus, Clem,
Alexandrinus, Epiphanius and Theodoret) and in some of the ancient Heathens (as
Macrobius and Diodorus Siculus) it is expressed by Jaho, and (...) as the Greek
write it. Which Name (however it be pronounced) some of the Jews imagine, was
concealed till Moses his time; who was the first, to whom it was revealed. But
this is evidently false, as appears from the whole Book of Genesis; and
particularly from XV. 7. where (before he calls himself El-shaddai) he says to
Abraham, I am Jehovah which brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees. In short,
the Opinion of Reuchlinus (in his Verb. Mirisicum) is far more justifiable;
which is, that it was revealed to our first Parents, at the same time that God
breathed into them the breath of Life. For as soon as Eve brought forth her
Firstborn, she says, I have got a Man from the LORD, IV Genesis 1. which Name
descended in a perpetual Succession from Seth to Abraham: who when he went by
God's Direction out of his own Country into Canaan, the LORD appeared to him
there, and there he built an Altar to the LORD, XII Genesis 7, 8. And it is to be
noted, that he does not say to Moses in this place, My Name Jehovah was not
known to them; but I was not known to them by this Name. That is, by that which
it imports; viz. the giving being (as we may say) to his Promises by the actual
performance of them: i. e. by bringing them into the Land of Canaan; and in
order to it, delivering them out of Egypt. Both which he had promised in the
forenamed Chapter (XV Genesis 14, 18.) and now intended to make good. And thus R.
Solomon interprets this place, as P. Fagius notes; I have promised, but have
not yet performed.

The like Expression we find in the Prophet Isaiah, as Theodorick Hackspan has
observed ( Disput. de Nominibus Divinis, N. 15.) LII Isa. 5, 6. where the Lord
says, My Name is blasphemed every day continually: therefore my People shall
know my Name; therefore they shall know in that day, that I am he that does
speak; behold, it is I.

Which cannot signify that the Jews did not then know, that this was one of
the Names of God: but that all who blasphemed him should be confuted by
sensible Proofs which he would give, of his own unchangeable Resolution to
fulfill his Promises, in bringing them out of Babylon: which fully demonstrated
that he was JEHOVAH.

Which word, some think, includes in it, not only his Eternal Existence, and
Immutable Truth; but his Omnipotent Power, which gave being to all things. The
last of which, was now made known, so as it had never been to Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob: for Moses was the first that wrought Miracles and Prodigies: God was
known to the Fathers, by Visions and Dreams: but not by Signs and Wonders.
Moses made him known by these unto the World. And therefore upon the whole
Maimonides well concludes from this place, that the Prophetical Spirit on
Moses, was more excellent than that which had been upon any before him, More
Nevoch. P. II. c. 35.

Ver. 4. And I also, etc.] The Hebrew word vegam may be better translated
although. Which makes a clear connection of this Verse with the former; and
explains the meaning of the Name Jehovah. By which he was not known in former
times, although he had made a Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to give
them the Land of Canaan; and often ratified, confirmed (and established as he
here speaks) this Covenant, XVII Genesis 7, 8. XXVI 3, 4, etc. But now he not only
declares himself mindful of that Covenant, ( v. 5.) but, because he was the
LORD, ( v. 6.) would deliver them from the Egyptian Bondage, and that with a
miraculous Power. Which should make them know more of him than their Fathers
did, ( v. 7.) both by his Delivering them out of Egypt, and by bringing them
into the Land which he swore he would give to their Fathers, v. 8.

This is the Sense of these five Verses.

The Land of their Pilgrimage, etc.] So it is often called, when he speaks to
Abraham, XVII Genesis 8. and so Isaac calls it, XXVIII. 4. and Jacob also, XXXVII.
1. And so it might be called, not only with respect to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, but also to their Posterity: because of the near Union that is between
Fathers and Children. Thus God is said to have given to these three Patriarchs
(as the famous Primate Usher observes) the Land of Canaan for an Inheritance,
CV Psalm. 11. which was not fulfilled to them, but to their Posterity. And as
the Possession of Posterity is attributed to the Fathers: so, upon the same
ground, he thinks, the Peregrination of the Fathers, is attributed here to the
Children, Chronol. Sacra, Cap. VIII.

Ver. 5. And I have also, etc.] This Verse also begins with the same Particle
vegam; and must be translated although, if the former Interpretation be right.
Or else those words [by my Name Jehovah was I not known to them] must come in
by a Parenthesis: and both these Verses be connected with what goes before, [
appeared unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by the Name of God Almighty] to whom he
so appeared, as to make a Covenant with them, which he perfectly remembered, and
having taken notice to what condition they were reduced, was now come to
deliver them.

Ver. 6. Say unto the Children of Israel, I am the LORD.] Tell them, I will now
show, that I am what this Name imports, v. 2.

And I will bring them from under the burdens of the Egyptians.] The heavy
Oppressions under which you groan, v. 5.

And I will rid you of their bondage.] They were mere Slaves, and lay also
under such insupportable Loads, as made it impossible for them to deliver
themselves: but it was to be the sole work of God.

And I will redeem you with a stretched out Arm.] This word redeem implies
their Servitude; from which he rescued them by a Power superior to Pharaoh's,
or any Power on Earth; as appears by the following Story.

And with great Judgments.] When God first promised this Deliverance, which
Moses was about to effect, he told Abraham, I will judge that Nation, which
oppressed them, XV Genesis 14. That is, punish them (which is one Office of a
Judge) according to their Deservings. This now he intended to perform (and
thereby show himself to be Jehovah) and that in a most terrible manner; by
inflicting not only very grievous, but many Plagues upon them. For Greg. Nyssen
observes, that all the Elements, the Earth, the Water, the Fire, and the Air,
were all moved against the Egyptians, (...), as an Obedient Army, L. de Vita
Mosis, p. 173. Thus Judgments and to Judge are used in many places for
Punishing, IX Psalm. 17. XIX Prove. 29. 2 Chronicles. XX. 12.

Ver. 7. And I will take you to me for a People.] By the right of Redemption
before mentioned.

And I will be to you a God.] He was so before; but now after a peculiar manner.

And ye shall know that I am the LORD your God, etc.] By seeing my Promises to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob fulfilled.

Ver. 8. And I will bring you unto the Land, concerning which, I did swear to
give it, etc.] Two things were promised to Abraham in that Vision mentioned XV
Genesis First, That he would deliver his Seed from this Nation which oppressed
them ( v. 14.) And secondly, That he would bring them into the Land of Canaan,
v. 16. Both these he now declares should be fulfilled (the former in the
foregoing Verse, and the latter in this) and thereby they should be convinced,
that he was indeed Jehovah, true and constant to his word.

I am the LORD.] He concludes as he began: having said this twice before, v. 2,
6.

Ver. 9. And Moses spoke so unto the Children of Israel.] He delivered this
Message, as he was commanded: which one would have expected, should have raised
their drooping Spirits. But quite contrary,

They hearkened not unto Moses.] They did not believe, or receive what he said,
(So Maimon. More Nev. P. I. cap. 45.) or it made no Impression upon them. The
Reason follows,

For anguish of Spirit.] In the Hebrew, because of shortness of Breath. They
were so extremely oppressed, that they could scarce fetch their Breath, as we
speak. Or, had no heart so much as to think of Deliverance, much less hope for
it: but sunk under their burdens.

And for cruel Bondage.] Common Slaves, though they cannot deliver themselves,
rejoice to hear the good News that they are likely to be delivered by those,
who have power and will to do it. But in this Slavery, they were used so
cruelly, that they were quite dejected, and incapable of any Comfort. So the
LXX. translate the foregoing words (for anguish of Spirit) (...), out of
faint-heartedness: they being quite dispirited.

Ver. 10. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] It is likely that Moses
finding the Israelites so regardless of what he said, went to the usual place,
where he was wont to have recourse to the Divine Majesty, (See v. 22.) to
receive new Directions what to do.

Ver. 11. Go in, speak unto Pharaoh King of Egypt, etc.] The LORD bids him go
again to Pharaoh, and renew the Demand he made before, v. 1.

Ver. 12. And Moses spoke before the LORD.] This Phrase liphne Jehovah, before
the LORD, plainly denotes that God appeared unto him in a visible Majesty, as I
observed above v. 1. and See XI. 4.

Behold, the Children of Israel have not hearkened to me, how then shall
Pharaoh hear me?] Their faintheartedness disheartened Moses also, and made him
unwilling to renew his Address unto Pharaoh. And there seems to be good reason
in what he says; if the Children of Israel, whose interest it was to give ear
to him, did not believe him; what hope was there that Pharaoh should comply
against his interest.

Who am of uncircumcised Lips.] This Reason he had alleged before, and was
fully answered (IV. 10, 11, etc.) and therefore ought not to have been repeated
now. For his being of uncircumcised Lips signifies no more than that he was an
ill Speaker, and wanted Eloquence: It being the manner of the Hebrews to call
those parts Uncircumcised, which are inept to the use, for which they were
designed, and cannot do their Office. Thus Jeremy says of the Jews, that their
ear was uncircumcised; and adds the Explication, they cannot hearken, VI Jer.
10. In like manner uncircumcised Lips, are Lips that cannot utter words; as
uncircumcised in heart, IX Jer. 26. are such as cannot understand. St. Stephen
puts both together, uncircumcised in heart and ears, VII Acts 51. Perhaps Moses
thought it some disparagement to him, that he was not able himself to deliver
his Mind, in an handsome manner unto Pharaoh: and therefore mentions this
again, to move the Divine Majesty, to circumcise his Lips, (as they speak) that
is, remove this impediment.

Ver. 13. And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron.] Here is no express
Answer made to his Objection, but it seems to be included in God's speaking
unto Moses and unto Aaron; whereas before he had spoken only to Moses, v. 1,
10. And it is likely Moses was admonished, that the LORD having given him Aaron
to supply his defect, he ought to be satisfied therewith: and go with him, and
renew his Address, both to the Children of Israel, and also unto Pharaoh. So
these words have respect to both parts of the foregoing Objection.

And gave them a Charge unto the Children of Israel.] He laid his Commands upon
them, strictly requiring them to obey him. Which is an higher Expression than
we meet withal before in the foregoing Injunctions (either in v. 6. or 11.) and
makes me think this Verse is not a mere Recapitulation of what had been said,
as some take it; but an Inforcement of what he had before commanded.

And unto Pharaoh King of Egypt, to bring the Children of Israel out of the
Land of Egypt.] I suppose he now gave them Authority to Threaten him, if he did
not obey.

Ver. 14. These are the Heads of their Fathers Houses.] The principal Persons
of the several Families of Israel.

The Sons of Reuben the firstborn, etc.] See XLVI Genesis 9. where the Sons of
Reuben are reckoned up in this very order; in which they are here mentioned
again, to introduce the Genealogy of Moses and Aaron. Who being chosen by God
to be the Deliverers of his People, it was sit to show that they were of the
same Stock, though not of the eldest Family, of the Children of Israel. To whom
God promised, when he went down into Egypt, that he would surely bring him up
again, XLVI Genesis 4. that is, in his Posterity: which would not have been so
manifestly the Work of God, if they that were the Instruments of it, had not
been of his Posterity.

Ver. 15. The Sons of Simeon, etc.] They are mentioned for the same reason, and
in the same order, that they were in Genesis XLVI. 10.

Ver. 16. These are the Names of the Sons of Levi, etc.] Having briefly set
down the Heads of the two eldest Families of Israel, he enlarges now upon the
third: from which he himself was descended.

Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.] These three are mentioned also in the XLVI Genesis
11. as coming with Jacob into Egypt.

And the years of the Life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.] He
is thought to have lived the longest of all the Sons of Jacob: none of whose
Ages are recorded in Scriptures, but only his and Joseph's; whom Levi survived
Twenty seven years, though he was much the elder Brother. Kohath also the
second Son of Levi, attained near to the same Age with himself, v. 18. And his
Grandson, Moses his Father, lived just so long as Levi did, v. 20. Next to
Levi, the longest Liver of all Jacob's Sons was Naphthali, if we may believe
the Tradition in R. Bechai, who says he lived to the Age of an Hundred thirty
and three years; which was the Age of Kohath.

Ver. 17. The Sons of Gershon, Libni and Shimi, etc.] These were born in Egypt,
from whom descended two Families mentioned afterward, III Number. 18, 21.

Ver. 18. The Sons of Kohath, Amram, etc.] He had the most numerous Offspring
of all Levi's Sons, III Numb. 28. from the eldest of which Moses came.

And the years of the life of Kohath, were an hundred thirty and three years.]
He sets down the Age of none but only of Levi his great Grandfather, and Kohath
his Grandfather, and of Amram his Father. And Primate Usher makes account that
Kohath was Thirty years old when Jacob came into Egypt, and lived there an
Hundred and three years; and died Thirty two years before Moses was born. See
Chronolog. Sacra, Cap. XI.

Ver. 19. The Sons of Merari, Mehali.] From this Mehali, it is thought, sprung
the famous Singer Heman, who composed the LXXXVIII Psalm, 1 Chronicles. VI. 33.

And Mushi.] From whom descended Ethan, who composed the LXXXIX Psalm, 1 Chronicles.
VI. 44.

Ver. 20. And Amram took him Jochabed his Father's Sister to Wife.] It must be
acknowledged that the Hebrew word Dod signifies an Uncle: and therefore some
would have the word Dodah, in this place, to signify only his Uncle's
Daughter. So the Vulgar, and the LXX. translate it. But Moses tells us so
expressly that she was born to Levi in Egypt, (XXVI Numb. 59.) that it
unavoidably follows she was Sister to Amram's Father. Which the forenamed great
Primate maintains ( Cap. VIII. of the same Book) against Scaliger and Pererius,
who would have Jochabed called Levi his Daughter, only as Ephraim and Manasseh
are called Jacob's Sons. Which would make a very easy Sense (as I observed II.
1.) if it would consist with those words in Numbers XXVI. 59. whom her Mother
(for that must be understood) bare to Levi: which show she was his Daughter.
And thus R. Solomon understood it: and so did Tostatus and Cajetan, and diverse
others, whom our Usher there mentions. And see our most Learned Seldom, L. V.
de Jure N. and G. Cap. IX. p. 584. Which shows how sincere a Writer Moses was,
who does not stick to relate what might be thought in after Ages (when the Law
against such Marriages was enctaed) a blot to his Family. And it is observable
that he does not say one Syllable in Commendation of his Parents; though their
Faith deserved the greatest Praise, as the Apostle to the Hebrews shows, XI.
23. But Moses, as Jac. Capellus truly observes, did not write for his own
Glory, but for the Service of God and of his Church, ad A. M. 2481.

And she bare him Aaron and Moses.] This shows, that God exactly fulfilled his
Promise of Delivering the Israelites out of Servitude in the fourth Generation,
XV Genesis 16. ( i. e. the fourth from their Descent into Egypt) for Moses was the
fourth from Levi; being his great Grandson.

And the years of the Life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven
years.] The very same Age with his Grandfather Levi, v. 16.

Ver. 21. And the Sons of Izhar, Korah, etc.] He gives an account of his
Uncle's Sons, but says not one word here of his own. Who were not to succeed
him in his Place and Dignity, nor to be advanced to any other Office. Such was
his Humility, and generous Love to his Country, that he only sought the Good of
that; but Nothing for his own Family.

Ver. 22. And the Sons of Uzziel, etc.] This was another of his Uncles; whose
Posterity he mentions, that it might be seen how God blessed the Tribe of Levi:
notwithstanding the Sin he had committed at Schechem, and the Punishment his
Father denounced against him for it, XLIX Genesis He says nothing of Hebron,
another of his Father's Brothers; because perhaps he died Childless; or his
Children had no Issue.

Ver. 23. And Aaron took him Elisheba, Daughter of Aminadab, Sister of Naashon
to Wife.] Though he says nothing here of himself, yet he relates particularly
what concerned Aaron: who, he shows, was matched into an honorable Family, with
the Sister of a Prince of the Tribe of Judah, chief Commander of their Host
when they were come out of Egypt, I Numb. 7. II. 3. The knowledge of this, he
thought might breed in Posterity a greater Reverence to the Priesthood: which
was settled in the Family of Aaron.

And she bore him Nadab and Abihu.] These two perished in the very first
Sacrifice which their Father offered: because they did not take Fire from the
Altar, but offered with strange Fire, X Lev. 1, 2.

Eleazar.] Who succeeded his Father in the Priesthood, ( Numb. XX. 25, etc.)
and assisted Joshua in the Division of the Land of Canaan, XIV Josh. 1. XIX.
51. XXI. 1. From him sprung Zadok and the following Highpriests, till the
Destruction of Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. VI. 4, etc.

And Ithamar.] From whom came Eli, and Ahimelech, and Abiathar (in the time of
David) in whom this Family was Extinct.

Ver. 24. And the Sons of Korah, etc.] Though he himself perished in his
Rebellion against Moses, who was his Cosin-German; yet his Family remained
(XXVI Numb. 58.) and were famous in the days of David; being often mentioned in
the Book of Psalms.

Ver. 25. And Eleazar took one of the Daughters of Putiel to Wife.] Who this
Putiel was, is not certain. Dr. Lightfoot thinks he was an Egyptian Convert,
whose Daughter Eleazar married. But I see no good ground for this Opinion, but
rather think it more likely, Eleazar would marry one of the race of Abraham;
being Son to the High Priest. He was married indeed before his Father was
promoted to that Dignity; yet Aaron was so great a Man in his own Tribe, (See
IV. 14.) and married into so honorable a Family in Israel, (v. 23.) that it is
not probable he would suffer his Son to match with an Egyptian Proselyte.

These are the Heads of the Fathers of the Levites, etc.] The great Persons,
from whom sprung the principal Families among the Levites. He says nothing of
the other Tribes; because his intention was only to derive his own Pedigree and
his Brother Aaron's from Israel.

Ver. 26. These are that Moses and Aaron, to whom the Lord said, bring out the
Children of Israel, etc.] These are the two Persons, to whom God gave
Commission, to be the Deliverers of their Nation out of the Egyptian Bondage.
He had mentioned, just before their Genealogy, the Charge God gave them, both
to the Children of Israel and unto Pharaoh, v. 13. And now he goes on to show
that they were the Men, who were peculiarly chosen by God to discharge that
Office; first by going to the Children of Israel, which he mentions here; and
then to Pharaoh, which he mentions in the next Verse.

Bring out the Children of Israel from the Land of Egypt.] Assure them of their
Deliverance, notwithstanding the Pressures under which they groan.

According to their Armies.] Not by a disorderly Flight; but every Family in
such good order, as an Army keeps, XII Exodus 41, 51. XIII. 18.

Ver. 27. These are they that spoke to Pharaoh, etc.] Who carried the Message
from God to Pharaoh, requiring him to let Israel go out of Egypt, V. 1, 2, etc.
VI. 13.

These are that Moses and Aaron.] He repeats it again, that all Generations
might mark who were the Men that God employed, in this great and hazardous.
Work of Demanding the Liberty of the Children of Israel from Pharaoh's
Servitude: and effecting it in such manner as is afterward related in this Book.

There have been Critical Wits, who made this an Argument, that Moses was not
the Author of these Books: because it is not likely, they imagine, he would
write thus of himself. But no Body but these Critics can see any Absurdity in
it, that he and his Brother, being the Instruments in Gods hand of effecting
such wonderful things, should not let Posterity be ignorant of it: but take
care not only to Record it, but to set a special Note upon it, that none might
rob them of the Honor God bestowed on them; and He (by whose direction this
was written) might have the glory of working such mighty things, by such inept
Instruments, as Moses often acknowledges himself to have been. Nor is this more
than Ezra, Nehemiah and Daniel say concerning themselves: and St. John may as
well be denied to be the Author of the Gospel which bears his Name, because he
says, This is the Disciple that testifies these things, etc. XXI. 24. And
besides this, the History of succeeding Ages show us the necessity of this,
which Moses has said of himself. For if he had not told us what his Progeny
was, we see by what we read in Justin and Corn. Tacitus, and such like
Authors, what false Accounts we should have of him: for Justin, from Trogus
Pompeius, makes him (as I observed before) the Son of Joseph. Nay, the Jewish
Writers have been so fabulous, that we should have learnt as little Truth from
them, if Moses had not told it us himself.

Ver. 28. And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spoke unto Moses, etc.]
Having finished the Account he thought fit to give of himself and of his
Brother, whom God was pleased to employ in this great Embassy; he resumes the
Relation of it, which he broke off at the end of v. 13.

Ver. 29. That the LORD spoke unto Moses saying, I am the LORD, etc.] This and
the next Verse, seem to be a Recapitulation of what God said in his last
Appearances to him, v. 2, 10, etc. and of his desire to be excused from the
Employment on which he was sent; urged by two Arguments, v. 12, 13. where they
are related something more largely than they are here, in the last Verse of
this Chapter. In which he mentions them again; that there might be a clearer
connection, with what God further added for his Encouragement, when he gave him
the forenamed Charge ( v. 13.) to deliver a new Message unto Pharaoh.

Ver. 30. And Moses said before the LORD.] We read the very same v. 12. which
makes me think this is not a new Objection; but merely a Recital of what he had
objected there. See what I have said on the foregoing Verse.

Behold I am of uncircumcised Lips, etc.] See v. 12.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses.] He received new Orders from the
SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty; before whom he stood, VI. 12, 30.

See.] Mark what I say, in answer to all thy Objections.

I have made thee a God to Pharaoh.] Therefore why should thou fear to
appear before him, who is but a Man? Moses is not called absolutely a God; but
only a God unto Pharaoh. Which denotes that he had only the Authority and Power
of God over him: or rather, he was God's Ambassador to speak to him in his
Name; with a Power ready to Execute all that he desired, for the Humbling of
Pharaoh, and Punishing his Disobedience to his Message.

And Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet.] Let therefore the Uncircumcision
of thy Lips, be no longer an Objection: for he shall interpret thy Mind, as
Prophets declare the Mind of God.

Some slight Wits have from this place also drawn an Argument, that this Book
was not written by Moses: but by some other Author long after his time.
Because the word Nabi, they fancy, was not now in use to signify a Prophet: as
appears, say they, from 1 Samuel IX. 9. where it is said, He that is now called
(Nabi) a Prophet, was before time called (Roch) a Seer. Which seems to signify
that the word Nabi (which Moses here uses for a Prophet) was but newly come
into use, in Samuel's days. But this is very far from Samuel's meaning: whose
plain sense is this, that he who foretold things to come, or discovered
secrets, was anciently called a Seer, not a Prophet. Which signified heretofore
only an Interpreter of the Divine Will: but now they began, in Samuel's days,
to apply the word Nabi (or Prophet) to those who could reveal any Secret, or
foresee Things future. Which had not been the use of the word formerly: but it
signified, as I said, one that was familiar with God, and knew his Mind, and
delivered it to others: as I observed upon XX Genesis 7. where God himself calls
Abraham a Prophet; as he here calls Aaron. And what holy Writer would dare to
alter the word which God himself used? Which is far more proper also to this
purpose than either ROEH or CHOSEH (which these Men sancy were the words in use
in Moses his time, not Nabi) for they do not answer the intention of God in
this Speech concerning Aaron. Who was not to see, and Divine, or to receive
Revelations from God; but to be a Mouth to Moses; to utter what God revealed to
him, not to Aaron. Which is the original signification of the word Nabi: there
being no derivation of it so natural, that I can find, as that of R. Solomon's,
from the word Nub, which signifies to utter, or to bring forth, X Prove. 31.

Ver. 2. Thou shall speak all that I command thee, etc.] This explains the
latter end of the former Verse: that Moses should deliver God's Mind to Aaron;
and Aaron should deliver it to Pharaoh: requiring him from God to dismiss the
Children of Israel out of his Country.

Ver. 3. And I will harden Pharaoh's heart.] Or, but I will harden, etc. which
Avenarius translates, I will permit his heart to be hardened. Though there is no
need of it; for God here only foretells what Pharaoh would force him to do, (See
IV. 21.) after several Signs and Wonders had been wrought to move him to
Obedience. For he was so stupid, and hardened his heart so often, (VIII. 15,
32.) that in conclusion God hardened him, by withdrawing all good motions from
him. And therefore, the first time that Jehovah is said to harden his heart,
there is a special remembrance of this, that the LORD had foretold it, IX. 12.

And multiply my Signs and my Wonders, etc.] The first Plagues that were
inflicted on him, proving ineffectual; it was necessary to send more and
greater, that if it had been possible, his heart might have been mollified.

Ver. 4. But Pharaoh will not hearken unto you.] Or rather, and Pharaoh shall
not hearken to your demands. For this was the effect of his hardening.

That I may lay my Hand upon Egypt.] Smite all their Firstborn: upon which
immediately followed their march out of Egypt.

And bring forth mine Armies, etc.] All the Tribes of the Children of Israel:
which were so multiplied, that every one of them singly made an Army. See VI.
26.

By great Judgments.] That is, grievous Plagues; which he inflicted on them,
one after another. And thereby made good his word, that Moses should be a God
to Pharaoh, v. 1. that is, a Judge, as the word Elohim sometimes signifies. See
VI. 6.

Ver. 5. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD.] Be convinced, or
made sensible that none can withstand me.

When I stretch forth my hand against Egypt, etc.] This was most especially
fulfilled, when he smote their Firstborn, which made them look upon themselves
as lost Men, if they continued disobedient, XII. 33.

Ver. 6. And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commaded them, so did they.] He
repeats what he says of their Obedience to God's Commands, because from this
time forward, they no longer disputed, nor made any Objection; but roundly went
about their business.

Ver. 7. And Moses was fourscore years old, etc.] The Israelites were under an
heavy Persecution when Moses was born; and God exercised their Patience (it
appears by this) a very long time, that their Deliverance might be for ever
remembered with the greater Thankfulness and Obedience. Such grave Persons as
these were fittest to be employed as God's Commissioners in this Affair: for
they could not well be thought to be hotheaded Men, who thrust themselves
forward into this Embassy, without a Warrant. So some of the Jews very
judiciously have observed, that God made choice of aged Men to work all his
Miracles before Pharaoh, and to receive his Revelations, because they were not
apt to invent, nor to be under the power of Fancy, at those years. See Sepher
Cosri, L. I. Sect. 83. where Buxtorf notes that Aben Ezra observes upon this
place, That none besides Moses and Aaron ever prophesyed in their old Age;
because they were more excellent than all the Prophets.

Ver. 8. And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying.] When they were about
to renew their Address to Pharaoh, God was pleased again to appear and give
them his Directions in their Proceedings.

Ver. 9. When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, show a Miracle for you.] It
was likely that Pharaoh would, when he was not in a Passion, ask, How shall I
know that you come from God with this Message to me? give me some proof of your
Authority: And such a proof as can be done by none, but by the Power of God.
And therefore God directs Moses what to do in this case.

Say unto Aaron, Take thy Rod.] The same Rod, is sometime called the Rod of
God, (IV. 20.) sometime Moses his Rod, and sometime Aarons: as we find it in
many places, v. 10. and 19. of this Chapter; and VIII. 5.19, etc. Because God
wrought all the following Miracles by this Rod; which sometimes Moses and
sometimes Aaron held in their hand. But commonly Moses delivered it unto Aaron,
as an Agent under him, to stretch it out for the effecting of Wonders. For he
tells Pharaoh, in this very Chapter, that with the Rod, which was in his hand,
he would smite the Waters, etc. v. 17. And immediately the LORD bad him Say
unto Aaron, Take thy Rod, and stretch out thy hand upon the Waters of Egypt, v.
19. By which it appears he had delivered the Rod unto Aaron. For a Rod being
the Ensign of Authority, Prophets were wont to carry one in their hand, in
token of their Office. And so did the Egyptian Magicians also, who had every
one their Rod ready to throw down, v. 12. And Mercury, whom the Egyptians
counted a Prophet (and thence called him Anubis) was represented with a Wand in
his hand.

And cast it before Pharaoh.] As God had before directed Moses, IV. 3, 21.

Ver. 10. And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and did so as the LORD
commanded them.] At their first Address to Pharaoh they only delivered their
Message; but did nothing to confirm it, V. 1, etc. Nor were they commanded now
to work any Miracle, unless Pharaoh demanded one. Which it is likely he did;
this second Address to him, moving him to ask, How shall I know that you come
from God?

And Aaron cast down his Rod before Pharaoh and before his Servants.] The great
Men of the Court, who are always supposed to be present where the King was;
though not mentioned in the foregoing Verse.

And it became a Serpent.] See IV. 3. where we read that Moses himself, when
this Change was first made, fled from before it; the sight of it was so
terrible. And therefore it is highly probable, that Pharaoh and his Servants
were no less startled, at the first appearance of it. Artapanus relates several
other Miracles besides this, in Eusebius his Praepan. Evang. p. 434, 435, and
441. which I mention to show that the Fame of Moses's Miracles was spread among
the Heathen: who were so far from disbelieving them, that they gave credit to
other false Reports, which some ill People had mingled with them.

Ver. 11. Then Pharaoh also called the Wise men.] When he had recovered the
fright in which we may well suppose him to have been, he sent some of his
Servants, to call in those who he thought could cope with Moses and Aaron in
wonderful Works.

Wise men.] This word is sometimes used in a good sense: and therefore to show
they were such, as we now call Cunning-men, he joins another word to it, which
is never taken in a good sense, viz.

Sorcerers.] Which most take to be such as we call Juglers; who cast mists, as
we speak, before Men's eyes; and make things appear otherwise than they really
are. For the Hebrew word Cischeph (from whence comes Macaschephim, which we
translate Sorcerers) signifies to delude the sight with false Appearances. Sir
John Marsham puts these two words together, and (by the figure of (...))
translates them, accersivit peritissimos artis magicae, he called the most
skilful Persons in the Magical Art, Chron. Can. Secul. IX.

Now the Magicians of Egypt.] This is a third word, which seems to be of worse
import, than the two former. Some translate it Necromancers: but it being a
foreign word, we cannot determine its particular meaning: though in general, no
doubt, it signifies men, that by evil Arts, performed amazing things: Such as
Simon Magus and Elymas in after times. See XLI Genesis 8. and Bochart in his
Hierozoicon P. 2. L. IV. Cap. XVIII.) where he has a large Discourse, about
the meaning of this word Chartumim: which, after all that others have said
about it, he thinks comes from the word Retan: which in Arabic and Chaldee
signifies to murmur, as Magicians were wont to do in their Incantations. So
Hartun is properly (...) an Inchanter. And the Name of (...) (the same with
Hecate) he thinks alludes to it; whom Magicians were wont frequently to invoke.

The Names of the principal Magicians at this time among the Egyptians, were
Jannes and Jambres, as not only St. Paul, 2 Timothy III. 8. but several, both
Jewish, Greek and Roman Writers tell us. I will mention but one, the Author of
Schalsch-Hakkabalah, who calls them by these names; and says that in our
Language we would call them Johannes and Ambrosius. The Reader may find a great
many more, if he please, in Primate Usher's Annals ad A.M. 2513. and in
Bochart's Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 53. p. 645. Artapanus in Eusebius calls
them (...), Priests at Memphis, whom Pharaoh sent for to oppose Moses.

The Original of which sort of Men seems to have been this; that God being
pleased to admit the holy Patriarchs to familiar Colloquies with him, the Devil
endeavored to imitate him; that he might keep Men in his Obedience, by
pretending Discoveries of Secret things to them. And when God was pleased to
work Miracles for the confirmation of the Truth, the Devil directed these Men,
who were familiar with him, how to invoke his help, for the performance of
strange things, which confirmed them in their Errors.

They also did in like manner with their Enchantments.] If the Hebrew word come
from lahat which signifies a flame, (See III Genesis 24.) it seems to denote such
Sorcerers as dazzled Men's eyes, and then imposed on them by shows and
appearances of things, which had no real being. But it may be derived from
laat, which signifies hidden and secret; and then denotes those that used
secret Whispers or Murmurs, as Inchanters did (as Bochartus in the place now
mentioned interprets it) or such as had secret Familiarity with Demons; as it
is expounded in the Gemara Sanhedrin, Cap. VII. n. 10. where there are many
Examples of the former sort of Enchantments, by the deception of the sight. For
instance, R. Asche relates that he saw a Magician blow his Nose, and bring
pieces of Cloth out of it. And R. Chajah saw one cut a Camel in pieces with his
Sword, and then set it together again: which was nothing, says he, but the
delusion of the Eye. Several other stories are told of the same Nature.

Ver. 12. For they cast down every Man his Rod.] They were sent for to confront
Moses, and therefore attempted to do the very same thing that he had done. For
they took him for a mere Magician, like themselves; and it was a common thing
in ancient times, for such kind of Men to contend one with another. And their
great study was (as Gaulmy has observed in his Notes upon The Life and Death
of Moses, written by a Jew, p. 241, etc.) to find out the Genius that attended
their Opposer; whom they strove to gain to their side; or to terrify him by a
greater and more powerful Angel. And they only were insuperable who had a Deity
to their genius; as Porphyry says Plotinus had. Who contending with Olympius
an Egyptian, when his Genius was called (...), to appear visibly; there came a
God and not a Demon. Which made the Egyptian cry out, (...), he is happy who
has a God for his Genius, as I suppose it should be interpreted. And thus the
Jewish Author of The Life and Death of Moses, fancies that these Magicians who
resisted Moses, turned over all their Books to sind out the Name of that Deity,
by which he did wonders, so much superior to theirs, etc.

And they became Serpents.] Not real Serpents, but seeming, as Josephus
understood it, and several Christian Writers: Particularly Sedulius L. IV.
Carm. -- imagine ficta
Visibus humanis Magicas tribuere figuras.
I omit other ancient Authors, who suppose that as Spirits can assume Bodies
like to Men, so they can as easily, out of the same Air, make the appearance of
a Serpent; just as Circe is said in Homer to have changed Vlysses's Companions
into Hoggs. But there are those who take these to have been real Serpents,
brought hither by the power of the Devil: who withdrew their Rods, and put
these (which he suddenly transported from some other place) in their room.
Which if it be true, it makes the Power that wrought by Moses the more
wonderful; whose Serpent devoured them all.

But Aaron 's Rod swallowed up their Rods.] The Serpent, into which Aaron's Rod
was turned, moved toward them, and eat them up. Which was, as I said, the more
astonishing, if they were real Serpents, of the same bigness (as we may well
suppose they would endeavor to bring) with that of Moses. However their
Serpents (whatsoever they were) could not stand before his; but were swallowed
up, while his still remained. This might have convinced Pharaoh, if his
Magicians had not made him believe, that they would in time sind a Power
superious to Moses. The Jews also imagine Pharaoh himself was a Magician; and
helped to get out of Moses the Secret, whereby he wrought these Wonders. Which
were the greater, because Moses, no doubt, in conclusion, took this Serpent by
the Tail (as God had commanded him, IV. 4.) and it became a Rod in his hand
again. Whereas the Egyptian Sorcerers had no Rods remaining to take up; they
being vanished with their Serpents. Greg. Nyssen L. de Vita Mosis, p. 173.
takes the devouring of their Rods to have been a plain Argument, (...), etc.
that the Rods, i. e. Serpents of the Magicians, had no vital power in them,
able to defend themselves; but were mere Delusions, without any real virtue.
And here I cannot but take notice of a remarkable Passage in Numenius a
Pythagoraean Philosopher, recorded by Eusebius L. IX. Praepar. Evang. Cap.
VIII. where he tells us, that Numenius (in this third Book (...)) expressly
says that Jannes and Jambres were (...), inferior to none in Magical Skill;
and therefore chosen by the common consent of the Egyptians to oppose Musaeus
(as the Heathens call Moses) the Leader of the Jews: of whom he gives this
noble Character, that he was a Man most powerful with God in Prayer, (...).
Which is a plain Confession, that he took Moses to be as he is called in these
Books, a Man of God: and may serve to shame those, who either believe not this
History, or think Moses to have been only a great Magician.

Ver. 13. And he hardened Pharaoh 's heart; or rather Pharaoh's heart was
hardened.] For so we translate this very Hebrew Phrase, v. 22. and I can give no
account, why we translate it otherwise here. Especially since the Vulgar and
the Chaldee so render it, and the LXX. also in this Verse, (...) Pharaoh 's
heart grew stiff; or, waxed strong and stubborn. And v. 22. (...) his heart was
hardened. And it is plainly the like form of Speech with that in the next Verse
14. where God himself interprets his own meaning, Pharaoh's heart (...) is
heavy, and will not stir. Nor is there in any of these three Verses, the least
mention of any Person by whom his heart was hardened.

That he hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had said.] It is likely upon the
first sight of the Serpent, his heart was inclined to hearken; but seeing the
Magicians do the same, it returned to its first bent: and there fixed,
notwithstanding Moses's Rod devoured theirs. This God had predicted III. 19.
knowing his wicked Disposition would not yield to any means he should think sit
to use, for his Reformation.

Ver. 14. And the LORD said unto Moses, etc.] It is likely Moses, after he had
been with Pharaoh, and wrought this Miracle, returned to the place where the
Divine Majesty was wont to appear unto him, (VI. 12, 30.) and gave him an
account of what had passed. Whereupon the LORD told him, he saw Pharaoh was
resolved in his way; and therefore it would be to no purpose to wait to see,
what would be the effect of the late Miracle: but bid him go the next Morning,
and carry a threatening Message to him.

Pharaoh 's heart is hardened, he refuses to let the People go.] It is
observable that he does not say, I have hardened Pharaoh's heart, (and therefore
there should have been no such intimation, in our translation of v. 13.) but
Pharaoh's heart is hardened. Which can imply no other hardening, than what
proceeded from his own settled Resolution, not to lose the Service of the
Israelites.

Ver. 15. Get thee unto Pharaoh in the Morning.] Of the very next day, after he
had wrought the foregoing Miracle: And now begins the first of the Ten Plagues
which God sent upon the Egyptians, for disobeying his Ambassadors. Whose
Treaty with Pharaoh, as Jacobus Capellus ( ad A. M. 2502.) thinks, continued
about Eleven Months; from the end of Harvest (which he makes account was in our
May) to the beginning of the next year: which is the Opinion of the Hebrew
Doctors. But our excellent Primate Usher thinks, that all the following Plagues
were inflicted within the space of One Month; in such order of time, as I shall
observe in the beginning of each of them. And Bochartus gives good reason for
it, in his Hierozoic. P. 2. L. IV. Cap. VIII. For we are told here, v. 7. that
Moses was fourscore years old, when he began to treat with Pharaoh: and in V
Josh. 6. that they walked forty years in the Wilderness. Now if he had spent a
year in inflicting these Plagues, Moses, who died just as they were entering
into Canaan, must have been an Hundred and one and twenty years old: whereas he
was but an Hundred and twenty, as we read XXXIV Deuteronomy. 5. Nor was it suitable to
the Divine Goodness to be so long in delivering his People, who were reduced to
extreme Misery. It was but just also, that God should follow Pharaoh, whose
heart was so obstinately hard, with one Plague upon the neck of another; and
give him no time to breathe, after one was removed, before another came upon
him.

Lo, he goes out unto the Water.] God, who knows all things, foresaw his
motion before hand; and speaks as if he then saw him actually going out of his
Palace to the River: Either to walk there for Recreation; or to Worship the
River Nile. For as Bochart (whose words these are) observes out of Plutarch,
(...), Nothing was had in such honor among the Egyptians as the River Nile. If
it was so in Moses his days, it is not unlikely that he went to pay his Morning
Devotions to it. Or, if he were a Magician, as the Hebrews fancy, he might be
skilled in that which they call (...) For so, he observes, they say in the
Talmud: and make this the reason of Pharaoh's going to the River. Which
Jonathan follows in his Paraphrase, Behold, he goes out to observe Divinations
upon the Water, as a Magician, Hierozoic. P. 2. L. IV. Cap. XV.

And thou shall stand by the Rivers brink against he come.] Perhaps Pharaoh (as
the same Bochart observes) had forbid him to come any more to the Court; and so
God directs him to take this occasion to meet with him.

And the Rod which was turned into a Serpent, shall thou take in thine hand.]
To give him the greater Authority, and to put Pharaoh in fear at the sight of
that Rod, which had lately swallowed up all the (...) (as Greg. Nyssen calls
them) Magical Staves which encountered him.

Ver. 16. And thou shall say, the LORD God of the Hebrews has sent me unto
thee, saying.] See V. 3. To which add, that it is plain by this whole Story,
that all the Messages delivered by Moses, and all the Answers which Pharaoh
returned, were true and formal Treaties of a Solemn Embassage (as Dr. Jackson
speaks) upon which Moses was sent to the King of Egypt, from the LORD God of
the Hebrews; that is, their King (as he was become in a peculiar manner) under
whom Moses acted as his Deputy or Viceroy.

Let my People go, that they may serve me, etc.] The merciful kindness of God
to an hardened Sinner is here very remarkable, in renewing his Message, and
giving him Warning of what would come upon him, if he did not yield. Whereas he
might in Justice have inflicted it, without any Notice of his Intentions. He
sets before him also his Sin, and his Danger, in being hitherto Disobedient;
and behold, hitherto thou would not hear: i. e. thou have provoked the Divine
Majesty, by disregarding several Messages I have brought to thee from him.

Ver. 17. Thus says the LORD.] Attend to this new Message I bring to thee in
his Name.

In this thou shall know that I am the LORD.] He had asked in a contemptuous
way, Who is the LORD? and said after a supercilious manner, I know him not, (
v. 2.) nor indeed cared to know him; but slighted him and his Messengers; as
the word know not sometime signifies, being as much as not to regard. Therefore
now he bids Moses tell him, He would make him know, that he was the Omnipotent
LORD of the World; by the change of the Waters of the River (which Pharaoh
perhaps adored) into Blood.

Behold, I will smite with the Rod, that is in mine hand.] God and Moses are
represented in this History, as one Person (according to what he had said v. 1.
of this Chapter) and therefore it was the same thing to say, the LORD (whose
words Moses had begun to recite) will smite; or, to say, I will smite. See v.
16. It is to be observed also, that Aaron smote the River, v. 19. but it being
by Moses his Direction and Order, it was counted his Act: so that he might say,
I will smite, etc.

The Waters of the River, and they shall be turned into Blood.] This Plague was
the more remarkable, because, as Theodoret here observes, they having drowned
the Hebrew Children in this River, God now punishes them for it, by giving them
bloody Water to drink, XII Wisd. 7, 8. And if they had the same Notions then,
that the Egyptians had in future times, the Plague was the more terrible,
because it fell on that, which they thought had some Divinity in it, and (as
the same Theodoret observes) was honored as a God; because it made Plenty,
when it overflowed its Banks.

The Hebrew Doctors add another reason for this Punishment; because the
Egyptians had hindered them from their wonted Baptisms, (as the Author of The
Life and Death of Moses speaks) that is, says Gaulmyn, from Purifying
themselves in the River by Bathing, after they had lain in of their Children:
which in the scarcity of Water in that Country, could no where be done but in
the River.

Ver. 18. And the Fish that is in the River shall die, etc.] Here are three
grievous Effects of this Plague: It deprived them of their most delicious Food,
for so their Fish were, XI Numb. 5. And took away the Pleasure they had of
washing by the Rivers side, because it stank (both by the death of the Fish,
and the corruption of the Blood, through the heat of the Sun) by which means
the Water was made unfit for their Drink.

Ver. 19. And the LORD spoke unto Moses.] After he had been with Pharaoh, and
delivered this Message to him.

Say unto Aaron, take thy Rod and stretch out thy hand.] This Warning being
despised by Pharaoh, who would not relent; God requires them actually to do as
he had threatened. And now Moses had delivered his Rod to Aaron, that he might
by his Authority execute this Judgment.

Upon the Waters of Egypt.] These are general words, comprehending all the
particulurs following.

Upon their Streams.] There were seven Branches into which the River Nile was
divided, before it fell into the Sea: which seem to be here understood; being
called, IX Isa. 15. the seven Streams, or Rivers of Egypt.

Upon their Rivers.] There were several Cuts made by Art, out of every Stream,
to draw the Water into their Grounds: which seem to be here meant by Rivers.

And upon their Ponds.] These were dug to hold rain water, when it fell; as
it did sometimes: and near the River also, they dug Wells it is likely,
which may be here intended.

And upon all Pools of Water.] There were, here and there, other Collections of
Water: particularly in their Gardens, derived by Pipes from the River, into
Cisterns.

In Vessels of Wood, or of Stone.] Wherein Water was kept in private Houses,
for their present use.

Ver. 20. And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded, etc.] This first
Plague our Primate Usher makes account was inflicted about the XVIIIth day of
the Sixth Month: which in the next year, and ever after, became the Twelfth
Month. Artapanus tells this Story otherwise; but it is evident he had heard of
it among the Gentiles: and Ezekiel the Tragaedian relates it all right;
together with the following Miracle. See Eusebius. Praepar. Evang. L. IX. Cap.
XXIX. p. 442. Nor is there any thing more frequent in the Roman Story (as
Huetius observes, L. II. Alnet. Quaestion. Cap. XII. n. 12.) than Relations of
Rivers of Blood flowing out of the Earth; Pits full of Blood, showers of Blood,
and Waters of Rivers changed into Blood, etc.

And he lift up the Rod, and smote the Waters that were in the River, etc.]
Here is mention only of Smiting the Water in the River. And it is likely, that
only the Waters of the River were turned into Blood (as it here follows) at the
first lifting up of his Rod; and then all the rest of the Waters mentioned in
the precedent Verse.

Ver. 21. And the Fish that was in the River died, etc.] All the effects of
this Plague which were threatened, v. 18. (See there) immediately following. The
first of which was the death of the Fish; which perished in such great numbers,
that the River stank, etc.

And there was Blood throughout all the Land of Egypt.] The Waters were in all
places turned into Blood, except perhaps the Land of Goshen: which is not
comprehended under the Land of Egypt.

Ver. 22. And the Magicians of Egypt did so with their Enchantments.] See v.
11. In some of the Pools or Lakes of Water they made an appearance of the like
Change: which made Pharaoh think his God was as powerful as the God of the
Hebrews. The Land of Goshen, as I said, might possibly be free from this
Plague; as it was certainly from several of the rest; (VIII. 23. IX. 4, etc.)
and some fancy the Magicians had Water from thence, to show their power upon.
But I cannot think it probable, that they made Pharaoh stay so long: and one
may as well say they had it out of the Sea; or out of the Pits that the People
dug, v. 24. as Aben Ezra conjectures, and Justin. Martyr. Quaest. and Resp.
XXVI. ad Orthodox. But there is no need of any of these Conjectures, if it be
granted (as the History leads us to conclude) that Moses did not in a moment
change all the Waters of the Country, but only those of the River (as I said on
v. 20.) and afterward by degrees all the rest; when the Magicians had tried
their Art upon some of them. Which Moses also turned into real Blood; so that
neither they, nor any body else, was able to drink of them.

And Pharaoh 's heart was hardened.] The very same words in the Hebrew, which we
had before v. 13. where they should have been translated (I there observed) as
they are here; and also in VIII. 19.

Neither did he hearken unto them, as the LORD had said.] III. 19. This was
more apt to move his heart than the former Miracle, because it continued
longer, v. 25. and the Magicians could not by all their Spells, or Skill in
Sorcery, remove this Plague, in all that time. See next Verse.

Ver. 23. And Pharaoh turned and went unto his House.] It seems that upon his
refusal to hearken unto Moses his Monition ( v. 15, 16, etc.) God sent this
Plague that very Morning, before he got home to Dinner. So that there was not
time to fetch Water from distant places: but the Magicians exercised their
Enchantments upon some Ponds, which were not as yet turned by Moses into Blood.

Neither set he his heart to this also.] Here is the reason why his heart was
not moved by this Miracle. He did not seriously consider what Moses had done,
and examine the Difference between the Effect of his Power, and that of the
Magicians. Which was the cause that his heart was hardened (as we read before)
as all Men's are, who will think of nothing; but only to have their own Humor
satissied.

Ver. 24. And all the Egyptians dug round about the River for Water to
drink, etc.] The whole Country was forced to try to get Water to quench their
thirst, by this great labor. How it succeeded we are not told; but it is
likely they found clear Water, by percolation through the Earth. For Moses
smote only the Pits that were then in being, when Aaron stretched out his Rod:
which had no effect upon those which were dug afterward. Why they did not
setch it from Goshen, if there was any clear Water there (as we cannot but
think there was, for the use of the Israelites) is not easy to determine.
Their Pride perhaps would not suffer them, till they had tried other ways, to
supply their wants.

Ver. 25. And seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten the
River.] The Rod of Moses could effect nothing without the LORD; by whose Power
this Change was made in the Waters. Which lasted seven days before this Plague
was removed. By which means they were convinced that all the Waters were really
corrupted: and they felt the heavy Effects of it, in a grievous stench, and
perpetual Labor in digging Pits all about the River. Whether Pharaoh at last
begged to have this Plague removed, or no, we are not told. It is likely he was
so obstinate, that he would not stoop to ask this favor of them: which might
be the reason it lasted so long: to see whether he would be moved to humble
himself so far. To which when he would not yield, God took it away, to make
room for another stroke: or, as some think, it continued together with the
Plague of Frogs; and were both removed upon his Petition.

It is a weak Conjecture of the Hebrew Doctors, from these Words, that all the
Ten Plagues lasted seven days apiece; which is plainly contrary to the Story.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses.] Who attended upon the Divine Majesty,
we may reasonably suppose, every day, to know his Pleasure. And after the seven
days (mentioned v. last, of the foregoing Chapter) were fulfilled; the LORD
commanded him to Address himself again to Pharaoh: and to threaten him with a
new Punishment; which was inflicted upon the XXVth day of the sixth Month; and
taken away the day after, v. 10.

Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus says the LORD, etc.] The very same
Message, in effect, which he had delivered to him before, V.I. VII. 16, 17.

Ver. 2. And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, etc.] He again threatens
the Plague before he inflicts it; both that Pharaoh might know it came not by
chance, but by the determinate Counsel of God; and that he might prevent it by
Repentance and Submission to God's Command.

I will smite.] This word commonly signifies in the Scripture Language, to
kill; but here only to afflect grievously. See LXXVIII Psalm 45. where to
destroy them, signifies to annoy them.

All thy Borders.] Every part of his Country, to the utmost extent of it, i.e.
in all places where the Egyptians dwelt. For it is not likely the Israelites
were infested with them. See v. 4.

With Frogs.] The Hebrew word Tsaphadea signifies, as Eben Ezra thinks, an
Egyptian Fish: which some will have to be a Crocodile: As Gaulmyn observes in
his Annnotations on the Life and Death of Moses, p. 256. But this is
undoubtedly false; for they could not infest them in that manner, as is
described in the next Verse.

Ver. 3. And the River shall bring forth.] Under the Name of the River, is
comprehended all the Streams, Ponds, Lakes, and other Waters in Egypt, (as
appears from v. 5.) For most of them came, one way or other, out of the River:
they having little Rain in Egypt.

Frogs abundantly.] The Nile naturally produced Frogs, but such great abundance
of them as silled the Country, was miraculous; especially being produced on a
sudden; and their going out of the River and Fields, into the Cities and
Houses, etc. was still more miraculous.

Which shall go up.] Out of the River: which lay lower than the Land.

And come into thine House, etc.] This explains, what he meant by smiting in
the foregoing Verse: viz. inflicting a sore Plague, more grievous than the
former. For that spoiled only their Water, but not their other Liquors: whereas
this made them uneasy Day and Night, in every place; whether they sat, or
walked, or lay down, or did eat and drink. For their very Dough (as we translate
the word of this Verse, in the Margin) was infested with them, as soon as they
had kneaded it; and so was their Drink in all likelihood, as soon as it was
poured into their Cups. Nay, they got into their Ovens: so that for the
present, I suppose, they could not bake their bread.

Ver. 4. And the Frogs shall come up both upon thee, and upon thy People, etc.]
They came not merely into their Houses, but crawled upon their Persons. And
here it is observable, that this Plague is limited to the Egyptians ( Pharaoh,
his People, and Servants) the Israelites, one would think by these words, being
exempted from it.

Ver. 5. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, say unto Aaron, etc.] No doubt, Moses
delivered the foregoing Message unto Pharaoh; but he, it seems, turned away,
and would give no Answer: For here immediately follows a new Order (which God
perhaps gave Moses upon the spot, as we speak, before he returned home) to
inflict the Plague he had bid him threaten.

Ver. 6. And Aaron stretched forth his hand.] He, as the Minister of Moses (who
was to him as God, IV. 16.) inflicted this Plague upon Egypt.

Over the Waters.] He did not go to every place, where there was Water, but
stood by the River, and stretched his Rod over it, toward every part of the
Country (as Eben Ezra rightly explains it) and immediately God effected what
Moses had denounced.

And the Frogs came up, and covered the Land of Egypt.] That is, there were
vast numbers of them came up: for they did not so cover the Land, but there was
room for more; which the Magicians counterfeited. The Jews think here was,
Mensura pro Mensura, like for like, as we speak. For they say it was a piece of
their Bondage, that the Egyptians, when they pleased, sent them a fishing: and
now God made the River spawn nothing but Frogs. Whose very croaking, others of
them think, put the Egyptians in mind of the Cries of the poor Children whom
they barbarously murdered.

Ver. 7. And the Magicians did so with their Enchantments, etc.] They should
rather have shown their skill in removing the Frogs, or destroying those which
Moses had brought. Which one would think Pharaoh expected from them; for they
being unable to do this, he betook himself to Moses, whom he entreats to take
them away: which he would never have done, if their power had not quite failed,
and been unable to give him any relief. So Aben Ezra observes, he called for
Moses; because he saw the Magicians had only added to the Plague, but could not
diminish it.

Ver. 8. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, entreat the LORD,
that he may take away the Frogs, etc.] He that had proudly said not long ago,
Who is the LORD? etc. V. 2. now says, Entreat the LORD, etc. This was an
acknowledgment that the LORD sent them; and that he only had power to remove
them. In the former Plague, he did enough to make Pharaoh know he was the LORD,
VII. 17. but this had that effect upon him for the present: which made him
earnestly entreat those, whom he had scorned, to become Intercessors to God for
him and his People.

And I will let the People go, that they may do Sacrifice unto the LORD.] This
was not his settled Resolution, but the present Danger made him consent to it:
For if the Frogs had continued long, there had been no living in the Country.
As appears from what we read in Athenaeus, out of Heraclides Lembus ( Lib.
VIII. Deipnos. Cap. 2.) who says the whole Country of Paeonia and Dardania were
covered with Frogs, which God rained down from Heaven in such abundance, that
the Houses and Highways were full of them. They spent some time in killing of
them; and, by keeping their Doors shut, they made a shift for a while to bear
this Calamity: but when it did no good, but (...), etc. all their Vessels were
full of them, and they mingled themselves with their Meat, whether boiled or
roast; and they could tread no where but upon Frogs, they left their Country;
being forced to it also, by the stench of the Frogs when they died.

They that would see more of this, out of several other Authors, may consult
Bonfrerius upon this very place: and Bochartus in his Hierozoic. P. 2. L. V.
Cap. 2. p. 661, etc.

Ver. 9. And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me, when shall I entreat for
thee.] Do thou appoint the time when I shall pray for thee, as St. Hierom
translates it; and so does the Syriack, and Onkelos, and the LXX. who differ
from the Hebrew Text in words only, not in sense. For by adding the word saying
(as we do in VII Judge. 2. where there is the same expression) this Paraphrase
of Bochart is very proper, ( Hierozoic. P. 2. L. V. Cap. 2.) though it belongs
not to thee to determine the time of thy Deliverance, which depends wholly upon
the Will and Pleasure of God; yet I, who am his Minister, give thee leave to
take so much upon thee, as to prescribe what time thou please, for the
removal of this Plague. For thus he thinks Moses his words are to be
translated, Glory over me, by telling me, when I shall intercede for thee, etc.
Moses saw perhaps that Pharaoh was much addicted to Astrologers, who fancied
all things here below to be governed by the Motion and Influence of the Stars:
and therefore would have him name the time; that he might be satisfied there
was no day nor hour under such an ill Aspect, but he could prevail with God, at
any Moment he thought good to pitch upon, to Deliver him.

Bonfrerius, I think, has expressed in short the literal sense of the Hebrew
words, Tibi hunc honorem defero, ut eligas quando, etc. I will do thee the
honor, that thou may assign the time. And our Dr. Jackson still shorter,
Glory over me, that is, says he, you shall command me.

Ver. 10. And he said, to morrow.] But why not on that very day? all Men
naturally desiring to be instantly relieved from their Sufferings. Perhaps he
thought (as we said before) to try Moses his Power; believing the next day not
to be so lucky as the present, on which Moses had condescended to his Request.
Or it might now be toward night, when he called for Moses: who, he thought,
would expect some time to pray to God, for what he desired.

Be it according to thy word.] Thou shall have thy desire.

That thou may know there is none like unto the LORD our God.] May no
longer depend upon thy Magicians and their Gods: being convinced, that our God
alone, whom we call JEHOVAH, can wound and heal.

Ver. 11. And the Frogs shall depart from thee, etc.] This demonstrated the
power of Moses with God, that he could as certainly foretell the removal of the
Frogs, as he had done the bringing them upon the Land.

Ver. 12. And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh.] To the place, it is
likely, where Moses was wont to attend upon the Divine Majesty.

And Moses cried unto the LORD because of the Frogs.] In the Hebrew the words
are, Cried to him about the business, or the matter, of the Frogs, which God
had sent upon Pharaoh. Or, as Aben Ezra understands it, concerning the Frogs,
which he had promised Pharaoh should be removed: as if the words should be
translated thus, He cried unto the LORD concerning what he said about the
Frogs, and appointed unto Pharaoh. For so the word Sham in XV. 25. signifies to
appoint or propose, and so the LXX. here translate the words (which we render
had brought against Pharaoh) (...), as he had appointed to Pharaoh.

Ver. 13. And the LORD did according to the word of Moses.] So powerful was he
with God in Prayer, as the Heathens themselves observed, from this Story. See
what I observed out of Numenius, VII. 12.

And the Frogs died, etc.] The Egyptians could not kill them; but God took away
their breath: yet not removing them from the places where they were, but
leaving them dead there. As appears by what follows:

Ver. 14. And they gathered them together on heaps.] That they might carry
them, it is likely, into the River; and so they might go down into the Sea. God
could have dissolved them into Dust (if he had pleased) or swept them into the
River from whence they came; or made them quite vanish in an instant. But he
would have them lie dead before their eyes; as a Token they were real Frogs,
and no Illusion of their sight.

And the Land stank.] This was a further sensible Evidence, that they were real
Frogs.

Ver. 15. But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite.] That he was freed from
the great strait, in which he was. For the Hebrew word for respite, signifies
breathing or enlargement; and makes the sense to be this: that when the burden
that pressed him was taken off, so that he could take his breath, he was of
another mind, etc.

He hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them, etc.] Was not so good as his
word, ( v. 8.) but returned to his former Resolution, not to let Israel go.
Which Resolution grew so much more stubborn and obstinate, than it had been
before; by how much the Plague of the Frogs had softened his heart, and inclined
it to yield to God, more than the two former Miracles had done.

Ver. 16. And the LORD said unto Moses, say unto Aaron.] The LORD seems to have
given Pharaoh no warning of this Plague; but to have inflicted it immediately
upon the removal of the Frogs, viz. on the Twenty seventh day of the sixth
Month. For his breach of Faith, was such an high Provocation, that he deserved
no other Treatment, but a more notable Judgment.

Smite the Dust of the Land, that it may become Lice.] Some would have the
Hebrew word Cinnim to signify Gnats, or some such kind of Creature. Thus many
of the Ancients understand it; and Artapanus calls it (...) a flying sort of
living Creature: which made such Ulcers by its biting, as no Medicine could
cure. See Eusebius, L. IX. Praepar. Evang. p. 425. But Bochartus has
sufficiently proved that our Translation is right; and that out of the very
Text. For Gnats, and such like Insects, are bred in Fenny places; but these
were brought out of the Dust of the Earth.

Ver. 17. Aaron stretched out his hand with his Rod.] He still is the
Instrument to execute all the Judgments which Moses denounced; as he was his
Mouth to deliver all the Messages he carried to Pharaoh.

And smote the Dust of the Earth, and it became Lice.] This showed the Lice
were not a Natural Production; for they come out of the sweat and filth of Men's
Bodies, and of other Living Creatures.

In Man and Beast.] This proves they were Lice; which stick fast both to Men
and Beasts. Whereas Gnats, though they sting sorely, cannot be said to be in
Man and Beast: for they are a most restless Creature, continually buzzing
about, and never settling constantly in one place. And there were various sorts
of these Lice: for Beasts do not breed the same that Men do: nor have all
Beasts alike; but some are peculiar to Horses, others to Oxen, others to Sheep,
and others to Swine and Dogs.

All the Dust of the Land became Lice.] That is, Nothing could be seen but
Lice, where Dust was before. Or, Lice were mingled every where with the Dust.

Throughout all the Land of Egypt.] Not of Goshen (it is very probable) which
was inhabited mostly by Israelites.

Ver. 18. And the Magicians did so, etc.] Attempted and endeavored to do so;
by using their wonted Invocations and Rites of Incantation. For the common
saying among the Jews is very frivolous, That Demons have no power over
Creatures so small as Lice. The meaning of which, Gaulmyn thinks, they
themselves did not understand; which, according to the Principles of the
ancient Magic, was this: That all Animals had a particular Genius presiding
over them, by whose Assistance their Worshippers could do any thing among that
sort of Creatures. But this is meant only of perfect Animals, not of Insects
(among whom they reckoned Lice) which had no such heavenly Power waiting on
them. But if there had been any such Notions then, these Magicians sure would
have understood it; and not fruitlesly have attempted that, which they had no
hope to produce.

But they could not.] Though they had counterfeited the former Wonders; yet
here a stop is put to their Power, so that they themselves confess their
weakness.

So there were Lice upon Man, and upon Beast.] This seems to suggest, that
since they could not produce any new Lice, they attempted to remove those,
which Moses had brought upon the Country. But they failed in that also: for
notwithstanding all that they could do, both Men and Beasts were pestered with
Lice. The Hebrews say (in The Life and Death of Moses) that this Plague was
inflicted upon the Egyptians, for another piece of Oppression which they
exercised on the Israelites: to whom they said, Go, sweep our Houses, and sweep
our Streets, etc. therefore God made Lice to cover the Earth a Cubit deep. But
this favors too much of their fabulous invention. It is more pertinent to
observe, that though we read of particular Persons, who, for great Crimes, were
punished with the Plague of Lice, (See Huctius L. II. Quaest. Cap. XII. n. 12.)
yet we do not find in any Story a whole Nation infested with them; and that
both Men and Beasts, without Exception: the Magicians themselves, in all
likelihood, being sorely asslicted with them: which made them cry out as here
follows.

Ver. 19. Then the Magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the singer of God.] The
same with what is called in other places of Scripture, the hand of God, CIX
Psalm. 27. that is, his Power. There are those (particularly Bochartus) who
think these Magicians did not by these words, give Glory to God: but thought to
save their own Credit with Pharaoh, by telling him, that it was not Moses or
Aaron, who were too hard for them, but a Divine Power superior to them all. To
this purpose Jonathan. But they ought then to have been sensible that the Power
which they dealt withal, was far from being Supreme: being unable to assist
them upon all occasions. And, no doubt, God intended to confound them, by
taking that time to disable them, when they least expected it. For why should
not their Power have extended to such a small thing as this, when they had done
greater? But God would not let them always abuse Pharaoh with their Illusions;
and gave them a check, when they thought themselves most sure of Success.

And Pharaoh 's heart was hardened.] One would have rather expected to have
heard, that his heart began to relent, when he saw his Magicians not only
puzzled, but quite bafled; so that they owned Moses acted by a Power above
theirs. But this it was, not to stick to the good Resolutions which had lately
been wrought in him, v. 8. from which he not only revolted, but grew more
resolute not to yield to God. The effect of which was this further Induration:
it being natural for evil Men, who resist the Means of their Cure, to grow
worse and worse affected.

This Miracle also of the Lice, being more loathsome to Pharaoh, than terrible,
might happily be the reason (as Dr. Jackson conjectures) that he did not entreat
Moses and Aaron to pray for him: as he had done upon the sight of the Frogs;
and as he straightway did after he felt the next Plague of the Flies.

I cannot but add also this further reflection of his, ( Book X. on the Creed,
Chap. XL.) that though the singer of God was very remarkable in producing the
Lice, which the Magicians could not, yet it was no way remarkable in hardening
Pharaoh's heart. For it is neither said, nor intimated, that the singer of God
hardened it; but Pharaoh's heart was hardened, that is, remained obstinate. The
Cause of which was his not harkening to them, as it had been before, v. 15.

Ver. 20. And the LORD said unto Moses, rise up early in the Morning, and stand
before Pharaoh.] As he had ordered him to do, before he sent the second Plague,
VII. 15.

Lo, he comes forth to the Water.] This confirms what was said there, that in
the Morning it was usual with him to walk out by the River; either for his
Refreshment, or for his Devotion. Perhaps, that after washing, he might worship
the Rising Sun. For Moses is commanded, to rise up early in the Morning, and
present himself before him.

And say unto him, Thus says the LORD, let my People go, etc.] The same
Message he had often sent him (VII. 16, 17. VIII. 1.) together with an
Admonition and Warning of his Danger: which God had not given him before the
last Plague, v. 16.

Ver. 21. Behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, etc.] The Hebrew word
Arob, being generally thought to come from a word, which signifies to mingle,
Interpreters commonly think it denotes a mixture of several sorts of Creatures.
And some take it, as we seem here to do, for all manner of Flies: which Aquila
calls (...), all sorts of Insects. Others take it, as it is in our Margin, for
a mixture of noisome Beasts: and so the Author of The Life and Death of Moses;
God sent Lions, Wolves, Bears, and Leopards, and suck like wild Beasts, which
killed not only their Cattle in the Field, but their Children in their Houses.
And so Josephus expounds it, (...). But Bochartus has confuted this Notion, by
very good Arguments, in his Hierozoicon P. 2. L. IV. Cap. XV. where he shows no
words have more significations than the Hebrew word Arab: which signifies not
only to mingle, but among many other things, to obscure and darken. From whence
the Even time is called Ereb. And therefore, with great reason, he approves of
the LXX. Version, who translate it (...), a Flesh-sly, very bold and
troublesome; being not easily drove away: which infests Dogs very much,
especially about the flaps of their Ears. Some take it for that large black
fly, which fastens upon Beasts, and sucks their Blood, called Arob from its
black color: as Oreb from thence signifies a Crow. And so Philo describes this
fly, called Cynomya, that it is as impudent as a Dog; and makes its Assaults
with great Violence, like a Dart: fastening its Teeth so deep in the Flesh, and
sticking so close, that it makes Cattle run mad.

This Plague the Jews say (in the forenamed Book of The Life of Moses) was sent
upon the Egyptians, because of the hard Service they made the Israelites
undergo, in feeding their Cattle.

Ver. 22. And I will sever in that day the Land of Goshen, in which my People
dwell, etc.] Here now the distinguishing Mercy of God to the Israelites is
plainly expressed; which is to be understood in the foregoing Plagues. And the
Hebrew word, as well as the Chaldee, signifies, I will make a wondrous
difference. So Jonathan, in that day I will work a Miracle in the Land of
Goshen: For indeed it was a mavelous thing, that Countries so near one
another, should be in such a different Condition at the same time. And it was
the more wonderful, because there was such store of Cattle in Goshen, whose
Dung is apt to breed Flies.

That thou may know, that I am the LORD in the midst of the Earth.] Who
governs all things here below; or that have a special care of my People. For so
Bochart understood by Earth, the Land of Goshen. In the midst of which God is
said to be, because he defended and delivered them from this sore Calamity,
which their Neighbors suffered. For thus this Phrase is used in many places,
VII Deuteronomy. 22. XXIII. 14. XLVI Psalm. 6, etc. And thus Conr. Pellicanus seems to
have understood this Passage, which he interprets, you shall know that I am the
LORD, and Prince of this Country.

Ver. 23. I will put a division between thy People and my People, etc.] It is
repeated again, because it was a remarkable thing, and denoted the Israelites
to be God's peculiar People; for whom he had a singular favor. Which is the
reason that this Mercy is called here a Redemption (as the word in the Hebrew
signifies, which we translate division) because God exempted and delivered the
Israelites from those Flies, which sorely infested all the rest of Pharaoh's
Dominions.

To morrow shall this sign be.] The finger of God was so remarkable in the last
Plague, ( v. 19.) that his contemptuous disregard of it was very provoking: So
that God would forbear no longer than till the next Morning, before he scourged
him with this new Judgment. Which was very grievous and noisome, as appears by
the following words; especially by his willingness to grant more than he had
done before, that he might be rid of it.

Ver. 24. And the LORD did so.] Here is no mention of Aaron's stretching out
his Rod, (as at other times) but this was done immediately by God himself: That
the Egpytians might not imagine there was any secret Virtue in the Rod; but
ascribe all to the Divine Power.

This Plague was threatened about the XXVIIIth day of the sixth Month; and
inflicted on the XXIXth: and removed on the XXXth.

And there came a grievous swarm of Flies, etc.] Or, a vast number of Flies:
for so the word Caved (which we here translate grievous or heavy) is used in L
Genesis 9. See there.

And the Land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of Flies.] We are to
understand here, by the Land, the Inhabitants of the Land: whose Blood these
Flies sucked, and left such a poison in it, that their Bodies swelled, and many
of them died. So the Psalmist understood it, LXXVIII. 45. There is something
like this recorded in Heathen Stories; particularly they say, that when Trajan
made War upon the Agarens, he was so assaulted with Flies, when he sat down to
eat, that he looked upon them as sent by God, and desisted from his Enterprise.
And that whole Countries have been infested with them, appears from a number of
Gods that were worshipped, because they were supposed to have drove them away,
at Acaron and several other places mentioned by the Learned Aretius (in the
place above quoted) from whence came the Names of Jupiter, (...) and (...), and
of Hercules, (...), etc.

Ver. 25. And Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, etc.] Sent a Messenger to
call them to him.

Go ye, Sacrifice to your God in the Land.] He had consented to let them
Sacrifice, when he last sent for them, v. 8. But he named no place; and also
quickly repented of the Concession. But now he determines it to the Land of
Goshen; where he grants them License to offer Public Sacrifice. But this Moses
tells him (in the next Verse) was not fit for them to accept; nor was it what
God demanded.

Ver. 26. And Moses said, it is not meet so to do.] Besides that this is not
the thing that God requires, it is not prudent, because it is not safe for us
to do it.

For we shall Sacrifice the Abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God.]
There is no Indication, that I can find, of any such Sottish Idolatry now among
the Egyptians, as was, it is certain, in after Ages, but what seems to be
suggested in this place: which Learned Men have generally interpreted, as if
the Sense was this: We must Sacrifice to our God, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, which
the Egyptians Worship and Adore: and that would be such an abominable thing in
their Account (to kill their Gods) that it would give them the highest
Provocation. Thus both the Chaldee Interpreters, the Syriack, St. Hierom, and
others: which Bochartus himself approves of in his Hierozoic. P. 1. L. II. Cap.
XXXIV. and LIII. and more largely P. 2. L. IV. Cap. XVII. But there is an
Objection lies against this Interpretation, that long after Moses his time the
Egyptians themselves did offer all the forementioned Creatures to their Gods:
For Herodotus relates (in his Euterpe, Cap. XLI.) after what manner they
Sacrificed an Ox in his time: and though some parts of the Country abstained
from Sheep, yet they sacrificed Goats; as, on the contrary, others abstained
from Goats and sacrificed Sheep. See upon XLIII Genesis 23. Therefore it may be a
Question, Whether these words do not refer only to the Rites and Ceremonies of
Sacrificing; and to the qualities and condition of the Beasts which were
offered: about which the Egyptians in after Ages were very curious. For the
same Herodotus tells us (in the same Book, Cap. XXXVIII.) how the Sacrifices
were examined by the Priest, and none allowed to be offered, but those which
had his mark upon them. And so Plutarch (in his Book de Isid. and Osir.) that
the Egyptians thinking Typho to have been red, sacrificed only such Oxen as
were of a red color: making such an accurate Scrutiny, (...), that if a Beast
were found to have one hair Black or white, it was judged unsit for Sacrifice.
The forenamed Herodotus indeed says, they would not Sacrifice Cows, because
they were sacred to Isis: which shows that in his time, there was great
Superstition about such Creatures; so that none durst offer the least Violence
to them. But, as we have no Evidence, that in the days of Moses they were
infected with such Opinions, so their Sacrificing such Creatures, as the Jews
did long after his days, and all Mankind had done from the beginning, seems to
be a prejudice against that sense of the words, which is generally put upon
them. But there were so many various ways of Sacrificing in the World, that it
is very probable the Egyptians differed very much from the Israelites: who
might offer also (it is likely) such Creatures as the Egyptians thought unclean;
whereby they might be enraged at their Profaneness.

Maimonides fancies the Egyptians worshipped the Sign or Constellation called
Aries; and that this was the occasion of this Speech: for which I can see no
reason, More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLVI.

And will they not stone us?] We cannot gather from hence, that there was such
a Punishment among the Egyptians, as stoning Men to death. For he does not
speak here of Punishment by their Laws; but of what might happen from a Popular
Fury.

Ver. 27. We will go three days journey into the Wilderness, etc.] So God had
directed them; and it was not lawful for them to Sacrifice in any place, but
where he appointed. Philo gives this reason, why they were to go into a
Solitary place, there to receive Commands from God about Sacrifice, and all
other parts of his Worship; because God intended to give them a Law different
from those of other Nations, or rather quite opposite unto them. In which there
were so many singular Rites, that they would have offended other People, and
seemed to them Profane, if they had exercised them among them, De Vita Mosis,
p. 615. And thus Corn. Tacitus understood the design of Moses, not to bring the
Israelites to as near a Conformity as he could with the Gentiles (which some
now in these days fancy) but to keep them at the greatest distance from other
Nations, by opposite Rites of Worship. His words are remarkable, L. V. Histor.
Cap. IV. Moses quo sibi in posterum Gentem sirmaret, novos ritus, contrariosque
caeteris mortalibus indidit. Profana illis omnia, quae apud nos sacra: rursum
concessa apud illos, quae nobis incesta.

Ver. 28. And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that you may Sacrifice to the
LORD your God in the Wilderness.] He does not say expressly they should go three
days Journey, as was demanded: which has made some think this was but a
niggardly Concession of Pharaoh's, who intended to deceive them with general
words. But Moses understood it otherwise, as appears by his acceptance of the
Grant.

Only you shall not go very far away.] No further than three days Journey.

Entreat for me.] This indeed is added so quickly, and as it were with the same
breath, that he granted their three days Journey; that it may make one think it
was the least part of his intention to permit that, but only to get rid of this
Plague. Which if it had continued long, the Egyptians must have left their
Country, to preserve themselves. Several People having been forced by Flies to
quit their Habitations, as many ancient Authors inform us, mentioned by
Bonfrerius and Bochartus.

Ver. 29. And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will entreat the
LORD that the swarm of Flies may depart, etc.] He was not more ready to desire,
than the LORD and his Servant Moses were to grant, the total removal of this
Plague: which was sent for his Reformation, not his Destruction; if he would
have duly considered it.

To morrow.] Yet he would not pray that he might be released from it presently;
but let him lie a while under the smart of this Rod: that he might be truly
humbled, and deal no more deceitfully with him, as he feared he would.

But let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more, etc.] He had promised fair
before, v. 8. but broken his word: which made this solemn Caution the more
necessary, lest he should be guilty of such false dealing again.

Ver. 30. And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD.] He gave
Pharaoh a good Example of Stedfastness, by making good his Promise immediately,
which he gave him in the beginning of the foregoing Verse.

Ver. 31. And the LORD did according to the word of Moses.] Here was punctual
performance on God's part, of what was agreed between him and Pharaoh, in the
foregoing Treaty.

There remained not one.] This was a greater Miracle than that of removing the
Frogs: for they remained in heaps and stank, v. 14. But these were all swept
away (by a mighty wind, perhaps) either into the Sea, or into the Deserts of
Libya.

Ver. 32. And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, etc.] This is here
made an act of his own; as it was no doubt in all the former Refusals to let
them go, v. 15, 19. And he hardened his heart, by not harkening, or not
regarding what they had done, as the word is used and translated IX. 21. That
which made him not to hearken, or regard, was his excessive Pride and
Covetousness; for he thought it a dishonor to submit to Moses: and he was very
loath to lose the Service of so many Slaves, which was really more worth to him,
than all the Land they possessed in Egypt.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. Then the LORD said unto Moses.] See VII. 1.

Go in unto Pharaoh.] It seems now he went to the Palace.

And say unto him, Thus says the LORD, etc.] He sends the same Message to him,
he ordered at the first ( v. 13.) and had continued ever since, VII. 16, etc.

Ver. 2. For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still.] If thy
covetous, griping Humor make thee still resolve to detain them in their
Slavery,

Ver. 3. Behold.] This word, as in most other places (as Dr. Jackson notes) is
here a special Character of the speedy Execution of the Plague threatened, and
of the remarkable manner of its Execution.

The hand of the LORD is upon thy Cattle, etc.] That is, he will smite them,
(which is done by the hand) and is just ready to do the Execution. Here is no
mention of Aaron's Rod, no more than in the foregoing Plague, and for the same
reason. See VIII. 21.

A very grievous Murrain.] That is, a great Plague, or Pestilence (as we call
it, in Mankind) of which abundance of Cattle shall die. For so the word Caved
(which we translate grievous) is used for numerous. See VIII. 24. But the
greater the Number was that died, the more grievous, no doubt, was the
Calamity: God intending to deal more severely than formerly with him, because
he had been guilty of a fraudulent Contempt of his former solemn Monition,
VIII. 29.

Ver. 4. And the LORD shall sever between the Cattle of Israel, and the Cattle
of Egypt, etc.] See VIII. 22. This was the greater wonder (as the word imports)
because the Israelites and Egyptians were mingled together in the Land of
Goshen: and their Cattle breathed in the same Air, and drank of the same Water,
etc. By which it appeared this Pestilence was not natural; but proceeded, as
was said before, from the hand of God.

Ver. 5. And the LORD appointed a set time.] That they might know, this stroke
came from him.

Saying, to morrow the LORD shall do this thing in the Land.] This Plague was
threatened upon the first day of the VIIth Month, (which afterward was changed
into the first Month of the Year) and inflicted on the second Day.

Ver. 6. And all the Cattle of Egypt died.] Some survived, it is plain from v.
19. Therefore the meaning is, either all that were in the Field, ( v. 3.) not
those in the Cities or Houses: or, rather a great many of all sorts of Cattle,
as Drusius expounds it, Omne genus, all kinds: as the word all must be
expounded v. 26. Vide L. 2. Animadvers. Cap. XVIII.

But of the Cattle of the Children of Israel died not one.] Of any sort
whatsoever.

Ver. 7. And Pharaoh sent, and behold there was not one of the Cattle of the
Israelites dead.] We do not find that he sent to make any such Enquiry in the
former Plagues. It is likely he slighted what they said, and would not do them
the Honor to seem to believe them. Moses also had said nothing of this
difference God would make between the Israelites and them, till the last
Plague; when the Flies were so busy and vexatious, that it made Travel
uneasy: as it was likewise in the two other before that, when they could tread
upon nothing but Frogs, or Lice.

And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened.] One would rather have expected to hear
that it relented; because he took the pains to satisfy himself that eevery
thing foretold by Moses was come to pass: which looks as if he meant, upon the
Truth of that Information, to alter his Course. This Plague likewise was much
heavier than all, or most, of the preceding: which were rather more noisome and
terrible (as Dr. Jackson speaks) than detrimental to Pharaoh and his People.
For we do not read before this time, of the death of any useful Creatures,
except Fishes when the Waters were turned into Blood: And that Calamity was not
so universal neither, being only in the River (and some think only near the
Court) as this Murrain, which was all over the Country; and did them a far
greater Mischief. But having accustomed himself to do evil, he grew still more
obstinate and hardened in Pride and Covetousness. For he does not so much as
pray to be delivered from this Plague; which had done all the Execution, he
thought, that was designed; and he intended perhaps to repair his loss, out of
the Flocks and Herds of the Israelites: which happily might make him less
affected with this wonder, than he had been with some of the former.

Ver. 8. And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron.] The former Plague having so
little moved his proud and stubborn heart, the Lord instantly, without any
further Message to him (as being now in Process of Sentence, says Dr. Jackson)
commands them to bring another Judgment upon the Egyptians, more dreadful and
noysom than any of the rest had been.

Take to you handfuls of Ashes of the Furnace.] In which Pharaoh had made them
labor (IV Deuteronomy. 20.) which moved God to punish him and his People with this
Plague, for their cruel usage of his People there.

And let Moses sprinkle it.] The Jews think God employed him only in Executing
this Judgment, being much heavier than all the foregoing. But both he and Aaron
being commanded to take Ashes (in the words foregoing) as we read they did v.
10. it is more probable they both sprinkled: and so the meaning is, let Moses
(as well as Aaron) sprinkle it.

Toward Heaven.] To show that the Plague came from thence.

In the sight of Pharaoh.] That he might be convinced of it.

Ver. 9. And it shall become small dust, in all the Land of Egypt, etc.]
Instead of these Ashes which they threw up into the Air, there came down a
small Sleet (as we call it) like that of Snow, or the Hoarfrost, which scalded
the Flesh of Man and Beast; and raised a Blister in every part upon which it
fell. The Poison of which penetrating into the Flesh, made sore swellings like
those we now call Bubo's. Insomuch that, as Philo understood it ( L. I. de Vita
Mosis) they were full of Blotches from Head to Foot. Certain it is, that the
Hebrew word Schechni signifies an Inflammation, that made a Tumor or Bile (as
we translate the word XIII Levit. 18, 19.) which turned into such a grievous
Ulcer, that Moses speaks of it afterward as an unusual Plague, which he calls
the Botch of Egypt, XXVIII Deuteronomy. 27. Dr. Lightfoot indeed observes, that in the
Book of Job (II. 7, 8.) it signifies only a burning Itch, or an inflamed Scab:
an intolerable dry Itch, which his Nails could not scratch off, but he was glad
to make use of a Potsherd to scrub himself. But then he confesses, that this
Schechni here spoken of, was higher than that, having Blains and Boils that
broke out with it; which Job's had not. So that the Egyptians, he thinks, were
vexed with a double Punishment at once; aching Boils, and a fiery Itch. But our
Interpreters take it otherwise, and say that Job also was smote with Boils:
which in conclusion, perhaps, had a Scab that itched very much.

Ver. 10. And they took Ashes of the Furnace, etc.] This Plague was inflicted
about the third Day of the seventh Month, according to Archbishop Usher's
Computation: who thinks it probable (as many others do) that from hence the
Tale was spread among the Heathens, that the Egyptians drove the Israelites out
of Egypt, because they were Scabby; lest the Infection should spread all over
the Country. For they endeavored, in future Ages, to make it be believed, that
what befell themselves, was a Plague upon the Israelites.

Ver. 11. And the Magicians could not stand before Moses, because of the Boils,
etc.] This Plague seized on them, as well as the rest of the Egyptians, and
that in the Presence of Pharaoh, (as these words seem to import) which
perfectly confounded them. For though, since the Plague of Lice, which they
could not counterfeit, we read of no attempt they ventured to make, to vie
Miracles with Moses and Aaron: yet they still continued about Pharaoh (it
appears from this place) and endeavored to settle him in his Resolution, not
to let Israel go: persuading him, perhaps, that though Moses for the present
had found out some Secret beyond their skill, they should at last be too hard
for him. But now, being on a sudden smote with these Ulcers, they were so
amazed, that we do not find they appeared again to look Moses in the face. For
now, as the Apostle speaks, their Folly was manifested to all Men, 1 Timothy III.
8, 9. In that they could not defend themselves from this terrible stroke; whick
publicly seizing on them before Moses, in the sight of Pharaoh and all his
Servants, rendered them so contemptible, that we never hear more of them.

Ver. 12. And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, etc.] If we suppose that
the Magicians, who had hitherto confirmed Pharaoh in his obstinacy, were forced
to withdraw in great Confusion, when they were smitten with the Boils; one
would have thought the next thing we should have heard, would have been that
Pharaoh relented. But here is not the least token of that mentioned in this
History, but rather the express contrary; that God was so angry with him, that
he himself hardened his heart, which he had never done before. This hardening
therefore which is said to be God's doing, was something sure very
extraordinary. Yet it was not an infusion of any bad Qualities or ungodly
Resolutions into Pharaoh's heart, but only that God did not vouchsafe him those
Convictions that might have softened him, and gave him up to his own hearts
lusts; and likewise ordered things so to fall out, that he should hereafter be
made by them, more and more obdurate. For he had hardened himself against five
Plagues; therefore God leaves him to himself, and resolves he shall continue in
his hardness. Accordingly he does not so much as desire to be freed from this
Plague, no more than he had done in the former, which was nothing so grievous.
The effect of such Induration is well expressed by Dav. Chytraeus in these
words, Cor induratum est, quod nec compunctione scinditur, etc. An hardened
heart is neither cut by Compunction, nor softened by any sense of Piety. It is
neither moved by Prayers and Entreaties, nor yields to Threatenings, nor feels
the smart of Scourges. It is ungrateful for Benefits; treacherous to Counsels;
sullen to Judgments; shameless to things most base; fearless of Dangers: For
getful of things past; negligent of things present; improvident for the future.
In short, it neither fears God, nor reverences Man.

As the LORD had spoken unto Moses.] The Margin of our Bible directs the Reader
to IV. 21. where God says, I will harden, etc. See there; (and III. 19.) And
observe that all along from thence to this place, it is very often said, in the
close of the former Plagues, that Pharaoh's heart was hardened as the LORD had
said, (VII. 13, 22. VIII. 15, 19, 32.) But this is the first time that it is
said, the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, as he had spoken unto Moses. Which
different Close gives us to understand, that now, after the Plague of Blains,
the Sentence of Destruction was irreversibly denounced against him; and God
resolved to dispose things so, that he should not repent, but run headlong to
his ruin.

Ver. 13. And the LORD said unto Moses, rise up early in the Morning.] That he
might speak with Pharaoh before he went abroad; or at his going out of his
Palace.

And stand before Pharaoh, etc.] Present thy self unto him, with the same
Message, that I have often sent to him. See V. 3. VII. 16, etc.

Let my People go that they may serve me.] But why does he send any more
Messages to him, may some say, after he had hardened him, and knew he would not
submit? To which Dr. Jael s^n's Answer is very apposite; That God dealt with
Pharaoh, just as he had done with the poor oppressed Israelites, after Moses
had delivered his first Message to him. Pharaoh immediately forbids his
Taskmasters to give them any Straw, and yet required the same Tale of Bricks,
which they made when they had Straw enough. The Lord in like manner demands the
same Obedience of Pharaoh, after he had deprived him of Understanding, and of
all good Motions, which he had demanded of him before, or at the first
Exhibition of his Signs and Wonders. And this is that which gave occasion to
the Question we find IX Romans 19. Why does he yet find fault? To which there
needs no further Satisfaction in this place.

Ver. 14. For I will at this time.] For now I will begin to send more terrible
Plagues upon thee, one after another, till I have destroyed thee.

Send all my Plagues.] All that I have resolved to inflict, as Menochius truly
expounds it: Not all that I am able, but all that I design to send for thy
destruction.

Upon thine heart.] Such as shall make thy heart ache (as we now speak) not only
afflict thy Body and Goods, but fill thy Soul with terror, or grief, or rage.

That thou may know there is none like me in all the Earth.] To teach thee,
by sad Experience, that my Power is superior to all other. To which, another
reason is added in the next Verse; that all the World might see the same. And a
third, X. 2. that Israel might learn to Worship him alone, and teach their
Children to do so likewise.

Ver. 15, 16. For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee, and
thy People with Pestilence, etc.] I do not see how this Translation can be
maintained; for we do not read, that God, after this, sent a new Pestilence
upon Pharaoh: and the Hebrew word deber signifies nothing else. This therefore
must needs refer to the Time past: and the sense of these three Verses (14, 15,
16.) must be this; I will send more Plagues on thee, and on thy Servants, (as
was threatened v. 14.) for the truth is, I had now stretched out my hand to
destroy both thee and thy People by my late Pestilence, wherewith you had all
been cut off, had it not been that I reserve you for further Punishments: for
which very cause I made thee to stand, when thou wast falling (i. e. kept thee
from dying) that I might send more Plagues upon thee, and make thy destruction
more notorious to all the World. See Paulus Fagius, and Theod. Hackspan, and
Fr. Junius also, who translate these words, I had smitten thee and thy People
with Pestilence, (i. e. when he destroyed their Cattle with a Murrain) and then
had thou been cut off from the Earth, as it follows in the end of this Verse;
that is, when the Boils broke out upon the Magicians.

Ver. 16. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up.] In the Hebrew
the words are, I have made thee stand: that is, preserved thee alive, when the
Pestilence would have cut thee off, as the Murrain did thy Cattle; if I had not
kept thee from perishing then, that I might destroy thee in a more remarkable
manner. And thus the LXX. understood it, when they translated it (...), thou
have been preserved, that is, from destruction. With which the Apostle agrees,
though he does not here follow their Translation, (...), I have raised thee; i.
e. from the foregoing Sickness, (IX Romans 17.) spared thee in the midst of
malignant Ulcers.

For to show in thee my Power.] By sending more dreadful Plagues upon him; and
at last overwhelming him in the Sea.

And that my Name may be declared throughout all the World.] If Pharaoh and his
People had all perished by the Pestilence, when the Cattle did, or died when
smitten with Blains; the terror of God's powerful Displeasure had not been so
visible to all the World, as it was in overthrowing the whole Strength of Egypt
in the red Sea.

Ver. 17. As yet exaltest thou thy self against my People, etc.] In these words
he returns to finish his Message begun, v. 13. which he concludes with this
Expostulation, which upbraids him with his senseless Obstinacy. Which, in other
words, may be thus paraphrased; Do thou still (notwithstanding all that I
have done to humble thee) proudly insult over my People, and resolve to keep
them in Bondage?

This Expostulation, which is very sharp and cutting, may seem to some
unseasonable, now that God himself had hardened him, and taken his Understanding
from him; though before nothing could have been more proper, while there was a
possibility of penetrating his heart. But God cannot lose his right to demand
that Obedience, which Men have made themselves unable to pay: and it was but
just he should be upbraided with his Obstinacy, even when he could not comply,
because he had brought upon himself this Punishment, of stupid Insensibility.
See v. 13.

Ver. 18. Behold, to morrow about this time.] As his Destruction was
determined, so it was to come speedily upon him; and therefore there was but
one Day between this Plague and the former.

I will send a very grievous Hail.] Great Hailstones, falling very thick, as
we speak.

Such as has not been in Egypt, since the foundation thereof.] Since it has
been inhabited. This shows that though Rain was not frequent in Egypt, yet
sometimes they had both Rain and Hail also. Otherwise there could not have been
a Comparison made between this and former Hail, if there never had been any at
all.

Ver. 19. Send therefore now, and gather thy Cattle, etc.] It appears by the
next Verse, that though Pharaoh and his Grandees could not be moved by all
these Judgments, yet there were some Persons in the Court, who were better
disposed, for whose sake God gives this Warning of their Danger, that they
might avoid it.

Ver. 20. He that feared the Word of the LORD among the Servants of Pharaoh,
etc.] That which is opposed to this in the next Verse is, He that set not his
heart unto the Word of the LORD; or, as we translate it, regarded it not: i. e.
did not attend to what was said and done by Moses, and seriously consider it.
Unto which the fear of God moves all those who are possessed with it; and
serious consideration will not fail to work in Men the fear of God, and of his
Judgments.

Ver. 21. And he that regarded not the word of the LORD, etc.] This was the
Cause of the Ruin of all that perished; they did not set themselves to consider
the irresistible Power of him, who inflicted such terrible Judgments upon them,
as Moses threatened. For at last they grew so stupid that they could not
consider; but were perfectly infatuated.

Ver. 22. And the LORD said unto Moses, stretch forth thy hand.] With his Rod
in it, as it is explained in the next Verse; and as he had directed on other
occasions, VIII. 16, 17. where it is said, Aaron stretched out his and with his
Rod.

Toward Heaven.] To show the Plague was sent from God.

That there may be Hail on all the Land of Egypt, etc.] Here he more fully
expresses the Damage it would do, both to Men and Beasts, and to the Herb of
the Field, which comprehends all the Trees, v. 25.

Ver. 23. And Moses stretched forth his Rod.] Sometimes Aaron did it; but it
was at the Command of Moses, and as his Minister: who sometimes did it himself,
and was Commanded by God so to do, v. 22. He gave warning of this Plague about
the fourth Day of the VIIth Month, and inflicted it upon the fifth, and removed
it the sixth. The Author of The Life and Death of Moses, fancies that God sent
this Plague to punish the Egyptians, for the drudgery they imposed upon the
Israelites, in making them till their Fields for them.

And the LORD sent Thunder and Hail, etc.] It was no wonder there should be
Thunder; but the Claps of this were far more terrible, than any that had been
heard before in that Country. As the Hall also was more ponderous, and came
down with a greater force, and was mixed with Fire. Which the Author of the
Book of Wisdom observes (Chap. XVI.) as a thing unusual. And herein consisted
the miraculousness of this Plague; That whereas other Storms of Hail generally
reach but a little way (sometimes not a Mile) this spread it self over the
whole Country, v. 25. And Flashes of Lightning were not only mingled with it,
but Fire ran upon the Ground, and killed their Cattle, (LXXVIII Psalm. 48.) when
at the same time, all the Land of Goshen, though a part of that Country, felt
nothing of this Storm, v. 26.

And the LORD rained Hail upon the Land of Egypt.] This is repeated, to show
that it fell as thick as Rain, and was not a mere shower, but a continual Hail:
and that this was the principal part of this Plague, being alone mentioned v.
22. and 26. (where nothing is said of Thunder or Fire) and put in the first
place by the Psalmist, both in LXXVIII. 48. and CV. 32.

Ver. 25. And the Hail smote, etc.] That is, killed every Man and Beast that
was in the Field, v. 19.

And smote every Herb, and broke every Tree of the Field.] Especially their
Vines and Figtrees, as the Psalmist tells us, LXXVIII. 47. CV. 33. Very great
Hailstones have fallen in several Countries; some of a prodigious bigness (as
credible Historians relate) whereby some living Creatures have here and there
been killed: but none ever made such a general destruction as this Storm did.
Yet we are not to understand it as if no green thing escaped, nor a Bough of
any Tree was left: but the meaning is, that a great many of every kind were
destroyed; though some, as appears by the following Chapter, still remained.

Ver. 26. Only in the Land of Goshen, etc.] So that the Egyptians that lived
among them, fared the better (it is thought) at this time for their sake.

Ver. 27. And Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron.] This is no more
than he had done several times before, (VIII. 8, 25.) but it may seem strange
he should do it now, after the LORD had hardened his heart. The clearest account
of it is, that he acted now as a Man distracted and frighted out of his Wits;
which made him rave and cry out for help, in very passionate words, without any
serious meaning.

I have sinned this time, etc.] The meaning is not, that he had not sinned
before; but, I now acknowledge my Offense, and the Justice of God in punishing
the wickedness of me and of my People. Which Confession does not argue any
tenderness of heart; but was extorted by the horrible Fright he was in of being
undone, if he did not make some Submission.

Ver. 27. Entreat the LORD (for it is enough).] Or, beseech him that what I
have already suffered may suffice.

That there be no more mighty Thundrings and Hail.] The words import frightful
Claps of Thunder, which sounded as if God was angry with them; especially since
the Hail fell like Thunderbolts upon their Heads, and struck those down that
walked abroad. This was the reason that he begged their Prayers: For he and his
Servants could not always continue within Doors; and while the Hail lasted,
there was no Safety abroad.

And I will let you go.] Not quite away; but three days Journey into the
Wilderness, as they desired.

And ye shall stay no longer.] He promises to dismiss them immediately.

Ver. 29. And Moses said unto him, as soon as I am gone out of the City.] By
this he demonstrated the great Power of God, who he knew would protect him,
from receiving any harm by the Thunder, Lightning and Hail, which killed all
others that went abroad into the Fields.

I will spread forth my hands unto the LORD.] This was an ancient Posture of
Supplication, in all Nations (as many Learned Men have shown) whereby Men
declared, that God is the Giver of all good things; and that they hoped to
receive Help from him. For our Hands are the Instruments, whereby we receive
any Gift that is bestowed upon us.

That thou may know, how that the Earth is the LORD's.] Have a demonstration
(which was sufficient to make him know) that the LORD governs all things: as
appeared by the ceasing of this dreadful storm, upon Moses his Prayers to God,
as well as by the pouring of it in such violence upon them.

Ver. 30. But as for thee, and thy Servants, I know that ye will not yet fear
the LORD God.] The generality of the Court he knew, would continue as obstinate
as their Prince; though some of them had some sense of God, and of his
Judgments, as we read v. 20.

Ver. 31. And the Flax and the Barley were smitten, etc.] From hence our
Learned N. Fuller gathers, that this fell out in the Month of Abib, as
Archbishop Usher observes in his Annals. For it appears by Pliny and others,
that Barley began to ripen in those Countries in March; but Wheat not till
April. Herm. Conringius differs from this account a little; for he thinks (in
his Treatise de initio anni Sabbatici) that this Hail fell in the Month of
February; Flax being sown here, and among the Romans, from the Calends of
October to the VIIth of the Ides of December, as he observes out of Columella.

Ver. 32. But the Wheat and the Rye were not smitten: for they were not grown
up.] In the Hebrew, they were hidden; i. e. were as yet under ground, as
Kimchi, and from him Junius and Tremellius expound it. But that cannot be the
meaning; for there was but a Months difference between the growth of Wheat and
of Barley to maturity. And therefore Bochartus has more truly expounded the
meaning ( Hierozoic. P. II. L. IV. c. 3.) that they were not yet eared: and so
being tender and flexil, yielded to the stroke of the Hail; and received less
harm than the Barley which was in the ear, and the Flax which was bolled.

Ver. 33. And Moses went out of the City, etc.] As he had promised v. 29.

And the Rain was not powered out.] It seems there was Rain together with the
Hail and Fire: which made this Plague still the more wonderful. Or, by Rain
must be understood, the shower of Hail which the Lord rained from Heaven v. 18.
which sense is confuted by the next Verse.

Ver. 34. And when Pharaoh saw that the Rain, and the Hail, and the Thunder
were ceased.] As soon as the Storm was over, and the Heavens clear again,

He sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, etc.] That which should have made
him acknowledge the Power of God (which was as apparent in stopping the Hail,
as in pouring it on his Country) made him the more contumacious. For seeing
this danger over, he fancied there would be no more.

Ver. 34. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, etc.] Continued in hardness;
for God would not soften it, having resolved still to harden him, as he had
began to do v. 12. and did now, X. 1. For he neither moved his heart to
remember his Confession, and his Promise, v. 27, 28. nor continued the means
which extorted that seeming Repentance from him. But by granting his Desire, to
have this stroke removed, suffered him to return to his wonted Obstinacy.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh.] Perhaps Moses
might think, that after seven Messages delivered to him, and as many Plagues
for his Refusal, and God's Declaration that he had hardened his heart, it was to
no purpose to make any new Address unto him. Which it is likely he would have
forborne, if he had not received this express Command from God, to go to him
again.

For I have hardened his heart, etc.] This is rather a Reason why he should not
go; and therefore the Particle ki is not to be translated for, but although, as
it many times is used in these Books, and then the sense is clear, Although I
have hardened his heart, yet let not that hinder thy going to him, but still
importune him; because I intend to take occasion from his Refusing to obey me,
to work greater Signs and Wonders, for your benefit (as it follows in the next
Verse) and for his Ruin.

That I might show these my Signs before him.] The Signs, he speaks of, were
those already done since he hardened him, and those which were to follow. For he
had threatened, when he said he would harden Pharaoh's heart (VII. 3.) to
multiply his Signs and Wonders in the Land of Egypt.

Ver. 2. And that thou may tell.] The LXX. translate it, that ye may tell:
for he speaks to Moses, as sustaining the Person of the whole People of Israel.

In the ears of thy Son, and thy Sons son.] All future Posterity.

What things I have wrought in Egypt.] This may refer to the Ten Plagues, which
he inflicted on the Egyptians.

And my Signs which I have done among them.] The turning of his Rod into a
Serpent, and two other Miracles, mentioned at his first Mission, are called
Signs, IV. 8, 9. and see VII. 9, 10.

That ye may know how that I am the LORD]. That there is no other God but me.

Ver. 3. And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh.] As God had commanded Moses,
v. 1.

Thus says the LORD God of the Hebrews.] This is the style wherein they began
to deliver their Message to him, and which they continued all along, V. 1, 3.
VII. 16, etc.

How long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me?] We meet not with this
chiding Question in any of the former Messages; which was most proper now that
he had so often refused to yield; or, instantly revolted from his seeming
Submissions.

Ver. 4. Behold, to morrow.] This word behold, denotes the speedy Execution of
a remarkable Judgment. See IX. 3. And according to the Computation before
mentioned, it was threatened on the seventh day of the Month Abib, to be
executed the next day.

I will bring the Locusts into thy Coasts.] The Hebrew word Arbeh comes from
rabah, which signifies to be multiplied. For there is no living Creature
multiplies more than this. Whence they are said (in the next Verse) to cover
the face of the Earth: and the Psalmist, speaking of them, says they came
without number, CV Psalm. 34.

Ver. 5. And they shall cover the face of the Earth, etc.] So that nothing
could be seen but Locusts. See v. 15.

And they shall eat.] How devouring they are and destructive to the Fruits of
the Earth, Vossius shows at large, L. IV. de Orig. and Pr. Idol. c. 19. and
Bochartus P. I. L. IV. Hieroz. c. 3. whole Countries having been laid so bare
by them, in a few hours, that it has brought a Famine upon the Inhabitants.
See Pliny L. XI. Hist. Not. c. 29.

The residue of that which is escaped, etc.] By this it appears, that the Wheat
and the Rye escaped the stroke of the Hail, IX. 31. so the Trees were not to be
broken, but some Boughs remained.

And shall eat every Tree, etc.] These Creatures spare not the very Bark of the
Trees; eating all things that come in their way, as Pliny testifies in the
forecited place, Omnia morsu erodentes, and fores quoque tectorum.

Ver. 6. And they shall fill thy Houses, etc.] The Author of the Book of
Wisdom, XVI. 9. seems to think that they killed Men and Women. But that
mistake, it is likely, arose from v. 17. which may have another Interpretation.
See there. Though if the Locusts died in their Houses, the stench of their dead
Bodies was so offensive, that it often bred the Pestilence, as Bochartus
observes, P. I. Hieroz. L. IV. c. 3, 5.

Which neither thy Fathers, etc.] They exceeded all that had been seen (and
they were a frequent Plague in those Countries) either in bigness, or in in
number, or in both. That is, all that had been seen in Egypt: For in other
Countries, perhaps there might have been as large; if Pliny may be believed,
that in India there had been some seen three foot long. The Jews in the Book
called, The Life and Death of Moses, fancy these to have been of such a vast
Bulk, that their Jaw-teeth were like those of Lions. But it is likely Moses
speaks here only of their multitude. For the Prophet Joel has such an
Expression, when he speaks also of their being without number, I Joel 6. Whose
Teeth are the Teeth of a Lion: i. e. they devoured all things greedily and
speedily.

And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.] Either Moses did not stay
for an Answer, knowing he would give him none better than formerly; or Pharaoh
answered so churlishly, that Moses hastily turned about (as the words seem to
import) and went away in some indignation.

Ver. 7. And Pharaoh 's Servants said.] Some of his Counselors, or Courtiers,
who feared the word of the LORD, IX. 20. Or, perhaps the whole Court began now
to be sensible of their Danger.

How long shall this Man.] They seem to speak contemptibly of Moses, to please
Pharaoh: who they were afraid would not like their Counsel, unless they
flattered him.

Be a Snare to us?] The LXX. and the Vulgar translate it, be a stumbling block:
i. e. lay before us the Occasion of our falling into one Calamity after
another. Or, involve and entangle us in so many Mischiefs.

Know thou not yet, that Egypt is destroyed?] Do thou not consider, that
so many Plagues have ruined our Country?

Ver. 8. And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh, etc.] Upon this
Advice, he commanded them to be called back again: and consented to let them
go, with some Limitations; to which Moses could not agree.

But who are they that shall go?]. In the Hebrew the words are, but who and
who? that is, Name the particulars. For his Covetousness would not suffer the
whole Nation to go; but he would keep some fast in his hands, as a Pledge for
the Return of the rest.

Ver. 9. And Moses said, we will go with our young and our old, etc. with our
Flocks and with our Herds, etc.] The reason of this large Demand is given in
the end of this Verse. They did not know what and how often they must Sacrifice
to the LORD: and therefore it was necessary their Flocks and Herds should go
with them. And they being to hold a Feast unto the LORD, none of them were to
be absent from the Solemnity.

Hold a Feast unto the LORD.] It appears from V. 1, 3. that it was to be a
Feast upon a Sacrifice: of which every one was to be a partaker.

Ver. 10. And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will let you
go, etc.] Most take this for a form of Imprecation; as if he had said, I wish
you may prosper no better, than I will accord to your desire. But some look
upon it as an Irrision or Jeer; as if he had said, you trust in the LORD, let
him do all he can to deliver you, as I am resolved to keep you here. This
justifies the truth of their Observation, who say, that Pharaoh at the first
behaved himself like a proud Fantastic Humorist, who slighted all that Moses
said or did; but since the Plague of Murrain on the Cattle, and Blains upon the
Egyptians, like a fantastic distracted Bedlam, who raved, as if his Brains had
been blasted (to use Dr. Jackson's Phrase) with the Fumes of his seared
Conscience.

Look you to it, for evil is before you.] It is uncertain, whether he meant
evil, that they designed against him; or, which he designed against them. The
former best agrees with what follows; as if he had said, you intend a
Rebellion; therefore I will let none but the Men go. Or, more plainly, it is
visible you design some evil: i. e. you have conspired to be gone, and make a
Revolt. Or, it is plain and manifest by your very Countenances, that you intend
some evil. If we take it the other way, for evil which he threatened to them,
the meaning must be, Mark what I say, I will take a course with you, unless you
be content to go and Sacrifice upon my terms; i. e. the Men only.

Ver. 11. Not so.] You shall not have your will.

Go now ye that are Men and serve the LORD, for that you did desire.] So he
Interprets their Demand, V. 1. pretending that Women and Children needed not to
attend upon Sacrifices.

And they were driven out from Pharaoh 's presence.] It is likely he said, I
have no more to say to you; or, you know my mind, and therefore get you gone:
and then commanded his Officers to thrust them out of Doors; which they did
with some violence. This shows he was in a fury; which made him neither regard
God, nor Man: but reject the good Counsel his own Servants had given him, ( v.
7.) as well as the Commands which Moses from God had delivered to him.

Ver. 12. And the LORD said unto Moses, siretch out thine hand, etc.] Upon
this, the Lord immediately ordered Moses to Execute the Judgment he had
denounced. Which, as I said before, was threatened about the seventh day, and
inflicted upon the next; and removed on the ninth day of Abib. Compare v. 4,
13, 19.

Ver. 13. And Moses stretched forth his Rod over the Land of Egypt.] See VIII.
6.

And the LORD brought an East wind, etc.] Though the Hebrew word kadim does
properly signify the East, yet it is sometimes used for the South, as Boehart
has demonstrated, P. II. Hieroz. L. I. c. 15. and so the LXX. here understood
it. For though in Arabia, which lay East of Egypt, there were great store of
Locusts, yet not such Numbers as were in Ethiopia, which lay South of it; and
abounded with them more than any Country in the World. Some People there, lived
upon nothing else but Locusts; which were brought thither in the Spring, about
the Vernal Aequinox, in vast quantities; partly by the Western, and partly by
the Southern Winds, as the same Bochart shows out of good Authors, L. IV. c. 3.
And now it was about that time of the year, when by a Wind blowing from those
parts, they were brought into Egypt. See LXXVIII Psalm. 26.

Ver. 14. And the Locusts went up over all the Land of Egypt.] Being lifted up
by the Wind (as Pliny speaks) they sly in the Air in a great Cloud; which now
it seems spread it self over all the Land of Egypt, solicit spectantibus
populis, etc. (as the same Author speaks) People looking on them in great fear,
lest they fall down and cover their Country; as the words following tell us
they did here in Egypt.

And rested in all the Coasts of Egypt.] After they had hovered a while in the
Air over the whole Country, they came down and settled upon the Ground in every
part of it.

Very grievous were they.] By their vast Numbers. For so the word Caved, I have
often observed, signifies: and so the Vulgar Latin here translates, innumerable.

Before them there were no such Locusts.] See v. 6.

Neither after them shall be such.] i. e. Not in the Land of Egypt; though in
other Countries there might; particularly in Judea, when God brought this
Plague upon it, I Joel 2.

Ver. 15. For they covered the Face of the whole Earth, etc.] The word in the
Hebrew which we translate Face, signifying properly the Eye, it induced Onkelos
to translate this Passage, they covered the Sun; which is the Eye of the Earth:
That is, there was such a thick Cloud of them before they fell, that they
darkened the Sun; as when they were fallen, they darkened the Land, as it here
follows. Or, the meaning is, there were such Numbers that they not only covered
the Earth, but the Sun also. For many Authors mentions such prodigious Clouds
of them, as have so thickened the Sky, that the Day has been turned into Night.
See Bochart. P. II. Hieroz. L. IV. c. 5.

And they did eat every Herb of the Land, etc.] See v. 5.

Ver. 16. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste.] This Dr. Jackson
not improperly calls, another raving sit, or phrenetical symptom; into which
this new Calamity threw him.

I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.] Whom he had lately
caused to be driven out of his Presence, ( v. 11.) but now humbles himself
before them, more than he had done at any time before. For this was such a
Plague as all Men accounted, a manifest Token of the Divine Displeasure.
According to that of Pliny, L. XI. c. 29. Deorum irae pestis ea intelligitur.
This is taken for a Plague of the Anger of the Gods: or, as some Copies have
it, Mira pestis, a wonderful Plague sent from above.

Ver. 17. Now therefore, forgive, I pray you, my sin only this once, etc.]
Nothing could be spoken more humbly, and seemingly penitent, than this
Supplication; which includes in it also a Promise never to offend again. But
there was no Sincerity in it, being the effect only of a great fright, which
extorted this Confession and Submission from him, without any serious meaning
to continue in this Resolution. Thus we all naturally think of Repenting (as
Pellicanus here piously reslects) when we are in great straits; nay, and
promise it too, till we are out of danger: when we perform little of what we
promised, as our whole Life testifies.

That he may take away from me this death only.] We cannot gather from hence,
that the Locusts killed Men and Women, as the Hail did: for the Fields, and the
Trees, etc. are said to die, as well as Men, XLVII Genesis 19. XIV Job 8, etc. But
the Locusts, destroying the Supports of Life (by eating up the Corn, and the
Grass, etc.) might, by consequence, be said to kill the People. In both which
regards, Pharaoh might call them deadly Locusts.

Ver. 18. And he went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD.] Both Moses and
Aaron were called to Pharaoh; and therefore now went both out: But one only is
mentioned, viz. Moses, because by his Prayers this Plague was removed.

Ver. 19. And the LORD turned.] This is supposed to be done the next day, as I
observed v. 12. according to what is said VIII. 29.

A mighty strong West-wind.] Strong Winds are the only Remedy to free a Country
from this Plague, as Pliny has observed. For if they die in those Fields on
which they settle, the Air is so corrupted by the stench, that it breeds
Pestilential Diseases.

Which took away the Locusts, and cast them into the Red Sea.] That which we
call the Red Sea, the Hebrews call the Sea of Suph, i. e. of Flags; as we
translate the word Suph, in the second Chapter of this Book, v. 3. because it
was full of a certain Weed (which the Latins call alga, and the Greeks (...))
which some Travelers have affirmed to be of a red Color, and to make the
Water appear as if it were red also: from whence some fancy it was called the
Red Sea. Certain it is, it had the Hebrew Name of Suph from hence; there being
such abundance of this Weed in that Sea, that the Inhabitants of the Coast,
plucking it up out of the Water, and laying it in heaps to be dried by the Sun,
it becomes so compact, that they build Houses of it, as Bochartus has observed
in his Phaleg. L. IV. c. 29. But it is most likely to have had the Name of the
Red Sea from this: that what the Hebrews called the Sea of Suph, the nearer
Neighbors called the Sea of Edom, from the Country which it washed, viz.
Idumaea, 1 Kings IX. 26. XXI Numb. 4. From whence, the Greeks, who knew not the
reason of the Name, called it (...), the Red Sea; because Edom, in Hebrew,
signifies red, as we find XXV Genesis 29. Now this Sea (which late Writers call
Sinus Arabicus) lies East of Egypt: and therefore a West wind was most proper
to drive the Locusts thither.

There remained not one Locust in all the Land of Egypt.] The Power of God
appeared no less in sweeping them all away, than in bringing them upon the
Country: for both were done at the instance of Moses.

Ver. 20. But the LORD hardened Pharaoh 's heart, etc.] See IX. 12. He left him
to himself; and did not move him to persist in his late good Resolution.

Ver. 21. And the LORD said unto Moses.] He left off now to treat with Pharaoh;
and only proceeds in the Execution of the Sentence of utter Destruction, which
he had decreed against him.

Stretch out thine hand toward Heaven.] See IX. 22.

That there may be Darkness over the Land of Egypt.] So that they should not
see any thing at Noonday.

Even Darkness that may be felt.] In the next Verse he calls it thick Darkness:
which was made, I suppose, by such clammy Foggs, that they sensibly affected
the Egyptians.

Ver. 22. And there was thick Darkness in all the Land of Egypt three days.]
Some think, that during this three days Darkness the Israelites were
Circumcised; when the Egyptians, by reason of the great Horror they were in
all that time, could take no Advantage of them. And so Dr. Lightfoot expounds
CV Psalm. 28. They rebelled not against his word; but submitted to be
Circumcised. For the words seem to signify some special piece of Obedience,
which they then performed. The Author of The Life and Death of Moses, will have
it, that they punished and cut off several wicked People among the Israelites
themselves; which they did at this time, that the Egyptians might not know it,
and rejoice at it. But that which is more certain, is, that if the former
Plague ended on the ninth day, this Judgment was ordered upon the tenth of the
Month Abib. On which day they begun to prepare for the Passover, by taking up
the Lamb which was to be then slain four days after. And God appointed this to
be the first Month of the Year, which hitherto had been the seventh, XII. 2, 3,
4.

Ver. 23. They saw not one another. We may well look upon this, as an Emblem of
the Blindness of their Minds; which was so great, that they had not the least
discerning of their approaching Destruction. Some of the Romans mention such
Darkness for a short time, as was counted prodigious, by Livy and Julius
Obsequens. Particularly at the Death of the Emperor Carus, there was such a
Mist, that one man could not know another, (See more Examples in Huetius, L.
II. Alnet. Quaest. c. 12. p. 203, etc.) But of such a Darkness as this, which
continued to obscure all things three days together, there is no Record, but in
this Sacred Story. Which no Man has the least reason to disbelieve; it being
as easy for God to continue it for three days, as for one hour; there being
also a very great reason for it, both to punish the Egyptians, and relieve the
Israelites.

Neither rose any from his place.] None stirred out of their Houses; for they
could not see one another within Doors: no, not by the help of a Candle, or a
Fire, as the Author of the Book of Wisdom understood it, XVII. 5. where he also
supposes, that they were affrighted with Apparitions; and their own evil
Consciences were also a great Terror to them, while they remained Prisoners so
long in dismal Darkness. And the Psalmist justifies him, in part, when instead
of mentioning this Plague of Darkness (as he does the rest which were inflicted
on the Egyptians) he says, God sent evil Angels among them, LXXVIII Psalm. 49.

But all the Children of Israel had light in their dwellings.] Whereby they
were enabled to go about their business, and get all things ready for their
departure, without any notice of the Egyptians, much less any hindrance from
them; who were in a Mist, and could not see what they were a doing.

Ver. 24. And Pharaoh called unto Moses.] He was so terrified by the horrible
Apparitions he had seen, that at the end of the three days of Darkness, he sent
a Messenger to call Moses: for before that time none could find their way to
him. Or perhaps, the meaning may be, that in his ravening sit, he called for
Moses, as if he had been near him.

And said.] When Moses came, he made his former Confession a little larger: but
had not the heart to comply entirely.

Go ye, serve the LORD; only let the Flocks and the Herds be stayed, etc.] It
was a perfect infatuation to higgle (as we speak) with Moses, and still drive
his Bargain as low as he could, when he was reduced to such Distress, that he
was upon the brink of Destruction. But this was the effect of his Covetousness,
which was incurable; and would not suffer him to part with them, but still to
keep a Pawn for their Return to his Servitude.

Let your little ones go with you.] His Blindness made him think this a great
Condescension, because he had denied it before, v. 10.

Ver. 25. And Moses said, Thou must give us also Sacrifices and
Burnt-offerings, that me may Sacrifice, etc.] The difference between
Sacrifices, and Burnt-offerings, See XVIII. 12. As they were to Sacrifice to
the LORD their God, which was the Service he required, so they were to hold a
Feast unto him; at which both Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings were necessary.

Ver. 26. Our Cattle also shall go with us.] i. e. Therefore we cannot leave
our Cattle here, because we must use them in Sacrifices, etc.

There shall not an Hoof he left behind.] i. e. The smallest thing. For this
was a Proverbial Speech in the Eastern Countries, as appears by the like saying
among the Arabians; which was first used about Horses, and afterward
translated to other things; Present Money even to an Hoof: That is, they would
not part with an Horse (or any other Commodity) till the Buyer had laid down
the price of it, to a Farthing, as we now speak. Or, according to the present
German Language, the Hoof may be put for the whole Beast; and the meaning be,
we will not leave so much as one behind us. So Conr. Pellicanus.

For thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God.] To offer Sacrifice to him.

And we know not with what we must serve the LORD, etc.] Who was to appoint his
own Sacrifices: as he afterward did, when they came into the Wilderness.

Ver. 27. But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, etc.] He did not incline
Pharaoh to comply with this motion; but suffered him to persist in his
Obstinate Resolution, not quite to part with them. See v. 20.

Ver. 28. And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me.] This sounds, as if he
intended again to have him driven from his Presence, (as v. 11.) so soon did he
forget his own humble Confessions and Supplications to him, v. 16, 17. and
returned to his frantic Rage and Fury against him.

Take heed to thy self, see my face no more: for in that day thou see my
face, thou shall die.] A Speech more foolish than proud, (as Dr. Jackson
observes) to come from a Man whom the LORD had so much impoverished, and so
often humbled; and given sufficient Proofs of his Power, not only to bring
greater Plagues immediately upon him, but to cut him off.

Ver. 29. And Moses said, Thou have spoken well, I will see thy face again no
more.] That is, unless I be called for; as one would think he was; because
Moses did deliver one Message more to him, XI. 4, 8. Though we may suppose he
delivered it now; or, that he did not deliver it himself, but by some other
Person. But that does not agree with the last words of v. 8. of the next
Chapter. And we read also, XII. 31. that Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron by
night: who perhaps did not go, but only receive his Message.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses.] It is uncertain, when the LORD spoke
this. I suppose it was, as soon as he came out from Pharaoh, at the end of the
three days Darkness: which continued the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth of
the Month Abib; and on the fourteenth, in the Morning, Moses received this new
Revelation.

Yet I will bring one Plague more upon Pharaoh and upon Egypt.] The killing of
their Firstborn; which was the last Plague inflicted on them in Egypt.

Afterward he will let you go hence, etc.] Not only consent to dismiss you
entirely; but be earnest with you, and urge you to depart. So we find it came
to pass XII. 31, 33.

Thrust you out altogether.] Perfectly and completely, with some kind of
compulsion.

Ver. 2. Speak now in the ears of the Children of Israel.] Give order therefore
to the Israelites, as I formerly promised to direct, III. 21, 22.

And let every Man borrow of his Neighbor, etc.] See III. 21, 22. Unto which
this may be added, that some of the ancient Fathers looked upon this as a piece
of Justice, that they should be paid their Wages, for the Labor they had
undergone, in the Service of the Egyptians; which God orders in this manner. So
Epiphanius in his Ancoratus, Number. CXII, CXIII. where he gives this account of
the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians, that they had served them a long time
for Nothing (he makes account CCXV. years) and therefore (...), etc. was it not
just, both before God and Man, that their Wages should be paid them before they
left the Country? See Petavius on that place. And Haeres. LXVI, LXXI, LXXXIII.
and Irinaeus L. IV. c. 49. Tertull. adv. Marcion L. II. c. 20. And so the
Author of the Book of Wisdom took it, X. 17. where he says, the Lord gave the
Israelites the Goods of the Egyptians, (...), the Reward of their Labors. See
more XII. 35.

Ver. 3. And the LORD gave the People favor in the sight of the Egyptians.]
According to his Promise III. 21.

Moreover the man Moses was very great, etc.] This seems to be given as a
reason, both why the Court durst not meddle with Moses, though he had brought
so many Plagues upon them; and why the People were forward to grant the
Israelites what they desired, because they all highly esteemed him, and had him
in great reverence, as a Person that had extraordinary power with God: From
whence some think it credible, that their Posterity might give him Divine
Honors, as is reported by some ancient Writers.

Ver. 4. And Moses said, Thus says the LORD.] It is manifest (from v. 8.) that
these words were spoken from the LORD to Pharaoh; but it is a great question,
when they were spoken. It is commonly thought that Moses said this, when he
last parted with Pharaoh, and told him, he would see his face no more, X. 29.
And then the first words of this Chapter, must be translated in the time past,
the LORD had said unto Moses, that he would bring one Plague more upon the
Egyptians: which he now denounced to Pharaoh, because he said he should not
have the liberty of being admitted to him again. Or else Pharaoh, contrary to
his peremptory Resolution, sent once more to speak with Moses; as it is plain
he did, after the Firstborn were slain, XII. 31.

About midnight.] About the midst of the following Night. For they having kept
the Passover, in the Evening of this fourteenth day of Abib, the Firstborn
were slain in the middle of that Night. Not precisely (the Hebrew indicates)
but it might be a little before or after Midnight. See Theodorick Haespan, of
such kind of Speeches. Disput. de locut. Sacris. N. IV.

Will I go out.] By an Angel, who was sent from the SCHECHINAH, (which resided
in some part of the Land of Goshen) and ordered to go and do this Execution.

Into the midst of Egypt.] Perhaps he means the Royal City; where he began this
Execution, and then smote the whole Country round about.

Ver. 5. And all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt shall die.] This was the
sorest Plague that had been hitherto inflicted; Nothing being so dear to
Parents as their Children, especially their Firstborn.

From the Firstborn of Pharaoh, etc.] i. e. From the highest to the meanest
Person in the Kingdom.

That sits upon his Throne.] It is uncertain whether this relate to Pharaoh,
or to his Firstborn. The LXX. seem to incline to the former; having left out
the Pronoun his, and simply translated it, that sits upon the Throne. But
the Chaldee determines it to the latter, by translating it, who is to sit upon
the Throne of his Kingdom; i. e. to be Pharaoh's Successor, the Heir of the
Kingdom of Egypt.

The Maidservant that is behind the Mill.] None were more miserable than those
Slaves, whose Work it was to turn a Mill with their Hands, and grind Corn
perpetually; especially when they were condemned to this in a Prison, nay, in a
Dungeon: that so we are to understand this, appears from XII. 29. The ancient
Comaedians often mention this; and we find an instance of such Drudgery, in the
Story of Sampson, XVI Judge. 21.

Ver. 6. And there shall be a great Cry throughout the Land of Egypt, etc.] The
Calamity being general in every House, it made a general and very loud
Lamentation: Men, Women, Children and Servants, bewailing the loss of the prime
Person in the Family.

Ver. 7. But against any of the Children of Israel, shall not a Dog move his
tongue, etc.] A great wonder! that when so many Thousand People were upon their
March, with abundance of Cattle, etc. not a Dog should stir; who, though never
so gentle, yet commonly Bark when they hear the least noise, especially in the
Night. All Travelers know this.

That ye may know how that the LORD does put a difference between the Egyptians
and Israel.] This was indeed a plain Testimony of God's special Care and
Providence over the Israelites; that when there was such a great Cry throughout
all the Land of Egypt, ( v. 6.) all was quiet, still and silent among them.

Ver. 8. And all these thy Servants shall come down to me, etc.] You that now
forbid me to come to you (for Pharaoh himself is included, it appears from XII.
31, etc.) shall be forced to come to me; and submissively entreat; nay, press
me to be gone, etc.

Come down.] It was a descent from that part of Egypt where the Court was, unto
Goshen: though it may simply signify, come to me.

Get thee out, and all the People that follow thee.] In the Hebrew the words
are, that is at thy feet: that is, to the very last man. For they that bring up
the Rear, as we speak, or march last after their Commander, are said in
Scripture, to be at their feet: As Wagenseil has observed in his Confutation
of R. Lipman's Carmen Memoriale. See XLIX Genesis 10.

And after that I will go out.] When you shall think I oblige you, to leave
your Country.

And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.] It moved the meekest Man on
Earth to a just Indignation (which, it is likely, he expressed in his
Countenance and Behavior) to see Pharaoh remain so stupidly insensible, as not
to regard this Threatening; which he might well think would be as certainly
Executed, as all the rest had been.

Ver. 9. And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you.]
That is, I told thee at the first how it would be, and the reason of it, III.
19, 20. Of which it was very proper to put Moses in mind at this time, when he
was going to fulfill the last part of those words; after that (after this last
Plague) he will let you go.

That my Wonders may be multiplied in the Land of Egypt.] That he might do one
Wonder after another, till he had finished Pharaoh's Destruction. See VII. 3.

Ver. 10. And Moses and Aaron did all these Wonders before Pharaoh.] This seems
to be a Summary of what has been said hitherto, concerning the wonderful
Plagues of Egypt: which, as God designed to inflict upon that Country, so he
did, by Moses and Aaron as his Instruments.

And the LORD hardened Pharaoh 's heart, so that he would not let the Children
of Israel go, etc.] The Obstinacy of Pharaoh under several severe Judgments is
so notorious, that it need be no wonder that the LORD himself hardened his
heart, so that he would not suffer the People to depart, till what is here
threatened was Executed upon him. There is nothing more agreeable to the Rules
of Justice, than to inflict heavy Judgments upon contumacious Offenders; and no
Punishment heavier than to let them undo themselves by their own Wickedness,
and blindly run on, without any stop, in their evil Courses unto utter Ruin.
This was the Case of Pharaoh; of which the Heathen had a broken Notion, when
they said, Quos Jupiter vult perdere, prius dementat: Those whom God intends to
destroy, he first infatuates.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, etc.] We are not told here,
when the LORD spoke this to them; but it is very likely it was on the Tenth day
of this Month; before he brought the Plague of Darkness on the Land; wherein he
gave the Israelites opportunity to prepare for their Departure: And then he
changed this Month from the Seventh (as it was before) to the First, as it here
follows.

Ver. 2. This Month.] Which in process of time was called Abib, XIII. 4. XXIII.
15. because then the Corn was eared, and grew toward ripeness (for Abib
signifies an Ear of Corn) and was in after Ages called Nisan, II Nehem. 1. III
Esth. 7. which is a Chaldee word, denoting this to be the Month wherein they
went out to War; from Nissin, which signifies Ensigns or Banners (as Bochart
probably conjectures) which at that Season were usually advanced; viz. in the
Spring time. So the Hebrews understand that place, 2 Samuel XI. 1.

Shall be unto you the beginning of Months.] i.e. The principal Month of the
Year.

It shall be the first Month of the Year to you.] And therefore was hereafter
to begin the Year. Which is a plain intimation that the Year had another
beginning before this time, which was in the Month they called Tisri, about
Autumn; but was now translated unto the Spring. And so we find that all the
ancient Nations began their Year, after their Harvest and Vintage, which were
the conclusion of their Year. But from hence forward the Jewish Computation,
was from this Month of Abib; at least, as to their Feasts and Things Sacred;
though their Civil Year still began where it did before. For after this, we
sind the old account continued, as appears from the XXIII. 16. where the
Harvest is said to be in the end of the Year. And yet the Author of Meor E
Najim (as Guliel. Vorstius shows in his Observation upon R. D. Ganz) affirms,
that the ancient Hebrews followed this new Account from the time of their going
out of Egypt, till the building of the Temple (in all their Contracts and
Affairs using this Era of Exodus, in memory of that illustrious Deliverance)
as after that time till the Captivity of Babylon, they dated all their Writings
from the Building of the Temple.

Ver. 3. In the Tenth day of this Month.] This is a Law which has respect to
all future Ages, as well as to this present Time; that they should begin to
prepare for the Passover, four days before: For which the Jews give such
Reasons as these: viz. It was necessary when they went out of Egypt to make
this preparation, lest a multitude of Business, when they were pressed to be
gone in haste, should have made them neglect it. And it was necessary
afterward, that they might more narrowly observe, if there were any Blemish in
the Lamb; and that they might be put in mind to dispose themselves for so great
a Solemnity.

And it is observable that our Blessed Savior (the true Paschal Lamb) came to
Jerusalem on this very day ( viz. the Tenth of Nisan) four days before he was
offered, XII Joh. 1, 12. Yet there are those who think, that this Precept was
peculiar to this Time of their Departure out of Egypt. For they that came, in
after Ages, out of all parts of the Country to worship God at this Feast, could
not so well observe it; unless we suppose them to have come some days before to
Jerusalem (as its certain some did, XI Joh. 55.) or to have sent before hand
thither, to have a Lamb prepared for them, which is not unlikely.

They also, who think the Egyptians now worshipped such kind of Creatures,
imagine withal, that this day was chosen in opposition to them: who, because
the Sun entered then into Aries, began on this day the Solemn Worship of this
Creature, and of that Celestial Sign. Thus the Author of the Chronicon
Orientale, in express words: This was the day in which the Sun entered the first
Sign of Aries, and was most Solemn among the Egyptians. And therefore God
commanded the Israelites to Sacrifice that Creature which they worshipped. But
there is no certainty of this, nor of what the Author of Tzeror Hamor observes,
that the Feast of the Egyptians being at its height on the fourteenth day, God
ordered the killing of this Lamb at that time: which was the greatest contempt
of their Coniger Ammon (whom they worshipped then with the greatest Honors)
showing he could be no God, whom the Israelites eat.

They shall take to them every Man a Lamb.] The word Seh signifies a Kid as
well as a Lamb, XV Numb. 11. XIV Deuteronomy. 4. and it is evident, from the fifth
Verse of this Chapter, that they might take either of them for this Sacrifice.
But commonly they made choice of a Lamb, as the fittest of the two; being of a
more mild and innocent Nature. They that are of opinion, the Egyptians now
worshipped such Creatures, imagine also this was ordained to preserve the
Israelites from their Idolatry, by commanding them to kill such Beasts as they
adored. So R. Levi ben Gersom, God intended by this, to expel out of the Minds
of the Israelites, the evil opinion of the Egyptians, etc.

A Lamb for an House.] Some translate it for a Family. But that is not true:
For as Tribes were divided into Families, so were Families into Houses: and
when many Lambs were few enough for a whole Family, some Houses were so small
that they could not eat one, and therefore were to call in the assistance of
their Neighbors, as it follows in the next Verse.

Ver. 4. And if the household be too little for the Lamb, let him and his
Neighbor, etc.] They were not to be fewer than Ten Persons, nor more than
Twenty, to the eating of one Lamb. At which meal, Men, Women, and Children,
Masters and Servants (if Circumcised) were entertained, and every one did eat a
piece, at least as big as an Olive, if we may believe the Hebrew Doctors.

Every Man, according to his eating, shall make your count for the Lamb.] That
is, every Master of a House, shall take such a number of Persons to him, as
will be sufficient for the eating of the Lamb.

Ver. 5. The Lamb shall be without blemish.] In the Hebrew, perfect, or without
defect. There are ten Blemishes mentioned in XXII Levit. 22, 23, 24. which made
a Sacrifice unfit for the Altar. About which the Heathen themselves were very
curious, as I noted above out of Herodotus: who relates how exact and
scrupulous the Egyptian Priests were in their Scrutiny, whether a Beast were
fit to be offered. See VIII. 26.

A Male.] Because the Male was counted more excellent than the Female, I
Malachi 14. and therefore all whole Burnt-offerings (which were the most
perfect sort of Sacrifices) were to be Males only, I Lev. 3, 6. From hence this
Custom (as Bochart thinks) was derived to the Egyptians; who offered only
Males, as he proves out of Herodotus, P. I. Hieroz. L. III. c. 33, 50. But
whatsoever the Egyptians did, the Romans did otherwise. For Servius says (in
VIII Aeneid.) In omnibus Sacris faeminini generis plus valent victimae; that
Sacrifices of the Female kind, were of greatest value in all their Holy
Offices. Such different fancies there were in the World in after Ages: but what
Opinions they had in Moses his time, none can certainly resolve.

Of the first year.] It does not signify that the Lamb was to be a year old
(for then it was incapable to be offered) but under a year old. It was fit for
Sacrifice at eight days old, though not before, XXII 30. XXII Lev. 27. (which
Laws, Maimonides says, were observed in the Paschal Lamb, as they were in the
Daily Sacrifice, XXIX Exodus 38. XXXVIII Numb. 3. and in others, XXIII Lev. 18,
19.) and so it continued sit from that time, till it was a year old: after
which it was not accepted. For which Bochart gives a very likely reason in the
forenamed Book, P. I. L. II. c. 50. p. 585.

Ver. 6. And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same Month.] When
it was to be offered to God by all the People, as our Savior was upon the very
same day. Which the Jews expected, as appears by a memorable passage which
Andr. Masius (in V Josh. 10.) quotes out of that Tract in the Talmud called
Rosch Hashanah, where they say it was a famous and old opinion among the
ancient Jews, that the day of the New Year, which was the beginning of the
Israelites deliverance out of Egypt, should in future time be the beginning of
their Redemption by the Messiah. Which was wonderfully fulfilled in our Lord
and Savior; who keeping the Passover the day before the Rulers of the Jews
observed it, it fell out that he, the true Lamb of God, was offered on that
very day, which Moses here appointed for the Offering this Typical Sacrifice.

And the whole Assembly of the Congregation of Israel shall kill it.] God here
grants a Liberty to any Man among the Israelites to kill the Passover. Which
act did not make him a Priest (whose work it was to offer the Blood) for in
other Sacrifices any Man that brought them might do the same, I Lev. 3, 4, 5.
And this is given as a reason, why the People did not kill the Passover in
Hezekiah's time, because they were unclean; and therefore the Levites had the
charge of it, II Chron. XXX. 17.

But besides this, Moses seems to mean, that all the Company who were to eat,
were to be present at the Sacrifice: By which means, the whole Assembly of the
Congregation of Israel were engaged in this Service. And this was exactly also
fulfilled in our Blessed Savior (whom the Apostle calls our Passover) against
whom the Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, and all the People, conspired to
take away his Life.

In the Evening.] In the Hebrew the words are (as is noted in the Margin of our
Bibles) between the two Evenings. The first of which began, when the Sun began
to decline from its Noontide point, and lasted till Sun set. Then began the
second Evening, and lasted till Night. Between these two Evenings, about the
middle of them, was the Passover offered. For after the offering of Incense,
they began on this day to kill the daily Evening Sacrifice, between two and
three in the Afternoon (a little sooner than on other days) and having sinished
that, and trimmed the Lamps (as Maimonides in his Treatise on this Subject,
Cap. 1. Sect. 4. describes the order of it) they went about the Paschal
Sacrifice; which continued till Sunsetting. That is, there were about two
hours and an half, for the dispatch of all the Lambs. For the daily Evening
Sacrifice, and all belonging to it, being over in an hours time (by half an
hour after three) all the rest of the day till Sunset (which was two hours and
an half at this time of the Year) remained for the killing of the Paschal
Lambs. See Bochart. Hieroz. P. I. L. II. c. 50. p. 558. and our Learned Dr.
Lightfoot, in his Gleanings on Exodus. Now our three a Clock in the Afternoon,
being the fame with the Jews ninth hour, it is evident our blessed Savior
offered up himself to God for our Redemption, about the same time that this
Lamb was slain, for their deliverance out of Egypt, XV Mark 34, 37.

Ver. 7. And they shall take of the Blood.] Which was the Means that God now
appointed for their Preservation.

And strike it.] By dipping a bunch of Hysop into it, v. 22.

On the two Side-posts.] Upon which Folding-doors moved. For from thence,
Bochart thinks, they had their Name in the Hebrew.

And on the upper Door-posts.] The Hebrew word Maskuph is no where to be found,
but in this Chapter; and its carrying in it a signification of looking-through,
may induce us to think they had Lattices at the top of their Doors, through
which they could peep, to see who knocked, before they opened them. Both these
were sprinkled with the Blood, but not the Threshold, lest any Body should
tread upon it, which had been profane, this being an holy thing. This striking
or sprinkling of the Blood upon the Posts, seems to have been peculiar to the
first Passover, at their going out of Egypt; and not to have been used in after
Times: when there was not the same occasion for it, viz. to distinguish their
Houses from the Egyptians, for their preservation from the destroying Angel.

In the Houses wherein they shall eat it.] In which the whole Nation was
gathered together; and so all delivered.

Ver. 8. And they shall eat the Flesh in that Night.] For it was not lawful to
let any of it remain till the Morning, v. 10. And the Hebrews say, they were to
eat it after they had Supped, and were well filled with other Meat.

Roast. with Fire.] Neither raw, nor sodden (as it follows in the next Verse)
for it might be sooner roasted than sodden: and they were in haste to be gone,
when it was offered.

And unleavened Bread.] Partly to put them in mind of their hardships in Egypt
(for unleavened Bread is heavy and unsavory) and partly to commemorate their
Deliverance from thence in such haste, that they had not time to leaven it, v.
39. XVI Deuteronomy. 3.

And with bitter Herbs.] They were used for the same end, to put them in mind
of their hard Bondage in Egypt, which made their Lives bitter to them, l. 14.
Maimonides says, there were sive of these Herbs, whose Names he mentions: but
it is hard for us to tell what they were. That great Man Bochartus has given
some guesses at them; and thinks the first of them was wild Lettice, which is
extreme bitter. See Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 50. p. 603, etc. and his Canaan
L. II. c. 15. p. 857.

Ver. 9. Eat not of it raw.] i. e. Half roasted; when some of the Blood remains
still in it. So Mamonides expounds it: and see Hottinger in his Smegma Orient.
p. 169. For it does not seem necessary to forbid them to eat it quite raw,
Mankind generally abhorring such Food; unless we suppose there were such
barbarous Customs now, as there were in after times; when in some of the
Gentile Feasts (particularly those of Bacchus) which had their original in
Egypt, as Herodotus tells us, L. II. c. 49. and Plutarch also L. de Isid. and
Osir.) they tore the Members of Living Creatures in pieces, and did eat them,
the Blood running about their Mouths, as Julius Firmicus observes. But the
opinion of Theodoret seems to me probable ( Sermon. X. (...)) that in old time,
the wicked Demons were in love with the Sacrificing of Men to them: but when
they saw Mankind began to abhor such Sacrifices, and to abstain from them, as
abominable Cruelty, then they invented (...), etc. Scourgings and Whippings,
Eating of raw Flesh, and of other such like Rites, Tom. IV. p. 625.

Nor sodden at all with Water.] It seems superfluous to say sodden, or boiled,
with water: there being no other way of boiling things. But the Hebrew word
bashal signifying to roast, as well as to boil, according as the matter is,
Moses takes away that ambiguity, by adding with water: and also by expressly
naming the opposite to it, but roast with fire. Which was ordained in opposition
to some Gentile Customs in the Eastern Countries (if they were so ancient as
the times of Moses) where they boiled the Flesh of their Sacrifices, when they
prayed to their Gods against Drought, by the scorching Heat of the Sun. So
Athenaeus relates out of Philocorus, that the Athenians did, in their
Sacrifices to the (...), who came, in all likelihood, from the Egyptian Horus,
which signifies Apollo or the Sun. The Zabii also were wont to boil Kids in
Milk.

Roast with fire.] Contrary to the manner in all other Peace Offerings, whose
Flesh, that was allowed to be eaten, either by Priest or People, was to be
sodden; even in the Feast of the Passover: as we read expressly 2 Chronicles. XXXV.
13. where these things are accurately distinguished. And Maimonides gives this
as the reason of it (why they are commanded to eat it roasted) because they went
out in great haste, and had not time to Boil it, P. III. More Nev. c. 46. Some
of the Gentiles in aftertimes roasted their Meat in the Sun, as Heliodorus
tells us, L. I. Aethiopic. And some Grecian Women (as Plutarch tells us) did
the same in their Feast called (...).

His Head with his Legs, and the Purtenance thereof.] They were to roast the
Lamb whole: to avoid perhaps the Superstition of the Gentiles; who were wont to
rake into the Bowels of their Sacrifices, to make curious observations; and
also (in the (...) of Bacchus) thought themselves full of their Deity, when
they ate the Entrails of their Sacrifices, with the Blood running about their
Mouths, as Arnobius tells us.

Ver. 10. And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the Morning.] This was a
Law about Eucharistical Sacrifices, XXII Lev. 30. and before that VII Lev. 15.
(only there is an Exception in the two following Verses, 16, 17. for Sacrifices
that were a Vow, or a voluntary Offering) by which God provided that Holy
Things should not be in danger to be corrupted, or put to profane Uses; and
that they might not lose their just Estimation: as even common Meat does, which
is not so much valued, when it is kept till the next day; for Men desire that
which is fresh and newly dressed.

In this Paschal Sacrifice also, it was the more necessary it should not
remain, lest they should have been forced, either to carry it away with them,
which might have been troublesome; or if they left it behind hind them, it
might have been profaned, and exposed to contempt by the Egyptians, or at least
have been corrupted, which would not have beseemed so holy a Meat. Besides,
there might have been danger also of turning such Relics to Superstitious
Uses, as the brazen Serpent was: God working as great a Deliverance by the one,
as by the other. And this we may the rather think, because it is certain the
ancient Idolaters were wont to save some part of their Sacrifices for
Superstitious Purposes, as appears from VI Baruch 27. Herodotus testifies the
same concerning the ancient Persians, L. I. c. 132. Which the Hebrews might
have been easily inclined to do, if they had left any Remains of this
Sacrifice, which had such wonderful Effects for their Preservation.

And that which remains of it till the Morning, ye shall burn with sire.] We
read in Macrobius of such a Custom among the ancient Romans, in a Feast called
Protervia: where the manner was (as Flavianus there says) ut si quid ex epulis
superfuisset, igne consumeretur: that if any thing was left of the good Cheer,
it should be consumed with Fire, L. II. Saturnal. Cap. 2.

Ver. 11. And thus shall ye eat it.] He here orders the Habit and Posture
wherein they should partake of the Passover: which was like Travelers, or like
those who were going about some laborious Work. So the three following
Particulars plainly import.

With your Loins girt.] They wearing long and loose Garments, in the Eastern
Countries, it was necessary to tie them up, and gird them about their Loins,
whenever they either went a Journey, or undertook, as I said, any great
Labor; that so their Garments might not be an Impediment to them, as they
would have been, if they had hung down about their Heels. See 2 Kings IV. 29.

Your Shoes on your feet.] Many fancy this refers to the ancient Custom of
putting off their Shoes (which God now forbids) when they went to eat, lest
they should make the Beds dirty, on which they lay leaning. But Bochart has
demonstrated that this Custom was not so ancient; but that in Moses his time,
and after, they sat at their Tables as we do now: of which there are many
Instances, in the Book of Genesis, and elsewhere. And therefore it is more
likely the Jews were wont to go without Shoes, when they were in Egypt; for
anciently Men did so; and that being an hot Country, there was no need of them.
And besides, they were so oppressed, that they may well be supposed to want
many such Conveniences of Life. But now God commands them to put on Shoes,
being to travel a long Journey. See his Hierozoicon, P. I. L. 2. c. 50. p. 508.

And your Staff in your hand.] Still the Posture of Travelers, who never went
without a Staff; both to support them in slippery places, and to defend them
against Assaults, XXXII Genesis 10. They seem now to have eaten the Lamb, leaning
on their Staves; and therefore stood all the time, as Men ready to depart. But
these were things peculiar only to that Pasover which they kept in Egypt:
afterward they were not tied to them.

Ye shall eat it in haste.] As Men expecting every moment to begin their
Journey. This was the Foundation of many of the Laws about the Passover, as
Maimonides observes P. III. More Nev. c. 46.

It is the LORD's Passover.] To be kept in memory of his wonderful Mercy in
sparing the Israelites, when he destroyed the Egyptians; and delivering them
from their cruel Bondage.

Ver. 12. For I will pass through the Land of Egypt this Night.] See XI. 4.

And will smite all the Firstborn, etc.] A most grievous Judgment; all
Children being very dear to their Parents, especially their Firstborn; and
those more especially who are their only Children, as it is likely they were to
many in Egypt. It was the forer Plague also, because no Man's Children were
spared, that he might comfort his Neighbors: but they were all at the same
time bewailing their loss. It is not certain, by what sort of Death they were
smitten; but it was sudden, and extinguished them all in the same moment.

And against all the Gods of Egypt I will execute Judgment.] And so Moses tells
us he did, XXXIII Numb. 4. From whence it appears that the Egyptians were
Idolaters in Moses his days; and the Jewish Doctors will have it, that all
their Idols were destroyed this Night. So Jonathan in his Paraphrase; Their
molten Images were dissolved and melted down; their Images of Stone were dashed
in pieces; their Images made of Earth were crumbled into bits, and their Wooden
ones reduced to Ashes. Of the truth of which we cannot be assured; though we
meet with it not only in Pirke Elieser, c. 48. but in the Author of Dibre
hajamim, etc. or, The Life and Death of Moses: whose words are these; All the
Firstborn, both of Man and Beast, were smitten; the Images also and Pictures
destroyed; whereupon the Jews borrowing Gold, Silver, and Garments of the
Egyptians, they went away laden with Riches, according to what God said to
Abraham, XV Genesis 14. That Nation whom they shall serve, will I judge; and
afterward shall they come out with great Substance. This the Heathen seem to
have understood (for this Story reached them) as if they had carried away the
Gold and Silver and Garments of the Egyptian Idols: For so Trogus reports it
(in Justin L. XXXVI. c. 2.) that when Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt,
Sacra Aegyptiorum furto abstulit; he stole away the Holy Things of the
Egyptians, which he makes the reason why Pharaoh pursued them. Artapanus also
in Eusebius says, that most of their Temples were overthrown by an Earthquake,
L. IX. Praepar. Evang. c. 27.

There are those, who by Elohim understand nothing but their Princes or Judges,
the great Men of the Kingdom, upon whom the Judgment of God was now executed.
But another place in this Book, XX. 23. plainly determines it to signify
Images.

I am the LORD.] There is no other God but me: as he had said he would make
both the Israelites and Pharaoh also to know, X. 2. XI. 7.

Ver. 13. And the Blood shall be to you for a Token.] Or a Sign, by which the
Israelites were assured of Safety and Deliverance from the destroying Angel. Of
which Token, if we may believe Epiphanius, there was a Memorial preserved even
among the Egyptians themselves, though they were ignorant of the Original of
their own Rites. For at the Aequinox (which was the time of the Passover) they
marked their Cattle, and their Trees, and one another, (...), with red Oker, or
some such thing, which they fancied would be a Preservative to them.

And when I see the Blood.] Wheresoever my Angel finds this Blood upon the
Door-posts.

I will pass over you, etc.] Here is the reason of the Name of Pesach, as the
Hebrews call it; or Pischa, or Pascha, as it is called by the Chaldees: because
God ordered his Angel to pass over, or pass by the Children of Israel, and not
to smite any body in their Families, when he smote every Firstborn of the
Egyptians, v. 23.

Ver. 14. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial.] To preserve in mind
God's wonderful Works, which he made to be remembered, CXI Psalm. 4. that is,
ordered and disposed things in such a manner, that they should not be
forgotten: particularly, by instituting a Festival Solemnity upon this day, as
it here follows.

And you shall keep it a Feast to the LORD, etc.] Called the Feast of the
Passover: the Rites of which are all manifestly contrived to preserve a Memory
of the Benefits they now received.

An Ordinance for ever.] To the end of that Economy. For it often signifies
only a long Duration, as XV Deuteronomy. 17. And here imports no more, but that they
should keep this Ordinance, not only now, but when they came into the Land of
Canaan.

Ver. 15. Seven days shall ye eat unleavend Bread.] The seven days following
the Feast of the Passover, were observed as a distinct Festival, and called The
Feast of unleavened Bread, v. 17. because no Bread that had any leaven in it,
might be eaten all that time. Which the Jews expound thus: Not that they were
bound to eat unleavened Bread all those seven days (which was necessary only on
that Night when the Passover was killed) but only not to eat leavened Bread.
That was utterly unlawful; but they might eat Rice, or parched Corn, or any
such thing. See Petavius in Epiphan. Haeres. LXX. N. XI.

At their march indeed out of Egypt, they were forced to eat unleavened Bread
(having none else to eat) not only for seven days, but for a whole month: that
is, from the fifteenth of the first Month, to the fifteenth and sixteenth of
the next; when God gave them Manna and Quails, XVI. 1, 12, 13. But necessity,
as I said, compelled them to this; they having nothing else to support them in
the Wilderness during that time; because, through haste, they were constrained
to bring their Dough out of Egypt unleavened, v. 39.

Even the first day ye shall put leaven out of your Houses.] Which they
searched with great diligence the Evening before; that the smallest Crumb might
not be left behind. So their Doctors tell us, particularly Maimonides in his
Treatise on this Subject. See Buxtorf Synagog. Judaic. c. 17.

That Soul shall be cut off from Israel.] See concerning this Cereth (or
cutting off) which is often mentioned in these Books, XVII Genesis 14. Most think
it a Punishment by the Hand of God, and not of Man.

Ver. 16. And in the first day there shall be an holy Convocation, and in the
seventh day, etc.] The first and the last days of the Feast of unleavened Bread
were kept holy (the other five were working days) because, as God delivered
them from their cruel Bondage in Egypt upon the first day, so he overthrew
Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea upon the seventh.

No manner of work shall be done in them.] No manner of Servile Work. See XXIII
Lev. 7, 8.

Save only that which every man must eat, etc.] He that did any other Work, was
to be beaten. For they equal these days with the Sabbath in this regard; that
whatsoever Work was forbidden on the Sabbath, might not be done on any such
days as these, which they call good days. But they might provide good Cheer on
these days; though not more than could be eaten. See Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. c.
19. where he shows at large what things might be done, and what not on these
days, according to the Opinion of their Doctors.

Ver. 17. And ye shall observe the Feast of unleavened Bread, etc.] He repeats
it again; because it was a thing of great moment, to have these seven days
observed entirely, and not only the Passover upon the fourteenth day in the
Evening: that they might every year think so long of God's great Goodness, in
delivering them from their miserable Condition in Egypt, as not to let the
sense of so singular a Benefit slip at any time quite out of their Minds.

By an Ordinance for ever.] See v. 14.

Ver. 18. In the first Month, on the fourteenth day of the Month at Even, etc.]
The Passover was celebrated in the Conclusion of the fourteenth day of this
Month; just before the beginning of the fifteenth day. For the next Morning,
when the Israelites, immediately after they had eaten the Lamb, were hastened
out of Egypt, was not part of the fourteenth day, but of the fifteenth: as we
read XXXII Numb. 3.

Until the one and twentieth day of the Month at Even.] That is, for seven days
(as was said before, v. 15. and again is repeated v. 19.) which began
immediately after the eating the Paschal Lamb, in the end of the fourteenth
day. For if they should be reckoned from the beginning of the fourteenth day,
there would be not seven, but eight days of unleavened Bread.

Ver. 19. Seven days shall there be no Leaven found in your Houses.] This still
makes the Precept stricter; that they were not only to abstain from any thing
leavened, but not so much as to have it in their Habitations. Accordingly the
Jews tell us, of an exact Search which every one was bound to make, with
lighted Wax-Candles, lest it should remain in any Corner or Crevise of the
House. Their Scrupulosity in this matter is exactly described by Buxtorf, in
his Synag. Jud. cap. 17. p. 394, etc.

Whether he be a stranger, etc.] That is, one of another Nation; but had
embraced the Jewish Religion, by receiving Circumcision. For none else were
admitted to eat of the Passover, v. 48. Such a Person was called by the Greeks,
a Proselyte.

Ver. 20. Ye shall eat nothing leavened.] This, according to the Jews, explains
what follows, in all your Habitations shall ye eat unleavened Bread. That is,
if they eat any Bread at all, it was to be without leaven. See v. 15.
Accordingly, on the day before the Passover, they were very busy in making
Cakes, which they call Mazzoth, without any Butter, or Oil, or so much as Salt
in them; of mere Water and Flower. Which being very insipid, some made bold (as
their Authors tells us) to add Eggs and Sugar; and sometimes the Richer sort
made them of mere Almonds; both for the honor of the Feast (as they pretended)
and for the comfort of sick and infirm People, as well as to render them more
pleasant. Yet on the first day of the Feast, they would eat none of these, but
only the Bread of Affliction, (as they called it) made merely of Meal and Water.

Ver. 21. Then Moses called for all the Elders of Israel.] Immediately after he
had received the Command from God, he summoned them to deliver it to the
People, that it might be put in Execution. Concerning Elders, see III. 16.

Draw out, and take you a Lamb.] It is thus expounded by Jonathan in his
Paraphrase, Withdraw your hands from the Idols of Egypt, and take a Lamb to
your Families, etc. By which it appears, he thought this was opposed to the
Rites of the Egyptians: but I know not on what ground; for the Israelites
offered no Sacrifices there.

According to your Families.] See v. 3.

And kill the Passover.] It belonged to every Man to do it (as was said v. 6.)
and now there was no Priest, as yet, ordained: but every Father of a Family
exercised that Office. I need not mention the manner, after which the Jewish
Writers say it was to be slain.

The Passover.] The Hebrew word Pesach signifies principally, the Angel's
passing by the Israelites when he slew the Egyptian Children. From whence it
came to signify also the Lamb that was offered in memory of this Deliverance;
and was a means of it at this time. So it signifies here, and in many other
places. And likewise it signifies all the Sacrifices which were wont to
accompany this Lamb, and were offered to God with it, at this Festival, XVI
Deuteronomy. 2. And (lastly) the Feast it self is called by this Name, XXII Luke 1.

And here it may be fit to note, that the Lamb being first killed in Egypt, it
was killed in every Man's House, for they had no Altar there, nor any other
place where they had liberty to kill it. But after they came to the Land of
Canaan, it was not lawful to Sacrifice it any where, but in the place which God
appointed for his Worship, XVI Deuteronomy. 2. From whence Meimonides concludes, that
whatsoever they did with other Sacrifices; yet this could not be offered in the
High Places, but only at the Temple. And it is likely they did so in the
Wilderness, the Tabernacle being newly erected at the keeping of the second
Passover, IX Numb. 5.

Ver. 22. And ye shall take a bunch of Hysop.] So the Leper was to be cleansed,
and the House infected with Leprosy, XIV Lev. 6, 7, 49, 50, etc. and so the
Prophet David prays to be purged from his sin, LI Psalm. 9. Whence it is that
Hesychius calls this Herb (...), an Abstersive and Purging Herb, because it was
appointed by the Law of Moses for this purpose; otherwise, there is nothing
Abstersive in its Nature.

And dip it in the Blood that is in the Basin.] The Hebrew word Saph, which is
here translated Basin, is translated Cup in XII Zach. 2. but the LXX. and
Vulgar take it to signify the Door, or Threshold of the House, where some
suppose the Lamb was killed. Certain it is, that some of the Vessels of the
Sanctuary are called in the Plural Number Sippim and Sippoth, 1 Kings VII. 50.
LII Jer. 19. though the Vessels which received the Blood of the Beast at the
Altar of Burnt-offerings, are called by another name. See XXVII Exodus 3. There
were no such now, and therefore they received the Blood at present in a common
Basin or Cup.

And strike the Lintel, etc.] Or sprinkle it, as many understand it. For there
being, as yet, no Altar, the Blood is ordered to be sprinkled in this manner;
having in it something of the Nature of a Propitiation. Because by this
sprinkling of the Blood, God's displeasure was turned away from the Israelites,
when it fell upon those Houses where this Blood was not seen.

And the two Side-posts.] See v. 7.

And none of you shall go out of the Door of his House.] The destroying Angel
could have discerned an Israelite from an Egyptian, though he had met him in
the Street: But this was required, to teach them that their Safety consisted,
in being under the protection of the Blood of this Lamb, which was shed to save
their Blood from being spilt. Thus in the Flood there was no Safety but in the
Ark: nor could Rahab have been saved, when Jericho was destroyed, out of the
House where the scarlet thread was tied.

Until the Morning.] When they were importuned by the Egyptians very early (not
long after Midnight, v. 31, etc.) to be gone with all they had, out of their
Country.

Ver. 32. For the LODR will pass through to smite the Egyptians.] As he had
threatened v. 12. For he rehearses to the Elders what God had told him.

And he sees the Blood, etc. the LORD shall pass over the Door, etc.] So he
had promised before, v. 13. Maimonides, being of the Opinion that the Zabij and
other Idolaters abhorred the killing of such Creatures, thinks that God
ordained this killing of the Lamb, etc. both to purge the Minds of the Jews
from such false Opinions, and make profession of the contrary; and to persuade
Men that that Action which they accounted deadly, preserved from Death;
according to these words, The LORD shall pass over the Door, etc. P. III. More
Nevoch. c. 46.

Ver. 24. And ye shall observe this thing, etc.] Keep this Feast, by
Sacrificing a Lamb, and eating no leavened Bread: though some of the Ceremonies
wherewith it was now observed, in after times were not necessary.

Ver. 25. When you be come to the Land, which the LORD shall give you, etc.]
This Deliverance is not to be forgotten when God has given you rest, in the
Land he has promised you. But there you are most carefully to preserve the
memory of it, by keeping this Feast every year. And indeed, most think they
were not bound to keep it till they came thither: but what they did in the
Wilderness the next year, was by a special Direction, not by virtue of the
Command in this Chapter, IX Numb. 1, 2, etc.

Ye shall keep this Service.] In all things, except what was proper and
peculiar to their coming out of Egypt.

Ver. 26. When your Children shall say unto you, What mean you by this
Service?] When Children were Twelve years old, their Parents were bound to
bring them to the Temple; where, seeing what was done at this Festival, they
would be apt to enquire into the meaning of it. At every Feast also of the
Passover, the eldest Person at the Table instructed all the younger sort, that
were there present, in the reason of this Institution, rehearsing these very
words, as Conradus Pellicanus observes; This is the Sacrifice of the Passover,
in remembrance that the LORD passed over the Houses of the Children of Israel
in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our Houses.

Ver. 27. It is the Sacrifice of the LORD's Passover.] Or, the Sacrifice of the
Passover to the LORD: i.e. in honor of the LORD, who passed over the
Israclites, when he smote the Egyptians. It is frequently called by the Name of
a Sacrifice, XXIII. 18. XXXIV. 25. XVI Deuteronomy. 4, 5, 6. and it is called Corban;
which is a Name given only to those things, which were brought to be offered up
to God. See IX Numb. 13. where, as it is called Corban, so the same word is
used for bringing it, which is commonly used about other Sacrifices. And it
further appears to have been properly a Sacrifice, by the Rites belonging to
it: For the Blood of it was sprinkled by the Priests, 2 Chronicles. XXX. 16. XXXV.
11. Which, though it could not de done here, because they had no Altar in
Egypt; yet the Posts of their Houses (as I observed before) were sprinkled with
it; and it had an effect accordingly.

And the People.] To whom the Elders (v.21.) reported these things from Moses.

Bowed the Head and worshipped.] Expressed their belief of what Moses had said;
and humbly acknowledge God's goodness to them.

Ver. 28. And the Children of Israel went away.] To their several Habitations.

And did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron.] ( v. 1.) They kept the
Passover.

So did they.] According to all the forenamed Rites belonging to it.

Ver. 29. And it came to pass that at Midnight the LORD smote, etc.] According
to the foregoing threatening, XI. 4, 5. See there.

The Captive that was in the Dungeon.] The Pit or Hole under Ground. For the
Hebrew signifies the lowest part of the Prison. See XI. 5.

Ver. 30. And Pharaoh rose up in the Night, he and all his Servants, and all
the Egyptians.] I suppose the Angel made a great noise when he came to give the
blow; which made the Egyptians start out of their sleep, and behold the
Calamity which was come upon them. Or perhaps the Firstborn gave such a
lamentable Shriek, when they were struck, that it awakned the whole Family.

And there was a great cry in Egypt.] It is no improbable Conjecture, which was
made a great while ago by Fortunatus Seacchus in his Myrothec. Ebaeochrism, L.
I. c. 6. that the Solemn Feast among the Egyptians, wherein they went about
with Candles in the Night, seeking for Osiris with Tears and great
Lamentations, took its Original from Pharaoh's rising up out of his Bed at
Midnight, and all the Egyptians with him; who lighting Candles, and finding
their Children dead, bewailed them with loud Cries. And it is not unreasonable
to think, as he does, that Pharaoh's eldest Son, who was now slain, had the
Name of Osiris: whose sudden Death by this stroke, all Posterity lamented in
one Night of the year. Which was when the Moon was at full, as he observes out
of Apuleius: which still confirms this Conjecture, it being at a full Moon when
this Slaughter was made, and the Israelites delivered out of Egypt.

For there was not an House, where there was not one dead.] If there were any
Children in it.

Ver. 31. And he called for Moses and Aaron.] By some of his Servants whom he
sent to them; as v. 33. seems to signify.

By Night.] He durst not stay till the next Morning, for fear he should have
been cut off also before that time.

And said, Rise up.] One would think by this that they found them sleeping
securely in their Beds, when this deadly blow was given to the Egyptians.

And get you forth from amongst my People, both you and the Children of Israel,
etc.] For he was sorely afraid, if they staid any longer, they would bring some
greater Mischief upon him.

Go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.] He had several times made this
Concession; but was never so much in earnest as now.

Ver. 32. Also take your Flocks and your Herds, etc.] Though his heart had been
often hardened, yet this Slaughter of all their Firstborn made such a deep
impression upon him, that he comes fully up to their Terms, yielding for the
present to all they had desired; though he did not continue constant in this
mind, but soon revolted.

And bless me also.] Pray for me, as the Chaldee translates it.

Ver. 33. And the Egyptians were urgent upon the People.] They that brought
from Pharaoh a grant of all the Israelites desired (and others also who had
lost their Children) pressed very hard upon them to accept it, and that with
all speed: not out of love to the Israelites, but for fear they should perish
themselves, if they did not leave their Country. Pharaoh especially, seeing his
Firstborn, the Heir of his Crown, struck suddenly dead, had reason to conclude
the next blow would be at his own Life.

To send them out of the Land of Egypt.] This shows they were not merely
dismissed, but entreated, nay importuned to depart. Such a change had this
Slaughter, and the general Outcry that followed upon it, made in their hearts.

In haste.] They that were unwilling before to hearken to the Israelites
Petition, now make their Petitions to them: and were so glad to be rid of them,
that they would not suffer them to delay their departure: Nay, made a
Golden-bridge (as we speak) for their speedy passage out of Egypt, v. 35, 36.

For they said, we be all dead men.] They were desirous the Israelites should
enjoy their Liberty, rather than lose their own Lives.

Ver. 34. And the People took their Dough, before it was leavened.] They seem
to have newly mixed their Flower and Water together, and kneaded it into a
Paste or Dough, as we translate it; but had not put any leaven into it; nor had
time to make it into Cakes, and bake them.

Their kneading-troughs.] The Hebrew word comprehends both the Dough, and the
Thing wherein it was contained: which in VIII. 3. we translate Ovens, and here
Kneading-troughs, in which their Dough was carried.

Being bound up in their Clothes.] The Hebrew word for Clothes, signifies any
thing that covers another; or, wherein it is wrapped: as the Dough was in
Linnenclothes, it is most likely, (for that is usual) to keep it from the cold
Air, which was sharp in the Night, and would have hindered its rising.

On their shoulders.] For we do not read of any Wagons or Horses they had, for
the Carriage of their Goods out of Egypt.

Ver. 35. And the Children of Israel did according to the word of Moses.] Who
had commanded them from God, to do as it here follows, (XI. 1, 2.) which was
their warrant, and justified the Fact.

And they borrowed of the Egyptians, etc.] So most understand it: though some
think it was a free gift which the Egyptians bestowed upon them; when they were
very desirous (as we read before) to have them gone out of their Country; which
made them not only entreat, but hire them to depart. So Jacobus Capellus ad
A.M. 2503. They that had denied them leave to go away for a few days (says he)
now press them to depart with all speed; quin and praecibus Israelitas
demulcent, ac donis onerant Egyptii. See III. 23. But it is commonly thought,
that the Egyptians imagined the Israelites only desired to appear as well
adorned as they could before their God, at the great Feast they were to hold in
the Wilderness: and so readily lent them these Jewels and sine Clothes to deck
themselves withal; which they hoped would be restored to them again as soon as
the Sacrisice was over.

Ver. 36. And the LORD gave the People favor, etc.] As he had promised III.
21. and see XI. 3.

So that they lent them such things as they required.] Though the Men borrowed
as well as the Women, (XI. 3.) yet the Women are only mentioned, III. 23.
because they borrowed most: and the Women and Maidens of Egypt might be the
more willing to bestow their Jewels and Earings upon them, that they might woo
their Husbands, Children and Relations to be gone with all speed.

And they spoiled the Egyptians.] God has a Supreme Right to all things; and
there was a just cause why he should transfer the Right of the Egyptians unto
the Israelites. See XI. 2. Unto which add this Story, which is told in the
Gemara of the Sanhedrin; that in the time of Alexander the Great, the Egyptians
brought an Action against the Israelites, desiring they might have the Land of
Canaan, in satisfaction for all that they borrowed of them when they went out
of Egypt. To which Gibeah ben Kosam, who was Advocate for the Jews, replied,
That before they made this Demand, they must prove what they alleged, that the
Israelites borrowed any thing of their Ancestors. Unto which the Egyptians
thought it sufficient to say, That they found it Recorded in their own Books;
mentioning this place. Well then, said the Advocate, look into the same Book,
and you will find the Children of Israel lived four hundred and thirty years in
Egypt: pay us for all the labor and toil of so many Thousand People as you
employed all that time, and we will restore what we borrowed. To which they had
not a word to answer. Tertullian mentions such a Controversy, or Plea, between
the two Nations, L. II. advers. Marcion. where he relates this from an ancient
Tradition. See Mr. Seldom, L. VII. de Jure Not. and Gent. c. 8. Besides this,
it is not impertinent to observe, that the Egyptians were declared Enemies to
the Jews: now it is not unlawful to spoil an Enemy; nor ought this, upon that
account, to be called a Thest. This reason Clemens Alexandrinus joins to the
former; See L. I. Stromat. p. 345. D. But no body, I think, has expressed this
in better words, and more full of sense, than our famous Dr. Jackson, Book X.
upon the Creed, Chap. 40. where considering God, as become the King of this
People, in a proper and peculiar manner; and considering also, what
unsufferable wrongs the King and People of Egypt had done unto this People of
God, who were now become his peculiar Subjects, or Proprietary Leiges; he
concludes that this Fact, even by the Course of Human Law, or Law of Nations,
was more justifiable, than Royal Grants of Letters of Mart, or other like
Remedies, are, against such other Nations as have wronged their Subjects, or
suffered them to be wronged by any under their Command, without Restitution,
when they solemnly or by way of Embassy demanded it. In short, whatsoever the
Hebrew Women took from the Egyptians, they took and possessed, by the Law of
Reprisal: that is, by virtue of a Special Warrant granted, by the LORD himself,
as he was now become, in Special, not only the God of his People, but their
King.

Ver. 36. And the Children of Israel journeyed from Rameses.] Whether this were
a City or a Country, the Israelites seem in this place to have made a general
Rendevouz (as we now speak) it being well known to them; for they were
thereabout first planted, XLVII Genesis 11.

Unto Succoth.] This day being the fifteenth of Nisan, they began to keep the
Feast of Unleavened Bread at this place; called Succoth from the Booths or
Tents which were here first erected (no Houses being there) wherein they
continued while they lived in the Wilderness; and many preferred them before
Houses, when they came to Canaan. Whence we read, so often, such Expressions as
these, To thy Tents, O Israel, or, They went every Man to his Tent.

It is an idle fancy of R. Solomon upon this place, that they traveled this
day an CXX. miles, and that in an hour, because it is said XIX. 4. that God
carried them on Eagles wings. Some will have this place called Succoth, because
the Cloud of Glory began here first to overspread them.

About six hundred thousand on foot that were Men.] i. e. Were Twenty years old
and upward; all fit for War.

Besides Children.] If we reckon all under Twenty years of Age, with all the
Women and old Men, there could not be less than fifteen hundred thousand
persons. A vast increase in the space of a little more than two hundred years,
from LXX. Persons that went down into Egypt.

Ver. 38. And a mixed multitude went up also with them.] Some think these were
only a Rabble, that marched along with them; imagining they would return at
three days end. Which when they saw they did not, they began to mutiny, and
quarrelled with Moses, etc. as the Author of Dibre Hajamim tells the Story.
Others think that many Israelites had made Marriages with the Egyptians (as
some it is plain did, XXIV Lev. 10.) who now accompanied them at their
Departure, being loath to leave their Relations. But it is most probable they
were Proselytes of the Gate (as the Jews call them) who had renounced Idolatry,
but were not entered into the Covenant, by being Circumcised. See Seldom L. I.
de Synedriis, c. 3. It is uncertain what number there was of these; but it
appears they were a multitude.

And Flocks and Herds and very much Cattle.] Some of which perhaps belonged to
the mixed Multitude: for they among the Egyptians that feared the LORD's word,
preserved their Cattle from the stroke of the Hail, which destroyed all that
was in the Field, IX. 20.

Ver. 39. And they baked.] When they came to Succoth.

Unleavened Cakes, etc.] The Scripture often mentions such Bread, XVIII Genesis 6.
XI Numb. 8. 1 Kings XVII. 12. for it was not leavened. They could not stay till
it was leavened; being thrust out in haste as they were preparing it, v. 33.
which does not signify that they put Leaven to it, when they came to Succoth
(as Grotius understands it) for that was inconsistent with the Feast of
Unleavened Bread; which they were commanded to keep, v. 15. and which it is
reasonable to suppose they now observed, as well as killed and eat the Paschal
Lamb, v. 6, 28.

Neither had they prepared themselves any victuals.] This justifies what I
observed upon v. 15. that they lived a whole Month upon unleavened Bread, till
God sent them Manna to eat.

Ver. 40. Now the sojourning.] So the Hebrew word Moshab most certainly
signifies; not merely dwelling (as the Vulgar Latin renders it) but dwelling
like Strangers, who are not in their own Country. Thus Abraham is said to
sojourn, XX Genesis 1. and Isaac and Jacob, XXVIII. 4. And therefore, whereas the
Roman Copy of the LXX. reads here (...), the habitation, the Alezandrian Copy
has (...), the perigrination or sojourning, as we well translate it.

Of the Children of Israel.] These words comprehend their Fathers, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob; as is evident from hence: that otherwise Israel himself should
not be included in this sojourning; who was the Person that brought them into
Egypt, and lived there, with his Family, seventeen years. Nor is any thing more
ordinary in Scripture, than under the Name of the Father to comprehend all his
Posterity; and likewise, when the Posterity is only mentioned to intend also
their Fathers: there being such a near Union between Parents and Children, that
they are considered as one Person, XXVI Deuteronomy. 5, 9. X Judge. 11, 12. XII Hosea
4. and many other places. And therefore the Samaritan Copy here rightly reads,
The Habitation of the Children of Israel, and of their Fathers, etc. Which is
not to be taken for a Translation of these words, but an Interpretation. And so
some Copies of the LXX. had it, as St. Austin observes, anciently; and Drusius
lately mentions an Edition, wherein it was thus paraphrased, (...), they and
their Fathers.

Who dwelt in Egypt.] Here also the Samaritan Copy has it (as an Explication,
no doubt, not a literal Translation) who dwelt in the Land of Canaan and in
Egypt. And so the Vatican Edition of the LXX. The Habitation of the Children of
Israel, which dwelt in the Land of Egypt and in Canaan. Which is no late
Addition, but was in ancient Copies; for Aben Ezra testifies, in his Commentary
on this place, that they thus explained it, Which dwelt in Egypt and in other
Countries: as Drusius observes in his Quaesita per Epistolam 51.

Was four hundred years.] That is, from the time of Abraham's coming from
Charran into the Land of Canaan (when this sojourning began) till their going
out of Egypt, was just four hundred and thirty years. For from Abraham's coming
to sojourn in Canaan, to the birth of Isaac, was twenty five years; and Isaac
was sixty years old when he begat Jacob; who was an hundred and thirty years
old when he went down into Egypt: which Numbers put together, make two hundred
and fifteen years. And from his Families coming into Egypt, till their
departure, was just as many more. Which agrees perfectly with what the Apostle
says, that the Promise made by God to Abraham and his Seed, could not be made
void by the Law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, III Galat. 16,
17. How the first Promise made to Abraham was, when God bad him go to Canaan,
XII Genesis 3. See XV Genesis 13. There are some indeed that reckon their stay in
Egypt, to have been only two hundred and ten years; and then they took in the
five years Abraham stayed at Charran, after he left Vr of the Chaldees, to make
up these four hundred and thirty years: of which Opinion is Drusius, in the
place above mentioned. But Josephus says expressly, that they departed out of
Egypt, (...), Two hundred and fifty years after Jacob came into it, L. II.
Antiq. c. 5.

All the Difficulties that have been raised by Commentators in the Exposition
of these words, are avoided by this Interpretation. If we admit, that is, only
these two Synechdoche's (the figure of part for the whole) first, that under
the Name of the Children of Israel, is comprehended Israel himself, with his
Father and Grandfather: and secondly, that their sojourning comprehends the
whole time that this Nation dwelt in a Land that was not theirs; half of which
time, at least, was spent in Egypt. See Guil. Vorstius in his Notes upon
Tzemach David, p. 200. and 205. Ludov. Capellus Chron. Sacra. p. 135. But
especially our most Learned Primate Usher, Chron. Sacr. c. 8. where he largely
confutes the contrary Opinion; which if any one desire to see defended, I know
none that has done it better than Gerhardus J. Vossius, in his Isagogue
Chronologica Dissert. VII. c. 1, etc. where he fairly represents the Arguments
on both sides; but inclines himself to think the Children of Israel dwelt
CCCCXXX years in Egypt; and endeavors to answer those who assert that
Interpretation which I have given, Cap. 12. But acknowledges ingenuously ( Cap.
6.) that it is the sense, not only of the ancient Jews, but of the ancient
Christians, (such as Eusebius, Epiphanius, and St. Chrysostom among the Greeks,
and St. Hierom, St. Austin, etc. among the Latins) and of a vast number of
later Writers.

Ver. 41. And it came to pass, at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years.] These years (says St. Hierom in III Galat.) are to be computed, ab eo
tempore, quo Deus ad Abrahamum locutus est, etc. from the time, when God said
to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all Nations be blessed, i. e. when he went first
to Canaan.

Even the self same day it came to pass.]. They all went out on one day; or,
they went out that very day four hundred and thirty years, after Abraham came
to Canaan. So faithful was God in his Promise to his faithful Servant.

That all the Hosts of the LORD, etc.] So they are called, for the LORD was
become their King (as I observed III. 10.) and now led them forth as their
Captain General. And this word Hosts imports that they went out not confusedly,
but in good order, (See XIII. 18.) which is the more wonderful; there being
such a vast number of them ( v. 37, 38.) that one would think they could not so
soon get together, especially in any order. But Josephus has well resolved
this; That Moses, having notice of God's Intentions some days before, (See v.
1.) had disposed them for their Departure, (...), and distributing them into
several Companies, had appointed them the place of general Rendevouz, as we now
speak: or at least directed who should march first, and what order they should
observe, that they might not hinder one another in their March.

Ver. 42. It is a Night to be much observed.] In the Hebrew (as the Margin
notes) a Night of Observations. That is, a very remarkable Night; or a Night in
which there were many Precepts to be observed, as some will have it. Or, as
Conradus Pellicanus, a Night in which the LORD, after a special manner, watched
over the Children of Israel. For which reason the Jews expect their Messiah to
come in this Night; foolishly imagining he will then find them all most ready
to follow him to Jerusalem. For they have now corrupted an ancient Tradition,
which (I observed before v. 6.) was remarkably fulfilled in our Savior's
suffering that very Evening, when the Paschal Lamb was killed, and the Children
of Israel redeemed from the Egyptian Bondage.

Unto the LORD.] In honor of him, who had graciously begun to fulfill his
Promise made to their Forefathers, VI. 2, 3, 4.

This is that Night of the LORD, etc.] Which God has commanded to be observed;
because they came out at that Season (XVI Dent. 6.) under his Conduct from the
Egyptian Bondage. Or, it may be called that Night of the LORD, because his
Power and Mercy and Faithfulness to his Promises so signally appeared that
Night.

Ver. 43. And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron.] At the same time, I suppose,
that he instituted the Passover, ( v. 1.) he added this Caution about it.

This is the Ordinance of the Passover.] A further Rule to be observed at this
Feast.

There shall no Stranger eat thereof.] Several of the Jewish Doctors, by the
Son of a Stranger, understand an Apostate from the Religion of Israel to
strange Worship, i. e. Idolatry; as Mr. Seldom observes, L. I. de Synedr. c.
12. p. 479. But it is not to be so restrained, as appears from the next Verse:
which is a further Explication of this. Wherein he ordains, that no Man who did
not embrace their Faith and Religion, should eat of the Passover, though he was
a Proselyte so far, as to be permitted to live among them. For this being a
Commemoration of the great Deliverance bestowed upon the Israelites, none but
they were to partake of it; unless they would be Circumcised, and thereby come
into the Covenant made with Abraham. Which gave them a title to all the
Privileges of his Children; and obliged them, as well as the Natural
Israelites, to give Public Thanks for this Work of their Redemption from
Egyptian Bondage; to Worship and Serve their God according as he directed.

Ver. 44. And every Manservant that is bought for money.] As many were in
those Times and Countries; who became their Masters proper Goods, as much as
their Cattle.

When thou have Circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.] He was not to be
Circumcised against his Will: but if he refused, after a years trial (as
Maimonides expounds it) to receive Circumcision, his Master was to sell him
again. For it is very unreasonable to think, that he was to be compelled to be
Circumcised, as those Hebrew Doctors seem to understand it, who say, That both
Master and Servant were forbid to eat of it, till the Servant was Circumcised.
See Seldom, L. II. de Synedr. c. 1. Where he shows at large, that, according to
the Hebrew Doctors, no Man was to be admitted a Proselyte, to partake of the
Paschal Lamb, unless his whole Family was Circumcised with him; both Children
and Servants.

Ver. 45. A Foreigner.] The Hebrew word Toschab literally signifies a Dweller
or Inhabitant: by which Name those pious Gentiles were called who renounced
Idolatry, though they did not embrace the Jewish Religion; because they were
permitted to settle among them, and dwell in their Country, which was not
allowed to other Foreigners, who continued Idolaters. See Seldom, L. II. de
Jure N. and G. c. 3. etc. 5. Where he observes Maimonides makes this Exception,
That no such Persons might dwell in Jerusalem, because of the singular Holiness
of that City; but any where else they might, with the Profession of Judaism.

And no hired Servant.] Some of them were Servants to the Jews, and so dwelt in
the same House with them; and were called Hirelings when they bound themselves
to serve their Masters for three years: as the Jews gather from XVI Isa. 14.

Ver. 46. In one House shall it be eaten, etc.] In the first Night wherein this
Sacrifice was slain, they were enjoined not to stir out of Doors, v. 22. and
therefore not to carry forth ought of the Flesh abroad into another House.
Besides, they were in such haste, that they had no time to send Messengers from
one House to another; which Maimonides makes the ground of this Precept, More
Nev. P. III. c. 46. In aftertimes also, that Law being in force ( v. 4.) that
lesser Households, who had not Company enough to eat the Lamb up, should join
with some other; it is here explained that, for maintenance of Friendly
Society, they should not divide the Lamb, and carry half of it to another
House, but all meet together in one, and feast upon it. Which the ancient
Fathers looked upon, as a Figure of the Unity of the Church of Christ.

This seems to be the most natural Interpretation, that it should be eaten
under one Roof. But R. Simeon says, That God only bound them, to eat in one
Company or Society, not in two; but it was lawful for that Family or Society to
eat it in two places, if they pleased, Halicoth Olam, P. IV. Sect. 3.

Neither shall ye break a Bone thereof.] The Jews fancy, this Law does not
speak of the lesser Bones; but only of those in which there was some Marrow. So
Maimonides in his Treatise on this Subject, c. 10. sect. 1. And indeed, being
eaten in haste, they could not have time to break the Bones, and suck out the
Marrow: which in the place before-named (in his More Nevochim) he makes the
Foundation of this Precept: Which was exactly fulfilled in the true Paschal
Lamb, of which this was a Figure, when he was offered for us, as St. John
observes, XIX. 33, 36.

Ver. 47. All the Congregation of Israel shall keep it.] Women and Children, as
well as Men. In after times indeed, only Men were bound to come up at the three
Feasts, XXIII. 17. XXXIV. 23. XVI Deuteronomy. 16. But devout People were wont to
carry up their Wives and Children with them, as appears by Elkanah, 1 Samuel I.,
3, 4. and by Joseph, who went up with the Blessed Virgin, II Luke 41. And that
place in Samuel informs us, that their Sons and Daughters did eat of the
Sacrifice.

Ver. 48. When a Stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover,
etc.] See v. 43, 44.

No uncircumcised Person shall eat thereof.] Which is the reason, some have
thought, why they observed no Passover, as far as we can sind, after that in
the very next year that followed their coming out of Egypt; because they were
generally Uncircumcised. But this seems to relate to Men of another Nation; who
though they were not admitted to eat of the Lamb, unless they received
Circumcision; yet having renounced Idolatry, the Jews say they might eat of the
unleavened Bread, and of the bitter Herbs.

Ver. 49. One Law shall be to him that is home-born, etc.] Nothing could be
more equal than this, that no Man should enjoy this Privilege, who was not of
their Religion: but whosoever embraced it should partake of the same Benefits.

Ver. 50. Thus did all the Children of Israel.] They kept this Passover; and
afterward another, by a special direction IX Numb. but afterward, during their
stay in the Wilderness, they seem to have omitted it; because they omitted
Circumcision, without which ( v. 48.) they were not capable to partake of it.

As the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.] Observed it according to
all the Rites here enjoined: though in future Ages several of them were
omitted, as peculiar to this time.

Ver. 51. And it came to pass the self same day, etc.] On the day after they
celebrated the Passover, they began their March out of Egypt. Which was a thing
so notorious, that the memory of it was preserved in Nations far distant from
them: though the Story was much corrupted, for want of the Knowledge of these
Sacred Records. For Strabo mentions it, (to name no more) but says the Report
was, that the Jews were descended from the Egyptians, (which might be believed
by Strangers, because they dwelt so long in that Country) and that Moses was an
Egyptian Priest, who had a certain part of that Country; but being dissatissied
with the present state of things, forsook it, and many Worshippers of God
((...)) followed him. For he affirmed and taught that the Egyptians had not
right Conceptions, who likened God to wild Beasts and Cattle: nor did the
Asricans or Greeks conceive of him better, who represented him like to Men:
(...) For there is but this one only God, that which comprehends us all, and
the Earth and the Sea, which we call Heaven, and the World, etc. In which
words, he makes Moses not so foolish as the Egyptians and other Nations, but
attributes a senseless Opinion to him, (that the World, which we see, is God) if
this be the right reading of his words. But I rather think the place is
corrupted, and it should be, (...), etc. For this is Moses his true Opinion,
with which he begins his Books, that he only is God who made the Heaven and the
Earth. And this perfectly agrees with what follows in Strabo, That no Image can
be made of this God, and therefore a Temple without any Image must be erected
to him, etc. Which is not true, if we take the visible World to be God; for the
Image of the Heaven and the Earth may be made, as well as of a Man or a Beast.
However, it is true which he adds, That Moses persuaded many good Men, and
brought them into that Country, where Jerusalem is the chief City; where they
lived a long time happily, (...), doing justly, and being sincerely Religious.
Which is a notable Testimony from a Pagan, to be noted aureis literis, with
Letters of Gold, as Casaubon speaks in his Annotations on this place, L. XVI.
p. 760, 761.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] After they came to Succoth:
where I suppose the SCHECHINAH appeared to him, as it had done in Midian and in
Egypt; to direct him in his Conduct.

Ver. 2. Sanctify unto me the Firstborn.] Separate, or set apart, from common
uses; for I appropriate them to my self, as it follows in the end of the Verse.
This word (Sanctify) as our Mr. Mede observes, signifies differently in
several Conjugations. Sometimes it signifies to devote, and consecrate to the
Service of God; and sometimes to use a thing as holy, being already devoted to
him. And thus he reconciles this place, where he bids him sanctify all the
Firstborn ( i. e. look upon them as things separated to his own use, and
therefore not to be used by them) with another place, XXVII Lev. 26. where he
says concerning the Firstborn, No Man shall sanctify it, it is the LORD's;
i. e. the LORD has already set it apart to himself, and therefore no Man is to
Consecrate that again, which God has already Consecrated, that is, taken for
his own. See L. II. de Sanctuario Dei, p. 552.

Firstborn.] There were two sorts of Firstborn. Some who were the Firstborn
of the Father, called the beginning of his Strength, XXI Deuteronomy. 17. The other,
the Firstborn of the Mother, which are called here, whatsoever opens the
Womb. The Hebrews make a great difference between these two; and say, That to
the former sort belong the Prerogatives, both of having the Inheritance of his
Father, and also the Priesthood: but to the latter only belongs one of these
Prerogatives, viz. the Priesthood. And they gather it from this very place,
Whatsoever opens the Womb (which is the Firstborn of the Mother) is mine; i.
e. shall be employed in my Service. But instead of these, God took the Levites
to attend upon him, III Numb. 12. After which, the Firstborn were to be
redeemed at a certain Rate, which was part of the Priests maintenance, XVIII
Numb. 15, 16. See Seldom de Successionibus ad Leg. Hebr. c. 7.

Among the Children of Israel.] Whom this Precept concerned peculiarly, but no
other People. Therefore the Jews say, that if one of them and a Gentile had any
Beast in Common between them, the Firstborn was free, (as their Phrase is)
because it is here said, among the Children of Israel, not the Gentiles. See
Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. c. 38.

Both of Man and Beast.] As is further directed and explained, v. 12, 13.

It is mine.] And therefore was to be offered to God, if it were a Male of any
Beast; only an Ass was to be redeemed, XXXIV. 19, 20. God intended by this Law
to teach them (says R. Levi Barzelonita) that the whole World was his; and
that Men had nothing in it, but by his gracious Grant: who challenged the
Firstborn of every thing to himself, because all was his. For the Firstborn
Male was dearer to a Man, says he, than the Apple of his Eye, (as no doubt he
was) yet he was bound to Consecrate him to God. But the plainest reason of this
Law was, to put them in mind of God's miraculous Providence, in sparing their
Firstborn, when those of the Egyptians were all killed. To which the Jewish
Doctors add a more ancient right God had to them: being the Persons who
Sacrificed to God, before Priests were ordained by the Law of Moses. So Onkelos
takes the young men, XXIV. 5. to have been the Firstborn; and the Priests
mentioned XIX. 22. ( Aben Ezra also upon XVI Numb. 1. says the same) the truth
of which I shall examine there.

Ver. 3. And Moses said unto the People.] God seems to have commanded Moses at
the same time he gave this Precept, to repeat here at Succoth, what he had said
to them in Egypt, concerning the Observation of the Passover, and of the Feast
of Unleavened Bread. It being of great moment to have the Benefits hereby
Commemorated, in perpetual remembrance.

Remember this day, etc.] Which was the first day of Unleavened Bread;
commanded to be kept holy, XII. 16.

For by strength of hand the LORD brought you out.] That is, by a miraculous
Power; which constrained Pharaoh to let you go, much against his will. So God
promised at his first appearance to Moses, III. 19.

There shall no leavened Bread be eaten.] Unleavened Bread was to be eaten on
the Passover Night, and afterward no leavened Bread. See XII. 15, etc. where
this is represented as the Sense of the Jews: but the sixth and seventh Verse
following seem to say otherwise.

Ver. 4. This day came ye out.] In the Morning of this Day they began their
March.

In the Month of Abib.] This word Abib signifies an Ear of Corn: for then
Barley began to ear. The Syriack word hababa has something of its sound, which
signifies a flower: and so they here translate it, The Month of Flowers. Whence
Macarius says, God brought Israel out of Egypt, (...), in the Month of
Flowers; when the pleasant Spring first appeared. See XXIII. 15.

Ver. 5. And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the Land, etc.]
From hence they conclude, this Precept did not oblige them in the Wilderness:
but it was by a special Direction and Command that they observed it the year
after this, IX Numb. 1, 2, etc. See XII. 25, 50. In confirmation of which the
XII Deuteronomy. 1. is alleged, where he begins to recapitulate all the Laws they
were to observe in Canaan; among which this is one, XII. 5, 6. yet this alone
would not have been sufficient to prove this, (for he might be thought now only
to reinforce his Laws, at their etrance into Canaan) if he had not added v. 8.
Ye shall not do after all the things you do here this day, etc. Which supposes,
that in the unsettled Condition wherein they were in the Wilderness, they had
not kept themselves to all those Rules which follow, and had been formerly
delivered.

Which he swear unto thy Fathers to give thee, etc.] XV Genesis 18, 19, etc.

Ye shall keep this Service in this Month.] Both the Passover, and Feast of
Unleavened Bread, XII. 25.

Ver. 6. Seven days shall thou eat unleavened Bread.] This seems to confute
what the Jews say, that they were not bound to eat unleavened Bread, but only
when they ate the Passover. See XII. 15.

And in the seventh day shall be a Feast unto the LORD.] As the first day was
holy ( v. 3.) so was the last, (XII. 16.) that they might not fail in their
Gratitude for so great a Benefit, as they now Commemorated.

Ver. 7. Unleavened Bread shall be eaten seven days.] This seems still to make
the Injunction plainer, that for seven days together they should eat unleavened
Bread. Which is so often repeated, because this made them sensible, more than
any thing else, of the wonderful Hand of God in bringing them out of Egypt;
which was so sudden and hasty, that they had not time to bake the Dough they
had prepared, nor so much as put Leaven to it, XII. 39.

There shall no leavened Bread be seen with thee.] From whence the Jews
conclude, That not only all such Bread is to be carefully sought for, and
thrown out of their Houses, but all their Vessels that have been used the year
before, thoroughly scoured; least any thing should remain, in them, that might
give a tincture of acidity to the Bread, that might be made in them. In which
work they spend some days before the Passover, as Buxtorf observes in his
Synag. Jud. c. 17.

Neither shall there be Leaven seen with thee, etc.] For which Cause, as he
there observes, they abstain, all the time of this Feast, from all such things
as may possibly have some Leaven in them. As from Honey and Sugar, which are
often adulterated with Flower, etc.

Ver. 8. And thou shall show thy Son in that day, etc.] That is, on the first
day of Unleavened Bread, it was to be a part of their Religion, to instruct
their Children in the meaning of their Killing the Lamb, and their Abstinence
from Leaven. This the Jewish Doctors make one of the DCXIII. Precepts, that
Parents should tell the whole Story of their going out of Egypt on the
fifteenth day of Nisan: when every one, according to his Ability, was bound in
his own Language, to bless and praise the Name of God, for all his Miracles,
which he wrought for them. They are the words of R. Levi of Barcelona.

Ver. 9. And it shall be for a Sign unto thee.] These seem to be still the
words that the Parents were to say to their Children upon these Festivals;
whereby they taught them to look upon this Observation, as a Token or Memorial
of what God had done for their Forefathers, when he brought them out of Egypt.

Upon thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes.] To make thee as
sensible of God's Goodness, as of that which thou have in thy Hand; or of a
Thing that is continually before thine Eyes. The Jewish Superstition about
their Phylacteries took its rise from hence, but without any good ground: it
being evident he speaks not of tying Parchments, or any thing else, about their
Wrists, etc. but of teaching their Children the meaning of their Holy Rites.
And so some of themselves have expounded it; particularly the forementioned R.
Levi of Barcelona: who gives this reason why such abundant care was taken to
have these things remembered; Because, says he, this is the Foundation of our
Law and of our Religion: for which Cause, in all our Blessings and Prayers, we
Commemorate our coming out of Egypt; because it is a Sign to us, and a perfect
Demonstration of the Creation of the World, and that our Lord God is the Author
of all Creatures, and does what he pleases, etc. For who but he could change
the Course of Nature, and work such great and unheard of Signs as he did? This
is sufficient to confute those that deny the Creation of the World; and to
establish us in the belief of God most blessed: and to persuade both that there
is a Providence, and that his Power extends to all things, both in general and
particular. So he. See v. 16.

That the LORD's Law may be in thy mouth.] That their Children might be able to
declare to their Posterity, the Law of the LORD about these Matters.

For with a strong Hand has the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.] By slaying
all their Firstborn in one Night. See III. 19.

Ver. 10. Thou shall therefore keep this Ordinance.] Of the Passover; and of
the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

In this season from year to year.] On the fourteenth, and the seven following
days of the first Month.

Ver. 11. And it shall be, when the LORD shall bring thee into the Land of the
Canaanites, etc.] Under the Name of Canaanites he comprehends all the rest of
the seven Nations. And these words seem to import, that the Law of the
Firstborn was not to take place, till they came into the Promised Land. Yet we
find III Numb. 12, 13. that God demanded all the Firstborn of them, though he
took the Levites in their stead: And both being numbered, and there being Two
hundred seventy three Firstborn Males, more than there were Levites, ( v. 41,
42, 43.) he required them to be redeemed at five Shekels apiece, and the Money
to be given to the Priests, v. 46, 47, 48. But perhaps after this, the Law was
not observed till they came to Canaan.

Which he swear unto thy Fathers, etc.] See v. 5.

Ver. 12. That thou shall set apart unto the LORD all that opens the Matrix.]
Here he shows what he means by that Sanctification of the Firstborn, which was
mentioned v. 2. and for what end and reason this was ordained. For that which
is called Sanctifying there, is here called setting apart, or separating it
from the rest of that kind of Creatures, for another use, viz. to be Sacrificed
to the LORD. For the word heevarta, which we translate set apart, is in the
Hebrew, make to pass over. Which is explained XXII. 30. Thou shall give it unto
me, viz. to be offered at the Altar.

The Males.] The Firstborn are only mentioned, v. 2. but here it is explained
to signify only the Males. If a Female came first, and afterward a Male; that
Male was not devoted unto God, because it did not open the Womb, a Female
coming before it.

Shall be the LORD's.] And therefore set apart from common uses, to be employed
in his Service. That is, every firstling Male of a Cow, Sheep, or Goat was to
be offered in Sacrifice; and the Blood being sprinkled on the Altar, the Flesh
of them was given to the Priests. See XVIII Numb. 17, 18. where what is here
briefly delivered, is there more largely explained.

Ver. 8. And every firstling of an Ass.] There was the same reason for Horses
and Camels: but an Ass is only mentioned, because abundance of Asses were bred
in Judea; where there were few Horses or Camels. And therefore XVIII Numb. 15.
it is said in general, The firstlings of unclean Beasts thou shall redeem.

Thou shall redeem with a Lamb.] Which was to be Sacrificed to God. If a Man
had not a Lamb, he was to give the price of one. And because all Lambs were not
of an equal price, (some being worth more than others) the Rabbis say, that a
good eye, i. e. a liberal Man gave a Shekel; an evil eye half as much; and a
middle sort of Men gave three quarters. It was to be redeemed also within
thirty days.

If thou will not redeem it, then thou shall break (or cut off) its neck.] It
was to die, one way or other, and not to be employed in common use: but thus to
be disposed of, if they would not give a Lamb, or its value, in exchange for
it. Which Men might sometimes be unwilling to do, because Asses being so
plentiful in that Country, they might not be worth so much as a Lamb. It is no
improbable Conjecture of Mr. Seldom, that from this Law of redeeming Asses, the
Gentiles took up a fancy, which was common among them, that the Jews worshipped
an Asses Head. See L. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. c. 1. Which was one of their
Calumnies also of Christians (whom they took to be the same with the Jews) as
we read in Minutius Faelix, Tertullian and others.

All the Firstborn of Man among thy Children shall thou redeem.] See v. 11.
Humane Sacrifices were not acceptable to God. For though he once commanded
Abraham to offer his Son, yet it was not actually done; and here he declares he
did not approve of such Sacrifices, by commanding them not to offer their
Firstborn to him, as they did the Firstlings of clean Beasts; but to redeem
them. For the way of the Gentile World, even in those days, was to offer their
Children to Moloch, as appears from XX Lev. 2. where he orders him to be put to
death, who gives any of his Seed to Moloch. The very same Phrase which is used
(as I observed v. 12.) concerning Sacrificing the Firstlings of their Oxen,
etc. And in the XVIII Lev. 21. he uses both Phrases, saying, Thou shall not
give any of thy Seed to pass through to Moloch, or to pass over to Moloch. The
very same word, which we here translate v. 13. set apart. And it was but
necessary to give such Precepts; for, notwithstanding these Prohibitions, the
Israelites fell into this barbarous way of Worship, as we read CVI Psalm 37, 38.

Now this Redemption of their Firstborn, was not long after ordered by God
himself; who took the Levites instead of them, (as we read Numb. III.) where a
certain Sum of Money was paid for all the rest of the Firstborn, that were
above the number of the Levites. Which Sum, they who were born after that time,
paid to the Priest.

Nor was this a thing unknown to the Gentiles. For Paulus Venetus says, L. I.
c. 45. that the Inhabitants of that Region in India, called Tanguth, redeemed
their Sons with a Ram, which they offered after the manner of the Hebrews:
which makes it probable that this Law of Moses had reached them; there being
several Remainders of the Hebrew Language upon those Coasts; as Huetius
observes in his Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. c. 6.

Ver. 14. When thy Son asks thee, in time to come, What is this?] Desires to
know the meaning of this; or whence this Custom of Offering or Redeeming the
Firstborn Males, is derived.

That thou shall say unto him.] Great care was taken for the Instruction of
Children in the Rites of their Religion; it appears by this, and by v. 8. where
they are commanded to teach them the reason of eating unleavened Bread, as here
of their Consecrating the Firstborn.

That by strength of hand, etc.] See III. 19.

Ver. 15. And it came to pass when Pharaoh would hardly let us go.] Obstinately
persisted in his Resolutions to keep us in slavery, or hardened his heart (as it
may be translated by adding the word libbo) against all the Monitions had been
given him, and the Plagues inflicted on him.

That the LORD slew all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, etc.] Which struck
such a terror into him, that immediately he dismissed us, XII. 30, 31, etc.

Therefore I sacrifice unto the LORD all that opens the Womb, etc.] Because
when he slew all their Firstborn, he spared ours, XII. 13, 23, 27.

Ver. 16. And it shall be for a token upon thine hand.] By this means there was
a perpetual remembrance preserved, of God's gracious Deliverance of them, when
the Firstborn of Egypt were slain. For nothing else can be meant by these
words, but that they should endeavor by Consecrating their Firstborn, to keep
that Divine Benefit in mind as carefully, as if they had put a Sign upon their
Hand, or bound it upon their Forehead before their Eyes, to help their Memory.
For it is a plain allusion to those, who having frail Memories, are wont to tie
a Third, or some such thing upon their Finger, that they may not forget what
they desire to remember: That which is upon their Hand, being continually in
view, and so not easily forgotten.

And for frontlets between thine eyes.] Whatsoever be the Original of the
Hebrew word Totaphot, which we translate Frontlets, it is certain it signifies
no more than Zicaron in the ninth Verse: a Memorial, or Monument, as the Vulgar
translates it. And so Aben Ezna expounds it, kenu Zicaron, as it were a
Memorial; and that immovable, as the LXX. take it. Yet from hence the
Talmudists have extracted their Phylacteries (or pieces of Parchment, wherein
this and other Texts were written) which they fancied were a kind of Amulets to
defend them from dangers. For so they are said to be in the Gemara Schabath:
and therefore used in their Prayers, to drive away Evil Spirits, as J.
Braunius, and many others have observed. I shall only note further, that this
word is found but three times in the Law, and yet the Vulgar translates it
three several ways; which shows how little the Original of it is understood,
though the Sense of it is plain and certain. See Petitus his Var. Lectiones, c.
20.

For by strength of hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.] This has been
often mentioned in this very Chapter ( v. 3, 9, 14.) and now here repeated
again, to make them very sensible; both that they owed their Deliverance
entirely to God, and that nothing was too hard for him to accomplish.

Ver. 17. God led them not through the way of the Land of the Philistines,
etc.] That was the nearest way from Egypt to Canaan, by the Mediterranean, to
the River of Egypt, (as the Scripture calls it) and so to Azotus and Gaza:
which was a Journey of not above three days, as Philo says; others say of ten.
But certainly it was no great way, for the Sons of Jacob went it often to and
fro, XLII, XLIII, etc. Genesis

Lest peradventure the People repent when they see war, etc.] The Philistines
being a very warlike People, would, in all likelihood, have opposed their
Passage: and God knew the temper of the Israelites to be so timorous, that they
would run away, and rather return to Egypt than sight their way to Canaan. For
all People grow cowardly by being kept long in slavery; which breaks their
Spirits, and sinks them as low as their Condition. They fought indeed about
forty days after this with Amalek; but it was only one Battle; and then they
were provided with Arms (which they had not now) from the Egyptians, whom they
found dead on the Seashore. But their base temper appeared too plainly the
next year, when they heard the Report of the Spies concerning the Inhabitants
of Canaan: which put the whole Congregation into a fit of Despair, and made
them think of returning to Egypt, XIV Numb. 1, 2, etc.

Ver. 17. But God led the People about.] The Pillar of Cloud mentioned v. 21.
in which the LORD was, conducted them in a way further about.

Through the way of the Wilderness.] He led them to the right hand toward the
Red Sea, and the Desert of Arabia.

Of the Red Sea.] See X. 19.

And the Children of Israel went up harnessed.] Or in Military order: for
though it is not likely the Egyptians suffered them to have any Arms, yet, they
did not go away tumultuously, like Fugitives; but marched like Soldiers in good
order; and, as in our Margin it is translated, five in a Rank. Which is the
interpretation of Theodotion anciently, and of Montanus and others lately. But
Hottinger translates it, in the form of an Army. For the Arabic word Chamis
(from whence it is likely comes the word Chamuschim here used) signifies
exercitus (...), an Army consisting of five parts; which are the Front, the
main Battle, the right Wing and the left, and the Rear. Smegma. Orient. p. 71.
And so David Chytraeus long before him, quinque agminibus, in five Bodies, as
we now speak. But the interpretation of Aben Ezra seems to be the most proper
of all others, who simply expounds it, girt about their Loins; i. e. expedite
or ready, as Onkelos expresses it. For the Hebrew word Chomasch, signifying
those parts that are under the five small Ribs, about which Men were wont to be
girt, when they went to sight or to travel; this word may well be rendered
(...), well girt, as the LXX. trrnslate it, I Josh. 14. IV. 13. Here indeed
they translate it, (...), they went up in the fifth Generation, (which St.
Austin follows) taking Jacob for the first; Levi the second; Coath the third;
Amram the fourth; and Moses the fifth. But as this Exposition does not agree
with the Hebrew word, which does not signify the fifth, but in fives; so it
cannot be said of the Children of Israel in general; for all the Tribes were
not yet come to the fifth Generation. Our Nic. Fuller has a learned Discourse
upon this word in his Miscellan. L. V. c. 2.

Ver. 19. And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him.] And of the rest of the
Patriarchs, it is very probable. See L Genesis 25. To which add that the Jews say,
every Tribe took care of the Body of the Founder of their Family. Which is far
more likely, than the Story which the Author of The Life and Death of Moses
tells, that he carried Josephus's Coffin out of Egypt upon his own shoulders:
it being more probable that some of that Tribe undertook the care of it. That
it was buried in the bottom of Nile, is not affirmed only by him, but by
Jonathan: though others say in the Banks of Nile. And they seem all to have it
out of the Talmud; where in the Gemara of the Title Sota, c. 1. sect. 47. they
say the Egyptians themselves buried their Relations in the Nile, to make the
Waters prosperous. And tell a vain Story, how a Woman called Serach, told Moses
where the Body was, when he was at a loss where to find it, after he had
searched for it three days, (as the forenamed Author tells the Tale, while the
Jews were borrowing Jewels of Gold and Silver of the Egyptians) and that he
called it up from thence, throwing (as he adds) the ineffable Name into the
River; which brought it up presently, though in a Leaden, or as others say, a
Marble Coffin.

For he had straightly sworn the Children of Israel, saying, etc.] See L Genesis 25.
From whence Gaulmyn L. II. c. 2. Annot. in Vit. Mos. not improbably
conjectures, that the Custom was derived, of carrying the Ashes of their
Ancestors into their own Country; first by Hercules among the Greeks, and long
before by the Egyptians and Chaldeans: whom the Arabians, as he shows, imitated
in following Ages.

Ver. 20. And they took their journey from Succoth.] They stayed but one day at
Succoth, (as Jac. Capellus supposes) where Moses gave the foregoing Directions
to them: And upon the XVI. of Nisan they marched to Ethan.

And encamped in Ethan.] So called, he thinks, because the way here was very
rugged and craggy.

In the Edge of the Wilderness.] Next to the Red Sea, called the Wilderness of
Shur, XV. 22.

Ver. 21. And the LORD went before them.] By the LORD we are here to understand
the SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, which appeared to Moses in the Bush, III. 2.
when he gave him Commission to bring his People out of Egypt; and directed him
all along in his Embassy to Pharaoh, and his Treaty with him, VI. 1, etc. and
now appeared in a glorious Cloud to conduct them, and assure them that he would
take care of them. For this Cloud was a Symbal of his gracious Presence with
them, and special Providence over them. It being an Emanation from him (says
R. Levi ben Gersom) which was a Sign (as others of the Jews speak) that God was
Night and Day with them, to keep them from all evil. To which the Prophets
allude, LII Isa. 12. II Micah 13. And though his going before them, be not
mentioned before this time, yet it is most likely he appeared in this Cloud, as
their Conductor from their first coming out of Egypt, and led them to Succoth,
and then to Ethan; as he did afterward to their several Stations, X Numb. 11,
12, etc. Which does not signify that God himself moved from place to place
(for he is always every where) but this Cloud was moved by him from whom it
came, as a Token that he was present, by his special Favor, Care and
Providence, wheresoever it went.

By day in the pillar of a Cloud.] It appeared from Heaven, I suppose, in the
form of a great long Pillar; which below spread it self abroad, and covered the
whole Host of Israel. For it is certain, it was not only their Guide, to lead
them the way (as it here follows) but also was a covering to them, whereby they
were assured of the Divine Protection. For so we are informed X Numb. 34. XIV.
14. CV Psalm 39. 1 Corinthians. X. 1. And I can see no reason to think these were
different Clouds, since one and the same would serve for both purposes.

And by night in a pillar of Fire.] The same Pillar appeared in the Night like
Fire, which in the Day was like a Cloud. The reason of which follows:

To give them light.] That they might be able (as the next words tell us) to
travel by Night, as well as by Day. Which made the Psalmist say, he went before
them all the night, with the light of fire, LXXVIII. 14. This flaming Light I
take to have been a glorious appearance of Angels from the SCHECHINAH; for they
always attend upon the Divine Majesty, who makes his Angels Spirits, his
Ministers a flaming fire, CIV Psalm 4. Some fancy there were two distinct
Pillars, as these words, and the next Verse seem to import: but it is plain by
other places, it was but one and the same Pillar, which had these different
Appearances. See the next Chapter, XIV. 19, 24. I Deuteronomy. 33. Therefore Salvian
rightly describes it L. I. de Gubern. Dei, where he calls it, Mobilem columnam
nubilam die, igneam nocte, congruas colorum diversitates pro temporum
diversitate sumentem; sc. ut and diei lucem lutea obscuritate distingueret, and
caliginem noctis flammeo splendore claritatis radiaret. And see Greg. Nyssen de
Vita Mosis, p. 175.

Now that the SCHECHINAH, or, the Glory of God, was in this Cloud, appears from
hence; that it was the same Cloud which afterward rested upon the Tabernacle,
as soon as it was set up, and is called the Cloud of the LORD, XL Exodus 38. X
Numb. 34. For the Glory of the LORD was within the Tabernacle, as the Cloud was
without it, XL Exodus 34, 35, etc. And it is there also described just as it is
here, that it appeared as a Cloud upon the Tabernacle by Day, and as a Fire by
Night, XL. ult. And so it is also IX Numb. 15, 16. At Even there was upon the
Tabernacle, as it were the appearance of Fire till the Morning. So it was
always, the Cloud covered it by Day, and the appearance of Fire by Night. And
then it conducted them in their Journeys, as it did now, XL Exodus 36. IX Numb.
17, 18, etc. Which shows that this Cloud, which now conducted them out of
Egypt, was the very same with that which afterward settled upon the Tabernacle:
And the Glory of the LORD being in that, I make no doubt it was so in this.
Which is the reason that the LORD is said to go before them, and to lead them
by this Cloud. For though the LORD of all does not go from place to place, yet
this visible Glory, which represented him as in a special manner present with
them (and therefore called the Glory of the LORD) did go along with them in the
Cloud, to their several Statious, whither they removed.

It is no improbable Conjecture of Taubman, in his Notes upon Virgil, that from
hence it was, that the Poets never make a Deity to appear but in a Cloud with a
brightness in it. Ad hoc exemplum credo Poetas sancivisse nullum Numen
mortalibus apparere sine Nimbo. Est autem Nimbus, nubes divina, seu fluidum
lumen, quod Deorum capita tingit.

Ver. 22. He took not away the pillar of the Cloud by day, and the pillar of
Fire by night, from before the People.] That is, it continued with them as long
as Moses lived, till they came to pass over Jordan into Canaan; when not this
Cloud, but the Ark was their Guide. And it need not seem incredible, says
Clemens Alexandrinus ( L. I. Stromat. p. 348.) that they were thus led by a
Pillar of Fire, when the Greeks consider that Thrasybulus, they believe, was
thus directed, (...), etc. by a Fire which went before him, and conducted him
in a dark Winter Night through unknown ways, when he brought back the Athenian
Exiles to their Country. The wonder was, that this Fire continued to lead the
Israelites forty years in the Wilderness; whereas that of Thrasybulus (if it be
true) was but a short appearance. As that Light also was, which they say shone
from Heaven to bring Timoleon unto his Port, when he sailed to Italy.

This Pillar also the same Clemens thinks (in the place now named) signified
(...), that no Image could be made of God. From whence he thinks likewise, it
was that the ancient Heathen, before they learnt to make Images, set up Pillars
and worshipped them, (...), as Representatives of God. Which Huetius has
lately made out in many Examples (in his Quaestiones Alnetanae, p. 203, 206.)
and thinks that from this Pillar, which had two Appearances, the two Pillars
were erected to Hercules in his Temple at Tire; and two likewise set up in the
Temple of the Sun in Egypt.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses.] Out of the Cloud (where the
SCHECHINAH was) from whence he afterward gave all his Laws.

Ver. 2. Speak to the Children of Israel, that they turn.] They were going
directly toward Horeb: unto which they asked leave to go, three days Journey.
And might have reached it this Night, if they had proceeded forward on the left
hand, into the Wilderness. But by this Order they turned to the right hand,
into a Road that led them toward the Red Sea; which made Pharaoh think they
had lost their way.

And encamp before Pihahiroth.] Before the Straits of two great Mountains; full
of dangerous holes; as many think the word hiroth imports. And Pi in Hebrew
signifying a Mouth, this word Pihahiroth may properly be translated in our
Language, the Chops of Hiroth. The former day, they had marched about eight
miles; but now they doubled their pace, and marched sixteen miles from Etham
hither.

Between Migdol and the Sea.] Some take Migdol to have been a Tower or Fortress
(for the word carries that signification in it) upon the top of one of the
Mountains before mentioned. But there was a Tower called (...) by Herodotus and
Hecataeus, and others; which Bochart probably conjectures was this place.
Certain it is, there was a City in Egypt called Migdol, XLIV Jerem. 1. And
Stephanus de Vrb, expressly says, that (...) was (...); but whether the same
with this place, I cannot determine.

Over against Baal-zephon.] This, I doubt not, was the name of a Town also, or
City; as Ezekiel the Tragaedian expressly calls it. For Baal was the name of a
City, 1 Chronicles. IV. 33. and it is likely there being more of the same Name, this
was called Zephon, to distinguish it from some other Baal in those parts.
Either because it lay North; or had an eminent Watch-Towre in it. There are
those indeed, who following the Jewish Doctors (See Seldom de Diis Sir.
Syntagm. I. c. 3.) imagine there was an Image of Baal set up by the Magitians
of Egypt, by Pharaoh's order, near this Arabian Gulf, to hinder the Israelites
in their Passage. And Varenius does not quite disallow this: for he takes
Baalzephon to have been a great Plain, into which they were to enter, by the
Chops of Pihahiroth: in which an Idol was worshipped, which looking from the
Red Sea toward the North, was called the Lord of the North; as Baalzephon
imports. And Kircher seriously maintains, it had a power of Fascination, to
stop the Israelites in their Journey; which there is no ground to believe. For
such Images made under a certain Constellation, to avert evil things, etc. were
not now in use: being no older, there are good reasons to think, than the time
of Apollonius Tyanaeus, who was the first Inventor of them.

Ver. 3. For Pharaoh will say of the Children of Israel.] Here he gives the
reason for this Order; that Pharaoh might be enticed to pursue them, imagining
they were in such Difficulties, that they could not avoid falling into his
hands.

They are entangled in the Land.] Perplexed, or dubious; not knowing which way
to go.

The Wilderness has shut them in.] They were cooped up, he thought, by the
Sea, and by craggy Mountains, which it was impossible for them to pass;
especially being encumbered with a multitude of Women, Children and Cattle.

Ver. 4. And I will harden Pharaoh 's heart.] He had hardened it before, IX. 12.
X. 1. But now ordered things so, that he was more senseless than ever he had
been. For having lately felt such an heavy stroke upon all the Firstborn, as
mollified his heart for the present, and moved him to let Israel go; it was the
highest degree of Infatuation not to fear (as formerly they had done, XII. 33.)
that the next blow (if he pursued them) would be at himself and his followers.

And I will be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Host.] Show my Power and
Justice in their Destruction. Which would not have been so visible, had they
died of the Pestilence, when the Cattle died of the Murrain, and Pharaoh's
heart was first hardened; as it was by hardening him so far as to follow the
Israelites into the Red Sea, where he and his whole Host was overthrown: which
made the terror of the LORD's Wrath manifest to all the World.

That the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD.] Have the greatest
demonstration of my irresistible Power, VII. 5. For the more strange the
Infatuation was, which led Pharaoh and his Host to such an ignominious Death,
the more apt the hearts of the People that remained would be, to acknowledge
the Hand of God therein.

And they did so.] They marched to this place on the XVIIth day of Nisan; which
was their third days Journey. Jacobus Capellus thinks they rested this day,
being the Sabbath, and came not hither till the XVIIIth.

Ver. 5. And it was told the King of Egypt that the People fled.] Some of the
mixed Multitude that went along with them, (XII. 38.) seeing this strange turn,
it is likely forsook the Israelites, and returned to Pharaoh, to inform him
that they had lost their way; and were shifting for themselves by slight into
dangerous places. Or, as it is commonly interpreted, some Spies which Pharaoh
had upon them, seeing them leave the way to Horeb, whither they desired to go
three days Journey to offer Sacrifice; concluded they never intended to return
to Egypt, but would run quite away from them. This news, we may suppose, was
brought to Pharaoh on the XVIIIth day.

And the heart of Pharaoh, and of his Servants, was turned against the People.]
They had quite forgot their late Fears (XII. 33.) which made such a change in
them, they would not suffer the Israelites to stay any longer in their Country:
but those Fears being vanished, their Minds altered again, and they repented
they had dismissed them.

And said, what have we done that we have let Israel go from serving us?] What
a gross Error have we committed, in losing the Labor of so many Slaves?
Covetousness, as I have observed often, had a principal hand in hardening
Pharaoh's heart.

Ver. 6. And he made ready his Chariot.] Caused it immediately to be made
ready: which we may suppose was done on the XIXth day, when he began to pursue
them.

And took his People with him.] All that were wont to attend him, on such
accasions.

7. And he took six hundred chosen Chariots.] The best Chariots in Egypt, which
were always ready prepared for such Expeditions.

And all the Chariots of Egypt.] That could be got ready on a sudden; for he
had not time to muster all his force; but made all the haste possible, lest the
Israelites should get out of the straits wherein they were, and go so far away
that he could not overtake them. For which reason he pursued them with Chariots
and Horsemen, who could make larger marches than the Israelites on foot. The
strength also of this Kingdom consisted in Chariots, which carried Men in them,
who sought out of them. And every one knows that Egypt abounded with Horses, as
well as Chariots; and that they were accounted very strong in these, XXXI Isa.
1. yet Bochartus thinks all besides the six hundred Chariots Royal, were only
Carriages for their Baggage. Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 9.

And Captains over every one of them.] This shows there were Men in them, and
that to every Chariot there Belonged a Troop of Horsemen (we know not of what
number) who were commanded by a Captain. The Hebrews say there were Fifty
thousand Horsemen; the Arabians make them as many more.

Ver. 8. And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh King of Egypt.] As he said
he would, v. 4.

And he pursued after the Children of Israel.] Of all the infatuated
Resolutions (to use the words of a famous Divine of our own, Dr. Jackson, Book
X. chap. 11.) that either King or People adventured on, the pursuing of the
Israelites with such a mighty Army, after they had most earnestly entreated and
urged them to leave their Country, may well seem to every indifferent Reader,
the most stupid. And so the Author of the Book of Wisdom justly censures it;
XIX. 3. For whilst they were yet mourning and making Lamentations at the Graves
of the Dead, they added another foolish device, and pursued them as Fugitives,
whom they had entreated to be gone. Yet Josephus gives good hints, that even
this effect of Divine Infatuation, was but such as has seized upon worldly
wise Princes, and Statesmen in former Ages, and may hereafter be inflicted
upon more.

And the Children of Israel went out with an high hand.] Boldly and with
assured confidence; not sneakingly, like Slaves or Fugitives. So Onkelos
understood it, when he translated it bare-headed, i. e. confidently, fearing
nothing: having been delivered and conducted by the powerful hand of God; as it
is often repeated, XIII. 9, 14, 16. unto which some refer this Phrase, and not
to the Israelites. See Drusius L. XVI. Observat. c. 2.

Ver. 9. But the Egyptians pursued after them.] This did not discourage Pharaoh
and his Servants: who, perhaps, were of the same mind with the Syrians; who
fancied the God of Israel might not be alike powerful in all places; but though
he was stronger than their Gods in the Hills, yet they might be too hard for
him in the Plain, 1 Kings XX. 23. So the Egyptians, who had seen how much
superior Moses was to their Magicians, might possibly thus reason with
themselves, (as the same Learned Dr. expresses it) Who knows whether all this
Power was given unto Moses to be exercised only within the Meridian or Climes
of Egypt; or whether his Commission extend over Palestine and Midian? They
presumed at least, that the LORD God of the Hebrews, had not granted Moses such
a Command over the Armies or Host of Men (though he had done Wonders among
reasonless Creatures) as the King of Egypt had: because the Israelites, they
knew, had no skill in Feats of Arms, no Captains of Infantry, and no Cavalry at
all, no Weapons or Engines of War; of all which the Egyptians had great
abundance. Upon these, or some such like Presumptions, and vain Collections,
they became foolhardy, and desperately resolute to be revenged upon the
Children of Israel, for all the losses they had sustained by their Leaders,
Moses and Aaron.

All the Horses and Chariots of Pharaoh, and his Horsemen and his Army.] By this
it appears that there were both Horse and Foot, who pursued them; though it is
likely the Foot were mounted, to make the greater speed.

And overtook them incamping by the Sea, etc.] On the XXth day of Nisan,
toward Evening, they had got within sight of the Israelites, who were just
settling their Camp where God directed them, ( v. 2.) having had no time to rest
themselves after lo long a march.

Ver. 10. And when Pharaoh drew nigh, etc.] So that the Israelites could
discern with how great a force the Egyptians were about to attack them.

They were sore afraid.] They who had marched hither, with a high hand, ( v.
8.) full of Alacrity and Courage; now on a sudden were so dismayed, that their
Spirits sunk within them. For they had not a settled Confidence and Resolution
wrought in them, by all the Wonders God had done for them: But, though whilst
they thought Pharaoh disheartened to meddle any more with them, they went on
boldly; now their hearts began to fail them, when they saw him at their backs.
For they were unfit for War, weary also, and in a very bad place.

And the Children of Israel cried out unto the LORD.] This had been the proper
Remedy against their Fear, if in a thankful Remembrance of what God had often
done for them, they had humbly beseeched him to deliver them in this great
strait: which was as easy for him to do, as to work all the Miracles they had
seen in Egypt. But these cries seem, by what follows, to have been rather the
effect of Despair, than of hope in God: such Shrieks as naturally proceed from
Men, when they are ready to perish. Pellicanus indeed thinks, that by the
Children of Israel is meant such as were good among them, who fell to their
Prayers, when the rest fell to Railing, as it follows in the Verse. But such
words comprehend the generality of the People, and not only the better sort.

Ver. 11. Because there were no Graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die
in the Wilderness?] This is very sarcastical and reproachful Language; arguing
the height of Discontent, or rather of Rage against their Deliverer. From
whence we may learn, the wicked temper of those who are ungrateful and
unmindful of Benefits.

Wherefore have thou dealt thus with us, to carry us out of Egypt?] They seem
to have been of the very same temper with the Egyptians, who had no remembrance
what they had lately felt, nor made any reflections on what God had done in a
wonderful manner among them. This neglect of God bred such a hardness of heart
in them and their Posterity, as was in Pharaoh and his People; which provoked
God to harden them, in the same manner, to their utter destruction. For, as the
Apostle observes, God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardneth, IX Romans 18. His Mercy, that is, was not so tied to them, because
they were Abraham's Seed, but he could and would harden them, as he had done
Pharaoh; if they proved as obstinate as he was.

Ver. 12. Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, let us
alone, etc.] Do not increase our Miseries, by attempting in vain to deliver us.
This they seem to have said, after the first Message Moses and Aaron delivered
to Pharaoh: which only moved him to lay greater Burdens on them, V. 21. VI. 9.

For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, then that we should die
in the Wilderness.] This is the Language of base and servile Spirits; who chose
rather to live miserably, than die gloriously in pursuit of their Liberty.

Ver. 13. And Moses said unto the People, fear ye not.] These words argue a
most admirable Spirit that was in Moses; who was neither angry with them, nor
dismayed at the approach of Pharaoh: But meekly and sedately Exhorts them to be
of good Courage, and to trust in God; who he assured them, would perfect what
he had begun for them.

Stand still, etc.] I do not desire you should do any thing else, but only hope
in God; and wait to see what he will do for you, before this day be done.

For the Egyptians whom you have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more
for ever.] Never see them more, as they saw them now, alive; though they saw
them lie dead ( v. 30.) after their overthrow in the Sea. For the Power of
Egypt was so shattered by that loss, and they were so confounded by it, that we
never read of the least inclination in them, to attempt any thing upon the
Israelites, though they wandered forty years in the Wilderness.

Ver. 14. The LORD shall sight for you.] He would not have them discouraged for
want of Arms, because they should have no need of them: God himself undertaking
to defend them, and to discomfit their Enemies.

And ye shall hold your peace.] Be still, and do nothing: not so much as strike
one stroke. Or, as some understand it, do you forbear your Cries. Or, he will
silence all your Murmurings.

Ver. 15. And the LORD said unto Moses.] See v. 1.

Wherefore criest thou unto me?] He does not blame him for crying unto him for
help; but bids him continue his Prayer no longer, for he would do as he
desired. Greg. Nyssen calls this (...) a cry without a voice; a silent cry
without speaking a word; de Vita Mosis, p. 175.

Speak to the Children of Israel, that they go forward.] Toward the Sea, before
which they lay encamped, v. 2, 9.

Ver. 16. But lift thou up thy Rod, and stretch out thine hand over the Sea.]
By that Rod wherewith he had done such Wonders in Egypt, he bids him believe he
would work a Passage for them, even through the Sea.

And divide it.] Command that it be divided, and I will effect it. For so it is
explained v. 21. not could it be done by any Power but God's.

And the Children of Israel shall go on dry ground, through the midst of the
Sea.] See v. 21, 22.

Ver. 17. And I, behold I, will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they
shall follow them.] The LORD would have this noted, as a special Judgment of
his upon them. For of all the hardnings or infatuations which had possessed the
hearts of the Egyptians, this was the greatest and strongest, that they should
adventure to follow the Israelites, when they saw, or might have perceived the
Red Sea to open her bosom, to give the Children of Israel a passage.

And I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Host, etc.] By giving
them such an overthrow, as shall magnify both my Power and my Justice in their
Destruction. All the former Judgments upon their Cattle, or Corn, and the
Annoyances on their Bodies by Frogs and Lice and Blains, were the just Awards
(as the forenamed Dr. Jackson speaks) of God's punitive Justice upon Pharaoh
and his Servants, for the Wrongs that he had done to his People, by bringing
them into undeserved Bondage. But he had not yet called them to an exact
account, for making away so many Infant-males of the Hebrews, as they drowned
in the River. For that innocent Blood he reckons with them now, and made them
the Executioners of his Vengeance on themselves, by giving them over to their
own proud Presumptions of good Success, in pursuing those whom they had lately
beseeched to depart out of their Land.

Ver. 18. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD.] See v. 4.

When I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his Chariots, etc.] By
overthrowing them in the Redsea; that the Blood of the Hebrew Infants might be
required of them, according to the I aw of Retaliation, or most exquisite Rule
(as the abovementioned Author speaks) of Punitive Justice.

Ver. 19. And the Angel of the LORD which went before the Camp, removed and
went behind them.] The LORD himself is said to go before them, XIII. 21. (See
there.) But we must understand that where the LORD is, he is attended by his
Angels. Some of which were sent from the SCHECHINAH which was in the Cloud, to
conduct the Israelites, and take care of them. The Jews take this Angel to have
been Michael, as we read in Pirke Elieser, c. 42. He sent Michael the great
Prince, etc. for so he is called XII Dan. 1. Others say it was Gabriel. But
which soever of them it was, he was only the Commander of that Host, which by
the LORD's Commandment went before the Israelites to fight for them. The Jews
call him by the proper Name of Metraton; because he marked out their Camp for
them where they were to stay; and described their way in their Journey to their
several Stations; especially here in the Red Sea. Vid. Buxtorf. Histor. Arcae.
c. 14. p. 131. etc.

And the pillar of the Cloud went from before their face, etc.] This, it is
evident, was done in the day time, before the night came: for the Cloud
appeared only in the day; in the night there was the appearance of Fire.

And stood behind them.] To protect them from the Egyptians, who were at their
backs, v. 9, 10. but, by the intervention of this Cloud, quite lost the sight
of them; as it follows v. 20.

It may be noted here therefore once for all, that there were several uses of
this Cloud. First, to guide them in their Journeys. Secondly, to prevent them
from the heat of the Sun in the Wilderness; where there were few Trees, and no
Houses to shelter them. Thirdly, to defend them from their Enemies, that they
might not assault them. And lastly, God from hence, when there was occasion,
spoke with Moses. For, it is plain, he appeared in this Cloud, XXXI Deuteronomy. 15.
And from thence talked with Moses, XXXIII Exodus 9, 10. And out of it called for
Aaron and Miriam to come before him, XII Numb. 5.

Ver. 20. And it came to pass between the Camp of the Egyptians, and the Camp
of Israel.] This was done, as I said, in the day time: and in the next words
Moses informs us, how it appeared in the night.

And it was a Cloud and Darkness to them.] i.e. To the Egyptians.

But it gave light by night to these.] To the Israelites.

It was at the same time both a Cloud and a Fire: being dark on the one side,
next to the Egyptians; but bright and shining on the other side, next the
Israelites. So that they might see their way, and the Egyptians not see them,
nor come near them (as it here follows) all the night.

Ver. 21. And Moses stretched out his hand over the Sea.] Having his Rod in his
hand, v. 16. This was done in the beginning of the Night.

And the LORD caused the Sea to go back.] By this it is evident, that the
SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, was present, and employed his Angel ( v. 19.) in
this work. As it is well explained by Pirke Elieser, c. 42. The holy blessed
God appeared in his Glory upon the Sea, and it fled back, etc. So the Psalmist
understood it, LXXVII. 16. The Waters saw thee, O God, the Waters saw thee:
they were afraid, etc. and v. 19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy paths in the
great Waters, etc.

By a strong East Wind.] Or rather a South Wind, as the LXX translate the
Hebrew word kadim. Which though it properly signify the East, yet in many
places it is used, as Bochart has demonstrated, for the South, P. II.
Hierozoic. L. I. c. 15.

All that Night.] All the forepart of the Night.

And made the Sea dry Land, and the Waters were divided.] Or rather, after the
Waters were divided, as Bochart shows it should be translated. Thus LXIV Isa.
5. Thou art wroth, and we have sinned; the meaning is, for we have sinned, as
Kimchi, and we our selves also there translate it, Hieroz. P. II. L. III. c. 2.
p. 409.

Dry Land.] The memory of this was preserved by the Heathen, as we find in
Diodorus Siculus, L. III. (...), etc. There is a Tradition among the
Icthyophagi, who border upon the Red Sea, which they had received (...), from
their Progenitors, and was preserved unto that time; how that upon a great
recess of the Sea, every place of that Gulf ((...)) was quite dry, and the Sea
falling to the opposite part, the bottom of it appeared green, (from the Weeds,
I suppose, that were in it) but returning back with a mighty force, possessed
again its former place. No Man is so blind as not to see, that this is a
Description of the miraculous Work of God for the Israelites: the memory of
which those barbarous People did not suffer to perish, but propagated it to
their Posterity: as Bochart well observes in his Phaleg. L. IV. c. 29. The
Egyptians indeed, we may well think endeavored to blot out the memory of this
shameful Overthrow, and kept no Record of it; for Diodorus, it seems, could
learn nothing of it among them (though he lived a considerable time there) but
received this Intelligence from the poor Icthyophagi, among whom this Tradition
was carefully preserved.

The Waters were divided.] Into twelve paths ((...)) according to the number of
their Tribes, as the Tradition is in Epiphanius Haeres. LXIV. n. 6, 9. which he
had from the Hebrews, who affirm the same in Pirke Elieser, c. 42. And Kimchi
mentions it upon CXXXVI Psalm. 13. where because God is said to have divided the
Red Sea into parts, they sancy there were twelve Divisions; every one defended
with a Wall of Water. But there is no foundation for this in these words, nor
in LXXVII Psalm. 19. where paths being in the Plural Number, they thence also
deduce the same Conceit, of a several path to every Tribe. See Simeon de Muis
on that place.

Ver. 22. And the Israelites went in to the midst of the Sea.] About the second
Watch of the Night (which was at Midnight) and about break of Day, they were
got quite through.

Upon the dry ground.] This was not looked upon by the ancient Heathen as
incredible: For Homer makes Neptune driving his Chariot upon the Waves; and the
Sea withdrawing its Waters. And the Waters of Scamander being swelled to
destroy Achilles, he makes to be dried up by Vulcan. As Nonnus also makes
Bacchus drying up Hydaspes; and smiting Orontes with his Thyrsus to have gone
over it. See the Learned Huetius in his Quaestiones Alnetanae, p. 206, etc.

And the Waters were a Wall unto them on the right hand, and on the left.] The
strong East Wind contributed, no doubt, to the cutting of the Waters in two;
though not without the help of Angelical Powers. But I do not see, how it could
do any thing to the compacting of the Waters to such a degree, that they were
no longer fluid, but firm as a Wall or Bank on each side of them, (See XV. 8.)
which was effected wholly by the Angelical Ministry; who upheld the Waters in
that solid posture, till the Israelites were got quite out of the Sea.

It has been an old Question, Whether they went quite cross the Red Sea, or
only fetched a compass, and came out upon the same Shore, from which they went
in. The Hebrew Doctors are of opinion, that they did not go over to the
opposite Shore: but making a kind of Semicircle, found themselves, when they
came out, in the same Country where they were before: Their reasons are,
because they could not in so small a time have marched so far; for in the
narrowest place, that Gulf is XII. or XV. German Miles over; so that they could
not all have passed through, in less than three or four days, as David
Chytraeus makes the computation. But especially, because Moses expressly makes
their next Station to be in the Wilderness of Etham, XXXIII Numb. 8. in which
place they were the day before they came to the Sea, XIII Exodus 20. Therefore
they were still in the same Wilderness.

Ver. 23. And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the midst of
the Sea, etc.] Imagining perhaps they were still upon the Land, or on the Shore
where the Sea was retired; the darkness of the Night not suffering them to see
the Mountains of Water on each side: or rather, their Minds being so intent to
overtake the Israelites, that they regarded nothing else: For when Men are
engaged in a fierce chase of any thing, with eager desires and confident hopes
of it, it takes up all their thoughts, and makes them overlook what lies before
their eyes. Thus by their own violent Passions, and proud Imaginations, God
blinded their Minds, and hardened their hearts (as he said he would, v. 17.) to
rush into their own destruction.

Ver. 24. And it came to pass that in the morning watch.] The Romans, and the
Hebrews also, divided the Night into four parts, containing three hours apiece.
At the beginning of which the Guard of Soldiers, who kept watch by Night, was
changed; and thence they were called Watches. Two of them we find mentioned by
St. Luke XII. 38. and St. Mark mentions them all, XIII. 35. and particularly
the fourth Watch, VI Mark 48. called here the Morning Watch; which was the last
of them: between Daybreak and the Morning.

The LORD looked unto the Host of the Egyptians.] He frowned upon them; as we
speak now in our Language. For in Scripture, God is said sometimes to look,
upon those, whom he is about to punish, CIV Psalm 32. IX Amos 4. III Habakkuk 6.

Through the pillar of fire and the Cloud.] By this it is manifest there was
but one Pillar, which had different Appearances: and that the SCHECHINAH, or
Divine Majesty was in it. It seems to me also very probable, that whereas the
cloudy part of the Pillar had been toward the Egyptians hitherto; now it
turned the other side toward them: and the siery part appearing, let them see
the danger wherein they were; and by its amazing brightness perfectly
confounded them. So Philo seems to have understood it, when he says ( L. III.
de Vita Mosis) that from the Cloud that was in the Rear of the Israelites,
there shone a fiery Appearance of the Deity. Which may well be the meaning of
the LORD's looking through the Pillar of Fire.

And troubled the Host of the Egyptians.] This glorious Light, I suppose,
flashing in their Faces, put them into a Consternation. But Josephus adds, in
the conclusion of his Second Book of Antiquities, that there was a dreadful
Storm or Tempest, with Thunder, Lightning and Hailstones from the Cloud, which
put them into the greatest disorder; as it follows in the next Verse. Hither
Dr. Hammond refers those words of the Psalmist, LXXVII. 17, 18. The Clouds
poured out Water; the Skies sent out a sound: thine Arrows also went abroad.
The Voice of thy Thunder was in the Heaven: the Lightnings lightened the World,
the Earth trembled and shook, etc.

Ver. 25. And took off their Chariot wheels.] Some of their Wheels were broken
by the Hailstones, or burnt with Lightning: with which, its likely, their
Horses were so affrighted, that they fell into disorder; and one Chariot
running against another, some of their Wheels were taken off.

That they drove heavily.] They could scarce move, or but very slowly, when
their Wheels were broken, or taken off: And those Wheels that remained sunk
deep into the Sand, when the Waters returned upon it.

So that the Egyptians said, etc.] They cried one to another, Let us give over
the pursuit.

For the LORD fights for them, etc.] Now Moses his words were made good, ( v.
14.) and the Egyptians themselves acknowledged it, v. 18.

Ver. 26. And the LORD said unto Moses.] He spoke to him out of the Cloud,
where the SCHECHINAH was; as I have often said.

Stretch out thy hand over the Sea, that the Waters may return again upon the
Egyptians, etc.] God was pleased to use the Ministry of Moses in the drowning
of the Egyptians, as he had done in the Preservation of the Israelites in the
Sea, ( v. 16, 21.) that all the People might honor and reverence him, and be
obedient to his direction.

Ver. 27. And the Sea returned to its strength.] The sense is truly expressed
by the Vulgar, the Sea returned to its former place. The great Walls, or heaps
of Water which were on either side of them, falling down, and rushing upon them
with a mighty force, overwhelmed them, and filled the whole Channel as before.

When the Morning appeared.] When it was light.

And the Egyptians fled against it.] They were so frighted by the Light which
shone in their Faces, and by the Thunder and Hail, etc. that they turned back;
and, like Men distracted, run and met the Waters, which came tumbling down upon
them.

And the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the Sea.] The Hebrew word
imports throwing down with violence and precipitation: and may be translated,
threw them headlong. Artapanus in Eusebius ( L. IX. Praepar. Evang. c. 27. tell
this Story from the Heliopolitans, after the same manner that Moses does: only
he makes some of them to have been killed with Lightning, and the rest drowned.

Ver. 28. And the Waters returned and covered the Chariots, etc.] The Sea
returned to its former depth; so that they were swallowed up.

And all the Host of Pharaoh that came into the Sea after them.] Some have
fancied that all the Host of Pharaoh did not perish; but only so many of them
as pursued the Israelites into the Sea; which they fancy this place intimates
some did not. But the plain meaning is, that they all came into the Sea after
the Israelites, and were all drowned in it. It is a wilder fancy, that Pharaoh
alone was saved by the Angels, Michael and Gabriel; because he cried out, as he
had done heretofore, IX. 27. The LORD is righteous, and I and my People are
wicked. Thus the Author of Dibre Hajamim (or The Life and Death of Moses) who
says they transported him to Nineveh, where he reigned as long as the
Israelites wandered in the Wilderness. The same is related by other such
fabulous Writers, who are soberly confuted by Aben Ezra from the following
words, There remained not so much as one of them: and from XV. 4, 19. where
Moses in his Song plainly makes Pharaoh to have perished among the rest. And
with him an old Midrash says, that Jannes and Jambres were drowned, who had
been the great Instruments of hardening Pharaoh's heart. See our Learned J.
Gregory. Observe. c. 15.

Ver. 29. But the Children of Israel walked on dry Land, etc.] Or, Had walked:
for it seems to be a mere fancy, that they were still in the Sea, and had not
passed quite through it, when Pharaoh and his Host were drowned. For which
there is no ground but this word walked; which may as well be translated in the
time perfectly past, as in the present. And so, I doubt not, Moses meant, that
the Israelites were safe on Shore, when the Sea returned upon the Egyptians.

And the Waters were a Wall unto them, etc.] See v. 22.

Ver. 30. Thus the LORD saved Israel.] As he had promised v. 13.

That day.] Which was the XXIst of Nisan; and the last day of the Feast of
Unleavened Bread; which, by God's command, was to be kept holy, XII. 16. And
now there was a very great reason for it; and for that triumphant Hymn which
they sung upon this Solemnity, Chap. XV. Mr. Mede will have this Day to have
been that which they afterward kept for their Sabbath, in memory of their
Redemption out of the Land of Egypt, and the House of Bondage. This he gathers
from the Repetition of the Decalogue in the Fifth of Deuteronomy; where leaving
out the reason for this Commandment, from the Creation of the World, Moses
inserts this other of their Redemption out of Egypt, as the ground of observing
that Seventh day rather than any other, v. 15. Therefore the LORD commanded
thee to keep the Sabbath; namely, not for the quotum of one day in seven (of
that there was another reason, from the Example of God in the Creation) but for
the designation of that day, after the preceding six days rather than any
other, Discourse XV. p. 74.

And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the Seashore.] It may be interpreted,
that, as they stood upon the Seashore, they saw their dead Bodies floating
upon the Waters. But it is likely also, that by the working of the Sea, and by
the Divine Providence, many of their Bodies were cast on shore, that the
Israelites might have the benefit of the Spoil, and especially of their Arms,
which they wanted, and were now by this overthrow furnished withal.

This Shore was inhabited by the Icthyophagi, among whom the memory of this
Recess and Return of the Sea was preserved, (as I observed upon v. 21.) and
unto whom the dead Bodies were given for food, as the Psalmist says, LXXIV.
14. that is, to the Beasts and Birds of Prey, which peopled the neighboring
Wilderness. This was done by the righteous Judgment of the LORD God of the
Hebrews: who made this proud Prince, his Statesmen and Army a Prey, not only
to the Fishes and Sea Monsters; but a visible booty (as Dr. Jackson speaks) to
the promiscuous sorts of ravenous Creatures which inhabit the Deserts.

Ver. 31. And Israel saw that great work, etc.] Of making a path for them to
walk on dry Ground in the middle of the Sea; and then drowning the Egyptians
when they followed them in the same path.

And the People feared the LORD.] They beholding and considering the powerful
hand of God, which appeared in this great work; it begat in them, for the
present, high and awful Thoughts of him, and devout Affections to him. For the
fear of the LORD includes all Religion. Or, if we take the word fear in a
restrained sense, for a dread of the Divine Majesty; the meaning is, they were
sensible how dangerous, as well as vain, it is, to oppose his Authority, to set
themselves against his Will, or slight his Warnings, as Pharaoh and the
Egyptians did.

And believed the LORD, and his Servant Moses.] Believed the Promises which God
had made them by Moses, of bringing them into the Land of Canaan, (III. 17.)
looking upon Moses as a Servant of his, who faithfully declared the Mind and
Will of God unto them.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. THen sang Moses and the Children of Israel, etc.] Upon the XXIth of
Nisan, as I said before, which was the last day of Unleavened Bread; when they
came safe through the Sea, and saw the Egyptians drowned, they sang this Song
of Praise to God, for their wonderful Deliverance. So the constant Tradition of
the Hebrews is, and there is great ground for it.

This Song.] Called the Song of Moses the servant of the LORD, (XV Rev. 3.)
because he composed it by a Divine Inspiration, to be sung by all the People.
And it is the most ancient Song of which there is any memory.

Unto the LORD.] In praise of the Divine Power and Goodness; which remarkably
appeared in this Deliverance.

Josephus, L. II. c. ult. of his Antiquities, says that this Song is composed
(...), of Hexameter Verse: which Eusebius represents as the Opinion of many
others, L. XI. de Praepar. Evang. c. 3. But I do not see how this can be made
out; nor what St. Hierom says concerning such Songs, in many places. And after
all the pains that Franc. Gomarus has taken in his Lyra Davidis, to find of
what sort of Numbers this, and other Songs in Scripture consists, he has not
given any satisfaction to Learned Men. Who think (as Ludov. Capellus does in
his Animadversions on that Book) that all the Bible may be made Verse according
to his method: Nay, by his way of resolving Sentences, all the Orations of
Tully and Demosthenes may be turned into Verse, of some sort or other. The
Author of Sepher Cosri seems to me to deal ingenuously, who, when the King of
Cosar objects to them, that the Songs in the Bible are not artificially
composed, according to Numbers and Quantities of Feet and Syllables, makes the
Jew answer, That the Scripture Poetry was of a nobler sort, not formed to
tickle the Ear, but affect the Heart, by the great height and elevation of the
Sense, together with lofty Expressions, whereby Men were moved to attend to it,
and to keep it in mind; P. II. Sect. 69. etc. And so much Abarbinel
acknowledges upon this place, That no such Verses, consisting in the number and
quantity of Syllables, are to be found either in the Bible, or in the Talmud,
(either in the Mischna or the Gemara) but are of later invention among the
Jews, in imitation of the Arabians and other Nations among whom they dwell in
this long Captivity. Yet in the Scripture Poetry, there is a certain
disposition of words, which make them melodious, and sit to be sung to Musical
Instruments; and so sententious that they might be more easily remembered than
simple Narrations: though now, after so many Ages, they cannot reduce this
Poetry to Rules. He tries indeed to bring this Song under certain Regulations;
fancying that it consists of eight Orders or Ranks, (as he calls them) two of
which are very short, and two very long; and four of a middle size: which he
prosecutes with much Subtilty, but with little Satisfaction.

And spoke, saying, I will sing unto the LORD, etc.] Every one joined in this
Song of Praise; which may be thus Paraphrased.

Ver. 1. We will joyfully praise the LORD; for he has in a most illustrious
and magnificent manner shown his Power; by throwing Horse and Men, when they
little thought of it, into the Sea.

Ver. 2. It is he who has given us this Victory, and therefore he is to be
praised and acknowledged as our Deliverer. He is our most gracious and mighty
God; for whom we will prepare a Tabernacle wherein to Worship him. Our Fathers
had great Experience of his Goodness, and therefore we are the more bound to
make him our most thankful Acknowledgments, and give him the highest Praises.

Ver. 3. There is none can stand before the LORD, who has perfectly subdued
our Enemies; and faithfully fulfilled his Promises to his Servants.

Ver. 4. For he has cast Pharaoh, and all his Chariots, and great Commanders,
into the Sea, as easily as one sends an Arrow out of a Bow.

Ver. 5. They are buried; and shall rise up no more.

Ver. 6. Thou have manifested thy Omnipotence, O LORD, most magnificently: it
was thy irresistible Power, O LORD, which dashed in pieces such mighty Enemies.

Ver. 7. It was a work of thy most excellent Power; which will be ever
magnified in the overthrow of such Adversaries: With whom thou no sooner
showedst thy self displeased, but they vanished as stubble does before the
slame.

Ver. 8. Thou did but give the Command, and by a vehement Wind the Waters of
the Sea were divided and heaped up, so that they swelled into little Mountains:
and were campact like a Wall, which was upheld from falling down, till the
People passed through the midst of the Sea.

Ver. 9. Our Enemies pursued us with a full considence, that they should
overtake, and make a prey of us; and after they had satisfied their Revenge
upon us, as certainly reduce us under their yoke, as they drew their Swords
against us.

Ver. 10. But with a turn of the Wind all their vain hopes sunk on a sudden,
together with themselves, to the bottom of the Sea.

Ver. 11. There are none among all that are called Gods, in Heaven or in Earth,
that are comparable to thee, O LORD, whose Perfections infinitely transcend all
other: and therefore art to be praised with the greatest fear and reverence;
for thy very works are wonderful, and to be had in admiration.

Ver. 12. By thy mighty Power they were buried in the bottom of the Sea; into
which they sank.

Ver. 13. And in great mercy thou have preserved thy People, whom thou have
brought out of Egypt, and rescued from cruel Servitude: and conducted, by a
mighty Providence, toward the holy Land which thou have promised to them,
there to dwell among them.

Ver. 14. And why should we doubt of our coming thither? The fame of this
wonder shall go before us, and strike a terror into the most valiant
Inhabitants of that Country.

Ver. 15. Nay, all their Neighbors, as well as they, shall sind their hearts
fail them, and become as weak as Water.

Ver. 16. Such a terror shall fall upon them, that they shall be no more able
to stir than a stone, when they hear of this dreadful Execution: but suffer thy
People, O LORD, to pass to their Inheritance, which thou have prepared for them.

Ver. 17. Thither shall thou bring them, and there make them to take root in
the highest Mountains of that Country: where thou have designed a place for
thine own Dwelling; of which thy Power also will lay the Foundation.

Ver. 18. And thou shall do more Wonders; since thy Dominion and Power endures
to all Ages.

Ver. 19. For who can dethrone Thee? Who in the same Sea have made a Grave to
bury the Egyptians, and a Path for thy People Israel to walk in, as if they had
been on dry Ground.

And now having given the sense of the Song in this Paraphrase; it may be
proper to confirm it, by the Explication of some Phrases in it.

Ver. 1. Has he thrown into the Sea.] The Hebrew word ramah signifies a sudden
Precipitation; when they were in the height of their hopes to overtake and
subdue the Israelites.

Ver. 2. He is my God.] Though some think the word El to be a Contraction of
Elohim; yet it seems to be derived from ajal, and is generally thought to
import might and strength. But I have taken in the other Notion of goodness
also. See v. 11.

Ver. 3. Prepare him an habitation.] As if they thought a Cloud, too mean an
Habitation for the Divine Glory, they resolve to build him a Tabernacle: just
as David, ashamed he should dwell in a Tabernacle, designed to build him a
Temple.

My Fathers God.] i. e. Jacob's; of whom God took a singular care, both before
and after he came into Egypt.

Ver. 3. The LORD is a Man of War.] i. e. Gets great Victories, as the Targum
expresses it. For when the Hebrews would express any eminent quality, they put
the word isch before it. As in 1 Samuel XVII. 34. we meet with this very
Expression concerning Goliath, a man of war from his youth; i. e. a great
Warrior. And in the foregoing Chapter David is called both isch Milchamah, a
Man of War, and isch Toar, a Man of Form or Beauty; i. e. a beautiful or comely
Person, as we translate it, 1 Samuel XVI. 18. And in this very Book, isch de
varim, a Man of Words, is an Eloquent Man.

The LORD is his Name.] He seems to allude unto that which God said to Moses,
when he first appeared to him, III. 14, 15, 16. VI. 3, 4, 6.

Ver. 4. Pharaoh's Chariots.] The Hebrew word Mercavah comprehends the Horses
by which they were drawn; which were commonly four to each Chariot, as
Maimonides probably gathers from 1 Kings X. 29. Where a Horse is said to come
up out of Egypt at an hundred and fifty shekels, and a Chariot at six hundred;
because it comprehended four Horses, More Nevoch. P. I. c. 70.

Chosen Captains.] The Hebrew word Schalish imports something extraordinary;
either in their Stature, or in their Command, which they had, perhaps, over
three Squadrons, as we now speak. But Hen. Valesius, a very Learned Man, thinks
the LXX. rightly translated the word by (...); which he translates three
fighting out of a Chariot. For (...) and (...) are both words belonging to
Military Discipline, (which they call Tacticks) and (...) he takes to be of the
same kind, and rightly rendered by Rusinus ternos statores, in Eusebius. Histor.
Eccles. L. IX. c. 9. p. 358.

Ver. 5. Sank to the bottom as a stone.] The Waters which stood up like a Wall,
falling down with great violence upon them, they sank under their weight to the
bottom of the Sea; from whence, after some time, they rose up again, and were
thrown upon the shore, (XIV. 30.) though not all of them; but some seem to have
been buried in the bottom of the Sea. See v. 12.

Ver. 6. Right hand.] Is frequently used for the height of Power exerted in the
Preservation of good Men, or the Destruction of the bad, XX Psalm 6. XXI. 8.

Ver. 7. In the greatness of thy excellency, etc.] All words being too low to
declare the greatness of God's Power, which appeared in the overthrow of the
Egyptians; he endeavors to rise higher and higher in his Expressions, to show
how much he admired it.

Thou sentest forth thy wrath.] He seems to allude unto God's looking upon
them, through the Pillar of Fire and of the Cloud, XIV. 24. and to the Thunder
and Lightning, which are supposed to have come from thence.

Ver. 8. And with the blast of thy nostrils.] This may relate to the strong
Wind, which drove the Sea back, XIV. 21.

The waters were gathered together. This word Aram, or Haram, signifies to heap
up together: From whence the Arabians call those great Banks, which are raised
to keep in Waters from overflowing a Country, by the name of Arem or Harem, as
Bochartus has observed in his Phaleg. L. II. c. 26. And so the word may be
here translated, the waters were heaped up as banks, on each side of the
Israelites.

Ver. 9. I will divide the spoil.] It belonged to Kings, and chief Commanders
to divide the Spoil; as Moses, David, and Joshua did among the Soldiers.

My hand shall destroy them.] Or repossess them (as it is in the Margin) bring
them back to their Slavery in Egypt.

Ver. 10. They sank like lead.] It signifies the suddenness of their
destruction: for a Talent of Lead sinks in a moment.

Ver. 11. Who is like unto thee, among the Gods?] Or, the mighty ones, as it is
in the Margin. For Elim is the Plural of El, which comes from Ejalah (says the
Author of Sepher Cosri) which denotes fortitude or strength. For from him
proceeds all Power and Might; but is himself more Sublime and Eminent, than to
be likened to any other Power, according to these words, which he quotes for
the proof of it, Pars IV. Sect. 3.

Fearful in Praises.] I see no solidity in the Gloss of R. Elieser, that Moses
speaks in the Plural Number, because the Angels praised God above, when the
Israelites praised him below, Pirke Elies. c. 42. The plain meaning is, that he
ought to be praised with the greatest Reverence; for to him alone (as Conradus
Pellicanus glosses) belongs all Honor and Glory, who can never enough be
praised.

Ver. 12. The Earth swallowed them.] They who were drowned in the Sea, are here
said to be swallowed up in the Earth; just as Jonah says, when he was in the
Sea, that he went down to the bottom of the Mountains; and the Earth with her
bars was about him for ever, II. 6. because the Sea, which swallowed both him
and the Egyptians, is in the Depths of the Earth. R. Elieser thinks that they
being thrown upon the Seashore, XIV. 30. the Earth opened her Mouth, and
swallowed them up. Which is possible; but there is no necessity of so
understanding it. Rather after the Israelites had spoiled them, the Sea which
had cast them on shore, afterward, as is usual, carried them off again, and
buried them in the Sand or Mud.

Ver. 13. Thy holy habitation.] The Country where God himself intended to have
a dwelling place, v. 17.

Ver. 14. The Inhabitants of Palestina.] The Philistines seem to have been the
most valiant People in that Country, to which the Israelites were to go; and
therefore here mentioned.

Ver. 15. The Dukes of Edom.] Concerning the word Alluphe, see XXXVI Genesis 18.
By this it appears, that Idumaea was at this time under the Government of
Dukes; though before Moses his Death they had Kings (XX Numb. 14.) For they
often changed their Government, as I observed upon XXXVI Genesis where Moses gives
an account both of their Dukes, and of their Kings.

Ver. 16. Shall be as still as a stone.] The LXX. translate it (...), turned
into stones; i. e. so struck with the terror of the LORD, that they remained
unmovable as stones; having no heart to oppose the passage of the Israelites
into Canaan.

Ver. 17. The Mountain of thine Inheritance.] Moses seems to have foreseen, by
the Spirit of Prophecy, that God would place his Habitation upon Mount Sion.
Which he understood, perhaps, from the Sacrifice of Isaac upon Mount Moriah,
XXII Genesis

Ver. 18. The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.] It may signify, that when
they came thither, they would always acknowledge him for their Sovereign; who
had done such mighty things for them.

Ver. 19. The Horse of Pharaoh went in with his Chariots, etc.] In this which
the Greeks call the Epiphonema of the Song, Moses briefly comprehends the whole
matter of it; and makes it end as it began.

Ver. 20. And Miriam.] Or, as the LXX. the Syriac and others read it, Mariam;
which some think comes from Marah, which signifies bitterness (as the Arabic
word Marara does) and that their cruel usage by Pharaoh, especially his Decree
that all the Male Children should be slain, was the occasion of this name; for
it made their life bitter to them, as the Text says, I. 14. Thus the Author of
Dibre Hajamim (or of the Life of Moses) and our Dr. Lightfoot and others. But
L'Moine guesses, not unhappily, that it signifies as much as Mar-jam, which is
in English, a drop of the Sea: from which the Story of Venus was framed, among
the Greeks; who feigned her to have been born of the froth of the Sea, which
gave her the Name of Aphrodite. The Fable of Diana also, as well as Venus, had
no other original, but from that which is here said of Miriam; as Huetius has
probably conjectured in his Demonstratio Evang. Prop. IV. c. 12. sect. 4.

The Prophetess.] She was called by this Name, I suppose, because she had a
Gift of composing Hymns, in praise of the Divine Majesty: which, it is certain,
is meant sometimes, by prophesying in Scripture. See 1 Samuel X. 5, 6. And thus
among the Greeks, a Prophet and a Poet were the same thing: and the Latin word
Vates signifies both. For, as Quintilian says, L. I. c. 10. Music was had in
such veneration in ancient times, that iidem Musici, and Vates, and Sapientes
judicarentur. But there are other places of Holy Scripture, which would incline
one to think, that she also received Revelations from God, for the direction of
the People. Particularly VI Mich. 4. where she is mentioned as one that
conducted Israel out of Egypt: and her own words, with Aaron's, XII Numb. 2.
has not the LORD spoken by us also? Which the LORD heard, and does not
contradict; but rather allow to be true: though they had not such near
Communication with him as Moses had, v. 6. Perhaps she instructed the Women, as
Moses and Aaron did the Men.

The Sister of Aaron.] And why not of Moses? The common Answer is, that Aaron
and she lived longest together; Moses having been absent from them XL. years.
Or perhaps, Moses was not by the same Mother, which Aaron and Miriam had. She
was married to Hur, if we may believe Josephus.

Took a Timbrel in her hand.] So the manner was in aftertimes when they
prophesied, 1 Samuel X. 5, 6. 2 Kings III. 15. and when they sang Hymns, XXXIII
Psalm 2. LVII. 7, 8. and upon any occasion of great rejoicing, XI Judge. 34. 1 Samuel XVIII. 6. From which we may learn, how ancient Music was in the Service
of God: there being nothing in which it can be better employed, than in his
Praises. Therefore it was no part of the Gentile Idolatry, that they used such
Instruments as these in their Divine Worship; but they honored false Gods in
that manner, that Moses and the Israelites had done the true. And it ought to
have a remark set upon it, that this way of praising God was no part of the
Mosaical Institution; but derived from more ancient times, before the Law was
given.

And all the Women went out after her.] To join with her in the Praises of God,
as the Men did with Moses and Aaron, with Timbrels and Dances. As they played
with these Instruments in their hands, so their whole Bodies made a decent
motion with their feet. Which afterward tended to lasciviousness, but
anciently was very grave, and so becoming, that such Dances were as devout
Expressions of Joy, as their solemn Music. This appears by the Example of
David, dancing before the Ark, when it was brought up from the House of
Obed-Edom, in a joyful Procession both of Men and Women, with Vocal and
Instrumental Music, 1 Chronicles. XV. 27, 28, 29. LXVIII Psalm 26. From which
Patterns all Nations, from the most ancient Times, made Dancing a part of the
Worship of their Gods; as Huetius observes in his Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV.
c. 6. n. 2. who ingeniously conjectures, in another place of that Work, ( c.
12. n. 4.) that from this Dancing of Miriam, and her Companions, on the
Seashore, Callimachus, in his Hymn to Diana, ascribes to her (...), threescore
Dancers, the Daughters of the Ocean.

Ver. 21. And Miriam answered them, etc.] i. e. She and the Women answered
Moses and the People, Verse by Verse; or after every Verse, sung by Moses and
the Men, Miriam and the Women, interposed and repeated this Verse, (which is
the first of the Song) saying, Sing to the LORD, for he has triumphed
gloriously, etc. And this was a way of singing in after Times, as appears from
the CXXXV Psalm, and III Ezra 11. of which I have given some account in my
Preface to the Paraphrase of the Book of Psalms. Which justisies, or rather
commends our way of Reading, or Chanting the Psalms interchangeably, by
Responses, as we call them, or Answering one to another: which certainly, it
appears by this place, is the most ancient way of all other. And is represented
in VI Isa. 3. as practiced by the Angels themselves, in their Worship of the
Divine Majesty.

Ver. 22. So Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea.] Not without some
importunity; they being eagerly bent upon gathering the Spoil of the Egyptians.
Some such thing the Hebrew word seems to import, which is jassa, he made them
to go up. Which signifies some unwillingness, or backwardness; arising either
from that Cause, or from a desire to return to Egypt (as some fancy) which now
perhaps they thought to be so empty, that they might get it for themselves.

And they went out.] From the Station, where they were at the Red Sea.

Into the Wilderness of Shur.] Mentioned XVI Genesis 7. and was a part of the
Wilderness of Etham; which was the general Name for this Desert, XXXIII Numb. 8.

And they went three days in the Wilderness.] Viz. the XXII, XXIII, and XXIVth
of Nisan.

And found no Water.] Which was a very great Trial of them. For their Cattle,
as well as they, suffered much by it; and could not afford them Milk sufficient
to quench their thirst.

Ver. 23. And when they came to Marah.] This was the fourth Station of the
Israelites, after they came out of Egypt; and in the same Wilderness: which had
this Name given it after they came there, from the bitterness or brackishness
of the Water.

They could not drink of the Water, etc.] This was the more grievous, because
they had wanted this refreshment three days.

Ver. 24. And the People murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?]
It is the conceit of Abarbinel, that Moses brought them from the Redsea,
without the direction of the Cloud, which conducted them thither: but then left
them to his Guidance. Which made the People think it was Moses his Fault, that
they were in this destress; who did not know how to lead them to the most
commodious and likely places, for the finding good Water. And therefore from
Marah they stirred not, till the Cloud again led them; because it is said XVII.
1. they journied from Sin, by the Commandment of the LORD. But all this is a
mere fancy, to excuse his Foresathers; who should rather have prayed to God,
than murmured against Moses. For we read expressly, God did not take away the
Pillar of the Cloud by day, and the Pillar of Fire by night, from before the
People, XIII. 22. That is, it constantly guided them in the way wherein they
should go, whether they traveled by day or by night. And in that very place,
which he builds his Opinion upon, where it is said, they journied according to
the commandment of the LORD; it is also expressly recorded, that there was no
water for the People to drink, XVII. 1.

Ver. 25. And he cried unto the LORD.] He did what they should have done; made
his earnest Prayer to God to relieve them in this distress: which he instantly
vouchsafed to do.

And the LORD showed him a Tree.] We are not told what Tree this was; whose
Wood being thrown into the Waters, took off their bitterness: but, to increase
the Miracle, the Jews will have this to have been a Tree of bitter taste,
(which Jonathan calls Ardophne) which naturally would have made the Waters
bitter, if they had been sweet. Demetrius mentions this wonderful cure of the
Waters, in Eusebius his Praepar. Evang. L. IX. c. 29.

Which when he had cast into the water.] By the order of the LORD, who showed
him the Tree. For the Wonder did not consist (as Huetius thinks, in his
Quaestiones Alnetanae) in curing the Water by throwing the Wood into it, (for
that may be done naturally, as Pliny shows) but that he found this Wood in the
Wilderness, by the direction of God: As Elisha found, by the same Divine
direction, that the throwing in of Meal would make Water sweet; which the same
Pliny says is a natural Remedy.

There he made for them.] Propounded to them, or appointed them.

A Statute, and an Ordinance.] This seems to signisie, that for their better
Government, God now gave them a few Rules to be observed for the present, till
he should more fully declare his Will to them from Mount Sinai. And it is a
most ancient constant Tradition of the Jews, That now he commanded them to
observe the Sabbath (which they understand by Statute) and to do Justice;
particularly honor their Parents; which they understand by Ordinance or
Judgment, as the Hebrew word imports. And they instance especially in keeping
the Sabbath, and honoring of Parents; because those two Commandments are
pressed upon them in Deuteronomy, with this particular inforcement, As the LORD
commanded thee, V Deuteronomy. 12, 16. which they will have to relate unto this
command at Marah. See Mr. Seldom, L. III. de Jure Not. and Gent. c. 9. p. 314,
333, etc. And perhaps these two might be in the number; but it is probable
there were more Commands besides these, which were now given them; as the
following Verse seems to intimate.

And there he proved them.] He began there to make a trial of their Obedience,
Whether they would observe these Laws, or no.

Ver. 26. And said, if thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD
thy God, etc.] This was the main thing he required of them, as Jeremiah
observes, VII. 22, 23. Where he says, God spoke nothing to them, in the day
when he brought them out of Egypt ( i. e. at this time) concerning
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, but only commanded them, saying, Obey my voice.
And this Maimonides himself confesses in his More Nevoch. P. III. c. 32. It
appears from the Scripture, and the Cabala also, that the first Precept which
God gave us after we came out of Egypt, was not concerning Burnt-Offerings and
Sacrifices; but it was that given us at Marah, If thou will diligently hearken
to the voice of the LORD thy God: where he gave us a Statute and a Judgment.
And it is a certain Tradition, that the Statute was the Sabbath; and the
Judgment was, the taking away all iniquity; i. e. doing Justice.

I will put none of those Diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the
Egyptians.] He incourages their Obedience by a gracious Promise, to preserve
them from those terrible Plagues, which he inflicted upon the Egyptians for
their Disobedience. Which is an Indication withal, that if the Israelites
proved like them, they should be punished in the same manner; as he threatens
afterward, XXVIII Deuteronomy. 59, etc.

I am the LORD that heals thee.] There are two parts of a Physicians Office;
to cure Men, when they are sick; and to preserve them in health, when they are
well. The latter is here chiefly intended; which the Psalmist takes notice of,
when he says, CV. 37. There was not one feeble Person among their Tribes.

Ver. 27. And they came to Elim.] They seem to have stayed but a day at Marah,
and on the XXVth of Nisan to have come to this place, called Elim, (which
signifies Rams) from the good Pasture which was here for the feeding Sheep; as
Jacobus Capellus will have it. But Bochartus thinks that El signifies in
general a Field; as El-Paran, XIV Genesis 6. he interprets the Field or Plain of
Paran: and consequently Elim signifies a part of the Wilderness, where there
were large and spacious Plains. Thus I find Ezekiel the Tragaedian (mentioned
by Eusebius) understood it, in his Exagoge: where he brings in one talking with
Moses, and pointing him to this place; where a great Light shone, on a sudden,
as a Pillar of Fire, to show it to them. Which he calls (...), a shady Meadow,
and says it was (...), an exceeding fertile Ground, L. IX. Praepar. Evang. c.
29.

Where were twelve Wells of Water, and threescore and ten Palm Trees.] Twelve
Wells of Water, according to the number of the XII. Tribes; and LXX. Palm
Trees, according to the number of the Elders of Israel, says the Hiorusalem
Targum, and Jonathan's Paraphrase. Which Nachmanides so much believed, that he
says each Tribe pitched their Tents about one of these Fountains: and the LXX.
Elders sat down under the shadow of the Palm Trees; giving thanks to God for
the Benefits they now received upon dry Land, as lately they had done in the
Sea. But there is no reason to think that the high Court, consisting of so many
Elders, was now constituted; as I have observed before: of which see Mr.
Seldom, L. I. de Synedr. c. 15. p. 626, etc. There is nothing in the Story
neither, to warrant what Ezekiel says in the place before-named, that these
Twelve Springs all gushed (...), out of one Rock, which was in this beautiful
Plain. No more, than there is for what follows in him, concerning a mavelous
strange Bird, such as no Man ever saw before, as big again as an Eagle, of
various Colors, and a most sweet Voice, which appeared to them upon this
occasion. Which he seems to have had out of some Talmudical Fable.

Palm Trees.] This Tree delights in watery Places; and therefore no wonder so
many were planted here by these Fountains. For it is noted by Pliny, that
gaudet riguis, and toto anno bibere amat, the Palm Tree delights in places well
watered, and loves to drink all the year. There were two sorts of these Trees:
the common, and that which was called (...), because it bare Dates; as
Salmasius has observed in his Plinianae exercit. p. 472. 1326. If these were
of the latter sort, they gave them the better entertainment.

And they encamped there by the water.] To refresh themselves and their Flocks,
in this delightful place.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. AND they took their journey from Elim.] After they had rested a good
while there; as appears by the end of the Verse.

And all the Congregation came unto the Wilderness of Sin.] Not directly; but
first they went back toward the Red Sea; which was their next Station after
they left Elim: as Moses tells us XXXIII Numb. 10. where he gives an exact
account of all their Stations; one of which is here omitted, because nothing
remarkable, I suppose, fell out there: and they did not stay long in it. This
Sin is different from that where Miriam died, XX Nunth. 1. and written with
different Letters.

Which is betweem Elim and Sinai.] So the direct way to Sinai had been into
this Wilderness of Sin: but, for some reason which we know not, they first
returned to some part of that Sea, where they had been before.

On the fifteenth day of the second Month, etc.] Just a Month after they came
out of Egypt. And therefore, it seems, they stayed a good while at Elim, where
there was plenty of Water, and some shade; which was now very comfortable: this
second Month (which they call Ijar) answering to part of our April and May. Or
otherwise, we must suppose they spent some time at the Red Sea: whether God
conducted them, perhaps, to put them in mind of his late great Mercy to them
there; which might incline them to be more obedient to his Commands, mentioned
XV. 25, 26.

Ver. 2. And the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel.] Their Elders
and all are included in these words, they being the same with those v. 1. which
certainly comprehend all that came out of Egypt. Though its likely, there were
some more pious among them, who were not guilty of what follows; when the
generality were so mutinous, that they who were better disposed, could scarce
be discerned.

Murmured against Moses and Aaron.] This seems to be an higher discontent than
the former, XV. 24. because the whole Congregation were engaged in it: whereas
there it is only said, the People were concerned in it. And there they
quarrelled only with Moses: but here with both their Leaders. And as that was
for want of Water, so this for want of Bread: all their Dough which they
brought out of Egypt, being now spent. So Josephus, and R. Bechai, which latter
says, the Dough they brought out of Egypt sufficed for a whole Month; from the
XVth of Nisan, to the XVth of Ijar, and the Night of the XVIth, they still are
of it. And then on the XVIth, he thinks, the Manna descended: which fell on the
first day of the Week, as he argues from those words v. 5. when on the sixth
day, they are commanded to gather twice as much as on other days. Which was,
says he, both the sixth day of the Week, and of the descent of the Manna.

Ver. 3. Would to God we had died by the hand of the LORD, etc.] As some of the
Egyptians did. A strange wish! proceeding from great ingratitude to God, and
forgetfulness of his Benefits.

When he sat.] That was the ancient posture of eating, before this time,
XXXVII. 25. XLIII. 33. and afterward, XXXII Exodus 6. XIX Judge. 6.

By the Fleshpots, and did eat Bread to the full. This is not likely; when
they were not only mere Slaves, but under cruel Hardships. But they untruly
magnisie their former Condition, that they may represent their present to be
more miserable, than really it was.

For ye have brought us forth into this Wilderness.] They were glad to be
brought out of Egypt; but their Discontent arose from their being brought into
a Wilderness; where they wanted all Provisions, but what they brought along
with them.

To kill this whole Congregation with hunger.] There was no danger of their
perishing presently; they having so many Flocks to feed them. But without Bread
this would not satisfy them; and they were loath, it is likely, to lose any of
their Stock, which they hoped rather to increase, than to diminish. Or else,
they longed for Dainties, as they did afterward: which moved God to send them
great store of Fowl; as we understand v. 12.

Ver. 4. Then said the LORD Dunto Moses.] He spoke to him out of the Cloud of
Glory, where the SCHECHINAH was; as I observed above.

I will rain Bread.] Send you down that which shall supply the place of Bread,
in a very plentiful manner; like drops of Rain from Heaven from above, out of
the Clouds. Which was, as Greg. Nyssen speaks, (...), etc. the most incredible
of all Wonders, that Bread should be given them, not as usually out of the
Earth, but out of the Air, where no Seed is ever sown, L. de Vita Mosis, p. 177.

Every day.] It came down in daily showers; as much only, as would suffice for
one day; that they might be kept in a perpetual thankful dependence upon God's
Providence; and that this might more evidently appear to be a miraculous Work
of his, who made it fall, at all times of the year alike. The Heathen
themselves preserved some Memory of this, in that Fable of Pan (whom Huetius
shows to be Moses) finding out Ceres, when she had been long wanting, to give
Men bread when they were ready to starve with hunger.

That I may prove them.] Some think this relates to what goes before,
concerning his sending them Bread every day: which was so ordered, that he
might prove, whether they would murmur, because they had not enough at once for
a whole year; or humbly hope in his Mercy, for a constant supply. But the
following words [ whether they will walk in my law, or no] direct us to a
larger sense; which is, that he tried whether they would be obedient to all his
Commands, when he let them want nothing to support and encourage them in his
Service.

Prove them.] Not as if he was ignorant; but that it might plainly appear to
others, and to themselves, what they were. Or, as Maimonides interprets it,
that it might openly appear to the World, that God sustains him, who follows
his Worship and Service, by means that he did not think of. So he expounds this
very place, More Novoch. P. III. c. 24. That every one may see and know,
whether it be beneficial, to give ones self to the Service of God, or not.

Ver. 5. On the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in.] When
they had gathered it, and brought it into their Tents; they were to grind and
bake it, etc. ( v. 23.) and make ready all things that were necessary against
the next day; which was to be a Festival ( viz. the Sabbath) on which they were
to do nothing. For the Sabbath was not to be disturbed with such kind of Work:
but though on other Festivals they might prepare their Meat, and only abstain
from labor; yet on this they might not so much as dress their Meat; but it was
to de done the Evening before; on which they were to prepare every thing for
the next day. From which preparation this day was called the Parascue, XXIII
Luke 54. the preparation for the Sabbath.

And it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.] Enough, that is for two
days, viz. that sixth day, and the next, which was to be the Sabbath, v. 23.
Where, what is here briefly said in general, is more particularly and largely
explained.

The Talmudists are generally of an opinion, that the XVth day of the second
Month, when they came hither, ( v. 1.) was the seventh day of the week. See Mr.
Seldom, L. III. de Jure N. and G. c. 11. Which if it be true, they knew nothing
of the rest of the Sabbath; for they traveled upon this day. But Mr. Mede has
observed, that it is altogether uncertain, whether or no, it was the seventh
day from the Creation. It might possibly fall out so, by the Providence of God,
that the seventh day, designed by him for their Sabbath, might be both the
seventh in order from the Creation, and also from the day of their deliverance
out of Egypt. But that which now determined this seventh day, after six days
labor, to be their rest, was their Redemption out of Egypt; and the
Overwhelming of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea: which was upon this very
day. The Example of the Creation, was a reason for sanctifying one day in
seven: but the designation of this seventh day, was, as I said, from their
wonderful deliverance. See Discourse XV. Book 1.

Ver. 6. And Moses and Aaron said unto all the Children of Israel.] What God
spoke to Moses alone, v. 4. is delivered to the People by Aaron also, who was
assistant to his Brother in the Government of them.

At Even.] On the Evening of this fifteenth day, God sent them Quails, as we
translate v. 13.

Then ye shall know, that the LORD has brought you out from the Land of
Egypt.] Be convinced, that it was by the LORD's Direction and Command, that you
were brought out of Egypt, into this place. And therefore you have no reason to
quarrel with us, who did nothing of our selves without his order: but rather to
trust in him; who can make as good provision for you here in the Wilderness, as
ever you saw in Egypt.

Ver. 7. And in the Morning.] When the Manna fell down, v. 13.

Then ye shall see the Glory of the LORD.] His great power (some interpret it)
in sending them Bread from Heaven, and Flesh also with it. But I take it rather
to refer unto the visible appearance of the Divine Majesty, which they saw
presently after this ( v. 10.) and were convinced of his real Presence in that
Cloud, by the descent of the Manna from thence next Morning, which no Power but
the Divine could produce. And so I find Abarbinel himself interprets it; Their
seeing the Glory of the LORD, is not to be understood of the Bread, or the
Flesh he sent them, but of the Fire which appeared to all the People, to
reprove them for their Murmurings.

For that he hears your Murmurings against the LORD.] He is present among
you; and takes notice of your ungrateful behavior toward him.

For what are we, that ye murmur against us?] Alas! we are but poor Instruments
of his; who has done all the Wonders you have seen, and by that means brought
you hither: And therefore why do you complain of us, as if we acted any thing
by our own Authority?

Ver. 8. And Moses said, this shall be, when the LORD shall give you, etc.] I
say again (therefore mark it) when the LORD shall give you Flesh to eat in the
Evening, and in the Morning Bread to the full; then you shall be convinced that
he has taken notice of your Murmurings: which are really against him, who
imploys us only as his Ministers; and will be so gracious, as not to punish
your Discontents, but provide for your Necessities.

Ver. 9. And Moses spoke unto Aaron.] Who was his Minister, as Moses was more
immediately God's.

Speak unto the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel.] Who were all
engaged in this undutiful Murmuring, v. 2.

Come near before the LORD.] Before the SCHECHINAH or Divine Majesty, which was
in the Cloud (as I observed XIII. 21.) and now was about to break forth upon
them in a glorious manner. But, because of their Murmurings, the Cloud was
removed, it is probable, to a greater distance from them, than it used to be.
Bonfrerius will have it, that they were to come near to the Tabernacle of
Moses, where the Glory of the LORD appeared, XXXIII. 7, 9. But there is no
proof that it was wont to be there, till that occasion. See upon that place.

For he has heard your murmurings.] He will show that he is among you, and
observes how ungratefully you requite him. It is not unlikely that Moses bad
Aaron go and speak to the People, because he himself retired to speak to God.
That is, to pray for them, and to acknowledge his great Goodness, in passing by
their Murmurings.

Ver. 10. And it came to pass, as Aaron spoke unto the whole Congregation of
the Children of Israel.] According to the Command of Moses, v. 9.

That they looked.] They were suddenly surprised, I conceive, with an unwonted
brightness; which made them look about to see whence it came. Or Aaron perhaps
bad them look that way.

Toward the Wilderness.] Whether the Cloud had conducted them; and stood at
some distance from them.

And behold the Glory of the LORD appeared in the Cloud.] The Divine Majesty
appeared in flaming Light; such as they had never seen before. See XIII. 21.
Thus N. Lyra truly expounds, Fulgor quidam insolitus, etc. an unusual Splendour,
representing the Divine Power, to reprove the Murmurings of the People.

Ver. 11. And the LORD spoke unto Moses.] Who was gone, as I said, to pray unto
God; whilst Aaron was speaking unto the People.

Ver. 12. I have heard the murmurings of the Children of Israel, etc.] He
repeats to Moses what he had bidden him tell them ( v. 4, 5, 6.) and perhaps
spoke it from the Cloud of Glory, in the Audience of all the People.

In the Evening ye shall eat Flesh.] v. 8.

And in the Morning ye shall be silled with Bread.] v. 4.

And ye shall know that I am the LORD your God.] Who brought you out of Egypt;
and will provide for you here in the Wilderness.

Ver. 13. And it came to pass that at Even.] According to God's Promise, v. 6,
8.

The Quails came up.] The only Person among the Jews, that adventures thus to
translate the Hebrew word Selau (which is used here, and XI Numb. 31. and CV
Psalm. 40.) is Josephus. All others either keep the Hebrew Name, or make it
another thing than Quails. For Jonathan translates it Pheasants; and Abarbinel
makes them a kind of Sea-fowl: and the Talmudists comprehend four sorts of
Birds under this Name, viz. that which feeds upon Figgs (which the Greeks call
(...)) and Thrushes and Pheasants, and Quails. (See Bocharlus, P. II.
Hierozoic. L. I. c. 14.) But all this is without good ground; for the account
which Moses gives of Selau in the Book of Numbers, agrees to none of these, nor
any thing that we have knowledge of, but a kind of Locusts: which Job Ludolphus
therefore pitches upon, and gives very solid Reasons for it; as I shall show
when I come to that place, XI Numb. 31.

Came up.] From the Country over against the Desert: from the Sea, says
Aben-Ezra; and Josephus, from the Arabian Gulf. Not that they were a Seafowl;
but were in great quantity, upon that Coast.

And covered the Camp.] It seems they fell in the very Streets, as we speak: so
that they needed not do more than step out of Doors, and take up as many as
they pleased. This lasted no longer than that Evening: for the Manna, which
fell next Morning, was to be their constant food.

And in the Morning the dew.] Besides the Morning dew, there was an Evening, VI
Hos. 4. V Cant. 2. and Moses in the XI Numb. 9. mentions the dew that fell in
the Night. From whence, I suppose, came the Opinion among some of the Jews,
that there was a double dew in which the Manna was enclosed: a dew below it,
which fell in the Night; and a dew above it, which after the Manna was fallen,
came upon it, and covered it in the Morning: by which means, being thus
enclosed, it was kept very clean.

Lay round about the Host.] Not in the Camp; but round about it on the face of
the Wilderness, ( v. 14.) For the Camp was not so clean a place, nor so apt to
congeal the Manna, that fell with the dew.

Ver. 14. And when the dew that lay, was gone up.] This shows the dew fell
first, and then the Manna fell upon it (as we read expressly XI Numb. 9.)
whereby it was kept pure, and free from the dust, that was upon the ground.

Behold, upon the face of the Wilderness.] When the dew was exhaled by the Sun,
the Manna appeared; which covered the Wilderness round about them.

There lay a small round thing.] This word is no where else to be found in the
Holy Scripture; which has made it differently rendered. But our Translation is
authorized by what is said v. 31. that it was like Coriander Seed: which has
respect, not to its color or taste, but to its form and sigure. And so the
LXX. here understood it, when they translated it (...).

As small as the hoar-frost on the ground.] This seems to relate to the color,
which was white: but expresses also that it was very small, like a drop of dew
frozen on the ground.

Ver. 15. And when the Children of Israel saw it.] Which was as soon as they
rose in the Morning, and went out of the Doors of their Tents.

They said one to another, it is Manna.] The Hebrew words Man-hu, are thought
by some to signify as much, as Mah-hu, i. e. What is it? So Philo, Josephus,
and a great number of the Ancient and Modern Expositors. Who take Man to be an
Egyptian word, signifying as much as the Hebrew word Mah. But it does not seem
likely, that they joined an Egyptian word to an Hebrew; as hu is acknowledged
to be. Therefore it may be better expounded, it is a Gift, or a Portion. For
Manah signifies to appoint or order ones Diet, (I Dan. 10.) and as kav comes
from kavah, by casting away the last Letter; so may Man in like manner, from
Manah. And the meaning is, This is the Gift of God, or, This is it which God
has appointed us: not knowing (as it here follows) determinately what to call
it. Suidas seems to have thought of this, when he defines it to be (...), etc.
See Drusius in his Quaest. Hebraicae, L. I. c. 62.

For they wist not what it was.] Had not a distinct conception what kind of
Food it was, not having yet tasted it; nor knowing certainly (as Abarbinel
fancies) whether this was the Bread that Moses bad them expect: who there tells
them, in the next words, that it was that Bread.

This is the Bread which the LORD has given you to eat.] You rightly called it
a Divine Gift (as Abarbinel goes on) for this indeed is the Bread which the
LORD bestows upon you for your Sustenance, according to his Promise which he
made you by me, v. 4.

Ver. 16. This is the thing which the LORD has commanded.] Here now Moses
shows how the use of this Food was to be regulated.

Gather of it every Man according to his eating.] As much as will suffice for
his, and his Families Sustenance for one day.

An Omer for every Man.] That they might be sure to have enough, he allows
every Person among them, to have an Omer: which was something less, than half a
Peck of our Measure. Here Abarbinel has a pertinent observation; That this,
being a Divine Food, was not to be used, as common things are, which Men gather
into heaps; lay up in Barns, traffic withal, or lay up for their Children: but
it was to be spent as a Gift of God both to Poor and Rich. Some can get more of
worldly Goods, and some less; by which means some give, and others receive: But
here all received from the Bounty of Heaven; and God ordered it so, that they
who were Poor should not want; and they who were Rich should have nothing
beyond their wants, to lay up or to sell, as they did other things. For every
one was to have only as much as he could eat: and no Man could eat above an
Omer. Which does not signify that they gathered it by measure; but as much as
they thought would amount to that quantity: with an intention, that if they had
more than they needed, others should have it, who had gathered less than they
needed.

Take ye every Man for them which are in his Tents.] For the old and the young,
who could not go out to gather for themselves.

Ver. 17. And the Children of Israel did so, etc.] Gathered what they thought
would be sufficient for themselves and their Families: according as they were
larger, or less in number. And when they came home they dealt to every one the
proportion which God ordered.

And gathered some more, some less.] They were not all alike able (it is like)
to gather, nor alike diligent; and so did not gather an equal quantity. But the
true reason, I have given already, viz. that some Families did not require so
much as others.

Ver. 18. And when they did mete it with an Omer.] When it was brought unto
their Tents, ( v. 16.) then the Father of the Family, or some of the Rulers of
the Congregation, ( v. 22.) measured what they had gathered with an Omer; and
gave to every one his proportion, according as God directed.

He that gathered much, had nothing over.] Had no more than his Omer.

And he that gathered little, had no lack.] He that had not gathered enough to
make an Omer for every man, had it made up to him out of other Men's gatherings,
who had more than enough. Abarbinel will have it, that they were so directed by
a miraculous Providence, as to gather just so much for their several Families,
that every Person's share would come to an Omer, and neither more nor less. And
so Greg. Nyssen calls this the Second Miracle which was in the Manna, having
observed one before, v. 14. But others think, that, if any part of it remained,
after every one in the Family had an Omer, it was Food for their Cattle; which
in the Wilderness wanted Grass sufficient for them. And this seems the more
probable, because otherwise we must make a new Miracle, that every Man, Woman,
and Child, should be able to eat an Omer: which all grant was sufficient for
the Sustenance of any Man whatsoever; but was too much, sure, for a Child.

They gathered every Man according to his eating.] As they were directed v. 16.

Ver. 19. And Moses said, Let no Man leave of it till the morning.] It was
therefore to be all spent, one way or other, the same day it fell. Which was
the Law of all the Holy Feasts, particularly of the Passover, XII. 10. and of
the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings, XXI Lev. 30. Besides, God would have them
depend upon his Providence, and trust him for fresh Supplies every day; as
Aben-Ezra well notes. And R. Levi ben Gersom; He that kept it till the morning,
betrayed his want of Faith, and feared God would send no more: for if he
believed, to what purpose should he be at the pains to keep it?

Here was a new Wonder, that as it fell every day for Forty years together,
both in Winter and in Summer; and likewise fell in such quantity, that every
one had an Omer, and none wanted this Measure; so it would not keep till the
next Morning; which it might have done in its own Nature, and did once in a
Week; and in the Ark was preserved to many Generations.

Ver. 20. Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses, but some of them left
of it till the morning.] Either through unbelief, or mere negligence, or a
wanton inclination to make an Experiment, some among them disobeyed his Command.

And it bred Worms and stank.] This was a Wonder also, that such an heavenly
Food, so pure and simple, should not only breed Worms, but also stink. Which
was a Punishment for their Disobedience, though a merciful one, in that God did
not inflict it upon themselves, but upon their Food.

The Jews commonly take these words to be transposed; things being wont first
to putrify, and then to breed Worms: and in that order Moses relates this
matter, when it was laid up for the Sabbath, v. 24. That it neither stank,
neither was any Worm therein. But Abarbinel thinks that Moses here speaks of it
according to the order, wherein they found it: which was, that first Worms
appeared in it to their Eyes, and then they smelt the stink. But in speaking of
what fell out on the seventh day, he follows the natural order, and says, it
did not stink, neither was any Worm in it.

And Moses was wroth with them.] Chid them severely, for their Disobedience to
him, who had bestowed such a singular benefit upon them.

Ver. 21. And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his
eating.] This is not needlessly repeated; but a further Explication of their
Care and Diligence, to furnish themselves early in the Morning, with as much as
was necessary, before the Sun grew hot and melted it; or (as some of the Jews
add) raised the Wind, which blew dust upon it.

When the Sun waxed hot, it melted.] That it might not be trod upon, nor
putrified. Which seems to be spoken of that which remained in the open Field,
ungathered: though Abarbinel will have it, that what they had brought into
their Tents melted also when the Sun grew hot; which obliged them not only to
gather it early, but to bake and prepare it presently, while it was yet hard,
and not dissolved. But I see no ground for this; nor is it likely that they
were constrained to prepare it all together; but might any time that day, at
Supper as well as Dinner, order it according to their liking. Others of the
Jews fancy that, being melted, it made little Brooks and Rivolets in the
Fields, etc. but the plain sense is, that the Sun which melted it, exhaled it
also into the Air, from whence it came, and returned again the next Morning.

Ver. 22. On the sixth day they gathered twice as much Bread, etc.] According
to the Command of God, v. 5. It appears by this place, where it is called Bread
(as it is v. 4, 12.) that it was of a hard Substance when it fell, though it
dissolved by the heat of the Sun; being like the Corn of which Bread is made.

And the Rulers of the Congregation came and told Moses.] He had bidden them
gather a double quantity on the sixth day; but had not told them the reason of
it, v. 5.) and therefore they come now to enquire what they should do with it.
By this, one would think they were the Rulers, who saw a distribution made to
every one, in a just proportion: or, that they appointed Overseers to take care
of it.

Ver. 23. And he said unto them, this is that which the LORD has said.] This
is the Command, which I have received from God about this matter.

To morrow is the rest.] Or shall be the rest.

Of the holy Sabbath unto the LORD.] To be kept holy, so as to do no work
therein. And therefore you must not so much as go into the field to gather your
Food; which is the reason why you are ordered to make two days Provision, in
one. The words in the Hebrew, (which we translate the rest of the holy Sabbath
unto the LORD) may be rendered, as they lie in order, the Sabbath, the holy
Sabbath unto the LORD. Which Abarbinel explains, as if the word Sabbath being
repeated, signified, that it was to be a Cessation from all manner of Work,
because it was the Sabbath of the LORD himself, wherein he ceased from his
Works.

At this time, and not before, the rest of the seventh day seems to have been
appointed. They performed Religious Offices upon one day in seven; but did not
cease from all Labor until now. These very words seem to show, there had been
some observation of a Sabbath heretofore, and was not wholly a new thing: for
if it had, they could not have understood Moses, nor known what he meant. See
what I have noted upon the Second of Genesis: where I thought it reasonable to
assert, That God intended to preserve a Memory of the Creation in six days, by
appointing the seventh day to be kept holy. And therefore the more pious any
people were, the greater respect they had to this day. But when the World grew
very wicked before the Flood, as they little thought of God, so it is likely
they neglected all distinction between this day and others. And the dispersion
of People after the Flood, very much blotted it out of their minds, as it did
many other good things. But in the Family of Abraham, we may well suppose, it
was continued; though not with such strict abstinence from all Labor, as, for
special reasons, was afterward enjoined. Which is the cause why we read nothing
of their resting in their Travels upon that day, before their coming out of
Egypt. Where they were under such cruel Servitude, that all observation of the
seventh day, it is likely, was laid aside: they being pressed, day and night,
by their Taskmasters to hard Labor without intermission. And therefore when
God brought them out of that Slavery, he renewed his Command for the
observation of the Sabbath, with this addition (in memory of their Deliverance
from the Egyptian Bondage) that they should rest from all manner of Labor upon
that day. Both these Reasons are given by Moses, why God commanded it to be
observed, in memory of the Creation in six days, XX Exodus 11. and in memory of
their deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage, V Deuteronomy. 15.

Bake that which you will bake to day, etc.] The words to day, are not in the
Hebrew; but are necessary to make the sense plain, because they were enjoined
on this day to prepare, or make ready all things against the next, v. 5.

And that which remains over, lay up for you to be kept till the morning.]
From which words some have inferred, that there was no prohibition of baking
and seething on the Sabbath, but the contrary rather is here supposed; (See Dr.
Heylin in his History of the Sabbath, Part. I. p. 100.) But I do not see, how
this consists with the further explication of this matter in XXXV Exodus 3.
where they are forbidden to kindle a Fire upon this day. Unless any one will
say, that for the present they might do it; but shortly after were prohibited:
which is not at all likely. For the plain meaning is, that if they would make
any baked Meats, or boiled, with the Manna, they must do it upon the sixth day:
though what they did not then bake, nor boil, they might safely keep till the
next day, and it should not breed Worms, nor stink. But what they so kept, was
to be eaten without baking or boiling, as it well might; being a food prepared
in Heaven for their eating, without any need of further Art. And therefore
called Bread, even when they gathered it, v. 22.

Ver. 24. And they laid it up until the morning, etc.] Without any Preparation
of it by baking or boiling; and it kept the whole seventh day without any
putrefaction.

Ver. 25. And Moses said, Eat that to day.] Simple, as it is, without baking or
boiling.

For to day is a Sabbath unto the LORD.] The frequent repetition of this in
this Chapter, v. 23. and again v. 29, 30. has led the Jews into this mistake,
that the Sabbath was not ordained by God till they came out of Egypt: directly
contrary to what we read in the Second of Genesis, that it was instituted from
the beginning. And therefore Moses here only gives an account, why this Precept
was renewed at their coming out of Egypt: when there was a new Religious
observation added to it, which was not necessary before, viz. resting wholly
from all manner of work. There is an excellent Discourse on this Subject, in a
late Learned Author, J. Wagensiel (in his Confutation of R. Lipman's Carmen
Memoriale, p. 559, etc.) who well observes, that, this Precept having a
peculiar respect to the Jews, we are not bound to observe the rest of the
Sabbath with such strictness, as they did; but only as the Patriarchs did,
before the giving of the Law, p. 564. As for the translation of the day from
the seventh to the first day of the Week, it is impossible for the Jews to
prove, that the day they observe is the seventh from the Creation. And besides
that, the whole World cannot be tied to the circumstance of time precisely: for
in some parts of it, the Sabbath will fall eighteen hours later than in
Palestine; as he evidently shows, p. 572, etc.

To day you shall not find it in the field.] This Moses said to them, as
Abarbinel thinks, in the Evening of the Sabbath: which was, in effect, a
Prohibition to them, not to go out to gather it on that day.

Ver. 26. Six days ye shall gather it, etc.] The same Author thinks this is
repeated to signify, that as long as they continued in the Wilderness, they
should gather it six days in a Week, as they did now: but never find any on the
seventh.

There shall be none.] As you rest, says he, from doing any thing about the
Manna, so God will cease from sending it unto you. Upon which he makes this
pious reflection, That in this World we must work for our Souls, if we would be
happy in the next World, which is an entire Sabbath or Rest. For he that
labors in the Evening of the Sabbath, shall eat on the Sabbath. To the same
purpose Origin, long before him, Hom. VII. in Exodus

Ver. 27. There went out some of the people on the seventh day to gather, etc.]
The same wicked disposition remained in them, which made them on other days
keep it till next Morning, v. 19, 20.

Ver. 28. And the LORD said unto Moses, how long refuse ye to keep my
Commandments, etc.] These chiding words, are full of indignation; and yet
signify the long-suffering Patience of God, with an untoward Generation.
Abarbinel expounds this passage as if, upon this occasion, he upbraided them
with all their other Transgressions; saying, You kicked against me at the Red
Sea, and believed not my words: at Marah also you murmured; and uttered very
discontented words at Elim. Nay, after I had given you Manna, you violated my
Precept, in reserving it till the next Morning. And now you break my Sabbath:
what hope is there that you will observe any of my Laws?

Refuse to keep my Commandments and my Laws.] He speaks thus, say some of the
Jews, because that in which they now offended, is a thing upon which the whole
Law, all his Commandments depend. So the same Abarbinel. Because the Sabbath
instructed them in the Creation of the World, upon which all the Law depends,
therefore he says, My Commandments and my Laws.

Ver. 29. See.] Consider.

For that the LORD has given you the Sabbath, therefore he gives you, on the
sixth day, the bread of two days.] You have no reason to seek it on the
Sabbath, being provided beforehand with as much as is sufficient for that day.

Let no man go out of his place.] The Jews say that a Man went out of his
place, if he went above Two thousand paces, from his dwelling. That is, if he
went beyond the Suburbs of his City, XXXV Numb. 5.

Ver. 30. So the people rested on the seventh day.] The Reprehension which God
gave them by Moses, ( v. 28.) and the solemn renewal of the Precept, ( v. 29.)
wrought so much upon them, that for the present they rested upon this day. And,
they not having been used to this rest, God did not immediately punish their
Disobedience in going abroad to gather Manna: though afterward he ordered a Man
to be stoned for gathering Sticks on this day; for he had often repeated this
Law to them, before that time.

Ver. 31. And the House of Israel called the name thereof Manna.] This is
repeated again, to show that the name which they gave it at first, ( v. 15.)
continued to it afterward: being so apt and proper to signify God's Providence
over them, that they could find no better.

And it was like Coriander Seed.] Of a round sigure, like that Seed, v. 14.

White.] Being like Bedolach, as Moses says XI Numb. 7. which signifies Pearl,
as Bochartus shows in his Hierozoic. P. II. p. 678. where he observes the
Talmudick Doctors (in the Title Joma) expressly say it was like Margalith (or
Margarith) i.e. Pearl.

The taste of it was like Wafers made with honey.] All things of a pleasant
relish, are compared, in Scripture, to Honey. Whence those words of David, XIX
Psalm 11. CXIX. 103. Onkelos says, Manna tasted like Escaritae: which was a
delicious Food at Rhodes (as Bochart observes out of Julius Pollux) between
Bread and Cake (like our Biscuit, I suppose) which was so grateful, that they
who did eat it were never satiated, but still desired more.

In the XI Numb. 7, 8. Manna is said to taste like fresh Oil. Which does not
contradict this: for, as Abarbinel and others observe, the meaning is, that
when it first fell before it was prepared, it tasted like Honey-wafers; but
when it was baked, then it tasted like fresh Oil. And so the words, XI Numb. 8.
plainly import; they took it, and beat it in a Mortar, and baked it, etc. and
the taste of it ( i. e. thus prepared) was like the taste of fresh Oil. Nay,
the Jewish Doctors commonly say it had all manner of pleasant savours,
according to Men's different Palates; and thence they fancy it is called, v. 29.
the Bread Mischne, (which we translate of two days) because it was changed
according to the diversity of those that did eat it; Children, young men and
old. Which conceit the Author of the Book of Wisdom follows, XVI. 20, 21.

Ver. 32. And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commands. I have
this further Command to deliver from God, concerning the Manna.

Take an Omer of it.] Just so much, as was assigned to every one for his daily
Bread, v. 16.

To be kept for your Generations.] For your Posterity, in future Ages.

That they may see the Bread wherewith I have fed you, etc.] For seeing with
ones eyes (says Isaac Aramah) mightily confirms a thing, and leaves one in no
doubt of it. And he took care they should see both the Manna it self, and the
measure, which he bountifully allowed to every one of them.

Ver. 33. And Moses said unto Aaron.] What God commanded Moses, he now commands
Aaron to do.

Take a Pot.] He says nothing of the matter of this Pot or Vrn; which some say
was an Earthen Pot, others say of Lead, Brass, or Iron: and Abarbinel thinks it
was of Glass, that one might see what was within. But the Apostle has settled
this Controversy, by calling it a Golden Pot, IX Hebr. 4. and so do the LXX in
this place. And indeed all the Vessels of the Sanctuary being of Gold, it was
but reason that this, which contained such a precious Monument of God's Mercy,
should be of the same Metal.

Lay it up before the LORD.] i.e. Before the Ark of the Testimony, as it is
explained in the next Verse: Which shows that this Command was given after the
building of the Tabernacle; and is here mentioned, because it belongs to the
same matter which Moses relates in this Chapter. Others suppose it was spoken
by way of Prolepsis; which seems not to me so probable.

Ver. 34. So Aaron laid it up.] When the Tabernacle was built.

Before the Testimony.] This is the same with before the LORD, in the foregoing
Verse. For the Divine Glory dwelt between the Cherubims, which were over the
Ark; which is commonly called the Ark of the Testimony, XXX. 6. XL. 3, 5. But
here and XXV. 36. is simply called the Testimony; by an Ellipsis, or leaving
out the first word, which is very usual in other Instances: For thus it is
called the Ark of God's strength, 2 Chronicles. VI. 41. but elsewhere, the first
word being omitted, it is called only his strength, LXXVIII Psalm 61. CV. 4.
And therefore the Ark is called the Testimony; partly because there God gave
them a special Token of his Dwelling among them; and partly because the two
Tables of Stone were in the Ark, which are called the Testimony, XL. 20. Where
it is said, Moses put the Testimony into the Ark: and then immediately, v. 21.
he calls it, the Ark of the Testimony.

Ver. 35. And the Children of Israel did eat Manna forty years.] Within a
Month; which wanted to make complete forty years. For it begun to fall just
XXX. days after they came out of Egypt (on the XVth of April) and ceased to
fall on the XVth or XVIth of March, the day after the Passover, which they kept
in the Fortieth year, V Josh. 11, 12. Now in all Writers, some days under or
over, are not wont to be considered, when there is a round Number.

But there are those who fancy these words were put into this Book, after Moses
his death: for which I can see no ground. For it is certain, he lived the
greatest part of the Fortieth year after they came out of Egypt, and brought
them to the Borders of Canaan, within sight of it, I Dent. 3. XXXIV. 1, 2, etc.
And therefore may well be supposed to have added these words himself to this
History, as he did the foregoing, v. 32. that all belonging to this matter
might be put together in one place.

Until they came to a Land inhabited.] i. e. To Canaan, or the Borders of it,
as it here follows. For these words, says Aben-Ezra, have respect to the
Wilderness in which they now were, which was not inhabited.

Until they came unto the Borders of the Land of Canaan.] That is, says he, to
Gilgal, which was the Borders, when they had passed over Jordan; when they did
eat of the Corn of the Land, and had no further need of Manna.

Ver. 36. An Omer is the tenth part of an Ephah.] From hence also some would
fain conclude, that Moses did not write this: because, say they, it is not
usual when Measures are in common use, to tell in other words how much they
contained; which then only is proper, when they are grown out of use. But such
Observations seem to proceed from an humor of Cavilling. For why may not an
Author set down distinctly, things very well known in his time, that Posterity
also may have as distinct a knowledge of them? Besides, the very same Men
complain on other occasions, that the Writers of History have omitted to give
us an account of several things, which in their time were most notorious;
whereby Posterity suffers much, for want of such Information. Nor do I see any
proof, that these Measures were not as common in after times, as they were when
Moses lived.

Several Learned Men have taken a great deal of pains, to reduce these Measures
to those of the Greeks and Romans, particularly Salmasius in his Epistles (N.
LXVII.) and Herman. Conringius in a Treatise on this Subject de Mensuris
Hebraicis. But none have done it so clearly and exactly, as a very Learned
Person of our own Country (Bishop Cumberland, in his Scripture Weights and
Measures, Cap. 3.) who computes an Ephah to have contained seven Wine-Gallons,
a Pottle and half a Pint: So that an Omer was near three Quarts: which, if any
one imagine too great a proportion to be allowed to one Person every day, he
propounds these things to be considered: That Manna, being of a globular
figure, (like Corianderseed) must needs have many empty spaces between every
three or four Grains; and those vacuities may reasonably be estimated a third
part of the Vessels capacity. And it being a light Aerial Food, must needs be
inwardly porous, and of a spungy contexture of parts. So that it wasted
something in dressing by Fire, as it melted by the Sun when it grew hot. And
consequently three Quarts might, it is probable, be reduced to three Pints of
an Oily liquid Substance. Which was not too much in an hungry Desert, where
they might well be thought to have refreshed themselves thrice a day. See also
what I have noted before, v. 18.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. AND all the Congregation of the Children of Israel journied from the
Wilderness of Sin.] Where they had been for some time (XVI. 1.) and now pitched
in Rephidim. That is, they rested here, after some other station, in their
passage hither: for Moses mentions two between the Wilderness of Sin and
Rephidim, XXXIII Numb. 12, 13, 14. And that is the reason of the words here
following.

After their Journeys.] They proceeded in their Journey to Dophekah, and then
to Alush; and so to Rephidim: where they stayed some time.

According to the Commandment of the LORD.] By the direction of the glorious
Cloud, which went before them, and fixed their station for them where it rested.

And pitched in Rephidim.] This place was in the Wilderness of Sin also: but
called by a particular Name; as the place from whence they came, was called by
the Name of the whole. So St. Hierom. All the Wilderness, as far as to Mount
Sinai, was called Sin, which was the Name also of one of their Stations (as
Moab was both the Name of a Province and of a City) and there were four others
in this Wilderness; those by the Red Sea, Dophekah, Alush, and Rephidim.

And there was no Water for the People to drink.] This gave occasion to another
remarkable Mercy of God to them; whereas nothing considerable fell out at the
two former Stations: which is the reason they are here omitted. So Abarbinel
judiciously observes. Moses would not set down in this History any of their
Stations, but those in which some new and notable thing happened: the rest, in
which no such thing was done, he describes in the Book of Numbers, XXXIII.

Ver. 2. Wherefore the People did chide with Moses.] Expostulate with him in
such an undutiful manner, that it may be translated scolded with him.

Saying, Give us Water, etc.] The word for give is in the Plural Number: and
therefore this was spoken both to Moses and to Aaron; though Moses be only
mentioned as the Person they contended with. For there was no need (as
Aben-Fzra and others observe) to mention Aaron, because Moses was not wont to
speak to the People, but by him. Abarbinel carries it further, and will have
this Speech directed to Moses and to God, because they came hither by God's
Commandment: which made them insolently say, if by God's Providence we were
brought to this place, let him take care we be not killed with thirst.

And Moses said, why chide you with me?] Who brought you hither by God's Order.

Wherefore do you tempt the LORD?] And why do you distrust his Power, and
Goodness, and Faithfulness to his Promise?

Ver. 3. And the People thirsted there for Water.] This looks like a needless
Repetition; it being said before, there was no Water in this place, ( v. 1.)
which made the People chide with Moses, for bringing them into such an
inconvenient Station. But if we consider it well, we shall find it a necessary
Explication of the grouth and progress of their Discontent. For, as Abarbinel
has well observed, as soon as they came to Rephidim, they saw it was no
commodious place, because it would not supply them with Water: which made them
begin to quarrel with Moses before they needed; merely out of fear, that when
the Water they had brought from Elim was spent, there would be none for them.
And now, when after a day or two it was all gone, they were really very
thirsty, and so fell into the murmuring here spoken of, from a sense of their
Misery, as before only out of a fear of it.

And the people murmured against Moses.] They proceeded from a lower, to a
higher degree of Discontent: which made them at first only expostulate and
argue with him; but now they murmur against him; and at length fell into such a
rage, that they seemed to be ready to stone him, v. 4. It is necessary to stop
such Motions, in their beginning.

Wherefore is this, that thou have brought us out of Egypt?] This shows the
necessity of preserving the Remembrance of God, and of his Benefits in our
Minds. Which if this People had done, they could not have fallen a third time
into such a discontented sit, as made them speak reproachfully of their
Deliverer, and slight the wonderful Deliverance it self, which God had lately
given them out of cruel Servitude. The Character which Plato (in his Axiochus)
gives of the Vulgar sort of People, belongs to the Israelites above all other;
viz. that this sort is (...), Tom. III. p. 369.

To kill us, and our Children, and our Cattle with thirst.] Children, as
Abarbinel observes, can less endure thirst than grown Men; and Cattle need
abundance of Water, which is the reason they mention them.

Ver. 4. And Moses cried unto the LORD.] Which he did not upon their first
complaint, v. 2. because their necessity was not so urgent: but now, seeing
their Distress, and the height of their Discontent, he prays God to take care
of them: hoping he would supply them with drink; as lately he had done with
Bread.

What shall I do unto this People?] He said enough, no doubt, to quiet them; by
remembering them what God had already done for them, and what reason they had
still to trust in his good Providence: But this would not satisfy them, unless
their thirst was presently quenched; which he could not do for them, and
therefore knew not how to appease them.

They be almost ready to stone me.] He represents to God, not only their
importunity, but his own great danger. For having promised to bring them to
Canaan, he was afraid (as Abarbinel fancies) that if they continued to think
they should die with thirst, they would take him for a false Prophet, who had
deceived them with Lies; and consequently inflict the Punishment upon him,
which the Law enacts against a false Prophet, which was stoning. But, the Law
being not yet given, this could not be in their thoughts.

Ver. 5. And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the People.] Be not afraid
of their stoning, (says the same Aharbinel) but though they murmur, and are in
a great passion, and impatient, go on before them confidently through the midst
of their Camps; and thou shall see they shall not touch the hem of thy Garment.

And take with thee of the Elders of Israel.] Not valiant young Men to thy
Lifeguard; but grave Persons to be Witnesses, that thou do really bring
Water out of a Rock; and the People may not say there was a Spring there
before. Concerning the Elders of Israel, See III. 16.

And thy Rod, wherewith thou smotest the River, take in thy hand.] Not a Sword,
or a Lance (says the same Writer) but that Wand wherewith thou smotest the
River of Egypt, and turnedst it into Blood; or did divide the Red Sea, as
some understand it: an Arm of the Sea, being by good Authors called a River.

And go.] As I bid thee.

When he is commanded to march before the People, it is supposed they were to
follow: but they could not all move so soon as he and the Elders, who went
before to the very place. Which the whole Body of the People could not do; the
passage to the Rock, it is likely, being narrow; so that they could not all see
him smite the Rock, and behold the Water gush out; but expected till it flowed
from thence unto their Camp.

Ver. 6. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the Rock.] That is, the
Glory of the LORD, which in the Cloud appeared in this place (as Abarbinel
truly expounds it) to strengthen his Faith; and to persuade the Elders, that
this Water was Divinely given them, even as the Manna was. For before that fell
from above, the Glory of the LORD appeared, (XVI. 10.) as it did now, before
this Water flowed to them from the Rock. So that they were fed continually by
the Divine Providence; from whence they received both their Meat and their
Drink.

There is an Emphatical He (as they call it) before the word for Rock; and
therefore it should be translated, upon that Rock. Where Abarbinel fancies the
LORD was wont to appear to Moses: but this being a rocky place, it may only
denote that particular part of the Rock to which God directed him to go; and
was the same (that Author probably thinks) with that mentioned XXXIII. 22.

In Horeb.] This was not a distinct Mountain from Sinai; but only a different
part of the same Mountain: which was long, and had many risings; of which this
was one.

And thou shall smite the Rock.] With the Rod, wherewith he smote the River,
VII. 17, 20.

And there shall come water out of it, that the People may drink.] According to
their Petition, v. 2.

And Moses did so.] i. e. Smote the Rock, and brought Water out of it, in such
plenty, that the Psalmist says, it ran down like Rivers, (LXXVIII. 15, 16.) to
supply the want of the whole Camp: unto which it flowed as far as Rephidim; so
that they needed not to go to Horeb for it. Which is the difference (as
Abarbinel thinks) between this Miracle, and that mentioned XX Numb. where the
Waters were but like a Well, to which they must go; and did not come to them,
much less follow them in their Journeys, as this did. For this was a continued
Fountain of Water, which flowed out of the Rock, (CXIV Psalm. 8.) and made this
part of Arabia habitable in future Ages, which no Man dwelt in before. Moses
does not add, and the People drank, and their Cattle, because (as Aben-Ezra
observes) he studied brevity; and this was easily understood.

In the sight of the Elders of Israel.] That they might be able to testify to
the People the truth of this Miracle; whereby they were relieved in their
Distress, and preserved in their Travels through the Wilderness. The fame of
which, no doubt, reached other Nations; the memory of it being remaining in
several of their Fables. For there is a manifest allusion to it in Euripides
his Bacchae, v. 703. where he makes one of them smiting the Rock at Cithaeron,
and Waters gushing out of it.

(...)
(...)
This I find observed by Bochartus in his Canaan, L. I. c. 16. and Huetius has
observed many more such Instances out of Nonnus, Pausanias, and diverse other
Authors, in his Alnetanae Quaestiones, L. II. c. 12. n. 18. And he thinks it
very probable, that the Fable of Janus was forged from hence; for which he
alleges many Arguments (in his Demonstratio Evang.) and this among the rest,
that Albricus describes his Image, holding a Rod in his left hand, with which
he smites a Stone, and out of it Water flows.

Ver. 7. And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, etc.] That
place which before was called Rephidim, was after this called Massah and
Meribah: with respect to their chiding there with Moses, which is the import of
Meribah; and their tempting God, which is the signification of Massah. Some
think this one place was not called by two Names, but that upon the second
striking of the Rock, almost forty years after this, it was called Meribah; and
till then only Massah. But in that Story it is not said the place was called
Meribah; but the water, XX Numb. 13.

Is the LORD among us, or not?] Does he take care of us, or not regard what
becomes of us? For God is said to be among, or (as the Phrase in the Hebrew) in
the midst of those whom he protects, and provides for, by a special Providence;
as we find VII Deuteronomy. 21. XXIII. 14. III Josh. 20. and many other places.

Ver. 8. Then came Amalek and fought, etc.] The ground of their Enmity, is
commonly thought to be the ancient grudge of the Seed of Esau, to those of
Israel. For Amalek was descended from the eldest Son of Esau, by a Concubine,
XXXVI Genesis 12. But it may very fairly also be supposed, that there was some
League between the Amalekites, and the People of Canaan, of mutual Defense:
which might move the Amalekites to oppose the passage of the Israelites, and
endeavor to hinder their Settlement in Canaan; unto which perhaps they
imagined their own pretenses to be as good; though the Israelites, challenged
the promise of it belonged to them alone.

Then came.] These words import, that the Amalekites were the Aggressors,
without any provocation. If they fancied the Israelites would Invade them, they
might have prepared to defend themselves; but it was no ground for Assaulting
them. Unto which perhaps they were moved (as for other Reasons, so) out of
greediness of Prey; hearing the Israelites were loaded with the Spoils of the
Egyptians.

And fought with Israel.] They came out of their own Country to sight with them
in the Wilderness. Or we may suppose that they attacked their Rear, as they
were upon their march from Rephidim to Horeb; and cut off some Straglers, or
such as lagg'd behind, through faintness and weariness, as Moses relates XXV
Deuteronomy. 18. The Author of Dibre Hajamim makes the Army of Amalek to have
consisted of an incredible Number; all exercising Divinations and Enchantments.

Ver. 9. And Moses said unto Joshua.] Who it seems was an eminent Person, at
their first coming out of Egypt.

Choose us out men.] Whom he knew to be as valiant as himself.

And go out, and sight with Amalek.] Meet them, and give them Battle.

To morrow, I will stand on the top of the Hill.] To pray to God, who had
lately appeared to him there, v. 6.

With the Rod of God in my hand.] This he said, to encourage Joshua to hope God
would not fail to deliver them; though a Miracle was required to bring it to
pass.

Ver. 10. So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, etc.] Nothing but a strong
confidence in God, could have animated Men unexperienced in the Arts of War, to
encounter such mighty Enemies.

And Moses, Aaron and Hur, went up to the top of the Hill.] The Jews do but
conjecture who this Hur was: But we may be certain he was a Person of great
Eminence for Wisdom and Piety; otherwise he would not have been joined with the
Leaders of God's People, Moses and Aaron. We read indeed 1 Chronicles. II. 19. of
one Hur, who was the Son of Caleb, and Grandfather of the famous Bezaleel; who
was of the Tribe of Judah. But there is nothing to persuade us that he was the
Person here spoken of; nor that he was the Son of Moses his Sister, as some of
the Jews tell us. See Pirke Elieser, c. 45. where strange Stories are told of
him. But it is more probable that he was Miriam's Husband, as Josephus affirms,
L. III. Antiq. c. 2. though we cannot tell whence he himself was descended.

Ver. 11. When Moses held up his hand.] Lifting up the hands was a posture of
Prayer, and imploring the Divine Aid, as we find in many places; particularly
III Lament. 40. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands, to God in the
Heavens. And it implies great Earnestness in Prayer; as does also listing up
the eyes, and listing up the soul, XXV Psalm. 1. CXXI. 1, etc. But though this
be true, and no doubt Moses and his Companions prayed to God most earnestly,
yet this was not the occasion of his lifting up his hand; which was to advance
the Rod of God, which he held in his hand, and lifted up as their Standard or
Banner, to which they should look, and hope for help from the mighty Power of
God, who had done such Wonders by that Rod.

That Israel prevailed.] The sight of the Rod of God, inspired them with such
Courage, that their Enemies could not stand before them.

And when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.] Their Spirits flagged, when
they did not see the Rod; and they began to give ground: imagining perhaps that
Moses despaired of Victory; who (the Fight being long) was not able always to
keep his hand erect.

Ver. 12. But Moses his hands were heavy.] Through weariness, by long holding
them out upon the stretch.

And they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat thereon.] It seems he
had been standing before; which gave them the greater advantage of seeing the
Rod, but made him the more weary.

And Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands.] Were his Supporters; which it is
probable was in this manner. Sometimes Moses held up the Rod in his right hand,
and sometimes in his left (for v. 11. he speaks only of one hand which was
lifted up, or let down) and Aaron stood on one side of him, (suppose his right
hand) and Hur stood on the other. Who, by that means, helped by turns to uphold
his hands in that posture: for if they had done it both together, they might
have been as weary as he.

And his hands were steady, etc.] Were kept up stretched out, without falling
down, till Sunset.

Ver. 13. And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his People, etc.] Routed their
whole Army. One would think the name of their Kings was Amalek (as the Kings of
Egypt were called Pharaoh) because he mentions Amalek and his People.
Otherwise, if Amalek signifies collectively the Amalekites, then his People
must signify those who were confederate with them.

Ver. 14. And the LORD said unto Moses.] He appeared, it is likely, to him again
in this place, (as he had done v. 6.) and gave him this order.

Write this for a Memorial in a Book.] Make a Record of it; as he did both
here, and XXV Deuteronomy. 17. etc. And no Body was so sit to do it as he, who saw all
that fell out in this Fight; and was the undoubted Author of what we read in
this Book; which was written by himself.

And rehearse it in the ears of Joshua.] That he, who was to be the Leader of
God's People after Moses, might never enter into any League with the
Amalekites. For his Prosperity depended upon the Observation of the Commands
given by God to Moses: which therefore were carefully written in a Book, and
delivered to him, that they might not be forgotten. See I Josh. 7, 8. where
there is a plain proof, that the Laws delivered by Moses, were written before
Joshua entered into the Land of Canaan.

For I will utterly put out the Name of Amalek from under Heaven.] Have a
perpetual quarrel with them, till they be quite extinct; as they were partly by
Saul, 1 Samuel XV. and partly by David, 1 Samuel XXX. 17. and partly by the
Children of Simeon, 1 Chronicles. IV. 43. Balaam also prophesied of their utter
Destruction, XXIV Numb. 20. Which may seem a hard Sentence; but it was (as
Maimonides observes) to terrify others from the like Malice. For as particular
Persons are sometimes punished very severely, for an Example to others; so are
Families and Nations. And Amalek, being the very first that drew a Sword
against Israel, unprovoked, God passed this heavy Doom upon them: whereas Ammon
and Moab (says he) who out of mere Covetousness committed what they did
against Israel, and wrought Mischief to them by Craft and Subtilty, had only
this Punishment inflicted upon them, that Israel should not contract Affinity
with them, etc. XXIII Deuteronomy. 3, 4. XXV. ult. More Nevochim P. III. c. 41.

Ver. 15. And Moses built an Altar.] Commonly Altars were built for Sacrifice:
which Moses perhaps here offered, in thankfulness to God for his Benefits,
particulary this great Victory. But they were also built sometimes, only as
Memorials (XXII Josh. 26, 27.) as this perhaps was: He thinking it sit to
preserve the memory of this Victory, not only by writing, but by this Monument
also, and the Inscription he lest upon it.

And he called the Name of it JEHOVAH-Nissi.] Or, The LORD my Banner; i. e. By
him we overcame them. Some will have it translated, not he called it, but he
called him; i. e. the LORD; by the Name of the LORD who lifted up a Banner; i.
e. fought for them, LX Psalm. 6. From which Inscription Bochartus thinks came
the Name of Dionysus among the Greeks: who from this word Nissi called him
Nissaeus or Nysaeus; and adding the Name of their own Jupiter to it, called him
(...), L. I. Canaan, c. 18. For Bacchus is said to have been a great Warrior,
and to have made mighty Conquests. And as Huetius observes, is called Arsaphes,
which is the very Name given to Moses by the Egyptians, who called him
Osarsiph. Nay, in Orpheus his Hymns, Bacchus is called Mises; which seems to be
the same with Moses. Out of whose Story, all that the Greeks and others say of
Bacchus, seems to have been framed; as he shows with great probability,
Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. c. 4. n. 3.

Ver. 16. For he said, Because the LORD has sworn, etc.] In the Hebrew the
words are, The hand upon the Throne of the LORD. Which is commonly interpreted,
The LORD has sworn by his Throne. So R. Solomon, and Aben-Ezra; and the
Chaldee, whose Paraphrase is, This is spoken with an Oath, from the face of the
terrible One, whose Majesty is upon the Throne of Glory, that the LORD will
have War with Amalek, etc. That is, says Maimonides, he has sworn by himself,
( More Nevoch. P. I. c. 9.) for in this, and all other places, the word Kiss
(i.e. Throne) signifies his Magnificence and Power: which is not any thing
without his Essence; but is himself.

But here being no mention of lifting up the hand, which is the Phrase for
Swearing, (VI Exodus 8. XXXII Deuteronomy. 40.) it may more simply be expounded,
because the hand of the LORD sitting upon the Throne of his Majesty is
stretched out, and holds up his Banner, to fight with Amalek throughout all
Generations. For Moses seems to allude in this Phrase, to what he had said v.
11, 12. When Moses lifted up his hand, then Israel prevailed, etc. and bids
them take notice, it was his hand, i. e. the Omnipotent Power of God, which
gave them this Victory; and would perpetually prosecute Amalek till they were
destroyed.

Joseph Scaliger would have Kes-jah to be but one word, and to signify the
same with Kese; which according to him, is the last day of the Month on which
this Battle was fought. And so this to be a part of the Inscription upon the
Altar; as if he had said, This Pillar was set up on the last day of the second
Month, to declare (...), irreconcilable War with Amalek for ever, L. III. de
Emend. Temp. p. 223. But this is too bold a conceit; and is confuted by Hacspan
and Glassius. There is a more ingenious conjecture (which I have some where met
with) if there were any thing in Scripture to warrant it; that laying the hand
on the Throne, was a form of Swearing: as touching the Altar was among some
Nations; which was as much as our laying the hand on the Bible: a principal
External Character of a Solemn Oath. Whence Juvenal says Atheists do
intrepidos altaria tangere, touch the Altars boldly, without trembling; i. e.
make no Conscience of an Oath.

But the Marginal Translation, after all, is very literal, and makes the sense
exceeding plain and clear: Because the hand (of Amalek,) is against the Throne
of the LORD, ( i. e. against God himself) therefore the LORD will have War with
Amalek from Generation to Generation. This is easy and natural, and agrees
with the whole History: that because they came out, and opposed the Design of
God, who in a visible, and most glorious manner, conducted the Israelites to
the Land, he had promised to give them, he would never be reconciled to them.
For it was an high Affront to his Majesty, who had lately done such astonishing
Wonders, as were famed, no doubt, in all the Neighboring Nations, XV. 14, 15.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. NOW Jethro, the Priest of Midian, etc.] Many ancient and later
Versions have it, Prince of Midian. See Chap. II. v. 16.

Heard of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel, etc.] The Fame of
which went into all the Countries thereabout, XV. 14, etc.

Ver. 2. Took Zipporah Moses wise, after he had sent her back.] It is
uncertain, when Moses sent her back to her Father: but it is likely it was done
at her own desire, when she saw how difficult his Work was likely to prove in
Egypt. See IV. 26. The Hebrew word seems to some to intimate a Divorce, as the
Mauritanian Jews take it. But all Christian Versions, and that of the Jerman,
Jews, and the Persian, understand it as we do. See Seldom de Vxor. Hebr. p. 629.

Ver. 3. And her two Sons, etc.] Whose Names carry in them a thankful
Remembrance of God's great Mercy to him.

Gershom.] See II. 22.

Ver. 4. Eliezer.] Who is thought to have been born a little before he left
Midian, and went out of Midian into Egypt by God's special derection. See IV.
25.

Ver. 5. And Jethro, etc. came unto Moses.] Took a Journey out of Midian to
give him a visit.

Into the Wilderness.] Into the same Wilderness where Moses and the Israelites
now were.

Where he encamped at the Mount of God.] viz. At Horeb, which was not far from
Midian, it appears from III. 11. where we read that when Moses fed Jethro's
Flock, he led them hither to this Mount. Which is called God's Mount, because
there he appeared sirst to Moses, III. 2, etc. and had lately appeared there
again upon the Rock, XVII. 6. unto which place he bid Moses lead the
Congregration, (XVII. 5.) who were now, I suppose, encamped thereabout, after
the sight with Amalek in Rephidim; which was not far from it.

Ver. 6. And he said unto Moses.] By a Letter which he sent him from the place
where he was encamped (of which these were the Contents) to give him notice of
his coming. Which was but necessary; that he might without any impediment pass
the Guards, which we may well think Moses had set very carefully, after the
Fight with Amalek; who had suddenly surprised the hindmost of the People, XXV
Deuteronomy. 18.

I thy Father-in-law Jethro, am come unto thee, etc.] Am upon the way, and come
near to thee.

Here it may be sit to take notice, that there is a great dispute among
Interpreters, about the time when Jethro came from Midian, with Moses his Wife
and Children: whether immediately after the Fight with Amalek, as it is here
set down; or some time after, when the Israelites were better settled. One
would think, that he could not but take the first opportunity to visit Moses,
and to bring him and his nearest Relations together; after he heard the News of
their coming out of Egypt, and their passing the Red Sea, etc. The news of
which could not but reach him, who was a Borderer upon this Wilderness. Yet the
Hebrews are generally of an opinion, that this fell out, after the giving of
the Law at Mount Sinai; and many Christians have been of the same mind:
particularly such great Men as our most Learned Primate Usher ad A. M. 2514.
and Mr. Seldom L. II. de Synedris, c. 2. where he says, no other account of it
is to be received, [nec aliam sane sententiam omnino amplexandam sentio] but
they are not agreed in what year he came. Some say it was in this first year,
after their coming out of Egypt: And the Hebrews have an opinion, that it was
in the Month of Tisri, and on the eleventh day of that Month, when Jethro gave
the following Counsel to Moses, v. 19, etc. i. e. above three Months after God
gave the Law from Mount Sinai; or after Moses received the second Tables. But
others are as consident that it was in the second year; and place this Story
according to order of time after X Numb. 28. or as Dr. Lightfoot thinks, it
should come in between the 10th and 11th Verses of that Tenth of Numbers. And
Primate Usher in like manner judges his coming to have been about that time.
But though all this be uncertain, yet Mr. Seldom thinks he has a strong ground
to affirm, it was after the giving of the Law, from what we read I Deuteronomy. 6, 9,
10, 11, etc. And I confess it seems plain from thence, that the Regulation
which Moses made by the advice of Jethro, was after God spoke to them in Horeb,
which is the same with Mount Sinai. For though he did appear at Horeb before
this (as I observed XVII. 6.) yet he said nothing then of that which Moses
mentions (I Deuteronomy.) which was after the giving of the Law. At which time he
says there ( v. 9.) it was that he told them, he was not able to bear them
himself alone, etc. But notwithstanding this, I cannot think that the coming of
Jethro to Moses was deferred so long (for no reason can be given why Moses here
places the Story of it, if it did not follow their Fight with Amalek) though he
did not give him the advice for the better Administration of Justice, till
after God had delivered the Law from Mount Sinai; as I shall observe in its
proper place.

Ver. 7. And Moses went out to meet his Father-in-law.] Before he came into the
Camp; or at least before he came to his Tent: that he might show the great
respect he bare to him, and his joy to see him.

And did obeisance and kissed him.] Welcomed him according to the Custom of
those Countries.

And they asked each other of their welfare.] Had such discourse together, as
Friends commonly have at their meeting, till they came into the Tent.

And they came into the Tent.] Into the Tent of Moses; or rather the Tent
prepared to entertain Jethro. But the Talmudists are so possessed with the
opinion, that this happened some Months, if not a whole Year, after the Law was
given, that they take this Tent to have been Beth-midrash, the House of
Exposition; or the School where Moses made the People understand the Law. For
so Jonathan in his Paraphrase upon this, and the foregoing Verse; I thy
Father-in-law am come unto thee, that I may be made a Proselyte. And if thou will not receive me for my own sake; yet admit me for the sake of thy Wife and
Children which I bring with me. And Moses went out from under the Cloud of
Glory to meet him, etc. and when they had mutually saluted, they came into the
Tabernacle of the House of Learning. But nothing can be more absurd than this
fancy; that he carried him immediately to hear a Lecture upon the Law.

Ver. 8. And Moses told his Father-in-law, all that the LORD had done to
Pharaoh, etc.] It seems to me, from these words, and those that follow, that
all we read hitherto about this matter, fell out in order of time as it is here
set down. For if it had happened after the giving of the Law, it is most
probable, he would have said something of the most remarkable passage of all
other, Gods glorious appearance to them on Mount Sinai, and the Law he had
delivered to them, etc. Whereas, at this meeting, he only relates what God had
done to Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians, and how the LORD delivered them; and all
the Travel that came upon them by the way: which comprehends their passing
through the Red Sea, and their want of Water and Bread, and their Fight with
Amalek. That is, all that we read in the foregoing Chapters. And accordingly
Jethro rejoiced for their deliverance from the Egyptians, v. 9. and gives
thanks to God for it, v. 10. taking notice of nothing else.

Ver. 9. And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the LORD had done to
Israel, etc.] The Gentiles, as Conradus Pellicanus here observes, more devoutly
acknowledged God's Mercies when they understood them, than the Jews themselves
did. With which our Savior, when he came, upbraids that People; sinding such
Faith among the Gentiles, as he could not meet withal in Israel.

Ver. 10. Blessed be the LORD who has delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, etc.] This may relate to the Preservation of Moses and Aaron, who
had brought the sorest Plagues upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians; and yet God
suffered them not to hurt them.

Who has delivered the People from under the hand of the Egyptians.] And then
this relates to the Deliverance of the whole Body of the People from the
Egyptian Bondage; and to the overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea:
whereby the Israelites were sinally delivered from under the hand, i. e. the
tyranny and oppression of the Egyptians.

Ver. 11. Now I know that the LORD.] He knew the true God before; but was now
fully convinced that he alone was the most High.

Is greater then all Gods.] Than all that the world accounted Gods. For he did
not acknowledge any more Divine Powers than One: but he speaks according to the
common opinion, Men had in those days, of other Gods besides the most High.
This is a common acknowledgment of good Men in after times, LXXXVI Psalm. 8, 10.
CXXXV. 5.

For in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them.] If we refer
this to what immediately goes before ( viz. all Gods) the meaning is, that the
LORD appeared superior to all the Egyptian Gods, who insolently attempted, by
the Magicians, to equal him in his wonderful Works; but were baffled and
exposed to contempt, and at last thrown down in their Images, VIII. 19. IX. 11.
XII. 12. But it is commonly thought to relate to the Egyptians and Pharaoh,
mentioned in the foregoing Verse: and then the meaning is, That the LORD
confounded them, that proudly contemned his Authority, saying, Who is the LORD,
etc. V. 2. whom he forced to beg his pardon, IX. 27. and at last drowned him
and his Host in the Red Sea, when they said, in an haughty, boasting manner, I
will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be
satisfied upon them, etc. XV. 9. And to this purpose the Chaldee expounds it;
In that very thing wherein they thought to judge (i. e. to punish or destroy)
the Israelites, they were judged themselves; i. e. drowned in the Sea, as they
intended to drown all their Male Children.

Ver. 12. And Jethro Moses Father-in-law.] He is constantly thus described ( v.
1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8. and every where else but v. 9, 10.) to distinguish him from
any other Jethro; to whom these things might possibly be thought to belong.

Took a Burnt-offering.] Which was to be wholly consumed upon the Altar, and
nothing of it eaten by any body, I Lev. 9. This now may be thought to have been
done, after the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai; which Moses here mentions
because he would put together all that belongs to Jethro's story (though not
all done at the very same time) just, as I said he did what belonged to the
History of the Manna, XVI. 33, 35. See there.

And Sacrifices.] i. e. Peace Offerings; of which the People, as well as the
Priests, were to be partakers, VII Lev. 34. XXVI Deuteronomy. 7. And regularly there
never was any Burnt-offerings made, which were wholly consumed upon the Altar,
but Peace Offerings attended upon them; if they were not Offerings for the
whole Congregation, but for particular Persons; that so, they who brought them,
might Feast also with God upon the Sacrifices. For feasting upon Sacrisices was
an Appendix unto all Sacrifices whatsoever, one way or other; if not by
themselves, yet by the Priests, who eat of the Sin Offerings, as the Proxies of
the People. Of this there are numerous Instances, not only among the Jews,
after the Law was given, but among other People, who had this Custom antecedent
to it: As appears from XXV Numb. 2. where the Midianites invite the Israelites
to the Sacrifices of their Gods, and the People did eat, etc. Which they did
not learn from Moses, but derived from higher Antiquity; it is probable even
from Abraham himself.

For God.] To be offered unto God. Who offered them we are not told; but it
should seem by the word took, that Jethro himself (who was a Priest) was
permitted to perform this Office; in token that they owned him to be a faithful
Servant and Minister of the most High God, as Melchizedeck was. And accordingly
it follows that Aaron was invited, with the Elders of Israel, to come and Feast
with him upon these Sacrifices.

And Aaron came.] This seems to signify, that Aaron was but a Guest, and had
not been the Priest who offered the Sacrifice. For though we suppose the Law to
have been now given, yet it is likely Aaron and his Sons were not yet
consecrated, nor the Service of God, as yet ordered, according to the Law that
had been delivered; no more then Judicatures were erected, as after this they
were by the advice of Jethro.

But of these things we can have no absolute certainty, but only make probable
conjectures.

And all the Elders of Israel.] See III. 16.

To eat Bread.] To partake of the Sacrifices that had been offered; for this
comprehends the whole Meal, XLIII Genesis 25.

Before God.] Before the Tabernacle where God dwelt. Or, if that was not yet
set up, in the place where God appeared in an extraordinary manner; which it is
likely was in the Tent of Moses, XXXIII. 7.

Ver. 13. And it came to pass on the morrow.] The next day, after this Solemn
Sacrifice: which the Jews (I observed above) say was on the XIth day of Tisri.
So Sepher Mechilta, and others from thence, as Mr. Seldom has noted, L. II. de
Synedr. c. 2. p. 75.

That Moses sat.] That was the posture of Judges.

To judge the People.] To hear Causes and determine them.

And the People stood by Moses, etc.] That was the posture both of the
Plaintiff, and the Defendant. And there were now so may Causes brought before
him, that they took up the whole day: so that he had not time to eat and
refresh himself.

Ver. 14. And when Moses Father-in-law saw all that he did to the People.] He
either was present, and observed himself; or was informed by others what
insupportable pains he took.

He said, what is this thing that thou do to the People?] What a burden is
this, to judge the Causes of a whole Nation?

Why sit thou thy self alone?] Take more upon thee than any one Person is
able to bear.

And all the People stand by thee, from morning to the even?] Till both thou
and they are tired.

Ver. 15. Because the People come unto me to enquire of God.] I cannot refuse
to do Justice; and there is none but my self, to declare what the Law of God is
in such Cases, as are brought before me.

To enquire of God.] Does not signify here, to desire him, to consult the
Divine Majesty for them; but to decide their Controversies, according to the
mind of God declared in the Laws he had given him. So the LXX. to seek for
judgment from God: and the Vulgar, to seek God's Sentence. For what was
determined according to God's Law, was the Judgment of God, and so it is called
by Moses. See Mr. Seldom, L. I. de Synedr. c. 15. p. 610.

Ver. 16. When they have matter.] Of Controversy.

They come to me.] That I may decide it.

And I judge between one and another.] Determine where the right lies.

And I do make them know the Statutes of God, and his Laws.] This explains what
is meant by enquiring of God; i. e. what was the Law of God, in the Case
brought before him. From which we may probable gather, that the Law was already
given from Mount Sinai, and all the other Laws and Statutes, which follow
(Chap. XXI, XXII, XXIII.) before this happened. Unless we will say, as some do,
that Moses was directed, upon the spot (as we speak) by a secret inspiration,
how to determine every Cause.

Ver. 17. The thing that thou do is not good.] Neither profitable for thy
self, nor for the People; as it follows in the next Verse.

Ver. 18. Thou will surely wear away.] Decay apace, and without remedy; as the
Phrase in the Hebrew signifies.

Both thou and the People that is with thee.] Such tedious Attendance will
impair them also, as well as thy self.

For this thing is too heavy for thee, etc.] Too much for one Man to undergo.

Ver. 19. Hearken now unto my voice.] Be advised by me.

I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee.] Though I am no
Israelite, I will take upon me to be thy Counselor; and I doubt not, God will
show my Advice to be good, by the good Success which will attend it.

Be thou for the People to Godward, that thou may bring the Causes unto God.]
Appoint others to hear Causes, and do thou give thy self (...), to the Worship
and Service of God alone, as Josepus expounds it, L. III. Antiq. c. 3. or, as
Ruffinus glosses, reserve thy self only to the Ministry of God; to attend, that
is, upon him, and know his mind. Which, if it be the sense, must be understood
with this Exception, only in greater Causes (as it follows afterward) which he
was to hear himself. And that may well be the meaning of these words, When the
People bring any matter to thee, which is too hard for other Judges to
determine, (v. 22.) do thou, if need be, carry it to God, that he may resolve
thee. Not that he was always to consult the Oracle; for he knew in most Causes
the sense of God's Law: but in some it might be necessary to have a particular
direction from Heaven. As in XV Numb. 34, 35. XXVII. 5, etc.

Ver. 20. And thou shall teach them Ordinances and Laws.] How these two differ,
is not certain: but Ordinances are commonly taken to concern matter of
Religion; and Laws civil matters of Justice and Charity. In both which he was,
if the Case required it, to bring it to God; and then to report to the People,
what his Resolution was about it.

And shall show them the way wherein they must walk.] How to behave themselves
toward God.

And the work that they must do.] How to behave themselves one toward another.

Ver. 20. Moreover.] Now in order to this

Thou shall provide out of all the People.] Look out such Men as are qualified
according to the following Directions. Which he did in this manner, as he
himself relates, I Deuteronomy. 13. where he says to the People, take ye wise and
understanding men, etc. In the Hebrew it is give ye, i. e. present to me such
Men as you think sit for this office: And then it follows, I will make them
Rulers over you. They chose them; and then he approved them, and gave them
authority. Or, perhaps they presented a good many whom they thought qualified;
and out of them he appointed such, as he judged most meet. And thus he says
again v. 15. So I took the chief of the Tribes, etc. See Mr. Seldom, L. I. de
Synedr. c. 15. p. 632.

Able men.] Men able to endure labor; or Men who are not needy, but rich and
wealthy; or Men of Parts, or Men of Courage: for it may refer to any of these,
especially the last; such as did not fear potent Persons, but God alone, as it
here follows.

Such as fear God.] Men truly Religious; who would fear to offend God by doing
Injustice; but not fear to offend Men by doing Right.

Men of Truth.] Honest, upright Men: whose love to Truth would make them sift
it out; by hearing both sides patiently, with impartial attention and unbiassed
affection.

Hating Covetousness.] Not greedy of Money; but abhorring Bribes, and all base
ways of Gain. Which, as Demosthenes says, (...) makes Judges besides
themselves, and no better than mad.

For all these good qualities, they were to be eminent and noted among the
People, as Moses his words import, I Deuteronomy. 13. where he bids them present to
him, not only wise men and understanding, but also known among their Tribes;
generally accounted Men of Understanding and Integrity.

And place such over them, to be Rulers of Thousands, etc.] The Hebrew words
are such, that it cannot be determined by them, whether this relate to the
number of Rulers, or of People that were to be ruled by them; as Mr. Seldom
observes and discourses upon it very largely, in the sore-mentioned place, L.
I. de Synedr. c. 15. p. 615. Where he shows that December vir, for instance, was
not only one set over ten; but one of the ten Judges of which a Court
consisted: and so the rest may be interpreted. But the most ancient and most
received Sense is, that he does not speak of the Number of Judges (for what a
strange Court would that be in which there was a Thousand Judges?) but of the
People, of whose Causes they were to take cognizance: And it is commonly
thought also there was but one Ruler over a Thousand ( Families or Men, it is
uncertain which) and so of the rest: though the words may import more than one,
in each of these Judicatures; whether greater or smaller. The Talmudists make a
prodigious number of Judges of each sort; but it is most rational to think that
Jethro's meaning was, That he should constitute greater and lesser Judicatures,
according to the Division of their several Tribes, into Thousands, Hundreds,
Fifties and Tens; and a competent number of Persons appointed to be Judges in
these greater or lesser Courts.

For that their Tribes were divided into Thousands (for instance) is apparent
from several places, XXII Josh. 14. VI Judge. 15. (where Gideon says, my Family
(in the Hebrew it is my Thousand) is the meanest in Israel, 1 Chronicles. XII. 20. V
Mic. 2. These Thousands Corn. Bertramus takes to be Families, whom the Hebrew
call Houses: which were divided into so many Heads, as they call them, as the
Tribes were into Families. And of these he thinks Jethro advises him to make
such Rulers, as are here mentioned, of several degrees. But others,
particularly Herman. Conringius de Republ. Hebr. Sect. 19.) think we are to
understand only Rulers over a thousand Men, not Families: as it is certain in
Military Affairs, the Captains of thousands were only of a thousand Soldiers,
XXXI Numb. 14.

Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens.] There were four
orders of these Rulers: but whether there was a subordination of the lower
order to the higher, as in Armies there is of the Captain to the Colonel, (as
we now speak) and the Inferiors to him, I cannot determine.

Ver. 22. And let them judge the People at all Seasons.] Sit every day, some or
other of them, in their several Districts. See v. 26.

Every great matter they shall bring to thee.] Not if they were able to
determine it themselves. For they had power to hear all Causes; but when they
found any too difficult, they were to refer it to be heard by Moses himself. So
R. Leviben Gersom explains it; Every great Cause, in which they know not what
to judge, they shall bring to thee, and thou shall show what is right: or how
it is to be decided.

There are those indeed who think there were several sorts of Causes, that
might not be brought before these Inferior Courts; but were to be reserved for
Moses's hearing and judging. These they make to be Four: First, All Sacred
Matters, or Things, belonging unto God; which they gather from v. 19. Secondly,
All Matters of Equity; where the rigor of the Law was sit to be mitigated.
Thirdly, All Capital Causes. And lastly, Such as the Chiliarchs, i. e. Rulers
of Thousands, and the other Judges referred to him. But this is said without
ground; for it is plain, all sorts of Causes might be determined by the
inferior Courts, if they were able to make an end of them, whether Civil or
Sacred. Only those which were too difficult for them; that is, when they did
not find a Law to direct them, or it was obscure, or they could not agree about
the Punishment, then they were to be brought before Moses. So he himself
charges; not that the People should bring such Causes to him as they thought
difficult; but that the Judges themselves should bring them; i. e. order an
Appeal to him, I Deuteronomy. 17. bring it unto me (speaking to the Judges) and I will
hear it. Which shows the Cause had been at the Bar of other Courts before, and
that it was not unlawful for them to meddle with it, if they had been able to
determine it. And accordingly we read here below, v. 26. that the Judges did
so. In short, these words do not intimate that there were some Causes the other
Judges might not try, if they were able; but only that such things as they
found themselves not skilful enough to determine, they should bring to him. See
Mr. Seldom in the forenamed Book, p. 633, etc.

But every small matter they shall judge.] Hitherto Moses but heard all Causes
promiscuously, great and small: but Jethro well advises him to delegate the
labor of judging all Causes liquidi juris, (as the Lawyers speak) where the
Right was clear: and to reserve no part of the Judicature to himself, but where
the Law it self was either defective or obscure.

So shall it be casier for thy self, etc.] Thou will ease thy self of a great
burden, by appointing others to take their share of it.

Ver. 23. If thou will do this thing, and God command thee so.] If thou will
follow this advice, by God's approbation; who was to be consulted whether he
allowed it.

Then thou shall be able to endure.] Thy days will be prolonged; which
otherwise will be shortened with this intolerable labor.

And the People go to their place in peace.] Go home very much satisfied, with
such quick dispatch, and happy composure of their Differences.

Ver. 24. So Moses hearkened to the voice of his Father-in-law, etc.] Followed
his Counsel, by God's approbation, with whom no doubt he advised, v. 23. Here
the Samaritan Copy inserts those words of Moses, I Deuteronomy. 9, etc. I am not able
to bear you my self alone, the LORD your God has multiplied you, etc. Which he
spoke indeed when he made this Constitution, but did not set it down in this
Book; where he intended only a short account of these Transactions.

Ver. 25. And Moses chose able men, etc.] Out of those who were presented to
him by the People. See v. 20.

Ver. 26. And they judged the People at all Seasons.] Whenever they resorted
to them: For some Court or other sat every day, that was not appointed by God
for other Business, i. e. for Religion.

The hard Causes they brought to Moses, etc.] It is plain by this that the
Judges, not the People, brought the hard Causes unto Moses. For the People
could not know, whether they might not have a Remedy nearer hand (than by going
to him on all occasions) till they had tried.

Ver. 27. And Moses let his Father-in-law depart.] After he had staid some time
with him, and could not prevail with him to stay longer, (which he earnestly
desired) and go with them to see the Accomplishment of God's Promises to them;
as those words X Numb. 29, etc. are thought to signify. But perhaps that Hobab
there mentioned, was not Jethro himself, but his Son; whom Moses also persuaded
not to return to his own Country: for he makes no reply, much less denies to
stay with Moses, when he pressed him the second time; though he refused at
first, v. 32. But this I shall consider in that place.

And he went his way into his own Land.] To make his Children, or the People of
the Land Proselytes, says the Chaldee Paraphrase. Which it is probable he
endeavored ( i. e. to bring them to true Religion) and affected in some
measure: so that Piety was propagated in some Families among them to future
Generations. For the Rechabites came out of this Country, 1 Chronicles. II. 55.
whose virtue Jeremiah Praises in the latter end of the Jewish Church, Chap.
XXXV.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 1. IN the third Month.] Or in the third new Moon. For the Hebrew word
Chodesh, signifies a new Moon, as well, as a Month: nay, that is the prime
signification, from whence the other is derived. And so we are to understand it
here; that on the New Moon, i. e. the first day of the third Month, (called
Sivan) after their coming out of Egypt, they came into the Wilderness of Sinai.
Which was just XLV. days, after they departed out of Egypt. For if we add to
the XV. days of the first Month XXIX. which made the second, these put
together, with this New Moon, make XLV. Unto which if we add that day when
Moses went up to God, ( v. 3.) and reported, when he came down, the Message God
sent by him to the Elders of Israel; and the next day after, when he returned
their Answer unto God, ( v. 7, 8.) with the three days more, which God gave
them to prepare themselves for his coming down among them, ( v. 10, 11.) there
were just Fifty days from their Passover to the giving of the Law upon Mount
Sinai: which laid the Foundation of the great Feast of Pentecost.

The same day.] i. e. On the forementioned New Moon of the third Month.

Came they into the Wilderness of Sinai.] So called from that famous Mountain
Sinai, which gave the name to the Wilderness which lay before it. This Mountain
was also called Horeb, IV Deuteronomy. 10. they being only different tops of one and
the same Mountain; but this higher than Horeb; so that one may see the Red Sea
from them, as they that have traveled into those Parts affirm. Who say it is
now called by the Arabians Tur; and by Christians the Mountain of St. Catherine.

Ver. 2. For they were departed from Rephidim, etc.] They began to move from
Rephidim toward that part of the Mountain called Horeb, upon their murmuring
for want of Water, XVII. 5, 6. But seem to have returned thither to fight with
Amalek, v. 8. And then they were led by God to this other side of the Mountain,
which is called the Wilderness of Sinai.

There Israel encamped before the Mount.] For the glorious Cloud having led
them hither, rested upon the Mount; as appears from the words following.

Ver. 3. And Moses went up unto God.] Whose glorious Majesty appeared upon the
Mount.

And the LORD called unto him out of the Mountain.] Or rather, for the LORD
called to him out of the Mountain, where the Divine Glory rested: unto which he
would not have presumed to go, if the LORD had not called to him, to come up
thither. Which was upon the second day of the third Month.

Thus shall thou say to the House of Jacob, and tell the Children of Israel.]
There was some reason, sure, for calling them by these two names, the House of
Jacob, and the Children of Israel: which perhaps was to put them in mind, that
they who had lately been as low as Jacob when he went to Padan-Aram, were now
grown as great as God made him, when he came from thence, and was called Israel.

Ver. 4. You have seen.] There needs no proof; for you your selves are
witnesses.

What I did unto the Egyptians.] Smote them with diverse sore Plagues; and at
last drowned them and their Chariots in the Red Sea.

And how I bare you on Eagles wings.] Kept you so safe, and placed you so far
out of the reach of your Enemies, as if you had been borne up on high by an
Eagle. Which are observed to carry their young ones, not in their feet, as
other Birds were wont to do, but on their Wings: and to soar so high, and with
so swift a motion, that none can pursue them, much less touch them. Bochartus
has observed all the Properties ascribed to the Eagle; with respect to which,
Interpreters have thought God's care of his People to be here compared with
that Bird, Hierozoic. P. II. L. II. c. 5. But after all, he judiciously
concludes that Moses best explains his own meaning, in his famous Song XXXII
Deuteronomy. 11. where the Eagles fluttering about her Nest, and making a noise, to
stir up her young ones to leave their dirty Nest, and try their Wings;
represents the many means God had used to rouse up the drooping Spirits of the
Israelites, when they lay miserably oppressed under a cruel Servitude, and
encourage them to aspire after Liberty, and to obey those whom he sent to
deliver them.

And brought you unto my self.] And by that means brought you hither, to live
under my Government. For this was the very Foundation of his peculiar Empire
over them, that he had ransomed and redeemed them out of Slvery, by a mighty
Hand and stretched out Arm (as he speaks XIII. 3. IV Deuteronomy. 34.) so as he had
not delivered any other Nation: and thereby by made them his own, after an
extraordinary manner, peculiar to them alone. This Joshua also recals to their
mind, when he was near his Death, and renewed this Covenant of God with them,
XXIV. 5, 6, etc.

Ver. 5. Now therefore.] Having wonderfully delivered them, and supported them
in a miraculous manner, by Bread from Heaven, and Water out of a Rock, he now
proceeds to instruct them in their Duty, as Greg. Nyssen observes, L. de Vita
Mosis, p. 172.

If you will obey my voice indeed, etc.] If you will sincerely obey me, as your
King and Governor, and keep the Covenant I intend to make with you, then you
shall be mine above all the People of the Earth: whose LORD I am, as well as
yours: but you shall be my peculiar Inheritance; in which I will establish my
Kingdom and Priesthood; with such Laws as shall not only distinguish you from
all other Nations, but make you to excel them. This is the sense of this verse,
and the following.

A peculiar treasure unto me.] i. e. Very dear to me; and consequently I will
take a singular care of you, as Kings do of those things which they lay up in
their Treasury. So the Hebrew word Segullah signifies. Which Origin proves they
really were, (notwithstanding all the Calumnies of Celsus) their Laws being so
profitable; and they being so early taught to know God, to believe the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Rewards and Punishments in the Life to come;
and bred up to a contempt of Divination, (with which Mankind had been abused)
as proceeding rather from wicked Demons, than from any Excellent Nature; and
to seek for the knowledge of future things in Souls, which by an extraordinary
degree of Purity, were rendered capable to receive the Spirit of God, L. V.
contra Celsum, p. 260. And this the Author of Sepher Cosri happily expresses,
when he says, Our peculiar Blessings consist in the conjunction of Minds with
God, by Prophecy, and that which is annexed to it: that is (as Muscatus
explains it) the Gift of the Spirit of God. And therefore he does not say in
the Law, if you will obey my voice, I will bring you after Death into Gardens
of Pleasure, but ye shall be to me a People, and I will be to you a God, Pars
I. Sect. 109.

For all the Earth is mine.] Which made it the greater honor, that he bare
such a special love to them.

Ver. 6. And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests.] An honorable, or a
Divine Kingdom: not like worldly Kingdoms, which are defended by Arms, but
supported by Piety. Or a Princely People, that should rule over their Enemies.
For the same word signifies both Priests and Princes: and in the first times of
the World none was thought fit to be a Priest, but he who was a King, or the
Chief of the Family; as we see in Melchizedek and Jethro.

That God was peculiarly the King of this People, I observed above, III. 10.
and here he expressly owns this peculiar Dominion over them, by saying, Ye shall
be to me a Kingdom. And one reason, perhaps, why he says they shall be a
Kingdom of Priests, is, because they were governed (while they continued a
Theocracy) by the High Priest, as the prime Minister under God, who in all
weighty Causes consulted God what was to be done; and accordingly they ordered
their Affairs, XXVIII. 30. XXVIII Numb. 21. Which is the reason why God
commands Moses to make such Garments for Aaron as should be for glory and
beauty, (or, for honor and glory) as we read v. 2. of that Chapter; i.e. to
make him appear great, like a Prince; for they were really Royal Garments. And
for his Sons also, he was to make Bonnets of the like kind for honor and
glory, v. 40. they being in the form of the Tiarae which Kings wore; and are
joined in Scripture with Crowns, XXIX Job 14. III Isa. 23, etc. Whence Philo
says, in his Book de Sacerd. Honoribus, that the Law manifestly dressed up the
High Priest, (...). But the liberty and freedom also wherein they were
instated, I doubt not is signified by these words, Kings and Priests, (as
Onkelos translates them, and as it is expressed in the New Testament, I Revel.
6. V. 10. and the Syriac also, Kingdom and Priesthood) for Kings and Priests
were, of all other Men, freed from Oppression. And thus I sind our Mr.
Thorndike, a most Learned man, glosses upon these words, ( Review of the Rights
of the Church, p. 132.) God calls them Kings, because redeemed from the
Servitude of Strangers, to be a People Lords of themselves; and Priests,
because redeemed to spend their time in Sacrificing, and feasting upon their
Sacrifices (under which Figure he afterward represents the happy estate of his
Church, LXI Isa. 6.) though they Sacrificed not in Person, but by their Priests
appointed in their stead, by imposition of the Elders hands, VIII Numb. 10.

An holy Nation.] A People separated to God from all other Nations, and from
their Idolatry, to serve God in an acceptable manner.

These are the words which thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel.] The
sum of what he was to say to them; comprehending both their Duty and their high
Privilege.

Ver. 7. And Moses came.] Down from the Mount, where he had been with God, v. 3.

And called for the Elders of the People.] The principal Persons in the several
Tribes, (See III. 16.) which he seems to have done in the Evening of the second
day of the Month.

And laid before their faces all these words, etc.] Plainly declared to them,
what God had given him in charge: which they went and propounded to the People
of the several Tribes, whom they represented.

Ver. 8. And all the People answered together, and said.] All with one consent
declared, as here follows.

All that the LORD has spoken we will do.] They consented to have the LORD for
their King; and promised to be obedient to his Will.

And Moses returned the words of the People unto the LORD.] This seems to have
been done the next day, which was the third day of the third Month. Upon which
Report made to God of the Peoples Consent, he proceeds, after a few days
preparation, to declare the Laws by which they should be governed, Chap. XX,
XXI, XXII, XXIII. and then in the XXIVth Chapter these Laws pass into a
Covenant between God and them.

Here Moses plainly acted as a Mediator between God and the People.

Ver. 9. And the LORD said unto Moses, lo, I will come unto thee.] Appear upon
the Mount.

In a thick Cloud.] In a darker Cloud than that, which had hitherto gone before
them, to conduct them; so that they should see nothing but Flashes of Lightning
which came out of it, in a very frightful manner, ( v. 16, 18.) For that there
was sire in it, appears from IV Dent. 11. V. 22, 23. though at first, perhaps,
only a thick Cloud appeared, as a token of his approach.

That the People may hear when I speak with thee.] Though they saw no
Similitude, yet they plainly heard a voice speaking unto Moses, and declaring
their Duty. Maimonides indeed thinks that the words were directed only unto
Moses; and that the Israelites heard merely the sound of the words, but did not
distinctly understand them, More Nevoch. P. II. c. 33. Which is directly
against what Moses says IV Deuteronomy. 12. The LORD spoke unto you out of the midst
of the sire, etc. and V. 4, 5. The LORD talked with you face to face in the
Mount, etc. saying, I am the LORD thy God, etc. which words are plainly
directed to all the People.

And believe thee for ever.] They had been staggered in their Belief, after
they had professed it at the Red Sea, (XV. ult.) but after this, it might be
expected they would never question his Authority any more.

And Moses told the words of the People unto the LORD.] Or rather, for Moses
had told, etc. Upon which account God was pleased to make the foregoing
Declaration. Till they had owned him for the LORD their God, i.e. their King
and Governor, he did not speak unto them at all; but only unto Moses: But now,
that they had consented to be his, he resolves to speak audibly to them; and
henceforth to dwell among them; and in order to it, six his Tabernacle with
them. For which he gives order (Chap. XXV. etc.) immediately after they had
entered into Covenant, to do as they had promised.

Or these words (which seem to be a needless repetition) may relate to that
which follows, and be translated thus: Moses having told the words of the
People unto the LORD, the LORD said unto Moses, Go unto the People and
sanctify them, etc.

Ver. 10. Go unto the People and sanctify them to day and to morrow.] This
shows that Moses was sent down early on the fourth day, to prepare them for the
Appearance of the Divine Majesty among them, by sanctifying them; that is,
separating them from all Uncleanness; or rather from all common and ordinary
Employments; that they might give themselves to Fasting and Prayer, and
Abstinence from otherwise lawful Pleasures. For Pirke Elieser takes Abstinence
from their Wives, mentioned v. 15. as a part of this Sanctification, cap. 41.
And so does Gregory Nyssen in his Book de Vita Mosis, p. 178. And Maimonides
observes, that Separation from Wine and strong Drink, is called Holiness in the
Law of the Nazarites, VI Numb. 5. and therefore may be thought part of the
Sanctification here required, More Nevoch. P. I. c. 33.

And let them wash their Clothes.] The Hebrews understand it, of washing their
whole Bodies. For thus Aaron and his Sons were to be consecrated to their
Office, XXIX. 4. XL. 12. and therefore thus the People were now to be made a
holy People unto the LORD, and made sit for the Presence of the Divine Majesty.
Under whose Wings (as they speak) none were received in future times, i.e. made
Proselytes, but by Baptism, (or washing of their whole Body) which was taken
from this pattern. And accordingly, where we read in the Law of particular
Purifications by washing their Clothes in case of any Uncleanness, as XI Lev.
25, 28, 40. XIV. 8, 47. (where Moses speaks of cleansing a Leprous Person) XXXI
Numb. 24. (where he speaks of cleansing Soldiers) and many other Cases, they
understand it in the very same manner. In some cases indeed it is expressly
prescribed, XV Lev. 5, 6, 7. XVI. 26, etc. and they expound all other, where
Clothes only are mentioned, by the same Rule; as Mr. Seldom shows, I. I. de
Synedr, c. 3. where he observes, that in the Pagan Language, pure Garments
signify the washing of the whole Body. See p. 29.

Ver. 11. And be ready against the third day.] He does not mean the third day
of the Month; but the third day after this command to Sanctify themselves. In
which they were bound to spend two entire days; and then the LORD promised to
come down in all their sight upon Mount Sinai. That is, when they were fit to
receive him, by their professing themselves an holy People; of which that
outward washing was a token.

For the third day the LORD will come down, etc.] Not from the Mount, but from
Heaven upon Mount Sinai. On which the SCHECHINAH descended in a Cloud, which
struck a great awe into them: For it was darker than the Pillar of the Cloud,
by which they had been conducted hither; thorough which some rays, or glimpse
of a glorious Majesty that was in it, broke forth upon them.

Ver. 12. And thou shall set bounds unto the People round about.] To keep them
at a due distance; out of a just reverence to the Divine Majesty.

Take heed unto your selves, that ye go not up, etc.] This Caution also was
given them, to work and preserve in their Minds a most profound Reverence of
the Divine Majesty, and to those Laws which were to be delivered from this
Mount.

Ver. 13. There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or
shot through.] Be stoned, if he were near at hand; or shot through with Darts
or Arrows, if at a distance. So Aben-Ezra. And so Jonathan likewise translates
the latter Clause, They shall throw Darts at him: And so our old Translation,
Stricken through with Darts. But the Talmudists, and the greatest Lawyers among
the Jews, expound both these Clauses of stoning; which was twofold, as we read
in the Misna Tit. Sanhedrin. c. 6. either by throwing Stones at a Malefactor;
or throwing him down from an high place upon Stones. And thus this last place
imports in the Hebrew, and may properly be translated, projiciendo projicietur,
he shall be violently thrown down; or, thrown down headlong. It is the very
same word with that XV. 4. concerning the casting Pharaoh's Chariots into the
Sea. And this was a Punishment, as Mr. Seldom observes, like that among the
Romans, from the Saxum Tarpeium, which the Jews inflicted upon some captive
Edomites, 2 Chronicles. XXV. 12. and Jehu inflicted upon Jezabel, 2 Kings IX. 32. On
which story R. Leviben Gersom observes pertinently, That as she caused Naboth
to be stoned, so she was punished her self in the same kind: for stoning, says
he, was either by throwing Stones at Malefactors, or throwing them down upon
Stones. To justify which he alleges this place in Exodus. And David Kimchi
makes the same Observation. See Mr. Seldom, L. I. de Synedr. c. 5. p. 74, etc.

When the Trumpet sounds long.] When the sound of it is protracted, or drawn
out; and consequently was less terrible, then while it was shorter and broken.
See v. 16.

They shall come up to the Mount.] To the foot of it, v. 17. that they might
more plainly hear the voice of God.

Ver. 14. And Moses came down from the Mount to the People.] As he had been
commanded v. 10.

And sanctified the People.] Commanded them to Sanctisie themselves, (as the
Author of Sepher Cosri explains it, P. I. Sect. 87.) both with Internal
Sanctification and External; among which the principal was, Separation from the
company of Women: as it here follows v. 15.

And they washed their Clothes.] See v. 10. Unto which add, that it is no
wonder they used this Purification before the giving of the Law: which had been
anciently in use, among their Ancestors, upon Solemn Occasions. As appears by
what I observed on XXXV Genesis 2. where Jacob, before the building of an Altar to
God in Bethel, as he had vowed, cleansed his Family after this manner. For so
Aben-Ezra truly expounds these words be clean, wash your Bodies: which was the
old Rite of cleansing. See there.

Ver. 15. And said unto the People, be ready against the third day.] Prepared
to hear the words of God.

Come not at your Wives.] For this time was set apart, for Solemn Fasting and
Prayer; that they might be fit to converse with God, by having their Minds
abstracted from earthly things.

Ver. 16. And it came to pass on the third day.] See v. 11.

There more Thunders and Lightnings.] Which broke out of the thick Cloud, to
awaken them to attend unto his Majesty, who was approaching.

And a thick Cloud.] In which a flaming Fire presently appeared, ( v. 18.)
(...), so that the Mountain could not be seen; as Greg. Nyssen explains it, de
Vita Mosis, p. 179.

And the voice of the Trumpet.] The heavenly Ministers, who were Attendants
upon the Divine Majesty, made a sound like that of a Trumpet, to summon the
People to come and appear before God, and receive his Commands.

Exceeding loud.] Beyond what the blast of any Men could make: for it made the
whole Camp quake, as the following words tell us.

Ver. 17. And Moses brought forth the People out of the Camp.] When their
trembling was abated, by the remission as we may suppose, of the sound of the
Trumpet.

To meet with God.] That they might be espoused to him.

And they stood at the nether part of the Mount.] Below at the foot of it, not
presuming to touch it; which they were severely forbidden, v. 11, 12. See IV
Deuteronomy. 11.

Ver. 18. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke.] Nothing could be seen but
smoke, mixed with a Flame.

Because the LORD descended on it in sire.] The SCHECHINAH came down into the
thick Cloud, ( v. 9, 16.) with a glittering company of Angels, who appeared
like flames of Fire, unto which they are compared by the Psalmist, CIV. 4. Thus
Moses himself seems to expound it, XXXIII Deuteronomy. 2. He came with ten thousands,
or myriads, of holy ones, ( i. e. of Angels) from his right hand went a fiery
Law for them. Which plainly relates to this appearance at Mount Sinai.

And the smoke thereof ascended, as the smoke of a furnace.] Mixed with Fire;
which went up even to the midst of Heaven, as Moses explains it, IV Deuteronomy. 11.

And the whole Mount quaked greatly.] See LXVIII Psalm. 8. CIV. 32.

Ver. 19. And when the voice of the Trumpet sounded long.] It is a different
word here in the Hebrew, from that v. 13. which we translate sounded long:
signifying that it proceeded or went on either a long time, or to a greater
loudness.

And waxed louder and louder.] In the Hebrew the words are exceeding strong:
(...), etc. the Trumpet exceeded it self; the succeeding Blasts transcending
those that went before, as Greg. Nyssen well interprets the whole.

Moses spoke.] The People trembled before at the loud sound of the Trumpet, (
v. 16.) but now it grew so very terrible, that Moses himself said (as the
Apostle expounds this passage, XII Hebr. 21.) I exceedingly fear and quake. For
hither, I think, Junius rightly applies those words.

And God answered him by a voice.] Bidding him not be afraid, but come up unto
him, as it follows in the next Verse. Greg. Nyssen thinks that the voice of the
Trumpet (...), became articulate, with the Organs of Speech, by the Divine
Power.

Ver. 20. And the LORD came down upon Mount Sinai.] It is said before that the
LORD descended upon it, v. 18. therefore the meaning here is, that the
SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, settled there, to speak unto the People.

On the top of the Mount.] On the highest part of it, that there might be the
greatest distance between him and the People, who stood at the foot of it.

And the LORD called up Moses, etc.] He stood lower before, though not so low
as the People: but now is called up higher, even to the very place where God
was. And consequently entered into the midst of the fire and smoke, wherein the
Mountain was wrapped, ( v. 18.) upon God's Appearance there. From which, in all
probability, the Persians (who had heard or read what is here related) framed
the story of their Zoroaster. Who, wandering in Desert places, was carried up to
Heaven, and saw God encompassed with Flames; which he could not behold with his
own eyes, (the splendor of them was so great) but with eyes which the Angels
lent him: and there he received from him a Book of the Law, etc. See Huetius
Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. c. 5. n. 2.

Ver. 21. And the LORD said unto Moses, go down and charge the People, etc.] It
seems that upon Moses's going up, some of the People thought of approaching
nearer; out of Curiosity, to see if they could discover more of the Divine
Majesty. And therefore God sends him down again immediately, to bid them
remember the Charge he had given them, and not dare to come nearer than they
were.

And many of them perish.] As many as were so presumptuous. Many sometimes
signifies all: and here all that should adventure to go beyond their bounds.

Ver. 22. And let the Priests also.] Who these were is much disputed; for Aaron
and his Sons were not yet Consecrated. The Jews (it is commonly known) readily
answer, they were the Firstborn; whose Prerogative it was to Minister to God,
as his Priests, till the Law of Moses ordered things otherwise. But I have
often observed this not to be true; being confuted by several Examples of
others who sacrificed, and were not the Firstborn. And lately there is a
Learned Man, who, in a just Discourse, has overthrown this Opinion, (See
Campeg. Vitringa Observe. Sacrae, L. II. c. 23.) which was called in question,
and briefly censured some time before, by a very Learned Friend of mine, Dr.
Outram de Sacrificiis, L. I. c. 4. Conradus Pellicanus, in the beginning of the
Reformation, seems to have given a better account of the Priests here
mentioned, which were, the prime and most honorable Persons in the several
Tribes; the Elders and such as administered the Government under Moses: among
which there might be some of the Firstborn, nay, it is possible, many of them;
but not by any special right which they had to this Office.

Which came near unto the LORD.] To perform Divine Services. By which one would
think he speaks of those, who had been already employed in this Office: for
having before this built an Altar, (XVII. 15.) some think it probable Sacrifice
was offered upon it. But if it were only a Monument, and no Sacrifices were to
be offered till they came to the Mount of God, who was to appoint them; then
Moses picked out the most excellent Persons (as I said before) to perform this
Service when they came there, XXIV. 5.

Sanctify themselves.] Nothing was said before of their Sanctification; which
is here enjoined by it self, because their high Office required a peculiar
Separation to prepare them for it.

Lest the LORD break forth upon them.] Lest when they come near to Sacrifice,
God should be offended with their Uncleanness, and destroy them. This supposes,
they might go nearer than the People.

Ver. 23. And Moses said unto the LORD, the People cannot come up to Mount
Sinai, etc.] He thought it was needless to go down to restrain the People;
having given them the Charge, which God commanded him v. 11, 12. and set bounds
about the Mount (as it here follows) by drawing a Line, perhaps, beyond which
they should not pass, and thereby separating the Mount from them; which he
calls sanctifying it.

Ver. 24. And the LORD.] Or, but the LORD

Said unto him, away, get thee down.] He knew the Peoples inclinations better
than Moses did; and therefore commanded him to make no delay, for fear they
should grow more bold than he imagined.

And thou shall come up, and Aaron with thee.] After he had delivered this new
Charge to them. Which was the more necessary, because Aaron being also called
up, they might think likewise of sharing in this Privilege.

And Aaron with thee.] Unto whom God did this great honor; because he was to
be called shortly to the dignity of the High Priest: and would be the more
respected by the People, when they saw him admitted far nearer unto God than
they were.

But let not the Priests and the People break through, etc.] But let not any
body else, as they love their lives, presume to press beyond their Line: no not
the Priests, on whom I have bestowed the honor of coming nearer to me than
other Men, v. 22.

Ver. 25. So Moses went down unto the People, and spoke unto them.] Delivered
the Message to them, and to the Priests, as he was directed: And then (as he
was also ordered) returned unto the Mount, and his Brother with him: but not to
the top of the Mount, where he was before, ( v. 20.) as appears from the
nineteenth Verse of the next Chapter: which shows that Moses was there where
the People might speak to him; and therefore, if he went up now to the top of
the Mount, he came down again, when the LORD spoke audibly to them, and stood
in a place where he might be a Mediator between them. So he himself says, V
Dent. 4, 5. that when the LORD talked with them face to face in the Mount, he
stood between the LORD and them. And accordingly it follows v. 23. of that
Chapter, that when they heard the voice out of the midst of the Darkness, they
came near to Moses, and said, etc. which shows he was not far off from them,
though nearer to God than they.

But perhaps Moses and Aaron did not come up into the Mount, till after the Ten
words (or Commandments) were spoken: when Moses, we read XX. 21. drew near unto
the thick darkness where God was; though we read nothing of Aaron there. Which
inclines me to think the foregoing account of this matter, to be the truer.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 1. AND God spoke all these words, saying.] After the Trumpet had
summoned them all to attend, and sounded a long time louder and louder, there
came a Voice from the SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, out of the midst of the
Fire (as we read IV Deuteronomy. 12. V. 4, 22.) that is, of the Angelical Host, which
incircled him, and appeared like Flames of Fire. Which made the Apostle say,
the Law was ordained by Angels (III Gal. 19.) who were then in attendance upon
the Divine Majesty, as his Retinue, when he spoke all these words, that follow
to the end of the seventeenth Verse; which are called the Ten words, or
Commandments, in XXXIV. 28. And he spoke them with so great a Voice, V Deuteronomy.
22. that all the People, who were very numerous, plainly heard them: which was
very wonderful.

This was upon the sixth day of the third Month, called Sivan. See Seldom L.
III. de Jure N. and G. c. 11.

Ver. 2. I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, etc.] In this Preface to the Ten Commandments, he asserts his Right to
give them Laws, not only in general, as he is the LORD of all, but by a
peculiar Title he had to their Obedience; whom he had taken to himself, after a
special manner, to be his People, by bringing them out of the Land of Egypt,
and the Servitude under which they groaned there. This was a Benefit fresh in
their Minds, and most apt to affect their Hearts: and therefore he does not say
(as the Author of Sepher Cosri observes, P. I. Sect. 27.) I am the LORD of
Heaven and Earth; or, I am thy Creator; but, I am the LORD thy God, who have
shown a particular favor and kindness to thee, by bringing thee out of the
Land of Egypt, etc. When he became their King by a special Title, (as I
observed III. 10.) and upon that account gave them these Laws, whereby they
were to be governed: and gave them peculiarly to them (as the forenamed Author
notes) who were tied to the Observance of them, by virtue of their Deliverance
out of Egypt, and God's placing his Glory among them. Whereas, if they had been
tied to them by virtue of their Creation, they would have belonged to all
Nations, as much as unto them. Thus He. Maimonides will have these words, I am
the LORD thy God, to signify the Existence of God; and the next, ( v. 3.) his
Unity: which two are the great Foundations of Religion, More Nevoch. P. II. c.
33. And indeed the word JEHOVAH, or LORD, is generally thought to signify, he
who is of himself. And the next word ELOHIM (which is the most ancient Name of
God in Scripture) Learned men of late derive from the Arabic word Alaha,
(there being no root in Hebrew remaining from whence it can so regularly come)
which signifies to worship, serve, and adore. Hottinger has taken a great deal
of pains, in his Hexaemeron, and elsewhere, to confirm this out of that, and
out of the Ethiopick Language also. The Jews say indeed, that Elohim is the
name of Judgment, as Jehovah is of Mercy; but Abarbinel confutes this, to
establish a Notion of his own, (viz. the Omnipotent Cause of all things) which
others oppose, as much as he does the former. And therefore most, I think, now
rest in the forenamed Notion, that it properly signifies him, who only is to
be religiously worshipped and adored; as it follows in the next words.

Ver. 3. Thou shall have no other Gods.] That is, believe in one God; or,
believe there is no other God but me, as Nachman interprets it; and
consequently worship no other God. This is the great Foundation (as the Hebrews
speak) of the Law: for whosoever confesses any other God, he denies the whole
Law. And they truly observe also, that this negative Precept includes the
affirmative, viz. a Command to worship Him, the only God. As when Naaman says,
he would neither offer Burnt-offering, nor Sacrifice to any other God, but the
LORD; it is plain he meant, that he would Sacrifice to him, 1 Kings V. 17. See
Seldom L. III. de Jure N. and G. c. 1.

Before me.] As they were not to forsake Him, and worship some other God; so
not to worship any other God, together with Him, as many did, 2 Kings XVII. 33.
For in his Presence he could not endure any Competitor.

Ver. 4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, etc.] The difference
between Pesel, which we translate graven Image, and Temunah, which we translate
Likeness, seems to be, that the former was a protuberant Image, or a Statue
made of Wood, Stone, etc. and the other only a Picture drawn in colors upon a
Wall, or Board, etc. Both which, some have thought, they were prohibited here
so much as to make; whether it were the Image or Picture, of the Stars, or
Birds, or Men, or Beasts, or Fishes; for fear they should be drawn to worship
them. Thus it is certain Origin understood this Commandment, when he said,
there was not permitted to be so much as (...), etc. a Picture-drawer, or a
maker of Statues in their Commonwealth: to take away all occasion of drawing
Men's minds from the worship of God, L. IV. contra Cells. p. 181. Clemens
Alexandrinus was of the same Opinion, L. V. Stromat. and Tertullian, L. de
Spectaculis, c. 23. Which they derived, in all probability from the Jews, who
from the time of the Maccabees, to the Destruction of Jerusalem, thought they
were forbidden by this Law to make an Image or Figure of any Living Creature,
especially of a Man. This Harmannus Conringius has plainly demonstrated (in
his Paradoxa de Nummis Ebraeorum, c. 5.) out of many places in Philo and in
Josephus. The latter of which tells us, L. XVIII. Archaeolog. c. 5. That all
their Governors before Pilate, were wont to use Ensigns in Jerusalem, without
the Image of Caesar in them, because their Law forbad (...), the making of
Images. And when Vitellius was to lead the Roman Army through Judaea against
the Arabians, with Images in their Ensigns, the People ran to meet him,
beseeching him to forbear it, (...), for it was not consonant to the Laws of
their Country to see Images brought into it. But whether this was the ancient
Exposition of the Law before those times, may be doubted. The Talmudists think
it was unlawful to make any Figures of Celestial Bodies, either prominent or
plain, though it were for Ornaments sake: but as for Animals, they might make
prominent Statues of them, except only of Men; the Images of whom they might
draw on a plain; See Seldom L. I. de Jure Not. and Gent. c. 6, 7, 8. Which
distinctions most look upon as ungrounded; and the common Opinion is, That
Moses did not forbid the very making of an Image; but, that they should not
make them, to set up in the place of Divine Worship.

Ver. 5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them.] If they saw
an Image (as they must needs do in other Countries, though we suppose they had
none among themselves) he requires them not to use any gesture, or to do any
thing that might signify Reverence or Honor given to them. Such were
prostrating themselves before them, bowing their bodies, kissing their hands;
much less to offer Sacrifice, or burn Incense, etc. to them. Here seems to be a
plain gradation in this Commandment; three things being here forbidden, if we
take the first part of it to signify that they might not so much as make a
graven Image, or any likeness of any thing, for fear they should be tempted to
Idolatry. But though this may be supposed to have been a sin, yet not so great
as the next, to bow down to them; which was a degree of Honor, too high to be
paid unto any Image. But was not the highest of all; which was to serve them,
by offering Sacrifice, burning Incense, making Vows to them; or swearing by
them; or consecrating Temples to them; or lighting Candles before them.

For I the LORD thy God am a jealous God.] This reason shows that this
Commandment is different from the first, and not a part of it. For worshipping
of Images is forbidden, not merely because he was their God, and there is but
one God, but because He is a jealous God, who could not endure any Corrival, or
Consort, in that which was proper to himself. And so the ancient Jews, and
Christians also, before St. Austin, took this for the second Commandment. The
Arabian Christians, in later times, particularly Elmacinus, distinctly name the
Ten Commandments, in that order which we now do; as Hottinger observes in his
Smegma Orientale, p. 436.

Visiting.] i.e. Punishing with heavy Judgments, XXVI Lev. 39.

The iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children.] This was threatened to terrify
them from this sin, which would ruin their Families; being a kind of High
Treason against the LORD of Heaven and Earth. Yet Aben-Ezra understands it only
of such Children as trod in the steps of their Forefathers; for if they
repented, the Punishment was mitigated, XXVI Lev. 40, etc.

Unto the third and fourth Generation.] That is, as long as they could be
supposed to live (which might be to see the third, and perhaps the fourth
Generation) he threatens to pursue them with his Vengeance in their Posterity;
whose Punishment they themselves should behold, to their great grief. So great
was his hatred to this Sin; and so odious were such People to him. Thus
Maimonides expounds it in his More Nevoch. P. I. c. 54. Visiting the iniquity
of the Fathers upon the Children, is threatened only against the Sin of
Idolatry; as appears from what follows, that such Sinners are called haters of
him. And he mentions only to the fourth Generation; because the most a Man can
live to see of his Seed, is the fourth Generation. Accordingly God orders,
says he, that if any City prove Idolaters, the Inhabitants should be destroyed
utterly, and all that was therein, XIII Deuteronomy. 13, 14, 15. Fathers, Children,
Grandchildren, Great-grand-children, and the newborn Children, were all
killed for the Sin of their Parents. Hence he says, VII Deuteronomy. 10. he repayeth
them that hate him to their face: which is there twice mentioned.

Of them that hate me.] For he looked on them, not only as Enemies, but as
haters of him. It is an Observation of the same Maimonides, that in the whole
Law of Moses, and in the Books of the Prophets, we shall never find these
words, Fury, Anger, Indignation, Jealousy attributed to God, but when they
speak of Idolatry: nor any Man called an Enemy to God, an Adversary, an Hater
of him, but only Idolaters, VI Deuteronomy. 14, 15. XI. 16, 17. XXXI. 29, etc. I
Nehem. 2. VII Deuteronomy. 10. XXXII Numb. 21. XII Deuteronomy. 31. XVI. 22. See More Nevoch.
P. 1. c. 36. which he repeats c. 54. No man is called an hater of God, but an
Idolater; according to that XII Deuteronomy. 31. every abomination to the LORD which
he hates. By which it appears that they counted the Worshippers of Images,
Idolaters; though they did not think these Images to be Gods, (for no Man in
the World ever thought an Image, made of Wood and Stone, Silver or Gold, to be
the Creator of Heaven and Earth, or the Governor of the World) but took them
only for things intermediate between God and them, as he there speaks.

This was a Law so well known to the ancient Heathens, that the best Menamong
them would suffer no Images to be set up in their Temples. In particular, Numa
forbad this to the Romans, which he learnt, as Clemens Alexandrinus thinks,
from Moses. Insomuch, that for the space of an Hundred and seventy years,
though they built Temples, yet (...), they made no Image, neither Statue, nor
so much as a Picture, L. I. Stromat. p. 304. Plutarch relates the same in the
Life of Numa Pompilius, and adds this reason, that he thought it a great Crime
to represent the most excellent Being, by such mean things; and that God was to
be apprehended only by the Mind. The ancient Persians pretend to have received
the same Law from their Zoroaster; who, in a number of things is so like to
Moses, that Huetius thinks (not without reason) his story was framed out of
these Books.

Ver. 6. And showing mercy unto thousands.] To invite their Obedience, he
promises to be kind unto them and their Posterity, for many Generations (so
thousands signifies) who were loyal and faithful to him. Such is the infinite
goodness of God, that he delights in showing Mercy, more than in Acts of
Severity; there being such a disproportion between the one and the other, as
there is between three or four, and a thousand. Which made the heavy Punishment
of Idolaters the more reasonable, because they might have enjoyed such great
and long continued Blessings, if they would have kept close to their Religion.

Of them that love me.] Adhered to him alone, as the only Object of Worship and
Adoration; with such an Affection as a chaste Wife bears to her Husband. For
God now espoused this Nation to himfelf, (as the Prophets taught them to
understand it) and therefore all the Idolatry which is forbidden in these
Commandments, is called going a whoring from him.

And keep my Commandments.] Not only professed to be his entirely, but proved
it by observing his Precepts. Which keeping or observing of his Commandments,
is mentioned here perhaps, and not any of the following Commandments; because
this and the first were the principal, upon which the rest depended: There
being no reason to mind what he said, if they acknowledged any other God but
him.

Ver. 7. Thou shall not take the Nante of the LORD thy God in vain.] By the
Name of the LORD in Scripture, is meant the LORD himself: and to take or lift
up his Name, is to Swear by him. So this word Nasa sometimes signifies without
the addition of God's Name, III Isa. 7. Jissa he shall lift up in that day;
which we truly render, in that day he shall swear: which they did then with the
Hand lifted up to Heaven. And to take his Name, or swear in vain, is to swear
falsely. That Is the principal meaning undoubtedly, that they should not call God
to witness unto a Lie; promising in his Name that which they meant not to
perform; or affirming or denying with an Oath, that which they knew not to be
true. For so the word Schave frequently signifies in Scripture, a Lie. This
relates not to their giving a Testimony before a Judge upon Oath, (of which he
speaks afterward, in a distinct Commandment) but to their Intercourse and
Commerce one with another. For an Oath, says R. Levi of Barcelona, ought to
establish every thing: and thereby we declare our selves to be as much resolved
concerning that which we swear, as we are concerning the Being of God.

Heathens themselves accounted an Oath so sacred a thing, that it was capital
for a Man to forswear himself as Hen. Stephanus (in his Fontes Juris Civilis,
p. 7.) observes out of Diodorus Siculus, L. I. and the reason he gives of it is
this, that such a Man committed two heinous Crimes, by violating his Piety to
God, and his Faith to Men, in the highest degree.

But besides this, both Jews and Christians, always understood swearing
lightly, upon frivolous occasions, or without any necessity, to be here
forbidden. R. Levi, beforementioned, says this Precept may be violated four
several ways, besides swearing that which we mean not to perform. And Salvian
aplies this to the trivial naming of God and our Savior, upon all occasions,
and sometimes upon bad occasions. Nihil jam pene vanius, quam Christi nomen
esse videatur, etc. Every body then swearing by Christ, he would do this or
that, though of no consequence whether he did it or no, or perhaps a thing,
which ought not to be done, L. IV. de Gubern. Dei, p. 88. edit. Baluz.

They that understand this of Swearing by false Gods (which are called vain
things in Scripture) do but trifle: that is condemned in the foregoing
Commandment; it being a piece of Worship to swear by them.

For the LORD will not hold him guiltless, etc.] If Men did not punish the
false Swearer, the LORD threatens that he will. And so Mankind always thought,
as appears by the Law of the XII. Tables, (mentioned by Hen. Stephanus in the
Book quoted above) Perjurij poena divina, exitium; humana dedecus: The Divine
Punishment of Perjury is utter Destruction; the Humane Punishment is Disgrace
or Infamy. And Alexander Severus was so sensible of this, that he thought,
Juris jurandi contempta Religio, satis Deum ultorem habet: The contempt of the
Religion of an Oath, has God for a sufficient Avenger. For an Oath is the
strongest Bond that is among Men, to bind them to Truth and Fidelity, as Cicero
speaks, L. III. de Ossic. c. 31. Witness, says he, the XII. Tables; witness
our Sacred Forms in taking an Oath; witness our Covenants and Leagues, wherein
we plight our Faith to Enemies; witness the Animadversions of our Censors, qui
nulla de re diligentius, quam de jurejurando, judicabant, who judged of nothing
more diligently, than of an Oath.

Nor was the other sort of vain (that is, light and idle) Swearing, without any
just occasion, suffered to go unpunished: for Mr. Seldom observes out of
Maimonides ( L. II. de Synedr. c. 11. p. 497.) that if any Man was guilty of
it, he that heard him Swear was bound to Excommunicate him, (what that was he
shows in the first Book) and if he did not, he was to be Excommunicated
himself. And there is great reason for these Civil Laws, which have provided a
Punishment for this Crime; not only because it is a great disrespect to God, to
use his Name so lightly, on every trivial occasion; but because such contempt
of the Divine Majesty, makes Men fall into the fearful Sin of Perjury.

Ver. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.] Be mindful of the day,
called the Sabbath; to make a difference between it and all other days; so that
it be not employed as they are.

Ver. 9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work.] This is not a
Precept requiring Labor; but a Permission to employ six days in a Week, about
such worldly Business as they had to do. Which Permission also God himself
abridged, by appointing some other Festival days; as all Governors may do,
upon some special occasions.

But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the LORD thy God.] Appointed by his
Authority to be a day of Rest from your Labors.

In it thou shall not do any work.] Herein the peculiar respect to the Seventh
day consisted: on all other days they might work; but on this they were to
cease from all manner of work. In which very thing, was the sanctifying of this
day; it being hereby separated and distinguished from all other days, in a very
remarkable manner. But then it naturally followed, that having no other work to
do, they should call to mind the reason why it was thus fanctified, or set
apart from other days. And the reason, say the Jews themselves, was, That
having no other business, they might fasten in their minds the belief, that the
World had a beginning; which is a thread that draws after it all the foundations
of the Law; or the Principles of Religion. They are words of R. Levi of
Barcelona.

Besides which there was another reason, which I shall mention presently. But
by this it appears, that the Observation of this day, was a Sign, or a Badge,
to whom they belonged: A profession that they were all the Servants of Him, who
created the Heaven and the Earth, as God himself teaches them to ununderstand
it, XXXI. 13, 17. And that their Minds might be possessed with this sense, he
ordered this Solemn Commemoration of the Creation of the World, to be made once
in Seven days. For, as if there had been quicker returns of it, their Secular
Business might have been too much hindered; so if it had been delayed longer,
this sense might have worn too much out of their minds.

Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, etc.] They might no more employ others in
their worldly Business on this day, than do it themselves: But their Children,
though they understood not the reason, were to rest; that in time they might
learn this great Truth, that all things were made by God.

Nor thy Cattle.] Their Oxen, and Asses, and all other Creatures wont to be
employed in their Labors, were to enjoy the benefit of this Rest as well as
themselves, V Deuteronomy. 14. Which was absolutely necessary; it being impossible for
their Servants to rest (as is here also required) if they were to set their
Cattle on work.

Nor thy stranger that is within thy gates.] No stranger, who by being
Circumcised, had embraced the Jewish Religion. But other strangers might work;
who only dwelt among them, having renounced Idolatry, but not taken upon them
the Obligation to observe their whole Law. Yet if any such Person was a Servant
to a Jew, his Master might not employ him on the Sabbath day in any work of
his; but the Man might work for himself, if he pleased, being not bound to this
Law. See Seldom L. III. de Jure N. and G. c. 12.

Ver. 11. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth.] There were two
reasons for the Sanctification of this day. One was, because God rested from
his Work of Creation on the Seventh day, which is mentioned here; the other
was, because he had given them rest from their Labors in Egypt, which he
mentions in the Vth of Deuteronomy. There is no body has explained both these
better than Maimonides, More Nevoch. P. II. c. 31. There are two different
Causes, says he, for this Precept, from two different Effects. For when Moses
first explained to us the cause of this Celebration, in the Promulgation of the
X. Commandments, he says it was, because in six days the LORD made Heaven and
Earth. But in the repetition of them, he says, Remember that thou was a
servant in Egypt, etc. therefore the LORD thy God commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath day, V Deuteronomy. 15. The first Cause, is the Glory and Magnificence of this
day, as it is said, Therefore the LORD blessed the seventh day and sancified
it, II Genesis 3. This was the effect of that Cause, for in six days he made
Heaven and Earth, (this was the reason, he means, of the first Institution of
the Sabbath) but that he gave this Precept of the Sabbath unto us ( i.e. the
Israelites) and commanded us to observe it, was from the other Cause, which
followed the first Cause, because we were Servants in Egypt. All which time we
could not serve according to our own Will and Pleasure, nor had any Rest, or
observed a Sabbath: And therefore God gave us this special Precept of Resting
and Cessation from Labors, to join together these two Reasons, viz. the belief
of the beginning of the World, which presently suggests to us the Being of God;
and then the memory of Gods Benefits unto us, in giving us Rest from our
intolerable Burdens in Egypt.

Wherefore he blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.] In the beginning of
the World he blessed the Seventh day, II Genesis 3. and now particularly chose
this Seventh day, for a Sabbath; which he ordered them to observe in memory of
their coming out of Egypt on that day; as I observed XVI. 5, 23. By which he
preserved in their minds, that singular Benefit which he had bestowed upon
them: and most manifestly (says Maimonides in another place, P. III. c. 43.)
procured great ease to all sorts of Men, by freeing a seventh part of their
Lives from wearisom Labor. Which has another Blessing in conjunction with it,
that it perpetually preserved and confirmed that most precious History and
Doctrine concerning the Creation of the World.

Ver. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.] In another place they are
commanded to fear them, XIX Lev. 3. and as here the Father is put before the
Mother, so there the Mother is put before the Father; to show, (as Maimonides
takes it, in his Treatise called Memarim, c. 6.) that we ought not to make any
difference between them; but they are both equally to be honored and
reverenced. Which is a Duty of such great concernment, that we are taught by
the placing of this Commandment immediately after those which peculiarly relate
to God's Worship; that next to his Majesty, our Parents are to be honored,
with that reverence, love, obedience, and maintenance, which is due to them.
And therefore notorious disobedience to them is threatened with death, as well
as Apostasy from God. Wherein this honor or fear does consist, is taught in
all Books of Religion: and Mr. Seldom has named a great many things wherein
the Jews place it, as the Learned Reader may see, L. II. de Synedr. c. 13. p.
558, etc.

I shall only add, that this was a Law among the Heathens, mentioned by
Saleucus, Charondas and others, in these words, (...), let Children honor
their Parents. And thus Vlpian expresses it, Filio semper honesta and sancta
persona Patris videri debet. And afterward, Filium Patrem and Matrem venerari
oportet. With much more, that Hen. Stephanus has collected, in his Fontes and
Rivi Juris Civilis.

That thy days may be long in the Land, etc.] As disobedience to Parents is, by
the Law of Moses threatened to be punished with death; so on the contrary, long
Life (which is the greatest worldly Blessing) is promised to the Obedient; and
that in their own Country, which God had peculiarly enriched with abundance of
his Blessings. Heathens also gave the very same encouragement, saying that such
Children should be dear to the Gods, both living and dead. So Euripides, (...)
(...).
And this famous Senarius, mentioned by the fame Henr. Stephanus, with many
other notable Passages, (...). Thou shall live long (or, as long as thou can
desire) if thou nourish thy ancient Parents. Whence children are called by
Xenophon, and others, (...).

Ver. 13. Thou shall not kill.] After the Command about the respect due to
Parents, naturally follows the regard we ought to have to all other Men, who
spring from them. And the greatest injury we can do another, is to take away
his Life; whereby he is deprived of all the Enjoyments of this World, and
Humane Society it self is also wounded, which cannot subsist if its innocent
Members cannot be safe. Innocent, I say, for this Commandment does not hinder
Men from defending themselves from violence, XXII. 2. nor forbids Magistrates
to punish those with death, who commit Crimes worthy of it: for this is to
preserve the Lives of other Men, XXII. 18, 19, 20.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not commit Adultery.] Next to a Man's self, his Wife is
nearer to him, than any other Person; they two being one flesh. Which makes the
injury done to him in her Person, a breach of Humane Society next to Murder.
Nay, the LXX. place this Commandment before the other, Thou shall not kill:
Virtuous Woman valuing their Chastity more than their Lives; and the Crimes to
which mere Pleasure tempts Men, being more grievous, in the opinion of the
great Philosopher, than those to which they are stimulated by anger. Whoredom
is also forbidden in the Law of Moses, and Incest; as Wounding any Man is, as
well as Murder: but in these X. Words, which are a short Abridgment of their
Duty, it was sufficient only to mention the principal things, of every kind,
which were hateful to God and injurious to Men.

Ver. 15. Thou shall not steal.] This was to injure Men in their Goods and
Possessions; either by open Rapine, or by Craft and Cheating; against which God
intended to secure them by this Precept. Several sorts of this Sin, are
afterward mentioned in particular Laws.

Ver. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.] As our
Neighbor is not to be injured by us in Deeds, so not in Words; by giving a
false Testimony against him before a Judge; which is the chief Sin of this
kind. This is both an injury to our Neighbor, and an affront to God; in whose
place the Judge is, whom we go about to deceive.

Large Commentaries on these Commandments are not to be expected; which may be
found in many Authors, commonly known.

Ver. 17. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, etc.] Here is forbidden so
much as the designing any Mischief to others, in any of the things
forementioned. For as all Injuries in word or deed are prohibited in the IV.
preceding Commandments: So in this he prohibits those, which are only in the
heart, or counsels of Men, but never come to light. And in the enumeration of
the things they were not to covet, he begins first with that which was last
mentioned, and so backard to the other. For he says, Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors House, by designing to bear false witness, or to commit theft. And
then follows, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, by intending to abuse
her, if opportunity served; nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, etc.
which are his principal Goods. He says nothing of thirsting after his Life;
which is supposed to be unlawful, because less than that is forbidden.

Menander has something like this; (...)
(...).
Do not so much as covet the thread of a Needle, for God sees thee, being
intimately present with thee. See more in Grotius his Prolegomena in Excerpta
ex Stobaeo.

Ver. 18. And all the People saw the Thundrings, etc.] Seeing being the
principal Sense, it is frequently put for the rest: and this passage may be
translated, they sensibly perceived, etc. See XLII Genesis 1. and Drusius's
Quaestiones Hebr. L. I. c. 10.

The Thundrings and the Lightnings.] XIX. 16.

And the noise of the Trumpet.] Which ceased, while God spoke the X. Words to
them; but now began again, together with Thunders and Lightnings, when they
were ended. For as they were introduced in a most Majestic manner, to raise
their attention, and strike an awe into them; so they were closed, that they
might be the more sensible of the dreadfulness of that Majesty who spoke to
them; and that they might have a greater reverence to his Law.

They removed and stood afar off.] They were at the bottom of the Mount, while
God spoke to them; but now started back, for fear those Flames they saw upon
the Mountain, (V Deuteronomy. 25.) and perhaps flashed from thence in a terrible
manner, should devour them. How far they removed, we know not; some think to
the place where they were encamped before this glorious Appearance, out of
which Moses brought them to meet with God, XIX. 2, 17.

Ver. 19. And they said unto Moses.] By the Heads of their Tribes, and their
Elders, (V Deuteronomy. 23.) who came from the People to Moses, while he remained
still in his place. For he says there, they came near unto him, when they
spoke these words; which signifies they were at some distance before.

Speak thou with us, and we will hear, etc.] They desire that what God had
farther to command them, He would be pleased to acquaint Moses with it; and
they would receive it, as his own words; but should die with fear, if they
heard him speak any more with his own Voice. This is more largely related V
Deuteronomy. 24, 25, etc. and accordingly God afterward communicated to Moses alone,
the rest of his Laws, both concerning Religion and Civil Government.

Ver. 20. And Moses said unto the People.] He bad the Elders return this Answer
to the People that sent them,

Fear not.] Be not afraid of your lives. No hurt shall come to you.

For God is come to prove you.] God intends by this dreadful Appearance, to
discover unto your selves and others, whether you will be such as you pretend,
XIX. 8.

And that his fear may be before your face.] And that you may have an awful
sense of him in your Mind, by having before your eyes continually, the Glory of
his Majesty, of which you were lately sensible, v. 18.

That you sin not.] Let this be your only fear, not to offend God, by
disobeying his Commands.

Ver. 21. And the People stood afar off.] In their Tents, within their Camp.
For God commanded him to bid the Elders, after this Discourse, to go to their
Tents from whence they came; where, I suppose, the rest of the People were, V
Deuteronomy. 30. But he bad Moses stay with him; and he would, as they desired, tell
him all the rest of the things, which he intended to enjoin them, v. 31.

And Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.] Who called him to
him again, as he had done before, XIX. 20. There is a curious Observation in
Pirke Elieser, that the Hebrew word here is not Nogesh, he approached, or drew
near, as we trunslate it; but Niggesh, he was drawn near: The Angel Gabriel or
Michael (as he fancies) coming, and taking him by the hand, and leading him up
to God, cap. 41. But this signifies rather, that he did not go up of his own
accord, but was called by God to draw near to his Divine Majesty. Which he did
the next day, upon the seventh day of Sivan: and received LVII. Laws (besides
the X. which God himself delivered) partly Civil, and partly Religious; which
were Explications of the Decalogue.

Ver. 22. And the LORD said unto Moses.] When they were together, in the thick
Cloud before mentioned.

Thus thou shall say unto the Children of Israel.] When thou go down again
to them.

Ye have seen that I have talked with you from Heaven.] The apprehension of one
sense (as Maimonides phrases it, More Nevoch. P. I. c. 46.) is usually in
Scripture put for the apprehension of another. As, See the word of the LORD, II
Jer. 31. that is, hear it, or mark it diligently. Or, the meaning here may be,
You saw, i. e. perceived, by the Thundrings, and Lightnings, and all the rest
of the Tokens of a Majestatick Presence, that it was I who spoke from above.

Ver. 23. Ye shall not make with me.] The Hebrew Writers here make a pause, or
full stop, as if it were a complete Sentence. And the meaning is explained in
the Talmud to be, Ye shall not make the Similitude of the Ministers, that
minister before me above, as the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, or the Angels, Ger.
Bab. upon Avoda Zura. And so Maimonides, upon the same Subject, It is unlawful
to form the Images of the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Celestial Signs, or
Angels, according to that which is written, Ye shall not make with me; i. e.
nothing like the Ministers that minister to me above, See Seldom L. II. de Jure
N. and G. c. 6. p. 198. But if we join these with the following words, the
sense is the same; that as they acknowledged no other Gods but him, so they
should not make any Image to represent him. To enforce which the word make is
repeated in the end of the Verse, whereby greater efficacy is added to the
Command.

Gods of silver, or gods of gold shall ye not make unto you.] He gives this
Caution, lest by the splendor of these Metals they should be tempted (being
prone to Superstition and Idolatry) to make such kind of Representations. For
by Gods, are meant Images to represent him; which at the first were made very
glittering, like the heavenly Bodies; but afterward they proceed to worship
Images of mere Wood, or Stone.

The coherence of this, with the foregoing Verses, is something obscure; unless
we observe how this is reported in the Book of Deuteronomy: where Moses puts
them in mind, that they saw no Similitude on the day that God spoke with them
in Horeb, IV. 15. and therefore not to make them a graven Image, the similitude
of any Figure, etc. v. 16, 17, 18, 19. Accordingly the meaning is here, ye have
seen that I talked with you from Heaven, ( i. e. you heard only a Voice, but
saw no Similitude of Man, or any other Creature) therefore ye shall not
represent me by any Image, though never so rich and glorious. And thus Greg.
Nyssen seems to have understood it, de Vita Mosis, p. 180. God gave Moses many
Divine Commandments, the chief of which is (...), Piety toward God, and to
have becoming Notions and Conceptions of the Divine Nature, as transcending all
visible things, nay all our thoughts, and like to nothing that we know. And
therefore he bids them, in their conceptions of him, not to look at any thing
they saw, nor liken (...), the Nature which transcends the whole Universe, to
any thing that they were acquainted withal.

There was the greater need of this Precept, if the Egyptian Worship in these
days, was the same with that in other times; when Osiris was adored in the form
of a golden Ox, or an Ox of Wood all gilded over, as Plutarch calls it (...).

Ver. 24. An Altar of Earth shall thou make unto me.] For the better
observation of the foregoing Commandment, he orders that his Altars should be
made as plain and simple as might be. Either of Sods and Turfs of Earth (which
were easily prepared, in most places, whilst they staid in the Wilderness) or
of rough and unpolished Stone (if they came into rocky places, where no Sods
were to be got) that so there might be no occasion to grave any Image upon
them. Such Altars Tertullian observes were among the ancient Romans, in the
days of Numa: when, as they had no sumptuous Temples, nor Images, so they had
only temeraria de cespite altaria, Altars hastily huddled up of Earth, without
any Art, Apolog. cap. 25. which Jamblicus calls (...), ex tempore Altars (as we
would now speak) thrown up on a sudden. And so Scioppius pretends he found some
MS. have it in that place of Tertullian, not temeraria, but temporaria; Altars
made only for a present use, not to remain after the Sacrifice was done. Nay,
Fortunatus Scacchus will have it, that Moses here commands them to make the
Earth their Altar; as the words may be translated out of the Hebrew: which he
thus interprets, Thou shall mark out a place upon the bare Ground, and there
offer Sacrifice, Myrothec. II. Sacr. Elaeochrys. c. 56.

And shall Sacrifice thereon thy Burnt-offerings, etc.] This Form of Worship,
as Maimonides himself acknowledges, was appointed by God, because it was used
in all the World. Which moved him, not to abolish it, but to translate it, from
created and imaginary Beings, to his own most Adorable Name. Therefore he
commanded us, says he, to make him a Sanctuary, (XXV. 8.) and consecrate an
Altar to his Name, and offer him Sacrifices, (for which he alleges this very
Text) and on the contrary prohibits us to do such things, to any other Being,
XXII. 20. XXXIV. 13, 14. More Nevoch. P. III. c. 32.

In all places.] This shows that the foregoing Commandment has a peculiar
respect to the time they were in the Wilderness (especially till the Tabernacle
was erected) when they were in their Travels, removing from place to place, and
not fixed in any: Then these Altars were very proper, which might be prepared
on a sudden, and as suddenly thrown down again.

Where I record my Name.] Or cause it to be remembered and acknowledged, by some
Token or Symbol (that is) whereby he signified that he would be worshipped
there. Which sense the Chaldee seems to me to have expressed most exactly; In
every place where I shall make my Glory ( i. e. the SCHECHINAH) to dwell, from
whence I will bless thee: i. e. hear their Prayers. This must be the meaning
here; because the Ark, which was the Memorial of God's Presence with them, was
not yet made. Or else, he means the Sacrifices and Altars before mentioned,
which Mr. Mede thinks may be here pointed at; because these were Rites of
Remembrance, whereby the Name of God was commemorated or recorded, and his
Covenant with Men testified and renewed. See Book II. page 453, etc. And indeed
the word Zacar does most certainly signify, not only to remember or record,
but to worship and to perform Sacred Offices: so the meaning may be, in every
place where I exhibit my self to be worshipped and honored.

I will come unto thee, or, meet with thee.] Upon which account the Tabernacle
of the LORD was called Ohel Moed, the Tabernacle of Meeting. Not because of the
Peoples meeting there to Worship (as is commonly supposed, when we translate
those words the Tabernacle of the Congregation) but of God's meeting there with
his People, as Mr. Mede observes ( p. 436.) from many plain places of
Scripture, XXIX Exodus 42. XXX. 36. XVII Numb. 4.

And I will bless thee.] Give thee testimonies of my gracious Presence and
Acceptance. The Gentiles believed their Gods were present, where their Images
were worshipped. But he promises to be present in all places whatsoever, where
he would have his Name celebrated ( i. e. where he would be worshipped) though
their Sacrifices were offered upon the most mean and simple Altar.

Ver. 25. If thou will make me an Altar of stone, etc.] If it cannot be made
without Stones (says Maimonides, P. III. More Nevoch. c. 45.) take care that
the Stones remain in their own natural form, and that they be not polished,
etc. This was to avoid Idolatry; for fear they should make any figure with the
Tools they employed, in shaping and fashioning the Stones, after an artificial
manner: or should reserve the pieces of Stone that were paired off, for
Superstitious or Magical uses. Just, says Maimonides, as he forbids planting a
Grove near his Altar, for that was to imitate Idolaters, XVI Deuteronomy. 22. See IV
Deuteronomy. 15, 16. which plainly shows this was the reason of this Command.

In short, these Altars were built like those of Turf, on a sudden, without any
Art; only by piling Stones one upon another. Such an Altar David built upon a
special occasion, 2 Samuel XXIV. 25. and after him Elijah, 1 Kings XVIII. 31, 32.
and Fortunatus Scacchus makes it probable, that it was such an one which Ezra
built, at their return from Babylon to their own Country, III. 2, 3. Myrothec.
II. Sacr. Elaeochrys. c. 59. where he represents the form of such an Altar
among the Heathen, out of an ancient Monument, p. 585. And there is little
doubt, I think, that the Altars built by the Patriarchs were of this sort;
particularly that which Abraham erected whereon to offer his Son Isaac, XXII
Genesis 9. for it was raised so suddenly, that no Art could be employed about it.

I omit other Reasons which the Jews allege for this Law, for they seem to me
to be fanciful. And shall rather observe that Plato in his Laws, ordered all
things belonging to the Service of God, should be very simple and plain,
without any Cost or Ornament: and therefore forbids Gold, Silver, or Ivory,
because they were things too invidious, ((...)) and Brass and Iron he would not
have used, because they were (...), the Instruments of Wars: but one single
piece of Wood or Stone should serve for an Image, and that made in a days time,
L. XII. de Legibus, p. 955. 56. Edit. Serran.

It seems difficult also to reconcile these two Verses, with God's own
Ordinance, not long after in the XXVIIth Chapter of this Book; where he bids
Moses to make him an Altar, neither of Earth nor of Stone, but of Shittim-wood,
covered with Brass, for the use of the Tabernacle, where he recorded his Name.
But it is to be considered, that these two Verses speak only of occasional
Altars (as I may call them) which they might have use of, not only before, but
after the Tabernacle was erected. These God does not forbid, when there was a
special reason for them; but he intending there should be no stated Altar, but
that at the Tabernacle, he would have these made of unpolished Stone, laid one
upon another, that they might be thrown down as soon as raised; and that they
might not draw People from the Tabernacle, nor administer occasion of Idolatry,
by an artificial Workmanship and Imagery. Now that there were such Altars
raised upon certain great Occasions, but not to continue, appears from the
Sacred History. For XXIV. 4. Moses built one at the Foot of Mount Sinai, by
God's command it is likely, and of this fashion. And he gave order for building
one of Stone after they came to Canaan, (XXVII Deuteronomy. 1, 2, 3.) which Joshua
performed, according to this Rule, as is expressly said VIII Josh. 30, 31. Of
this sort were those of Gideon and Manoah, VI Judge. 24, 26. XIII. 19. And we
read of Altars built by Samuel, 1 Samuel VII. 17. and by Saul, XIV. 35. and
David, as was before observed, 2 Samuel XXIV. 25. and Solomon, 1 Kings III. 2,
34. besides the Altar which was in the Tabernacle and the Temple.

Ver. 26. Thou shall not go up by steps unto my Altar.] This was most suitable
to the state of Travelers, to have their Altars low, not lofty. Besides, he
would not have them imitate the Gentiles, who Sacrificed in High Places;
imagining their Sacrifices were most acceptable, when they were nearest to
Heaven. Whence the Egyptians, living in a flat Country, wherein were no
Mountains, built Altars of a very great height, which could not be well done by
Sods of Earth, or Stones loosely laid together. Nor would God have it done,
when he ordered Mofes to make an Altar of Brass and Wood at the Tabernacle;
which it is evident was so low, that a Man might stand and minister there,
without being raised from the Earth: For it was but three Cubits high, (XXVII.
1.) which is less by one Cubit than the ordinary stature of Men.

Not go up by steps.] There were steps, in the Temple built by Solomon, unto
the brazen Altar, which was ten Cubits high: And Ezekiel expressly mentions them
in the description of his Temple, XLIII. 17. which seeming to disagree with
this Command, Interpreters are much concerned to reconcile them. And the
forenamed Fortun. Scacchus c. 63. contends earnestly that no Altar was higher
than three Cubits; and therefore those steps mentioned by Ezekiel did not
belong to the Altar, but to the Basis or Groundwork (as we speak) upon which it
stood. But this is said without good ground, for we read expressly that
Solomon's Altar was ten Cubits high, (2 Chronicles. IV. 1.) at which therefore the
Priest could not minister, without some steps, whereby he ascended so high, as
to be able to lay on the Wood, and the Sacrifice upon it, etc. By steps
therefore (to omit other Conjectures) I understand many steps (which are here
forbidden) such as the Gentiles had to go up to their Bamoth or High Places; as
we see by one of the Pyramids in Egypt, and the high Tower at Mexico; to which
they ascended by an Hundred and eighty steps. But a very few served for
Solomon's Altar; and they were so contrived also, as the Hebrew Writers tell
us, that there was no danger of that which God intended hereby to prevent, in
the words following.

That thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.] The Hebrews say it was a kind
of Causway or Bridge whereby they went up to the Altar; which rose by little
and little, till they came to the place where they were to stand. See
L'Empereur upon the Codex Middoth, c. 3. sect. 3. Or else the steps were so
broad and so little distant one from another, and the ascent thereby made so
easy and equal, that there was no need of lifting up their legs high, and
therefore no danger of discovering the lower parts of the Body, (their Thighs,
Buttocks, and Secret Parts) which might have been seen by those below (had they
ascended by many large and high steps) under such loose Garments as were worn
in those Countries; and thereby the Priests might have been exposed to
contempt, and the People moved to laughter, or had bad thoughts excited in
them. In short, the meaning is, they should not go up many steps, far distant
one from another, so that one must have taken large strides to ascend them.

The Jews say, particularly Maimonides, P. III. More Nevoch. c. 45. that the
Worshippers of Baal-Peor were wont to discover their Nakedness, that is, their
Secret Parts, before him. Which he takes to be the reason of this Command; lest
any such thing should happen in God's Presence: and this was the reason also of
another Law, that the Priests should have Breeches made for them, which none of
the People wore, in those times, but the Priests alone; and that only when they
ministered. The Gemara Hierosolym. upon the story of Balaam, gives a long
account of this Impure Worship, as L'Empereur observes upon Codex Middoth, c.
3. sect. 4. But there is no proof of this from any ancient Author; and the
Babylonian Gemara gives a different account of the Worship of Peor; which looks
as if the Jews studied how to make it ridiculous, as well as filthy. But if
there were any solid ground for it, it would afford the clearest explication of
this place.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 1. NOW these are the Judgments thou shall set before them.] By Judgments
are meant such Political Laws which God thought fit to give for the
determination of Differences among the People; and that they might be justly
and peaceably governed. Which, though they were not spoken with such Pomp and
Majesty as the X. Commandments were, (and much less were the Ceremonial
Precepts delivered with such solemnity) yet the Israelites believed that they
came from the same Authority, though spoken to Moses in the Mount privately,
and not in the audience of all the People; as appears by their submission to
these, no less than to the other Laws. And there was great reason for it; it
being their own desire not to hear God's voice any more; but to be instructed
by Moses what God required, and they promised to obey it, XX. 19.

Ver. 2. If thou buy an Hebrew Servant, etc.] Or a Slave. Some Persons sold
themselves by reason of Poverty: of which sort the Hebrews understand that Law
XXV Lev. 39. Others were sold by the Court of Judgment; which was in case of a
Theft they had committed; for which, not being able to make Satisfaction unto
him that had received the Damage, they were condemned to be his Servants. Of
these they interpret this place, and XV Deuteronomy. 12. But this Sale, they say, did
not extend to both Sexes; for a Woman was not to be sold for Theft.

In the seventh year he shall go out free for nothing.] If the Damage was so
great, that his six years Service had not satisfied for it, yet he was not to
be kept longer. And his Servitude also might end sooner, by Manumission, or
Redemption, or the Death of his Master, if he were a Gentile or a Proselyte.
Nay, if he were an Hebrew, his Death put an end to it, in case he left no Son.
And his Master also was bound to maintain his Wife and Children (if he had any)
all this time, giving them Food, Raiment, and a Dwelling, though they were not
to be his Servants. See Mr. Seldom L. VI. de Jure N. and G. c. 7.

It is remarkable, that he sets this Law in the first place, because Mercy,
next to Piety, is the most excellent Virtue: and God would have his People,
says R. Levi Barzelonita, adorned with, and full of the noblest qualities,
which are Benignity and Mercy.

This Year of Release also being a Sacred Year; the whole Land being Holy to
the LORD, so that no Man might challenge any Right or Propriety in it, to sow
his Field, or reap that which grew of it self, etc. it was Sacrilege for any
Master to keep a Servant from his Freedom, when the Year came, which was the
LORD's Release, as we read expressly XXV Lev. and XV Deuteronomy. Whence it was, that
because the Jews were so profane, as to break this Law, and not give their
Servants liberty, (as we read in the XXXIVth of Jeremiah) God punished them
with a Captivity of LXX. years, in which the Land lay waste, till it had
fulfilled the Years of Rest which they would not observe; as Mr. Mede has
truly noted, Discourse XXVI. latter end.

Ver. 3. If he come in by himself, etc.] That is, a single Man, without a Wife;
so he was to depart. But if he was a married Man when he was sold; as the
Master was not to let his Wife and Children want Food, and Raiment, and
Habitation, while he continued his Slave; so when he was free, he was not to
meddle with them, or detain them from their Father and Husband, XXV Lev. 41.

Ver. 4. If his Master have given him a Wife.] Unto such a Servant as this, who
was sold by the Court of Judgment, his Master might give a Gentile-Maid to
Wife, (and no other Hebrew but such as he, might marry a Gentile) that he might
beget Children of her, who were to be the Masters Servants or Slaves for ever.
The Hebrew Doctors say the Master could not do this, unless such a Servant had
a lawful Wife and Children before of his own, who were not to be kept from him;
but he might beget Children for himself, as well as for his Master; who could
not impose upon him more than one Maidservant, to be his Wife. He that sold
himself also, was not subject to this Law. But as his Master could not impose a
Wife of this sort upon him; so neither was he bound, when the Servant went
free, to bestow any Gift upon him: which was due only to him, that was sold by
the Court for Theft, (XV Deuteronomy. 12.) to whom the ancient Jews say he was to give
thirty shekels.

And she have born him Sons or Daughters.] During his Service.

The Wife and Children shall be his Masters, etc.] For the Wife was a Slave as
well as himself, when he married her. And she was given to Wife, merely that he
might beget Slaves of her. Who therefore continued with the Master, as well as
their Mother, when the Man had his Liberty: for they were not so much his, as
his Masters Goods; who had such a power over them, that he might Circumcise
them, as he did his own Children, without their consent. See Seldom L. VI. de
Jure N. and G. c. 7. and de Vxore Hebr. L. I. c. 6. p. 39.

Ver. 5. And if the Servant shall plainly say.] In the Hebrew the words are,
saying, shall say; i.e. Stand in it (as we speak) and steadfastly resolve, by
saying it, not in a fit, but constantly.

I love my Master, my Wife and my Children, etc.] If his love to such a Wife
and Children, who were not properly his own, was greater than his Love to
Liberty; which made him still desire their Company, and choose to stay with his
Master, who had been so good to him.

Ver. 6. His Master shall bring him to the Judges.] That it might appear he was
not fraudulently or forcibly detained against the Law, but with his own
consent, or rather at his desire.

He shall also bring him to the door, or the door-post.] After the Case had
been heard, and the Judges had given Sentence.

And his Master shall bore his ear through with an awl.] In token that he was
now affixed to his House, and might not so much as step over the Threshold
without his leave, but be obedient to his will for ever. This is to be
understood only of one that was sold by the Court; not of him that sold
himself. And though the Hebrews take this to have been a mark of Infamy, set
upon a Man who chose Servitude before Liberty; yet it being chosen out of love
to his Master, I cannot think that they intended by this Act to disgrace him.
But look upon it only as a solemn Addiction of him to his Master's Service;
which was done, it is likely, in the presence of the Judges. This Custom of
boring the Ears of Slaves, lasted a long time after this in Syria and Arabia,
as Bochartus shows out of Juvenal Sat. 1. and Petronius L. III, Hierozoic. c.
6. p. 1.

He shall serve him for ever.] Till the Year of Jubilee, or till his Master
died, (for his Son was not to detain him, when his Father was dead) unless he
would release him, or he was redeemed.

Ver. 7. And if a man sell his daughter, to be a maidservant.] Besides the two
former sorts of Persons sold to be Servants, there was a third here mentioned,
which is thus expounded by the Hebrews: That she was to be a Virgin, under Age;
that is, less then XII. years old and a day. For if she was more than that, it
was not lawful for him to sell her: and when she came to be of Age, it put an
end to her Servitude, as well as the Year of Jubilee did, or Redemption, or the
Death of her Master. Besides, her Father might not sell her, unless he were
reduced to extreme Poverty. If he did, without such necessity, he was forced by
the Court of Judgment to Redeem her. And she was not to be sold neither, unless
there were some hope, her Master or his Son might take her to Wife.

She shall not go out as the menservants do.] There were other, and better
Conditions for her, than for the Servant mentioned v. 3, 4. particularly, her
Master could not marry her to any Body, but to himself or his Son.

Ver. 8. If she please not her Master, who has betrothed her to himself.] This
shows she was sold to him, upon the presumption he would take her for his Wife;
and there was such a previous agreement about this, that there needed no other
Espousals: But if, after this, he changed his mind, and did not like her enough
to make her his Wise; then God ordains as follows,

Then shall he let her be redeemed.] She was to serve her Master six years, if
she was sold for so long; unless she was redeemed (which her Master is here
required not to refuse) or manumitted; or set free by the Year of Jubilee; or
by the Death of her Master; or (which was peculiar in this case) the signs of
her being ripe for Marriage appeared. See Seldom in the place before mentioned.

To sell her to a strange Nation he shall have no power.] No Man had power to
sell an Hebrew Servant to one of another Nation: And therefore by a strange
People (as the word is here in the Hebrew) must be meant an Israelite of
another family, that was not of her Kindred, nor had any right of Redemption.

Seeing he has dealt deceitfully with her.] Frustrated her hope of marrying
her.

Ver. 9. If he has betrothed her to his Son.] Which was expected from him, if
he did not think fit to marry her himself, he shall deal with her after the
manner of daughters. If the word he relate to the Father, the meaning is, he
shall give her a Portion, as if she were his own Daughter. If it relate to the
Son, the meaning is, he shall treat her like a Wife.

Ver. 10. If he take him another wife, her food, etc.] If after the Son had
married her, he took another Wife besides, he was still to perform to this, all
those things that belong to a Wife, viz. give her Food, and Raiment, and at
certain times (which were determined by Law in some Countries) cohabit with her
as her Husband. From this place, the Hebrews have made a general Rule, that
these three things are owing to all Wives from their Husbands, viz. Alimony,
Clothes, and the Conjugal Duty. For howsoever the Vulgar Latin understand the
last word, the Hebrews generally take it, for that which St. Paul calls due
Benevolence, 1 Cor. VII. 3. See Seldom de Vxor. Hebr. L. III. c. 4. Now what
was accounted Alimony, and sufficient for Clothes, he shows cap. 5. and what
belongs to the other cap. 6. The Hebrew word Gonata, which we translate duty of
marriage, properly relates to the stated and determined time, wherein every
thing is to be done; and therefore here signifies the use of marriage certo
tempore and modo, as Bochart has well expounded it, L. II. Canaan, c. 11. Many
indeed will have it derived from (...), from which comes (...), an habitation;
as if it signified here the cohabitation of a Man with his Wife. But Aben-Ezra
rather refers it to (...), from whence come (...) time: whence Gonat signifies
the set and appointed time wherein every thing is done. And so the Chaldee use
the word goneta, for the term prescribed to every thing (as the same Author
observes) that it may be done in due time and manner.

Theodorick Hackspan thinks Moses here speaks of the Father; to whom all the
precedent and subsequent acts belong, and not to the Son.

Ver. 11. And if he do not these three to her.] i. e. Neither marry her to
himself, nor to his Son, nor suffer to be redeemed,

Then she shall go out free without money.] When she came of Age, and was ripe
for Marriage, she was to be set free, and pay nothing for her freedom: Nay, on
the contrary, he was to give her something, as appears from XV Deuteronomy. 12, 13,
17. What the signs of Puberty were, Mr. Seldom shows Lib. de Successionibus, c.
9.

Ver. 12. He that smites a man, so that he die.] That is, commit wilful
Murder, as we now speak,

Shall surely be put to death.] Wheresoever we find this word Maveth (death)
absolutely, without any addition, it always signifies strangling. They are the
words of R. Levi Barzelonita. But the Jewish Doctors will not have this Law
extend unto Proselytes of the Gate, much less to Gentiles; whom, if any
Israelite killed, he was not to suffer death for it. See Mr. Seldom L. IV. de
Jure N. and G. c. 1. But Plato in his Book of Laws, L. IX. p. 872. has
determined more justly than these Rabbis, that in the Case of Murder, the same
Laws should be for Strangers and for Citizens.

Ver. 13. And if a man lie not in wait.] Do not design to kill another.

But God deliver him into his hand.] But he happens, as we speak, to kill a
Man, by that action which aimed at another end. This the Scripture expresses
more religiously, by acknowledging God in every thing that falls out, who
permits such things as are mentioned XIX Deuteronomy. 5. whereby a Man is killed,
without the intention of him, who was about such actions.

Then I will appoint him a place, whether he shall flee.] He may flee to one of
the Places, which I will appoint for his Security. Which place, the Jews say,
was the Camp of the Levites, while they continued in the Wilderness: but when
they came to Canaan, there were Cities appointed for this purpose, as we read
XXXV Numb. 11, 12. XIX Deuteronomy. 2, 3, etc. And there being several kinds of
involuntary killing Men, the Hebrews make these (...), or Places of Refuge, to
belong only to one of them, for the rest did not need them, as Mr. Seldom shows
L. IV. de Jure N. and G. c. 2. An Officer of Justice was not bound to flee, if
he chanced in the Execution of his Office to kill a Man that resisted him. Nor
a Master, if he killed his Scholar, or a Father his Son, when he gave him
Correction.

Ver. 14. But if a man come presumptuously.] The Vulgar Latin rightly
translates it industriously, or with design to kill him; for it is opposed to
ignorance. The Hebrew word also carries in it a signification of boiling anger;
which does not alter the Case: For if a Man in the height of his Rage, resolved
to kill another, and laid wait for him to execute his Design, it was justly
judged to be wilful Murder, and punished with Death. Which was far more equal
than Plato's Law, That such a Man should only be banished for three years; as
he, that on a sudden, killed a Man in his Anger, only for two, L. IX. de
Legibus, p. 867.

Upon his Neighbor.] The Hebrew Doctors by Neighbor understand only an
Israelite, or a Proselyte of Justice: As for others, they were not put to
death, if an Israelite killed one of them. Which was not the intent of this
Law; whereby God would have all Men that lived among them, safe and secure from
being murdered.

To slay him with guile.] By which it appeared the Act was designed and
deliberate. For two things are denoted by this word with guile; first
forethought, and then delay, as Isaac Karo observes; See L'Empereur in Bava
kama, cap. 3. sect. 6.

Thou shall take him.] If it be inquired who should take him, it seems to be
determined XIX Deuteronomy. 12. where the Elders of the City were to fetch away a
wilful Murderer from the City of Refuge. In after times the King ordered it, as
Moses did while he lived, 1 Kings I. ult. II. 29. By which places it appears,
That if a Man refused to come from the Altar (being judged upon proof to be a
wilful Murderer, or other high Offender) he might be there killed, as Georg.
Ritterhusius shows L. de Jure Asylorum, c. 8. where he observes out of Plutarch
in his Laconioa, that Agesilaus declared publicly at the Altar of Pallas,
where he sacrificed an Ox, that he thought it lawful to kill one that
treacherously assaulted him, even at the Altar. And thus the practice was among
Christians (as he there shows) when their Temples became Sanctuaries to
Malefactors.

From my Altar.] This was an Asylum, as well as the Cities of Refuge; but under
many Limitations, both with respect to the part of the Altar, and to the
Persons that fled thither, and to the Crime they had committed; as Mr. Seldom
shows in the place abovementioned, p. 475.

That he may die.] Though he was the High Priest, and in the Act of Sacrifice,
he was to be taken away without delay, if he had committed wilful Murder: If it
was involuntary, then he was to be taken from thence, and carried to the City
of Refuge: For God would not have a Pious place (as Conradus Pellicanus
glosses) be a Protection to Impiety. See Mr. Seldom L. III. de Synedr. c. 8. p.
100.

Maimonides his Observation is pertinent enough upon this occasion; That the
Mercy which is shown to wicked Men, is no better than Tyranny and Cruelty to
the rest of God's Creatures: and therefore though such Persons sought to God
for his Patronage, by betaking themselves to that which was dedicated to his
Name, he would not afford them any protection; but commanded them to be
delivered up to Justice, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 39.

Ver. 15. And he that smites his Father or Mother.] So as to wound them, and
to make the Blood come; or to leave a mark of the stroke, by making the flesh
black and blue, as we speak, Seldom L. II. de Synedr. c. 13. p. 556.

Shall be surely put to death.] Strangled (say the Hebrews, see v. 12.) by the
Sentence of the Judge, there being competent Witnesses of the Fact, as in other
Cases. The giving them saucy words, or making mows at them, which signified
Contempt, was punished also with Whipping. There was no need to say any thing
of killing them: for all wilful Murder was punished with Death. And Solon, it
is commonly noted, made no Law about this; because it was not to be supposed
any Man would be so wicked. Nor was this Crime known among the Persians, as
Herodotus says in his days. Nor do we find any mention of it in the Law of the
XII. Tables. But in after times there were most severe Punishments enacted
against Parricide, which are described at large by Modestinus. And Diodorus
Siculus tells us of the like among the Egpytians. See Hen. Stephanus in his
Fontes and Rivi Juris Civilis, p. 18. Plato would have him that killed either
Father or Mother, Brethren or Children, not only to be put to Death, but to be
disgraced after his Execution, by throwing his dead Body naked into a common
place without the City, where all the Magistrates, in the Name of the People,
should every one of them throw a Stone at his head, and then carrying him out
of the Coasts, leave him without Burial, L. IX. de Legibus, p. 873.

Ver. 16. He that steals a Man.] By a Man the Hebrews understand an
Israelite; whether he was a Freeman, or but a Servant; as Mr. Seldom observes,
L. VI. de Jure N. and G. c. 2.

And sells him.] No Israelite would buy him, and therefore such Plagiaries
sold him to Men of other Nations Which made the Crime to be punished with
Death; because it was a cruel thing, not only to take away his Liberty, but
make him a Slave to Strangers.

Or if he be found in his hand.] Though he had not actually sold him; yet his
intention was sufficiently known by his stealing him.

Shall be surely put to death.] I observed above v. 12. they interpret this
Phrase every where, to signify strangling. If it be said any where his blood
shall be upon him, it signifies stoning. Maimonides makes this the reason why
such a Man was condemned to die, because it might well be thought he intended
to kill him, whom he violently carried away, (at least, as I understand it, if
he could not find means to sell him) More Nevoch. P. III. c. 41.

Ver. 17. And he that curses his Father, or his Mother, etc.] The Hebrews take
this Law to concern those who cursed their dead Parents, no less than those who
cursed them, when they were alive; but not without Praemonition, and Witnesses,
as in other Capital Crimes: And not unless they cursed their Parents, by some
proper Name of God, as Mr. Seldom observes out of the Jewish Doctors, L. II. de
Synedr. c. 13. This, and the other Law v. 15. enacted Death as the Punishment
of such Crimes, because they were a sign (says Maimonides, More Nevoch. P.
III. c. 41.) of a desperate Malice, and audacious Wickedness; being a
subversion of that Domestic Order, which is the prime part of good Government.
See XX Lev. 9. And thus far the Athenians went in this matter, that by their
Law a Son was disinherited, who reproached his Father. And if the Father did
not prosecute such a Son, he himself became infamous. So Sopater ad Hermogenem;
(...). By the same Law also, if he struck his Father, both his hands were to be
cut off; as we read in Heraclides Ponticus in Allegor. Homen. and in Quimillian
Declam. CCCLXXII. Qui patrem pulsaverit, manus ei incidantur. And by another
Law he was to be stoned to death, as the Author of Problemata Rhetor. tells us:
(...), and that without any formal Process against him, (...).

Ver. 18. And if men strive together.] Fall out and quarrel.

And one smite another.] So that from words they proceed to blows.

With a Stone, etc.] Men usually in their anger take up any thing that is next
at hand, to throw at him against whom they are enraged; or finding nothing,
smite them with their fists.

And he die not, but keeps his bed.] Sometimes the blow falls in such a
place, that sudden Death follows: or such a Wound or Bruise is given, as
confines a Man to his Bed.

Ver. 19. If he rise again and walk abroad, etc.] If a Man recovered so far, as
to get up, and walk abroad, after the stroke, it was presumed (though he died
not long after) it was by his negligence, or something else, not of the Blow he
received. And upon the hearing of the Cause, the Judges were to acquit the Man
that gave the blow; i. e. he was not to die for it.

Only.] The Hebrew particle Rak signifies but or truly. as well as only: and
here expresses, that the Man who gave the blow should not escape all
punishment, but suffer something for the hurt he had done. Yet if we take it to
signify only, the sense is not much altered; for the meaning is (as Constant.
L'Empereur observes in Bava kama, cap. 8. sect. 1.) by this word, to exclude
Death, but not other Punishment in his Purse.

He shall pay for the loss of his time, etc.] The Jews say in Bava kama, cap.
8. sect. 1. that satisfaction was to be given him for the loss he had sustained
in five things: for the hurt in his Body; the loss of his Time; the Pain he had
endured; the Charge of Physician or Chyrurgeon; and the Disgrace: all which
they there endeavor to prove out of the Scripture. Two of them are plainly
here. The first of which the Doctors upon the Misna consider with great Nicety,
as L'Empereur observes upon the forenamed Treatise; some Men being able to
earn more by their Labors than others; and the disability the stroke brought
upon them, being more or less, of a larger or shorter continuance; with respect
to all which, a proportionable Compensation was made to them.

And shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.] Here they also distinguish
between the Cure of the Wound, Bruise, or Swelling caused by the stroke; and of
any other breaking out that he chanced to have at the same time. He was bound
to pay for the Cure of the former, but not of the latter. And if after a Man
was cured, he fell ill again, he that struck him was not bound to take care of
his Cure.

The same Provision is made in the Civil Law, as L'Empereur notes, which
perfectly agrees with this Constitution of Moses -- Judex computat mercedes
medicis praestitas, caeteraque impendia, quae in curatione facta sunt:
Praeterea operas quibus caruit, aut cariturus est ob id, quod inutilis factus
est.

According to Plato's Laws, he that wounded another in his Anger, if the Wound
was curable, was to pay (...), double to the Damage the wounded Man sustained
thereby. If it was incurable, he was to pay fourfold: and so he was to do
likewise if it were curable, but left a remarkable Scar. If the Wound was given
involuntarily, he was to pay only simple Damages. (...): For no Lawgiver is
able to govern Chance, L. IX. de Leg. p. 878, 879.

Ver. 20. If a man smite his servant, etc.] A Slave; who was not an Israelite,
but a Gentile:

He shall surely be punished.] With Death, say the Hebrew Doctors (in Seldom L.
IV. de Jure N. and G. c. 1. p. 463.) if the Servant died while he was beating
him: For that is meant by dying under his hand. But it seems more likely to me,
that he was to be punished for his Cruelty, as the Judge, who examined the
Fact, thought meet. for his smiting with a Rod, not with a Sword, was a sign he
intended only to correct him, not to kill him. And besides, no Man could be
thought to be willing to lose his own Goods, as such Servants were.

Ver. 21. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two.] A day and a night, as
the Hebrew Doctors interpret it.

He shall not be punished.] Because it might be presumed he did not die of
those strokes.

He is his money.] His Death was a loss to his Master; who therefore might well
be judged not to have any intention to kill him; and was sufficiently punished
by losing the benefit of his Service.

Ver. 22. If men strive, and hurt a woman with child.] Who interposed between
the contending Parties; or came perhaps to help her Husband.

So that her fruit depart from her.] She Miscarry.

And yet no mischief follow.] She do not die, as the Hebrew Doctors expound it.
See Seldom L. IV. de Jure N. and G. c. 1. p. 461.

He shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon
him.] Her Husband may require a Compensation, both for the loss of his Child,
and the hurt or grief of his Wife. Yet he was not to be Judge in his own Case;
but it was to be brought before the Public Judges, as it here follows.

And he shall pay as the Judges determine.] Who considered in their Decree what
Damage was done; which was estimated by the hurt his Wife received in her Body;
and by the lessening of her price, if she were a Slave, and might be sold. Unto
which several other Mulcts were added, to be given to the Woman her self, as
Mr. Seldom observes in the place abovenamed.

Ver. 23. And if any mischief follow.] If the Woman did die.

Thou shall give life for life.] In the Interpretation of this, says Jarchi,
our Masters differ. For some by Life understand that which is properly so
called, or the Person himself: so that it should signify, being put to death:
But others understand by it, a pecuniary Mulct; that so much Money should be
paid to the Heirs, as the Person killed might have been sold for. The LXX.
carry it to quite another sense; which is, that if a Woman Miscarry, and the
Child was (...), not yet formed and fashioned, that the Man who occasioned the
Miscarriage was to pay a Fine. But if it were formed, than Life was to be given
for Life. So that this whole Law is to be understood of an Abortion; and
according to the condition of the Abortive (not the Life or Death of the
Mother) so the Punishment was to be inflicted. And thus Philo takes it, and
has a large Discourse upon it. See Seldom L. IV. de Jure N. and G. c. 1. p.
464. and Constantin. L'Empereur in Bava kama, p. 200, etc.

Ver. 24, 25. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc.] These, and all the rest that
follow to the end of the 25th Verse, the Hebrews understand to signify
Pecuniary Mulcts; as may be seen in their Comments upon this place. And
Maimonides gives three Reasons for it, which L'Empereur takes notice of, and
endeavors to confute in his Annotations upon Bava kama, p. 187, etc. 198, etc.
But after all, there seems to be a great deal of reason, at least in many
Cases, to admit of a Compensation. As in that mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, L.
XII. where the one-eyed Man complained of this Law (which was among the
Heathen) as too rigid; for if he lost the other Eye, he should suffer more than
the Man whom he injured, who had still one Eye left. Upon such Considerations
Phavorinus argues against this Law, which was one of the XII. Tables, as not
possible to be justly executed, according to the very Letter of it. For the
same Member of the Body, is far more valuable to one Man, than it is to
another. For instance; the right Hand of a Scribe, or a Painter, cannot be so
well spared as the right Hand of a Singer. And therefore, the Law of the XII.
Tables, concerning Taliones (Like for Like) was with this Exception, Ni cum eo
pacit. That is, if he who had put out a Man's Eye, or taken away the use of any
other Member, would not come to an Agreement, de talione redimenda, to make him
Satisfaction, and redeem the Punishment, he was to suffer in the very same
kind. So Sex. Caecilius expounds it in Aulus Gellius, L. XX. c. 1.

Ver. 26. If a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, etc.]
It is but reason that this should extend to all Servants, though of another
Nation, not merely to those who were Jews. And so Maimonides seems to allow,
when he says, This is a Precept of Piety and Mercy to poor Wretches, who
should not be any longer afflicted with Servitude, when they have lost a Member
of their Body. More Nevoch. P. III. c. 41. And therefore the common Resolution
of their Doctors, is very cruel, That Gentile Servants (whom they call
Canaanites) who were not Circumcised, should not have the benefit of this Law.
For they thus distinguish Servants of another Nation. Some were Circumcised and
Baptized; others still remained Gentiles, or were only Proselytes of the Gate.
The former kind might be set free three ways; by being Redeemed by a Price paid
by themselves, or any Friend; by Manumition; and by virtue of this Law, upon
the Loss of any Member. For though only an Eye and a Tooth be here mentioned,
yet herein are included all the rest of the principal Members of the Body,
which being mutilated, cannot be repaired; which they reckon to be Four and
twenty in all. If they did not dismiss such a Servant thus maimed, the Court of
Judgment, upon an Appeal to it, compelled them to give him his Liberty, with a
Certificate of it. But the second sort of Gentile Servants could be made free
only be the two first ways, having no benesit (according to this Doctrine) by
this third way here mentioned. See Seldom L. VI. de Jure N. and G. c. 8. But
Heathens themselves were more merciful than these Doctors; for the Civil Laws
(as L'Empereur observes upon Bava kama, cap. 8. sect. 3.) made better provision
for Slaves when they were hardly used.

Ver. 27. And if he smite out his man-servants tooth, etc.] The loss of a Tooth
was not so great as that of an Eye: yet to prevent Cruelty, God ordained a
Master should lose the Service of his Slave, for so small a loss as this.

Ver. 28. If an Ox gore a man, or a woman, that they die, then the Ox shall be
surely stoned.] This was not a Punishment to the Ox, as the Sadducees, says
Maimonides, cavil against us; but to his Owner: who was admonished hereby, to
look better after his Cattle: For which reason also, the Ox was not to be
eaten, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 40.

And his flesh shall not be caten.] Because God would have the Owner entirely
lose all benefit by it, as Maimonides interprets it. And so Josephus, L. IV.
Arctaeol. c. 8. (...), etc. It was not permitted to be so much as profitable to
him for his Nourishment. And the Hebrew Doctors say, that if a Man eat so much
as the Bigness of an Olive of this Flesh, he was to be Scourged. By this means
both he and others were admonished to be more careful and cautious: And God
also declared how heinous the Crime of Murder is; the Punishment of which, in
some sort, reached even unto Beasts: which were therefore also stoned, when
they had killed a Man, that no more might be in danger of their Lives by them.
Some think its Flesh therefore could not be eaten, because, being stoned, it
was a Carcass whose Blood was in it. But Maimonides answers to this (in his
Treatise of forbidden Meats) that the Scope of the Law is, that as soon as the
Sentence for its being stoned was pronounced, it became unclean. Nay, if a Man,
to prevent this Sentence, killed it after a legal manner, no Man might eat a
Bit of it. And when it was stoned, the Flesh was neither sold, nor given to the
Gentiles, nor to the Dogs, etc. as Bochart obobserves, L. II. Hierozoic. P. I.
c. 40.

The same Maimonides in his Treatise of Pecuniary Mulcts, rightly extends this
Law to other Creatures, whether Beasts or Birds, that any Man kept; as
L'Empereur observes upon Bava kama, cap. 4. sect. 5. And Plato, I observe, has
the very same Law, that (...), etc. if an Ox, or any other Animal, kill a Man
(except it were in the Public Combats) the Officers called (...), that were
set over their Fields, were to kill it, and throw it out of their Territories,
(...), L. IX. de Legibus, p. 873.

But the owner shall be quit.] The loss of his Ox was all his Punishment. And
if the Ox did not kill the Man, but only wounded him, in that case the Owner
was obliged to make him such a Compensation as the Judges thought equal, and to
take care the like happened not again.

Ver. 29. But if the Ox were wont to push in time past, and it has been
testified to him, etc.] In the former case, the Owner was only punished with
the loss of his Ox; it being the first time that it had been known to push. But
if the Ox had formerly been known to be so unruly, and he had been told of it,
and yet did not take care to prevent further mischief, then he, as well as the
Ox, were to be put to death. The Jewish Doctors indeed have softened this by
diverse Exceptions: As first, they say it was to be proved that the Ox had
pushed upon three several days: for though it appeared he pushed a great many
times in one day, it would not make the Man liable. And secondly, it was to be
testified not only to the Owner, but before the Magistrate, that he had pushed
so often. And lastly, they interpret the last words of this Verse, (the Owner
also shall be put to death) of Punishment by the Hand of Heaven: that is, they
leave him to God. See Bochart in his Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 40. But though
Abarbinel propound this as the opinion of their Wise men, yet he was sensible
of its absurdity. For he confesses that God does decree the Sentence of Death
should be executed upon the Owner of the Ox: only he thinks that he remits
something of the strictness of it in the next Verse. And there are three Cases
here mentioned relating to this matter: One in the foregoing Verse, where the
Ox is ordered to be stoned. Another in this, where the Owner is also made
liable to be put to death: And a third in the next Verse, where a Pecuniary
Mulct is only set upon him.

Ver. 30. If there be laid upon him a sum of money, then he shall give it for
the ransom of his life.] By this it appears there might be a Case, wherein the
Owner of the Ox should not be put to death, but only be fined, though the Ox
had been wont to push, and he was told of it. And the Interpretation of this,
and the foregoing Law, which is given by Constantine L'Empereur is not
unreasonable upon Bava kama, c. 4. sect. 5.) Either the knowledge which the
owner had of the ill Conditions of his Ox was certain or uncertain; and his
carelessness in preventing the Mischief he was wont to do was greater or lesser;
and the Friends of him that was killed pressed the strictest Justice, or were
content to remit it. In the former cases (if the knowledge was certain, the
carelessness very gross, and the Friends were strict in the Prosecution) he was
punished with death: but if otherwise, he was punished only by setting a Fine
upon him. Certain it is, that the foregoing Law might prove too rigorous in
many cases (as if the Ox pushed, being provoked; or broke loose when he was
tied up; or was let go by the negligence of a Servant, etc.) and therefore God
permitted the Judges to accept of a Ransom, as they saw cause, which was to be
paid according as the Sanhedrim thought meet. So Jonathan.

Whatsoever is laid upon him.] He was to submit to the Fine, whatsoever it was:
and it was given to the Heirs of him that was killed. If a Man's Wife was
killed, the Jews say, it was given to the Heirs of her Father's Family, and not
to her Husband.

Ver. 31. Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, etc.] Because
what was said v. 29. of killing a Man or a Woman, might have been restrained to
the Father or Mother of a Family, whose loss was greatest, and their lives most
precious: therefore the same Law is here extended to the Children: yet both
Jonathan and Onkelos consine it to the Children of Israelites; as if all
Mankind besides were nothing worth. See Bochartus in the place abovementioned.

Ver. 32. If an Ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant, etc.] Whether
the Servant was of greater or lesser value, says Maimonides, the Punishment
was, the payment of thirty shekels (and the loss of the Ox) half the price of a
Freeman, who was estimated, he says, at sixty shekels, More Nevoch. P. III.
c. 40. He adds in another place (in his Treatise of Pecuniary Mulcts) that the
Owner was not bound to pay this Ransom, unless the Ox killed the Man out of his
own Ground. For if he was killed within in the Owners Ground, the Ox indeed was
stoned, but no Ransom was paid. Diverse other cases he mentions in that Book, as
L'Empereur observes upon Bava kama, p. 85. where he takes notice that Solon
himself wrote (...), a Law concerning the mischief done by Cattle, as Plutarch
relates in his Life.

Ver. 33. And if a man shall open a pit, etc.] In the Street, or public
Highway, as Jonathan rightly interprets it. For if he opened or dug a Pit
in his own Ground, he was not concerned in this Law, though another Man's Beast
fell into it.

And not cover it.] If he did cover it conveniently; though in time the Cover
grew rotten, and a Beast fell into it, he was not bound to make it good, as
Maimonides resolves the Case.

Ver. 34. The owner of the pit shall make it good, etc.] There were so many
Cases arose upon this Law, that it is not easy to number them. Maimonides has
amassed together abundance belonging to this matter, with wonderful accuracy,
as Bochartus observes; who has transcribed a great many of them, in his
Hierozoic. P. I. L. 2. c. 40. p. 391, etc.

Ver. 35. If one man's Ox hurt another that he die.] Which equally belongs to
all other Cattle, as Maimonides observes; for the Law mentions an Ox only for
example sake.

They shall sell the live Ox and divide the money, etc.] Though the Ox that was
killed, was worth as much more as the other; yet satisfaction was to be made
only out of the live Ox, which did the mischief, as the same Maimonides
observes, who has several Cases upon this Law, as may be seen in the
forenamed Book of Bochart's, p. 393. But it might so happen, that the Ox which
was killed was of little value, and the live Ox worth many pound: in which case
it seems so unreasonable, the Man whose loss was small, should be a great
gainer by the Sale of the Ox which did the mischief, that the Jewish Lawyers
resolve the meaning of this Law is, the Man whose Ox was killed, should receive
half the Damage he had sustained; as L'Empereur observes upon Bava kama, cap.
1. sect. 4.

Ver. 36. Or if it be known that the Ox has used to push, etc.] There is a
great difference between what is done casually, and what is done constantly.
The former Verse speaks of the hurt done by a Beast that was not wont to push;
and this, of the hurt done by one that was notoriously mischievous: And
accordingly greater Damages were given in this latter case, than in the former.
And by this general Rule the Jews regulated all other Cases: making those
Mischiefs, that were done. by Beasts which were wont to hurt, or were of a
hurtful Nature, to be punished above as much more, than the Mischief done by a
Creature that was not wont to hurt, or with a part of his Body, which uses not
to hurt. See L'Empereur in Bava kama, cap. 2. sect. 1.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. IF a man shall steal an Ox, or a Sheep, and kill it, or sell it.]
Before the Theft was discovered to be done by him.

He shall restore five Oxen for an Ox, and four Sheep for a Sheep.] There is a
smaller Satisfaction required in other things, v. 9. and here is also a
disproportion observable between the stealing of an Ox and of a Sheep. The
reason of both was this; that Money, Goods, Garments, Jewels, which Men keep in
their Houses, within Towns and Cities, are better guarded, and not so easily
stolen as Cattle in the Field: and of Cattle in the Field, an Ox was more easy
to be stolen than a Sheep: For Sheep feeding in Flocks, may be all in view of
the Shepherd; but Oxen feeding, scattered one from another, are not so easily
observed and kept by the Netherd. Thus Maimonides More Nevoch. P. III. c. 41.
But the true reason of the difference between an Ox and a Sheep seems to be,
That an Ox was of greater value, and likewise useful to more purposes in
Husbandry, (as ploughing, carrying in, and treading out the Corn, etc.) which
made the Punishment of stealing an Ox, greater than that of stealing a Sheep.
Yet there was a difference between a Thief, who came and confessed his Sin of
his own accord; and him that stood out till he was apprehended and convicted of
it: For in the former case, Moses seems to require only the Restitution of that
which was stolen, with the addition of a fifth part of the value, and a
Sacrisice, VI Lev. 4, 5. All this is far more equal than Plato's Constitutions,
which for all Thefts require the same Punishment, which was paying double;
(...), etc. L. IX. de Legibus, p. 857.

Ver. 2. If a man be found breaking up.] Some translate it, If a Man be found
with a digging Instrument; or, it may signify any sort of Weapon: yet he was
to be taken in the very act of breaking up, or digging.

And be smitten that he die, etc.] The Master of the House might kill the
Robber in this case; because it might well be thought he intended to kill him,
rather than lose his booty. The Law of the XII. Tables allowed this, as A.
Gellius relates, L. XI. c. 18. Duodecim Tabulae nocturnum furem quoquo modo,
diurnum autem, sese telo defenderit, interfici impune voluerunt. It was one of
Plato's Laws also, That if a Thief entered a Man's House in the Night, he might
innocently kill him: (...) L. IX. de Legibus, p. 874. But the Hebrew Doctors
make some Exceptions; as, if he did not fly; and if there were no Witnesses
present: for if there were, then it was like Theft in the day time. See Grotius
L. II. de Jure B. and P. cap. 1. sect. 12.

Ver. 3. If the Sun be risen, etc.] When they might possibly know who he was;
and it might be presumed he intended only to steal, not to kill; then to kill
him was to be accounted Murder.

He shall be sold for his theft.] For six years. But the Hebrew Doctors have
many mollisications of this Law: For they say, a Woman was not to be sold; nor
a Man, but for the principal Sum. For double, or four or sivefold, he was not
to be sold; but have credit for it, till he was able to pay. And he was not to
be sold, who robbed a Samaritan; nor if he had stolen less than he was worth,
when sold, etc. with many other, which so mitigate, that they almost abrogate
it. But the Law of the XII. Tables thought it reason, a Thief should be
delivered to him whom he robbed, to be his Slave, as A. Gellius tells us, L. XX.
c. 1. See Bochart. Hicrozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 40.

Ver. 4. If it be certainly found in his hand alive, etc.] There was a great
difference between Killing or Selling after the stealth; and having these
Cattle sound alive with him. In the former case he was punished four or
sive-fold, v. 1. but in this only double. Because the former concealed his
Theft with more industry, and left less hope of discovery and restitution than
in the latter, as Bochart there observes. Where he also takes notice of the
like Law at Athens, mentioned by Demosthenes, and by A. Gellius, L. XI. c. 18.
But the Hebrews here also have their Exceptions; and will not have this
extended to Women, Children, and Servants.

He shall restore double.] In case he did not confess the Fact himself, but was
otherwise sound out. For if he did accuse himself, and had neither sold nor
killed that which he stole, he was not to restore double. He that stole from
another Thief, was not bound, as Maimonides thinks, to restore double. But in
case a Thief killed what he had stolen, and after that consecrated it to God, he
was obliged notwithstanding to restore fourfold: though if he consecrated it
before he killed or sold it, only to restore double. For though the
Sanctification of a thing, after the Sin was committed, did not take away the
guilt: yet before he aggravated his Fault by Killing or Selling what he stole,
the Sanctification lessened the Punishment. See L'Empereur in Bava kama, cap.
7. sect. 1, 2.

Ver. 5. If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten.] This our
Rabbis, says R. Levi of Barcelona, understand concerning the Damage done by
Beasts eating another Man's Grass or Corn, etc.

And shall put in his Beast.] This they understand of the Damage that may be
done by their Feet, in treading down the tender Grass or Corn.

Of the best of his field, and of the best of his vineyard, shall be make
restitution.] What is determined in this case, the Jews extend to all other:
That Men should make satisfaction for the wrong done to their Neighbor in any
kind, with the best of what they possessed of that kind. So the Misma in Bava
kama, cap. 1. sect. 1. and Abarbinel on this place, Damages are paid out of the
best. Which made Men very careful in looking after their Beasts, that they did
no hurt in their Neighbors Grounds. For which Plato orders only such
Satisfaction to be made as the (...) should judge meet, L. VIII. de Legibus, p.
843. But the Jews were so scrupulous in this matter, that to prevent the Damage
one Man might do another, they made a Constitution that no Man should keep
Goats, or Rabbits, or any such like small Creatures, near the Corn-sields, or
Vineyards or Oliveyards of his Neighbor; no, nor in any parts of the Land of
Israel, (as the Misna has it in the Bava kama, cap. 7. sect. 7.) but in Syria,
or in the Deserts of their own Land. This the Talmudists carry so far, as to
urge it to inept Superstition; as L'Emperour observes on that place.

Ver. 6. If fire break out, etc.] The Hebrew word properly imports that which
breaks out of it self (as R. Levi Barzelonita observes) so that the meaning of
this Law is, that though a Man kindle a fire within his own bounds, and it
spread further to the damage of his Neighbor, he shall be guilty, though he
had no hand in putting the fire to the Stacks of Corn which were burnt by it;
because he should have looked better after it, when he had kindled it. For every
Man, says he, is bound to watch the fire that he kindles, lest it do mischief;
it being its nature to break out, and catch hold of any thing that is near it.
And therefore Plato ordains (in the place mentioned upon the former Verse) that
(...), etc. if a Man set fire to any combustible matter, and do not take care
his Neighbor receive no harm by it, he shall pay such Damages as the
Magistrates judges just. But here the Jewish Lawyers consider, at what distance
the fire was kindled; and resolve, that if there was a Fence of four Cubits
high, or a public Highway, or a River, between the Fire and the Field, or
Stack of Corn that was burnt, the Man that kindled it was free. See Bava kama,
cap. 6. sect. 4, 5. and L'Empereur in his Annotations there.

Ver. 7. If a man shall deliver unto his neighbor money, or stuff to keep,
etc.] The Equity of the Law contained in this and the following Verse, is very
well explained by Maimonides; P. III. c. 42. More Nevoch. He that takes a
Neighbor's Goods or Money to keep for nothing, and has no profit thereby,
does a kindness to his Neighbor, and therefore is not to bear the loss of
them; which must fall upon the Owner himself. But he that desires to be the
keeper of his Goods, and receives a benefit by the use of them, or is paid for
his care, must make them good if they be stolen. Or if the owner and the keeper
equally partake of the profit, they must equally bear the loss. R. Levi
Barzilonita interprets this place of that which a Man takes into his custody,
chinnam (as his word is) gratis, as we speak, without any reward for his care
in keeping it.

Ver. 8. Shall be brought to the Judges.] The principal Judges were called
Elohim, Gods. And there were to be three of them at least; who were to examine
upon Oath, ( v. 11.) and endeavor to find out the truth. See Seldom L. II. de
Syned. c. 5. p. 232.

To see.] i. e. Find out.

Whether he has put his hand unto his neighbors goods.] Or, whether through
negligence he suffered them to be stolen. In which he was bound to make them
good, as Maimonides says, in the place before mentioned; who will have the
Name of Elohim originally belong to Judges; and from thence to be translated to
God the Judge above all, P. II. c. 2. But of this see XX. 2.

Ver. 9. For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, or ass, or sheep.]
Though these be only mentioned, yet the Law reaches to all Cattle whatsoever.

Which another challenges to himself.] There is great variety in the
Translation of these words, (as Mr. Seldom shows L. II. de Synedr. c. 12.) but,
according to ours, the meaning is, When a Man affirms that he either deposited
such things with his Neighbor, or lent them to him, or that he took them, (as
R. Levi Barzelonita interprets it, Praecept. LIVE.) both Parties were to be
brought before the Judge; that he might examine where the Right lay.

He shall pay double unto his Neighbor.] i. e. He who pretended to have
deposited the Goods (suppose) was to pay double if he brought an unjust Action
against his Neighbor; or he with whom the Goods were deposited was to pay it,
if it appeared he had dealt fraudulently: But if it were found, that the Goods
were lost by mere chance, he was not bound to pay any thing.

Maimonides explains it thus, according to the Opinion of the Talmudists (as
Mr. Seldom observes in the place now mentioned) when a Man brings an Action
against another, about such things as are here mentioned, and the Defendant
confesses part of the Charge, but denies the rest; he was to restore as far as
he confessed; but for the other which he did not confess, he was to be put upon
his Oath. Or if he denied the whole, and be that brought the Action had but one
Witness against him, he was to purge himself by an Oath: For by the Law, no Man
was compelled to clear himself by an Oath, but in three Cases, of which this
was one, when a Man was guilty by one Witness.

Ver. 10. If a man deliver unto his neighbor an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or
any beast to keep, etc.] If he lend any of these things to his Neighbor upon
certain Considerations, or let them for hire; and his Neighbor affirms that
they died, or were hurt, or driven away by Enemies, who carried them Captive;
but there was no Witness of any of these Allegations, then the Cause was to be
brought before the Judge to find out the Truth, in the manner following:

Ver. 11. Then shall an oath of the LORD be between them both, etc.] If there
was no other way to discover the Truth, then he to whom they were delivered,
was to purge himself by an Oath, that he had not killed the Beast, nor done any
thing to hurt it: and the Owner was to trouble him no further; nor was he bound
to make any Satisfaction: Provided he had used these Goods according to the
Agreement between them: for if he had employed them contrary to their Contract,
then he was bound to make them good to the Owner, of whom they were borrowed or
hired. If he refused to take the Oath, he was pronounced guilty; and
Restitution was ordered to be made out of his Goods. But there were some
temperaments of this Law; for every Man was not admitted to purge himself by an
Oath. For instance; he that was of so bad a Reputation, that they had a
suspicion he would not stick to Perjure himself, was not admitted to be
adjured; no, though he that brought the Action required it, etc. See Mr. Seldom
L. II. de Synedr. c. 12. p. 520.

Ver. 12. And if it be stolen from him.] Through his negligence, who was
entrusted with it,

He shall make restitution to the owner thereof.] Because he was bound to have
looked better after it; by receiving wages for his care and pains in keeping it
(as some interpret) or engaging to make it good, if he did not take the same
Care of it, as if it had been his own.

Ver. 13. If it were torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, etc.]
If he could produce any part of it, as an evidence that it was torn, and he
endeavored to rescue it, he was not to make it good. But here the Hebrew
Doctors make many Exceptions: For they would have him make good what was torn
by one Wolf alone; because they think he might have been able to defend the
Cattle against one, though not against many. If also he put the Oxen or Sheep
into a Pasture, wont to be infested with wild Beasts or Thieves; or if he did
not call in the help of his Neighbors, etc. in these, and such like cases, he
was to make good that which was torn, as Maimonides reports their Judgment. See
Bochart. Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 44.

Ver. 14. If a man borrow ought of his neighbor, and it be hurt or die.] This
the Hebrew Doctors think concerns such things as were lent to another out of
kindness, without any consideration for the use of them. About which, if there
arose any controversy by reason of some maim that it received, or its death,
it was to be determined by the Rule following.

The owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good.] These
words, and those in the beginning of the 15th Verse, (but if the owner be with
it, he shall not make it good) seem to signify, that if the Owner was with the
thing that was lent, at the time of its hurt or death, it was to be presumed he
would do his best to preserve it, and see it was not ill used, and so must bear
the loss: But if he was not present at that time, then the contrary was
presumed, that the borrower was in fault, and therefore bound to make it good.
Which, though it may seem hard, was but necessary to make Men careful, and do
their best to preserve what was lent them in pure kindness. R. Levi of
Barcelona ( Praecept. LVI.) interprets it quite another way, in this manner;
That if the Owner was with it, at the time it was borrowed, though not present
at the time of its hurt or death, the borrower was free: but if the Owner was
present at the time of the hurt or death, but not at the time of lending, he
was bound to make it good. For the matter (says he) depends upon the beginning
of it.

Ver. 15. If it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.] Some make the Hebrew
word Sachir (which we translate hired thing) to relate unto the Person; If he
be a Mercenary; i. e. the Man who lends, agrees to let the borrower have it, at
a certain price, etc. But this is the same, in effect, with the sense of our
Translation, which makes this word relate to the thing it self: which, if it
were borrowed with a Condition to pay so much for the use of it as the Lender
demanded, then the Man who hired it was not bound to make it good, whether the
Owner were present, or not, when it was hurt or died. But the Owner was to run
the hazard, because of the hire which he received for the use of the thing.

Ver. 16. If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her.]
Whosoever lay with such a Maid in the City, was thought to have been an inticer
only (unless Witnesses came and proved that he forced her) because it might be
well supposed her Voice would have been heard, if she had cried out upon the
Force in the City. But if he lay with her in the Field, where no Body could
hear, it was presumed to be a Rape. Thus Maimonides, and other Hebrew Doctors.

He shall surely endow her, to be his wife.] This Law does not say, as the Old
Translation has it, he shall ondow her, and take her to be his Wife; but only,
endow her to be his Wife: that is, give her such a Dowry, that she might be his
lawful Wife. So the same Hebrew Doctors understand it; who will not have it to
be a Command that he should marry her (though that was best) but only that he
should make Satisfaction for taking away her Virginity; which was, by paying so
much, in the nature of a Dowry, as would render her fit to be his Wife, if both
of them could agree. Yet so, that if either he, or she, or her Father refused
(for it was in the power of any of these, as they say, to hinder the Marriage)
he paid this Mulct, as the Dowry of a Virgin, to her Father. See Selden's Vxor
Hebr. L. I. c. 16. There is another Law of this Nature, XXII Deuteronomy. 28, 29. but
it speaks of a Virgin deflowred by force: of which see there.

Ver. 17. If her father uiterly refuse to give her unto him.] Here is mention
made only of the Father; not of the Man that deflowred her: who, one would
think, should have been bound to marry her, if she and her Father pleased. And
so Josephus, (...), etc. (...). But if the Father of the Damosel did not like
to give her to him, he was to pay as here is directed.

He shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.] That is, says
Josephus, fifty shekels, (...), as a Satisfaction for her Reproach, L. IV.
Archaeol. c. 8.

Ver. 18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live.] This Law about Witches
follows the other about Virgins; because Witches, among other practices, helped
by ^vil Arts to allure and entice silly Virgins to consent to Men's
Solicitations. Epiphanius reports from one that saw it, such a Magical
Operation used by a Jew, to procure the Love of a Christian Woman, who was
preserved from the (...), power of his Witcheraft, by the Seal of Christ (as he
calls the Sign of the Cross) wherewith she fortified her self, at the first
attempt made upon her, Haeres. XXX. n. 7, 8. But such wicked Wretches did a
world of other Mischief, and therefore were to be put to death, whether they
were Men or Women. The Scripture indeed mentions a Witch only (says the Gemara
of the Sanhedrim, c. 7. n. 10.) because for the most part, they were Women, who
were addicted to Magic. So Maimonides also, because the greater part of Evil
Works are performed by Women; therefore the Law says, Thou shall not suffer
MECHAS SHEPHA, a Witch to live; P. III. c. 37. More Nevochim. Where he
discourses of the sorts of Witchcraft: and in general affirms, that there were
no Magical Works performed, without respect to the Stars. For such People held
that every Plant had its Star, and so had every Animal, and all Metals. For
Example; they said, Pluck such a Leaf, or such an Herb when the Sun, or any
other Planet is in such a place; let such a Metal be melted under such a
Constellation, or such a Constitution of the Moon; and then say such and such
words, and let a Fume be made with such Herbs or Leaves, and that in such or
such a form, and then this or that will follow. This was their Doctrine, and
such Works as these were the peculiar worship of the Stars, who were delighted,
they fancied, with such Actions, Words, or Fumes, and for the sake of them
would do whatsoever was desired.

All this, he says, he took out of their Books then extant; from which he
concludes, That the Scope of the Law being, that all Idolatry should be taken
out of the World, and that no virtue should be ascribed to any Star, of doing
good or hurt to Men, (which opinion led Men to their worship) it necessarily
followed, that all Witches and Wizards should be put to death, because they
were Idolaters; though after a peculiar and different way from that, wherein
the Vulgar worshipped Idols. And he thinks that a Witch is rather mentioned
than a Wizard, (though both intended) because Men are naturally more tender
toward the Female Sex, and apt to favor them: and therefore it is as if Moses
had said, Thou shall kill even a Woman that is guilty of this Crime. But
afterward, XX Lev. 27. he commands both Men and Women to be stoned.

Others of the Hebrew Doctors (particularly R. Levi Barzelonita) give this
Reason why Witches were not to live, Because they directly thwarted God most
blessed, who made all things when he created them, for such and such purposes:
which they perverted, and by devices of their own, made to serve other ends,
which God never designed; Praecept. LXII. But this they could not do without
the help of Evil Spirits; and therefore their Crime consisted in entering into
a Familiarity and a League with them, whose assistance upon such occasion they
invoked: which was, in effect, a renouncing of God.

This was an Impiety which had overspread the whole World, especially the
Eastern parts of it. And as for the Romans, we find a Law, as old as the XII.
Tables, against Witchcraft; Apud nos in duodecine Tabulis cavetur, ne quis
alienos fructus excantassit, as we read in Seneca, L. IV. Not. Quaest. c. 7.
where he mentions the like Law among the Athenians. For the Greeks were
extremely addicted to this, especially in Thessaly. Of which none, that I have
read, spoke so plainly as Plato in his Eleventh Book of Laws, p. 932, 933.
where he orders Punishments, not only for those who destroyed others by
Potions; but for those who pretended to be able to revenge themselves or
others, (...), either by certain Enchantments, or by Charms, or by those Spells
which are called Ties, or Knots. Concerning which, he acknowledges, it is hard
to know any thing, or to persuade others there is nothing in them. For if a Man
see any where (...), etc. waxen Resemblances, made and set either at their
doors, or in the turning of the ways, or at the Tombs of their Ancestors; none
can prevail with him to neglect these things, because he knows not what
efficacy is in them. And therefore he would have even such People, who used
these sorts of Witchcrafts, to be put to death, if they were Professors of any
sort of Knowledge, (as (...)) but if they were simple People, he leaves the
Judges to punish them, as they found reason.

Ver. 19. Whosoever lies with a beast, shall surely be put to death.] This is
so infamous a sin, and such a dishonor to Nature, and the Author of Nature (as
Conr. Pellicanus well glosses) that it was not fit such a Person should live
upon the face of the Earth, but die without mercy. See XVIII Lev. 23. XX. 15,
16. where this is more largely handled.

Ver. 20. He that sacrifices unto any god, save unto the LORD only, he shall
be utterly destroyed.] Sacrifice being the principal act of Worship in those
days, includes in it all other acts of Worship and Divine Service; which they
were required to pay to the LORD alone, XX. 2, 3, etc. but the Punishment of
doing otherwise, was not enacted till now. Of which he treats more largely XVII
Deuteronomy. 2, 3, etc. See there.

Ver. 21. Thou shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him.] Here are two
distinct Commands. The first of which [ not to vex a stranger] the Hebrews will
have to consist in not upbraiding him with his former state of Heathenism, nor
giving him any approbrious words: as saying, remember what thou wast; or what
thy father did. And this was neither to be done to a Proselyte of Justice, nor
to a Proselyte of the Gate, as far as Mr. Seldom could judge of their opinion
herein, L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 4. The second [ not to oppress him]
consisted in not using him hardly, in their dealings with him; by making him
pay, for instance, for any thing, more than it was worth. Which, the same Mr.
Seldom ( L. VI. c. 5. p. 690.) thinks, the Hebrews were of opinion, belonged
only to their usage of Proselytes of Justice, who were perfectly in their
Communion. But this is very unreasonable: for (as R. Levi Barzelonita himself
observes) by thus treating any Proselyte, they might endanger their return to
Paganism again, out of indignation to be so despised: and much more when they
saw they were wronged. Which God took care they should not be, because they
were more helpless than other Men, and had fewer Friends. Which is the reason
that this Precept (as the Jews themselves have computed) is inculcated in one
and twenty places. See particularly XXIII. 9. XIX. Lev. 33.

For ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.] There could not be a more
powerful reason to more them to treat Strangers kindly, than the remembrance of
their own Oppressions in Egypt, from which they were delivered by the mere
Mercy of God, which they ought to imitate.

Ver. 22. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.] Give them no
trouble, either in word or deed as the same R. Levi interprets it ( Praecept.
LXV.) but in all their Commerce with them, in buying, felling, or any other
intercourse, to treat them not only civilly, but kindly and benignly. And the
reason of the Precept, says he, is the same with the former; because Widows
and Orphans have few or none to protect them, or plead their Cause; and
therefore the Law took care of them, as if their Husbands and Parents were yet
alive.

Ver. 23. If thou afflict them in any wise.] By giving them ill Language, or by
infulting over them, or destroying their Goods: much more if (...) Man smote
them, he was liable to the Judgment of God, as Nachmanides interprets it.

And they cry at all unto me.] A Child, says the same R. Levi, cries to his
Father, and a Wife to her Husband: but the Widow and the Fatherless cry unto
me, and I will hear them, for I am merdiful.

I will surely hear them.] Punish you for your ill usage of them, as it follows
in the next Verse.

Ver. 24. And my wrath shall wax hot.] This signifies their Punishment should
be (...), sent upon them from God; who orders no Penalty to be inflicted by
their Judges, because he intended himself to be their Avenger, and that in a
very remarkable manner, by serving them in their kind; as it here follows.

And I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.] Here the Hebrew Doctors cry out, Measure for Measure (as
R. Levi observes) for he threatens that the Wives of those that afflicted them
should be Widows, and their Children fatherless, and find none to take pity
upon them. For with the Measure that men mete withal, others shall mete to
them: If a woman (as he goes on) shall afflict them, she shall die, and her
husband shall marry another wife, which shall afflict her children.

Ver. 25. If thou lend money to any of any people.] That is, to an Israelite.

That is poor by thoes] By a poor Man, they do not understand one that goes a
begging; but one in such want, that he is more to be pitied, than those who
have the confidence to beg in the Streets. The foundation of this Precept (as
the before mentioned R. (...) observes) was to fix in them the great virtue of
Mercy, Kindness, and Clemency: whereby poor People being helped, in this way of
lending them Money gratis, might recover again to a better condition, by the
goodness of God to them.

Thou shall not be as an usurer to him.] Neither domineer over him, nor make
him pray, and entreat, and wait long, as if he were a Slave; nor exact any
thing for the use of the Money.

Neither shall thou lay upon him usury.] Not make him find Sureties: Or, as
some of them interpret it, this is a Precept requiring all Israelites to have
no hand in letting out Money to Usury; either by writing the Bonds, or by being
a Witness to them; or by being bound with others for the Interest of the Money:
for the word they observe is in the Plural Number, Ye shall not put upon him
Usury. Which Law, concerning Usury, is fully handled by Mr. Seldom, L. VI. de
Jure N. and G. c. 9, 10. where he shows that some Usury was forbidden by the
Law; and other by the Decrees of their Wise men. The Law forbad them to
contract to receive back again, any Sum of Money more than they lent. But it
was further required by their Wise men, that they should not receive any Gift
before hand, to induce them to lend: nor any thing afterward by way of
Gratuity, or to express their Thankfulness. Yet this last was permitted, in the
Lone of Orphans Money, as Maimonides says. And what was thus forbidden to be
done to an Israelite, was permitted to be done to a Gentile. Nay, some will
have that to be an affirmative Precept which we read XXIII Dent. 20. obliging
them to take Usury of a Gentile, if they lent any Money to him. But that
Maimonides contradicts. And there are those who think this Law only forbad them
to take Usury of a poor Israelite, but not of a rich: it being unreasonable
that he should increase his Wealth by the use of his Neighbor's Money, and he
have no profit thereof.

Ver. 26. If thou at all take thy neighbors raiment.] His Coverlid, as we
speak, or Bed-clothes. For it is plain by what follows, he speaks of that which
was to keep him from the cold in the Night.

To pledge.] As a Security for the payment of the Money which he lent him.

Thou shall deliver it to him by that the Sun goes down.] This shows that he
speaks of a poor Man; which is more fully declared XXIV Deuteronomy. 12, 13.

Ver. 27. For that is his covering only, etc.] It was contrary to Humanity, to
keep from him the only thing he had to keep him warm in his Bed; for it was in
effect to kill him.

And it shall come to pass, when he cries unto me, that I will hear him.]
Punish thee for thy barbarous Cruelty, ( v. 23.) and besides, the Hebrew
Doctors say, he was to be beaten, by order of the Court of Judgment.

For I am gracious.] And would have you like my self.

Ver. 28. Thou shall not revile the gods.] i. e. The Judges, as no doubt it is
to be interpreted. See Mr. Seldom L. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. c. 13. p. 268.
And the Hebrew Doctors give this reason for it; because it tends to terrify
them from doing Justice, and exposes them to the contempt and hatred of the
People; whom it also inclines to Sedition. But many of them (See him c. 1. p.
9.) will have another Precept contained in this, That they Blaspheme not the
Name of the most High. Some few also (among whom is Philo) fancy it to be a
Command not to revile the Gods that other People worship, though they be false
ones. And so Julian the Apostate took it; who is confuted by St. Cyril, as Mr.
Seldom there observes.

Nor curse the ruler of thy people.] That is, either the Prince of Israel, or
the President of the great Sanhedrim. So R. Levi Barzelonita ( Praecept.
LXXVII.) The intention of the Scripture is to admonish us of our Duty to him,
who is the Prince of the Empire of Israel; with respect both to the Dominion of
the Kingdom, and of the Law (as his words are) it being a great Crime to speak
evil of him, by whose care all Differences were composed, etc.

If any Man was guilty of this Crime, he was to be scourged three times: and if
he were the Son of a Prince, he had four Scourgings. And that very justly; for
Heathens themselves reckoned this among the greatest Offenses. It was one of
the Laws of Charondas (as Hen. Stephanus observes in his Fontes and Rivis Juris
Civilis) (...), let these be reckoned the greatest Crimes; Contompt of the
Gods, and voluntary abuse of Parents; disrespect to Rulers and Laws; and
voluntary dishonor of Justice. In like manner Zalenous ordains, that next
after the Gods, and Demons, and Heroes, (...), Parents and the Laws and
Rulers, should be equally had in honor. And Plato thought those that would not
be subject to them, were unsufferable; because they had the Spirit of the old
Titans, who would have pulled the Gods out of their Thrones, (...).

Ver. 29. Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruit, etc.] The
Hebrews will have this to be a direction, for the bringing unto God, in due
order, those things which were to be offered to him. As first the Trumah; which
was the first Oblation that was made out of the Corn, when it was newly
thrashed out: which was to be, they say, a fiftieth part; which was given to
the Priest. Then the first Tithe, which was given to the Levites; and the
second Tithe, which the Possessors eat at Jerusalem, when the Tabernacle was
settled there. This order, they say, God here requires them not to invert, by
offering that last which should have been first. So R. Levi of Barcelona,
Praecept. LXXVIII. But, from what follows, it seems to relate only to the
First Fruits of their Harvest, and of their Vintage; which they were bound to
bring as soon as they were ripe; and it was the Portion of the Priests. See
XVIII Deuteronomy. 4. There was no determinate Portion prescribed: but they who were
tollerably good (as the Hebrews say) gave a fiftieth part; liberal Men a
fortieth; and covetous Men a sixtieth; less than which was not accepted for a
Trumah.

The firstborn of thy sons shall thou give me.] The reason of this is given
Chap. XIII. when it was first enacted.

Ver. 30. Likewise shall thou do with thine oxen, etc.] See XIII. 2, 12, 15.

On the eighth day thou shall give it me.] It was not acceptable to God,
because not fit to be offered to him, till the eighth day; for the same reason
that Children were not Circumcised till the eighth day. For all Creatures when
they are newly born, says Maimonides, ( P. III. More Nevoch. c. 49.) by reason
of their abundant moisture, are so weak and feeble, that it is doubtful whether
they will live or no: and therefore, till seven days be over, they are looked
upon as but Abortives, (so his words are) and scarce numbered among the Living.
Besides, they are not sufficiently purged till then, from the foulness of their
Stomach and Bowels: which is another reason they were not to be offered unto
God; who did not accept that which was imperfect or impure. Whatsoever was the
reason, this Law was observed also among the Gentiles, as Bochart shows out of
Pliny in his Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 50.

Yet there was this difference between these, and the First Fruits mentioned in
the foregoing Verse; that though these Creatures were sit for Sacrifice on the
eighth day, yet they might stay longer before they were offered, though not
beyond the year, for then they were not accepted, (as was observed before, XII.
5.) but the First Fruits of Corn, Wine and Oil, were to be offered presently,
as soon as they were ripe.

Ver. 31. And ye shall be holy men unto me.] Because the Israelites were a
peculiar People, separated to God by peculiar Laws and Rites by him instituted,
(and thence called an holy Nation, XIX. 6.) therefore God commanded them to
distinguish themselves, even in their Diet, from other People: and look upon it
as below their Dignity, to eat such things as the Gentiles did. This is the
meaning of their being holy to God, as appears from XIV Deuteronomy. 2, 3, 21.

Neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field.] Both
because the Blood was in it, and it was devoured by unclean Creatures. R. Levi,
before mentioned, says it was unwholesome; which he makes the reason of the
Prohibition. But whether it was torn by a Wolf, a Lion, or a Bear, or any other
Beast, it made no difference, if so be it died presently, or not long after. So
the Jews interpret the Hebrew word Terephah, as L'Empereur observes out of
Moses Mikkotsi (in his Notes upon Bava kama, cap. 7. sect. 2.) who faith it
signifies that which a Beast tears, or bruises, so that it is near to death,
though it be not actually dead. For if it was dead, they call it (...) Nevelah,
a Carcass: which in their Language signifies not only that which dies of it
self, but which is killed with a Weapon, or torn by a wild Beast. Accordingly
they take Terephah here to signify not only that which is torn by Beasts, but
that which any other way is so hurt, that it is near to death. As if it fall
from an House, and break its Ribs, or other Members; or an Arrow be shot
through its Heart or Lungs; or any Disease have affected chose Vital parts. If
Death were likely to ensue upon such things, it was not to be eaten.

In the field.] Whether it were torn in the Field, or any other place, it made
no difference: but the Field is mentioned, because there commonly such things
happen.

Ye shall cast it to the dogs.] R. Solomon says, they might sell it to the
Gentiles, whom the Jews counted no better than Dogs. Which agrees with the
Decree in the Misna, ( Bava kama, cap. 7. sect. 2.) that though it appeared
afterward, a Thief had stolen what was torn, yet he was to make the Legal
Restitution: contrary to the Opinion of R. Simeon, who absolved such a Thief,
because he might not eat it, and consequently have no benefit by it. But most
thought he might sell it; and therefore was liable to make Satisfaction. If any
Israelite did eat of it, he was to be Scourged. Sir J. Marsham quotes the like
Precept out of Phocylides his Verses, which end thus, -- (...). Let Beasts be
eaten by Beasts. Chron. Egypt. Sec. IX.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 1. THou shall not raise a false report.] The Hebrews think this Law
peculiarly concerns Judges; who are not to suffer their Minds to be
prepossessed with false Reports. For that word we translate raise, signifies
also to take up; i.e. to entertain, or receive (as we have it in the Margin)
and give credit to Reports. And consequently they were not to hear any Man's
Cause, unless his Adversary was present; but to look upon all as false, which
was said by one Party alone, without the other. So R. Levi of Barcelona. Yet he
confesses, that the Law has respect also to him, who brings an Action against
another; that he should not lay his Cause before the Judge, in the absence of
him that is to answer, though the Judge would hear it. And he also adds, that
the Rabbis take it to comprehend such, as report a Calumny, or that receive
it; or give a false Testimony. And Philo thinks the Greeks from thence took
that Law, (...), not to make a proof of a hearsay; which was in the Attick Law,
as Mr. Seldom observes, L. II. de Synedr. c. 13. p. 576. And it seems to me
most rational, to take this to relate to Witnesses, (as the following Clause
does) that they should neither Calumniate any Man, nor bring ungrounded Reports
to carry a Cause.

Put not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.] This the
Hebrews likewise think concerns Judges; who are required not to receive the
Testimony of a wicked Man, nor do any thing upon his suggestions. And here they
mention Ten sorts of Persons, whose Testimony was not to be received. But the
last words in this Clause, inclines one to think, it rather concerns Witnesses
than Judges. For to put ones hand with another, is to help and assist him; to
be confederate with him: And therefore to put the hand with the wicked, is to
help a wicked Man in a bad Cause, viz. (as the last words interpret it) by
giving a false Testimony in his behalf. Of the Hebrew word Chamas, which we
rightly render unrighteous, or unjust, Bochartus has a long Discourse in his
Hierozoic. P. II. L. II. c. 15.

Ver. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.] This may well be
thought to respect Judges, as the foregoing Verse does Witnesses. And the most
obvious meaning is, That no Judge should condemn an innocent Man, though the
whole Court, besides himself, gave Sentence against him. But many of the Jews
say, that they should not Condemn one, whom they thought guilty, if he was cast
only by one Voice: If there were a majority of two, then indeed, they say, a
Judge was bound to join with them. See Mr. Seldom, L. II. de Synedr. c. 5. p.
229. and c. 6. p. 259. where he shows they take the word evil in this place, to
signify the evil of punishment. See also cap. 12. p. 525. But this seems to be
only a Subtilty. Their Opinion is more reasonable, who by the Hebrew word
Rabbim here understand, not a multitude, but great and potent Men: to whom a
Judge was not to have respect in Judgment, no more than to a poor Man; who ( v.
3.) is opposed to these Men of might. But what follows I think will better
interpret this.

Neither shall thou speak in a cause, to decline after many to wrest Judgment.]
This is interpreted by Maimonides to signify, That no Judge was to give his
Sentence in a Capital Cause, either for Absolving, or Condemning, according to
the Opinion of the rest; if he were not able to deliver any Opinion of his own.
See Mr. Seldom, L. II. de Synedr. c. 13. p. 529. Other fancies they have about
the word Rabbim in this Clause of the Verse, which he notes there, c. 9. p.
421. But the sense I think will be most plain and easy, if we take Rabbim in
the first part of the Verse (as we do) for the Multitude; and in this latter
part for the great and potent or ruling Men, who are generally attended by a
Multitude. And expound the whole thus; That the Judges were not to be deterred,
either by the People, or by mighty Men, to pronounce a false Judgment. This
agrees with what follows, and with XIX Lev. 15.

Ver. 3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.] So as to give
a wrong Judgment in his favor. The word we translate countenance (in Hebrew
tehedar) signifies to adorn, or honor: and so we translate it XIX Lev. 15. And
so it may be translated here; Thou shall not adorn, or set off a poor Man's
Cause, with fine words and plausible colors, to make it look better than it
is. See I Deuteronomy. 16, 17.

Ver. 4. If thou meet thy enemies ox or ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again.] The Samaritan Copy adds (after ox or ass) or any
other beast. And Moses himself extends it to all sorts of Goods that are lost,
XXII Deuteronomy. 3. But the Jewish Doctors (as R. Levi of Barcelona confesses)
restrain the word Enemy, to an Israelite: as if they thought not themselves
bound to any such kindness for one of another Nation. This perhaps they
gathered from XXII Deuteronomy. 1, 2. where instead of the word Enemy, we find Moses
uses the word Brother. But this should have taught them, to look upon all Men,
even Enemies, as Brethren; having the same common Original, and bearing the
Image of the same God.

This Verse may be connected with the foregoing in this manner; If you be
inclined to show pity, do it in such Instances as these, but not in Judgment.

Ver. 5. If thou see the ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden.]
His Ass is only mentioned, but Oxen and other such like Creatures are intended;
as appears from the former Verse. Yet this likewise the hard-hearted Jewish
Doctors, would have belong only to an Israelite who hated them. And they put
several Cases upon this Law: As, what if the Beast be a Gentile's, and the
Burden belong to an Israelite, or on the contrary; what is to be done? And if
they meet with two Beasts belonging both to Israelites, and laboring under
Burdens; but one the Beast of a Friend, the other of an Enemy; which is he
bound to help? In which they resolve, that he is by this Precept to have regard
to the Beast of his Enemy: that he may subdue his evil Affection, which would
persuade him otherways. How far also the word see extends, is a question among
them: that is, how far they were to go out of their way to lend their help:
with such like Niceties, which I shall not trouble the Reader withal.

And would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him.] The sense
is clear enough: but the construction of the words, in the Hebrew, is not so
plain. For the word Azab, which we translate help, signifies to leave or
forsake: and so the Chaldee here interprets it; Thou shall in that moment
dismiss or forsake thy enmity to him, and go and help him. And L. de Dieu to
the same purpose; Rather than leave him under his Burden, quit thine enmity to
him, etc. A great many other ways there are to make out the Grammar of the
Hebrew words; but Bochart thinks all in vain: unless instead of the Particle lo
with a Vau, we admit it with an Aleph: and then they run clearly in the Hebrew
in this manner, Thou shall cease (or abstain) from leaving him, (i. e. not
follow thy own ill inclinations to pass by him) leaving thou shall not leave
him, ( i. e. by no means leave him) viz. to raise up his Beast himself, as if
it nothing concerned thee. Or, Thou shall abstain from leaving it, ( i. e. the
Ass, laboring under his Burden) I say thou shall by no means leave it. The
same thing is repeated, because it is a Command so opposite to Men's depraved
Affections; and therefore was fit to be inculcated, that they might not lightly
pass it over. See Hierozoio. P. I. L. II. c. 40. p. 399.

Ver. 6. Thou shall not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.] As they
might not favor a Man because he was poor, ( v. 3.) so much less might they
wrong him; or not do him right, because he wanted Money to prosecute it. There
seems to be an Emphasis (as Conradus Pellicanus observes) in the word thy poor:
importing that they had such a relation to them, that they ought to be as much
concerned for them, as any other Member of their Body.

But the Jews fancying this to be sufficiently included in the Precept before
mentioned, v. 3. understand here by the poor, a bad man: who is pauper
praeceptorum, non facultatum, one that wants Virtue, not Money. To whom a Judge
might not say, He was a wicked Fellow, and Condemn him without any further
Examination of his Cause: for it belongs to God (says the same R. Levi) to
execute Judgment upon the ungodly, and not to the Judges.

Ver. 7. Keep thee far from a false matter.] i. e. From a false Judgment (for
he seems to speak to the Judges) and neither admit that which is false, nor
pronounce it.

And the innocent and righteous slay thou not.] That is, says the before-named
R. Levi Barzel, beware carefully, lest thou take away the Life of him, that
may be innocent of that, whereof he is accused. And therefore, he says, the
Judges were to Condemn no Man, but by the Testimony of two Eyewitnesses. And
they make this Precept as much as, Thou shall not judge out of Conjectures.
Nay, if there were two Witnesses, that did not speak to the same matter, he was
not to be Condemned. As if one Witness said, he saw such a Man break the
Sabbath, and another said he saw him commit Idolatry; Judgment was not to be
given against him, upon this Testimony; because Moses says, Slay not the
Innocent. Another Example of which is still more close, which is mentioned in
the T. Sanhedrim: If one said he saw him Worship the Moon; and another that he
saw him Worship the Sun; the Man was not to be Condemned who was thus accused,
because the Witnesses did not speak to the same sort of Idolatry. See Seldom L.
II. de Synedr. c. 13. p. 567. By the same reason they were not to acquit him,
who was plainly Convicted of such Impieties.

For I will not justify the wicked.] i. e. Such an unjust Judge.

Ver. 8. And thou shall take no gift.] No, not to Absolve the Innocent; or to
Condemn the Guilty: as it is interpreted in Siphri.

For a gift blinds the wise.] Such Presents made to a Judge, are apt to cast
a Mist (as we speak) before his Eyes, i.e. to corrupt his Understanding; though
he be otherwise perspicacious enough, to discern between Truth and Falsehood,
Good and Evil, 1 Samuel VIII. 3. The word which we translate wise, is in the
Hebrew Piccehim, open or seeing: concerning which consult Bochart. L. I.
Canaan, c. 16. p. 470.

And perverteth the words of the righteous.] By words seems to be meant the
Sentence of those, who might otherwise have been inclined to be righteous and
upright Judges.

The Hebrew Lawyers say, That not only Pecuniary Gifts are here forbidden, but
such words also (I suppose they mean Promises of Reward) as may win the
Affection: and that he who gave the Present was guilty, as well as he that
received it. See Seldom de Synedriis, L. II. c. 13. p. 570. But especially Joh.
Coch. ad excerpt. Gem. Sanhedrim. cap. 1. sect. 10. Annot. 4. where, among
other things, he gives this ingenious derivation of the Hebrew word Schochad,
which we translate gift (out of the Treatise called Chetuboth) where it is said
to be as much as Schechu chad, that is, whereby he is one. For the Party who
receives the Gift has his Mind so drawn to the giver, that he becomes one and
the same with him. And no Man is fit to be Judge in his own Cause. Plato
thought this so necessary a Law, that he expressly enacts ( L. XII. de Legibus,
p. 955.) that all Men who served their Country in any Office, should (...),
perform their Duty without Gifts. (...). He that offended against this Law, was
to suffer death. Which was the Law of the XII. Tables among the ancient Romans.
Judex qui ob rem dicendam, pecuniam accepisse convictus est, capite punitor. A
Judge that is convicted to have received Money, for giving his Sentence, let
him lose his Head.

Ver. 9. Also thou shall not oppress a stranger.] This was said before XXII.
21. but then it was a Precept to all Israel; which is here applied peculiarly
to Judges. Whom he would have to deal equally with Strangers, and to make no
difference between them and Israelites, remembering what they themselves were
not long ago; and that they found by experience it was Affliction enough to be
Strangers. That Is the meaning of what follows in this Verse.

For ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt.] Ye have felt what a distressed Condition that is; how friendless and
helpless. See XXIV Deuteronomy. 17, 18. XXVII. 19.

Ver. 10. And six years thou shall sow thy land.] There was the same reason for
dressing their Trees.

And gather in the fruit thereof.] Together with the Fruit of their Trees.

Ver. 11. But the seventh year thou shall let it rest, and lie still.] Neither
sow, nor reap, nor prune their Trees, nor gather the Fruit.

The poor of thy people may eat.] And the Levites, and themselves also; who
might take their share, not to lay up, but for present use: though not as
Proprietors, but in common with the rest of the Country. Whence it was that
Alexander the Great, allowing them to live by their ancient Laws, among other
things granted (...), every seventh year should be tribute free; Josephus L.
XI. Archaeol. c. 8. For since they received nothing, it seemed reasonable to
him they should pay nothing.

And what they leave, the beasts of the field shall eat.] This signifies, God
sent such vast Plenty, when they observed his Laws, that so much sprung up of
it self, as would more than satisfy Men, and afford Food to the Beasts.

In like manner thou shall deal with thy vineyard and olive-yard.] Under these
two are comprehended all other sort of Fruit Trees, as the Hebrews themselves
acknowledge, who give several Reasons for this Law. Which was ordained, says
Maimonides ( P. III. More Nevoch. c. 39.) in compassion to all Men in general,
that they might have some time of breathing and refreshment. But principally,
say others of them, to be a memorial of the Creation of the World, and the
production of all things by the Power of God, in six days, and his resting on
the seventh^. Their exposing all things in common which that year produced, as
well as letting the Land rest, Put them in remembrance (says R. Levi of
Barcelona, Praecept. LXIX.) that God was their Preserver, as well as Creator:
the Earth bringing forth Fruit every year, not by its own proper strength, or
of its own accord, but because it has a Lord upon whom it depends; who, when
he speaks, has a right to dispose of its Fruits to a public use. This Command
also bred in them a trust in God and in his Providence; and was a Curb to
Covetousness, and taught them Mercy also and Liberality. Philo adds, that this
was a Politic contrivance to let the Earth rest: partly that it might have
time to recruit its strength, that it might bring forth more plentifully; and
partly that the People might grow stronger and more apt for all Employments, by
so long forbearance of their Labors. This Eusebius thought worthy to
transcribe out of him at large in his Praepar. Evang. L. VIII. c. 7.

But this Precept about the Year of Rest, is more fully delivered in XXV Lev.
v. 2, 3. where see what I have noted.

Ver. 12. Six days thou shall do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shall
rest.] He would not have them imagine, they should rest less on the Sabbath
this Year, than in others, because this whole Year was a kind of Sabbath; but
keep it with the usual strictness. Which is the reason perhaps of the
repetition of this Precept in this place.

That thine ox and thine ass may rest, etc.] This shows that one great end of
instituting the Observation of this Day at Marah (XV. 25. XVI. 23.) was that
Men and Beasts might rest, in remembrance of the rest that God had given them
from their Burdens in Egypt. See XXXV. 2. R. Levi Barzelonita observes that
this Precept is repeated in the Law XII. times.

Ver. 13. In all things that I have said unto you, be circumspect.] Be cautious
lest you offend in any of the forenamed Particulars; but especially in that
which follows.

And make no mention of the names of other gods.] Such Cautions as these, to
prevent Idolatry, are repeated no less than XLIV. times in the Law, as the same
R. Levi observes. And the meaning of this is, either that they should not Swear
by other Gods, or make any Vows in their Names; nor consequently enter into
Society with Gentiles (as the best of the Hebrew Writers understand it, and as
the Vulgar Latin takes it) or that they should not so much as simply name the
Gods of other Nations. They who are of this last Opinion, differ in their
Explication of it. For some of them say, only the calling them by such Names as
attribute some Divinity to them, is the thing forbidden; not calling them by
their proper Names of Moloch or Bell, or the like: and thus Tertullian
understood it. But there are others, who think it unlawful so much as to use
any of their Names in common Discourse; though there be no mention of their
Divinity. For Chemosh and Milcom, and such like Names, they say, are not
mentioned in Scripture, but with detestation and reproach (as the Abomination
of the Moabites or Ammonites) and therefore they think it unlawful to say, I
invite thee on the Feast Day of such an Idol of the Gentiles, or the like. Yet
some of those who imagine the simple use of their Names to be forbidden, except
the Names of those mentioned in Scripture. So Maimonides; The Names of the
Idols of the Gentiles which are mentioned in Scripture, it is lawful for us to
Name; as Peor, Bell, Nebo, Baal, etc. See Seldom L. II. de Jure N. and G. c.
13. p. 269, etc. They say, this Precept binds Men and Women, in all places, and
at all times; and the Punishment for its violation, was beating.

Neither shall it be heard out of thy mouth.] i. e. With any respect or
reverence to them: Otherwise, the simple pronunciation of the Name was not
unlawful.

The Sabbath being instituted, partly to preserve them from Idolatry, some
think that the reason why this Precept is joined to that.

Ver. 14. Three times shall thou keep a feast unto me in the year.] Viz. At the
Passover, Pentecost, and when they gathered all the Fruits of the Earth, and
dwelt in Tabernacles; as it follows in the next Verses. The first of which was
plainly instituted, in memory of their coming out of Egypt. The second, some
think, was in memory of their coming into Canaan (rather, of the overthrow of
Pharaoh in the Sea, and giving the Law on Mount Sinai). And the third in memory
of their dwelling so long in the Wilderness, and of the wonders which God did
there; as Maimonides observes in his More Nevoch. P. III. c. 43. At these three
great Solemnities three things were to be done: First, they were to make a
Feast: Secondly, to appear before God in the Court of the Temple: and thirdly
to rejoice. Besides which, they were to bring certain Offerings unto God.

Ver. 15. Thou shall keep the feast of unleavened bread, etc.] See XII. 17,
etc. XIII. 6, 7.

In the time appointed of the month Abib.] Or in the Month of new ears of Corn.
See XIII. 4. For many Learned men (particularly Huetius) think this word Abib
not to be a proper Name, but an Apellative (as they speak) the proper Names of
Months being not yet used among the Hebrews: who spoke of them before the
Captivity of Babylon, according to the order and number wherein they stood,
viz. first, second, third, etc. Month. See Demonstr. Evang. Prop. IV. Cap. de
Libro Joshuae n. 2.

And none shall appear before me empty.] The phrase in the Hebrew (which we
translate appear before me) is very remarkable, viz. None shall see my face:
Which does not signify that they beheld the External Symbol of his Presence;
but that they looked directly that way where it was; and that they should not
be accepted by God, unless they brought some Present with them. For none
approached to an Earthly Majesty in those Countries without a Present, (as we
read in the Sacred Story) which was a Token of Love and Affection, as well as
of Respect and Honor. And therefore this Precept did not belong only to this
Feast, but to all the three mentioned in the Verse before, as appears from XVI
Deuteronomy. 16. And accordingly there were special Oblations ordained by the Law it
self, which were then to be made. At the Passover, when their Harvest began,
they were to bring a Sheaf of the First Fruits of their Harvest, and might not
eat any Corn till this was done, XXIII Lev. 10, 14. At the next Feast they
brought two wave Loaves, for a second First-fruit, of their Wheat-harvest,
XXIII Lev. 17. and at the Feast of Tabernacles they offered the First Fruits of
Wine and Oil. See Mr. Mede, Discourse XLVI. p. 355. Besides all which, good Men
brought Free Will Offerings; which are often mentioned in the Law.

Ver. 16. And the feast of harvest.] Called also the Feast of Weeks, XXXIV. 22.
because it was Seven Weeks after the Passover. Mr. Mede in the place now named,
thinks this was called the Harvest Feast; because as Harvest began at the
Passover, so it ended at Pentecost. And thus Bochart also: At the Passover they
first put the Sickle into the Corn; and about Pentecost Harvest was finished,
and all brought into the Barn. Hierozoic. P. I. L. III. c. 13. But this seems
not to be true; for now only the First Fruits were brought: which were not
offered in the end, but in the beginning of Harvest. And so it follows here;

The first fruits of thy labors which thou have sown in the field.] Which is
not to be understood of all their Labors, but of those Fruits which were first
sown in the Ground. It being therefore called the Harvest Feast, because the
principal part of Harvest, viz. the Wheat Harvest (as it is expressly called
XXXIV. 22.) then began: which sort of Grain was sown before Barley, as that was
before Flax; and therefore here called the first fruits of their labors sown
in the field.

And the feast of in-gathering.] Called also the Feast of Tabernacles, XXIII
Lev. 34.

Which is in the end of the year.] By this it appears that their Year anciently
began in the Month Tisri, about Autumn: at which time the World it self began,
as Scaliger, and a great many other Learned Men assert, with such Reasons as
are not easy to be confuted.

When thou have gathered in thy labors out of the field.] At this Feast their
Harvest was completed; the Fruits of the Earth being not only ripe, but
gathered into their Barns. Which was the foundation of the great rejoying we
read of at this time; because God now gave them some rest, and respiration, as
Maimonides speaks, from their Employments, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 43. where he
observes that Aristotle himself, in his VIIIth Book of Ethics, mentions such a
Feast among the Gentiles, and upon the same ground, in these words, as he
recites them. Anciently Sacrifices, and public Assemblies for the sake of
Sacrifices, were in the gathering of the Fruits and Products of the Earth: as
if the Sacrifices were offered for their respiration. The Israelites dwelt in
Booths at this Feast for another reason: and their dwelling in Booths was now
most tolerable (as the same Maimonides there notes) because the Weather was
moderate at that time; when they were not wont to be troubled either with heat,
or with rain.

Ver. 17. Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the LORD
God.] This Verse more fully explains what was said v. 14. by showing where they
should keep these Feasts, viz. before the LORD; i. e. in the place where his
most glorious Majesty should settle; which was first in the Tabernacle, and
afterward in the Temple: And then who should appear before him there, viz. all
the Males. Others were not bound to it; though some Religious People carried
their whole Families with them, as appears by Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1. This Command
is repeated XXXIV. 23. and the true reason of it seems to have been this: That
while they dwelt in the Wilderness they are no Meat at all at their private
Tables, but what had been first offered up to God at the Tabernacle, XVII Lev.
4, 5. Which Precept was dispensed withal when they came into the Land of
Canaan, and dwelt, many of them, so remote from the Tabernacle, that they could
not come up every day to Sacrifice, XII Deuteronomy. 21. Instead of which therefore
there were these three constant and set times appointed in the year; in which
every Male was bound to come up, and see God at his Tabernacle, and there ate
and drink before him. Whence the Sacrifice which was then offered, was wont to
be called a Sacrifice of Seeing, as Dr. Cudworth has observed in his little
Treatise of the Right Notion of the Lord's Supper. But, as the Doctors
interpret it, they were not bound to bring their Males to appear before the
LORD, till they were able to walk, in their Father's hand, up from Jerusalem to
the Temple.

Ver. 18. Thou shall not offer the blood of my Sacrifice.] That is, the Paschal
Lamb, as Jonathan in express words interprets; and it appears from XXXIV. 25.
That the Passover was a Sacrifice, I observed before XII. 27.

With leavened bread, etc.] There being three great Solemn Feasts appointed in
the foregoing Verses, ( v. 14, 17.) in this and the following he prescribes
some Rules how they were to be observed. And here, in this Verse, ordains two
things relating to the Passover, that it should not be eaten with leavened
bread; nor any of the Fat of it remain until the morning. Both which were
ordained before (XII. 10, 14, 15.) in its first Institution: and here repeated,
upon its being mentioned again with the other Feasts.

It may be sit for me here to observe, that to move the Israelites to keep this
Passover with the greater care, God calls it both here, and in XXXIV. 25. after
a peculiar manner, my sacrifice, and my Feast (as the latter part of this Verse
may be translated) being a Feast of a most Solemn Nature; and a Sacrifice then
offered of singular use. For which reason he requires them, as not to offer it
with Leaven (which was at that time forbidden for special reasons) so not to
reserve the Fat of the Offering till the next day. For that was not for the
honor of the Sacrifice: Flesh being apt quickly to corrupt in those hot
Countries, and to offend the Palate, or the Nose, which had been against the
dignity of the Sacrifice. Which is the reason the Jews give, why the Flesh of
the Peace offerings was not to be kept till the third day, XIX Lev. 6. It was
to preserve the magnificence of the Sacrifice; things kept so long being apt to
stink. Whence (...), yesterdays meats, in Hippocrates, is the same with (...),
corrupt: and Galen expounds (...) by the word (...), to tend to corruption; as
Pet. Castellanus observes L. I. de Esu Carnium, c. 5. p. 42.

Ver. 19. The first of the first fruits of thy land, thou shall bring unto the
house of the LORD thy God.] This Precept has a respect to the next Feast, that
of Pentecost. And therefore, though there were several First Fruits, which were
all to be offered in their time (which were of seven things, Barley, Wheat,
Figs, Pomegranates, Olives, Dates, and Grapes) yet here are meant only the two
Loaves or Cakes made of their new Wheat, which were to be offered at this
Feast, (XXIII Lev. 17.) For till this was done, they might not make use of
their Corn. See more concerning this matter on XXIII Lev. 10. R. Levi of
Barcelona, and others, rightly observe, that this was brought, as an
Acknowledgment unto God, That he was the Giver of all good things.

Thou shall not seethe a Kid in its mothers milk.] This Precept has a
particular respect to the third Feast, that of the in-gathering of the Fruits
of the Earth, in the end of the Year, mentioned v. 16. And the Jews commonly
take it to be a Prohibition against eating a Kid so boiled, or tasting of the
Milk: taking it to be a Precept against Cruelty. But here is not a word about
eating, either of the Kid or the Milk; but only about boiling. The famous
Bochartus mentions three other Interpretations, but confutes them all: and
taking the words simply, as we translate them, supposes there was some such
Custom as this among the Gentiles, which Moses would not have them imitate. And
so does Maimonides in his More Nevoch. P. III. c. 48. where he takes this
indeed for a Command not to eat Flesh with such Milk: but says, that, besides
it was very gross Nourishment, etc. it seems to him it was prohibited, because
it smelt of Idolatry; the Gentiles doing so in their Worship, upon some of
their Feasts. He could not find indeed, as he confesses, any such Rite in the
Books of the Zabii: but yet he was confirmed in this Opinion, by the Law
constantly mentioning this, only when it speaks of their Feasts; for there are
other places where we meet with it, XXXIV. 26. XVI Deuteronomy. 21. in both which he
speaks, as he does here, of their three great Feasts. At the last of which,
Abarbinel expressly affirms, the ancient Idolaters were wont, when they gathered
the Fruits of the Earth, to sees a Kid in its Mothers Milk, that their Gods
might be the more propitious to them. But as he names no Author for his
opinion, so he does not explain the manner of it. Our most Learned Dr. Cudworth
was the first Person who happily found this in a Karaite writer; who says, All
the Trees and Fields and Gardens were sprinkled with this broth (of a Kid
seethed in its Mother's Milk) after a magical manner, to make them more
fruitful in the following year. This Bochart also takes to be the truest
Interpretation, and quotes the forenamed Doctor for it, (not having seen the
Author himself.) P. I. Hierozoic. L. II. c. 52. See Right Notion of the Lord's
Supper, p. 25.

To which may be added, that a Goat was anciently used in Magical Rites; and
that Demons were wont to appear in that form. But it must be noted withal,
that in every one of the three places, where this Precept is mentioned, the
LXX. translate the word we render Kid, by (...) a Lamb; though every where else
they translate it (...). And I make no question, but we are to understand here
either a Lamb, or Kid boiled in its Mother's Milk; and the Hebrews say, any
other clean Creature. Concerning which I shall add no more, but that nothing
could be more contrary to Nature (and therefore agreeable to the Institutions
of the Devil) than to boil any young Creature, in the Milk of its Mother, from
whom it came. Which they first offered to their Gods, and then eat some of it
themselves, and the rest they sprinkled, as before-said. Some Relics of which
Custom we find even among the Romans themselves, who propitiated Sylvanus, with
offering him Milk, and Faunus with a Kid: and every one knows both these were
used in the Worship of Bacchus.

Ver. 20. Behold, I send an Angel before thee.] In the 23th Verse he calls him
mine Angel: by which the Jews commonly understand Michael; there being but a
very little difference between Malachi (which signifies my Angel) and Michael.
But a great many Christians think this was not a created Angel, but an
increated, viz. the Eternal Son of God; who they supposed appeared to Moses in
the Bush, and conducted them all along to Mount Sinai. Which I am afraid to
assert, because it seems dangerous to me (as I observed upon XLVIII Genesis 16.)
to call him simply an Angel; i. e. a Minister, or Messenger, without any such
addition as that in III Malach. 3. The Angel of the Covenant. For so he was at
his Incarnation of which he there speaks: before which I dare not ascribe to
him such Ministerial Works as these, of bringing the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, and going before them to lead them the way to Canaan. This was properly
the Work of an Angel, to whom Moses attributes it, when he orders his
Ambassadors to say to the King of Edom, XX Numb. 16. When we cried unto the
LORD he heard our voice, and sent an Angel, and has brought us forth out of
Egypt, etc. But this Angel was a prime Minister in the heavenly Host, by whom
he was accompanied. So he says to Joshua, V. 14. I am come as Captain of the
Host of the LORD: which is the Title of Michael in X Daniel 13, 21. But though
we thus understand it here, this does not exclude the Presence of God himself,
but rather proves it: For this Angel and his Host, was sent from the
SCHECHINAH, who was in the Pillar of Cloud; which was moved by this Angel, and
conducted them through the Wilderness. See III. 2.

To keep thee in the way, etc.] To preserve and protect them, as well as to
direct and guide them, till they came to Canaan; which was the place God had
prepared for them.

Ver. 21. Beware of him.] Or, observe him.

Obey his voice.] Because he did but report what God himself commanded; who was
there present with them, as long as they obeyed him.

Provoke him not.] By any disobedience.

For he will not pardon your transgressions.] But punish you, when you
contumaciously offend me.

For my Name is in him.] He acts by my Authority and Power, and sustains my
Person, who am present where he is. For the Name of God is said to be there,
where he is present after a singular and extraordinary manner, 1 Kings VIII.
16. 1 Chronicles. VI. 5, 6. Maimonides expounds it, My word is in him; i. e. says
he, God's will and pleasure was declared by the Angel, P. I. More Nevoch. c.
64. In which he seems to follow the Chaldee, who translates it, for his Word is
in my Name; i. e. what he speaks is by my Authority.

Ver. 22. But if thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak.] By
this it appears that the words of the Angel, were the words of God; who spoke
by him: and both are to be understood to be present. See XXII Genesis 11, 15.

Then I will be an enemy unto thine Enemies, etc.] God and the Angel seem to me
to be so distinguished, in this Verse, that we should not look upon the Angel
as God, but as his Minister.

Ver. 23. For my Angel shall go before thee.] The word Malachi (my Angel)
consisting of the very same Letters with Michael, the Author of Baal Hatturim
takes it, as if he had said, Michael my proper or peculiar Angel, etc.

And bring thee unto the Amorites.] Who were the principal People in the Land
of Canaan; and had made themselves Masters of the first Country, which Joshua
conquered. See X Genesis 16.

And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, etc.] Concerning these, and the other
People here mentioned, see X Genesis 16, 17. XV. 19, etc. The Reader cannot but
observe that here are only VI. Nations mentioned, whereas there were VII. in
all, whom God delivered up into their hands, III Josh. 10. yet in another
place, where he commands them all to be utterly destroyed, Moses mentions but
VI. as he does here XX Dent. 17. For, as some have conjectured, the Gergasites,
who are here omitted, had been subdued by the Amorites, and were mixed with
them; who were the most powerful of all the VII. Nations, and had spread
themselves into many parts of the Country; as appears from XIV Genesis 13. XIII
Numb. 29. 1 Deuteronomy. 7, 19, 44.

Ver. 24. Thou shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them.] This is a
Caution against the Idolatry of the People of Canaan: into whose Country, when
he had brought them, he charges them to be so far from doing any honor to
their Gods, either outwardly by bowing down to them, or inwardly, by serving
them; i. e. as some of the Hebrews interpret it, praying to them, or giving
them thanks, etc. ( Seldom L. III. de Jure N. and G. c. 3.) that he commands
them to break them down, and utterly destroy them.

Nor do after their works.] These words are so large, that they may comprehend
all the abominable things which were done by the VII. Nations (mentioned in
XVIII Lev. and other places) but here the matter seems to restrain them to
their Worship, which he would not have them imitate, by building Temples or
Altars in honor of their Gods, or offering such Sacrifices as they did, or
observing any of their Religious Rites.

But thou shall utterly overthrow them.] This relates to the People of the
Land; as it is explained in XX Don't. 17.

And quite break down their Images.] For they were bound entirely to root
Idolatry out of the Land of Canaan: though in other Countries, which they might
conquer, they did not think themselves bound to break their Images, as Seldom
observes, L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 2.

Ver. 25. And ye shall serve the LORD your God.] Worship him as he directs, and
no other being. I observed before that none were so senseless, as to imagine a
Figure of any thing made of Wood or Stone, etc. to be the Creator of Heaven and
Earth: but they worshipped them (as Maimonides well observes) as things
intermediate between the most High, and them; which is here forbidden, More
Nevoch. P. I. c. 36.

And he shall bless thy bread and thy water, and I will take sickness away from
thee.] This is a Promise, that he would abundantly supply them with Meat and
Drink, and also give them health; without which they could take no comfort in
that plentiful Provision.

Ver. 26. There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren in thy Land.]
Abortion and Barrenness hinder all Propagation, both in Men and Beasts; and
therefore to the two foregoing Blessings, of Plenty and Health, he adds two
more in this place; a numerous increase of their Cattle and of their own
Progeny; together with long Life in the Land which he gave them.

The number of thy days I will fulfill.] Thou shall come to a good old Age, such
as healthful Men (who are not cut off by any accident) are wont to attain.
Procopius Gazaeus gathers from hence, that there is not a fixed term set for
every Man's Life. But it rather seems to suppose that there is a Term fixed
beyond which Men cannot ordinarily go (to some a longer, to some a shorter,
according to their several Constitutions) but may come short of it, by various
Accidents, and by their own ill usage of themselves, or by the Judgment of God:
who also, in regard to their Obedience, prolongs the Life of some Men, beyond
what it would naturally reach.

Ver. 27. I will send my fear before thee.] Strike a terror into the
Inhabitants of Canaan before thou come thither, which shall facilitate the
Conquest of them. See II Joshua 9, 10. with which agrees the Story that is told
in the Gemara Hierosol. ad Tit. Shebiith (by R. Samuel ben Nachman) that upon
Joshua's denouncing War against the VII. Nations, the Gergasites fled into
Africa. Which may be true Perhaps of a part of them, but not of them all; for
some of them were remaining, it appears from the Book of Joshua III. 10. XXIV.
11. This is confirmed by another Story in the Talmud of the Africans, suing to
Alexander the Great to be restored to their ancient Possessions in Canaan
(which I mentioned before) and the old Inscription in Procopius ( L. II. de
Rebus Vandal.) not far from Tangier, which said the ancient Inhabitants of that
Country fled from the face of Joshua the Son of Nun. Seldom L. VI. de Jure N.
and G. c. 13. p. 736.

And I will destroy all the people to whom thou shall come.] Make them more
afraid, when they come to fight; so that presently they shall run away, and be
easily slain: For that is the meaning of the last words, I will make all thine
Enemies turn their backs to thee.

Ver. 28. And I will send hornets before thee.] Either before they came
thither, or when they marched against the People of that Country. Both seem to
be true: that many of them were forced to quit their Country, when it was
infested by the Hornets God sent in great Swarms among them; and that they who
remained, when they came to sight, were assaulted by these Hornets, which flew
in their faces, and so forely pricked their Eyes (as Kimchi and R. Solomon take
it) that they could not see to strike a stroke. Whence those words of Joshua
(who expressly says this was fulfilled) XXIV. 12. that the Amorites were not
driven out by the Sword and bow of the Israelites, but by the Sting of these
Hornets. Which seem also to have pursued them when they fled away, and killed
them in their lurking holes, where they hid themselves after the fight, VII
Deuteronomy. 20.

Which shall drive out.] That several Nations have been driven out of their
Country, by contemptible Creatures, such as Frogs, Mice, Snakes, and Gnats, is
made good by Bochartus out of several Authors. And he has particularly shown
that by these very Creatures, Wasps and Bees, People have been forced to
forsake their Country, as Herodotus, Appianus, and Strabo testisie. See his
Hierozoic. P. II. L. IV. c. 13. p. 539, etc. where he shows the Sting of this
sort of Wasp (called a Hornet) is of all other the most pernicious: for it is
bigger than the ordinary Wasp, and fiercer; seldom stinging, as Pliny says,
without putting Men into a Fever. Ib. p. 543. And of their flying at Men's Eyes,
see what he alleges out of good Authors, p. 535.

The Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite from before thee.] These three
Nations it seems were principally infested by the Hornets; among whom perhaps
they were more venomous than elsewhere, (for so R. Solomon says, their Poison
was deadly) though the rest of the Nations also felt their Sting, as we read in
XXIV Josh. 11, 12.

Ver. 29. I will not drive them out from before thee in one year.] All the
reasons of which are not here declared, (as they are elsewhere, III Judge. 1, 2,
3.) because he would not dishearten them.

Lest the land become desolate, etc.] i.e. Lest some part of the Land should be
left without Inhabitants, and so be possessed by wild Beasts; which might have
been very dangerous to the Israelites in other parts where they were settled.
For if all the People of the VII. Nations, had been destroyed at once, the
Israelites were not yet numerous enough to People the whole Country; especially
when two Tribes and an half were settled on the other side of Jordan.

Ver. 30. By little and little I will drive them out before thee.] Diminish
them by degrees, till they were wholly expelled.

Until thou be increased and inherit the land.] Until the Israelites were grown
so numerous, that they were able to stock the whole Country.

Ver. 31. And I will set thy bounds, etc.] This was the utmost extent of the
Country, which he intended to bestow upon them, (See XV Genesis 18.) but they did
not enjoy it till the times of David, 2 Samuel VIII. 1, 3, etc. and Solomon 1
Kings IV. 21, 24. when their Dominion seems to have been enlarged not only to
Euphrates, but even beyond it, IV Ezra. 16, 20. (See my Paraphrase upon LXXII
Psalm. 8.) Before these times, it appears by the Book of Joshua, and those that
follow, that many of the old Inhabitaints remained long after his death.

From the Red Sea to the sea of the Philistines.] These were the Bounds from
East to West. For though the Red Sea was toward the South, yet the farthermost
part of it lay East. And the Sea of the Philistines is that now called the
Mediterranean, which was full West.

And from the Desert.] Of Arabia, called Shur, XV. 22.

Unto the River.] i. e. To Euphrates: Which made the Southern and Northern
Bounds of the Country God promised to them.

For I will deliver the inhabitants of the Land into thy hand.] This seems to
relate to that Land which the VII. Nations inhabited: for as far as Euphrates
they never drove out all the Inhabitants, but only made them Tributaries.

And thou shall drive them out before thee.] In such manner as is mentioned in
the foregoing Verses.

Ver. 32. Thou shall make no covenant with them.] i. e. With the People of the
VII. Nations. But with other Gentiles they might make Covenants: only not
suffer them to live in their Land, unless they renounced all Idolatry. Nay,
Maimonides is of opinion, that such of the VII. Nations, as renounced Idolatry,
were to be received into their Friendship: For that Law in the XX Deuteronomy. which
requires them to send a Summons to every City before they besieged it, with an
offer of Peace, he extends even unto them; and grounds his opinion upon XI
Josh. 19, 20. As for that Objection which seems to lie against this, about the
Gibeonites, who needed not by craft to have obtained a League with the
Israelites, if this were true Doctrine: His Answer is, That Joshua had sent a
Summons, with offers of Peace to them, and all the rest; which they rejected;
but would afterward have gladly accepted, and then it was not to be admitted:
and therefore they contrived that cunning way to be received into Friendship
with the Israelites. See P. Cunaeus L. II. de Republ. Hebr. c. 20. And Seldom
L. VI. de Jure N. and G. c. 13. where he quotes a Passage out of the Jerusalem
Gemara, which says, That Joshua sent three Letters to the Gibeonites. But he
shows withal, that other Jews contradict this; and expressly declare the VII.
Nations were not to be invited to peace. What the terms were on which others
were invited. See there cap. 14.

All this considered, I am inclined to think Maimonides his opinion too true;
which that place in Joshua very much favors; and so does the story of Rahab,
and the practice of Solomon; who only put the Remainders of these Nations under
Tribute, 1 Kings IX. 20, 21.

Nor with their gods.] This prohibits them to suffer any of the VII. Nations to
Exercise Idolatry among them, as R. Levi of Barcelona interprets it. Or rather,
he forbids them to make any Vows to their Gods, or oblige themselves to perform
any Act of Worship to them.

Ver. 32. They shall not dwell in thy land.] If a Gentile did renounce his
Idolatry, he might dwell among them; and was called a Stranger, Toshab,
dwelling, or inhabiting. But if he did not forsake it, they might not sell him
a Foot of Land, nor let him Hire a House among them: only he might come and
sell Commodities to them, as the same R. Levi expounds it. But Maimonides says,
they might not so much as suffer them to pass through their Country, when they
had power to hinder it; which others think too rigid an Opinion, as Mr. Seldom
shows, L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 3. p. 155, etc.

Lest they make thee sin against me.] All Society with Idolaters was forbidden,
lest they should infect the Israelites with their Infidelity, (as the same R.
Levi speaks) of which there was the greater danger, because they were too prone
to follow the Gentile Customs.

For if thou serve their gods.] This Caution being repeated three times in this
Chapter, ought to have been the more diligently observed by the Jews, and made
them more fearful of entering into Familiarity with Idolaters. Who were of
various sorts; for not only every Nation had its proper and peculiar Gods, but
every City, Town, House, n ay every Man made themselves Gods according to their
fancy.

It will surely be a snare unto thee.] Bring great Calamities upon thee, and at
last be thy ruin; as it is explained XXIII Josh. 13. II Judge. 3. For instead of
driving out the VII. Nations, they brought Israel under their yoke, and
grievously oppressed them; as we read in the Story of the Judges; particularly
in the IVth Chapter.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 1. AND he said unto Moses.] When God had delivered the foregoing Laws
unto Moses in the Mount, where he was with him (XX. 21.) after he had spoken
the X. Commandments; he bad him go down (as we read hear he did, v. 3.) and set
them before the People, XXI. 1. And when he had engaged them in a Covenant to
observe these Laws ( v. 7. of this Chapter) then to come up to him again; and
bring Aaron, and the rest that are here mentioned, with him.

Come up.] To receive further Orders from the Divine Majesty; together with the
two Tables of Stone.

Unto the LORD.] To the Mount, where the Glory of the LORD appeared; and from
whence he had spoken the Ten words.

Thou, and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, etc.] But not all to the same nearness unto
the Divine Majesty; as appears by the following Verse.

And seventy of the Elders of Israel.] This seems to intimate that there were
more than LXX. called Elders: But these were the Chief, being perhaps the Heads
of those Families which came into Egypt; which were just Seventy. See XVIII.
12. For he does not direct Moses how to choose them (as Corn. Bertram observes,
L. de Repub. Jud. c. 5.) but speaks as if they were well known and
distinguished from other Persons, by the rank they held among them. And
therefore called v. 11. the Nobles, or as the Latins speak, Magnates, seu
Optimates, the great Men, of the best quality in Israel. The reason of their
being thus called up to God, was to be Witnesses of Moses's ascending up to the
place where the Divine Majesty appeared; and that they also might have some
sight of it, v. 10.

And worship ye afar off.] All of them, before they came to the Mount, were, at
a good distance from it, to fall down prostrate before God, that they might be
possessed with such an holy Reverence to him, as not to presume to approach
nearer than they were ordered.

Ver. 2. And Moses alone shall come near the LORD.] Unto the very top of the
Mount, where the Glory of the LORD abode, v. 16, 17, 18. unto which none was
admitted but himself. Who now came nearer than he had done before, (XX. 21.)
for he went into the midst of the Cloud, v. 18.

But they shall not come nigh.] Unto that part of the Mount, whether he went;
but keep in a lower station.

Neither shall the people go up with him.] But stay at the bottom of the Mount,
(as they did before the giving the X. Commandments, XIX. 17.) below the place
where the Elders were. So I think Maimonides rightly understands this place, in
his More Nevoch. P. II. c. 32. where speaking of the several degrees of
Prophecy, or Familiarity with God, he observes that Moses was here placed in
the Supreme degree, (he alone being allowed to come near the LORD) below him
was Aaron placed; and below him Nadab and Abihu; and below them the LXX.
Elders; and beneath them, the rest of the People. Which is the meaning of that
saying of their Wise men, Moses is a wall by himself, and Aaron a wall by
himself: that is, they were in separate Apartments, at this glorious Appearance
of God.

Ver. 3. And Moses came.] From the Mount, where he had received the Precepts
mentioned in the three foregoing Chapters.

And told the People all the words of the LORD, and all the Judgments.] Some
understand here by the words of the LORD, the Ten Commandments, called the Ten
Words, XXXVIII. 18. But these words the People heard spoken by God himself; and
not by the report of Moses. Therefore I take these words to signisie rather
what he had spoken in the latter part of the foregoing Chapter, from the 20th
Verse to the end. And then by all the Judgments, he means those Laws which he
had received for their good Government in the XXI, XXII Chapters, and the
former part of the XXIII.

And all the people answered with one voice, and said.] In all likelihood Moses
had told the Elders what God had said to him; and they went and told it to the
People, who gave the following Answer to them. For thus it was before XIX. 6, 7.

All the words that the LORD has said, will we do.] They had consented before
in general, to do whatsoever God required of them; having him for their King
and Governor (XIX. 6, 7, 8.) but now they consent in particular, after God had
declared what he would have them do (in the XX Chapter) and Moses had also
reported the rest of the Judgments delivered in the XXI, XXII, XXIII Chapters.

Ver. 4. And Moses wrote all the words of the LORD.] Both the Ten Commandments,
and all the rest of the Judgments delivered in the foregoing Chapters. God
indeed wrote the Ten Commandments himself: but for the present Moses made a
Record of them, that the People might not only hear, but read what they had to
do.

And rose up early in the morning.] The next morning, it is likely, after he
had received those Judgments, and delivered them to the People, and wrote them
in a Book; which was upon the seventh day of Sivan, as I observed XX. 21. That
is, on the sixth of our June, as Jac. Capellus reckons. Therefore on the eighth
of Sivan he built the Altar, etc. as it here follows.

And builded an Altar under the hill.] At the foot of the Hill, where the
People were allowed to stand. This Altar was to represent God; to whom
Sacrifices were offered upon it.

And twelve Pillars, according to the twelve Tribes of Israel.] This was to
represent all the People. The Gentiles abusing such Pillars to Idolatrous uses,
the erecting of them is afterward forbidden in the Law. But before the building
of the Tabernacle, Moses here erects them, as Jacob had piously done in former
times, XXXV Genesis 14. See Seldom L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 6. p. 185.

Ver. 5. And he sent young men of the Children of Israel.] These are said by
the Hebrews, to be the Firstborn, as Onkelos here expressly translates it, He
sent the Firstborn: and the Paraphrase ascribed to Vzielides follows him;
adding this reason, Because the Aaronical Priests were not yet consecrated. The
Arabic and Persian Versions say the same, as Mr. Seldom has observed, L. I.
de Succession. ad Pontif. c. 1. and most Interpreters have been of the same
mind. But I have often observed before (particularly XIX. 22.) that I can see
no proof of this, that they only officiated as Priests: every Man anciently, in
his own Family, having a right to offer Sacrifice, till the Law of Moses
restrained it to the Family of Aaron. Therefore I take these young men to have
been the choicest Persons among them, whether Firstborn or others, who had
been appointed to Minister unto God. For Joshua, who is called here ( v. 13.)
Moses his Minister, is in XI Numb. 28. called his young man. Such were fittest
for all Service; especially for that of Sacrificing to God. For which they
anciently chose the strongest and properest Persons, as we see in the Greek
story of Jason (which our Learned Dr. Spencer observes, p. 140.) whose
Sacrifices were led to the Altar by the young men of his Company, i. e. Men of
greatest strength and beauty, L. I. Argonaut. And this so far remained, after
the Priesthood was consined to the Family of Aaron, that no Man was permitted
to officiate at the Altar, after he was Fifty years of Age; that is, when he
was past his best, (as we speak) the flower and strength of his Age, VIII Numb.
25. Fortunatus Scacchus conjectures that there were XII. of these young Men,
one of each Tribe, who offered in the Name of their Brethren, Myrothec. Sacr.
Elaeochrism, p. 2. c. 59.

Which offered Burnt-offerings, and sacrificed Peace Offerings of Oxen unto the
LORD.] Though Oxen are only mentioned, yet there were other Creatures
Sacrificed, as appears from IX Hebr. 19, 20. And in following times,
Peace Offerings might be either of Calves, or Lambs, or Goats, as we sind in
III Lev. and so might Burnt-offerings also; see I Lev. 2, 10. Our Learned
Primate Usher thinks also there were Expiatory Sacrifices offered together with
these Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings, and that in the first place; ad A.
M. 2513. men's. 3.

Ver. 6. And Moses took half the blood, and put it in basins.] It may be a
question, whether he spoke of the Blood of all the Sacrifices, or only of the
Expiatory (if there were any) or of the Burnt-offerings, or Peace Offerings.
But which way soever that be determined, this half of the Blood, it is certain,
was reserved to be sprinkled on the People, v. 8.

Concerning the word Agganot, which we translate Basins, the Learned Reader may
consult Bochartus in his Hierozoic. P. I. p. 549.

And half of the Blood he sprinkled on the Altar.] The Altar representing God,
(as was said before v. 4.) this Blood sprinkled upon it, signified that he for
his part engaged to be faithful in the Covenant, he now made with them, and
they with him; by performing all the Promises he had newly made them by Moses
in the latter end of the foregoing Chapter; especially, those four great
Promises, of Plenty, Health, numerous Offspring, and Long-life, v. 25, 26.
together with the driving out the People of Canaan from before them, v. 27, etc.

Ver. 7. And he took the Book.] Some have made it a difficulty to find, what
Book this was; and have been pleased to fancy that some Book which Moses wrote
is lost. When this plainly refers to what is said v. 4. where we read that
Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, that is, the Commandments and Judgments
mentioned in the four foregoing Chapters. Which though they made no great
Volume, yet might be called a Book in their Language: for even the Bill of
Divorcement, which they gave their Wives (and was very short) is called by this
Name of Sepher, a Book, XXIV Deuteronomy. 1.

Of the Covenant.] That they might remember upon what terms he would bestow
upon them the forenamed Blessings, he engages them in a Solemn Covenant to
observe the Commandments and Judgments contained in this Book.

Ver. 8. And Moses took the blood.] That half of it which was in the Basins, v.
6.

And sprinkled it on the people.] As he had sprinkled one half on the Altar, in
token God was a Party in the Covenant: so he sprinkled the other half on the
XII. Pillars, which represented the Children of Israel, in token that they were
the other Party engaged in the same Covenant. Thus our forenamed Primate, and
several others understand it: and it carries some show of probability in it.
Yet I cannot think it unlikely, that it was sprinkled upon the LXX. Elders, by
whom the People consented; if not upon all the People, who stood next to the
Altar, and are here expressly mentioned. The Apostle to the Hebrews IX. 19.
says he sprinkled the Book, as well as the People: which is not here
mentioned, but supposed. For when he went to sprinkle the Blood, we must
conceive he laid down the Book, that he might be at more liberty for this other
action: And perhaps he laid it on one of the Pillars, where it was sprinkled,
as they were, together with the People whom they represented.

And said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant, which the LORD has made with you
concerning all these words.] Look upon your selves as obliged by this Blood, to
observe all the Commands which I have delivered to you, in the words you have
heard. For there were two ways of making Covenants anciently; both which were
here used. The first was, after a Sacrifice had been offered, to sprinkle the
Blood of it upon both Parties, who were to be Confederates: which was done here
v. 6, 8. And secondly, the Confederates thereupon proceeded to eat together
some part of the Sacrifice; which follows v. 11. where we find the Elders of
Israel (who represented the People) did eat and drink in the Presence of God.

Ver. 9. Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and LXX. of the Elders
of Israel.] These things being done, they went up into the Mount, as they were
ordered, v. 1. i. e. they went up to that part of the Mount, where Aaron and
his Sons, and the Elders were appointed to come; but no further.

Ver. 10. And they saw the God of Israel.] When Moses is commanded to come near
unto the LORD, ( v. 2.) Maimonides acknowledges it may be understood of his
local approach to the place, where the Light, or Glory of God then appeared,
More Nevoch. P. I. c. 18. And therefore it is something strange, that he
expounds the Elders seeing God, of their apprehension of him by their
Understanding; and not rather of their beholding some glimpse of that visible
Majesty, which was on the Top of the Mount. For that, I doubt not, is the
meaning, as appears by what follows. And so the Chaldee expounds it, They saw
the Glory of the God of Israel; surrounded, we may well suppose, with an
heavenly Host of Angels, attending upon the SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, as
it was also called.

And there was under his feet.] This has made some conceive, that this visible
Glory appeared in the form of a Man, with his Back toward them, standing upon
a shining Pavement. But this is contrary to IV Deuteronomy. 15. For though that be
spoken of another time and place, viz. the Giving of the Law, which all the
People heard, but saw no Similitude; yet if the Elders had afterward seen a
Similitude, it would have spoiled Moses his Argument, they being the
Representatives of the People. This glorious Light therefore, far surpassing
all other, had no form, nor could be described by any Art: and consequently by
its feet, is meant only the lower part of it; which rested, as it were, upon a
most glorious Pavement. And thus the Divine Majesty is said to have had a
Footstool, (which was the cover of the Ark) though it had no Human shape.

As it were a paved work of Sapphire stone.] The glorious Majesty of God was
represented as having under it, a Pavement suitable to it self, very bright and
shineing. For there is a sort of Sapphire, called (...), spotted with little
points, or pricks of Gold, which shine like Stars interspersed in the Body of
it. See Salmasius in Solinum, p. 131, 203. Such was this Pavement, as we may
gather from the following words.

And as it were the body of Heaven in its clearness.] As clear as the purest
and serenest Sky, when it is all spangled with Stars. All which signifies, as I
take it, that the Glory of the LORD appeared far above the Glory of the Sun, in
its greatest brightness, upon a Pavement sparkling like the Stars in the
Heaven, when it is most clear. The LXX. instead of the words, saw the God of
Israel, have saw (...) the place of the God of Israel. As if they saw a Throne,
upon which there was a visible Majesty, beyond all description. And if this be
admitted, then this Throne may well be said to have feet, standing upon such a
glorious Pavement. And so they translate it in the next Verse, where this is
repeated.

Ver. 11. And upon the Nobles of the Children of Israel.] i. e. The Elders
beforementioned, v. 1, 9. called here Atzilim, to signify that they were the
prime and choicest Persons among the Israelites. For Atzal signisies to
separate; and consequently atzilim imports Men distinguished from others,
either by their Birth, Office or some excellent qualities.

He laid not his hand.] Did not hurt them. Whereas it was the common Opinion,
That they who saw God (though it was by one of his Angels) should presently
die. The splendor of that glorious Light was so dazzling, that it was a
singular favor it did not put out their Eyes, as the Light wherein St. Paul
saw our Savior, did his. We are told, v. 17. The sight of the Glory of the
LORD was like devouring fire. Which might put them in fear perhaps, they had
been scorched by it, when it flasht out upon them; but they found not the least
hurt by it. Thus Jonathan says in his Paraphrase upon the XXXII Chapter, that
when Moses delayed to come down from the Mount, the People fancied him to be
burnt up by the fire, which shone from the Presence of God, which there
appeared.

This sight of God which he vouchsafed to the Elders, was in all likelihood, to
convince them that he was among them, and had spoken to them, and sent them the
Precepts beforementioned by the hand of Moses.

Also they saw God, and did eat and drink.] After they had seen God, they were
so far from receiving any harm, that they feasted with him upon the Relics of
the Peace Offerings, with great Joy and Gladness. Or we may suppose, that the
Glory of the LORD shone upon them, as they sat down to eat and drink, in token
of their full consent to the Covenant now made, (for so the custom was of
making Covenants, XXIV Genesis 30. XXXI. 54.) and that notwithstanding they
continued to finish their Feast, not being dispirited (as good Men were
sometimes afterward, with glorious Visions, X Dan. 8, 16, 17.) but rather
strengthened and made more vigorous.

The word for saw in this Verse, is different from that in the former;
importing, I suppose, that this Appearance of God to them lasted some time.

Ver. 12. And the LORD said unto Moses.] He called to him, perhaps, with an
audible voice, from the place where they saw his Glory; that they might know
how familiar he was with God, and might more readily receive whatsoever
Commands he brought from him.

Come up to me into the Mount.] To the top of the Mount, where the Glory of the
LORD was, v. 17. For hitherto Moses had gone no further than the rest; but was
with them when they did eat and drink before the LORD.

And be there.] Stay with me there, v. 18.

And I will give thee Tables of stone.] Not only the Jews, but Epiphanius also
fancies these Tables were made of Sapphire, from what was said v. 10. But the
words signify plainly enough that they were of Stone.

And a Law and Commandments which I have written.] From this place the Jews
endeavor to establish their unwritten or oral Law, i. e. their Traditions;
which, they say, were now delivered, together with the Tables of Stone. So
Maimonides in his Preface to Jad Chazeka; All the Precepts which were given to
Moses on Mount Sinai, were given with their Explications; according to what is
said, I will give the Tables of Stone, and a Law, and Commandments: where by
the Law is meant the written Law, and the Commandments denote the Explication
of it, which we call the Oral Law. Thus he, and others of them, directly
against the Text it self, which says expressly, both of the Law and the
Commandments here mentioned, that they were written. See Seldom L. II. de
Synedr. c. 16. Therefore by Law and Commandments, we are to understand nothing
else, but the Law contained in the X. Commandments.

That thou may teach them.] Instruct the People to observe them, as the most
sacred of all other Precepts; being written, as well as spoken, by God himself,
who taught Men, by this Example, how to preserve their Laws. For Aristotle
says in his Problems, that in old time, Men being ignorant how to write,
(...), were wont to sing their Laws, that they might not be forgotten. It being
the invention of the Corybantes, (...) (as Theopompus speaks) to set up
Pillars, and ingrave their Laws upon them. Which Solon at last wrote on wooden
Tables, called (...) and (...), which were laid up in the Temple of the Mother
of the Gods, v. Sam. Petitum Praefat. in Leg. Atticas.

Ver. 13: And Moses rose up.] From among the Elders; with whom he was before.

And his Minister Joshua.] Who attended him further than the Elders; but not
into the place where he went. For God intending him to be Moses his Successor,
seems to admit him unto a nearer Familiarity, than any one else besides Moses.

And Moses went up into the Mount of God.] The place where the Divine Glory
appeared. But Joshua staid for him, in some lower part of the Mountain,
expecting his return. For he did not go up to the top of the Mount, as appears
from the XXXII Chapter; where Moses his descent from thence being mentioned,
Joshua is not named till it be said, that Moses was come down from the Mount,
v. 15, 17. He went with him therefore till he entered into the Cloud, and then
he staid, as it were, at the door waiting for his return.

Ver. 14. And he said unto the Elders.] Before he left them, he gave them this
order.

Tarry ye here for us.] Not in the place where they had seen God, and did eat
and drink with him; whether the People might not come: but rather in the Camp,
or some place near it, whether the People might, upon occasion, resort to them.
Unto which place Moses seems to have walked with them from the Mount, before he
returned to go up into it: or, at least, pointed them unto it with his singer,
that they might there wait for him.

Until we come again to you.] He could not tell how long God would detain him;
and therefore commands them to govern the People till his return to them.

And behold, Aaron and Hur are with you.] Who seem to have been of greatest
Authority, next to himself; and were with him in the Mount, when the Israelites
fought with Amalek, Chap. XVII.

If any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them.] In all Causes,
which were too hard for the Elders to determine, he directs them to go to Aaron
and Hur, as they were wont to do to him. By this it appears, that these LXX.
Elders, were some of the Judges appointed by the advice of Jethro, (XVIII. 22.)
which he continued to follow, and orders them to observe in his absence.

Ver. 15. And Moses went up into the Mount.] Having said this, he and Joshua
left them; and he went into the higher part of the Mount.

And a Cloud covered the Mount.] That part of it where he was: so that the
People, and Joshua also, lost the sight of him.

Ver. 16. And the Glory of the LORD abode upon Mount Sinai.] That visible
Majesty, which shone in extraordinary splendor, was settled, for the present,
upon the top of this Mount.

And the Cloud covered it.] i. e. Covered the Glory of the LORD, not the Mount;
as Aben Ezra observes. For the Cloud was not the Glory of the LORD, but
encompassed and covered it: so that for six days nothing but the Cloud appeared
to the Israelites: till on the seventh day, the Cloud was rent (as I take it)
or opened; and the Glory of the LORD appeared like flaming fire.

Six days.] Thus long it was hidden in a Cloud, so that Moses himself could not
see it, but remained wrapped up in darkness; which might have astonished him, if
he had not been supported by the Divine Power, and a comfortable sense of God,
who had often appeared to him, and conversed familiarly with him.

And the seventh day he called unto Moses.] The second time (for he had called
to him before, to come up to him, v. 12.) commanding him to approach into his
glorious Presence.

Out of the midst of the Cloud.] Where the Divine Glory was, and now broke out
and appeared, I suppose, unto Moses. Some think the seventh day might be the
Sabbath, upon which God chose to appear to him.

Ver. 17. And the sight of the Glory of the LORD was like devouring fire, on
the top of the Mount, in the Eyes of the Children of Israel.] It broke out of
the Cloud, after six days, so that the People saw it, like flaming fire. To
which the Psalmist seems to allude, XCVII Psalm. 2, 3. Clouds and darkness are
round about him, and fire goes before him, etc. Thus the Glory of the LORD is
described in other places, as within a Cloud, and sometimes breaking out of it,
XL Exodus 35. where the Cloud is said to be upon the Tabernacle, and the Glory
of the LORD to fill it within; which v. 38. is described like fire. See also
XVI Numb. 42. And thus at its first appearing, there was a Pillar of a Cloud,
and of Fire led them, XIII. 21. And it sometimes appearing in an amazing
brightness, beyond that of the Sun; and sometimes being wrapped up in as thick a
Cloud: God is likewise said, both to dwell in Light, and in thick Darkness, 1
Kings VIII. 12.

Ver. 18. And Moses went into the midst of the Cloud.] From whence the LORD had
called to him, v. 16. Therefore he broke through the thick Cloud, into the very
Prefence of God, which was in a secret part of the Cloud, called the midst of
it.

And gat him up into the Mount.] To the top of it, where the Glory of the LORD
appeared to him, in the midst of the Cloud; the External Parts of which and the
Fire only being seen by the People.

And Moses was in the Mount forty days, and forty nights.] That he might
receive the two Tables of Stone, and the Gift of Prophecy (as Elmacinus an
Arabian Christian adds) with Directions for the making the Tabernacle, and all
things belonging to it, and the Service to be performed there, by the Priest,
apparelled according to Divine Prescription, etc. which follow in the ensuing
Chapters: where Moses relates what orders God gave him about every thing
relating to his Divine Service. And it need not seem strange, as Clemens
Alexandrinus excellently speaks ( L. I. Stromat. p. 351.) that Moses received
his Laws from God; when the Greeks pretend the same of their Minos: only they
say he went into Jupiter's Cave, and was nine years there in learning the Laws
which he gave him; when Moses was but XL. days in the Mount, where God visibly
appeared. They believed also that Lycurgus received his Laws from Apollo: and
Zaleucus (as Plato, Aristotle, and diverse others, whom he mentions, say)
received his from Minerva. All this was firmly believed among them, who in not
acknowledging the Divinity of Moses his Ministration, were very ungrateful; for
his was the Archetype, as he speaks, or Pattern of what was pretended in their
Stories.

Forty days and forty nights.] It may be a question, whether the six days, that
he remained in the Cloud, before the LORD called him higher, be included in
these XL. days; or were only preparatory to his nearer access to God. They may
well be both: for it is not said, he was in the midst of the Cloud forty days
and forty nights; but that he was so long in the Mount. Part of which time was
spent in the dark Cloud; and the rest in the bright Presence of God, in the
midst of the Cloud: And in all that space, he did neither eat nor drink, XXXIV.
28. IX Deuteronomy. 9.

God could, if he had pleased, have revealed to him all his Mind, in a less
time: But the method of the Divine Wisdom is to do all things gradually. For
instance, the Substance of a Child in the Womb (says the Author of Schalsch.
Hakkabalah) is not perfected in less time than XL. Weeks, in all which time it
receives no Meat nor Drink (at the Mouth we must understand him) and so many
days did the Divine Power work in Moses to form him into a new Essence, (as his
words are) and give him a full Comprehension, of all that God communicated to
him. And all this time he neither did eat nor drink; for these actions (say
that Jew) prejudice the Understanding; which God intended to exalt by
depressing the Bodily Faculties and Powers. Which for want of Meat and Drink
were brought down very low, that the Understanding might be raised and lifted
up. And thus we find in after times, that Daniel chastened his Body, for three
whole Weeks together, the better to dispose him for heavenly Vision, X. 2, 3,
12.

This ascent of Moses from the Cloudy part of the Mount, to the fiery top of
it, was upon the XIVth of Sivan: and we may suppose, as Jacobus Capellus does,
that the Cloud accompanied him, as he went up, to defend him from the
circumambient flame.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses.] Out of that glorious and flaming
Light, wherein he appeared to him.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel.] When he went down from the Mount.

That they bring me.] In the Hebrew, take for me, out of their Goods.

An Offering.] The Hebrew word Terumah (or as some pronounce it, Trumah) is
commonly translated an Heave Offering, or Offering lifted up. Which the Chaldee
translates, that which is separated from common use: and in the separation,
perhaps, was lifted up toward Heaven, in token that they desired God to accept
it.

Of every man that gives it willingly with his heart, ye shall take my
Offering.] They were only to be moved to it, but not importuned; much less told
what quantity they should give: but every Man was left to his own good
Inclinations. And accordingly Moses delivered the Mind of God unto them, when
he came down from the Mount; and they made a free Oblation, XXXV. 5, 21, 29.
Besides which, there was also a Tribute laid upon them for the ransom of their
Souls, XXX. 12, 13, 14. which amounted to a great Sum of Money, as we find in
the XXXVIII. 24, etc.

Ver. 3. And this is the offering which ye shall take of them.] The things
which ye shall accept as an Offering to me.

Gold and silver and brass.] Unto what uses these were to be employed, we are
told afterward.

Ver. 4. And blue, and purple, and scarlet.] Wool, or Yarn, or Stuff, (or as
Abarbinel will have it, Silk) of these Colors. About which there is much
dispute: but no Translation has better described them than our English. For
Thecelet, which we translate blue, and Abarbinel will have to be a Seagreen,
is certainly a Skycolour. So Maimonides expresses it, the Color of the
Firmament: and Kimchi calls it ultramarine. This has been demonstrated by
Braunius, who shows how it was died, L. I. de Vest. Sacr. Hebr. L. I. c. 13.

Argaman also he has demonstrated ( c. 14.) signifies purple, as we translate
it. For both Josephus and Philo say so; and he brings many proofs that they say
true. And there being several sorts of Purple, he shows this had in it the
brightest and most storid redness: the manner of dying, which he also there
demonstrates. See also Bochartus concerning these two words, Thecelet and
Argaman, in his Hierozoic. P. II. L. V. c. 10, 11.

Tholaat-shani we also rightly translate Scarlet, as the same Brannius shows,
c. 15. of the forenamed Book. And very probably makes the word Scarlet
signify as much as the Color of Tire: For Sar or Sarra is Tire; and lacea is
a red color.

Abarbinel most absurdly makes this to be the native color of Silk, without
any dye. See Bochart. Hierozoic. P. II. L. IV. c. 27. p. 624.

And fine linen.] The Hebrew word Schesch signifies that pure fine linen,
called Byssus: So the Chaldee calls it butz. Which was peculiar to Egypt, as
some fancy, where their Priests were clothed with it; and thence called
linigeri. But Philostrutus says there was a Byssus among the Indians, with
which the better sort of People were clothed. And Pausanias says it grew in
Elis, and in no other part of Greece. See Salmasius Plin. Exercit. p. 998. and
what I have noted on XLI. Genesis 42.

And Goats-hair.] In the Hebrew there is only the word izim, which signifies
Goats: but all Interpreters, by a common Ellipsis, understand it of their Hair.
And Jarchi says it signifies the flower of Goats-hair; or, as we speak, the
down; the very softest part of it. And no other Wool (as they call it) was
accepted for the use of the Sanctuary (if we may credit Abarbinel) but only
this. For the Wool of Lambs, and Sheep was vile in comparison with this, which
was precious in the Eastern Countries; where excellent Cloth was made of it,
not inferior to Silk in softness and brightness; as the same Braunius observes
L. I. de Vestitu Sacr. Hebr. c. 9.

Ver. 5. And Rams-skins died red.] Or, red Ramskins; for such there were in the
Eastern Countries, which were naturally of that color.

And Badgers-skins.] The Hebrew word Thecasim, which we translate Badgers
(following those who think Thacas to be the same with the Latin word Taxus) the
ancient Interpreters take for a color. And Bochartus has at large endeavored
to prove that it signifies a kind of Violet or Purple Color. So that God
commands them to offer red and violet Rams-skins. See Hierozoic. P. I. L. III.
c. 30.

And Shittim-wood.] Kimchi says this was the best kind of Cedar: But Aben-Ezra
takes it for the Wood of a Tree which grew in the Wilderness, not far from
Mount Sinai, in that place where the Israelites sometimes encamped, XXV Numb.
1. called Shittim from this Wood: unless the Wood were so called from the place
where it grew. And thus St. Hierom seems to have understood it. For he says
upon III Joel, that they were great Trees, which were not to be found in the
Roman Countries, or in cultivated Places; but in the Desert of Arabia only. Out
of which very broad Boards might be cut, exceeding strong, and of incredible
smoothness and beauty. And upon XLI Isa. he calls it Lignum imputribile, an
incorruptible Wood (as the LXX. also here translate it (...)) very smooth,
excelling all Wood in firmness and brightness, etc. See Menochius L. V. de
Repub. Hebr. c. 2.

Ver. 6. Oil for the light.] For the Lamp that was to burn continually in the
Sanctuary.

Spices for anointing Oil, and for sweet Incense.] See XXX. 23, etc. and v. 34,
35, etc.

Ver. 7. Onyx-stones.] Or Sardonyxes. See 11 Genesis 12.

And stones to be set in the Ephod, and in the Brestplate.] There were two
Onyx-stones to be set in the Ephod, XXVIII. 9, 10, etc. and the other Stones
(whose names are there mentioned, v. 17, 18, etc.) were to be set in the
Breast Plate.

These five Verses contain all the Materials which were to be used about the
Sanctuary, and the Garments of the Priests who were to attend there. The only
question is, How they got such things in the Wilderness? Some think they
brought them with them out of Egypt, as it is evident they did Gold, Silver,
and Jewels. And Abarbinel thinks they also trafficked with the neighboring
People, while they remained here, of whom they bought Oil, and Spices, and
Shittim-wood, etc. which is probable enough, every thing being to be had for
Money, of which they brought good store from Egypt.

Ver. 8. And let them make me a Sanctuary.] Now follow Directions for the
making an House for God, and every thing belonging to it. For so this place is
sometimes called, God's House or Habitation, because there, as Abarbinel
observes, the SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, had its residence. And it is
called a Sanctuary, or Holy Place, because no uncircumcised, or unclean Person
might enter into it. For under the Name of Sanctuary, is comprehended, as the
Jews rightly understand it, all the Courts belonging to it, as well as the very
House it self; with all the Utensils, or Sacred Vessels, which are afterward
prescribed for the Service of it.

That I may dwell among them.] God resolving to manifest himself, as, in a
peculiar manner, constantly present among them, was pleased to order a Tent or
Tabernacle to be built for him; wherein, while they sojourned in Tents in the
Wilderness, he dwelt among them in a visible manner, by the SCHECHINAH, or
Habitation of the Divinity, which was sixed here; and was a special Type of
God's future dwelling in Humane Nature. In short, this Sanctuary was his
Palace, says Moses Nachmanides, wherein he dwelt as their King. And
accordingly Schem Tob upon Maimon's More Nevoch. P. III. c. 40. pertinently
observes, that God ordered all manner of things, belonging to a Palace, to be
in this House; particularly, Ministers that constantly attended on him; a Table
with daily Provision; all manner of Utensils, such as Pots, Spoons, Forks, etc.
a Closet proper to himself alone; that the most Vulgar Understanding might
conceive their King, the LORD of Hosts, continually resided there. And indeed
the Hebrew word Mikdash, which we render Sanctuary, sometimes signifies a
Palace, XXVIII Ezekiel. 18. and so Kimchi interprets it upon VIII Isa. 14.

Among them.] In the Hebrew, in the midst of them. For the Tabernacle, when it
was erected, was placed in the midst of their Camps, II Numb. 17. Which was the
reason that all unclean Persons were to be removed out of their Camp, lest God,
who dwelt in it, should be offended by the pollution, V Numb. 3. And this is
the reason why God is said to walk among them (XXVI Lev. 12. XXII Deuteronomy. 14.)
because he dwelt in that Tent, which moved up and down, as they did while they
dwelt in the Wilderness.

Ver. 9. According to all that I show thee, the pattern of the Tabernacle, and
the pattern of all the Instruments thereof, so shall thou make it.] This
signifies that God showed him a Model (as we now speak) of the House he was to
make, and of all the things belonging to it: And accordingly he bid him rear it
up, XXVI. 30. according to the Mischpat, the Scheme or Draught he showed him in
the Mount: which represented every thing so lively and distinctly, and in their
just proportions to him, that he was the better able to make them. For things
seen, and seen in all their Dimensions, as Abarbinel observes, are more easily
retained, as well as conceived, than things that are only heard. And Greg.
Nyssen had reason when he said ( de Vita Mosis, p. 181.) that God did not
represent the Sanctuary to Moses merely in a Picture, much less give him an
Idea of it only in his Mind; but set before him a Structure which he should
imitate. For so the Hebrew word Tabnit (which we translate pattern) signifies a
Structure, or Building; which cannot be better expressed than by the word
Model, which he now saw of the House he was to erect. Thus Maimonides explains
this word, in distinction from Temunah, which signifies only the resemblance of
a thing; whereas Tabnit signifies the structure, or disposition of it, i. e.
says he, its form; whether it be in a Square, or Circle, or Triangle, or any
other Figure; and he quotes this place for it, and v. 40. More Nevoch. P. I. c.
3.

Which confutes the Fancy of those, who will have Moses to have framed this
House, and all belonging to it, according to the fashion of such things, which
he had seen in Egypt, and were in use among other Nations: unto whose Religion,
he designed to make his as conformable, as might be safely allowed. And
particularly made this Tabernacle to be carried on the Priest's Shoulders, as
the Tabernacle of Moloch was, etc. Nothing seems to me to be further from the
intention of Moses, or rather from the Directions which God here gives him,
than this Conceit. He had a more Divine Guide than the Egyptians, and made
things by a Heavenly Pattern, and not according to their Modes. The Jews were
so possessed with this Opinion, that when the Temple came to be built instead
of this Tabernacle, they say it was done by consulting the Oracle, and by the
Solemn Decree of the King, and of the great Sanhedrim, and of the Prophets. For
which they allege this very place, as Mr. Seldom observes out of the Misna and
Maimonides, etc. L. III. de Synedr. c. 13. n. 2.

Ver. 10. And they shall make an Ark.] Or little Chest, or rather Coffer: which
was to be placed in the very inmost, and most secret part of God's House (in
his Cabinet, as we now speak, into which none entered but himself) the better to
represent his dwelling among them. And therefore was called the Ark of the
LORD, IV Josh. 5, 11. and the Ark of God, 1 Samuel III. 3. For herein was put his
most precious Treasure, those Divine Records, the two Tables of Stone, wrote
with his own Finger, called the Tables of Testimony, XXXI. 18. because they
were the Testimony of the Covenant between God and the Israelites; whereby he
testified his Will, and they their Obedience to it. Whence the Ark it self is
called the Ark of the Testimony, XXX. 6. (from whence also the whole Tabernacle
had its name, IX Numb. 11.) and the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD, X Numb. 33.

Of Shittim-wood.] See v. 5.

Two Cubits and an half shall be the length thereof, and a Cubit and an half
the breadth thereof, and a Cubit and an half the height thereof.] In this
Shape, and in these Dimensions it was set before Moses in the Mount, that he
might direct it to be made exactly of such an oblong Square (as we speak) as is
here described, in its length, breadth and height. There are great Disputes
among the Jews about a Cubit, which is commonly thought to be half a yard of
our Measure, that is, XVIII. Inches. But one that has taken a great deal of
pains to examine such things (Dr. Cumberland, now Bishop of Peterburgh) has in
a very Learned Discourse, about the Scripture Measures, given strong Reasons to
incline us to think that the Egyptian and the Jewish Cubit were about XXI.
Inches. And if they had not been so, the Table (which is described v. 23.)
would have been inconvenient, being but three quarters of a yard high, i. e. 27
Inches (according to the common Notion of a Cubit) which is too low for a
Table. Whereas according to his account, it was about Thirty two Inches, which
is a very convenient height for a Table. See Chapter II.

Ver. 11. And thou shall overlay it with pure gold.] Not merely gild it, but
lay it over with thin Plates of Gold; for if they had been thick, it would, as
Abarbinel notes, have been too heavy to carry. Thus we see Chests now sometimes
plated with Iron, in some parts of them.

Within and without.] So that nothing but Gold could be seen, whether it were
shut or open.

And shall make upon it a Crown of Gold round about.] A Border or List of Gold
went round at the top of it; which was called a Crown, because it compassed
every part of it: but was of another figure, not round, but square, as the Ark
was. It was of great use, as well as ornament, for the better settling the
Propitiatory upon the Ark, that it might not slip off, but be kept up firmly by
this Border going round about the top of the Ark. And it might the better be
called a Crown, because it was of some height, for the surer supporting of the
Propitiatory.

It may not be improper here to observe, that as the ancient Crowns were only a
plain Circle of Gold, or other thing, so they were set upon the Heads of none
but their Gods, as Pliny tells us, L. XVI. c. 4. who says there that Bacchus
was the first that put a Crown upon his Head, which was made of Ivy. Certain it
is, that God requires those things, which were peculiarly Sacred to him and his
Service to be crowned, as a Mark of their excellency: which were four only;
this Crown upon the Ark, and that upon the Golden Table ( v. 24. of this
Chapter) and upon the Altar of Incense, XXX. 3. and on the Head of the High
Priest, XXIX. 6.

Ver. 12. And thou shall cast four rings of Gold for it.] Which were of massy
Gold, we must suppose, because the Ark was carried by staves put into these
rings.

And put them in the four corners thereof.] The Hebrew word Paamoth comes from
Paam, which never signifies a corner, in the whole Scripture; but always a
foot, or basis, or step, as Aben-Ezra notes. Which has made some think, the
Ark had Feet to stand upon (such round knobs as now our Chests and Boxes many
times have) though the Scripture do not mention them. But we are not to make
Conjectures out of our own Heads; which some have carried so far, as to fancy
there were Wheels in these Feet, for the Ark to run upon, which made it God's
Chariot wherein he rode. But who ever heard of a Chariot carried on Men's
shoulders? Therefore Nachmanides more reasonably conceives, that these Rings
were indeed in the corners of the Ark, but not in the higher (as R. Solomon
would have them) but in the lower; and therefore said here to be in the feet.
For the Scripture calling the top of every thing, the head of it; the bottom is
commonly there called the feet: And so the Ark (by placing the Rings and Staves
in the bottom) was carried on high upon the Priests shoulders, representing God
who is highly exalted.

And two rings shall be on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side
of it.] That is, in the length of it (as Josephus expressly testifies) and not
in the breadth.

Ver. 13. And thou shall make staves of Shittimwood.] Of such a length, that
the Ark might be at a decent distance from those that carried it.

And overlay them with Gold.] With Plates of Gold, as the Ark it self was v. 14.

Ver. 14. And thou shall put the staves into the rings, by the sides of the
Ark.] The Hebrews say these staves were ten Cubits long.

That the Ark may be born with them.] Upon the shoulders of the Levites,
particularly the Sons of Korah. See Numb. IV. 4, 5, 6, etc. VII. 9. For it was
a Crime to carry it any other way, either in their Hands, or drawn in a Cart.
Compare 1 Chronicles. XIII. 7. with XV. 15.

Ver. 15. And the staves shall be in the rings of the Ark.] Continue and remain
in the Rings, whence they were once put therein.

They shall not be taken from it.] When they set down the Ark, they were not to
take out the staves, and put them in again, when it was to be carried; but let
them, as was said, continue in the rings: that there might be no danger of
letting them fall (which had been a great irreverence) and because they would
be best preserved, and take less harm there, than any where else; and if they
had occasion to remove the Ark suddenly all would be ready; and the Levites
were hereby kept from touching the Ark, or coming nearer to it, than the ends
of the staves.

Ver. 16. And thou shall put into the Ark, the testimony, which I will give
thee.] The two Tables of Stone, containing the Ten Commandments, which are
called the Testimony, and the Two Tables of Testimony (XXXI. 18.) because they
testified what the Will of God was, which they had consented to observe; and
were therefore public authentic Instruments attesting the Covenant between
God and them. Whence the Ark, which contained these, is called the Ark of the
Testimony (as I observed above, v. 10.) v. 22. and in a great many other places
of the XL Chapter. And in one place it is called the Testimony, XXX. 36. and
the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD, X Deuteronomy. 8. because then Ten words were the
principal part of the Covenant, to which they stood obliged. And perhaps the
Book of the Covenant which Moses made with them (XXIV. 7.) is comprehended
under the name of the Testimony. For though we read in 1 Kings VIII. 9. there
was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables of Stone, etc. yet the Apostle
mentions some other things that were not in, yet by or before the Ark, IX Hebr.
4. But I assert nothing in this matter. And shall only further observe, that
this direction, for putting the Testimony (or Tables of Stone) into the Ark, is
given before any order is taken, for making a Covering to it, which follows
after. And therefore he was to put in the Law before the Cover was set on. For
though v. 21. this be mentioned again, and put after the Cover is named, yet
the meaning is, that he should set on the Cover, having put in the Law. And it
is repeated, that he should be very careful of this, because the Cherubims were
to protect and defend it.

Ver. 17. And thou shall make a Mercy-seat.] The Hebrew word Capporet
literally signifies a Covering of any thing: And that is the proper
signification of this Mercy-seat (as we translate it) which was the Covering of
the Ark. For it had no Door, but was open at the top; so that they might put
the Tables of the Covenant into it, and then it was to be fastened above by this
Cover; which any one may discern by its dimensions, was exactly fit for it.

Others will have it called Capporet, not from Capar, to cover; but from
Cipper, to expiate, and render propitious. And so indeed the Apostle calls it
(...), the propitiatory; because God here showed himself to be propitious, and
appeased by the Blood of the Sacrifices, which was sprinkled before this place.
But the reason of this Translation may be, because when Sins are pardoned, they
are said in Scripture to be covered. The LXX. put both these together in their
Translation, which is (...).

Of pure Gold.] Not of Wood crusted over with Gold; but all (as Abarbinel
speaks) of solid Gold; because it was the Cover of the Ark, in which were the
Tables of the Covenant written with God's Finger, than which nothing was more
precious.

Two cubits and an half shall be the length thereof, etc.] Which was the length
of the Ark, v. 10. as the breadth was a Cubit and a half, both of that and
this. Which shows this was the Cover of the Ark, being most exactly adapted to
it.

Ver. 18. And thou shall make two Cherubims of gold.] We read of Cherubims in
the beginning of the World; and have good reason to believe thereby is meant
Angels. See III Genesis 24. But in what shape they appeared we are not told, nor
is there the least signification of it here in this place, but what we can
gather from v. 20. So that I can only say this, they were of such a shape as
the Angelical Ministers appeared in, which attended upon the Divine Majesty in
the Mount; or rather such as god showed Moses a pattern of, whereby to
represent these heavenly Ministers. For both the Ark, and all belonging to it,
were made according to the model God gave him; not from any Egyptian pattern,
as some imagine. Bochart seems to me to speak judiciously, when he says, they
were not Figures of Angels, but rather Emblems whereby the Angelical Nature was
in some sort expressed, Hierozoic. P. I. L. 2. c. 25. And were therefore
ordered to be made, as Maimonides conjectures, that the Jews might be confirmed
in the belief of the Existence of Angels, which is the second Article of their
Faith, next to the belief of God. And he commanded two to be made; because if
there had been but one, it might have led them into a dangerous Error, that
this was the Figure of God, whereby they might have been inclined to worship
it. But there being two of them ordered, with this Declaration, the LORD our
God, is one God, it led them into right thoughts, that God had many of these
Angelical Ministers. Thus he. More Nevoch. P. III. c. 45.

Of beaten work shall thou make them.] The Hebrew word Miksheh, which we
translate beaten work, signifies that both of them should be made out of the
same piece of Gold, that made the Cover of the Ark; so as to be one continued
work with that, not separate from it. This appears to be true from the next
Verse, Min hacapporet; out of the Mercy-seat shall ye make the Cherubims, etc.
or, from the Mercy-seat shall they proceed, on the two ends of it.

Ver. 19. And make one Cherub on the one end, and the other Cherub on the other
end.] This looks like a Tautology (says Abarbinel) it being said in the
foregoing words, in the two ends of the Mercy-seat: but it is far from it;
being a Declaration (as he takes it) that the Cherubims should not be placed
both on one side of the Ark; nor so, as not to be opposite one to the other:
but one on one side, and the other on the other side.

Even of the Mercy-seat, shall ye make the Cherubims, on the two ends thereof.]
They were not to be made separate from the Mercy-seat, and afterward joined to
it, but to be made out of it, so as to be one piece with it, (as was said v.
18.) Which in the execution of this Command appears very plainly, XXXVII. 8.

Ver. 20. And the Cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high.] This
shows they were made like flying Creatures; but had not the Resemblance of any
Fowl, that we know. So Josephus, (...), etc. flying Animals, like to none of
those which are seen by Men; but such as Moses saw figured in the Throne of
God; when he beheld, he means, his Majesty in the Mount, attended by the
heavenly Host, L. III. Antiq. c. 8. and again, L. VIII. c. 2. As for the
Cherubims, no body can tell, or conceive what they were like; (...). Some
indeed think, that we may understand from what Ezekiel says of them, their
true Figure; and that they had the face of Oxen. For that face which in I Ezekiel.
10. is called the face of an Ox, is afterward called X. 14. the face of a
Cherub. But it is to be considered, that, there is no proof the Cherubims here
spoken of by Moses, had the same face with those mentioned by Ezekiel, but were
rather a quite different representation. For here God was represented as
dwelling, nay sitting and abiding among the Israelites; but there as removing,
and departing quite away from his dwelling place: and consequently, I conceive,
his Ministers and Attendants appeared then in quite different shapes from what
they had now.

Stretch forth their wings on high.] As being upon the wing (to use our
Language) that is ready to fly, whether they were ordered by the Divine Majesty.

Covering the Mercy-seat with their wings.] Their Wings were not to lie close
to their Bodies, but to be raised up (as was said before) and spread: so that
meeting together, they made, as it were, a Seat over the Ark, called the Throne
of God.

Their faces shall look one to another.] To signify, says Abarbinel, their
mutual consent and concord.

Toward the Mercy-seat shall the faces of the Cherubims be.] They were so
contrived that they looked downward, when they looked one to the other; to show
(says he) that they were Keepers of the Law, which was under the Mercy-seat.

Ver. 21. And thou shall put the Mercy-seat above upon the Ark.] Having first
put in the Testimony which he gave him, (as it here follows) then he was to set
the Mercy-seat upon the Ark (within the Crown which encompassed it) as a Cover
to it. See v. 16.

Ver. 22. And there will I meet with thee.] When thou have occasion to consult
me, I will there be present to communicate my mind to thee. So Abarbinel; After
the Ark is made, and the Law put into it, and the Cover laid upon it, I will
speak with thee, from the midst of the Mercy-seat, between the Cherubims: So
that thou shall not need to come up hither any more into the Mount, to fetch
down Prophecy, (as his phrase is) but I will give it thee from thence, and tell
thee all that is to be taught Israel. See XXX. 6.

And I will commune with thee from above the Mercyseat, from between the two
Cherubims, etc.] Here the Glory of the LORD resided, between the Cherubims;
whose Wings were the Seat of the Divine Majesty; as the Cover of the Ark
beforementioned, was his Footstool. For he is said to sit between the
Cherubims, LXXX Psalm. 2. and the Ark is called his Footstool, XCIX Psalm. 8.
CXXXII. 7. This therefore being that part of the Sanctuary, which was the place
of his peculiar abode, where he is said to dwell, 1 Samuel IV. 4. (See de Dieu
there) when Moses had any occasion to consult him, he was to resort hither;
where God promises to meet him, and confer with him from hence: as we read he
did VII Numb. 89.

Of all things which I will give thee in Commandment unto the Children of
Israel.] This shows that he resided here as their Lord and Governor; the Wings
of the Cherubims composing his Throne, whereon he sat as their King, to give
orders for their Government: which more Imperatorio de Tribunali loquebatur, he
delivered from this Supreme Tribunal, after the manner of Emperors (as
Fortunatus Scacchus expresses it) or great Princes, who were wont in all
Countries to have such magnificent Thrones erected, from whence to speak to
their Subjects; Myrothec. Sacrorum Elaeochrism 2. c. 36.

Thus far he has named only the Furniture of the inward House or Cabinet of
the Divine Majesty, called the Holy of Holies. Now follows the principal
Furniture of the outward House, called the Holy Place.

Ver. 23. Thou shall also make a Table.] Which is a necessary part of the
Furniture of an House; and therefore here ordered to be made, in token of God's
dwelling among them, v. 8.

Of Shittim-wood.] Of the same Materials with the Ark, v. 10.

Two Cubits shall be the length thereof, etc.] It was neither so long, nor so
broad as the Ark; but of the very same height, v. 10. Josephus, to make the
Greeks apprehend its fashion, says it was like the famous Table at Delphi, L.
III. Antiq. c. 9. Which, if it be true, was made, it seems, in imitation of the
Table of Moses.

Ver. 24. And thou shall overlay it with pure gold.] Just as the Ark was; (See
v. 10.) and therefore it is probable that the lower parts of it, as well as the
upper, and the feet also were plated with Gold; so that it might be called a
golden Table.

And make thereto a Crown of Gold round about.] See v. 10. Where the same is
directed for the Ark: and this had the same use to keep what was set upon the
Table from slipping off, and falling on the ground.

Ver. 25. And thou shall make unto it.] That is, to the Crown of Gold (as
Fortunatus Scacchus understands it) though others refer it to the Table.

A border of an hand-breadth round about.] Which came down below the Crown, or
Cornice, as they now speak. Though some think this Border was toward the
bottom, to join the feet more firmly together.

And thou shall make a golden Crown to the border thereof round about.]
Wheresoever this border was (which I suppose was plated with Gold, like the
Table) it had a Crown or a Cornice, as an Ornament to it. For this Crown was
different from that mentioned in the foregoing Verse; and was under the border
(as the other Crown was above it) as Fortunatus Scacchus apprehends it;
Myrothec. 2. c. 38.

Ver. 26. And thou shall make for it four rings of gold.] As there was for the
Ark, v. 12. only they were to be cast; these to be made: but how we are not
told.

And put the rings in the four corners, that are on the four feet thereof.] The
Hebrew word here for Corners always has that signification; being quite
different from that word which is used v. 12. when he speaks of the Ark. Which
may well incline us to Josephus his opinion, that these rings were not below,
as they were in the Ark, but on the upper part of the Feet of the Table; so
that it was not carried up on high, as the Ark was, but hung down between the
Priests on whose shoulders the staves rested.

Ver. 27. Over against the border shall the rings be, etc.] Just below the
Border and the Cornice beforementioned ( v. 25.) were these rings to be
placed; as the Border and its Cornice were placed below the upper Crown (or
Cornice) which compassed the top of the Table, v. 24.

For places of the staves to bear the Table.] This expresses the use of the
rings.

Ver. 28. And thou shall make the staves of Shittimwood, and overlay them with
gold.] Such as were made for the carriage of the Ark, v. 13.

That the Table may be born with them.] By the Priests upon their shoulders.
For the Tabernacle being a moveable House, there was frequent occasions, as
they journeyed from one place to another, to carry this Table along with them,
as they did all other things belonging to the House of God.

It is not ordered that the Staves should remain in the Rings, as they did in
those belonging in the Ark ( v. 15.) because they might have been an hindrance
to the Priests in their Ministration at this Table every day. Therefore it is
likely, they were laid up in some place near it, and put in when they
traveled, as they were ordered to be, IV Numb. 6.

Ver. 29. And thou shall make the dishes thereof.] It is not easy to give an
account, either of the form, or of the use of these Keharoth, which we
translate Dishes, i. e. Patins, whereon to put the Bread, which were XII.
Loaves, XXIV Lev. 6. and the Frankincense which was to be set upon each row of
Loaves, v. 7. This is a plain sense, if the Loaves stood upon Dishes, and not
immediately upon the Table, as Fortunatus Scacchus thinks they did. And
therefore imagines they were full of fine flour of which the Bread was made; or
with Oil, which was to be mingled and used in their Sacrifices. But this is
more unlikely than the other, the flour not being kept here in the holy place,
but in the outward Court: And his reason for it is not solid; which is, That
the Heads of their Tribes offered every one of them a silver Charger (so we
render the same word we here translate a Dish, VII Numb.) full of fine flour
mingled with Oil. But those were not for the use of this Table, on which such
large Dishes or Chargers could not stand, there being no room for them.
Therefore at last he fancies them to have been Salt-cellars, which were set
upon the Table together with the Bread, being used at all meals. And Philo, as
he observes, seems to be of this opinion, who speaking of this Table (in his
Third Book of the Life of Moses) says, (...), upon it were Loaves and Salts:
from whence he conjectures there were two Salt-dishes at least. See his
Myrothecium Sacror. Elaeochrism. c. 41. L. II.

And spoons thereof.] If this be a true interpretation of the Hebrew word
Cappoth, their use was to put Incense into the Dishes, and to take it out: for
that they contained incense, is evident from VII Numb. 14, 20, 26, etc. Which
makes the forenamed Author think this word should rather be rendered Vials,
which Pollux numbers among the Sacred Vessels; and it is plain were used in
offering Incense in the Temple: for St. John saw the XXIV. Elders, having every
one of them golden Vials full of Odours, or Incense, V Rev. 8. whence it is the
LXX. translate this word (...). The form of which Fort. Scacchus in the place
forementioned, has adventured to describe.

And covers thereof.] Wherewith both the Loaves and the Incense were covered.
So it is commonly understood. But Fortunatus Scacchus endeavors at large to
prove that the Hebrew word kesoth is rightly translated by the LXX. (...),
which were Vessels used in their Libamina, when they poured Wine upon the
Sacrifice, or upon the Altar when they sacrificed. For Authors do not agree
when this was done, some saying the Wine was poured out after the Sacrifice was
slain, and laid on the Altar; others, that it was most commonly done before.
The manner being, first to throw Frankincense into the Fire on the Altar, then
to pour out the Wine, and then the Sacrifice was slain. In which order Homer
and Ovid report it, as Cuperus observes in his Apotheosis Homeri, p. 71.
However this be, it is certain, from Hesychius, Pollux and Suidas, that (...)
signisies such a Vessel: And Josephus says, that when Pompey went into the
Holy Place, he saw there such Vessels as these, together with the Table and
Candlestick, (...), etc. L. I. de Bello Jud. c. 5. The only Objection against
this is, that there was no use for such Vessels in that place. To which, I
think, it may be truly answered, that it was fit notwithstanding God's House
should be furnished with all kinds of Utensils.

And bowls thereof.] So St. Hierom understands the Hebrew word menakioth,
which, following the LXX. he translates cyathos: the form of which Fortunatus
Scacchus (in his forenamed Book, cap. 44.) has endeavored to make out, and
establish this as the certain meaning of the word. But it is very hard to tell
of what use they were here, where no Drink was used: and yet our Marginal
Translation of the next word seems to favor it, making these to pour out
withal. And indeed the Hebrew word signifies both to cover and to pour out. But
the former seems most proper here, unless we take these to have been Bowls (or
such like Vessels) set here merely to signify more completely, that God kept
House among them, (as we speak) they being part of the Furniture of a Table.

Others think they were Stands, upon which the Dishes of Bread were set.

To cover withal.] If we allow of this Translation, and it relate to the word
Bowls immediately preceding, then it signifies these Vessels were a larger
sort of Covers. Or it may refer to the whole; that all the forenamed Vessels
were made to cover the Table entirely. But the Marginal Translation being also
agreeable to the Hebrew Text, it may possibly declare the use of the forenamed
Vessels, which was to pour out withal. For in their Libamina there were several
sorts of these Vessels used among the Gentiles; one only to taste the Wine
before the Sacrifice, which Scacchus thinks was that the Romans called
Simpulum: another to pour it upon the Sacrifice when it was offered, which they
called Guttus, because it had a narrow mouth out of which the Wine came out by
little and little.

Of pure gold shall thou make them.] All things in this part of the House were
of Gold, that the Royal Palace of their King might be most sumptuously
furnished, suitable to the greatness of his Majesty.

Ver. 30. And thou shall set upon the Table Shewbread.] In the Hebrew, Bread
of the Face, or Presence; because it was set before the Ark of the Covenant
where God was present. The forementioned Fort. Scacchus thinks the Heathen from
hence borrowed their Custom of setting Sacred Loaves before Ceres, in her Feast
called Thesmophoria, as he observes out of Athenaeus L. III. Deipnosoph, c. 25.
and other places. Vid. Myrothec. 2. Sacr. Elaeocrism. c. 39.

Before me always.] These Loaves constantly stood upon the Table (new ones being
brought, when the old ones were removed every Sabbath Day) before the Divine
Majesty; a Cloth being spread upon it, whereon these and all the forenamed
things were set, IV Numb. 7. And there were XII. of them in all, representing
the XII. Tribes of Israel, whose Offering these were to God, whose Ministers
are them in the Holy Place, XXIV Lev. 5, 7, 8, 9. They were set in two rows,
one piled upon another, as Josephus represents them.

When Maimonides wrote his More Nevochim, he confesses ( P. III. c. 5.) to that
day he was ignorant of the reason of this Table, and the Bread continually upon
it. Which is very strange, when at the beginning of these Directions, God had
declared, he would have an House built, that he might dwell among them, v. 8.
which dwelling among them, was admirably represented, by its having in it all
things belonging to a Dwelling House, particularly a Table and Bread
(signifying all Provision) whereby they were made to understand, that God, as
was said before, kept House among them. Which no Body has explained so well,
as an incomparable Writer of our own, Dr. Cudworth, in a Discourse put out long
ago, concerning the Right Notion of the Lord's Supper, cap. 6. where he
observes out of Nachman, That there was a Table and a Candlestick ordered for
this House, because they were the ordinary Furniture of a Room. For which
reason, the Table had its Dishes, Spoons, Bowls, and Covers (though they were
never used) and was always furnished with Bread upon it; as the Candlestick
also had Lamps continually burning. From hence it was likewise that there was a
continual Fire, in this dwelling of God, upon his Altar. And, to carry on the
Notion thoroughly, constant Meat and Provision brought to it, by the Sacrifices
there offered. Which were partly consumed by Fire upon God's own Altar; and
partly eaten by the Priests, who were God's Domestic Servants, and therefore
to be maintained by him. And besides the flesh of the Beasts offered up in
Sacrifice, there was a Mincha or Meat Offering made of Flour and Oil; together
with a Drink Offering, which were ever joined with the daily Burnt-Sacrifice,
being the Bread and the Drink which were to go along with God's Meat. So the
Sacrifices are called in the first of Malachi. It was also strictly commanded,
as we read in Leviticus, that Salt should accompany every Sacrifice and
Oblation; because it was not sit, as the same Nachman observes, that God's Meat
should be unsavory. And all these were to be consumed on the Altar only, by
the holy Fire which came down from Heaven, because they were God's Portion, and
therefore to be consumed by himself, in an extraordinary manner.

There are those of the Jews, who look upon this Bread set on God's Table, as
an acknowledgment that they received their Food from God. And we may add, that
this Bread being made of the same Corn, which they eat of themselves, it still
farther represented to them, that they were God's Convivae; who continually
entertained them with that Provision which was made for him.

Ver. 31. And thou shall make a Candlestick of pure gold.] Another necessary
piece of Furniture for a House; especially when there were no Windows in it.

Of beaten gold shall it be made.] Not hollow, but of solid Gold.

His shaft.] The main Body or Trunk of it.

And his branches.] Which shot as it were out of the Trunk.

His Bowls.] Or Cups: for so the word Gebieha is translated, XLV Genesis 1, 5. and
they were in the fashion of an Almond, as it is ordered v. 33.

His Knops.] Round, like an Apple or Pomegranate; as the word Caphtoreha
signisies.

And his Flowers.] The Vulgar translates it Lilies: but the word properly
signifies the Blossoms of Trees.

Shall be of the same.] All of Gold: though not all of one piece: for as Fort.
Scacchus, not unreasonably conjectures, these several parts of the Candlestick
were separable one from another, when there was occasion to remove it from one
place to another. See his Myrothec. Sacr. Elaeochrism. c. 46.

Ver. 32. And six branches shall come out of the sides of it, etc.] In this and
the following Verses, he describes how all the abovenamed Parts should be
disposed so, as to make the Candlestick appear glorious. And first he here
directs that three branches should come out of each side of the main Trunk or
Shaft.

Ver. 33. Three Bowls made like unto Almonds, with a knop and a stower in one
branch, etc.] Next he orders that every Branch of the six, should have three
Bowls (or Cups as I said before) into which perhaps the Snuff was to fall: and
between every one of them a Knop and a Flower. And the Cups were to be of the
figure of an Almond.

So the six Branches.] Were to be all alike.

That come out of the Candlestick.] i. e. Out of the Trunk; which is here, and
in the next Verse, called the Candlestick: because it was the main part of it,
which supported all the Branches.

Ver. 34. And in the Candlestick.] i. e. In the main Trunk or Shaft, out of
which the Branches proceeded.

Shall be four Bowls like to Almonds, with their knops and their stowers.] The
Branches were to have but three Bowls and as many Knops and Flowers; but the
Shaft or Trunk was to have four of each; it being longer than the Branches that
came out of it.

Ver. 35. And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, etc.] This
being repeated twice, signifies that the knops should be so contrived, that out
of three of them should arise two Branches, one of the one side, and one on the
other. So that out of the fourth knop, which I suppose was the lowermost, there
was no Branch at all: but that, with the Cup and Flower, were the ornament of
that part of the Shaft which was under the Branches.

That proceed out of the Candlestick.] i. e. Out of the Shaft or main Trunk, v.
33.

Ver. 36. Their knops and their branches shall be of the same, etc.] No
difference between them; but all solid, not hollow work, of pure Gold.

Here is nothing said of the foot of it; which was no question proportionable
to the rest. Nor does he mention the length of the Start or Trunk: But
Fortunatus Scacchus adventures to guess that it was near double the height of
the Table, and of the Altar of Incense, which made it look Majestically; and
yet did not raise it so much, as to damnifie the Roof of the Tabernacle,
Myrothec. 2. c. 45. p. 439.

Ver. 37. And thou shall make the seven Lamps thereof.] i. e. Cause them to be
made. But of what Metal it is not said; most likely, of Gold, as well as the
Tongs, and the other things mentioned v. 38. The form is not here prescribed,
which the forenamed Scacchus ( Myrothec. 1. c. 7.) thinks was like an Almond.

And they shall light the Lamps thereof.] They whose work it is, viz. the
Priests, XXX. 7, 8. XXIV Lev. 3, 4.

That they may give light over against it.] That is, over against the
Candlestick (as some will have it) the six Branches all inclining to the Trunk
in the middle. But here he speaks of the seven Lamps, not of six only, which
gave light over against some other thing, which I take to be the Table. For it
is plain by XXVI. 35. and XL. 24. that the Candlestick was placed over against
the Table, being on the South side of the House, as the Table was on the North.
See VIII Numb. 2.

Ver. 38. And the Tongs thereof.] Or, Snuffers belonging to it: which Scacchus
(both in his first and second Myrothecium) probably proves were not of such a
form as are now in use; but were only little Tongs or Scissers, whereby the
Lamps were clipped to make them shine more brightly, Myrothec. 1. c. 10. and 2.
cap. 46. p. 455.

And Snuff-dishes.] In which the Snuffers, and the Snuffings of the Lamps were
put: and for the latter use, he thinks they had Water in them.

Shall be of pure gold.] It was most for the magnificence of this House, and
becoming the Divine Majesty who dwelt there, that the meanest thing therein
should be made of pure Gold.

Ver. 39. Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.] A
Talent was Three thousand Shekels, as will appear afterward: which how much it
makes of our Money, see XXXVIII. 25.

Ver. 40. And look that thou make all after their pattern.] Take care to
observe that Precept, which I have already given v. 9. and now repeat again;
that every one of these things be made according to that Model which I set
before thee. For God would have nothing left to the fancy of the People, who he
knew were too much inclined to the Gentile Superstition. And if Moses had not
been determined by a Divine Prescription, they would have been apt, in all
these things, to have interposed their own Inventions.

Which was showed thee in the Mount.] By this it still plainly appears, that
Moses saw not only the House, but all the Furniture belonging to it; set up in
the Mount before him, just as he afterward set it up below among the People.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 1. MOreover.] From the Furniture, he proceeds to the House; and first
orders him how to make the inward part of it.

Thou shall make me a Tabernacle.] The Hebrew word Mischean properly signifies
a place to dwell in; an Habitation (according to what was said XXV. 8.) For
this was the place of the SCHECHINAH (which comes from the same root with
Mischcan) which dwelt here as in its House. But it is commonly translated a
Tabernacle, only to signify what kind of dwelling it was, viz. a portable
House, as Philo calls it, (...): which might be taken down, and removed from
one place to another, and set up again, without any damage to it.

With ten Curtains.] These were so many pieces of Tapestry (as we now call
them) with which this Tent was hung on the sides, and covered at the top.

Of fine twined Linen.] Concerning fine Linen, see XXV. 4. and concerning
twined Linen, see XXVIII. 6.

Blue, purple, and scarlet.] i. e. Yarn died of these Colors. See XXV. 4.

With Cherubims.] It is uncertain what Figure these were of. See XXV. 18.

Of cunning work shall thou make them.] There were two sorts of Work more
Artificial than ordinary: the one called Choscheb, (which is that here
mentioned) the other Rokem, which we translate needle Work. The former was the
most excellent; for it was done by weaving, and had figures on both sides:
whereas that by Needlework had only on one side, as Jarchi here notes. Who says
there was, suppose the figure of a Lion on one side, and of an Eagle on the
other: or rather, he should have said, the same figure appeared on both sides,
as Maimonides seems to take it, in his Kele Hammikdah, c. 8. Wheresoever any
Work is called Rokem in Scripture, it is to be understood of Figures which are
made only on one side of the Web: but the Work called Choscheb had sigures on
both sides, before and behind. See XXVIII. 39.

Ver. 2. The length of one Curtain shall be eight and twenty Cubits, etc.]
Every one of these Curtains was fourteen yards long, and two yards broad: for a
Cubit was half a yard of our measure, according to common estimation. It was
some Inches more, as I have observed on XXV. 10. but to make the Reader more
easily comprehend it, I shall not exactly compute the length and breadth of
these Curtains, but follow the Vulgar Opinion. And with these, it will appear
afterward, both the Roof of the Tabernacle was covered, and the sides of it
likewise, almost down to the ground, that is, within a Cubit of it, as Josephus
says, and as may be made out from the Text: the Tabernacle (according to the
common Notion of a Cubit) being fifteen yards long, five yards broad, and as
many yards high.

Every one of the Curtains shall have one measure.] Be exactly of the same
length and breadth.

Ver. 3. The five Curtains shall be coupled together, one to another: and other
five Curtains, one to another.] Being thus sewed together, of ten Curtains
(each of which, as was said before, was fourteen yards long, and two yards
broad) was made two large pieces of Tapestry; each of them fourteen yards long,
and ten yards broad. With one of these pieces of Tapestry the Holy Place was
covered, it being just so many yards broad as that place was long; so that it
did not come down before at the East End, which was the Entrance of the
Sanctuary. The other piece of Tapestry covered the Holy of Holies: which being
but five yards long, one half of this piece hung down behind it at the
West End, and touched the silver Bases.

Ver. 4. And thou shall make loops of blue upon the edge of the one Curtain,
etc.] These two great Curtains being made by sewing five lesser together; the
Loops were not woven with the Curtains, but tackt to the Selvage of the
outermost of them; and were made of blue Tape.

In the coupling.] In that part of the great Curtains, where they were to be
coupled together.

Ver. 5. Fifty loops shall thou make in the one Curtain, etc.] Each of those
great pieces of Tapestry had fifty Loops; answering one to another so exactly,
that they might take hold one of another.

Ver. 6. And thou shall make fifty taches of gold, etc.] By these golden
Clasps, the Loops were so linked together, that the two great pieces of
Tapestry made but one Covering. Which is the meaning of the following words.

And it shall be one Tabernacle.] By this Union the Covering of the Tabernacle
shall be, as if it were one entire piece.

Ver. 7. And thou shall make.] Now he gives Directions about the outward part
of the House.

Curtains of Goats hair.] Though a soft kind of Cloth was made of Goats hair,
yet in comparison with the other, it was a courser sort of Covering, to be laid
over the finer beforementioned, for their preservation and sheltering from the
Weather. The old Arabians called Scenitae, made their Tents of Goats Hair; for
Solinus calls them Cilicina, which he interprets Caprarum pilis texta.
Concerning the word we translate Goats hair, see XXV. 4.

To be a covering upon the Tabernacle.] By Tabernacle, in the foregoing words
v. 6. seems to be meant the covering of the Tabernacle, which was of one entire
piece. And so it is to be understood here, where a second Covering is ordered
to be thrown over the first.

Eleven Curtains shall thou make.] There was one more of these Camlet Curtains
(as I may call them) than of the Tapestry, which were but ten.

Ver. 8. And the length of one Curtain shall be thirty Cubits.] As there was
one Curtain more of these, so they were one yard longer than the former.

And the breadth of one Curtain four Cubits.] This was the breadth of the
former v. 2. (where see what a Cubit was) but there being one Curtain more of
these than of the other, they were two yards broader than them, when they were
all joined together. Insomuch that they both came down lower than the other, on
either side, half a yard; and also hung down a yard before the entrance of the
Tabernacle, which the former did not cover at all.

Ver. 9. And thou shall couple five Curtains by themselves, and six Curtains by
themselves.] They were to be coupled together after the same manner as the
former, that they might make two large pieces: but there being eleven Curtains
in all, there were but five in one piece, and six in the other.

And shall double the sixth Curtain in the forefront of the Tabernacle.] The
meaning seems to be, that he should turn up that part of the Curtain, which
hung down at the entrance of the Tabernacle.

Ver. 10. And thou shall make fifty loops, etc.] This may be sufficiently
understood by what was said concerning the Loops of the other Covering, v. 4, 5.

Ver. 11. And thou shall make fifty taches of brass, etc.] The two great pieces
of the inner Hangings, being the richer, were coupled together with Clasps of
Gold, ( v. 6.) but these, being coarser, only with Clasps of Brass. Which did
not lie directly over the the Golden, but, as Dr. Lightfoot observes, were
three quarters of a yard more Westward: these two large pieces, not being of an
equal bigness.

And couple the Tent together.] i. e. These outward Hangings or Covering (as we
translate the word Ohel, v. 7.) of the Tent.

That it may be one.] That the two pieces may be knit together by the Loops and
Clasps into one. See v. 6. where this place is there called Mischean (dwelling)
which is here called ohel; to show more clearly what kind of dwelling it was;
an ambulatory House, such as Shepherds have, which they remove from place to
place, IV Genesis 20.

Ver. 12. And the remnant that remains of the Curtains of the Tent, the half
Curtain that remains, shall hang over the backside of the Tabernacle.] These
outward Curtains being four Cubits, that is, two yards and more broader than
the inward, they hung down above a yard lower than the other on the backside
(or West-part) of the Tabernacle, as they did on the Front or Entrance (I
observed before v. 8.) which was on the East.

Ver. 13. And a Cubit on the one side, and a Cubit on the other side of that
which remains in the length of the Curtains of the Tent, it shall hang over
the sides of the Tabernacle, etc.] These outward Curtains being a yard (as two
Cubits are commonly esteemed) longer than the inward, as appears from v. 8.
they hung down therefore on either side a Cubit, that is, half a yard lower
than the inward did. And yet they did not come quite to the ground, but the
foundation of the Tabernacle, which was of Silver, might be seen round about,
save only at the West End.

Ver. 14. And thou shall make a covering for the Tent of Rams skins, died red.]
This was a third Covering, to be laid over the other two, to keep them from
wet. It is not said of what dimensions it was, which has made some fancy it
covered only the Roof. But it is far more reasonable to think it was as large
as the foregoing Covering of Goats hair; which might have been spoiled by Rain
and Dust, if the sides had not been defended as well as the roof. Concerning
these Rams skins see XXV. 5.

And a covering above.] That is a fourth Covering above that of Rams skins, for
the greater Security of the two inmost Hangings; which had need of all this
defense, especially on the Roof; because it was flat, and consequently the Rain
was more likely to soak into it.

Of Badgers skins.] I observed on XXV. 5. that all the ancient Interpreters
take Thachas for a Color, and not for a Badger, or any other Animal. For which
there is this considerable Argument, which I did not there mention; That when
God sets forth his extraordinary Kindness to Israel, as his beloved Spouse, and
shows, in many magnificent Expressions, how richly he adorned her, he says
among other things, that he shod her with THACAS, which we translated Badgers
skins; of which the meanest People never made any use for Shoes: And therefore
Bochartus rightly concludes it signifies something of greater value, viz. Rams
skins died of a kind of Purple color.

Ver. 15. Thou shall make boards for the Tabernacle.] Or Planks, which were the
Walls of the House.

Of Shittim-wood.] See XXV. 5.

Standing up.] Erect upon one end; and not lying side-ways.

Ver. 16. Ten Cubits shall be the length of a board.] By this it appears the
House (according to the Vulgar Opinion of a Cubit) was but five yards in
height. See v. 18.

And a Cubit and an half shall be the breadth of one board.] Three quarters
broad; by which, compared with v. 18. it will appear how long the House was.

Ver. 17. Two tenons shall there be in one board, etc.] The Hebrew calls them
hands; because they were so made, as to take fast hold of the Sockets mentioned
v. 19.

Set in order one against another. They were in each corner of every Plank, at
the bottom of it.

Ver. 18. And thou shall make, etc. twenty boards on the south side,
southward.] By this it appears the Tabernacle was thirty Cubits, that is
(according to common estimation) fifteen yards long; each of these twenty
Boards being three quarters of a yard broad. But this seems not to be
magnificent enough; and therefore it is more reasonable to follow their
Computation, who think the Jewish Cubit, was three Inches and more longer than
our half yard. Which makes the Tabernacle near half as big again, both in
length and height, than it is commonly described. See XXV. 10.

Ver. 19. And thou shall make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards,
etc.] There were two silver Sockets for each Plank, whose Tenons sinking into
these Mortaises, the middle of the Planks settled upon these Bases, as the
Foundation of the House. For so the Hebrew word Adon imports; signifying that
which supports another thing which stands upon it. And these seem to have been
so large, that two Sockets were as long as each Plank was broad, that is, three
quarters of a yard; and being joined close together, they made one entire
Foundation, though consisting of several pieces.

Ver. 20. And for the second side of the Tabernacle on the north side, there
shall be twenty boards.] This Verse, and the next, only direct that the North
side of the Tabernacle should be answerable to the South.

Ver. 22. And for the sides of the Tabernacle westward.] The Hebrew word we
translate sides, should rather be translated ends. For (...), when it is
applied to an inanimate thing, signifies the end, the term, or extremity of it.
As XLIX Genesis 13. we translate, it a border, and the LXX. in XXXVII Isa. 24.
translate it (...), the extreme parts of Lebanon. And so both the Chaldee
Paraphrasts in this place explain it, by the ends of the Tabernacle westward;
for the Entrance was on the East, and the end of it on the West.

Thou shall make six boards.] Of the same breadth with the other, which made
them four yards and an half, according to the Vulgar notion of a Cubit.

Hitherto there is no direction about the Entrance, or East End; which is
reserved till the last.

Ver. 23. And two boards shall thou make for the corners of the Tabernacle in
the two sides.] Besides the six Planks beforementioned, there was a Plank at
each corner, which joined the end of the Tabernacle and the two sides together;
and made the whole Building stronger and more steadfast. How broad they were, he
does not tell us; but I suppose only large enough to make the West End five
yards broad, that is, each of them half a Cubit.

Ver. 24. And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled
together above the head of it, unto one ring, etc.] To make all more firm,
these two corner Planks (for of them he seems here to speak) were to be knit to
the other Planks, both at the top and at the bottom, with a golden Link. Some
think every Plank was thus linkt to the next (whence they are here called
Twins) for the strengthening the whole Fabric: but if this be true, it is not
clearly expressed.

Ver. 25. And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, etc.]
Thus there were eight Planks in all at the West End, ( v. 22, 23.) whose Tenons
struck into the Mortaises of sixteen silver Bases. See v. 19.

Ver. 26. And thou shall make bars of Shittim-wood.] Besides the Links of Gold
which held the boards together, at the top and at the bottom; there were also
wooden Bars, which run into Staples of Gold, which were fastened in every Plank,
as it follows v. 29.

Five for the boards of the one side of the Tabernacle.] There were five of
these Bars on each side, v. 27. whereby the Planks were held tight together. Of
what length they were, is not here said; but Josephus tells us, they were each
five Cubits.

Ver. 27. And five bars for the boards of the Tabernacle for the two sides
westward.] Besides those on the North and South side (mentioned in the latter
end of v. 26. and the beginning of this) there were five at the West End. For
so it should be translated, not the two sides (for there was but one) but the
two ends; that is, the two Corners at the West part of the Tabernacle, which
was much strengthened by these Bars. Or the Plural Number (as is usual) is put
for the Singular; this being the end wherein two sides terminated.

Ver. 28. And the middle bar.] This seems to intimate that the other four were
at the top, and at the bottom; and this in the midst of the Planks.

In the midst of the boards, shall reach from end to end.] The Hebrew Doctors,
whom Dr. Lightfoot follows, take this as if it signified that this Bar went
through the very Planks, which were bored in the midst. But then the Planks
must have been of such a thickness, as would have made them less portable, than
this Tabernacle seems to have been; for they would have been Timber rather than
Planks. I take it therefore that this was a long Bar, which reached from end to
end, and went through Staples, which were in the middle of the Planks, as the
other did above and below. The only question is, Whether these Bars were in the
inside of the Tabernacle, or the outside? It seems most probable they were
without, under the Coverings; for they had not been so sightly within.

Ver. 29. And thou shall overlay the boards with gold.] If they were overlaid
with Plates of Gold, it made them very heavy; unless we suppose the Plates to
have been very thin. Others therefore take it, that they were only gilded.

And make their rings of gold, for places for the bars, etc.] The Staples were
of massy Gold, into which the Bars went; which were also either overlaid with
Plates of Gold, or gilded.

Ver. 30. And thou shall rear up the Tabernacle, according to the fashion
thereof, which was showed thee in the Mount.] When all these Materials were
prepared, then he is here commanded to set it upon, according to the Model,
which was shown him now in the Mount. See XXV. 40.

Ver. 31. And thou shall make a vail of blue, etc.] Concerning these Colors
see XXV. 5. and of fine Linen, XXV. 4. of twined Linen, XXVIII. 6.

Cunning work.] R. Solomon here repeats what he said before on v. 1. that the
Work called Choscheb was so artificial, that it had not only figures on both
sides, but those different one from the other: For example, on one side a Lion,
on the other an Eagle. Josephus says all sorts of Flowers, and other
Ornaments, were wrought in this Vail, except only the figures of Animals.

With Cherubims shall thou make them.] See XXV. 18. This Vail seems to have
been of the same Work with the rest of the inward Hangings of the Tabernacle
mentioned v. 1. unless we suppose that in them the Cherubims only were of
Cunning Work. But I take the whole Work of this Vail to have been of that sort;
the Cherubims being in the midst of all sorts of Flowers and other Pictures.

The Hebrew word Paroketh, which we translate Vail, coming from Perek, which
signifies hardness and rigor, (I Exodus 13, 14.) it has made some conclude,
that this Vail was of a great thikness, (the Hebrews say four singers) which
makes it the more wonderful that it was torn in sunder at our Savior's
Passion. Certain it is, that it was so thick, that none could look through it
into the Holy of Holies.

Ver. 32. And thou shall hang it upon four pillars of Shittim-wood, overlaid
with gold.] This is a sign that it was thick and heavy, there being four
Pillars to support it, which stood at an equal distance one from another. Of
Shittim-wood, see XXV. 5. It is uncertain whether the Pillars were plated over
with Gold, or only gilt.

Their hooks shall be of gold.] Some will have the word vavehim to signify the
heads of the Pillars; for so the LXX. calls them (...). But it literally
signifies hooks (as we translate it) in the form of the Letter Van, which were
on the top of the Pillars, upon which the Vail was hung; as appears from the
next Verse.

Upon four sockets of silver.] As the top of the Pillars were of Gold, so they
stood upon Pedestals of Silver.

Ver. 33. And thou shall hang up the Vail under the taches.] The golden Clasps
that knit together the two great pieces of Hangings ( v. 6.) were just between
the Holy and the most holy place: So that the Vail, which separated these two,
hung exactly under these Clasps.

That thou may bring in thither, within the Vail, the Ark of the Testimony.]
A separate place being made by this Vail, the Ark was to be brought into it
(See XXV. 16, 22.) and set at the West End of it.

And the Vail shall divide unto you, between the holy place and the most holy.]
It made a Partition of the Tabernacle into two parts; one of which was the holy
Place, into which none but the Priests might enter; and the other the most
holy, into which none but the high Priest might enter, and that but once in the
Year. The most holy Place was but a third part of the Tabernacle; being a
perfect Square, five yards high, and as many long and broad; according to the
common Opinion concerning a Cubit.

Ver. 34. And thou shall put the Mercy-seat.] See XXV. 17.

Upon the Ark of the Testimony, in the most holy place.] This being the most
precious Testimonial of God's Presence with them, was put in the most secret
place of God's House. Just as the Palladium, or whatsoever other sacred thing
it was of which the Vestal Virgins were the Conservators (for Diodorus Siculus
says he could not certainly tell, nor did he think it became a Religious Man
to enquire into that which was intended to be a secret) was kept in the inmost
part of the Temple of Vesta, which was called Penus, as we are told by Festus.
Who says, Penus vocabatur, locus ultimus in aede Vestae, tegetibus septus,
etc. Into this place none but the Vestal Virgins, and the Pontifex Maximus
might go; as Lipsius observes in his Syntagma de Vesta and Vestalibus, c. 4.

Ver. 35. And thou shall set the Table without the Vail, etc.] This Verse only
directs how the Table and the Candlestick (which were ordered to be made XXV.
23, 31.) should be set in the Holy Place, which was without the Vail; one of
them on the South Side, and the other on the North-side over against it. But
whither in the middle of the Holy Place, or more toward the upper end is not
said.

Ver. 36. And thou shall make an hanging for the door of the tent.] Now
directions are given about the entrance of the Tabernacle; before which he
orders a Curtain to be hung. Which may be called the first Vail, with respect
to that beforementioned, ( v. 31.) which the Apostle calls the second, IX
Hebr. 3.

Of blue and purple, etc.] Concerning these Colors see XXV. 5. and concerning
fine twined Linen, XXVIII. 6.

Wrought with Needle Work.] This was not such curious Work as that which we
translate cunning Work (v. 31.) which was in the other Vail, before the most
Holy Place. See XXXVIII. 39.

Besides this, Josephus says there was another Vail of Linen, to defend it
from the injury of the Weather; which was wont to be drawn aside upon
Festivals, that the People might see the Beauty of this first Vail. And indeed
it is very probable, that some Curtain or other, was in bad weather, at least,
hung before it, to secure it; as the covering of Skins, was over the Hangings
of the Tabernacle.

Ver. 37. And thou shall make for the hanging, five pillars of Shittim-wood.]
These Pillars seem to have been disposed in this manner. Two of them were
placed at each corner, which, if they took up a Cubit, then the other three
being placed at an equal distance, made four spaces, each of two Cubits ( i.e.
a yard) wide: at which the Priests entered, when they went to Minister in the
Sanctuary.

And overlay them with gold.] It is not certain, whether with Plates of Gold,
or only gilded. But it appears from the XXXVI. ult. (where we read of the
Execution of this Command) that by Pillars are here to be understood only the
Chapiters of them, which were all gilded; and the Pillars themselves had only
fillets, or hoops of Gold about them, in several parts of them.

And their hooks shall be of gold.] As those for the other Vail were; See v. 32.

And thou shall cast five sockets of brass for them.] Their Bases, on which
they stood, were meaner than those for the Pillars on which the second Vail
hung; for they were of Silver, as the Foundation of the whole House was, v. 25,
32.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 1. AND thou shall make an Altar.] Of Burnt-offering, as it is explained
XXXVIII. 1. And the Hebrew word Mizbeach properly signifies, that upon which
Sacrifices were slain and offered.

Of Shittim-wood. What sort of Wood this was see XXV. 5.

Five Cubits long, and five Cubits broad, etc.] It was two yards and an half
square (according to the common notion of a Cubit) at the top and bottom of it.

And the height thereof shall be three Cubits.] Being a yard and half in height
from the ground, the Priest (as Fortunatus Scacchus observes) who ministered at
it, was half a yard above it; the common stature of a Man being four Cubits, i.
e. two yards, Sacr. Elaeo. Myroth. 2. c. 65. It is not said how thick the Wood
was, of which this frame (as I may call it) was made; but it is certain that it
was hollow within, that the Grate mentioned v. 4. might hang in the midst of it.

Ver. 2. And thou shall make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof.]
The Hebrew word kerem, which properly signifies an horn, signifies also an
eminent or High Place; as in V Isa. 1. God says he had planted a Vineyard in a
fruitful Hill; where the words in the Hebrew are in a horn of the Son of Oil.
From whence it signifies a Pinnacle, or Spire rising up from any Building, as
these Horns did from the Altar, for the Ornament of it. Some will have it that
they were useful also to tie the Sacrifices to it, (which they gather from
CXVIII Psalm 27.) and that they were of the fashion of Oxen or Rams-horns.
Fortunatus Scacchus contends earnestly for this (in his Myrothec. 2. Sacr.
Elaeochrism. c. 65.) such Horns being much in use in the ancient Religion, as
appears (he observes) from the Altars of the Gentiles. And yet he confesses in
the LXIX Chapter of the same Book, that such kind of straight Pinacles as I
mentioned before, after the manner of Obelisks (as his words are) were more
convenient for the putting of the Blood of the Sacrifices round about them, as
is required XVI Lev. 18.

His horns shall be of the same.] These Spires seem to have been wrought out of
the same piece of Wood, with the Corners of the Altar.

And thou shall overlay it with brass.] Some think it was overlaid with Brass,
not only without, but within; that the fire which burnt in the Grate might not
take hold of the Wood. To prevent which, others fancy it was lined within with
unhewn Stone: but there is no mention of any such thing; and it was
unnecessary, if the Brass be supposed to have been of such a thickness as to
secure the wooden frame of the Altar.

Ver. 3. And thou shall make his pans.] The Hebrew word Siroth signifies Pots
as well as Pans; but there is determined to the latter sense, by the use of
them, which here follows.

To receive his ashes.] Or rather to carry out the ashes, which fell from the
Altar upon the Earth; and being taken up, were put into these Pans, to be
carried into a a clean place, IV Lev. 12. Fortunatus Scacchus has adventured
to delineate the form of them, in the Book beforementioned, cap. 73.

And his shovels.] The Hebrew word Hajahim properly signifies Beesoms or
Brooms; but here is rightly translated Shovels, by which, being made of Brass,
the Ashes under the Altar were scraped together on an heap, and then thrown
into the Pans.

And his basins.] The principal use of these Vessels was to receive the Blood
of the Sacrifices, which was to be sprinkled as the Law directed: For the
Hebrew word Mizrakoth carries this signification in it. Besides which Fort.
Scacchus thinks they served for the mixture of the Oil, with sine Flour and
Frankincense, which were to be burnt on the Altar. For when any Man offered a
Meat Offering, the Priest was to take an handful of the Flour and of the Oil,
with all the Frankincense, as Gods part, to be consumed on the Altar; and
therefore we must suppose some Vessel wherein these were brought to the Priest,
as the Law requires, II Lev. 1, 2.

And his flesh-hooks.] Or Forks, as the word Mizlegoth may be translated; which
Fort. Scacchus thinks were in the form of a Trident. With which they stirred up
the Fire; and also ordered the pieces of the Sacrifice, if any chanced to lie
out of it, and put them into it, that every bit might be surely consumed.

And his fire-pans.] These are commonly taken for Dishes or Censers, in which
the Priest carried burning Coals from this Altar, into the Sanctuary, to offer
Incense upon the Golden Altar. But the abovenamed Fort. Scacchus thinks they
did not Minister in the Holy Place with brazen Censers; and therefore takes
these Fire-pans for a larger sort of Vessel, wherein the Sacred Fire which came
down from Heaven, was kept burning, whilst they cleansed the Altar and the
Grate from the Coals and Ashes; and when this Altar was to be carried from one
place to another, as it was often in the Wilderness, Myrothec. 2. Sacr.
Elaeochrism. c. 73.

Ver. 4. And thou shall make for a grate.] This was the principal part of the
Altar; the Wood being laid here, and the Sacrifices burnt in it. Whence the
Greeks call it (...); which was the Name the Heathen gave to the Fireplace
upon their Altars, as we learn from Jul. Pollux. The figure of it was round (as
Fort. Scacchus gathers from the very Name in Hebrew; for Michbar signifies a
Scive) but grew less and less, till at the bottom it ended, like a Top, in a
point. So he describes it in the forenamed Book, cap. 71.

Of Network.] It was made full of holes, like a Scive, or Net, (and thence
called simply the Net, in the latter end of this Verse, and in the next) that
the Ashes might fall through them to the bottom of the Altar; where there was a
Door, on the East Side, to open and take out the Ashes.

Of brass.] The Motal of which all the forenamed things were made, and the
Altar it self was overlaid.

And upon the Net.] i. e. the Grate full of holes, as was said before.

Thou shall make four brazen rings.] The use of which was double; first that by
them it might be hung upon the Altar: and then, when it was to be cleansed, or
removed in their Travels, it might by them be taken off.

In the four corners thereof.] This seems to overthrow what I now said of its
Circular Figure: But it is to be observed that Moses does not use the same word
here, which he does when he speaks of the four Corners of the Altar, which he
calls Pinoth, v. 2. but calls these only Ketzoth, which may be better
translated the extremities of it, as the said Fort. Scacchus has noted.

Ver. 5. And thou shall put it under the compass of the Altar beneath.] Some
have fancied that this Grate was placed only at the top of the Altar: but that
does not agree with these directions, which only place it beneath, in the
hollow part of the Altar (called in the Hebrew Carcob, which signifies as R.
Solomon says, any thing that is round, and is by us translated the Compass)
but so much lower than the top of the Altar, that it was even to the midst of
it, as it here follows.

That the Net may be even to the midst of the Altar.] This shows the depth of
the Grate to have been a Cubit and an half: for the Altar being three Cubits
high ( v. 1.) and the bottom of this being even to the middle of the Altar, it
must hang down half way to the ground, and consequently be a Cubit and an half
from the top of it to the bottom. So that this Grate seems to have been made
like to a Furnace, full of holes round about, as well as below; and perhaps was
hung by Chains, in the Rings beforementioned, to the Horns of the Altar.

Ver. 6. And thou shall make staves for the Altar, etc.] Of such a length that
they might be laid upon the shoulders of the Priests; and the Altar, when they
carried it, hang between them.

Ver. 7. And the staves shall be put into the rings.] Besides the Rings for the
Grate, there were others (it appears by this) in the Altar it self, into which
the staves were to be put, when it was to be removed.

And the staves shall be upon the two sides of the Altar to bear it.] It Is
plain by this, that the Staves were not put into the Rings of the Grate (which
was within the hollow part of the Altar) unless we imagine as Dr. Lightfoot
does, that the Rings of the Grate came through the frame of the Altar, and hung
out on the sides of it; so that the Frame and the Grate were carried together.
But besides other Objections against this, from the different form of the Grate
and the Altar, it may be doubted whether they were carried together, and not
separate one from another; especially if we conceive the Grate to have been
carried with the Fire still burning on it; which would have immediately
consumed the Purple Cloth, wherewith the Altar was to be covered, when they
removed it, IV Numb. 13. But the Fine-pans beforementioned, v. 3. it is
probable, as I noted there, received the Fire out of the Grate: and then, it
being cleansed from the Ashes, was carried together with the Altar, to which it
was fastened by its Rings; a Purple Cloth being spread over both.

Ver. 8. Hollow with boards shall thou make it.] Otherwise the Grate could not
have been in the midst of it, as is before ordered, v. 5.

As it was showed thee in the Mount.] Of this also he had a Model set before
him, as he had of other things. See XXV. 9, 40.

So shall they make it.] By that Pattern he was to direct the Workmen to make
it.

Ver. 9. And thou shall make the Court of the Tabernacle.] The Hebrew word
Chatzar properly signifies a green Field or Close. Such was this place,
uncovered, in the open Air; but enclosed with Pillars and Hangings; which made
it such a place as we call, a Courtyard before an House. In this Court stood
the Tabernacle, or Dwelling House of God: not just in the midst of it, but
toward the upper end. And here the Altar of Burnt-offering stood, between the
Tabernacle and the lower end of the Court: and the Laver, wherein they washed,
stood on one side of the Altar. David speaks of more Courts than one, LXV Psalm.
5. LXXXIV. 3. but Moses made only one; into which the Priests came to offer
Sacrifice. Whether the People were admitted into it, is not certain: if they
were, it could contain no great number; and they stood at a great distance from
the Priests in the lower part of the Court; and were separated by some bounds
or other, as they were in after times when they came into Canaan. Where being
settled, and the Tabernacle fixed in Shilo, the Hebrews say it was enclosed with
a Wall, as well as with Hangings: and then, it is likely, a distinct Court was
made for the People; at least, it was so in David's time, as the places
abovementioned prove. And in the Temple of Solomon we read plainly of more
Courts than one, 1 Kings 6.36. VII. 12. 2 Chronicles. IV. 9. XXXIII. 5. viz. the
Court of the Priests, and the Court of the People. Unto which, in the Temple of
Herod, after the Captivity, was added a third, the Court of the Women.

For the southside, southward.] It was to have two large sides, as the
Tabernacle had; whose South Side being first ordered to be made (XXVI. 18.) so
is the same side of the Court.

There shall be hangings for the Court of fine twined Linen.] What fine Linen
and twined were, see XXV. 5. XXVIII. 6. These Hangings were not curiously
embroidered with Flowers, as those of the Tabernacle were (XXVI. 1.) but were
made of simple fine Six-threded Linen.

Of an hundred Cubits long, for one side.] By this it appears that the length
of the Court was an hundred Cubits, or fifty Yards; though of Yards longer than
ours, as I have said before XXV. 10. See v. 18.

Ver. 10. And the twenty Pillars thereof.] These are thought by most to be made
of Shittim-wood.

And their twenty sockets shall be of brass.] The Pillars were placed, five
Cubits distant from each other, upon Bases of Brass: which were more firm and
lasting than Wood.

The hooks of the Pillars.] These were like our Tenters, to hang the Curtains
of the Court upon. See XXVI. 32. concerning the word Vave.

And their fillets shall be of silver.] The Hebrew word Chaschuk properly
signifies a Circle: but whether these were thin hoops of Silver, or only
fillets, (as we translate it) or silver twist, is uncertain. Yet it seems to be
plain from the XXXVIIIth Chapter, that the Heads of the Pillars, into which the
Hooks were fastened, were silvered over.

Ver. 11. And likewise for the north-side, etc.] Here are the very same
directions given for the Hangings, Pillars, Bases, etc. of this side of the
Court; which are nothing different from the former.

Ver. 12. And for the breadth of the Court, on the westside, shall be hangings
of fifty Cubits, etc.] By this it appears that the Court was as long again, as
it was wide; there being Hangings but of half the length for the West End, and
only half so many Pillars and Sockets.

Ver. 13. The breadth of the Court on the east side, etc.] This end was of the
same dimensions with the West End.

Ver. 14. The hangings of one side of the gate, shall be fifteen Cubits, etc.]
The Hangings of this end of the Court were divided, because there was to be a
Gate; the entrance into the Court being at the East End. Each side of the Gate
consisted of fifteen Cubits; and accordingly the Hangings were of that length,
upon three Pillars on each side; as this Verse and the next directs.

Ver. 16. And for the gate of the Court shall be an hanging of twenty Cubits.]
The entrance being twenty Cubits wide, if we add to them the fifteen Cubits
which were on each side of the Entrance, they make in all fifty Cubits; which
was the breadth of this East End of the Court, as well as of the West, v. 12,
13.

Of blue, and purple, and scarlet, etc.] Concerning all this see XXV. 5. and
here only observe, that the Hangings of the Gate were far richer, than of the
rest of the Court: which were merely of fine twined Linen, v. 9. but these of
several other beautiful Colors, and adorned, with that work which they called
Rokem, which we translate Needle Work. What that was see XXXVIII. 39.

And their pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.] Proportionable to
those on each side of the Gate; which were three for Hangings of fifteen
Cubits, ( v. 14, 15.) as these were four for Hangings of twenty.

Ver. 17. All the Pillars round about the Court shall be filletted with
silver.] Those at the East and West End, as well as those on the South and
North-sides.

Their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.] As was before
directed v. 10, 11.

Ver. 18. The length of the Court, etc.] Here all the Dimensions of the Court
are put together: the length and breadth of which might be inferred from the
Hangings ( v. 9, 12, etc.) but here are expressly determined; together with the
height, which was not at all intimated before; and now appointed to be five
Cubits, l. e. two yards and an half, of larger measure than ours. So that the
Tabernacle might be plainly seen by the People; for it was as high again as the
Walls (if I may so call them) that encompassed it.

Of twined Linen, and their sockets of brass.] This seems to be a brief
repetition of what was said before concerning the Hangings, and the Pillars
which stood on Bases of Brass.

Ver. 19. All the Vessels of the Tabernacle in all the service thereof.] This
is also a repetition in general of what was said before particularly ( v. 3.)
for all the Vessels belonging to the Tabernacle it self, were of Gold, as we
read in the XXVth Chapter.

And all the pins thereof.] The Tabernacle had nothing of Brass in the Fabric
of it, but the Bases of the Pillars at the Entrance, XXVI. 37. and therefore
these Pins, I suppose, belong to them, whereby the Pillars were fastened in
their Sockets.

And all the pins of the Court shall be of brass.] These brazen Pins were
struck into the ground (as Dr. Lightfoot understands it) that the Hangings,
which were tied to them by Cords, might be kept from flying up at the bottom.

Ver. 20. And thou shall command the Children of Israel, that they bring thee
pure Oyl-olive beaten.] Not squeezed out by a Press, or by a Mill, (for such
was full of Sediment and Dregs) but which run freely from the Olives, being
bruised with a Pestel.

For the light.] In the golden Candlestick, XXV. 37.

To cause the Lamp to burn always.] Sufficient to keep the Lamp always burning.
Some imagine, that it did not burn day and night, but being lighted every
Evening, went out in the Morning. And there are some places which seem to
favor this Opinion, particularly 1 Samuel III. 3. where mention is made of the
Lamp going out, viz. in the Morning. See also 2 Chronicles. XIII. 11. where we read
of setting the Lamps to burn every Evening: which seems to signisie that they
did not burn in the Day. But Josephus, who was a Priest, and could not but
know, and had no reason to tell a lie, says they burnt Day and Night. And
indeed it was but necessary; for otherwise the Priests must have ministered in
the dark, at the Altar of Incense, before the Divine Majesty. Who kept a Table
in the Sanctuary, which required light; for no Body feasts in darkness. And
therefore R. Levi of Barcelona ( Praecept. XCVIII.) says, God commanded a Lamp
should always burn in the Sanctuary, for the Honor and Majesty of it; there
being no Light conveyed to it otherways. But it is highly probable, there were
not so many of the Lamps burning in the Day, as in the Night, when all the
seven Lamps were lighted: some of which were put out in the Morning, and
lighted again in the Evening. So Josephus says expressly, L. III. Antiq. c. 9.
Three burnt all Day before the LORD, and the rest were lighted in the Evening.

Ver. 21. In the Tabernacle of the Congregation without the Vail.] That is, the
second Vail, which was before the most Holy Place.

Which is before the Testimony.] That is, the Ark of the Testimony. See XXV.
21, 22.

Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the LORD.] As
direction is more fully given XXX. 7, 8.

It shall be a Statute for over, etc.] See XXXVIII. 43.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 1. AND take thou Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among
the Children of Israel.] Here Aaron and his Sons are designed to the Priests
Office: and afterward (XXXII. 19.) the whole Tribe of Levi were Consecrated to
the LORD by a noble Act of Zeal which they performed. And at last (I Numb. 51.
and many other places) it was made Capital for any one else to officiate at the
Tabernacle, but they only.

That he may minister unto me.] Attend on me as my Servant in my Court. For
Cohen signifies one that serves in ministerio honorabili, in an honorable
Office, as appears from XII Job 19. Therefore David's Sons are called by this
Name, 2 Samuel VIII. 18. and it was given to the Priests, quatenus fuerunt
primarij Dei Ministri, as they were the principal Ministers of God; as Junius
observes upon XLI Genesis 45.

In the Priests Office.] Wheresoever there has been any Religion, there have
been Priests; whose Office it peculiarly was, to Minister unto God in the
Service belonging to him. But this is the first time we read of any Constituted
in Israel by a Divine appointment; at least, the Priesthood was not confined to
the particular Family of Aaron, who was made High Priest, and his Sons Priests
of a lower Order. Some Heathens imitated this, by continuing the Priesthood in
a certain Family. For Plato says there were in some places (...), both of Men
and Women; which in the founding of a City he would not have a Lawgiver alter;
but where there was no such Constitution, he would have annual Priests, and
none but grave Men of 60 years of Age put into the Office, L. VI. de Leg. p.
759.

Even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aarons sons.] These were all
the Males in this Family at present; whose Descendants in future Ages were all
Priests.

Ver. 2. And thou shall make holy Garments for Aarou thy brother.] If very good
Authors did not affirm it, we should scarce think it credible, that the
Priests, among some of the ancient Heathens, offered Sacrifices to their Gods
naked. Particularly the old Arabians, as Hottinger observes in his Histor.
Orientalis, L. I. c. 7. But such filthiness was abhorred by most People, whose
Priests were not only Clothed, but performed their Service at the Altar, in a
peculiar Habit. So that there is scarce any Author, who treats of the
Sacrifices and the Priests of the Heathens, that does not speak of their
Garments also. As Moses here in the first Institution of the Priesthood among
the Jews, to offer peculiar Sacrifices at God's House, takes a special care, by
the Divine direction, about their Vestments. Which the Hebrew Doctors think so
inseparable from the Priesthood, that they fancy Adam, Abel and Cain did not
Sacrifice without them. See III Genesis 22.

They are called holy, because they might be worn by none but them; and by
them, only when they ministered unto God.

For Aaron thy brother.] The High Priest had some Garments peculiar to himself,
which none of the other Priests might wear. They were four; the Breast Plate,
the Robe, the Ephod, and the Plate of Gold. There were four more he also wore,
but they were common to him with the other Priests, viz. the Coat, the Drawers,
the Girdle, and the Bonnet. Their Bonnets indeed and his Miter were of a
different form; yet they are not considered, by the Jews, as distinct
Vestments, being both Coverings of the Head. And they make account the High
Priest never wore at one time above eight sorts of Garments; nor the lower
above four. This is the universal sense of the Hebrew Writers; and I cannot
give any account, why Grotius mentions only seven Garments of the High Priest
(reckoning the golden Plate for one) which he will have to answer unto the
seven Lamps in the Candlestick. For it is evident by this very Chapter he wore
eight, viz. the Ephod, v. 8. the Breast Plate, v. 15. the Robe, v. 31. the Plate
of Gold, v. 36. the embroidered Coat, the Girdle and the Mitre, v. 39. which
are all ordered for Aaron the High Priest: and afterward ( v. 42, 43.) Breeches
are ordered for him as well as his Sons; which make up the number of eight.

For glory and for beauty.] To make their Office more respected, and strike Men
with an awful sense of the Divine-Majesty, whose Ministers they saw appear in
such grandeur. For this, and the foregoing Precepts (as Maimonides observes)
were given to render the Sanctuary of God more august and magnificent; for
which end he magnified the Dignity of those who Ministered there; and not only
separated them from other Men, but ordered them to be clothed in beautiful and
precious Garments, that they might appear there like Men of Honor, More
Nevoch. L. III. c. 45. unto which R. Levi of Barcelona well adds, ( Praecept.
XCIX.) that by these glorious Garments the Priests were put in mind of their
Dignity, and admonished to perform the Divine Service, with a Spirit suitable
to the greatness of him, unto whom they were Consecrated. It may be sit for me
also to add, That there being two sorts of Garments, which the High Priest wore
(those they called white, and these they called golden) both of them were very
rich, and made him look gloriously; whether the Materials, or the Colors, or
the Art wherewith they were made, be regarded; as will appear in the particular
account which is given of them in this Chapter. See v. 40.

Ver. 3. And thou shall speak unto all that are wise-hearted.] So the Hebrews
call those, who had extraordinary skill in any Art: according to the ancient
Opinion, which made the Heart the Seat of the Mind.

Whom I have filled with the Spirit of Wisdom.] Endued with singular skill. For
the word ruaeh in Scripture sometimes signifies a Gift of God; whereby they who
had it, performed what they undertook excellently. And Mechanical Arts are
called Wisdom, as well as higher Sciences: So St. Paul calls himself a wise
Masterbuilder. Which was the ancient Language of the World before the time of
Pythagoras, as Cuperus observes (in his Apotheosis Homeri, p. 119.) out of
Georgius Diaconus his Preface to Aristotle's Logic, and out of Nichomachus
Gerasinus, whose words are very remarkable. When all before Pythagoras were
called by the common Name of (...), even Builders of Houses, and Curriers of
Leather, and Pilots, (...), and in general, every one that was skilful in any
Art or public Work; that Philosopher denied this Name to them. Notwithstanding
which some Authors, in after times, still observed the ancient use: insomuch
that Aelian calls Fishermen, who understood their Art well, (...), L. I. de
Animal. c. 2. and Lucian calls Perilaus (...), a wise Brasier, and Aristotle
himself observes that Phidias was called (...), a wise Stone-cutter, L. V.
Moral. ad Eudemum. Nor were the Latins Strangers to this Language (as Cuperus
shows in the same place) which is here used by Moses: whose entire sense in
these words is this; That the Men here spoken of, hoing very skilful of
themselves in their several Arts, their skill was so increased by God's special
Gift, that they became mavelous Artists.

That they may make Aarons Garments.] They were first employed in making
Garments for Aaron; which were the most costly, and required most care in the
work about them. The principal of these excellent Artists were Bezaleel and
Aholiab, XXXI. 1, 2, etc.

To consecrate him.] To be put on at his Consecration, XXIX. 5, 6, etc.

That he may minister to me in the Priests office.] For without these Garments
he might not minister. Whence that common saying in the Talmud, concerning the
Priests, While they are clothed in their Garments they are Priests; when they
want them, they are not Priests. Which Maimonides expresses thus; When they are
clothed in their Garments, their Priesthood is upon them; when they are not
clothed with them, their Priesthood is not upon them. That is, they might no
more perform Divine Service, than mere Laymen. Whence it was that under the
second Temple, (when they wanted the holy Oil to anoint him) the High Priest
was made, merely by clothing him, with the forenamed eight Garments. And as
they might not minister without these, so they might not add any other to them:
If they did, their ministry was unlawful. For which reason they might not wear
Gloves on their Hands, or Shoes on their feet: for from their Knees (to which
their Breeches reached) to their feet, they were naked; only their Coats, in
some sort, covered their Legs. But they stood barefoot in the Sanctuary while
they ministered. We do not find indeed that God any where forbid them to
minister in Shoes; but they being not commanded, when God orders other
Vestments, particularly Bonnets for their Heads, and says here expressly, these
are the Garments thou shall make, that Aaron may minister to me in the Priests
Office; the Jews thence concluded, that God intended they should use no other,
and not so much as any thing on their Feet in the Sanctuary. And this out of
Reverence to that holy Place; as Moses was commanded to put off his Shoes,
because of the Presence of God in that Ground where he stood.

Which to me is an Argument that Moses did not intend to come as near to the
Egyptian Rites, as he might with safety, but rather to oppose them. For their
Priests had (...) on their Feet, as Herodotus tells us, L. II. c. 7. And so the
Priests of several other Nations ministered in Shoes of several kinds: though
others, it is certain, ministered barefoot; particularly the Priests of Diana at
Castobala, as Strabo tells us, L. XII. And nothing is more known than that
saying of Pythagoras, (...), Sacricrifice and worship unshod: The People, as
well as the Priests, putting off their Shoes when they came to the Temple, as
the Jews did.

Ver. 4. And these are the Garments which thou shall make, etc.] These, which
follow, were the principal Garments wherewith the High Priest was clothed:
besides which there was a Plate of Gold; and also Breeches, common to him and
all the rest of the Priests.

And they shall make.] The skilful Men beforementioned, were to make them by
his order and direction.

Holy Garments.] Which none should wear but they. See v. 2.

For Aaron thy brother, and his sons.] Some of these were peculiar to Aaron;
others of them common to him and to his Sons; as will appear in the particular
account which is given of them afterward.

That they may minister unto me in the Priests office.] See v. 3. These
Garments were only to be used in the time of their Ministration: at other times
they never wore them, but were then habited like other Men; as Mr. Seldom
proves L. II. de Succession. c. 7. and at large confirms L. III. de Synedr. c.
11. n. 3. etc.

Ver. 5. And they.] i. e. The skilful Workmen beforementioned.

Shall take gold, etc.] This Verse directs to the Materials, of which the
Priest's Garments were to be made. For though these five words denote so many
colors; yet the first word and the last ( viz. Gold and sine Linen) show the
Matter also is included; from which Color cannot be separated. And as for the
Matter of their Garments, they were made either of Woollen or Linen; nothing of
Hair, or Silk being used in their Contexture: For as to Gold and Jewels, they
were rather for Ornament, than for the making the Substance of the Garments. So
all the Hebrew Doctors, whose Maxim is this, The Priests are not clothed in
their Ministry at the Temple, but in Woollen and Linen. The Matter of them
indeed is not here expressed in this Chapter, save only of their Breeches,
which are ordered to be made of Linen, v. 42. But in XXXIX. 27, etc. all the
Garments of Aaron's Sons are expressly said to be made of fine Linen; except the
Girdle, which was partly of Linen, partly of Woollen. The Garments of the High
Priest, which the Jews call white Garments, were certainly made of Linen; and
his Girdle also was of the same, without any mixture of Woollen, when he wore
those Garments, on the great Day of Expiation, as Braunius shows L. I. de
Vestitu Sac. Hebr. c. 7.

Gold.] The Hebrews say there was seven sorts of Gold, which was diversified
either by its color, or the place from which it came, or its goodness. But
that which was used about these Garments, they conclude was the Gold they
called tahor, which we translate pure Gold, v. 22, 37. i. e. the sinest, and of
the brightest color; between a yellow and red.

And blue, and purple, and scarlet.] Of these Colors see XXV. 4.

And fine Linen.] The Hebrew word Schesch signifies a pure kind of sine Linen,
not Silk (as some have imagined) for there was no such thing known in Moses his
days. It was of a shining white Color; and therefore all the Inferior Priests
were clothed in white, their Garments being made of this. And such were all the
Garments wherewith the High Priest entered into the most holy Place, on the
great Day of Expiation. And wheresoever the Scripture speaks of sine Linen, and
mentions no Color, we are to understand white.

Ver. 6. And they shall make the Ephod.] We retain the Hebrew word, which does
not express the form of this Garment; but the next Verse teaches us something
of it; that it was a short Garment which hung behind upon the Shoulders down to
the Buttocks, and came down before upon the Breast and the Belly. It consisted
of three parts; that which covered the Breast and the Back (which the Hebrews
take to be properly called the Ephod) than the two Shoulder pieces, which came
up from the Arm-holes to the Shoulders (mentioned in the next Verse) and then
the Girdle belonging to it, v. 8.

Of gold, of blue, and of purple.] See the foregoing Verse.

And fine twined Linen.] Here is another word added to Schesch (or sine Linen)
which is Maschzar. Which is never joined with any thing but Schesch in all the
Scripture; and only once found without Schesch, which is to be understood
XXXIX. 24. It is thought by Maimonides and other Hebrew Doctors, to signify
Linen of six threads: Some will have it, that where it is mentioned alone, it
signifies eight thredded Linen.

With cunning work.] The Hebrew word Choscheb, which we translate cunning,
signifies the most artificial, or ingenious sort of Work; which consisted in
the great variety of Figures and Colors that were in it; like that which is
sometimes made of diverse Birds feathers; as J. Braunius shows L. I. de Vest.
Sacr. Hebr. c. 17.

Ver. 7. It shall have the two shoulder-pieces thereof.] They are so called,
because they covered the Shoulders: from whence the LXX. call the whole Ephod,
by the Name of (...). The Jews think they were woven by themselves, and then
sewed to the back and breastpieces with a Needle. So the next words seem to
them to signify.

Joined at the two edges thereof.] Which Abarbinel interprets in this manner;
The Ephod shall have two Shoulder-pieces, which being made by themselves
separate from it, were afterward sewed to the two Extremities of the Ephod.
But the Hebrew words, if they be examined, import no such thing; but run thus,
It shall have two shoulder-pieces, joined at the two ends of it. Now they might
be joined in the very weaving of it, and not by a Needle afterward: and so they
were in all probability, as Braunius has endeavored to demonstrate.

And so it shall be joined together.] In the Hebrew the words are no more but
these, and it shall be joined together: which may be understood of the
coherence of the forepart and hinder-part, by the two golden Buttons set with
Onyx stones, which joined them together on the Shoulders.

Ver. 8. And the curious girdle of the Ephod.] The word Chosheb, which we
translate curious Girdles, signifies it was of such artificial Work as the
Ephod it self was. And it seems to have been two strings (as we may call them)
which went out of each side of it, and tied it to their Bodies, under their
Arm-holes about the heart. So the High Priest had two Girdles; that Belt (as we
may call it) which tied his Coat to him; and this Girdle which tied the
forepart and hinderpart of the Ephod together. It is called the Girdle of the
Ephod, because it was annexed to those two Clothes, and not to the
Shoulder-pieces.

Shall be of the same.] Or, Out of it: to signify that the Girdle was woven
together with the Ephod, and went out of it. So Jarchi and Abarbinel.

According to the work thereof.] This signifies it was to be made of the same
Matter, and woven after the same manner, with all the Ornaments of the Ephod it
self; having all those five Colors in it, mentioned v. 4. and here repeated
again.

Ver. 9. And thou shall take two Onyx-stones.] Concerning the Onyx-stone see II
Genesis 12.

And grave on them the names of the Children of Israel.] The Princes (as
Abarbinel observes) presented Moses with these Stones; on which he himself did
not engrave the names of the Children of Israel, but some person skilful in
that Art. For it is expressly called, v. 11. The work of an Engraver in Stone.

Ver. 10. Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest
on the other stone, according to their birth.] The six eldest on that Stone
which was upon the right Shoulder; and the six younger on the other upon the
left: as several of the Hebrew Doctors expound it; particularly Jarchi, with
whom Josephus agrees L. III. Antiq. c. 8. The Talmudists indeed dispose them
otherwise; but this is most suitable to the word toledoth according to their
Generations, or their Birth, as we render the latter end of the Verse.

Ver. 11. With the work of an engraver in stone.] Done with such Art as such
Workmen use.

Like the engravings of a signet.] The same words are used again v. 36. where
he speaks of the Engravings upon the Plate of Gold. On which Abarbinel says
the Letters were protuberant, as they are upon Coins, or upon Wax impressed
with a Seal: but here on the Ephod and the Breast Plate, he thinks the names
were cut deep in the Stones, as Letters are in a Seal. For which I can see no
reason, the words being the very same: and therefore if the Letters were
protuberant in the one, they were so in the other.

Thou shall make them to be set in ouches of gold.] The Hebrew word
Mischbetzoth, which we translate ouches, signifies as much as the Latin word
funda; the socket, as I may say, wherein the Stones were set. Both which made a
Button; not of a round figure, but something like a Lozenge, or as Maimonides
expresses it, like the figure of those holes, that are in the Stomach of such
Animals as chew the Cud, called reticulum. See Joh. Braunius de Vest. Saer.
Heby. L. I. c. 17. n. 8. By these Buttons the hinder-part of the Ephod was
fastened to the forepart upon the Shoulders; and the Breast Plate also hung
upon them, by golden Chains.

Ver. 12. And thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulders of the Ephod,
for stones of memorial unto the Children of Israel.] This is explained in the
following words, that Aaron might bear their Names before the LORD, upon his
shoulders for a memorial. That is, might remember to recommend the XII. Tribes
of Israel unto God, when he offered Incense, and made his Prayers before him.
Or, for a Token that he appeared before God, in the Name of the whole People of
Israel.

Others will have this Memorial refer to God, before whom he presented himself,
that he might be gracious unto his People, when the High Priest came thus
attired, according to his own order to pray for them; with assurance that he
would be mindful of them all. And to this the 29th Verse seems to incline;
where the same is said to be the intention of engraving their Names upon the
XII. Stones on the Breast Plate. See XXXIX. 7.

Ver. 13. And thou shall make ouches of gold.] See v. 11. where the word
Misohbetzoth is explained.

Ver. 14. And two chains of pure gold at the ends, etc.] These Chains did not
consist of many little rings, but of many threads or wires of Gold twisted
together like a Rope. For which reason Moses adds, of wreathen work shall thou
make them. This Bartenora takes to be the meaning of the word migbaloth (which
we translate at the ends) which he expounds Cords or Cables. They were not,
says he, like to those Iron Chains wherewith Prisoners are bound, consisting
of several Joints; but twisted of Golden threads, till they were as thick as
Cords. Others think migbaloth signifies equal; because they were of an equal
thickness, or of an equal length. But our Translation also may be defended; for
the ends of them were annexed to the Rings of the Breast Plate, v. 24. But as
these Chains were annexed at one end to the Rings of the Breast Plate, so at
the other end they were annexed to the Golden Buttons upon the Shoulders; so
that the Breast Plate hung upon the Golden Buttons by the Chains.

And fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches.] Moses only briefly mentions the
two Chains in this place, to signify that the Ouches in the Ephod served for
the support of the Breast Plate, by these two Chains; which properly belonged
to that, and not to the Ephod, as Jarchi observes. And therefore after
directions for the Breast Plate (which here follow) they are again spoken of in
their proper place, v. 22. As v. 27. there are two golden Rings spoken of,
which belong to the Ephod; but not mentioned till then, because by these Rings
the Breast Plate and Ephod were knit together.

Ver. 15. And thou shall make the Breast-plate] Next after the Ephod directions
is given for the Choschen, which we translate Breast Plate; taking it, I
suppose, to come from the Hebrew word Chazeh, which signifies the Breast. For
by the change of a Letter (which is not unusual) Choschen may well be thought
to come from thence, because it lay upon the Breast, and covered it.

Of Judgment.] For the Priest wore it, when he went to consult the Divine
Majesty, about the great Concerns of their Religion or Government; and received
such Answers, as directed them what to determine in dubious Cases, either in
War or Peace. See v. 29.

With cunning work.] See v. 6.

After the work of the Ephod thou shall make it, etc.] It was to be made of the
same Materials with the Ephod; and with the same Artifice, as it here follows.

Ver. 16. Apiece shall it be being doubled.] The words are in the Hebrew,
apiece shall it be doubled. Which are to be thus understood, that the
whole Piece was not square, till it was doubled. So Maimonides. It was a Cubit
long ( i. e. two Spans) and its breadth a Span: but being doubled, it was a
square of a Span, both in length and in breadth. From whence it follows that it
was hollow; so that it may be compared to one of our Purses: only, it does not
appear, whether it were sewed together at the sides, or on one side, or open on
both sides; though it is commonly said so to be. But it is possible that it was
doubled, merely that it might be stronger to bear the weight of so many
precious Stones, and of the Rings and Chains; not that it might have any thing
put between it.

A span shall be the length thereof, etc.] This is just the measure of a Man's
breast.

Ver. 17. And thou shall set in it settings of stones.] Or, as it is in the
Hebrew, fill it with fillings of stones. Which plainly signifies that these
Stones were set, as precious Stones are now in our Rings, in a funda or hollow,
which was filled up with the Stone. In the 20th Verse we translate it
inclosings. So Jarchi, because the Stone filled up the hollowness of the Ouches
to which they were fitted, and therefore Moses uses the word sillings.
Abarbinel here observes that Moses says fillings of Stone, in the Singular
Number, not the Plural (and so in the next words, four rows of Stone, not
Stones, as we translate it) to signify that all the Stones were so set in the
Breast Plate, as if they were but one Stone. For all the Fundae in which they
were set, consisted of one mass of Gold, wherein there were twelve Ouches, in
which every single Stone was set, as we see it now, in our present Lockets.

Even four rows of stones.] With a square of precious stone.

The first row shall be a Sardius, etc.] There is so little certainty what
these Stones were, that nothing can be affirmed about them; as appears by the
vast variety of Interpretations, that have been made of them, by Writers both
old and new. The first of them is called Odem in the Hebrew, which some take to
be a Ruby; but have no other reason for it, but only because (...) signifies
red. Others take it for an Adamant; which may seem to be derived from Odem, as
a Jaspri is from Jasphe. And there are several other Conjectures, but none so
probable as that of our Translators; who call it a Sardius (or Sardine Stone,
as they render it IV Rev. 3.) which is of a red flaming Color (as Braunius
has demonstrated from several Authors, L. H. de Vest. Sacr. Hebr. c. 8. n. 8.)
but, as some describe it, with a cast of yellow in it, like that of fresh Oil.
And it is not improbable that this Stone had the Name of Sardius from the
Hebrew word Sered, which signifies red, XLIV Isa. 13. as Kimchi there
interprets it. And thence the Divine Majesty is said to look like a Sardine
Stone (in the place abovenamed) because he appeared in great anger. So an
ancient Writer, (...).

A Topaz.] The second Stone in this row, is in Hebrew called Pitdah, which we
truly translate a Topaz: which was a Stone of a green Color, not a yellow, as
we now commonly understand it. So Pliny and others, as the same Braunius shows
L. II. c. 9. where he fancies that the word Topasion, by an easy change of
Letters was made out of Pitdah: for the Syriack Interpreter XXI Rev. 20. calls
this Stone Topadion; in which there are the same Letters that are in Pitdah.
But however this be, it appears from the XXVIII Job 19. that this is the right
Translation of the word; for there it is Pitdah Cush, the most excellent Topaz
Stones, being found in an Island belonging to Arabia, called thence by the Name
of Topazion.

And a Carbuncle.] So we translate the third Stone of the first row (which in
Hebrew is called Bareketh) following perhaps Aberbinel. But the greatest part
of Interpreters take it for the Smaragdus: which good Authors describe as the
most radiant of all other Stones; and therefore called perhaps Bareketh, from
its extraordinary splendor. For barak, every Body knows, fignifies to glitter,
XXI Ezekiel. 10. The best Authors say, the Color of it is a Grass-green;
wonderfully refreshing (as Pliny describes it) to the eyes, when one looks upon
it.

Ver. 18. And the second row shall be an Emeraud.] The Hebrew word Nophech,
which we translate Emeraud, is by most Interpreters taken to signify a
Carbuncle. Some of which Stones are white; but the most excellent of all other
are red, shining like Fire, or a burning Coal: whence the Name of Carbuncle,
from Carbo a hot Coal. And to this the Hebrew word Nophech agrees; which
Braunius ingeniously conjectures comes from Phuch, which signifies that Red
wherewith Women painted their Faces, 2 Kings IX. 30. And, in short, he takes it
for that Stone which now we call a Ruby. And so Abarbinel translates it, and
Luther also; vid. L. II. c. 11.

A Sapphire.] This Stone is mentioned before, XXIV. 9. and it retains its Name
to this day, almost among all People. So that there is no question, but only
what kind of Stone it was, about which Authors differ. For some say it was a
white Stone, (and there are some so pale, that they incline to that rather than
any other Color) but it is plain, that Stone was called anciently a Sapphire,
which is now so called; being of the Color of the Heavens, or the Veins, that
is, a Sky-colour. See XXIV. 10. V Cantic. 14. IV Lament. 7.

And a Diamond.] So we rightly translate the Hebrew word Jahalom; which is
thought to come from halam, which signifies to break. Whence Halmuth is an
Hammer, or a Mad, V Judge. 26. For the Adamant or Diamond is the hardest of all
Stones; which breaks them all, but is broken by none, as Abarbinel speaks. It
was anciently accounted the most precious of all Gems, as Pliny acknowledges L.
XXXVII. c. 4.

Ver. 19. In the third row, a Ligure.] So we translate the Hebrew word Leschem,
which being no where else found, the meaning of it is uncertain. But a great
many, both of the Ancient and Modern, translate it as we do: though what a
Ligure is, cannot easily be resolved. Some think (...) or (...) to be nothing
but the best Ambar. But that is no precious Stone, as all here mentioned are;
and therefore (to mention no other Conjectures) Braunius thinks we are to
understand by this word, a kind of Jacinth: of which there being diverse sorts,
he judges it likely to be that which nearest approaches to the color of Ambar;
which has made Authors take them for the same. The Ancients indeed commonly by
a Jacinth understand a Stone of a Violet color, but more pale and dilute than
in the Amethyst: and the Stone now called an Amethyst, was anciently called a
Jacinth. Yet they mention Jacinths of diverse other colors, and some shining
like Fire; vide L. II. de Vestit. Sacr. Hebr. c. 14. n. 11, 12.

An Agate.] So the Hebrew word Schebo (which is no where else mentioned in
Scripture) is translated by the greatest part of Interpreters; who take this
for that Stone the Greeks call Achates. Which is so well known that it needs no
description; being that beautiful Stone which Nature has painted with great
variety: from whence it has got several Names, as the same Braunius observes
in the same Book, cap. 15. n. 4. etc. And the very Name of Achates, seems to be
derived from its various Colors: Akud in Hebrew signifying that which is
spotted, as Jacob's Cattle were, XXX Genesis 35. Though now, because they are
common, they are of no great value; yet anciently, it appears from Theophrastus
and Pliny, they were more precious. See there n. 9.

And an Amethyst.] The Hebrew word Achlama is no more to be found in Scripture
elsewhere, than the two former. But the best and most ancient Authors take it
as we do, for that Stone which other Writers call an Amethyst. Which is of a
bright Violet color, or like red Wine, from whence it has its Name in the
Greek. The nearer these Stones came to a Purple, and the more they had of the
Flame of a Carbuncle, the more precious they were esteemed, as the forenamed
Braunius shows L. II. c. 16. n. 56.

Ver. 20. In the fourth row, a Beryl.] The Hebrew word Tharschisch is very
variously interpreted; but the LXX. Josephus, and a great many others, take it
for that which the Ancients call a Chrysolite; that is, a Stone of a golden
Color, which others call a Topaz. This Braunius endeavors to prove was the
color of Tharschisch out of X Dan. 5, 6. V Cant. 14. etc. See c. 17. n. 12,
13, etc.

An Onyx.] The Hebrew word Schoham we meet withal in the beginning of the Bible
(II Genesis 12.) and translate it as we do here, an Onyx. But Josephus, St.
Hierom, and the Vulgar, translate it Sardonyx; which was of a mixed Color, of
white and red. For the most precious Indian Sardonyx, had a Radix (as they call
it) white, like the Nail of ones Finger; and the Superficies red like Blood;
and both of them transparent: From whence it had its Name; the Sardius Stone
(as was said before) being red, and the Onyx signifying the Nail of ones
Finger. See the forenamed Braunius c. 18.

A Jasper.] Though the Hebrew Name, which is Jaspeh, be retained among all
People to this day, yet all Interpreters have not translated it as ours do,
who, no doubt, are in the right. For why should we not think Jaspeh is
certainly that Stone which the Greeks and Latins call Jaspri: as we doubt not
the Sapphire beforementioned ( v. 18.) is the Stone they call Saphirus. The best
of these Stones are of a green Color, like a Smaragdus; but sometimes they
have little spots or points in them, of various colors: which has made some
Authors call this Stone Panthera. See Braunius c. 19.

They shall be set in gold in their inclosings.] Or, more literally, They
shall be golden ouches, in which they are set. See v. 17. and v. 11.

Ver. 21. And the stones shall be with the names of the Children of Israel,
etc.] Upon each Stone was to be engraven the Name of one of the Sons of Jacob.
And, in all probability, in the same order wherein they were engraven upon the
two Stones of the Ephod: where it is ordered they should be engraven according
to their birth, v. 10. And so Josephus says it was here, (...), which is but
the translation of Moses his words now named, according to their Generations.
And so Maimonides understands it, though here it be only said, according to the
twelve Tribes; as if he had said, upon the first Stone in the first row ( viz.
the Sardius) shall be the Name of Reuben; upon the second the Name of Simeon;
upon the third, the Name of Levi; and so of the rest.

Like the engraving of a signet. See v. 11.

Ver. 22. And thou shall make upon the Breast Plate, Chains.] These Chains are
not different from those mentioned v. 14. as some imagine: who think there he
speaks of the Chains of the Ephod, and here of those of the Breast Plate. For
the Ephod had no Chains belonging to it, nor needed any: and the Breast Plate
had only these two; which, though mentioned before, are now more exactly
described in their proper place, and the use of them directed.

At the ends.] Concerning the word gabluth, see v. 14. where I observed, some
think it signifies Cords, from gabal, which, as well as chabal, signifies a
Rope or Cord; from whence some fancy comes our English word Cable.

Of wreathen work.] So many Wires of Gold were wreathed together, as to make a
Chain of some thickness, like a Cord. So Bartenora interprets it. Abarbinel
says they were weaved; but he must mean such a weaving as we make with our
Fingers, when we twist several Threads together, which the LXX. call (...),
twisted work.

Ver. 23. And thou shall make upon the Breast Plate two rings of gold, and
shall put the two rings on the two ends of the Breast Plate.] The Breast Plate
had four Rings in all; one at each corner of the Square. And here he gives
direction for the making those two, which were at the two upper corners of it:
the other two are ordered v. 26.

Ver. 24. And thou shall put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings,
which are on the ends of the Breastplate.] This Verse and the next show how
these Chains were to be disposed, and for what end they served. Below they were
fastened to the two Rings, in the upper part of the Breast Plate, as is here
directed: and above they were fastened to the two Buttons, upon the
Shoulder-pieces of the Ephod, as is directed in the next Verse. So the
Breast Plate was supported by these two Chains, which hung upon the Buttons, as
the Breast Plate did upon them.

Ver. 26. And thou shall make two rings of gold.] That is, two other besides
those mentioned v. 23.

And thou shall put them upon the two ends of the Breastplate.] This is to be
understood of the lower corners of the Breast Plate, as v. 23. of the higher.

In the border thereof.] In the lower Border of it.

Which is in the side.] Or, over against

The Ephod inward.] So that these two lowermost Rings were not seen, being
inward; lying, as it were, between the Ephod and the Breast Plate.

Ver. 27. And two other rings of gold thou shall make.] These, though belonging
to the Ephod, are not mentioned till now; because the use of them would more
plainly appear in this Place.

And shall put them on the two sides of the Ephod.] Or rather, Shoulder-pieces
of the Ephod: for so we translate it more plainly v. 7.

Underneath.] Below, or at the lower end of the Shoulder-pieces.

Toward the forepart thereof.] Or, in its forepart.

Over Against the coupling thereof.] Opposite to the Rings of the Breast Plate;
being to be coupled to it by these Rings.

Above the curious girdle of the Ephod.] All this is said only to mark out the
place exactly, where these two Rings were to be fastened to the Ephod; that the
Breastplate might be inseparable from it.

Ver. 28. And they shall bind the Breast Plate by the rings thereof, unto the
rings of the Ephod, with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious
girdle of the Ephod.] A blue Lace, or Ribbon, being put through the two lower
Rings of the Breast Plate, and then through the Rings of the Ephod; they by it
were tied together, a little above the girdle of the Ephod.

And that the Breast Plate be not loosed from the Ephod.] And thus being
joined, they were not to be separated one from another; no not out of the time
of Ministration: but always continued so fast together, that the Ephod could
not be put on without the Breast Plate. Thus Maimonides, and the Gemara c. 7.
of Joma, If any one remove the Breast Plate from the Ephod, or the Staves from
the Ark, he shall receive forty stripes.

Ver. 29. And Aaron shall bear the names of the Children of Israel in the
Breast Plate of Judgment, upon his heart.] Appear in the Name of the whole
People of Israel, to beg direction of God in all difficult Cases.

When he goes in unto the holy place.] Where with his Face toward the Ark
(where the Divine Glory sat) he prayed to God for them.

For a memorial before the LORD continually.] That God might remember them,
when he remembered him daily of the Promises made to them, and to their
Forefathers. Which in Scripture phrase, denotes God's gracious hearing his
Prayers, when he addressed himself unto him, in the manner he required. For
then he is said to remember his People, when he granted their Desires; and they
remembered him, when they did as he bad them.

Ver. 30. And thou shall put in the Breast Plate of Judgment.] It is called
both here, and in the foregoing Verse, the Breast Plate of Judgment, not only
for the reason there named; but because the High Priest (nay, the whole Body of
the Priests, but he especially) sat as a Judge to determine several
Controversies, as appears from many places, X Lev. 11. XVII Deuteronomy. 8, 9. XIX. 7.
XXXIII. 8. 2 Chronicles. XV. 3. etc.

The Vrim and the Thummim.] There is not the least intimation any where what
these were, nor any direction given to Moses for the making of them, as there
is for the rest of the Priestly Attire. Which may incline one to conclude one
of these two things: either that they were things delivered to Moses by God
himself, as the two Tables of Stone were; or that they are not things different
from the precious Stones beforementioned. But if the former of these were
true, I should think it would have been as plainly mentioned, that God
delivered these unknown things to him, as that he did the two Tables of Stone.
The other has something in the Scripture to countenance it. For in the XXXIX
Chapter of this Book, where Moses sets down the making of all those things
which are here ordered; he mentions only the four rows of Stones, in the same
manner as he does here; but says not a word of putting the Vrim and Thummim in
the Breast Plate: though he spoke particularly of other things, even of the
Rings, and the Chains, and the Lace whereby it was tied to the Ephod. And on
the other side, when he speaks of habiting Aaron with all these Vestments, in
order to his Consecration, he only says VIII Lev. 8. that he put the
Breast Plate upon him, also he put in the Breastplate the Vrim and the Thummim;
but says not a word of the four rows of Stones. For which it is hard to give a
reason; unless it be, because the Vrim and the Thummim were one and the same
thing with the XII. precious Stones: So that it was indifferent, whether he
said Vrim and Thummim were put into the Breast Plate, or the XII. precious
Stones; which are the only things in all this description of the holy
Vestments, that can be thought to be Vrim and Thummim. And indeed, there being
such a particular direction for every thing else, and also a description of
their form and fashion, (as that the Chains should be of wreathen work) one
cannot but think there would have been something said of these, if they had
been distinct from what was mentioned before. Mr. Mede indeed thinks that
nothing is said concerning them, because they were things well known to the
Patriarchs. But this is well confuted lately, by another great Man, Dr. Pocock,
in his late learned Commentary upon the Prophet Hosea, page 149. unto which I
refer the Reader, because I have other things to note, and would not willingly
enlarge too much on this Subject.

As for that which some have said concerning two little Images, or
Representations of Angels, which were put in the hollow of the Breast Plate, I
see no foundation for such a Conceit. One may better say, that these two words,
Vrim and Thummim, were written, or wrought on the Breast Plate; signifying that
from hence they should receive the clearest and most perfect Resolution of all
their Doubts. And of this opinion was R. Asaria in his Meor Enajim, c. 46.

But if we take the former to be the truer Account, that he only repeats what
he said before (as he does what he had said of the Rings belonging to the
Breastplate, v. 14, 22.) then the meaning is, that the XII. Stones should be
the most sparkling, and most perfect, in their kind, that could be got, (for
Vrim all acknowledge signifies Fires or Illuminations; and Thummim the greatest
Perfection) and that all belonging to the Breastplate (the Square stuff, the
Stones engraved, the Rings, the Chains and Lace) should be prepared and made
ready before they were set in the Breast Plate.

And of this opinion (that the precious Stones were the Vrim and the Thummim)
were Josephus and the Talmudick Doctors, who therein, I take it, were in the
right; though they do not give a likely account how the mind of God was
declared by them.

And they shall be upon Aaron 's heart.] So it is said concerning the Names of
the Children of Israel ( v. 29.) which were engraven on the XII. Stones; and
seems to confirm the foregoing Interpretation.

When he goes in before the LORD.] To minister unto the Divine Majesty, and to
enquire of him: which he did in the Holy Place, standing with his Face toward
the Ark, in the Holy of Holies. Into which he went only once a year, upon a
particular Business, to expiate the Sins of the People; and had not on these
glorious Robes here mentioned; but was only clothed in fine Linen, as we read
XVI Lev. And therefore it is strange that Buxtorf should say he went into the
Sanctum Sanctorum with the Vrim and Thummim, to enquire of God. See his History
of them cap. 1. (where he alleges this Verse for it) and cap. 3.

And Aaron shall bear the Judgment of the Children of Israel.] By Judgment is
here meant the Breast Plate of Judgment, as it is called, when he begins to
speak of it v. 15. and in the foregoing Verse; just as the Ark of the
Testimony, is sometimes called the Testimony. Or else the meaning is, that he
should carry the great Concerns of the Children of Israel (their weighty Causes
and Doubts) before God; and desire his direction, for the King, for the great
Council, and for the People, in all difficult Matters, both in War and in
Peace, whether belonging to Religion or to Civil Government.

Upon his heart before the LORD.] He was never to appear in the Holy Place
without this Breast Plate, with the Names of all the Children of Israel upon
it. Many learned Men have taken notice of that passage in Aelian, L. XIV. Var.
Hist. c. 34. where he relates how the Egyptian Priests had an Image made of
Sapphire Stone, about their Neck (which was called (...), i.e. Truth) when they
sat in Judgment. And Diodorus Siculus says, L. I. c. 75. that it consisted of
more precious Stones than one; from whence some have imagined that Moses took
his Pattern of this Breast Plate. But as they did not wear this Badge of
Authority, when they ministered about Sacred Things, but in their Civil Courts
where they sat as Judges; so there is no reason to think this Ornament of
theirs, was so old as the time of Moses, (there being no mention of it in
Herodotus) but was rather a later Invention, unto which other Countries were
not Strangers. For the Vestal Virgins among the Romans, at least she that was
called Maxima, wore an Ornament upon her Breast made of precious Stones, as a
Statue dug up at Rome, in the beginning of the last Century, seems to
represent it, (See Lipsius cap. ult. de Vesta and Vestal.) And Gutherius has
proved that these Vestal Virgins sat in Judgment, and tried Causes, as the
Pontifex Maximus did; and then it is likely, and not at other times, wore this
Antepectorale. There is more ground also to say, that the Egyptians took their
Pattern from the Jews, than that they took it from the Egyptians; there being
in the time of Solomon a great Correspondence between them, by his marriage
with Pharaoh's Daughter.

Continually.] Whenever he appeared before the LORD, to enquire of him. The
greatest difficulty is, how the LORD answered by Vrim and Thummim? Which the
Jews generally think was by the shining of the Stones, and the prominence of
such Letters in them, as made the Answer. If they had left out the latter part
of this resolution (about the prominence of the Letters) what they say would
have been more likely. Especially since Josephus only mentions their
extraordinary splendor; telling us, for instance, that when the High Priest
enquired, whether they should go to War or not? If God approved of it, there
was such a refulgent brightness in the Stones, (...), that made all the People
know, God would be present for their help and succor. And when God did not
approve of their undertaking, he says there was a cloudiness upon the Stones,
as there had been for two hundred years (he confesses) before he wrote his
History, (...), God being angry with them, for the transgression of his Laws,
L. III. Antiq. c. 9. But this alone could not resolve such questions as that, I
Judge. 1. Who shall go up first to sight against the Canaanites? To which the
LORD answered ( v. 2.) Judah shall go up. For if this Answer was given, in the
way now mentioned, that Stone alone, which had the Name of Judah engraven on
it, must have had a Splendour in it above all the rest. Which if we should
suppose, yet an Answer could not have been given to all their questions, merely
by the Refulgency of all, or of any one Stone; as if they asked, Which way they
should go against an Enemy? Therefore it is more likely, that there was a
Voice, which spoke to the High Priest, from the Divine Glory, on the
Mercy-seat; as we read there was to Moses when he went into the most Holy Place
to speak with God, VII Numb. 89. Against which I do not see what can be
objected: and it seems far more probable than their opinion, who think God
inspired the High Priest at that time, when he consulted him, as he did the
Prophets. For this makes no difference between enquiring by Vrim and Thummim,
and by the Prophets, but only this; That God (they say) constantly answered
when the High Priest consulted him, which favor he did not always grant the
Prophets. If there be any Truth also, in what the Jews say concerning the
Bath-col under the second Temple, it seems to me to tell us, That God then
directed them, without the Vrim and the Thummim, in the same way as he had
formerly done with it. Certain it is, that such a Voice often spoke to our
Savior, in the audience of his Apostles, out of the High and Holy Place in the
Heavens; to show that he was the Prophet like unto Moses, whom he promised to
raise up unto them, XVIII Deuteronomy. 15.

There are those who have adventured to affirm, That others besides the High
Priest might wear the Vrim and Thummim, to consult the Divine Majesty,
particularly their Kings. But how weak the Grounds of this Assertion are, will
appear when I come to those places, which they allege to justify it. I shall
conclude what I have to note about this matter, with one Observation more; That
this is one of the principal Reasons, why the Government of this People before
they had Kings, was (as Josephus calls it) a Theocracy, that is, The Empire of
God, because he by this Oracle of Vrim and Thummim, prescribed how they should
proceed in all their public Affairs of great moment. And another Reason was,
because he stirred up Judges, when he thought it necessary; who being of his
immediate appointment, are so far acknowledged by him, that when they were
weary of Samuel's Government (who was a Judge) and desired a King, God declared
it was not Samuel whom they rejected, but himself.

Ver. 31. And thou shall make the Robe.] The Hebrew word Mehil, which we
translate Robe, is by the Latins called Pallium, and by the LXX. (...), a
Garment coming down to the Ankles. The form of it is intimated in the next
Verse; and the matter of it is here ordered to be all of blue, i. e. of blue
Cloth. Some indeed say of Silk: but is is certain Thechelet signifies Wool
died of a sky-colour. See Braunius L. I. de Vest. Sacr. Hebr. c. 9. n. 1.

Robe of the Ephod.] So called because the Ephod was put upon it.

Ver. 32. And there shall be an hole in the top of it.] From hence the Form of
it may be gathered, that it was like one of our Surplices, or Shirts without
Sleeves; but with two holes on the sides, to let their hands through. And it
was put on over their Heads, it appears by this hole at the top; and so covered
their whole Body.

In the midst thereof.] Not cross-wise, from shoulder to shoulder; but
long-wise, from the back to the middle of the breast, as Abarbinel expounds it.
Wherein it differed from a Surplice, and from the Tunick, or Coat: the hole of
which at the top, was round; whereas this was oblong, as they speak.

It shall have a binding.] This was both for handsomness, and for strength,
that it might not be further slit. Josephus mentions the former, as a reason
for this binding or border, that there might appear no (...) (as his word is)
no deformity about the Priest: and the Text it self in the end of the Verse
mentions the latter, that it be not rent. This binding Abarbinel thinks, on the
former account, was on the inside, for decorum sake, that nothing might be seen
but the Robe.

Of woven work.] It was not to be sewed to it, but woven with it of one entire
piece; which could not be done without a great deal of Art. So Abarbinel, the
opening or hole was not to be cut with Scissars, and then sewed with a Needle;
but it was woven with the very Garment.

As it were the hole of an Habergeon.] The ancient Habergions or Corslets,
being made of Leather and Linen, needed a Limbus about the Neck to keep the
parts firm and tight. But whether the binding had hooks and eyes (as we call
them) like those which are in Corslets, to fasten the parts together, is
uncertain. Abarbinel affirms it, but without any Authority.

That it be not rent.] That is, the Robe be not rent in putting it on; or by
the Ephod and Breast Plate that were upon it; for that had rendered it
contemptible; a Rent among us (says R. Levi Barzelonita) being dishonorable,
Praecept. CIII.

Ver. 33. And beneath upon the hem of it.] Or, upon its skirts. (...) says
Josephus, toward the bottom, where it touched the feet.

Thou shall make Pomegranates.] So the Hebrew word Rimmonim undoubtedly
signifies, as Maimonides and other learned Jews affirm. Jarchi says they were
to be of the bigness of an Hens egg.

Of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet round about the hem thereof.] Though
the Robe it self was of one simple color, yet the skirts of it were very much
adorned by variety of Colors in the Pomegranates; which were made of Yarn dyed
blue, purple and scarlet, (of these see XXV. 4.) and the LXX. add, of sine
Linen. For so we read they were made XXXIX. 24.

And bells of gold between them round about.] The Targum upon VI Esth. 10.
makes the Kings of Persia to have worn such kind of Garments. For he represents
Ahasuerus as saying to Haman, Go to my Wardrobe, and take one of my best purple
Cloaks, and of the best silk Vests, with Gems at the four corners of it, and
golden Bells and Pomegranates hanging round about. And no doubt they were
intended partly as an Ornament to the High Priest, their Matter being of Gold;
but what their Form was, we are not told. There were round Bells in use amongst
them, like those which we commonly see upon the Collars of our Horses Necks:
but Maimonides says these were of a Pyramidal Figure, open at the bottom, with
Clappers in them, like our little hand Bells.

Ver. 34. A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate,
upon the bottom, etc.] So there was a Bell (as the Jews explain it) between
every two Pomegranates; and a Pomegranate between every two Bells. But how many
of each there was, is uncertain; though the Jews commonly say there were LXXII.
Which if it was true, and the Pomegranates were of such a bigness, as was said
before; this Robe would have been so wide at the bottom, as to have been
cumbersom, especially with so many Pomegranates and Bells, hanging upon it.

Ver. 35. And it shall be unto Aaron, to minister.] He was never to appear
before God without this Garment; nor to wear it but when he Ministered. The same
is said of all the Priestly Garments, both of his and of his Sons v. 3, 4.

And his sound shall be heard when he goes in unto the holy place before the
LORD.] That the People, upon this notice, might fall to their Prayers, while he
was offering Incense; which represented their going up to Heaven.

And when he comes out.] That they might then dispose themselves, to be
dismissed with his Blessing.

That he die not.] For neglecting to appear before God, in this solemn manner,
as he required. For it is the common Maxim among the Jews, That when the
Priests were clothed with their Garments, they were held to be Priests; when
they were not so clothed, they were not Priests. That is, if they presumed to
minister without this Attire, it was an illegal act, and unacceptable to God.
See v. ult.

Ver. 36. And thou shall make a plate of pure gold.] The Hebrew word Zitz is
translated (...) by the LXX. which signifies a leaf expanded. And such was this
Plate (as we render it) a thin piece of Gold, two fingers broad (as Jarchi
tells us) and so long as to reach from one Ear to the other; being bound to the
forehead with a string, which was tied behind the head; and thence is called a
Crown, (XXXIX. 30.) as all things are which compass the forehead. And Crowns
being anciently made of Flowers, or Leaves, which we call Garlands, Josephus
says this Crown was adorned with the Figures of that Flower which the Greeks
call (...), of which there were three rows, L. III. Antiq. c. 8. And indeed the
Hebrew word Zitz signifies a a Flower; which has made some think this Plate
had its Name from the Flowers which were wrought in it, to make it look more
beautiful. See XXIX. 6.

And grave upon it like the engravings of a signet.] Not by cutting the Letter
deep in the Plate, but by making them protuberant, like those which are made by
a Seal upon Wax. See v. 22.

HOLINESS TO THE LORD.] The ancient Crowns perhaps had some image or other in
them (for in later times Domitian had a golden Crown with the Effigies of
Jupiter and Minerva, as Suetonius tells us) instead of which God commands his
own great Name to be engraven on Aaron's Crown, in these words; which signify,
that he was Separated to the Service of the most High. It is but a frivolous
question which the Jews make, Whether these words were engraven in one Line, or
in two, one above another? For there is no reason to make us think they were
not in one Line, as they are here written.

Ver. 37. And thou shall put it on a blue Lace.] It hung on a Riband of blue,
by which it was fastened upon the Mitre, as it follows in the next words. The
Talmudists fancy there were three Ribands; one at each ear, and one in the
middle; which is this here mentioned. But this one was sufficient for the
purpose, as will appear when the next words are rightly understood.

That it may be upon the Mitre.] There was an order before for making a Mitre,
among other Vestments: but we have not been told hitherto, of what it was made
(which is mentioned below v. 39.) nor what was the Form of it. The Latins
anciently called it Stroppus, which is the same with the Greek (...); being a
fillet wound about the head of their Priests, as Festus tells us. Prudentius
calls it tortum infulam, because it was made sometimes of three or four Ribands
or Laces wreathed together, vid. Cuperus in his Apotheosis Homeri, p. 138. The
ancient Greeks call it Tiara, and Cidaris, and sometimes Diadema; which was
commonly made of byssus or fine Linen, as appears even from the story of
Alexander the Great, who (as Justin tells us) took his Diadem from his Head, to
bind up the Wounds of Lysimachus, L. XV. which shows that it was made of fine
Linen, which was proper for that purpose.

They were of diverse Colors, but commonly white: and such were the Diadems of
Kings, which Ammianus calls fasciolam candidam regiae majestatis insigne, L.
XII. Such was the Mitre of the High Priest ( v. 39.) and the Bonnets of the
lower Priests. The former of which they called Mitznephet, and the other
Migbaoth. They did not differ at all in their Matter, but only in their Form.
Both consisted of sixteen Else of fine Linen, as the Hebrew Doctors agree; but
do not tell us of what breadth: which might be wrapped round several times about
into what Form they pleased. And the Migbaoth or Bonnets, they all say, came
lower down upon the forehead, than the Mitre; and rose up higher, like an
Hillock. But the Mitznephet did not cover the forehead at all, and was flatter
than the Bonnets, but much broader, consisting of more folds round; like the
Turbants which are now worn in the East, or like an half Sphere.

Now some understand these words, that it may be upon the Mitre, as if the
golden Plate was bound upon the Mitre; which is contrary to what follows v. 38.
it shall be upon Aaron 's forehead. This therefore must be understood of the
Lace or Riband, which was to come down over the Mitre, to fasten the golden
Plate, which depended upon it. For being put through a little hole in the
middle of the Plate, it went over the Mitre; and each end of it being put into
the holes of the Plate, which were at each ear, it was brought up again, and
tied over the Mitre. Thus we must interpret it, if there was but one string to
fasten it. It cannot be denied indeed, that sometimes more than one thing of a
kind is intended, where the Scripture speaks in the singular Number (as in
VIII. 21. X. 4, etc.) and therefore we may conceive, as I said before, that
there were three Ribands, one at each end, and another in the middle, by which
it hung upon the forehead; whereby they might more easily be fastened at the top
of the Mitre.

Upon the forefront of the Mitre it shall be.] That is, the golden Plate shall
be in the forefront of it. By which it appears that the Hebrew Doctors rightly
described it, as reaching before from ear to ear; but no part of it behind.
That is, it was an half-circle, not an whole; incompassing only the forepart
of the Head, not like other Crowns that incompass it round.

Ver. 38. And it shall be upon Aarons forehead.] The Mitre, as I said before,
did not come down low (as the Bonnets did) but only covered the Crown and the
upper part of the Head; the whole forehead being left bare, that there might be
space enough for this Plate of Gold to lie upon it; and for his Philacteries,
as the Jews will have it, which were next to the Mitre, and then the Crown, a
little above the Eyes. But some of them think the High Priest wore no
Phylacteries, having no need of them, when he was clothed with so many holy
Garments. But, not to trouble our selves with that, it appears by these words,
that the Plate did not lie upon the Mitre, but upon the High Priests forehead.

That Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the Children of
Israel shall hallow in all their gifts.] These words suppose there might be
some defects in their Sacrifices and Gifts, which they consecrated and
presented unto God (though they were ignorant of it) which were all pardoned
(for that is meant by bearing, that is, taking away iniquity) by the
Intercession of their High Priest, when he appeared before God with this Crown
upon his Head, that is, thus perfectly and completely attired. Wherein he
represented our great High Priest, Christ Jesus; by whose perfect Sanctity and
Satisfaction, all the Defects of our sincere Services are supplied.

And it shall be always upon his forehead.] That is, whenever he went in to
minister in the Holy Place.

That he may be accepted before the LORD.] That the Children of Israel, and
their Sacrifices and Gifts, might be accepted when they presented them to God;
which they were not, if the High Priest did not appear before him, in this
manner, on their behalf. The Heathens themselves (as Athenaeus informs us, L.
XV. c. 5.) thought Prayers and Sacrifices then acceptable to their Gods, when
they offered them with Crowns on their Heads. And therefore a great many
Authors tell us the Priests in all Countries, were crowned when they ministered;
nay, the Sacrifices themselves, and their Altars, and their holy Utensils were
crowned; as if all their Services had been ineffectual, if made without a
Crown. For they that prepared the Beasts for Sacrifice, and the Musicians, and
all that were present were crowned, as appears out of ancient Coins and
innumerable ancient Writers. See Cuperus Apotheos. Hom. p. 70.

Ver. 39. And thou shall embroider the Coat of fine Linen.] This Coat is one of
the Garments ordered to be made v. 4. in Hebrew called Ketonah: from whence
both the Greek word (...), and the Latin Tunica seem to be derived. The Matter
of it was fine Linen; and therefore it was white. The Form of it was not much
unlike one of our Shirts, with Sleeves coming down to the wrists; but made
pretty close to the Body, and so long as to reach down to the heels. It was the
most inward of all the Priestly Garments, being next to their Body. And, though
it be not mentioned in the description of it, there is no doubt, that it had a
slit in the neck of it, by which it was put over their head, and then tied to
the neck with strings.

Embroidered.] The Hebrew word Taschbetz all agree signifies a work with
certain Figures woven in it, either of Gold, or other Materials. But what sort
of Figure, is not certain. The famous Salmasius thinks they were round, like to
our Eyes. Others take them to have been square or cubical. R. Sol. Jarchi says
in general, that it was a work like the Ouches (as we translate Mischbetzoth)
in which the precious Stones were set. But none, I think, has made such likely
guesses at the figure of them as Jo. Braunius, who takes them to have been
nothing else, but lacus aut fossulas angulares, etc. such little deep holes, as
resemble those that are in one of the Stomachs of those Animals that chew the
Cud, called Reticulum. See L. I. de Vestitu Sacerd. Hebraeorum, c. 17.

And thou shall make the Mitre of Linen.] See v. 37. where the Mitre is
mentioned.

And thou shall make the girdle of needle work.] It is mentioned before v. 4.
under the name of Abanet or Abnet, which no doubt signifies a Girdle or Belt;
yet not like our common Girdles, but like that which we call a Schash, being
made of twined Linen, and Worsted of diverse colors, as we find XXXIX. 29.
where blue, and purple, and scarlet signifies Wool, or Worsted-yarn of these
colors. Such were the Girdles of all the Priests, which they wore all the
year, the High Priest as well as the rest; except upon one day (that of
Expiation) when he had on a Girdle of fine Linen only, not mixed with Woollen.
These Girdles were of such a length, that they might go round the Body more
than once, as Josephus tells us, L. III. Antiq. c. 8. For, if we may believe
him, they were Two and thirty Else long, and four Fingers broad, being hollow
within. When they were not in the Act of Ministration, both ends of them hung
down to their very feet, (...), etc. (as the same Josephus speaks) for
comeliness sake, that they might appear more goodly to the beholders: which
agrees to what Moses says in the next Verse, that they (as all the Priestly
Garments, v. 2.) were made for glory and beauty. But when they went about any
holy work, belonging to their Office, they threw them over their left shoulder,
that they might not be an hindrance to them. The use of this Girdle was to girt
their Coat close to them; which they tuckt up also in the Girdle (when they
went about their Ministry) to the middle of their Legs, that it might not
incumber them in their Service.

Of needle work.] This was a different sort of work from Taschbetz (which we
translate broidered, v. 4.) and from Choscheb (which we translate cunning, v.
6, 15.) and is here called Rokem. Which signifies the same with Choscheb, as to
the variety of Colors and Figures in the Work: but Choscheb, as the Hebrew
Doctors tell us, was done by weaving, and Rokem with a Needle, as we rightly
take it. Of the two Choscheb was the most artificial, as the word seems to
intimate; being wrought on both sides with the same Figures, whereas Rokem was
only on one side. This they gather from XXVI. 31. where the Vail is ordered to
be made of the Work called Choscheb, which it is probable was glorious on both
sides, both within and without the most Holy Place. Josephus says this Girdle
was wrought with Flowers of the several Colors mentioned XXXIX. 29.

Ver. 40. And for Aarons sons thou shall make Coats.] The Coats of all the
Priests, as well as of the High Priest, were embroidered, as Maimonides
expressly affirms. And it seems to be the sense of v. 4. where he is commanded
to make Garments not only for Aaron, but for his Sons ( i. e. all the rest of
the Priests) among which the broidered Coat, may well be thought to belong to
them. See XXXIX. 27.

And thou shall make for them girdles.] The Girdles of the inferior Priests,
were the very same with that of the High Priest, (as well as their Tunicks or
Coats) being to bind their Coats to their Body.

And bonnets.] How these differed from the Mitre of the High Priest, in their
Form, not in their Matter, see v. 37.

For glory and for beauty.] The Garments of all the Priests were contrived to
make them appear in a splendid and comely manner, when they ministered to the
glorious Majesty of God, being of sine Linen, which was worn by the greatest
Persons, made with great Art, especially their Coats and Girdles, which were
finely adorned (as I have shown in the Verses foregoing) with elegant Figures,
and rich Colors: for blue, or sky-colour, purple and scarlet belonged to Kings
and Persons of Honor. But the Garments of the High Priest were above all the
rest most glorious, and design^ so to be, v. 2. For besides those common to him
with all the Priests, which were very costly, he had others far more precious:
particularly the Ephod and its Girdle, the Breast Plate set with Stones of
great value, the Robe, and the Crown of Gold. The two Stones also on the
shoulders of the Ephod, were not only precious in their kind, but for their
bigness; being so large that. Twelve Names were engraven in them, containing
Six and thirty Letters. All which considered, Philo had reason to say (L. de
Sacerd. Hon.) it is manifest the Law dressed up their Priest, (...), to the
venerableness and honor of a King. For the Priesthood in old time was so
honorable, that Kings themselves discharged it: which is the reason that in
Scripture, Princes and Priests have the same Name of Cohenim.

To all which I may add, That they took such care all their Garments should be
for glory and beauty, that when they were foul they did not wash them, nor
repair them when they had any breach in them: but new ones were bought, and the
old employed about the Lamps in the Feast of Tabernacles. See Mr. Seldom L.
III. de Synedr. c. 11. p. 142.

Ver. 41. And thou shall put them upon Aaron thy brother and his sons with
him.] As we read he did VIII Lev. 6, 7, etc. 13. and this was part of Aaron's
Consecration, v. 3. of this Chapter.

And shall anoint them.] He anointed Aaron by pouring the holy Oil upon his
Head, VIII Lev. 12. but he anointed his Sons only by sprinkling some of it upon
their Garments (as he did upon his also) with the Blood of the Sacrifice, XXIX.
21. VIII Lev. 30.

And consecrate them.] By the Sacrifice of a Ram, called the Ram of
Consecration; the Blood of which he put upon the tip of their right ear, etc.
XXIX. 20. VIII Lev. 22, 23, etc. and by the Wave-offering which he put into
their hands, that they might wave them before the LORD, XXIX. 24. VIII Lev. 27.
From whence the phrase for consecrate here in this place, is in Hebrew fill
their hand.

And sanctify them.] By the foregoing Ceremonies. For they were set apart to
the Divine Service, by putting on their Garments, anointing them, and offering
the Sacrifice of Consecration, and by washing them with Water, as appears from
VIII Lev. 6, 7, 12. where it is said he anointed Aaron, to sanctify him; and
v. 30. having sprinkled their Garments, it is said, he sanctified Aaron and his
Garments, and upon his Sons, and upon his Sons Garments with him.

Ver. 42. And thou shall make them linen breeches.] Though these are mentioned
in the last place, yet they were put on the first of all the Priests Garments;
after them the Coat, which being girt about with the Girdle, the Bonnet was put
upon the Priest's head. The High Priest, in like manner, having put on his
Breeches, Coat and Girdle (which were common to all Priests) was clothed with
his Robe, and next with the Ephod and Breast Plate, which were inseparable; and
last of all with his Mitre and the golden Crown. To which order Nature it self
directed them; the inward Garments being always put on before the outward.

Now as to these Miknese, which we truly render Breeches, the Matter of them
was Linen, as we are here informed: and not ordinary Linen, but that which the
Hebrews call Schesch, which was fine Linen; and more than that, they were of
twined (or six-threded) Linen, as we read XXXIX. 28. They were made with great
Art, being woven of one piece, and not sewed together, as Maimonides tells us.
The Form of them was like our Breeches or Drawers, which may be the reason why
Moses here uses a word of the dual Number, because they had two parts, which
covered each Thigh distinctly.

To cover their nakedness.] This was opposed, as Maimonides thinks, to the
idolatrous Worship of Peor; which, if we may believe him, was so beastly, that
it was performed by discovery of their Nakedness, More Nevoch. Part. III. c. 45.

From the Loins even to the Thighs they shall reach.] They were bound about the
Loins with Strings, which ran through the top of them, that they might be drawn
straiter, or looser as they pleased; and came down the Thighs, as far as to
their Knees. There were some Breeches anciently, which covered the Legs also,
and came down to the Feet, such as Sailers use in cold Countries: but these did
not come down so low; the intention of them being only to cover those Parts (as
it goes before) which ought not to be exposed. For though they had a Coat over
their whole Body, yet that being loose and wide below, by some accident or
other, those Parts might have been seen which ought to be secret, if that had
not been prevented by these Drawers, which so covered the lower Parts, that
nothing could possibly be seen. For in this they differed from our Drawers,
that they had no opening, either behind or before. Some think before this time
there were no such thing as Breeches in use among the Hebrews; nor after this,
among any other Men, but the Priests in their Ministration. But in latter Ages
they came in use, as appears from III Dan. 21.

Ver. 43. And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in
unto the Tabernacle, or when they come near unto the Altar to minister in the
holy place.] They could not be permitted so much as to appear in the
Tabernacle, much less to minister, especially in the Holy Place, without their
holy Vestments. Which they wore there only, but in no other place: for at home,
or abroad, or in the Sanhedrim, and all other places out of the Temple, they
wore common Garments, such as other Men did. Insomuch that St. Paul could not
distinguish the High Priest, when he sat in the Court by his Habit from other
Judges, XXIII Acts 5. And accordingly we read XLII Ezekiel. 14. XLIV. 17, 18, 19.
an express Precept for putting off the Priests Garments, and laying them up in
the Chambers appointed for that purpose, when they went out of the Court where
they ministered. The High Priest, as Maimonides informs us, had a Chamber, or
Vestry peculiar to himself, where his Garments were laid up, when he put them
off, as the Robes of Kings are in their Wardrobe. Of this one cannot reasonably
doubt, that they being not only precious, but sacred things, were kept safe in
the Temple, which was an holy place. And so were the Garments of the Inferior
Priests, as we may learn from Ezra and Nehemiah: who, among other things put
into the Treasury, mention a certain number of Priests Garments, II Ezra 69.
VII Nehem. 70. In their Vestries also there were peculiar Chests, where every
sort of Vestment were kept by themselves. All the Breeches, for instance, which
had this Inscription Miknese, i. e. Breeches. In like manner all the Coats and
the Bonnets had two distinct Chests with this Inscription, Ketonoth and
Migbaoth: and so had the rest, as we are told in the Misna Tamid c. 5.

But while they were in the Temple they might keep on their holy Garments (only
not sleep in them there) even at those hours when they did not minister. Which
this Text seems to suppose, when it says, they shall be upon them, when they
come into the Tabernacle, as well as when they come near unto the Altar to
minister. Thus the Talmudists; In the Temple they might keep on their Garments,
whether in the time of their Ministration, or out of it. But this they
understand only of their Breeches, their Coat and Bonnet: for their Girdle they
were bound to lay aside as soon as they had done Ministering.

That they bear not iniquity and die.] That God do not punish them with Death,
for being so profane as to appear before him, without their holy Garments,
which he appointed to preserve his Service from contempt.

It shall be a statute for ever unto him, and his seed after him.] That is, as
long as there shall be any Priests of the Order of Aaron, they shall appear
before God in these Garments. But that Priesthood being abolished, by the true
eternal Priesthood of Christ, there is no longer any use of them; no more than
of the Sacrifices those Priests offered, which are completed in the Sacrifice
of Christ. As for the Jewish sense of these words, it is manifest, that it has
been long confuted; there having been no Priesthood, nor holy Garments, nor
Sacrifices, no nor Temple among them, for above Sixteen hundred years. Nay,
before the coming of our Savior, some of the Priestly Ornaments, and those the
chief of all, were gone, viz. the Vrim and the Thummim in the Breast Plate;
which they generally confess were not in the second Temple; and it may be a
question, whether they continued to the end of the first. But the truth is,
there was the Breast Plate and the Ephod, and consequently the Vrim and
Thummim, as to its Matter and Form (though it had lost its use, there being no
Answers from God given by it) and accordingly all the rest of the Priestly
Garments remained as long as there was any Priesthood; which is the full sense
of these words, a statute for ever to him, and his seed after him.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 1. AND this is the thing that thou shall do unto them to hallow them.]
Having ordered Aaron and his Sons to be set apart to attend upon him in his
House, as his Ministers; he now directs how they should be hallowed (or made
holy) that is, separated to his Service, in the Priests Office.

To minister unto me in the Priests Office.] This was the design of their
Separation from other Men, as was often said before, XXVIII. 1, 3, 4, 41, 43.

Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish.] There were several
things to be done before this, though this was the chief. For they were to be
washed, and robed with their Priestly Garments, and anointed; and then they
were completed by peculiar Sacrifices, which are directed and described v. 10,
11, etc. and put in execution VIII Lev. 1, 2, etc.

Ver. 2. And unleavened bread, etc.] Together with the foregoing Sacrifices
(which it will appear hereafter were of several sorts) there was a Mincha to be
offered; Bread being necessary at a Table together with Flesh. And this
consisted of three parts; unleavened Bread, unleavened Cakes tempered with Oil,
and unleavened Wafers (or thin Cakes, like to our Pan-cakes) anointed with Oil,
before they were put into the Pan, to be fried. All these were to be made of
wheaten flour: and the two last were accounted a delicious Bread among the
Greeks, as Athenaeus tells us L. III. Deipnosoph.

Ver. 3. And thou shall put them into one basket, etc.] All these making but
one Meat Offering, were to be put into one Basket, and so brought to the door
of the Tabernacle, to be presented there to God together with the Bullock and
Rams, v. 23.

Ver. 4. And Aaron and his Sons thou shall bring unto the door of the
Tabernacle.] To be presented unto God, together with their Sacrifice.

And shall wash them with water.] This was the first thing that was done for
the hallowing them ( v. 1.) as we read VIII Lev. 6. and was performed, some
think, at the Laver, which is directed to be made in the next Chapter (XXX. 18,
19.) where they were to repeat this washing every time they went in to minister
unto God. But now, I take it to be more likely, at their first Consecration,
Water was brought from thence to wash them at the Door of the Tabernacle,
before they were permitted to enter into it. Whether their whole Bodies were
now washed, is not said; but we may probably gather that they were; for they
were now looked on as wholly unclean (being unhallowed) and therefore were to
be washed all over: though, being once cleansed, they needed not do more, when
they went to minister, but only wash their hands and their feet. Which agrees
with our Savior's words, XIII Joh. 10. Such washings, every Body knows, were
in use among the Gentiles, before they offered Sacrifice.

Ver. 5. And thou shall take the Garments.] Their Bodies being washed, they
were, next of all, robed with those Garments prescribed in the foregoing
Chapter.

And put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the Ephod, and the Ephod, etc.]
The order wherein these Garments were put on, according to the Talmudists, was
this: First the Breeches were put on by the Priest himself, and that privately;
which is the reason perhaps they are not here mentioned. They being tied about
his Loins Moses put upon him the close Coat, which came down to his Ankles.
Then this being bound to him by the Girdle (which was round several times about
him under the Arm-holes) he put upon him his Bonnet. This was the manner of
habiting an ordinary Priest. But when the High Priest was consecrated, after
the Girdle before named, was put on the Robe, with the Ephod and Breast Plate,
and then his Mitre; to which was added the Golden-plate, tied with a blue
Riband upon his forehead. See Seldom de Succession. ad Pontif. L. II. c. 8.

Ver. 6. And put the holy Crown upon his head.] By this Crown is meant nothing
else but the Golden-plate, on which was written Holiness to the LORD, XXVIII.
36. Which is expressly called by the name of a Crown, (XXXIX. 30. VIII Lev. 9.)
being bound upon the forehead with a blue Riband like a Diadem. Josephus seems
to call the Mitre by the name of a Crown, ( L. VI. Halos. c. 15.) but then he
immediately adds, (...), etc. about which there was another Golden Crown,
having holy Letters written in it, etc. Vide Seldom L. II. de Succession. c. 7.

Ver. 7. And thou shall take the anointing Oil.] The next thing that was done
for the Consecration of Aaron, was anointing him with that Oil which God
ordered to be made, XXX. 31, 32, etc.

And pour it upon his head and anoint him.] The Jews seem to think these two
distinct things, pouring Oil on his head, and then anointing him. The manner of
which they say was thus: The Oil being poured upon his head, which ran down to
his face, he that anointed him drew with his Finger the figure of the Greek
Letter Chi (or St. Andrew's Cross) upon his forehead between his Eyebrows.
This was done, Aben-Ezra thinks, before his Mitre was put upon his head. But
that is contrary to the order here set down, which prescribes the putting on
all his Priestly Garments (of which this was one) before the anointing. And he
was therefore to be anointed in all his Habiliments, because he was anointed to
minister unto God; which he could not do without all the holy Garments (XXVIII.
43.) particularly this, it being unlawful to appear before God with the Head
uncovered; as it was also among the Gentiles. Other of the Jewish Doctors
therefore think, that when his Head was wrapped about with the Mitre, a place was
left bare upon his Crown, for the pouring the Oil upon it. Certain it is, that
it was so poured on his Head, as to run down upon his Beard, CXXXIII Psalm. 2.
And the Jew says the form of the Letter Chi, was drawn upon his forehead, to
distinguish his anointing, from that of their Kings; who were anointed in the
sorm of a Circle or Crown. See Seldom de Succession. L. II. c. 9. Where he
observes also, that there being no holy Oil, all the time of the second Temple
after the Captivity, they made High Priests only by putting on their holy
Garments. Which that they might have complete, they made an imitation of Vrim
and Thummim (though they had not the Oracle it self) that none of the eight
Garments might be wanting. So Maimonides.

The only remaining difficulty is, Whether all Aaron's Sons were anointed as
well as himself. And Mr. Seldom in the place before-named, thinks they were at
the first, but not in future times: though all Aaron's Successors in the High
Priesthood were consecrated by anointing, as long as the holy Oil lasted; that
is, to the Captivity of Babylon, or as some say fifty years before, when it was
hid and no more found. And there is a place in the next Chapter, which seems to
favor this Opinion, XXX. 30. But as we read of no Command for their anointing,
as there is here for Aaron's: so when this Command came to be executed, it is
said expressly, that Moses poured Oil on Aaron's Head; but that upon his Sons he
only put the holy Garments, VIII Lev. 12, 13. And therefore he is peculiarly
called, The High Priest from among his Brethren, upon whose Head the anointing
Oil was poured, XXI Lev. 10. The anointing therefore of his Sons, XXX. 30. is
only meant of that Unction which is here mentioned v. 21. of this Chapter,
where a mixture is ordered to be made of the Blood of the Sacrifice and of the
anointing Oil, which was ordered to be sprinkled both upon Aaron and his Sons,
and upon their Garments, and was a part of their Consecration. For it was done
accordingly at that time, as we read VIII Lev. 30. So that Aaron himself had a
double Unction; one proper to him alone, as High Priest, upon whose Head the
holy Oil was poured; another common to him with his Sons, as he was a Priest,
whose Garments were sprinkled with the Oil and Blood mingled together.

Ver. 8. And thou shall bring his sons, and put coats upon them.] The High
Priest was first habited, and then his Sons, in the order I have described v. 5.

Ver. 9. And thou shall gird them with girdles, etc.] See v. 5.

And the Priests office shall be theirs, etc.] That is, as long as the holy
Garments were upon them, the Priesthood was upon them: but if they were not
upon them, neither was the Priesthood upon them. They are the words of
Maimonides in Celi Hammikdash, c. 10. Or the meaning may be, they shall enjoy,
in perpetual Succession, the Office of Priests, as their Father and his
Successors the Office of High Priests.

And thou shall consecrate Aaron and his sons.] Thus doing, they shall be
completely consecrated. For in the Hebrew the phrase is, Shall fill the hand of
Aaron, etc. which was done after the manner prescribed v. 22, 23, 24, etc.
Which shows that this was the principal part of their Consecration; or at
least, the consummation of it. And there was besides this, a peculiar Offering,
which both Aaron and his Sons are commanded to offer, in the day of their
anointing, VI L^^. 20, 21.

Ver. 10. And thou shall cause a bullock.] The young bullock he commanded him
to take v. 1.

To be brought before the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] In order to its
being offered to God: for in this and in the following Verses, the Sacrifices
are prescribed which were to be made at the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons;
which were three: The first is this here mentioned, which was an Offering for
Sin, as appears from v. 14. For till their Sins were expiated, they were not
fit to offer any thing to God; much less to offer for the Sins of others. The
next was an Holocaust, or whole Burnt-offering, as a Gift or Present, whereby
they were recommended to God. And the third was a Peace Offering; on which they
made a Feast, and by that were initiated into God's Family.

And Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.]
This was the form in all Sacrifices, both Burnt-offerings, I Lev. 4. and
Peace Offerings, III Lev. 2, 8. by which they devoted the Sacrifice to be the
LORD's. But in Sin Offerings, there being a Solemn Confession of Sins made (XVI
Lev. 21.) he that laid his hands on the Beast, seemed thereby to have
transferred the Guilt from himself, unto the Sacrifice, desiring it might be
accepted for him.

Ver. 11. And thou shall kill the bullock before the LORD.] Though Moses was
never Consecrated after the manner of Aaron, yet he was made a Priest, for this
peculiar purpose, by an extraordinary Commission from God.

By the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Where the Altar of
Burnt-offering was placed, at the crection of the Tabernacle, XL. 6, 29.

Ver. 12. And thou shall take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the
horns of the Altar with thy finger.] Some have fancied that he means, upon the
horns of the Altar of Incense; because when a Priest offered a Sin-offering for
himself, he was so to do, IV Lev. 7. But it is to be considered that Aaron and
his Sons, for whom this Sacrifice was offered, were not yet Priests, but common
Men, who by this Sacrifice were to be made Priests. Whose blood therefore was
to be put upon the horns of the Altar of Burnt-offering, as is expressly
required in other Sin Offerings, IV Lev. 25, 30.

And pour all the blood.] All the rest of the blood.

Beside the bottom of the Altar.] This shows he speaks of the Altar of
Burnt-offering; at the bottom of which there was a Trench, into which they
poured the Blood of the Sacrifice, as I shall show hereafter.

Ver. 13. And thou shall take all the fat that covers the inwards.] He means
that part of the Beast which is called the Omentum, in which all the Bowels are
wrapped; which in IX Lev. 19. is simply called that which covers. This has a
great deal of fat upon it to keep the Bowels warm, and was much used in ancient
Sacrifices, both among the Greeks and Romans, who herein followed the Jews.
Nay, the Persians also offered to the Gods nothing but the Omentum, or a part
of it, as Bochartus observes out of Strabo. See Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 45.
And from the Condition and Situation of the Omentum the Heathen Diviners made
their Conjectures; insomuch that some think it had the name of Omentum, because
they made their good or bad Omens from thence.

And the Caul that is above the Liver.] Our Interpreters take this for the
Diaphragm or the Midriff, upon which the Liver hangs. But Bochartus has
demonstrated, I think, that it signifies the greatest lobe of the Liver, upon
which the Bladder of Gall lies, L. II. Hierozoic. P. I. c. 45. The only
Argument against it is, that this Jothereth (as the Hebrews call it) is said
here to be above the Liver; and therefore must signify the Diophragm, upon
which the Liver depends. But the Particle Al signifies upon, as well as above:
and is to be here so translated upon or by the Liver. And the reason why this
lobe of the Liver was peculiar to the Altar, was because of the fat that is
upon it.

And the two Kidneys, etc.] For the same reason the Kidneys were appropriated
to God: which had one of their names from the fat that is upon them, which
Homer (as the same Bochartus there observes) calls (...).

Ver. 14. And the flesh of the bullock and his skin, etc.] The Burnt-offering
being flead, the skin of it was given to the Priest, VII Lev. 8. But in
Sin Offerings the skin was burnt (and the Flesh also in some cases) and that
also without the Camp, not at the Altar, IV Lev. 11, 12. VIII. 17. The Heathen
sometimes burnt the skin even of their Holocausts, as Bochart. shows, P. I.
Hierozoic. L. II. c. 34.

Shall thou burn with fire, etc.] The Hebrew word here for burn is quite
different from that in the foregoing Verse, which is used concerning the
burning of Incense, which soon vanished into smoke, as the fat there mentioned
did. But the flesh, and the skin, and the dung, were burnt with a stronger
fire, and were longer before they were consumed; and therefore burnt without
the Camp, where the Ashes were poured out, as a thing abominable.

It is a Sin-offering.] The Priest might eat of any Sin-offering, whose Blood
was not brought into the Sanctuary; or rather it was his Duty so to do (X Lev.
17.) because it argued that the Peoples Sin was born and taken away by the
Priest. It may seem strange then that Moses (who was in the place of a Priest)
is ordered to burn all this Sin-offering, and not permitted to eat of it;
though Aaron and his Sons could not, because they were not yet Priests. The
best reason I have found of it is, that it was to signify the imperfection of
the Legal Dispensation; since the Sins of the Priests themselves could not be
taken away, by the Priests of the Law, or their Sacrifices; but were to expect
a better Sacrifice, or a better High Priest, as Dr. Jackson's words are in his
Consecration of the Son of God, c. 26. n. 2.

Ver. 15. And thou shall also take one ram.] One of the Rams mentioned above v.
1.

Aaron and his Sons shall put their hands upon the head of the Ram.] See
concerning this v. 10.

Ver. 16. And thou shall slay the Ram.] Where the Bullock was killed, by the
Door of the Tabernacle, v. 11.

And thou shall take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the Altar.] It
was a different Sacrifice from the other, and therefore had different
Ceremonies belonging to it; some of the Blood of the Bullock being only put on
the Horns of the Altar, v. 12. How the Blood was sprinkled round about upon the
Altar, will be explained I Lev. 11.

Ver. 17. And thou shall cut the Ram in pieces.] That the Parts might the more
easily be burnt upon the Altar.

And wash the inwards of him, etc.] Upon which there was a great deal of fat;
which being put upon the pieces, and the Head, made them consume the sooner, by
nourishing the flame. Thus Homer represents the Sacrifice of the Greeks (as
Bochart observes) when they offered to Jupiter; They cut the Thighs in pieces,
and then covered them over with fat. (...). Iliad. 2. v. 423. Vid. Hieroz. Pars
I. Lib. II. 2. c. 45. p. 472.

Ver. 18. And thou shall burn the whole Ram upon the Altar: it is a
Burnt-offering unto the LORD, etc.] By this it appears, that as the former was
a Sin-offering, so this was an Holocaust or Burnt-offering; which would not be
received, till their Sins were expiated by the foregoing Sacrifice. Nothing of
which was offered at the Altar, but some of the fat only, because (as R. Levi
ben Gerson observes) the Offerers were not yet worthy, that God should accept
any Offering from them.

Ver. 19. And thou shall take the other Ram.] Mentioned v. 1.

And Aaron and his Sons shall put their hands upon the head of the Ram.] See v.
10. This, it will appear afterward v. 28, 32. was a Peace Offering: upon which,
being now reconciled to God, and received into his favor, they feasted with
him at his Table.

Ver. 20. Then shall thou kill the Ram.] Where the Bullock was killed, which
was first offered, v. 11.

And take of his blood.] Which was received in a Basin.

And put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron and his Sons, etc.] This
being peculiarly called the Ram of Consecration, v. 22, 31. the Blood of it was
not put upon the Horns of the Altar (as in this first Sacrifice v. 12.) nor
merely sprinkled round about the Altar (as in the second, v. 16.) but put upon
Aaron and his Sons. And first upon the tip of their ears, to signify that they
should hearken to the Divine Prescriptions; and then upon their Thumbs and
great Toes (in which lie the strength of the Hands and Feet) to denote their
ready and strenuous performance of every thing required of them. And being put
upon the tip of their right ear, and the Thumb of their right hand, and the
great Toe of their right foot, it may well be thought to signify, the most
exact and perfect obedience: the right hand being every where represented as
the most excellent and strongest to do any Execution. To this purpose Abarbinel
discourses on this place, whose words are these: All this tended to make the
Priest understand, that he ought to apply himself diligently to the study of
the Law; and to employ his hands with the same diligence in his Sacred
Ministry; and to walk in the way of God's Precepts, etc. Some of the Jews
consider these things so scrupulously, as to say the Priests might not use
their left hand in their Ministry, no more than Minister with unwashen hands.

And sprinkle the blood upon the Altar round about.] i. e. The remainder of the
Blood. It is no improbable conjecture of Fortunatus Scacchus, that from hence
the Heathens learnt their Taurobolia and Criobolia: which in process of time
they disguised with Infernal Rites and Ceremonies. For a deep hole being made
in the Ground, the Priest to be conserrated was put into it; and then Planks
being laid over it, with a great many holes in them, the Bullock or the Ram was
slain over them, and their Blood running down into the hole, the Priest
received it on his Eyes, his Ears, his Nose, his Mouth; nay, he besmeared his
Body with it. And this was accounted the highest Consecration of a Priest; the
virtue of which lasted Twenty years before it was renewed: and he that was thus
consecrated, was had in the greatest Honor and Veneration. Thus filthily did
the Devil pervert the most simple and cleanest Rites, which Moses prescribed,
of putting a little Blood, with a fragrant Oil on the tip of one of their Ears,
Thumbs and Toes, Myrothec. 2. Sacr. Elaeochrism. c. 77.

Ver. 21. And thou shall take of the blood that is upon the Altar.] Some of
that which was sprinkled (as the foregoing Verse directs) round about the
Altar. Or, perhaps some of the Blood was left in the Basin, upon the Altar, for
that use.

And of the anointing Oil.] Which is afterward ordered to be made XXX. 23, etc.

And sprinkle it upon Aaron and upon his Garments; and upon his Sons, and upon
the Garments of his Sons with him.] By which sprinkling, both they and their
Garments were separated to an holy use, as it follows in the next words, And he
shall be hallowed and his Garments, etc. See upon v. 7. This may be looked upon
as a lively Representation of our Purification by the Blood of Jesus Christ,
and by his Holy Spirit.

Ver. 22. And thou shall take of the Ram the fat.] All the Fat in general was
to be the LORD's, III Lev. 3.

The Rump.] Here he seems to reckon up the particulars. And the Rump of a Sheep
was the principal in those Eastern Countries, where their Tails are of a
prodigious bigness, and exceeding fat, as Bochartus observes, P. I. Hieroz. L.
II. c. 45. and Job Ludolphus in his Histor. Aethiop. L. I. c. 10. n. 16. and in
his Comment. in Histor. L. I. c. 10. n. 76.

And that covers the inwards, etc.] See v. 13. where these and the following
words are explained.

And the right shouldor.] In Peace Offerings this belonged to the Priest, VII
Lev. 32. and so it is here ordained, v. 27, 28. But now it was to be burnt upon
the Altar, ( v. 25.) because they were not yet Priests, as the following words
tell us, which give the reason why this shoulder was burnt.

For it is a Ram of Consecration.] Whereby they were consecrated, and made
Priests; but not yet completed, and therefore could not eat of that shoulder.

Ver. 23. And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oyled bread, etc.] Of that
Bread and those Cakes mentioned v. 2. of this Chapter.

That is before the LORD.] Which had been presented unto God ( v. 3.) for this
by the Law, was to accompany their other Sacrifices, XV Numb. 4.

Ver. 24. And thou shall put all.] Both Bread and Cakes, and Fat and right
Shoulder, beforementioned.

In the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his Sons.] Thence this Sacrifice
was called Milluim, that is, filling of the hands; which we translate
Consecration. And their hands were thus filled, to show that Aaron and his Sons
did not usurp this dignity, or take it upon themselves (as we speak) but were
called unto it by God, who ordered these things to be put into their hands,
that they might present them to him. R. Solomon will have this Ram called the
Ram of sillings or impletions; because by this Sacrifice they were completed,
and absolutely made Priests; nothing remaining to be done after this.

And shall wave them.] When such holy things were put into the Heads of the
Offerers by the Priest, then the Priest put his hands under theirs, and they
were lifted up, and then waved about on all sides.

For a Wave-offering.] The Hebrew word Tenuphah signifies agitation, or shaking
to and fro; which Abarbinel says, was performed upward and downward, and then
round about to all quarters of the World, to signify that the Earth is the
LORD's, and the fullness thereof; or, rather that he is the possessor of Heaven
and of Earth. Others of them speak to the same purpose.

Before the LORD.] Standing with their Faces toward the Sanctuary.

Ver. 25. And thou shall receive them from their hands, etc.] After they had
waved them, they delivered them into the hands of Moses; who, as the Priest at
this time, laid them upon the Altar, and burnt them.

For a Burnt-offering.] It is certain this was not an whole Burnt-offering, but
a Peace Offering, as appears from v. 28, 31, 32. yet some of it being burnt on
the Altar, that part is called a Burnt-offering.

It is an Offering made by fire.] So the Burnt-offerings are called I Lev. 9,
13, etc. but this was so only in part, as I said, not in the whole; and may be
interpreted by III Lev. 5. where all that was to be burnt of the
Peace Offerings, is commanded to be burnt upon the Burnt-Sacrifice, and in that
regard might be called a Burnt-offering. See v. 27.

Ver. 26. And thou shall take the Breast of the Ram of Aarons consecrations.]
Of the Consecration of him and of his Sons.

And wave it for a Wave-offering before the LORD; and it shall be thy part.]
Being a Peace Offering, the Priest who offered the Sacrifice, was to have his
share of it: and therefore the Breast is here given to Moses, after he had
acknowledged it to be God's by waving it about, and that he had it only as his
Minister.

Ver. 27. And thou shall sanctify the breast of the Wave-offering, and the
shoulder of the Heave Offering.] Upon this occasion, he makes a general Law, to
be always observed hereafter; That, though in this peculiar Case, the right
shoulder of this Sacrifice was burnt, (being for Aaron's Consecration) and
called a Burnt-offering, v. 25. yet in all future times, both the Breast and
this Shoulder should belong unto the Priest. Therefore the word sanctify here
signifies, as much as declare them to be sanctified, or set apart for the
Priests use; as they were again by an express Law, VII Lev. 31, 32, 33, 34.

Which is waved, and which is heaved up.] There is no difference, that I can
find, between Terumah which we translate Heave Offering, and Tenuphah which we
translate Wave-offering; but the former was only lifted up, and so waved; and
the other was waved all manner of ways, up and down, East, West, North, and
South, to signify that he to whom it was offered, was Lord of the whole World,
and all that therein is.

Ver. 28. And it shall be Aarons and his Sons by a statute for ever.] So it is
called VII Lev. 34. and it is again repeated for greater confirmation, XVIII
Deuteronomy. 3.

For it is an Heave Offering.] It is consecrated to God, to whom it belongs;
and he bestows it upon his Ministers.

And it shall be an Heave Offering of the Sacrifice of their Peace Offerings,
etc.] And it shall always in future times be presented unto God, as his part of
the Peace Offerings; who constitutes the Priests to eat it in his stead. As the
former Ram was a Burnt-offering, so this, it is plain, was a Peace Offering, in
token, that now they were in a state of perfect Friendship with God. Which was
procured by their Sin-offering ( v. 14.) which was offered first; whereby their
Present to God ( v. 18.) was made acceptable, as now their Persons were
declared by this Sacrifice of Peace Offering.

Ver. 29. And the holy Garments of Aaron shall be his Sons after him, to be
anointed therein, etc.] Upon this occasion also, God makes another general Law,
That all the Successors of Aaron in the High Priesthood, should be set apart to
that Office, in such Garments, and by such an Unction, and such Sacrifices as
he was consecrated withal. And it appears by XX Numb. 28. that Aaron's Son was
invested with the very same Garments which Aaron wore: for those which
peculiarly belonged to the High Priest, did not decay as the Tunick and
Breeches did, and therefore went from one to another.

Ver. 30. And that Son which is Priest in his stead, shall put them on seven
days.] This was to be done seven days, one after another, that a Sabbath might
pass over him. For no Man could be a complete High Priest, as the Jews imagine,
till a Sabbath had gone over his head. But the principal intention of this was,
that he might be made a Priest with great Solemnity and Deliberation; and put
on his Habit so often, that he may learn how to appear in them after a decent,
or rather magnificent manner, before he undertook to Minister. Yet the Jews
say, that if he did offer Sacrifice before the seven days end, it was not
accounted unlawful; provided he had been anointed, and had put them on once. So
Maimonides, who adds that he was to put them on by day, and not by Night. See
Seldom de Successionibus, L. II. c. 8. Where he shows ( cap. 9.) this is to be
understood of his Unction also, which was to be by day, and not by night; and
to be repeated seven times. And by the same reason, the Sacrifices were also to
be repeated; though if he ministered before they were offered, the Doctors held
it not to be illegitimate; as he shows in the end of that Chapter.

When he comes into the Tabernacle of the Congreation, to minister in the holy
place.] At this entrance into the Tabernacle he was to put them on for seven
days together, before he could go to minister in the Sanctuary.

Ver. 31. And thou shall take the Ram of the Consecration.] That is, all the
rest of the Flesh, which was not burnt on the Altar, nor given to Moses. Who
having had their share ( v. 22, 26.) the Remainder, as the manner was in
Peace Offerings, belonged to those that brought the Sacrifice.

And seethe his flesh in the holy place.] At the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, as we read expressly, VIII Lev. 31. and as it is explained in the
next Verse, that there they should eat it. Fire was taken from the Altar to
boil it.

Ver. 32. And Aaron and his Sons shall cat the flesh of the Ram.] That is,
Feast with God in his own House, as Persons now completely qualified to
minister unto him.

And the bread that is in the basket.] All the remaining Bread and Cakes, which
were presented unto God, after that which was burnt upon the Altar, as his
part, v. 23, 24, etc.

By the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Hence it appears, that
this Sacrifice had something in it peculiar, from other Peace Offerings; which
might be carried home and eaten there, after God and the Priests had had their
parts. But this was to be eaten in God's own House, where they were Ministers,
as a thing more holy: and therefore Aaron and his Sons and Daughters could not
eat of it, as all the Family did of other Sacrifices of this kind.

Ver. 33. And they shall eat those things.] Aaron and his Sons alone were to
eat them; and no Body else with them.

Wherewith the atonement was made.] The atonement was not made by these things,
but by the Bullock, which was offered in the first place; which made them fit
to have their hands filled with these things (as the Hebrew phrase is for
Consecrating) v. 23, 24. to complete their Sanctification. And therefore the
words should be thus translated, They shall eat those things, for whom the
atonement (or expiation was made.)

To consecrate, and to sanctify them.] Their Consecration and Sanctification
began, by the Sacrifice for Sin; and was completed by this now mentioned.

But a stranger shall not eat thereof.] None that are not of the Family of
Aaron, to whom alone this holy Food belonged. Nor were all his Domestics
allowed to eat of it, though they might eat of other Peace Offerings; but only
Aaron and his Sons: who being consecrated Persons, were to eat these things,
which had a special holiness in them, being part of the Sacrifice of
Consecration; and therefore appertained only to such Persons as had been
consecrated.

Because they are holy.] Had a special holiness, as I said, in them; which made
it fit only for such Persons to eat them.

Ver. 34. And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread
remain unto the morning.] He and his Sons being not able to eat it all.

Then thou shall burn the remainder with fire.] This is a further argument,
that there was a peculiar holiness in this Sacrifice, of which only Aaron and
his Sons might eat: for if this had been like to the flesh of other
Peace Offerings, it might, according to the following Law, have been kept two
days, before it was eaten, VII Lev. 15, 16, etc.

It shall not be eaten.] Upon the second day.

Because it is holy.] Is of a more than ordinary Sanctity; being offered to
make Men holy to God: and therefore the greatest care was taken, it should not
be in danger to be in the least corrupted.

Ver. 35. And thus shall thou do unto Aaron, and unto his Sons, according to
all things which I have commanded thee.] This is the sum of what I have to
command thee, concerning the Consecration of Aaron, and of his Sons.

Seven days shall thou consecrate them.] They shall not be made complete
Priests, in less time than I have appointed. Which no doubt was to make them
sensible of the weight of their Office.

Ver. 36. And thou shall offer every day a Bullock for a Sin-offering, for
atonement.] Lest he should think that only the Ram of Consecration should be
offered seven days together, he here expressly directs, the Bullock for a
Sin-offering should be so often repeated. The reason of it follows, because it
was for atonement. Which appears by the next words to signify, that it was not
only for the atonement of the Priest, but of the Altar it self, which was, by
this Sacrifice, made fit for God's Service. And that is the reason perhaps, why
he says in the Plural Number, it was for atonements. So the Hebrew Text.

And thou shall cleanse the Altar when thou have made an atonement for it.] The
Altar was not capable of any guilt; therefore this word atonement is here used
improperly, to signify that by these repeated Sacrifices, it was set apart to
be a place where Expiations should be made. Or simply, this Expiation of the
Altar was no more, but, of a common, making it a sacred Place: or, as
Fortunatus Scacchus understands it, it was purified by these Rites, from that
desilement it must be supposed to have contracted, by the hands of the Workmen
that made it: for all Vessels, in the sense of the Law, were looked upon as
made unclean, by the touch of any unclean Person. And therefore perhaps the
Altar was also washed with Water, as the Priests were; which is here called its
cleansing.

And thou shall anoint it, to sanctify it.] To perfect its Sanctification or
Separation from common use, it was anointed with the holy Oil (mentioned in the
next Chapter) as Aaron and his Sons were. For as by the Blood of the Bullock it
was Expiated, so by this anointing it was Consecrated: which is meant by
sanctifying it.

Ver. 37. Seven days thou shall make an atonement for the Altar, and sanctify
it.] Many think that these were not distinct seven days from those in which the
Priests were expiated and consecrated; as the Bullock for the Cleansing of the
Altar, was not a distinct Bullock from that for the Priests: but the same
Sacrifice served for both. This Opinion I shall consider in the conclusion of
this Book (XL. 17, 18.) and now only observe, that thus not only the Priests
among the Heathen, but their Altars also were dedicated, by their Taurobolia
and Criobolia (which I mentioned v. 20.) for we find an ancient Inscription,
wherein one is said to have set up PETRAM TAVROBOLIATAM, an Altar consecrated,
by besmearing it with the Blood of those Sacrifices, as Fortunatus Scacchus
interprets it, Ib. c. 69.

Make an atonement for the Altar.] By the Blood of the Bullock.

And sanctify it.] By anointing it with the holy Oil.

And it shall be an Altar most holy.] The reason why it is so called, is given
in the following words; because it was not only thus separated to an holy use,
but made those things to be holy which were offered upon it. Which they could
not be till it was thus expiated and sanctified. Therefore Fort. Scacchus
expounds these words [ an Altar most holy] it shall be fully and completely
consecrated, by observing all the Rites which are here prescribed, for seven
days together. Till the end of which no Sacrifice whatsoever was offered on
this Altar (because it was not cleansed and sanctified to make them holy and
acceptable) but on the eighth day, when all was performed that was required on
the preceding seven days, fire came down from Heaven, and consumed the
Burnt-offering, VIII Lev. 1, 24.

Whatsoever touches the Altar shall be holy.] Nothing was acceptable unto God,
unless it was offered upon this Altar; which sanctified every thing that was
laid upon it, according to God's direction. Thus our Savior seems to explain
these words, XXIII Matthew. 19. The Altar sanctifies the Gift. That was the name
for all things presented unto God, which were called Korban; being destined to
be offered at his Altar.

Ver. 38. Now this is that which thou shall offer upon the Altar.] The
principal use of the Altar was, That there might be a constant Sacrifice
offered upon it, in acknowledgment of God's Sovereign Dominion over them. Which
could not be done till it was expiated and consecrated: but that being
finished, Moses directs here what should be the first Sacrifice offered upon it.

Two Lambs.] These were to be a Burnt-offering; which was the most ancient of
all other Sacrifices, being the same that Abel offered.

Of the first year.] See XII. 5.

Day by day continually.] There were other occasional Sacrifices of various
sorts; but these were stated and so constant, that they were never intermitted.
No, not upon Festivals, when other Sacrifices were added: as upon the Sabbath
this Sacrifice was doubled, XXVIII Numb. 9, 10. and upon New Mons and other
Feasts, several other Sacrifices were appointed, as may be seen there, v. 11.
and in the rest of that Chapter. It appears by IX Lev. 17. that this daily
Sacrifice was offered (at least for some time) in the Wilderness: but after
they began to wander to and fro, for Eight and thirty years, some think it was
omitted. Which was the reason that God renewed this Charge in XXVIII Numb. 3,
4. See Junius and Menochius on that place.

Ver. 39. The one Lamb thou shall offer in the morning; and the other thou
shall offer at even.] At what time in the Morning and Even is not here plainly
prescribed: But the word in the Hebrew for the latter-being, between the
Evenings, which was about three a Clock in the Afternoon; the Morning Sacrifice
also was offered between the Rising of the Sun and Noon, viz. at nine a Clock
in the Forenoon.

Ver. 40. And with one Lamb a tenth deal of flour.] Most understand the tenth
part of an Ephah, which was an Omer: concerning which see XVI. 36. And so Moses
afterward expressly orders by God's command, XXVIII Numb. 5.

Mingled with the fourth part of an hin of Oil, etc.] An Hin was the sixth part
of an Ephah; containing one Wine Gallon, two Pints and fifteen Inches (as
Bishop Cumberland computes it, in his Learned Treatise of Scripture Measures)
So that the fourth part of it was a Quart, and something more than a quarter of
a Pint.

The principal thing here to be observed is, That this was ordained (as I noted
upon the XXVth Chapter) to represent God's dwelling among them in the
Sanctuary; where this daily Sacrifice was the constant Provision made for his
Table (as the Altar is called) and Bread and wine a necessary attendant (as
they are at all Tables) upon the Meat that was set before him.

Ver. 41. And the other Lamb thou shall offer at even, and shall do thereunto
according to the Meat Offering in the Morning, and according to the
Drink Offering thereof.] The same Rites were to be observed in this, that were
in the Morning Sacrifice, without any difference. For as Abarbinel observes, in
his Preface to the Book of Leviticus, the true Reason of these two Sacrifices
was, That all Men, who live well, having two Meals a day, so many Sacrifices
(which were his Meat) were therefore appointed for the Divine Majesty.

For a sweet savor.] See I Lev. 9.

An offering made by fire unto the LORD.] i. e. A Burnt-offering, as the next
Verse explains it.

Ver. 42. This shall be a continual Burnt-offering throughout their
Generations, at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] For there the
Altar of Burnt-offerings stood, as we read XL. 6, 29. XVII Lev. 6, etc.

Before the LORD.] Who dwelt in the most Holy Place, in the upper end of the
Tabernacle.

Where I will meet you.] Their coming to Worship in that place, is called
drawing nigh to God: accordingly he promises to vouchsafe his gracious Presence
with them. See XXV. 22.

To speak with thee.] More especially, he promises to meet Moses there upon
occasion; and to declare his Mind and Will to him, in such Cases wherein he
should consult him.

Ver. 43. And there I will meet with the Children of Israel.] That they might
not think his meeting with them (beforementioned) was only by revealing his
Mind to Moses, and so to them, (as the last words of the foregoing Verse might
seem to intimate) he explains his meaning to be, that there he would grant
Tokens of his special Love and Favor to them all, when they approached unto
him.

And the Tabernacle shall be sanctified with my glory.] The glorious Presence
of God, which filled this House, XL. 35. was that which sanctified it, or made
it an Holy Place. But some refer this not to the Tabernacle, but to Israel
(which is just before mentioned, and the word Tabernacle not in the Text) and
the truth is, they were made an holy People also, by this glorious Presence of
God among them, in the Tabernacle.

Ver. 44. And I will sanctify, etc.] That is, manifest them to be sanctified;
or still more completely sanctify them, by the appearance of the Divine Glory
in the Tabernacle, IX Lev. 24.

The Tabernacle of the Congregation.] In the Hebrew the name is Ohel moed,
which signifies exactly the Tabernacle of Meeting: So called, not from the
Peoples meeting there (as we seem to take it when we translate it, Tabernacle
of the Congregation) but from God's meeting there with them, which is mentioned
just before; and in the next Chapter, XXX. 36. is expressly called the
Tabernacle of Meeting (as I think it should be translated) where I will meet
with thee. Which shows, that this was the reason of its name. See also XVII
Numb. 4. and Mr. Mede Book II. p. 436.

Now all the People could not come to attend upon the daily Sacrifice, which
was offered for them, and so to meet with God here; and yet it was a Maxim
among them, That no Man's Sacrifice was accepted, unless he was present at it:
therefore there were certain select Persons chosen to wait upon God, in the
Name of all the rest, (and there were XXIV Classes of them, as of the Priests
in David's time) called by the Jews Stationary men; who never missed, when
their Course came, to attend upon the Divine Majesty at the Tabernacle, as the
Representatives of all their Brethren. Concerning which see Pet Cunaeus, L. II.
de Repub. Jud. cap. 10. and our Learned Dr. Lightfoot in his Temple Service,
Chap. 7. Sect. 3.

I will sanctify both Aaron and his Sons, to minister to me in the Priests
Office.] He declared them to be sanctified to be his Priests, by the appearance
of his glory at their first Sacrifice after their Solemn Consecration; and by
Fire coming from Heaven to consume their Burnt-offering, IX Lev. 23, 24.

Ver. 45. And I will dwell among the Children of Israel.] The Chaldee renders
it, I will place my Divinity ( i.e. the SCHECHINAH) among them. In the Hebrew
it is, in the midst of them: for the Tabernacle was situated in the very middle
of their Camp, while they were in the Wilderness, II Numb. 17.

And will be their God.] Bestow special Blessings upon them; such as he did not
vouchsafe to other People.

Ver. 46. And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, that brought them
forth out of the Land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them.] By his special
Favors toward them, it was evidently manifested to them, that he brought them
out of the Slavery of Egypt, to make them a select People unto himself; among
whom he settled his Habitation, and appeared, by a most glorious Symbol of his
Presence, to be in the midst of them.

I am the LORD their God.] How could they doubt of it, when they remembered, in
what a wonderful manner he had brought them out of Egypt; and what they had
heard him declare from his own mouth at Mount Sinai? XX. 2.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 1. AND thou shall make an Altar to burn Incense upon.] This is commonly
called the golden Altar; upon which sweet Incense was as constantly burnt every
day, as the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of a Lamb (beforementioned XXIX. 38,
39.) was offered at the Brazen Altar.

Of Shittim-wood shall thou make it.] See XXV. 5.

Ver. 2. A Cubit shall be the length thereof, and a Cubit the breadth thereof,
(foursquare shall it be).] It was a Square of not much more than half a yard;
because it served only to offer Incence upon twice a day, and had no other use.

And two Cubits shall be the height thereof.] It was a high again, as it was
broad; that the Priest might minister there without stooping.

The Horns thereof shall be of the same.] At each corner there was a Spire,
rising out of the same piece with the corner Post. See XXVII. 2.

Ver. 3. And thou shall overlay it with pure Gold, etc.] The top of it, and the
Frame on all sides, with the Horns, were to be covered with Plates of Gold, as
the Table was XXV. 24.

The top thereof.] The Vulgar Latin translating the Hebrew word gag, by
craticula, has led many into a a conceit that there was a Grate upon this
Altar, as there was upon the other. But as the word for that is quite different
(viz. michar) so there is not the least mention here made, of cleansing this
Altar from the Ashes, or of any thing to receive them: and therefore Fortunatus
Scacchus ingenuously acknowledges, there was no Grate on this Altar; but a
golden Pan, or Dish was set upon the top of it (as we translate it rightly)
with Coals therein, when Incense was to be burnt; and taken away with the
Coals, when that was done.

And thou shall make unto it a Crown of Gold round about.] A border of Gold,
which went about the brim or edge of it. See there XXV. 24. This seems to have
been made of massy Gold, not of Shittim-wood, overlaid with Gold.

Ver. 4. And two golden Rings shall thou make to it, under the Crown of it.]
The golden Crown arose upward above the Table, and these Rings were fixed below
it.

By the two corners thereof, upon the two sides thereof shall thou make them.]
On each side of the Altar, near the Corners of it were these golden Rings
annexed; at each of the four corners, one.

And they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.] This shows the
use of the Rings.

Ver. 5. And thou shall make the staves of Shittim-wood, and overlay them with
Gold.] Just like the Staves for the carriage of the Ark and the Table, XXV. 13,
28.

Ver. 6. And thou shall put it before the Vail.] In the midst of the House,
between the Candlestick and the Table; though not just between, but something
higher, toward the Vail; where it was placed directly before the most Holy
Place.

That is by the Ark of the Testimony.] See 25.22.

Before the Mercy-seat.] Toward which the Priest looked when he offered
Incense; recommending to God the People and their Prayers, which they were
making without, while he burnt Incense within. There is no ground to think that
this Altar stood in the most Holy Place, as St. Austin and some others have
conceived; for these words are a plain demonstration to the contrary. See
Cunaeus L. II. de Repub. Jud. c. 5.

That is over the Testimony.] That is, the Ark; which is here simply called the
Testimony, as it is v. 36. because it was the principal thing in the Ark, XL.
20. See XXV. 22.

Where I will meet with thee.] Though Aaron and his Sons might go no further
than the Holy Place (except only once a year when Aaron alone went into the
most Holy) to offer Incense, before the Mercy-seat: yet Moses had the
privilege to consult the Divine Majesty, in the most Holy Place, where the
Divine Glory shined, as these words, and XXV. 22. VII Numb. ult. seem to
intimate. For since he was admitted into the Mount (as P. Cunaeas argues, in
the place beforementioned) to speak with God face to face, for many days
together; it is not unreasonable to think that he was admitted to speak with
him, upon occasion, in the most holy place in the Tabernacle.

Ver. 7. And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incense.] He did it at first; but
afterward his Sons in their courses performed this Service: as appears from I
Luke 8, 9. where Zacharias, who was not High Priest, offered the Incense when
it came to his turn, according to the custom of the Priest's Office.

Sweet Incense.] For it was a compound of several Spices, which were very
fragrant, as appears by the latter end of this Chapter.

Every morning when he dresseth the Lamps.] At the rising of the Sun the
Priests went in to look after the Lamps which they had lighted in the Evening
before. The dressing of them, as the Hebrews describe it, consisted in
cleansing the Snuff-dishes, and snuffing those Lamps they found burning, and
supplying them with new Oil; and in putting new Cotton (as we now speak) and
Oil into those that were gone out, and lighting them at some of the Lamps which
still continued burning.

He shall burn Incense upon it.] The manner of it is described by Dr. Lightfoot
in his Temple Service, Chap. 9. Sect. 5.

Ver. 8. And when Aaron lights the Lamps at even.] See concerning this XXVII.
20.

He shall burn Incense upon it.] As he did in the Morning.

A perpetual Incense.] In the same sense that the Morning and Evening Sacrifice
is called a continual Burnt-offering, (XXIX. 38, 42.) this is called perpetual
Incense, because it was never intermitted twice a day. And one reason why it
was thus continually burnt, was, because of the vast number of Beasts that were
slain, and cut to pieces, and washed and burnt every day at the Sanctuary: which
would have made it smell like a Shambles (as Maimonides speaks) if this sweet
Odor had not perfumed it, and the Garments of the Priests who there ministered.
Whence, says he, that Speech of our Rabbis, This sweet Odor might be smelt
as far as Jericho. Whereby the Reverence due to God's House was preserved;
which would have been contemptible, if there had been an ill smell constantly
in it, as he truly observes, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 45.

Before the LORD.] For this Altar stood right over against the Mercy-seat, v. 6.

Throughout your Generations.] In all future Ages.

Ver. 9. Ye shall offer no strange Incense thereon.] None but that, which by
God's own order is directed to be made, in the latter end of this Chapter.

Nor Burnt-sacrifice, nor Meat Offering, neither shall ye pour Drink Offering
thereon.] There was another Altar appointed, without the Holy Place, for all
these: which as they might not be offered any where else, so this Altar was
appropriated for an Offering more grateful than all their Burnt-sacrifices, or
Meat and Drink Offerings. So Porphyry seems to have learnt from this place (for
he was acquainted with these Books) It is most sit to worship the Gods with
Incense, both because it is more grateful, and also more pure than an Hecatomb:
for Blood does not at all delight the Gods. Accordingly we find in XVI Numb.
46, 47. that the wrath of God was appeased, when it broke out in a Plague upon
the People, merely by offering Incense, whereby he is said to make an atonement
for them.

Ver. 10. And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once a year,
with the blood of the Sin-offering of atonement.] Only once a year the Blood of
that great Sin-offering, which was made for the general Atonement of the
People, was to be put upon the Horns of this Altar; though no Sacrifice might
be burnt upon it.

Once in the year.] Upon the great Day of Expiation, which was the tenth day of
the seventh Month: when the High Priest was first to go with the Blood of the
Sin-offering into the most Holy Place, and sprinkle it before the Mercy-seat;
and then come out into the Sanctuary, and there put the Blood upon the Horns of
this Altar, and sprinkle it upon it also with his Finger seven times, as we
read XVI Lev. 18, 19.

Shall he make atonement upon it.] The Atonement mentioned so often in this
Verse, seems to relate to the Altar it self (as it is explained XVI Lev. 18.)
which was hereby cleansed from the Impurities, which it was supposed to have
contracted by the Sins of those who constantly officiated there.

It is most holy unto the LORD.] This may be meant of that Solemn Expiation,
upon the Day of Atonement; which was the most holy Rite in all their Religion:
for that Sacrifice is called by the peculiar Name of the Sin-offering of
Atonement, or Expiation, XXIX Numb. 11. Or, it may be expounded of this Altar
it self; which by this was declared to be separated to the most holy Service,
in which none should presume to officiate but they who were thereunto
consecrated. Which was the reason of the heavy Punishment upon King Vzziah; for
attempting that which belonged to the Priests only, as we read 2 Chronicles. XXVI.
18, 19, 20.

Ver. 11. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] This is often repeated in
this Chapter ( v. 17, 22, 34.) and in the next; to show that God did not
deliver all his Precepts to Moses in the Mount, without intermission; but gave
him some time to rest, and then spoke to him again.

Ver. 12. When thou take the sum of the Children of Israel, after their
number.] This was done twice by God's own order, Numb. I. and XXVI. From whence
it does not follow that it could not be done lawfully, without a special
Command: for there might be reasonable Causes, why the Rulers of the People
might think fit to order them to be numbered, especially in time of War.

The reason why this is here mentioned seems to be, because, besides the
Offerings made voluntarily (XXV. 2.) every Man also paid half a Shekel toward
the building of the Tabernacle, and providing all the Furniture of it; for
which directions had been given in the foregoing Chapters. This appears from
XXXVIII. 25, 26.

They shall give every man a ransom for his soul.] This was an homage, whereby
they acknowledged they were God's redeemed ones; and whereby they also
preserved their Lives, which were in danger if they did not pay it.

Unto the LORD.] To be employed about his House.

That there be no Plague among them, etc.] Which God might have justly
inflicted, if they had not made him this Acknowledgment, for increasing and
multiplying them according to his Promise.

Ver. 13. This shall they give, half a shekel.] A Shekel wanted not much of our
half Crown. See XXIII Genesis 15. and Bishop Cumberland's Treatise of Scripture
Weights and Measures, Chap. 4.

After the shekel of the sanctuary.] There the Standard was kept, by which such
money was to be examined: as Justinian commanded the Weights and Measures,
whereby all others were to be regulated, to be kept in the great Church of
every City. For I see no reason to think, that there were two sorts of Shekels
among the Jews, one Sacred and the other Common; but much reason against it:
for a Shekel of the Sanctuary, which is the Rule of the rest, XXVII Lev. 25.
was in value but twenty gerahs; which is the same with aguroth, 1 Samuel II. 36.
and is by the LXX. translated (...).

An half shekel shall be the offering of the LORD.] This was a Tax, which was
continued in following times, for the Reparation of the Tabernacle, and
afterward of the Temple, XVII Matthew. 24. For Cicero in his Oration pro Flacco
speaks of Gold, sent every year in the Name of the Jews, out of Italy and all
the Provinces, to Jerusalem: which Mr. Seldom thinks was this half Shekel, paid
for the maintaining the Public Sacrifices, and such like Uses, Lib. II. de
Jure N. and G. c. 8. And he shows L. IV. c. 5. out of the Misna, in the Title
Siklim, and other Authorities, That on the first day of the Month Adar, men
were appointed to sit in every City of Judea, to receive this Payment. Which is
the Tribute mentioned by Titus in his Oration to the Jews; wherein he puts them
in mind how kind he had been to them, in permitting them to take Tribute, and
to gather Gifts for God, (...), Josephus L. VI. Halos. c. 34.

Ver. 14. Every one that passes among them that are numbered, from twenty years
old and above, shall give an offering unto the LORD.] Every Man was bound to
offer, whether Priest or Levite, Israelite or Stranger; except Women, Servants,
and such as were under Age. Yet if any one of these did make a voluntary
offering it was accepted: only from a Gentile, who was an Idolater, they would
not accept it, as Maimonides tells us. See Seldom L. III. de Jure N. and G. c.
4. p. 291.

Ver. 15. The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than
half a shekel.] They were all equally concerned in this Tax, being for the
support of the daily, weekly, monthly and annual Sacrifices; and for the
providing Salt, and Wood, and the Shewbread, etc. whereby all Israel came to
have an interest in whatsoever was done at the House of God all the year long.
The Priestly Garments also were provided out of this Money, and other things
belonging to the Divine Service, and to the Reparations of the House of God.
See Mr. Seldom L. III. de Synedr. c. 10. n. 2, 3, 4. Where he shows, That if
any thing remained in the end of the year, after all these Charges defrayed, it
was spent in extraordinary Burnt-offerings; which were called the second
Sacrifices of the Altar.

When they give an offering unto the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.
Whence this Money is called in the next Verse Keseph Hakippurim, the Money of
Expiations. Which made every Man, though never so poor, endeavor to raise it,
though he sold his Clothes to get it: And he that failed to pay this Tribute,
was separated from the Congregation, and not comprehended in the Expiation, (as
R. Levi of Barcelona speaks, Praecept. CV.) that is, was not partaker of the
benefit of the Expiatory Sacrifices.

Ver. 16. And thou shall take the atonement-money of the Children of Israel,
and shall appoint it for the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.]
See the Verse foregoing, and X Nehem. 32, 33. where we read of Ordinances made,
to charge themselves with the third part of a shekel, for the forementioned
uses; because the Expenses were then so great, that half a Shekel was not
sufficient to maintain them.

That it may be a memorial for the Children of Israel before the LORD, to make
an atonement for their souls.] A Testimony of their Gratitude to God; who
graciously accepted this Acknowledgment of him, and spared their Lives, which
by their Sins they had forfeited: this being a Propitiation for them, because
it purchased Propitiatory Sacrifices to be offered on their behalf.

Ver. 17. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] See v. 11.

Ver. 18. Thou shall also make a laver of brass.] There is nothing said, either
here, or XXXVIII. 8. concerning the form or the bigness of it. But we may
probably think, that though Solomon made a Sea of Brass, much bigger than this
Vessel, (which was to be carried about with them in their Travels in the
Wilderness) yet he made it of the same form; and that was Circular, as we read
2 Chronicles. IV. 2, 3, etc. And after their return from the Captivity of Babylon,
the Laver was restored (as L'Empereur observes out of Maimonides in his
Annotations on Codex Midoth, c. 3. sect. 6.) but there is nothing to be found
in the Talmudists concerning its Dimensions.

And his foot also of brass.] The Basis of it was so contrived, as to receive
the Water, which run out of the Laver at certain Spouts.

To wash withal.] At those Spouts the Priests washed their hands and their
feet, before they entered upon their Ministration. For if they had put their
hands and feet into the Laver, the Water in it would have been defiled by the
first Man that washed therein. And the Sea of Brass made by Solomon was so
high, that they could not put their feet into it.

And thou shall put it between the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the
Altar.] It stood, according to the Talmudists, between the Porch of the Temple
and the Altar; and consequently, in the Tabernacle, at the entrance of it, but
a little on the South Side, and not just before the Altar. That is, it was
placed like our Fonts, which stand at the lower end of our Churches, toward
the Door. So that the Priests coming into the Court, immediately went to the
Laver and there washed, and then ascended to the Altar.

And thou shall put water therein.] The Heathens were so Superstitious, as to
think there was a greater virtue in some Waters than in others for their
lustration: particularly the Greeks (as Fort. Scacchus observes) would admit of
no other Water, in some of their greatest Solemnities, but that from the
Fountain Calliroho. But the Divine Institution was more simple, requiring
merely Spring Water, for all manner of Purifications: only this Water here
mentioned was put into a Vessel sanctified by a solemn Unction, XL. 11.

Ver. 19. For Aaron and his Sons shall wash their hands and their feet
therein.] Which that it might be done more conveniently, the Talmudists tell us
there were twelve Spouts or Cocks, in the form of a Woman's Breast (whence they
call them Paps or Dugs) to let the Water out of the Laver: so that the twelve
Priests, who attended upon the daily Sacrifice, might wash there all together.
See L'Empereur in the place abovenamed, where he treats at large of this; and
of the Conveyance of Water into the Laver: which in the Tabernacle (at least
while they were in the Wilderness) was brought thither every day in other
Vessels, and put into it, according to the Direction in the Conclusion of the
foregoing Verse.

Every one knows that the Gentiles took great care of washing their hands
before they sacrificed, as appears by many places in Homer (to name no other
Authors) who in the first Book of his Iliads, speaking of the great Sacrifice
that was preparing to be offered, for the appeasing of Apollo, says, (...).
upon which words Eustathius observes it was the ancient custom, before they
sacrificed, to wash their hands, (...), for none but those who were clean and
pure might meddle with sacred things. And again in the third Book, (...). They
poured Water upon the hands of the Kings: (...), says Eustathius, as being
about to Sacrifice. But I do not find in any Author, that they were concerned
for more than washing their hands (from whence came the Proverb of doing things
illotis manibus, See Erasmus in his Adages) there being no mention of washing
their Feet: Which was an Extraordinary degree of Purity, which God required in
his Priests, who ministered in his House barefoot: And so they did among the
Gentiles also, as appears by that saying of Pythagorus mentioned by Jamblichus
(...), Sacrifice and worship without shoes; which St. Ambrose thinks was
borrowed from Moses, L. I. Epist. VI. See Cuperus in his Apotheosis Homeri p.
185.

Ver. 20. When they go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, they shall wash
with water.]. This washing was not to be repeated before every Act of their
Ministration; but it sufficed for all the Service of that day, if they washed
once at their entrance upon it. Only on the great Day of Expiation, before five
of the various Duties then to be performed, the washing was to be renewed.

That they die not.] By the Hand of Heaven, as the Jews speak; that is, of God,
who punished such profanation as ministering to him in their uncleanness, with
death. And the Service performed by such a Person, was all without effect;
whether he were the High Priest, or a common one, as R. Levi of Barcelona
says, Praecept. CVI.

Or when they come near to the Altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire
unto the LORD.] Whether they were to go in to Minister at the Altar of Incense
in the Tabernacle (of which he speaks in the first words of this Verse) or to
offer Sacrifices at the Brazen Altar in the outward Court; they were to wash
before they entered upon their Service.

Ver. 22. So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not.]
There was no need of doing more, being washed once all over before they were
consecrated, XXIX. 4. but their Hands and Feet were to be washed upon pain of
death, every day before they ministered.

And it shall be a statute for ever to them.] As long as the Tabernacle or
Temple stood.

Ver. 23. Take thou also unto thee principal spices.] So we rightly translate
the Hebrew word Roschim, which literally signifies heads; but thence, the
chief of any kind of thing: the Head being the principal or chief Member of the
Body.

As for the word Besamin, which we translate Spices, it seems to be a general
Name, for all the following Species, which are comprehended under it. See v. 34.

Of pure Myrrh.] The Hebrew word Mor, according to Maimonides signifies Musk;
and David Kimchi commends their Exposition, who take it for a kind of
Frankincense: but the general Opinion of the Hebrews, as well as of later
Writers, is, that it signifies Myrrh, which seems to be derived from the
ancient word Mor. And that being the best which flows from the Shrub of it
self, Moses is required to make use of such Myrrh. For the word Deror (which
we translate pure, or not adulterated) properly signifies freely flowing or
dropping Myrrh: which was far better than that which came out from the Tree by
Incision. The fragrancy of this is taken notice of by a great number of
Authors; who also mention it as having a principal part in the composition of
the most costly Ointments, as Fort. Scacchus observes L. I. Myroth. Sacr.
Elaeochrism. c. 51, 52. and L. II. c. 8.

Five hundred shekels.] That is, in weight; which was two hundred and fifty
Ounces: a Shekel being as much as half an Ounce of our weight.

Of sweet Cinnamon half so much.] There were two sorts of Cinnamon: one that does
not smell very much; another which was very Aromatic, and rarely to be found (
Galen says, in his time) but in the Closet of Kings. And therefore God
commands Moses here to take not mere Cinnamon, but with the addition of Bosem,
which signifies sweet-scented.

Salmasius in his Plin. Exerc. treats of both these Spices.

And of sweet Calamus two hundred and fifty shekels.] This Spice has also the
same addition of Bosem to it, because there was a Calamus that was not
sweet-scented; and that which was they held very precious, being not of the
growth of Judea, but coming from distant places. So we read VI Jer. 20. Of
sweet Cane from a far Country: and Isaiah intimates in XLIII. 24. that it was a
Foreign Commodity of great value: and Salmasius is positive, that there was no
Aromatic Calamus grew out of India, Plin. Exercit. p. 1052. But Bochartus very
well observes that there was no Traffic, in all likelihood, with India in the
days of Moses: and therefore they had it then from Arabia; where Dionysius
Periergetes, together with Frankincense and Myrrh, mentions (in one and the
same Verse) (...), sweet smelling Calamus. See Hierozoic. P. II. L. V. c. 6.

Ver. 24. And of Cassia five hundred shekels.] There is no mention of this
Spice (which the Hebrews call Kidhah) but here and in XXVII Ezekiel. 19. where it
is joined with Calamus, and reckoned among the precious things, which were
brought to the Marts of Tire. Therefore it does not signify that Cassia, which
is now used among purging Medicines; but another mentioned by Pliny together
with Cinnamon, L. XII. c. 19. There being one sort of it called Isocinamomum,
because it was equal to Cinnamon in virtue and in value. See Salmasius in his
Plinianae Exercit. in Solin. p. 1302. But this sort of Cassia differing but
little from Cinnamon, Fort. Scacchus thinks, for that very reason, we are here
to understand by Kidhah that Aromatic Plant, which the Ancients call Costus:
the best of which was brought out of Arabia, and was of a white color, as he
proves out of Avicenna, Dioscorides and Pliny. And it appears by Propertjus it
was used by the Ancients to be burnt on their Altars, as well as Frankincense:
Costum molle date, and blandi mihi thuris honores. Myrothec. Elaeochrism. P.
II. c. 11, 12.

After the shekel of the Sanctuary.] See v. 13.

And of Oyl-olive.] Which was clear and free from all Dregs. See XXIX. 40.

An hin.] I observed there that it contained a Winegallon, and two Pints, and
something more.

Ver. 25. And thou shall make it.] From hence, and from those words v. 23. Take
thou unto the sweet Spices, etc. the Hebrew Doctors conclude that Moses made
this holy Oil with his own hands. Of which there is no certainty; much less
that none ever adventured to make it after him: nay, it is evident that
Bezaleel made it, as well as all other things beforementioned, XXXVII. 29.

An Oil of holy Ointment.] To anoint with it all the things mentioned in the
next Verse; whereby they were sanctified, (that is, set apart) for the Service
of God. It was not thick, like those Compositions which we now call Ointments,
but thin as Oil is; being nothing but Oil, with an infusion of these strong
Spices, which made it have a comfortable scent. For it is observed by
Dioscorides, that Oil was very proper, (...), for the preparation of Ointments:
Odours being better preserved in Oil, than in any other Liquor, as Pliny
observes L. XIII. c. 2. And this Oil, no doubt, was the purest they could get
(such as they brought for the light of the Tabernacle, XXVII. 20.) which would
best imbibe the Tincture.

After the art of the Apothecary.] Or Ointment-maker; of whose Art Theophrastus
and Dioscorides give an account. But the manner of making this Ointment, as
Maimonides describes it, was thus: The Spices were beaten severally (he should
have excepted the Myrrh, which was liquid) and then they were mixed together,
and macerated in pure Water, till all the virtue of them was extracted. Which
being done, the Hin of Oil was poured upon them, and all was boiled upon the
fire, till the Water was evaporated, and the Oil alone remained. See Guil.
Schickard in his Mischpat hamelek, c. 1. p. 24.

It shall be an holy anointing Oil.] Wherewith none were to be anointed, but
Sacred Persons and Things.

Ver. 26. And thou shall anoint the Tabernacle of the Congregation therewith,
etc.] This and the following Verses, show the use of the holy Oil; which was to
consecrate or set apart every thing hereafter mentioned, to the Service of God.
Whereby the Majesty of God's House (as the Jews speak) was set forth: for
anointing belonging only to Kings and Princes, this Ceremony begat in Peoples
minds a greater fear and reverence toward God himself, as Maimonides his words
are, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 45.

Ver. 27. And the Table and all his Vessels, etc.] Here being such a particular
mention of every thing that was in the Sanctuary; he only says, when it was
erected, (XL. 9.) Thou shall take the anointing Oil, and anoint the Tabernacle,
and all that is therein, etc.

Ver. 28. And the Altar of Burnt-offering, etc.] In this Verse he mentions all
that was without the Sanctuary, in the Court of the LORD's House; of the
Unction whereof he also gives a particular charge, XL. 10, 11. And accordingly
when he gives an account of the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, he also
tells us how he executed these Commands of anointing the Tabernacle, and all
that was in it; but more especially this Altar, which he sprinkled seven times
with the holy Oil, VIII Lev. 10, 11. See there.

Ver. 29. And thou shall sanctify them.] Separate all the forenamed things
from common uses, to the Service of God alone, by anointing them with this holy
Oil.

That they may be most holy.] They were made hereby most holy, because as it
here follows, they made other things to be holy.

Whatsoever touches them shall be holy.] As the Gift was made holy by the
Altar, upon which it was laid. See XXIX. 37.

Ver. 30. And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons, etc.] See XXIX. 7, 8.

Ver. 31. This shall be an holy anointing Oil unto me, throughout your
Generations.] The Jews understand this, as if it were meant of this individual
Oil now made by Moses; which lasted till the Captivity, or till the time of
Josiah. But this seems to be as fabulous, as that Josiah hid it so, that it
could never be found after his death. For there were so many things to be
anointed with it at present, and in future times (all the High Priests being
anointed, not with a drop or two, but with such a plentiful effusion of it,
that it ran down to their Beards, nay, the Skirts of their Garment, CXXXIII
Psalm. and their Kings also, when there was any doubt of their Title) that this
Oil could not last so long, much less retain its Scent for so many Generations,
without a Miracle, of which there was no need. For though there was near half
an hundred weight of the Spices, yet there was but five or six quarts of Oil;
and therefore the Ointment could not be more: the odours of these Spices being
only extracted by infusion, and the Substance left behind. And such a quantity
as this, one may well suppose was near spent, in the anointing of so many
Things and Persons, as are here mentioned: and therefore it was upon occasion
to be made again, as the Perfume was, which follows here v. 34.

Yet it must be confessed that there has been a very ancient Opinion among the
Jews, That in the second Temple there was no holy Oil: for which one can see no
reason; but that they did not think it lawful to make this Composition, and
therefore consecrated their High Priest, only by putting on their Robes. How
they came to fancy it unlawful does not appear; but the omission of this
Unction after their return from their Captivity, seemed to foretell that there
should be another and better kind of Unction, which was by the Holy Ghost; the
variety of whose Gifts might perhaps be fore-shadowed by these several Spices.

An holy anointing Oil unto me.] There was no Rite or Ceremony ordained whereby
this Oil became holy; but it was consecrated by this Divine Institution, which
appropriated it unto God alone in these words, unto me. Which separated it to
God's Uses and Service; and made it unlawful for any Body to employ it to other
purposes.

Ver. 32. Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured.] Here follow two
Prohibitions, to breed in the People the greater Reverence to this holy
Ointment. The first is this, that it should not be poured on man's flesh, i. e.
on common Men, who were not Priests, or were not appointed by God to be
anointed with it. It is well known that in the Eastern Countries (whom the
Greeks and Romans also imitated) Men were wont to anoint their Heads and Faces,
and that with very precious Ointments, especially at their Feasts, and when
they would make a splendid Appearance: and therefore they are here forbidden to
make use of this Oil for such Uses.

Neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it.] This is
a second Prohibition, not to make any Ointment of these Spices, for private and
common use.

It is holy.] It is set apart for my use alone.

And shall be holy unto you.] And therefore you shall not employ it to any
other.

Ver. 33. Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever puts any of it
upon a stranger, etc.] That is, if any Man broke either of the foregoing
Prohibitions, by making the like Compostion, or putting any of this upon one
who was not a Priest, he was liable to be cut off from Israel. What that is,
see XVII Genesis 14. The reason of these Prohibitions is manifest, as Maimonides
excellently Discourses, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 45. which was, That this sweet
Odor being smelt no where else, Men might be more in love with it in the
Sanctuary: And that none by being anointed with the like, might fancy
themselves better than others, from whence great Dissentions and Mischiefs
might have arose. The same may be said concerning the Perfume, v. 37, 38.

Kings indeed are said to have been anointed with this very Oil; at least
Solomon was, 1 Kings I. 39. (though we may doubt of David when he was anointed
King of Judah, 2 Samuel II. 4.) which was, I suppose, by a special direction of
the Prophets; that the People might look upon them as sacred Persons, and
special Ministers of God for their good. The Jews also will have it, that he
whom they call the anointed of War, that is, say the Jews, the Priest mentioned
XX Deuteronomy. 2. but I should rather think, the General who commanded their Forces,
in any sudden danger, was anointed also with this Oil, that he might be
inspired with Courage, when he fought as a sacred Person. So that they
interpret the first words of the foreging Verse [upon man's flesh shall it not
be poured] in this sense; None shall be anointed with it, but the High Priest,
the anointed of War, and the Kings of the House of David. For the Kings of
Israel were not anointed with it, but with simple Balsom, as they also tell us.

Ver. 34. And the LORD said unto Moses, take unto thee sweet Spices.] There are
the same words here in the Hebrew, that we had before v. 23. save only that
there he says, Take to the Besammim (with the addition of Rosch principal, or
most excellent) and here take to the Samim, which we translate sweet Spices.
How these two differ, Interpreters of all sorts extremely vary. But they both
seem to be general words, which contain the following Species under them; and
Samim to signify Spices of less value than Besamim. The latter of which
denotes such Spices as were either liquid, or most proper to mix with Oil, and
other liquid things, to give them a fragrancy, as Fort. Scacchus thinks; who
has discussed these two words with great diligence, in his Elaeochrism.
Myroth. P. II. c. 7.

Stacte.] The Hebrew word signifies something that drops, which some have taken
for Balsom: but the LXX. translate it as we do; and Salmasius has shown that
it is the liquid part of Myrrh (not which slows of it self) which drops from
it, when it is pressed out by Art: See Plin. Exercit. p. 520. The same Fort.
Scacchus c. 8. observes out of Dioscorides, who calls it (...), etc. the most
unctuous part of fresh Myrrh, pressed out with a little Water, c. 74. This was
used in their Perfumes which the Heathen burnt upon their Altars, as appears by
that of Euripides in Troad. where he mentions (...).


Onycha.] The Hebrew word Secheleth is translated by Jonathan, Ceseth; which
the famous Bochartus proves by many Arguments to be ladanum, which was one of
the principal Aromaticks among the Arabians. The Stream of Interpreters indeed
carry it for Onycha, but are not agreed what that is. For some take it for the
Hoof or Claw of an Animal (as Maimonides) others (as Jarchi) for the Root of a
Plant, which is smooth and transparent as the Nail of a Man's Hand, which the
Greeks call Onyx: But there are others, and more numerous, who take it for the
shell of a Fish, in the Fens of India, that are full of Spikenard; upon which
this Fish feeding, it makes the very Shell odoriferous. See Hierozoic. P. II.
Lib. V. cap. ult. He observes also P. I. L. III. c. 1. that there was such a
Shellfish in Babylonia, which was nearer to the Jews than the Indian. The
Greeks called it Onyx from the form of it; and the Hebrews Secheleth from its
color, which was black.

And Galbanum.] That which is sold in our Shops is of an offensive smell; but
there was another in Syria, in the Mount Amanus, which had an excellent Scent.
And therefore, to distinguish it from ordinary Galbanum, there is a word added
to it, as the Vulgar Latin takes it, in which it is called Galbanum boni
odoris. For that Translation joins the next word (which we translate sweet
Spices) unto Galbanum: as if he had said, Aromatic Galbanum.

With pure Frankincense.] It was gathered twice in the year; in the Spring and
in the Autumn: and Pliny tells us, that gathered in the Autumn was the purest
and whitest; with which the other (that was reddish) was not to be compared, L.
XII. c. 14. Every one knows that this was very much used by the Gentiles upon
their Altars.

Of each shall there be a like weight.] This is the common Interpretation of
the Hebrew words; and I will not trouble the Reader with any other. But we have
no certain knowledge what weight this was: for I see no Authority for what the
Hebrew Doctors say, that there was LXX. pound of each of these four Spices. And
they add (which makes all they say of this matter questionable) that there were
also several pounds of Cinnamon, and Cassia, and Crocus; in short of XIII.
several Spices, which Josephus ( L. VI. Haloseos, c. 6.) assirms were in this
Composition. Of which Moses, they say, made in the whole CCCLXVIII. pound; that
is, one pound for every day in the year, and three for the day of Expiation.
And accordingly R. Levi Barzelonita says, the Priests made every year, as much
as would suffice for every day of it: and that the ordinary Priests might make
it, as well as the High Priest, Praecept. CI.

Ver. 35. And thou shall make it a perfume.] Some think the last words of the
foregoing Verse signify, that each sort of Spices was to be pounded, one by
one; and then they are all ordered here to be put together.

A Confection after the art of the Apothecary.] Made with great care, and
according to this Divine Prescription. Thus Plutarch, speaking of the Aromatic
(...) among the Egyptians, which was burnt Morning and Evening on their Altars,
says it was not put together, (...), on any fashion, or as it happened; (...),
etc. but the Sacred Books were read to those who compounded it, when it was
mixed, L. de Isid. and Osiride.

Tempered together.] Both the Chaldee and the LXX. render this mingled; just as
Salt is with any thing upon which it is sprinkled.

Pure.] Without any other mixture.

And holy.] To be used only in the Divine Service. For this was one of the most
ancient ways of worshipping God; the word (...), i. e. Sacrifice (as Porphyry
says L. II.) being derived (...): the first Men making a Fume, by burning
parts of Trees and Shrubs and Seeds and Fruits. And the sweeter their scent
was, the more grateful they fancied the Fume was unto their Gods. So that
though at first they contented themselves with simple Herbs and Plants, and
Moses here prescribes only some few Spices fetched from Foreign Countries, yet
in aftertimes they increased them to a greater number: for that Aromatic
Mixture I mentioned before among the Egyptians, called (...), was a Composition
of sixteen things, which Plutarch reckons up in the forenamed Book. And
Sophocles brings in Clytemnestra (in his Electr. v. 637.) calling for (...),
Fumes of all sort of Seeds to be offered to Apollo, that she might be delivered
from her Terrors.

Ver. 35. And thou shall beat of it very small.] Reduce it to powder.

And put it before the Testimony.] Burn it upon the Altar of Incense, which was
placed before the Ark, as we read v. 6. This seems to be the meaning; and not
that he should put it in a Dish upon the Table, ready to be burnt: for the
Table did not stand before the Ark of the Testimony.

Where I will meet with thee.] See XXIX. 42.

It shall be unto you most holy.] Employed only in the worship of God, before
the most Holy Place.

Ver. 36. And as for the persume which thou shall make, etc.] Or rather, And
the persume which thou shall make, you shall not make to your selves according
to the composition thereof. For any private use; which is imported in these
words, to your selves.

It shall be unto thee holy for the LORD.] Entirely separated to the Divine
Worship; and therefore not to be touched by any but the Priests, and that when
they ministered in the Sanctuary, before the Mercy-seat.

Ver. 38. Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto.] For his own
pleasure. See v. 33. R. Levi of Barcelona has well explained this: No Man was
to make this Composition with the same Spices, and the same weight, and with an
intention to burn it. So he interprets those words, to smell thereto: that is,
to make a Persume with it, by burning it, Praecept. CXI. yet if any Man (as
Maimonides observes) did smell this Perfume, but did not make it, he was not
guilty of being cut off.

Shall even be cut off from his People.] See v. 33. Their opinion is not
improbable, who think by this is meant not only the Excision of the
Transgressor, but of his whole Race; none of which should remain to keep up his
Name in Israel. By which severe threatening, the People were deterred from
profaning these holy Things.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] After all the foregoing
Directions from the XXVth Chapter unto this, (in which, as I said before XXX.
11: one may well think there was some intermission) the LORD proceeded to give
Moses this following Information, to encourage him to go about this work.

Ver. 2. See, I have called.] Be not solicitous where thou shall find Workmen,
who have skill enough to make all the things which I have commanded; for I have
taken care of that; and pitched upon one, who shall be the chief Director of the
whole business.

By name.] Made a particular choice of one Man above all others, whom I have
designed for this Work. It appears by other places, that this Phrase (to call
him by name) gives Bazaleel the pre-eminence above all other Artisicers. See
XXXIII. 12, 17. where he says the same of Moses; and XLV Isa. 3. where he
says it of Cyrus.

Bazaleel the son of Uri.] See 1 Chronicles. II. 18, 19, 20. Though he was
particularly chosen and sitted for this Work; yet there was another joined with
him to be his Assistant, v. 6. Which two did not do all the Work with their own
Hands (as appears from XXVIII. 3. where he speaks of many Persons endowed with
extraordinary Skill) but they were the principal Artists, and the chief
Directors and Overseers of the Work. And therefore after the mention of
Aholiab, v. 6. he speaks also of others into whose hearts he had put Wisdom, to
do all that he commanded.

The son of Hur, of the Tribe of Judah.] This Hur is thought by some to have
been the Husband of Miriam, the Sister of Moses. See XVII. 10. And then the
observation of Abarbinel is not impertinent, that God did the more particularly
declare his choice of Bezaleel, and Moses the more punctually remember it, to
take away all Exceptions from the Israelites; who might have been apt to think
that Moses had too much regard to his own Kindred, if he had appointed him to
be the chief Governor of this Work, without the special Call of God unto it.
For thus they might have cavilled (as some of them did afterward, in part) he
makes himself King, and Aaron his Brother High Priest; and now delivers into
the Hands of his Nephew all the Oblations and Collections that have been made
for the Tabernacle. For which there could be no color, after God had solemnly
declared, it was done by his special Order. He adds also (which is not so
justifiable) that there was a strife among the Israelites, who should undertake
this Work; for which, though Moses knew the fitness of Bezaleel, yet he durst
not mention him, for fear they should think him partial; till God commanded
him, saying, Do not regard what the People say, for thou, and they all, shall
see, that he is chosen by me, and not by thee, unto this Work; for I will give
him extraordinary Wisdom, etc.

Ver. 3. And I have filled him with the Spirit of God.] i. e. With an excellent
Spirit; or with Divine Inspiration. Which was but necessary; because the
Hebrews, being long kept in slavery under the Egyptians, cannot be supposed to
have been bred up to the Learning of those ingenious Arts mentioned in the next
Verses. For they were acquainted only with the making of Bricks, during that
heavy Servitude; and therefore God instructed several Men, particularly
Bezaleel, in those Arts which they had no Master to teach them, and which their
natural Genius, though never so great, could not attain, especially on a
sudden, without Inspiration.

In wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge.] Here Wisdom, Understanding
and Knowledge, do not signify as they do in other places, particularly in the
Proverbs, and in XI Isaiah 2. (where the Messiah is said to be filled with the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and the Spirit of Knowledge) but skill in
the Arts of Ingraving, and Setting Jewels, and Weaving, and Needlework, etc.
How Wisdom differs from Understanding and from Knowledge is not much material;
they may be many words used only to express their Skill in all sorts of Arts,
that might make them accomplished Workmen, as it follows in the later end of
the Verse, to work in all manner of Workmanship. They that would see how the
Hebrews distinguish them, may look into Paulus Fagius upon the place, or
Buxtorf's Historia Arcae, c. 2. n. 3.

Ver. 4. To devise cunning works, etc.] There are two things required in an
excellent Artist; good Invention, and Ability to do what he has contrived. The
first of these seem to be intended in this Verse; and the other in the next:
together with a dexterity to teach other Artificers, who were to be employed
under Bezaleel and Aholiab.

Ver. 5. And in cutting of stone, etc.] There were no Stones employed about the
Tabernacle; and therefore this must be meant of cutting and setting the
precious Stones mentioned Chap. XXVIII. and in graving on them what God
commanded, v. 11, 21.

And in carving of Timber.] We do not read in the foregoing Chapters, of any
carved Work about the Tabernacle; and therefore this word may better be rendered
(as it is in the beginning of the Verse) cutting, rather than carving Timber.
For it signifies, in general, doing all the Work of Carpenters and Joyners.

To work in all manner of Workmanship.] That was necessary for the making of
every thing God had commanded.

Ver. 6. And I, behold, I have given with him.] Lest Moses should think one
principal Contriver and Director not to be sufficient, God joins another with
him.

Aholiab of the Tribe of Dan.] It is observed by R. Bechai, that God chose one
out of the lowest Tribe (for so they accounted that of Dan) as well as one out
of the chief, which was Judah: that Bezaleel, says he, might not be lifted up
with vain Conceit; for great and small are equal before God. And he truly
observes, that one of the same Tribe, of Dan, by the Mothers side, was the most
skilful Person that could be found, for the Building of the Temple by Solomon,
2 Chronicles. II. 14.

And in the hearts of all that are wise-hearted, I have put wisdom.] That is,
God endued the Minds of all ingenious Persons among them, with an extraordinary
Skill; which they never learnt, either by their own study or any Master, but
had it by an inspiration from above. There were several, no doubt, who had a
natural Genius to such Arts as were necessary in this Work; but they could not,
by their own Industry, have attained such Skill as God bestowed on them; at
least not so soon, as to go immediately about the building of the Tabernacle,
and all things belonging to it.

That they may make all that I have commanded thee.] Not to imitate the
Egyptian Contrivances, as some have fancied (for which no such great Skill, one
would think, was necessary) but to make all exactly according to the Model
which Moses had seen in the Mount, and he described to them: which could not
have been done without God's extraordinary Assistance.

Ver. 7. The Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the Ark of the Testimony,
etc.] These things are here mentioned, according to the order of Nature: which
is first to build an House, and then to provide its Furniture. And it is
observable, that there was but one House, or Tabernacle, one Ark, and one
Altar, either for Sacrifice, or Incense, to preserve in their Minds the belief
of the Unity of God: contrary to the Gentiles, who had their Temples and Altars
every where, and each Family its domestic Gods, and particular Superstitions.

Ver. 8. The pure Candlestick.] It is hard to tell why this is particularly
called pure, unless it be because it was entirely of pure Gold, (XXV. 31.)
which the Table, and Altar of Incense were not; for they were only overlaid
with pure Gold, XXV. 24. XXX. 3. Some have thought that it is called pure,
because no Blood was ever sprinkled upon it, as there was on the Altar of
Incense: but this is not a good reason, for we do not find there was any
sprinkled on the Table.

Ver. 9. The Altar of Burnt-offering, etc.] Concerning this and the Laver he
had received orders XXVII. 1. XXX. 17.

Ver. 10. And the Clothes of Service.] Wherewith the Ark, and the Table, and
the Candlestick, and the golden Altar were covered (IV Numb. 6, 7, 9, 11, etc.)
when the Camp removed.

The holy Garments for Aaron, etc.] Which are ordered Chap. XXVIII.

Ver. 11. And the anointing Oil and sweet Incense, etc.] These was ordered in
the foregoing Chapter, v. 23, 34.

Ver. 12. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] After he had delivered him
all the foregoing Orders, about the Tabernacle, its Furniture, and the Workmen
to be employed in making them; he added what follows,

Ver. 13. Speak unto the Children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths shall
ye keep.] This has been mentioned thrice already, see XVI. 23. XX. 8. XXIII.
12. but here seems to be repeated again, upon this special occasion; that they
might not think this Sacred Work would warrant them to break the Sabbath. On
which he bids Moses tell them, they must not do this Work, no more than any
other: For the Tabernacle was built for the Service of God, which was
principally performed upon this day. And he uses a word of the Plural Number,
not to signify any other Sabbath but this; which recurring so often as once in
seven days, he might well admonish them to keep his Sabbaths. And so the
Apostle plainly speaks, II Coloss. 16.

For it is a sign between me and you.] This plainly shows he speaks of the
weekly Sabbath; the observation of which testified to all the World, what God
they worshipped: as all Nations signified, by their Rites and Ceremonies, what
their Gods were to whom their Services were paid. Now the Israelites stood in a
double relation to God; as his Creatures, and as those who were redeemed by him
from the Egyptian Bondage: In both which regards the Sabbath was a Sign or a
Token between him and them. For by observing one day in seven, after six days
labor, they signified that they worshipped the Creator of the World; who in
six days made all things, and then rested: and by observing such a seventh day
(See XVI. 5.) after six days labor, rather than any other, they signified they
owned him to be their Deliverer from Egyptian Slavery. This is opened
excellently by our Mr. Mede, Discourse XV. p. 73, 74.

Throughout your Generations.] During this Polity which God now establishes
among you.

That ye may know that I am the LORD that does sanctify you.] To be my
peculiar People, by observing this Solemnity. For it was peculiarly enjoined to
them, and to no other Nation; and was looked upon as a singular Benefit
conferred on them above all People; as appears by the devout Acknowledgment
Nehemiah makes of this, among the rest of the Divine Favors to them, That he
made known unto them his holy Sabbath, IX. 14. and see XX Ezekiel. 11, 12.

Ver. 14. Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore.] Since it is such a
distinguishing Mark, be the more careful to observe it.

For it is holy unto you.] This depends upon what was said in the Conclusion of
the foregoing Verse, that hereby they were sanctified, or separated to God as a
peculiar People; and therefore in all reason should look upon this as an holy
day.

Every one that desileth it, shall surely be put to death.] If there were
credible Witnesses of his Profanation.

For whosoever does any work thereon.] This was to defile, or profane it.

That Soul shall be cut off from amongst his People.] God seems to threaten,
that he himself would shorten his days, if the Judges, for want of Witnesses,
could not punish him. So Eliah ben Moseh (one of those whom the Jews call
Karaites) most excellently expounds this, and all the rest of the Punishments,
threatened to the Violation of this Precept; which Mr. Seldom has given us out
of a MS. L. I. de Synedris, c. 6. The sense is this, in short; He that violates
a Negative Precept, as they call it, either does it secretly, which is most
frequent; or openly, which happens seldom: unless a Man be one of those
profligate Wretches whom we call Apostates. Now him that secretly brake the
Sabbath, the Scripture threatens with cutting off, viz. by the hand of God,
according to what is written here in this place. In like manner incestuous and
unlawful Conjunctions are threatened, XVIII Lev. 29. because they were wont to
be committed secretly. But if any Man did any Work openly on the Sabbath, so
that there were Witnesses of it, he was to be stoned, according to what is said
XV Numb. 35. Though if he did it out of mistake, either secretly or openly, he
was only to bring a Sacrifice for his Error: And if he offended against any of
the Decrees of the Wisemen about the Sabbath, he was to be beaten. Or if there
was no Court of Judgment in the place (as now, in their present Condition) then
all such Transgressors were left to God to punish them, of whatsoever sort they
were.

Ver. 15. Six days may work be done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest,
holy to the LORD.] So it is called also XXXV. 2. and XXIII Lev. 3. And so the
Sabbath wherein the Land rested, is likewise called XXV Lev. 4. But the Hebrew
words Schabbat Schabbaton (Sabbath of Rest) properly signifies Sabbath above
all Sabbaths, i. e. the greatest Sabbath; on which a rest was to be most
punctually observed from all manner of Work: which the Jews, as de Dieu notes,
call the weighty Sabbath; as if other days of rest were but light in comparison
with this. According to that saying of R. Josee, Great is Circumcision, because
the weighty Sabbath gives place to it; that is, admits of this Work, though the
Rest on this Sabbath be so very great.

Shall surely be put to death.] As an Idolater, who did not acknowledge the
Creator of the World. See before v. 14.

Ver. 16. Wherefore the Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe
the Sabbath throughout their Generation, for a perpetual Covenant.] The most
litteral Interpretation of this Verse, seems to me to be that of Lud. de Dieu,
The Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, by making the Sabbath a
perpetual Covenant throughout their Generations. That is, by never suffering it
to be interrupted, they made it a perpetual Covenant between God and them
throughout all Ages.

Ver. 17. It is a sign between me and the Children of Israel for ever.] A Badge
and Livery that they were the Servants of the most High, who made the Heavens
and Earth. A Mark of their being devoted to him, and continuing in Covenant
with him, no less than Circumcision.

For in six days the LORD made Heaven and Earth.] In memory of which the
Sabbath was first instituted; to preserve perpetually, and establish that most
precious History and Doctrine of the Creation of the World, as Maimonides
speaks, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 43.

And on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.] Delighted in the
Contemplation of all his Works, which he saw were very good, I Genesis 31. The
same Maimonides observes that the word jinnaphash (which we translate was
refreshed) comes from nephesh, which, among other things, signifies the
intention of the Mind, and the Will: and therefore the sense of this Phrase is,
All the Will of God was perfected and brought to a Conclusion; his whole good
Pleasure was absolutely finished on the seventh day, More Nevoch. P. I. c. 67.

Ver. 18. And he gave unto Moses, when he made an end of communing with him
upon Mount Sinai.] When he dismissed him, having said all that is before
related during his forty days stay with him in the Mount, he delivered unto him
two Tables of Testimony, to carry down with him to the People.

Two Tables of Testimony.] Wherein God testified to them his Mind and Will, in
the principal things which concerned their Duty. See XVI. 34.

Tables of stone.] That what was written upon them might be more durable. There
is no ground to think that these Tables were made of some precious Stone (as
the Author of the Book Cosri, and other Jews fancy) for the word Eben in the
Hebrew simply signifies any sort of Stone; and is wont to have some other
joined to it, when precious Stones are meant, as in 2 Samuel XII. 30. 1 Kings X.
2. 2 Chronicles. III. 6.

Written with the finger of God.] i. e. By God himself. Just as the Heavens,
says Maimonides, are said to be the work of his fingers, VIII Psalm. 4. which
he interprets in another place (XXXIII. 6.) By the word of the LORD were the
Heavens made. Therefore written by the singer of God, is as much, says he, as
by the word; that is, the Will and good Pleasure of God, More Nevoch. P. I. c.
66. In short, this Phrase signifies, that God employed neither Moses, nor any
other Instrument in this Writing, but it was done by his own powerful
Operation. For all things that we do, being wrought by our hands and our
fingers, these words are used to express God's power. See XXXII. 16.

This was a thing so notorious in ancient times, and so much believed by those,
who were not Jews, that many other Nations pretended to the like Divine
Writings, that they might gain the greater Authority to their Laws. Thus the
Brachmans report in their Histories, That the Book of their Law (which they
call Caster) was delivered by God to Bremavius, upon a Mount in a Cloud: and
that God gave also another Book of Laws to Brammon, in the first Age of the
World. The Persians say the same of those of Zoroaster; and the Getes of
Xamolxis. Nay, the Brachmans have a Decalogue like this of Moses, and accurate
Interpretations of it, in which they say there is this Prophecy, That one day
there shall be one Law alone throughout the World. This evidently shows how
well the World was anciently acquainted with these Books of Moses, and what a
high esteem they had of them. See Huetius L. II. Alnetan. Quaest. c. 12. n. 19.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 1. AND when the People.] Not the whole Body of the Congregation; but so
many of them, that the rest durst not appear to oppose their desires.

Saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the Mount.] The Jews fancy that he
stayed beyond the time that he had appointed for his return to them. But that
is not likely; for he himself was not told how long God would detain him there.
See XXIV. 14. The meaning therefore is, that he stayed longer than they
expected; so that they did not know what to think of it. And having as yet
received no Directions about the Service of God, for which they were called out
of Egypt (VII. 16. and other places) they thought it was time to desire Aaron
to set about it, in such a way as other People served their Gods.

The people gathered themselves together unto Aaron.] They applied themselves
to him, as being left by Moses, to be the chief Director and Governor of
Affairs, together with Hur during his absence, XXIV. 14. And according to the
Computation made concerning the time of his going up into the Mount, (See XXIV.
18.) this happened upon the fifteenth of our July; which Month the Hebrews call
Tamuz.

And said unto him, Up.] One cannot think that they spoke thus to him, at the
very first word; but other Discourse passed before this: unto which Aaron, in
all probability, making some difficulty to consent, and persuading them not to
persist in their Demand, they would not be denied any longer, but said in a
seditious manner, Up, make no further delay, for we will have what we desire.

Make us Gods.] Or rather, make us a God: for so Nehemiah expresses it in the
Singular Number, IX. 18. and so Elohim is often translated, XX Genesis 13. XXXV.
7, etc. For their meaning was, Make us a sacred Symbol or Sign, as other
Nations have, that may represent God in a visible manner to us. So the Jews
expound it in Pirke Elieser, c. 45. They said to Aaron, the Egyptians extol
their Gods, they sing and chant before them; for they behold them with their
eyes. Make us such Gods as theirs are, that we may see them before us. And so
R. Jehudah in the Book Cosri, P. I. Sect. 97. They desired a sensible Object of
Divine Worship to be set before them; not with an intention to deny God, who
brought them out of Egypt: but that something in the place of God might stand
before them, when they declared his wonderful Works. Such, no doubt, was their
meaning; for they could not be so senseless as to imagine the true God could be
made by a Man; or that an Image could go before them (as it here follows) which
may have feet, but cannot walk, as the Psalmist speaks. And therefore Eben-Ezra
judiciously interprets it, Some Corporeal Image in which God may reside.

Which shall go before us.] Conduct us through the Wilderness. God himself in a
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, hitherto went before them: but that Cloud now
covering the Mount where Moses was, and not stirring at all from thence, they
imagined, perhaps, that Moses being lost, it would no longer lead them as it
had done.

For as for this Moses, etc.] This does not seem to be the Language of those
who had any regard to him.

We wot not what is become of him.] They thought, perhaps, that he was consumed
in the Mount, by the Fire which shone from the Face of God, as Jonathan
paraphrases it. Greg. Nyssens Reflection upon this Demand of the People is very
natural; That they were like Schoolboys, who in the absence of their Master,
were carried (...), with senseless impetuous Motions into Rudeness and Disorder,
p. 183. de Vita Mosis. For there were many among them who were infected with
the Egyptian Idolatry, as we learn from XXIV Josh. 14. XX Ezekiel. 7, 8. XXIII. 3,
8. And therefore hankering after that way of Worship by Images, which they had
learnt there, they took this opportunity to desire a visible Representation of
God among them, as the Egyptians had. And so St. Stephen looks upon this as a
turning back in their hearts unto Egypt, VII Acts 39, etc.

Ver. 2. And Aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings, etc.] This
confirms what I said, that there was some debate about this matter, before they
spoke those words to him v. 1. Up, make us Gods, etc. For it is not credible
that Aaron would immediately consent to so foul a Fact as this, without the
least Argument against it. Which is so unlikely, that the Jews have devised
this Tale; That Hur rebuked them in his Presence, the People fell upon him and
killed him: which affrighted Aaron into a speedy Compliance.

The golden earrings.] These, it is probable, were some of the Jewels which
they borrowed of the Egyptians, XII. 35. and possibly might have worn
superstitiously, as I observed XXXV Genesis 5. they did very anciently. There are
those who think Aaron hoped they would not have easily parted with these; and
so their Design might have been broken.

From the ears of your Wives, of your Sons, and your Daughters.] Men wore these
Ornaments in the Eastern Countries, as well as Women; as we find in the story
of the Ishmaelite and Midianite Soldiers, VIII Judge. 24. and Pliny L. XI. c.
31. In Orient quidem and viris aurum eo loci, etc. In the East it is esteemed
an Ornament for Men to wear Gold in that place; speaking of their Ears. See
Bochart. Hierozoic. P. I. L. I. c. 34.

Ver. 3. And all the People.] All that were engaged in this Design; who were so
many (as I said v. 1.) that the rest it is likely durst not oppose it.

Broke off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them to
Aaron.] So zealous is Superstition; which prevails over Pride and Covetousness.

Ver. 4. And he received them at their hands.] They seem to have presented them
as an Offering, toward the making of a Representation of God; wherein every
one of them might have an Interest: and accordingly Aaron accepted them.

And fashioned it with a graving tool.] The Hebrew word cheret (which we
translate graving Tool) is used for a writing Pen, VIII Isa. 1. and for a
crisping Pin, which Women used about their Hair, III Isa. 22. And therefore
Interpreters take it here for an Instrument of Engraving. And some think that
Aaron made such marks with it in this Calf, as there were in the Egyptian Apis:
which was a Cow that had a Spot on her right side like a Crescent (as some
Writers say, though Herodotus say otherwise, and the marks are variously
reported. See Pignorius in his Mensa Isiaca, p. 18, etc.) and a square white
spot in the forehead. But others think it more likely, that the Calf coming
rough out of the Mould, Aaron only polished it with a proper Tool. For though
Apis was in great honor among the Egyptians, yet it was a living Cow, and not
the Image of one, which they had in such Veneration. Therefore Mr. Seldom (in
his Syntagma I. de Diis Syris, c. 4.) takes it to be more probable, that this
golden Calf, or Ox, or Bullock (for so the Psalmist differently calls it, CVI.
19, 20.) was made in imitation of that golden Ox that represented Osiris; which
was very famous among the Egyptians. Who had a mighty Veneration for the River
Nile, called in Hebrew Sichor (from whence came Siris) and for the Dog Star
(called Siris likewise) at whose rising that River began to swell; and for the
Sun (which was principally meant by this Name) to whom both the Bull at
Heliopolis, and the Ox at Memphis were Consecrated, as Macrobius tells us L. I.
Saturnal, c. 21. But though all this be very ingenious, yet the truth of it may
be well questioned, as I shall show presently; when I have noted that this
Translation, fashioned it with a graving Tool, is not so agreeable to what here
follows, as another which the Hebrew words will as well bear.

After he had made it a molten Calf.] The words in the Hebrew are, and he made
it, etc. we translate them after, etc. to make this agree with what goes before
according to our Translation, he fashioned it with a graving Tool: which may as
literally be translated he bound them up in a bag. For we find the word
jatzar, which we here translate fashioned, to have the signification also of
binding or tying up: and cheret in the Plural Number to signify a bag, 2 Kings
V. 23. And thus the Prophet Isaiah (as Bochart observes) describes the making
of Images, XLVI. 6. they lavish Gold out of the Bag, and they make it a God.
Which agrees with what is here said of Aaron, He received the Earrings, and
put them in a Bag, and then having made a Mold, cast them into it, and made a
golden Calf. See v. 24.

A molten Calf.] So he calls it, because it was no bigger than a Calf, though
the Head was like an Ox: and therefore, as I observed before, so called by the
Psalmist. What moved Aaron to represent God in this sigure, is hard to resolve.
Most think he imitated the Egyptians, among whom he had long lived: which seems
not to me at all likely, since he had seen the Judgment that God executed
against all their Gods, XII. 12. yet so great a Man as J. Gerh. Vossius has
taken a great deal of pains to prove, that Joseph was adored by them under the
Name of Apis and Serapis: and that his Symbol was an Ox. This he has labored
to support by many ingenious Conjectures. But it is not likely, if he were thus
publicly honored as a God, that a King should arise who knew not Joseph; i.
e. had no regard to him, I Exodus 8. and another succeed him, who endeavored to
ruin all his Kindred. The Worship of Serapis also was not so ancient; for
Herodotus says not a word of it, nor any Body else till the time of Alexander
the Great; and many Authors say it was brought into Egypt out of Pontus by
Ptolomy: See Bochartus in his Hierozoic. P. I. p. 338. And though Apis was more
ancient, yet not of such antiquity as Moses, as a very learned Person of our
own (Dr. Tenison, now Archbishop of Canterbury) has shown in his Book of
Idolatry, Chap. VI. Part 4, 5, etc. And as for Osiris, both Plutarch and Strabo
say he was the same with Apis: which was not then known, as I have said, in
Egypt, no more than Typhus or Typhon, whom Philo thinks to be here intended;
but was certainly a later Invention, and as Bochartus imagines, represented
Moses himself, though very much disguised.

Cuperus indeed has made it probable (in his Harpocrates, p. 83, etc.) that
there was a Serapis worshipped in Egypt, before that brought out of Pontus: But
whether it be so or no, I do not take it to be at all material, because it is
not likely that Aaron would make such a Representation of the Divinity, as was
in use among them from whose Slavery God had lately delivered them. For how
could he think the LORD, to whom he proclaimed a Feast, would be pleased to be
represented by any of those Idols, on whom, as I said before, he had executed
Judgment, at their departure out of Egypt? Or what reason is there to think the
Israelites themselves could be inclined to think their God to be like any
thing, which that People worshipped, who abhorred the Sacrifices which the God
of Israel required? Their Conjecture seems to me far more likely, who think
that Aaron, in making this Calf, took his pattern from some part of the
SCHECHINAH which appeared to him and the Elders of Israel (when they eat before
God, XXIV. 10.) attended with the Angels: Some of which called Cherubim, they
think appeared with the faces of Oxen. But as there is no mention in that place
of Cherubims, nor of the Angels appearing in any shape whatsoever; and Moses
expressly says, the Israelites saw no manner of Similitude on the day when the
LORD spoke to them in Horeb, IV Deuteronomy. 15. (and therefore Aaron and the Elders,
in all probability saw none afterward) so I think there is no evidence that the
heavenly Ministers at any time appeared in this shape, till the SCHECHINAH
departed from the Temple, in the days of Ezekiel. See XXV. 18, 20.

After all this considered, Aaron seems to me to have chosen an Ox to be the
Symbol of the Divine Presence, in hope the People would never be so sottish as
to worship it; but only be put in mind by it of the Divine Power, which was
hereby represented. For an Oxes head was anciently an Emblem of Strength, and
Horns a common sign of Kingly Power. So they were among the Phoenicians (as
Pignorius observes in his Mensa Isiaca, p. 15. out of Eusebius his Praepar.
Evang. L. I. cap. ult.) and among the Egyptians (as Diodorus Siculus relates L.
I.) and among the Romans, as appears by that famous story of Genucius Cipus (in
Val. Maximus L. V. c. 6.) who when he was Praetor had Horns come out of his
Head on a sudden, as he was going out of the City to the Wars: whereupon he was
told, Regem eum fore, si in Vrbem revertisset, That he should be a King, if he
returned into the City. And something like it is related by Julius Capitolinus
concerning Clodius Albinus, at whose Birth a Cow brought forth a Calf with
purple Horns, which they looked upon as signum Imperij, a Token of Empire. Which
made the ancient Fathers, perhaps, when they spoke of this Calf, or Ox of
Aarons, mention only its Head. For so does Tertullian ( L. ad versus Judaeos c.
1.) cum processisset eis bubulum caput: and St. Cyprian, Lactantius, St.
Hierom, St. Ambrose, and others: Not because they thought Aaron made only the
Head; but because this was the principal part whereby God was represented.

And they said.] The People cried out aloud.

These be thy Gods, O Israel.] Or, as Nehemiah expresses it, IX. 18. This is
thy God, etc. the Image or Symbol of the Divine Majesty: or as Abulensis
interprets it, His Divine Virtue resideth in this golden Body. The Plural
Number is commonly used for the Singular, especially when God is spoken of, as
I observed before, XX Genesis 13. XXXV. 7. 2 Samuel VII. 23.

Which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.] This shows they looked upon
this Ox, only as a Representation of the Almighty LORD their God; for it being
but newly made, they could not imagine they were brought by it from the
Egyptian Slavery, but by his Power, which perhaps they fancied now resided in
it.

Ver. 5. And when Aaron saw it, he built an Altar before it.] As at the Peoples
request he made it, so he seeing them receive it with such applause, presently
Consecrated it; by building an Altar, offering Sacrifices, and keeping a solemn
Feast in its honor.

And Aaron made proclamation.] Caused it to be publicly proclaimed throughout
the Host; that every one might have notice of the Solemnity.

And said, to morrow is a Feast.] Which was a part of Worship ordained by his
Authority.

To the LORD.] Not to this Ox, but to the Creator of the World, whom they
worshipped in this Image. Notwithstanding which, this was no better than an
Idol, VII Acts 41. and they gross Idolaters, CVI Psalm. 19, 20. 1 Cor. X. 7.
Some think indeed, that Moses being gone, and, as they imagined, either burnt
up or famished, they desired this Representation of God to go before them and
direct them, as a kind of Teraphim: but God allowed no such visible sign to be
made of his Presence with them, which he knew would in a short time have their
Adoration.

Ver. 6. And they rose up early on the morrow.] The next day, which was the
XVIth of our July, they kept their Festival. And to show their Devotion, they
began betime in the Morning, and seem not to have staid for Aaron: but, as it
follows, offered Sacrifices themselves.

And offered Burnt-offerings.] Which always preceded others. See XVIII. 12.
XXIV. 5. where I observed that whole Burnt-offerings were entirely consumed on
the Altar being wholly Gods.

And brought Peace Offerings.] This intimates that some Persons received what
they brought; and perhaps they were the young men mentioned XXIV. 5. where I
noted also that of Peace Offerings the People that brought them had a share,
that they might Feast with God; and they invited their Friends likewise to
Feast with them. There is no mention either here, or in the other places, of
Sin Offerings: whereof the Priests had a part, but not the People.

And the People sat down to eat and to drink.] Upon the Sacrifices of
Peace Offerings; whereof the People, as I said, had their part: and by
partaking of it, had fellowship with the Idol, to whom they were offered, as
the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. X. 20, 21. Thus the Egyptians kept a (...) at the
Feast of Apis; in imitation rather of the Israelites, than otherwise.

It may be fit here to note, That this Custom of Sacrificing, and also of
feasting on the Sacrifice, in token of their Communion with him, to whom the
Sacrifice was offered, was so very ancient, that it is not easy to believe the
observation of St. Chrysostom to be true, That God gave no Commandment about
Sacrifices, till after this Sin of worshipping the golden Calf. When seeing
their proneness to offer such Sacrifices, he thought sit to ordain them
himself, and direct them to their right Object. Much less is it true, that
before this (...), we not find any where the Name of Sacrifice (as he speaks
Homil. XVII. upon Acts VII.) no not with the qualification of Grotius, who says
(upon XV Exodus 26.) that there was no Law about Sacrifices, except that of the
Passover, till after they had committed Idolatry. For besides that there is an
order how to make an Altar, on which to Sacrifice their Burnt-offerings (XX.
24.) which supposes God's intention about them; and the building of an Altar
and actual Sacrifice upon it, at the Sealing of the Covenant between God and
Israel, XXIV. 4, 5, etc. (which surely was not without God's command) there is
an whole Chapter in this Book about Sacrifices at the Consecration of Aaron and
his Sons, before this sin was committed, Chap. XXIX. and particular Directions
given in the 38th and 39th Verses of that Chapter, about the daily
Burnt-offering. I omit what might be said concerning the Oblation of Sacrifices
from the beginning of the World, which it is hard to believe was without a
Divine Institution. St. Hierom's words therefore are also too large, who says,
in his Commentaries upon XX Ezekiel. that the Israelites received only the
Decalogue before this Offense of the Calf: after which God gave them
multiplices Legis Ceremonias, abundance of Legal Ceremonies. All that can be
justly said in this matter, is, That Moses had not yet delivered to them the
Commands beforementioned, which God had given him; and that they had received
but a few Commands about Sacrifices, till after this sin: when the Precepts
were multiplied, that they might upon all occasions offer Sacrifice to God, and
not to Demons, as they were inclined to do. The daily Burnt-offerings were
appointed before (as I said) though not delivered to them; and so was the
Sin-offering for the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, and the Altar, XXIX.
36, etc. But the Sin-offering for particular Persons, and for the whole
Congregation of Israel, and the great variety of Sacrifices, with the manner of
them, were not yet prescribed; and perhaps were ordained upon this occasion, to
preserve them from Idolatry; though not merely for that, there being respect in
them to the great Sacrifice of Christ, especially in that Sacrifice upon the
Day of Expiation. But in general, it may be reasonably thought that if they had
not been perverse, they might have been left more at liberty, to do these
things at pleasure, according to the Law of Nature; and they might perhaps have
been permitted to offer Sacrifices every where, as the Patriarchs did, though
there is no certainty of such Speculations.

And rose up to play.] So God commanded at their Festivities; and when they
offered solemn Sacrifices to rejoice before him, XII Deuteronomy. 6, 7. XVI. 11. as
David did before the Ark, after he had sacrificed Oxen and Fatlings, 2 Samuel VI.
13, 14, 15, 16. Thus they now expressed their Joy, by Music, and Dancing, and
Songs, and such like tokens of Mirth, which was wont to be very great upon
their Feasts. See v. 18. There are those, who think, that after they had eaten
of the Sacrifices to the Idol, and drunk liberally, they committed Fornication,
after the manner of Heathen Worshippers. Thus Tertullian expounds this Phrase
L. de Jejunio, cap. 6. Intellige Scripturae verecundiam; the Scripture modestly
expresses their lewd filthiness. And so this very word which we translate here
play, is used by Potipher's Wife, XXXIX Genesis 17. the Hebrew Servant came in, to
mock me, i. e. to violate my Chastity. So that the Israelites did now, as they
did afterward when they worshipped Peor, XXV Numb. 1, 2. And the truth is,
these Sacrifical Feasts, were turned among the Gentiles into Drunkenness and
Lasciviousness, which are wont to be Companions: insomuch that the ancient
Greeks, even Aristotle himself, as Athenaeus tells us, ( L. II.) derived the
(...) to be drunk, from (...), after the Sacrifice; when they were wont to
drink very largely. And it is also true, that nothing enticed Men to Idolatry,
more than these filthy Pleasures, which were a part of that Worship: yet I
think it is not credible, that the Israelites at the very Dedication of their
Idol, when they pretended much Religion, fell into such foul practices, which
were not at first committed among the Heathen. Nor is there any signification
of it in this story; but only of their singing and dancing, v. 18, 19.
(accompanied, it is likely, with Music) which Philo indeed calls (...),
unseemly Dances; but that was only, I suppose, because they were in honor of a
Calf. Nor did the Gentiles themselves, as I said, run at first into such excess
of Riot, as Athenaeus observes L. VIII. Deipnosoph. where in the Conclusion of
it, he describes all the City full of the noise of Pipes, and Cymbals, and
Drums, and the voice of those that sung in a great Festival; and thence takes
occasion to remember, that the Ancients observing what a great inclination
People had to Pleasure, took care they might enjoy it (...), orderly and
decently, by setting apart certain Times to entertain them with it. When in the
first place they Sacrificed to their Gods, and then were left to take their
Ease: that every one believing the Gods came to their Sacrifices, (...), might
behave themselves at such Meetings, with Modesty and Reverence. For we are
ashamed, says he, to speak or do any thing unseemly before a grave Person: and
therefore supposing the Gods to be nigh them, (...), they passed their Festival
days, in ancient times, decently and soberly. And so he proceeds to show how
much the World was altered in his time, when nothing but mad revelling was to
be seen on such occasions. He observes it also as a sign of the ancient modesty
at these Feasts, that they did not (...) lie along, (...), but they sat down to
eat and drink, as the Israelites here did.

Ver. 7. And the LORD said unto Moses, go get thee down.] He had dismissed him
before, having done communing with him, XXXI. 18. and now sends him away from
the Mount in some haste, at the end of the XL days mentioned XXIV. ult.

For thy People, which thou broughtest out of Egypt.] These words are generally
looked upon, as God's abandoning the Israelites, and disowning them to be his
People. But then, they would not have been Moses his People neither, but
utterly destroyed ( v. 10.) Therefore the true meaning is explained by St.
Stephen, who calls Moses their (...), Deliverer, VII Acts 35. because by his
hand God redeemed them; and in that regard they became his People.

Have corrupted themselves.] He does not mention Aaron, though he was very
angry with him also, IX Deuteronomy. 20. because the People were the beginners of the
Revolt, and he complied with them out of fear.

Ver. 8. They have turned aside quickly out of the way, which I commanded
them.] It was not much above six Weeks since they heard God charge them, in a
terrible manner, not to worship any Image, XX. 4. and they solemnly promised to
do whatsoever Moses commanded them from God, v. 19. immediately after which,
this Command is in a peculiar manner repeated v. 23. Ye shall not make with me
Gods of Silver, neither shall ye make unto you Gods of Gold. Which, with all
the rest of his Judgments, they covenanted also to observe, XXIV. 3, 8. And
therefore such a speedy Revolt, from such Obligations, made their Crime
exceeding heinous.

They have made them a golden Calf.] For what Aaron did was at their
instigation.

And have worshipped it.] By kissing it (says R. Elieser in his Pirke, cap.
45.) and bowing down to it; and then offering Sacrifice to it (as it here
follows) and acknowledging it to be their Conductor out of the Land of Egypt.

Ver. 9. And the LORD said unto Moses.] He added this further, before he went
down from the Mount.

I have seen this People.] Long observed their disposition.

And behold, it is a stiff-necked People.] This Character of them is repeated
XXXIII. 3, 5. XXXIV. 9. being a Metaphor from untamed Heifers, who draw their
Necks and Shoulders back when they are put under the Yoke. The Prophet Isaiah
alludes to this, when he says of this People, XLVIII. 4. Thy Neck is an iron
sinew, which would not bend. And Jeremiah V. 5. where he says the great Men
had broken the Yoke, and burst the Bonds.

Ver. 10. Now therefore let me alone.] Do not interpose in their behalf, with
thy Prayers and Deprecations for them.

That my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them.] That the
just indignation I have conceived against them, may proceed to punish them with
utter destruction.

And I will make of thee a great Nation.] Or, I will set thee over a great
Nation; make the Prince of a mightier Nation than they (as the words are XIV
Numb. 12.) for so the word Asah (to make) signifies, 1 Samuel XII. 6. where we
translate it, advanced Moses and Aaron. Which seems to be the meaning here,
because Moses urges v. 13. the Promise made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as if
that would not be made good if the People were all destroyed. Whereas there
would have been no danger of that, if God had made a great Nation to spring
from Moses, who was of their Seed.

Ver. 11. And Moses besought the LORD.] The Hebrew word Challah, from whence
comes Vaichall (which we translate besought) importing something of Sickness
and Infirmity; denotes that Moses besought the LORD with much earnestness, and
great agony of Mind.

His God.] He hoped he had not lost his Interest in God, which the People had
justly forfeited.

And said, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people.] There was great
reason for this high displeasure against them, which God threatened v. 10. and
Moses himself was not only angry, but his Anger waxed hot, v. 19. yet he hoped
other Reasons would move the Divine Mercy to moderate his Anger; that is, not
to punish them so severely as they deserved.

Which thou have brought out of the Land of Egypt, with great power and with a
mighty hand.] This is one ground of hope, That God would not on a sudden
destroy what he had employed so much Power to preserve.

Ver. 12. Wherefore should the Egyptians say, for mischief did he bring them
out.] This is another reason, that the Egyptians might not be led into a
misbelief, or confirmed in their infidelity.

To slay them in the Mountains.] There were many Mountains besides Sinai (where
they now were) in that Desert into which God led them; and they were the most
dangerous part of it.

Turn from thy fierce wrath, etc.] Let these Considerations prevail for a
Pardon.

Ver. 13. Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel, to whom thou swarest by thine own
self, etc.] This is the great Argument of all, the Promise made to their
Forefathers, fathers, who were his faithful Servants, and this Promise
confirmed by an Oath (often repeated) which he hoped God would faithfully
fulfill.

I will multiply your seed as the Stars of Heaven.] XV Genesis 5. XXII. 17. This
part of the Promise he had fulfilled; which made him hope he would fulfill the
other part, which here follows.

And all this Land that I have spoken of will I give to your seed, and they
shall inherit it for ever.] XII Genesis 7. XIII. 15. XV. 7. XXVIII. 13.

Ver. 14. And the LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his
people.] He did not change his Mind; for there was not a peremptory Decree, or
definitive Sentence (as they speak) pronounced against them: but only a
signification of what they deserved ( v. 10.) which, unless it had been for the
forenamed Reasons, and Moses his Intercession, he would have inflicted upon
them.

Ver. 15. And Moses turned.] From the Presence of God, with whom he had been
forty days.

And came down from the Mount.] From the place where he was with God, to that
where he left Joshua, waiting for his return. See XXIV. 13.

And the two Tables of the Testimony were in his hand.] Which God promised to
give him, and one would think had ready prepared for him before he went up into
the Mount, XXIV. 12. and when he was coming down delivered into his hands,
XXXI. ult. They are called Tables of Testimony, because God declared and
testified therein, what his Mind and Will was, as I have often noted.

The Tables were written on both their sides.] Some fancy that the Writing was
both on the forepart and the back part of them; that so the Ten Commandments
might be read by those who stood, either before or behind when they were set
up; being written (according to this Conceit) twice over. But they were not
made to be set up, but to be reposited in the Ark; and therefore the meaning
is, they were written on both the Leaves (as I may call them) which were to be
folded up, and shut like a Book, when they were laid in the Ark.

On the one side and on the other were they written.] On the right hand, and on
the left. How many were written on the one, and how many on the other, is
variously disputed, but cannot certainly be determined.

Ver. 16. And the Tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing
of God, graven on the Tables.] The Tables were made, and planed by God himself;
as well as the Letters written by him, XXXI. 18. and no Creature employed in
either Work; much less Moses, who seems to have found them ready prepared for
him, when he came into the Mount, as I observed before from XXIV. 12.

Ver. 17. And when Joshua heard the noise of the people, as they shouted.]
Being come to the foot of the Mount, they could easily hear the noise which the
People made in the Festival.

He said unto Moses, there is a noise of war in the Camp.] Knowing nothing of
the occasion, he took it for the noise which Soldiers make (called by the
Hebrews teruah, by the Greeks (...)) who make a great shout when they give the
onset; and much greater when they get the Victory.

Ver. 18. And he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome.] Being before
instructed by God what: the People were a doing ( v. 7.) Moses could easily
correct his Mistake; assuring him it was neither the cry of strength, nor of
weakness (as the words are in the Hebrew) i. e. of Conquerours, as we rightly
translate it, or of those that are overcome.

But the noise of those that sing do I hear.] Out of merriment in a Festival.
For thus Apis was brought in solemn Pomp to Memphis, the Royal City; the
Children going before in Procession, and singing a Song of Praise to the Deity.
Which was not the Pattern to the Israelites, nor borrowed, perhaps, from them;
but the common Practice of the World on such occasions, from ancient Times, as
I observed before out of Athenaeus ( v. 6.) whose words are, (...). And this
was part of the Entertainment in private Feasts; as appears by those known
words of Homer, -- (...)
(...).
They feasted upon excellent cheer, and were very merry; and then the Divine
Songster sung among them.

Ver. 19. And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the Camp.] Which was
at some distance from the Mount, XIX. 21, 23. XX. 21. XXIV. 1.

That he saw the Calf and the dancing.] Which began early in the morning, and
continued all day: for we may presume it was toward the evening before Moses
got to the Camp; having spent a considerable part of the day in beseeching God
for them.

And Moses anger waxed hot.] The sight of their Madness, turned his Compassion
he had for them ( v. 11, 12, etc.) into a kind of Rage.

And he cast the Tables out of his hands, and he brake them beneath the Mount.]
He did not do it till now (though he knew their guilt, and no doubt was
affected with it before he came night to the Camp, and saw the Calf and
dancing) because he would have the People see how he resented their wickedness,
and with what indignation it filled him. And now he did it, no doubt, by the
same Divine Impulse, or Heroic Motion, which stirred him up to kill the
Egyptian. See II. 12. For he is never blamed for this; and therefore did it by
a Divine incitement: to show the Israelites, how unworthy they were to be
espoused to God (as some have expressed it) by these Instruments, or Deeds,
which were most precious Tokens of God's love to them. To this effect Abarbinel
discourses, Moses did not leave the Tables in the Mount where they were
delivered to him, when he heard how the People had revolted: but brought them
along with him, that he might make all Israel sensible what they had lost, by
breaking them before their eyes.

Ver. 20. And he took the Calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire.]
Melted it down; so that though the Matter remained ( i. e. the Gold) yet the
form and external shape of the Calf was so destroyed, that it might be said
properly enough to be burnt. For the Romans (as Bochart observes) called that
place where they melted their Metals Vstrina.

And ground it to powder.] Some have pretended to the knowledge of an Herb,
which will dissolve Gold, and reduce it to Ashes: but they do not say what it
is, or that it was to be found in that Wilderness. And if Moses had known, and
used this Secret, what need was there of his grinding it again, after it was
dissolved to Ashes? It is most likely therefore that this was done with a file,
whereby it was grated into dust as small as flour, which is ground in a Mill.
With such dust, some powdered their own Hair, and the Mains of their Horses (as
Bochart observes in his Hierozoicon P. I. L. II. c. 34.) which made them
glitter and sparkle when the Sun shone upon them.

And strawed it upon the water.] Of the Brook which descended out of the Mount,
XVII. 6. IX Deuteronomy. 21. By which means the Calf was utterly abolished; and
demonstrated (as Abarbinel notes) to have no more Divinity in it, than the
dust, or water has.

And made the Children of Israel drink of it.] He did not constrain them; but
having no other water, they could not avoid, when they were thirsty, to drink
with this mixture. Which Moses threw into it, not to discover who were guilty
of Idolatry, as the Jews fancy, who say this was like the Water of Jealousy, V
Numb. 27. which made their Bellies swell, or their Beards, as some have since
fabled, turn yellow (for it was a general Apostasy, v. 1, 3.) but to make them
sensible how vile a thing this Idol was; which was gone into their Draught, and
mixed with their Dung and their Urine. They that have a list to see the
Conceits of the Jews about it, may look into Seldom de diis Syris Syntag. I. c.
4. and J. Wagenseil upon Sota, p. 1128.

Ver. 21. And Moses said unto Aaron, what did this people unto thee?] It was
not sufficient that the Idol was destroyed, but he thought fit to call his
Brother to an account, for his mis-government in his absence. Who makes a very
weak defense, as all Commentators observe, to whom I refer the Reader. And
shall only note, That the best Apology he could have made had been this (if it
had been true) that he only represented God unto them, as he had represented
himself to him and the Elders of Israel; when the Cherubims, in the form of
Oxen, made part of the Train of the SCHECHINAH or Divine Majesty. But he says
not a word of this; which I suppose therefore is a groundless opinion.

That thou have brought so great a sin upon them.] If they had made or built an
House for the Divine Worship (says Sepher Cosri in the place abovenamed)
according to their own fancies; that they might have offered their Sacrifices
there, and directed their Devotions thither, it would not have seemed to me so
grievous a sin: for at this day we make such Houses, and have a veneration for
them, and promise our selves the Divine Benediction in them, etc. But to make
an Image, was directly against the Command of God; and to fancy that he would
be present with that which he abhorred, very much aggravated the Crime.

Ver. 22. And Aaron said, let not the anger of my Lord wax hot.] He beseeches
him in a very humble manner to hear him calmly.

Thou know the people.] He had been long acquainted with their rebellious
and obstinate Humor: which made them fall a murmuring as soon as ever they
were delivered from Pharaoh at the Red Sea, XV. 24. XVI. 2, etc.

That they are set on mischief.] The words in the Hebrew berahu, are more
emphatical, they are in wickedness, or in Idolatry: like that expression in St.
John, 1 Epist. V. 19. the whole World lies in wickedness. Or as we say in our
Language, they were stark naught.

Ver. 23. For they said unto me, Make us Gods, etc.] This Verse is but a
recital of what the People said to him, v. 2. see there.

Ver. 24. And I said unto them, Whosoever has any Gold let him break it off;
so they gave it me.] This is the sense of v. 2. and 3.

Then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this Calf.] He speaks as if
he did not make the Calf, but the Gold being cast into the fire, out it came in
this form. Which made Dr. Jackson think it more than probable, that there was
some Magical or Daemoniacal skill practiced in the sudden moulting of this
Idol, which very much increased the Peoples Superstition to it. For what else,
says he, could Aaron mean by these words, I cast it into the fire, and there
came out this Calf, than that there was some secret invisible operation whereby
it was molded into this form, in an instant: which raised, as I said, the
Peoples Devotion to it? Herein he follows some Jews, who go a great deal
further, saying, That the Devil entered into it, and made it roar like a Bull,
to strike a greater awe into the People, as R. Juda says in Pirke Elieser, c.
45. And in Tanchuma they say, it not only roared, but danced also. Which seem
to me to be Conceits invented for the Excuse of Aaron; who is said plainly
enough, v. 4. to have made this molten Calf. Which he could not have done
without designing it, and running the Gold into a Mould of this Figure.

Here is no account at all given, what Judgment Moses made of this defense; but
it appears by IX Deuteronomy. 20. that God was so angry with him, that he had been
destroyed, if Moses had not interceded for him, and beseeched God to pardon his
weakness in complying with a People set on Mischief ( v. 22.) For no doubt, in
his own Mind he was against this Fact, as the Levites were, of whom he was the
Chief.

Ver. 25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked.] Without the Divine
Protection. For the Glory of the LORD in the Cloud, it is likely departed, and
went up from them; which we read descended again, XXXIII. 9.

For Aaron had made them naked, etc.] Laid them open by this Sin, to the Scorn
of all their Enemies; who should hear of such a shameful Revolt from their God.

Ver. 26. Then Moses stood in the gate of the Camp.] Where the Courts of
Judgment were wont to sit, to hear Causes and to punish Offenders. So it was in
their Cities, in after times, which it is likely was derived from the usage
now: as now they did but follow the practices of their Forefathers. For in the
days of Abraham the City Gate was the place where all public and private
Business was transacted, XXIII Genesis 10, 18. which seems to have been the manner
in all the Country; for at Schechem we find, as well as here at Hebron, when
Hamor and his Son proposed to make an Alliance with the Israelites, they
motioned it to the People at the Gate of the City, XXXIV Genesis 20. Which was the
same thing with the Forum or Exchange among the Romans: the Market being also
held here, where there were Seats for the Judges and Elders.

And said, Who is on the LORD's side?] Abhors this Idolatry, and cleaves to the
Worship of the LORD only?

Let him come unto me.] To receive his Commands; who was under God their Leader.

And all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.] If not the
whole Tribe, yet as many as had any Zeal for the LORD; who were the most. This
is an Argument there was a general defection of the People to this Idolatrous
Worship, that none but the Sons of Levi appeared to join with Moses on this
occasion.

Ver. 27. And he said unto them, thus says the LORD God of Israel, put every
man his sword by his side.] The LORD himself, by his Command, warrants what I
bid you do.

And go in and out from gate to gate throughout the Camp.] They were not to go
into their Tents (where they who were sensible of God's Displeasure, it may be
presumed were bemoaning their sin) but to kill every one they met in the Street.

And slay every man his Brother, and every man his Companion, etc.] All the
Israelites were Brethren; and they are commanded to spare none they met withal,
because they were near Relations, or Friends, or next Neighbors. Some may
imagine this too hazerdous an Undertaking, the Levites being but a very small
number, in comparison with the People of Israel. But having God's warrant, they
were consident none would have the Courage to oppose them; for Guilt makes Men
timorous: and the Levites also found them, as Men used to be at the conclusion
of a Festival, weary with their Dancing and Sports. Besides, there are those
who by their being naked, v. 25. understand they were unarmed: for Aaron had
disarmed them to their shame, by setting up the Calf for them to dance about;
which made them lay aside all thoughts of their Arms, and so were more easily
slain by the Levites.

Ver. 28. And the Children of Levi did according to the word of Moses.] Who
being, under God, their chief Ruler, passed this extraordinary Sentence upon
the Offenders, without the common Process in Courts of Judgment, as Mr. Seldom
observes L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 2. in the end of it.

And there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.] The Vulgar
has twenty three thousand; contrary to the LXX. as well as the Hebrew Text,
and all the Eastern Versions, except the Arabic, printed at Rome in this Age,
and manifestly out of the Vulgar Latin, as Mr. Seldom has observed in the same
place, and Bochart shows largely to be against all the ancient Translations and
Writers, Hieroz. P. I. L. II. c. 34. p. 353. Where he notes also out of Philo,
these three thousand to have been (...), the principal Ringleaders of this
Impiety.

In memory of these Disasters, the Breaking of the Tables, and this Slaughter,
the Jews keep a Fast every year, on the XVIIth of Tamuz; which by Jac. Capellus
computation, answers to the XVIth of our July.

Ver. 29. For Moses had said, consecrate your selves to day to the LORD.] Or,
Moses said, ye have consecrated your selves, etc. Which way soever we take it
(either as spoken before the Execution, to encourage them to it; or afterward,
to commend them for it) the meaning is, That this Act was as acceptable to God
as a Sacrifice, and had procured them the honor to wait upon him as his
Ministers.

Every man upon his Son, and upon his Brother.] This seems to signify that
some of the Tribe of Levi had also prevaricated; to whom these pious Levites
had no regard, but killed them indifferently with the rest, though they met
with one of their own Children. For which they are highly commended by Moses in
his Blessing, XXXIII Deuteronomy. 9. But it may signify no more, but that they went
out with this sincere Resolution to spare none, though never so dear to them.

That he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.] This Blessing was the
Preferment of the Tribe of Levi, to be God's Ministers in his House; and to
enjoy all the Tenth of the Land for an Inheritance, XVIII Numb. 21, 24.

Ver. 30. And it came to pass on the morrow.] Which was the XVIIIth day of
Tamuz, or our XVIIth of July.

That Moses said unto the people.] Whom he assembled together, that he might
make them sensible of their sin.

Ye have sinned a great sin.] He set their sin before them, it is likely, in
all its aggravating Circumstances.

And now I will go up unto the LORD.] But he would not have them despair of
recovering God's Favor; though he could not absolutely assure them of it.

Peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.] That God might not
inflict any further Punishment upon them.

Ver. 31. And Moses returned unto the LORD.] Not, as yet, to the place where he
was before with the LORD for forty days; but to some part of the Mount where he
might put up his most fervent Prayers to God; by which his Anger was turned
away, as well as by Sacrifices.

And said, O this people have sinned a great sin.] He begins his Prayers with a
Confession of their Guilt in a most pathetical manner.

And have made them gods of gold.] Contrary to the express repeated Command of
God, XX. 4, 23.

Ver. 32. Yet now.] Here follows his earnest and most affectionate Deprecation
for them.

If thou will, forgive their sin.] Be thou pleased, or, O that thou would
forgive them. See Dr. Hammond upon XCV Psalm. not. 6.

Or if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy Book which thou have written.] Let
me die, rather than live to see the Evils that are coming on them, if thou
punish them as they deserve. God has no need of a Book, wherein to Register
and Record any of his purposes: but the Scripture uses the Language of Men, as
the Jews speak; who, to this day, retain this form of Speech, in their Prayer
wherewith they begin the New-year.

O our Father, and our King, write us in the Book of the best Life, in the Book
of Righteousness, in the Book of Redemption.] They desire, that is, to be
preserved that year, in a happy condition; free from sin, from want, and from
danger. See Theodorick Hackspan, in his Annotations on this place.

Ver. 33. And the LORD said unto Moses, Whosoever has sinned against me, him
will I blot out of my Book.] This was all the Answer Moses could obtain, That
they only should perish, who had offended the Divine Majesty. Which does not
deny them a Pardon, if they ceased to offend him.

Ver. 34. Therefore now go.] Speak no more of this matter, but return to the
Camp.

Lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee.] Take the
Conduct of the People upon thee, to the Land which I promised to bestow on
them. This supposes God would not punish them as they deserved; though by the
words following, it appears he abated something of his wonted kindness to them.

Behold, mine Angel shall go before thee.] Not the Angel spoken of XXIII. 20.
but some lesser Minister in the Heavenly Court, as appears from the next
Chapter, v. 2. where he says only, I will send an Angel before thee, viz. in
the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, XIII. 22.

Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them.] Upon
the next occasion to punish other Offenses, I will further punish this. Whence
the saying of R. Isaac in the Gemara Sanhedrim, c. 11. There has no vengeance
come upon the world, in which there has not been half an ounce of the first
Calf. To which R. Vschajah there has respect, in these words; Till the days of
Jeroboam the Israelites sucked but of one Calf, but afterward of three. That is,
their Punishment was twice as great; for they made two Calves, though they had
seen the terrible Punishment which came upon their Forefathers, from making one.

Ver. 35. And the LORD plagued the people.] With the Pestilence, as some
imagine, though it be not mentioned in Scripture. Or, he means all the Evils
that afterward consumed them in the Wilderness. But there are those who
understand this of the slaughter made by the Levites; which he briefly repeats
(as the manner sometimes is in these Writings) as a Conclusion to this History
of the Golden Calf.

Because they made the Calf, which Aaron made.] Provoked him to make.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and thy
people, etc.] This is a renewal of the Order he had already given XXXII. 34.
which he further explains, by expressly assuring him, he would make good his
Promise to their Forefathers, of which Moses had remembered him, XXXII. 13. But
they were not by this ordered presently to remove, till Moses had been again in
the Mount, and the Tabernacle was set up and all the Service of it prescribed.

And I will send an Angel before thee, and I will drive out the Canaanite, the
Amorite, etc.] I will not wholly withdraw my Protection from you (as he had for
the present, XXXII. 25.) but send one of my Ministers to discomsit your
Enemies, till you get possession of their Land.

Ver. 3. For I will not go up in the midst of thee.] For though I intended to
have dwelt among you my self, by my special Presence (which was in the
SCHECHINAH, XXV. 8. XXIX. 43, 45, 46.) you have justly forfeited that favor.
The Chaldee gives the true sense of this Speech, I will not make my Majesty (so
the SCHECHINAH or Divine Glory was called) to go up in the midst of thee. And
accordingly it follows, v. 7, 8, 9. that he did remove to a distance from them.
Concerning that Phrase, in the midst of thee, See XVII. 7.

For thou art a stiff-necked people]. See XXXII. 9.

Lest I consume thee in the way.] It is not fit for me to see my self affronted
to my face, by stiff-necked Offenders, and not punish them with utter
destruction. This is an Argument that the Angel, he says he would send before
them, was not God himself (as the Eternal (...) is) for then he would have had
the same reason to consume them for their Disobedience.

Ver. 4. And when the people heard these evil tidings.] This threatening of such
a grievous Punishment,

They mourned.] Fasted perhaps, and wept; and hung down their Heads with shame
and sorrow.

And no man did put on him his ornaments.] But every one laid aside his usual
Attire, and appeared in the Habit of Penitents; which, in after times, was
Sackcloth.

Ver. 5. For the LORD had said unto Moses, say unto the Children of Israel, ye
are a stiff-necked people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment,
and consume thee.] This Verse gives a reason of their Mourning, because Moses
had by God's order said to them, what God said to him, That they were such a
perverse People, it was not safe for them, that he should stay among them; and
be provoked by their Transgressions suddenly to destroy them.

Therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee.] These words show that he had
not peremptorily resolved to forsake them (as he threatened v. 3.) but might be
moved by their Repentance to continue with them. And therefore he orders them,
to put themselves in a mourning Habit, in token of their hearty sorrow for
their sin.

That I may know what to do unto thee.] Deal with you, according as I find you
disposed. See XXII Genesis 12.

Ver. 6. And the Children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments.] Not
only of those wherewith they had decked themselves, at their late Festival, but
of all other that they ordinarily wore; which they, who were not dressed,
forbore to put on, v. 4.

By the Mount Horeb.] Or rather (as the Hebrew word mehar imports) from the
Mount: that is, a great way off from the place where God appeared; as unworthy
to come into his Presence.

Ver. 7. And Moses took the Tabernacle.] His own Tent as the LXX. interpret it,
(...): meaning, I suppose, not his own private Tent, where he and his Family
lived; but a public Tent, where he gave Audience, and heard Causes, and
enquired of God; which Bonaventura C. Bertramus calls Castrorum Praetorium, in
his Book de Repub. Jud. c. 4. For such a place, we cannot but think, there was
before that Tabernacle was erected, whose pattern he saw in the Mount; where
all great Affairs were transacted, and where Religious Offices, in all
probability, were performed.

And pitched it without the Camp, afar off from the Camp.] At the distance of
Two thousand Cubits, as R. Solomon interprets it. Which was done to humble
them, when they saw the Displeasure of God and of his Servant against them,
declared by this Departure far from them: For they might justly fear he would
remove quite out of their sight.

And called it the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Gave it the same name,
which was afterward appropriated to the Tabernacle, built for Divine Service
alone. Because, here God met with Moses, and communicated his Mind to him; and
hither they were all to resort, who had any business with Moses; or would
receive an Answer, to their Enquiries, from God.

And it came to pass, that every one which sought the LORD, went out unto the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, which was without the Camp.] This is commonly
understood of those who came to desire Resolution in any Case of Dissiculty;
which they could not have, as formerly, within the Camp: but were forced to go,
and seek it without. Which, as it showed God's Displeasure, so withal gave them
some hope of Mercy; because it plainly appeared, God was not quite alienated,
and estranged from them.

Ver. 8. When Moses went into the Tabernacle, all the people rose up, and stood
every man at his Tent door.] In reverence to him, as their Leader, whom they
had lately despised. Or, it may be thought also, a posture wherein they
implored his Intercession for them, that God would be pleased graciously to
return to them. Which is expressed by what follows.

And looked after Moses.] Expecting what would be the end of this Business;
both God and his Minister being removed from them.

Until he was gone into the Tabernacle.] As long as they could see him.

Ver. 9. And it came to pass, as Moses went into the Tabernacle, the cloudy
pillar descended.] In which the SCHECHINAH or Divine Majesty was (XL. 35.)
which was gone up before, because of their Idolatry, whereby the Camp was
become unclean: but now came down again, upon the removal of the Tabernacle.
Where, it is very probable, it used to be settled, as the Token of the Divine
Presence among them: and afterward was translated to the Tabernacle, made after
God's appointment, where this Cloud stood just, as it did here, at the Door of
it, XII Numb. 5.

And stood at the door of the Tabernacle.] Openly to assert the Authority of
Moses, with whom God showed himself present, though he had forsaken them.

And the LORD talked with Moses.] Which shows the Divine Glory was within the
Tabernacle, where Moses now was: and so the People understood it, as appears by
the next Verse.

Ver. 10. And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the Tabernacle
door.] Which they knew was an evident Token that God was there.

And all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his Tent door.] Bowed
themselves unto the Divine Majesty, and humbly deprecated his Displeasure;
acknowledging, we may reasonably think, his great Goodness, in condescending to
appear again to them, though at a distance from them.

Ver. 11. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, face to face.] In a familiar manner,
which did not affright or astonish him, by a dreadful appearance of his
Majesty; which, in the sight of the Children of Israel, looked like devouring
fire, XXIV. 17. but appeared to Moses in a milder and more cheerful brightness.
The like expression in XII Numb. 8. seems to relate only, to the Discourse he
had with Moses, which was clear and plain, and by a Voice; not in Visions and
Dreams, and obscure Resemblances: and so it may be understood here, as
Maimonides takes it, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 45. But Abarbinel thinks that
these Expressions signify, God treated with Moses in his own Person, not by an
Ambassador; just as one Friend converses with another. And this is a common
Notion among the Jews, that God did not speak to Moses by an Angel, but by
himself: which they take to be the meaning of this Phrase face to face. Which
seem to me rather to import the clearness and evidence of that Divine Light,
wherein God revealed himself to Moses; whether it was by himself, or an Angel,
it matters not. Yet the New Testament determines this question, when it tells
us, The Law it self was given by Angels, in the hand of a Mediator. And
accordingly the old Tradition was, That Moses saw things in a clear and bright
Glass; but the rest of the Prophets, in a Glass that was dim and cloudy.

As a man speaks to his friend.] This is added to show, how differently God
treated Moses, from all other Men. For he is said to have talked face to face
with all the Israelites, V. Deuteronomy. 4. but it was out of the midst of fire, which
struck a terror into them: whereas he spoke to Moses out of the midst of a
glorious, but comfortable Light, which gave him high satisfaction.

And he turned again into the Camp.] After some time spent in Conversation with
the Divine Majesty, he went to comfort the People, it is likely, with hopes of
recovering his Favor; of which they might have quite despaired, if he had
staid long from them.

But his servant Joshua, a young man, departed not out of the Tabernacle.] It
is hard to tell for what end Joshua should stay behind his Master; and it seems
not decent that Moses should return alone without his Servant to attend him.
They that say he stayed to guard the Tabernacle, have no foundation for it; and
they have not much, who say, he stayed to give Judgment in small: Causes, which
needed not Moses his Resolution (according to XVIII. 26.) For we never read
that Joshua was a Judge, but a constant Attendant upon Moses his Person. And
therefore the words may better be translated, as they plainly run in the
Hebrew, He turned again to the Camp, and his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a
young man. At which there is a stop in the Hebrew (over the word Naar, young
Man) to distinguish these from the following words; which are

Departed not out of the Tabernacle.] That is, the LORD departed not from
thence, but his Presence remained there; and would not come into the Camp, as
Moses did. And this Interpretation is the more likely, because the last words
in the Hebrew are, out of the midst of the Tabernacle: which cannot refer to
Joshua, because he did not go thither; but only Moses, who conversed alone with
the Divine Majesty.

Why Joshua is called a young Man, when he was near sixty years old, is not
easy to resolve. Perhaps it signifies a valiant Man; for so he was: or, he had
waited on Moses from his youth: or, as Maimonides, this is the Phrase of the
Hebrew Nation, who call all Men young, till they begin to decay; as Joseph is
called, when he was Thirty years old, XLII Genesis 2. More Nevoch P. II. c. 32.

Ver. 12. And Moses said unto the LORD.] When, or where Moses spoke what
follows, we are not here informed. It is likely, that after he was satisfied
the People were very penitent, he returned to the Tabernacle; and there made
this Address unto the Divine Majesty, for a perfect Reconciliation with his
People.

See.] A word imploring attention and regard to his Petition.

Thou say unto me, Bring up this people.] Lead them to the Land of Promise,
XXXII. 34. XXXIII. 1.

And thou have not let me know whom thou will send with me.] Thou have only
said, thou will send an Angel before me; but I hope to obtain greater favor
from thee, which thou have not yet declared to me. And I have no heart to
proceed, if thou thy self wilt not guide us in the Pillar of Cloud, as thou
have done hitherto, and dwell among us, as thou have promised, in thy
Sanctuary. This seems to be the sense (if this Verse be compared with the 15th)
and not barely that he did not know what Angel he would send with him.

Yet thou have said, I know thee by name.] The Chaldee takes it to be the same
with what is said of Bezaleel, whom God called by name, XXXI. 2. that is,
particularly designed to make the Tabernacle, and all belonging to it. But to
know, is more than to call; signifying God's special Love and Kindness to Moses
above all Men, as the LXX. interpret it.

And thou have also found grace in my sight.] God had often heard his Prayers
for this People, as he hoped he would do now. For that was the effect of his
being an acceptable person unto him; which is the proper signification of this
Phrase.

Ver. 13. Now therefore I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight.] If I
still continue in thy favor.

Show me now thy way.] The Interpretation of Maimonides ( More Nevoch. P. I. c.
54.) is too much strained, who thinks he here desires the knowledge of God's
Attributes, as v. 18. he desires the sight of his Essence. The plain meaning of
this Prayer is, That God himself would conduct him, and show him the way
wherein he should lead his People, unto their rest in the Land of Canaan,
XXXII. 34.

That I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight.] That I may be fully
assured of thy gracious acceptance of me.

And consider that this Nation is thy people.] I do not beg this merely upon my
own account, but for those who have been redeemed by thee out of the Land of
Egypt, and have engaged themselves to be thine by a Solemn Covenant (XXIV.) and
now return unto thee by Repentance, v. 6.

Ver. 14. And he said, My Presence shall go with thee.]

In the Hebrew, My face, i. e. I my self, as the LXX. translate it: My Majesty,
as the Chaldee. He promises, that is, to continue with them, as he had done
hitherto, and not merely send an Angel to accompany them: but to lead and guide
them himself, by the Pillar of the Cloud, and his glorious Presence in the
Tabernacle.

And I will give thee rest.] Some think these words are particularly spoken to
Moses; and signify that God would give him ease in this Point, and quiet his
Spirit (which was now very solicitous about his Departure from them) by
returning to them. But as the foregoing words are a Promise, that he would take
the Conduct of the People again; so is this, that he would not leave them till
he had brought them to their rest.

Ver. 15. And he said unto him, If thy Presence go not with us.] Some translate
the words, for he (i.e. Moses) had said unto him, i. e. to God, if thy
Presence, etc. So that these words and the following are the reason of God's
Answer to him, v. 14. And if they be not thus taken, one would have expected
Moses should rather have given God thanks for his gracious Promise, than
further pressed him to it. But the 17th Verse does not well agree with this;
and therefore these words are to be looked on, only as part of what Moses said
to God, after his Promise that his Presence should go with him. Which he
acknowledged to be the greater favor; because otherwise he had rather never
stir from the place where they now were.

Carry us not up hence.] Let us go no further, if thou thy self do not lead
and guide us in our way.

Ver. 16. For wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy people have found
grace in thy sight?] How shall all the People round about us, be convinced,
that we are not abandoned by thee in this Wilderness?

Is it not in that thou go with us?] Is not this the great Demonstration of
it, that thou leadest us in a Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Day and Night?

So shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon
the face of the Earth.] This will distinguish us, while it continues with us,
from all other People whatsoever; none of which have such a Token of thy
Presence with them. The Manna indeed continued all this time to descend for
their Sustenance, which was a miraculous food: but it might have been ascribed
to other Causes, if this glorious Token of God's Presence had not still
appeared among them.

Ver. 17. And the LORD said unto Moses, I will do this thing also, that thou
have spoken.] Distinguish you from all other People: not only by leading you in
a Pillar of Cloud and Fire, but dwelling among you, as I designed, XXV. 8.

For thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.] He owns Moses
still to be most acceptable and dear to him, as he had been v. 12. and
therefore, at his Intercession, promises to be perfectly reconciled, and return
to his People.

Ver. 18. And he said, I beseech thee.] Having obtained so much favor of God,
he presumes to ask something beyond all this, but with all humility.

Show me thy Glory.] In the Hebrew the word is hareni, make me to see to
signify, apprehend with the understanding, not with the bodily eye, More
Nevoch. P. I. c. 4. For by Glory he there understands ( cap. 54.) the Divine
Essence, which he makes Moses to be desirous to apprehend; which is not likely,
such a Man as he should think possible. For thus he explains himself in his
Book de Fundamentis Legis, c. 1. n. 10. Moses desired to know the truth of the
Divine Essence, as one Man knows another, whose Face he beholds, and his Image
is so engraven in his Mind, that he Exists there distinguished from all other
Men: So he begs that the Divine Essence might be distinct in his Mind, from all
other Essences, till he knew the truth of it, as it is in it self. But he
confesses in another place of that Book, ( cap. 64.) That by the Glory of the
LORD is many times understood a created Light or Splendour, whereby God
miraculously set forth his Majesty, XXIV. 26. and other places. And I can see
no reason, why it should not so signify here, and the meaning be, That he
desired to see that glorious Presence (or Face of God, as it is called) which
he promised should go with them; not veiled in a Cloud, but in its full
Splendour and Majesty. For hearing him speak from the SCHECHINAH, he supposed,
perhaps, that God appeared therein, in some visible shape, which he desired to
be acquainted withal. To confirm this, it is observable that God himself, in
his Answer to Moses, calls this Glory his Face v. 20. as he had done v. 14, 15.
And thus R. Jehudah in the Book Cosri, Pars IV. Sect. 3. (toward the latter
end of it) seems to have understood it. See upon v. 29.

Ver. 19. And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee.] Which
Maimonides thinks signifies his making Moses to understand the Nature of all
Creatures, and how they are knit and united together, and after what manner
they are governed, both in general and particular; because when God had made
all his Works, he saw that they were very good, I Genesis 31. But that Text is a
very slender ground for such an Interpretation. The LXX. seem to come nearer to
the matter, who interpret this passage, (...), I will pass before thee with my
Glory. That is, he promises to give him a Transient view of his Glory, while it
passed by him, ( v. 22.) though it could not be seen in its full Majesty. And
then the word tobhi (which we translate my goodness) must rather be rendered my
beauty, it being the same with glory, only a softer word, to express such a
degree of its Splendour, as would not hurt him, but be delightful to him. And
thus the word tobh is used in the second Chapter of this Book, v. 2. and 1 Samuel
IX. 2. Or, if this be not the meaning, all his goodness must signify his
gracious Intentions concerning the Children of Israel, to whom, he assures him,
he would fulfill all his Promises, which was sufficient for him to know.

And I will proclaim the Name of the LORD before thee.] The LXX. seem to have
understood this right, when they translated it, I will call to thee by my Name
(saying) the LORD is before thee. That is, lest, when I pass by thee, thou
should not observe it, I will admonish thee, by a Voice calling to thee, and
telling thee, That now the LORD is presenting himself to thee. And so we find
he did XXXIV. 6.

And will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I
will show mercy.] This is the Substance of the words, which he tells him he
would proclaim, after notice given of him of his coming to pass by him. And
their meaning is, that he would dispense his Favors, according to his own good
pleasure, as he did now to Moses; unto whom he vouchsafed such a Revelation of
himself, as he did not make to others. For thus he explains it XXXIV. 6, 7.
where he tells him, He would be very gracious, patient, and long-suffering unto
some; but punish severely the Iniquity of others.

Ver. 20. And he said, Thou can not see my face.] But as for thy request,
that I would make thee see my Glory, in its full Splendour, thou art not capable
of it. I know none that has explained this whole matter better than R. Jehudah
in Sepher Cosri, P. IV. Sect. 3. For the Glory mentioned in Scripture, there is
one of such a nature, that the Eyes of the Prophets could sustain it; another
all the Israelites saw (as the Cloud and the consuming Fire) but another so
pure and bright to such an high degree, that no Prophet is able to apprehend
it: but if he venture to look upon it, his Composition is dissolved, i. e. he
dies. Such was the Glory here spoken of, a Splendour so great and piercing that
none could behold it.

For there shall no man see me, and live.] Accordingly we find, when the
SCHECHINAH, or Divine Glory, filled the Tabernacle, Moses was not able to enter
into it, XL. 35. that is, he could not, with safety to his life, look upon it.
And so it was after the Temple of Soloman was built and consecrated by Solemn
Prayer to God, The Glory of the LORD filled the House, and the Priests could
not enter into the House, because the Glory of the LORD had filled the LORD's
House, 2 Chronicles. VII. 1, 2.

From this Speech to Moses, it is likely that Men in future times, imagined
they should die immediately, when they saw only an Angel appear in such a high
glittering manner that it amazed them.

Ver. 21. And the LORD said, Behold there is a place by me.] It does not
plainly appear by the story, from whence God now spoke to Moses. It is most
likely from the Mount, where he had long conversed with him. Or, if it was from
the Tabernacle (where his Glory appeared v. 9. and continued v. 11.) that was
not far from the Mount; where he tells him, he would make his Glory pass before
him.

And thou shall stand upon a Rock.] It is probable, This was the Rock in Horeb,
where the LORD had formerly appeared to Moses, XVII. 6.

Ver. 22. And it shall come to pass, that while my Glory passes by, that I
will put thee in a clift of the Rock.] Perhaps it was in one of the Clefts
which was made in the Rock, when God brought Water out of it, LXXVIII Psalm. 15.
into which he directed Moses. For that is meant by putting him in the cleft;
showing him the place where he should be, while the Divine Majesty passed by.

And I will cover thee with my hand, etc.] That he might not be hurt by the
splendor of that Glory, as it passed by the Cleft. This does not certainly
signify, that the Glory of the LORD appeared in an Human shape: for Hands are
ascribed to God (in accommodation to us) when nothing is meant but this
invisible Power: which now, perhaps, cast a Cloud about him, that he might not
be struck dead by the inconceivable brightness and force of those Rays, which
came from the Face of the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 23. And I will take away mine hand.] As soon as the Face (as it is called
v. 20.) of the Divine Majesty was gone by him (which it was impossible for him
to behold, and live) he promises to remove that Cloud which covered him: so
that he should look upon the hinder Parts of his Glory, though not upon the
Face.

And thou shall see my back parts.] In which the Glory of the Divine Majesty
shone, in a lower degree of Light; which was not so piercing, as to put out the
Eyes, and take away the Life of the Beholders: And yet there was such a
resplendent Brightness in it, that Moses's Face shone when he came down from
the sight of it, XXXIV. 29. For that luster in his Countenance, is to be
ascribed, in all probability, to that sight which he had of the Divine Majesty
at that time. Some little Particles of Light remaining upon his Face, and
sticking to it (if I may so speak) from that exceeding great Splendor which
shone upon him, and passed before him, as he lay in the hollow place of the
Rock.

But my face shall not be seen.] My Glory in its full Luster, without any Vail
before it, cannot be seen. See v. 20. There are many other Interpretations of
this Verse, as well as of the 18th and 19th. Maimonides in his Book de Fundam
Legis, c. 1. n. 11. takes it thus: God revealed that to Moses, which no Man,
either before or after him, ever knew: he making him to apprehend something of
his very Essence, whereby God was separated in his Mind, from all other Beings;
as a Man discerns another Man, when he sees his back parts, and by his Mind
discerns his Proportions distinct from all other Men. But in his More Nevoch.
P. I. c. 21. he takes this Discovery to Moses, to be the Knowledge God gave him
of his Works and Attributes, viz. those mentioned XXXIV. 6. And thus Gregor.
Nazianzen. ( Orat. XXXIV. p. 559.) expounds it, (...), etc. Those things are
the back Parts of God, which are after him; whereby he is known as the Sun is,
by its Image in the Water, etc. Upon which Elias Cretensis has this ingenious
gloss, That the Face of God signifies his Essence before the beginning of the
World; and his hinder Parts, his Creation and Providence in the Government of
the World. But Maimonides, in the same place now mentioned, acknowledges also,
that this may be interpreted according to the Targum; That God made his
Majesty, that is, an exceeding bright Representation of himself (though not in
its full Glory) to pass before him. Which Onkelos sometimes calls Jekara,
Glory; sometimes Memra, the Word; and sometimes SCHECHINAH, the Majesty. Which
seems to be the most litteral meaning; that God himself, particularly the
Eternal WORD, in a visible Glory or Majesty appeared unto him; in so much
Splendor as Human Nature was able to bear; but not in his unvailed Brightness,
which is, as the Apostle speaks, inaccessible.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses.] Having obtained a Promise of a Pardon
for the People, and of greater Favor to himself, than had been hitherto shown
him; God directs him here to dispose things for the performance of both.

How thee two Tables of stone, like unto the first: and I will write upon these
Tables the words that were in the first Tables which thou brakest.] Every
attentive Reader must needs observe the difference between the first Tables,
which Moses brake, and those which he is now ordered to prepare. For God did
not only write his Laws with his own finger upon the first Tables, but the
Tables themselves also were the work of God, XXXII. 16. Whereas in these, as
Greg. Nyssen well expresses it ( de Vita Mosis, p. 183.) (...): The writing
indeed was by the Divine Power, but the matter of them framed by the hand of
Moses. So that, at the same time, God showed he was reconciled, he put them in
mind that he had been offended; and restored them to his favor with some
abatement.

Ver. 2. And be ready in the morning.] On the XVIII. day of July. See XXXII. 30.

And come up in the morning unto Mount Sinai.] From whence God spoke to the
Israelites (V Deuteronomy. 4, etc.) those very words which he intended to write upon
the Tables. He orders him to come up in the morning, that all the People might
see him ascend, and carry the Tables with him.

And present thy self there to me, in the top of the Mount.] Where the Divine
Majesty appeared before in its Glory; and where Moses stayed with him forty
days and forty nights, XIX. 26. XXIV. 17, 18.

Ver. 3. And no man shall come up with thee.] The same Precept is renewed,
which was given at his first ascent, XXIV. 1, 2.

Neither let any man be seen throughout the Mount.] XIX. 12, 21, etc.

Neither let the Flocks nor Herds feed before the Mount.] He seems to require
their removal to such a distance, that they should not be within view of the
Divine Majesty. By which means the People were naturally led to stand in
greater awe of God, and there was the less danger of any Beasts touching the
Mount, XIX. 13.

Ver. 4. And Moses hewed two Tables of stone, etc.] These and the following
words only declare that he did as God bad him, v. 1, 2.

And took in his hand the two Tables of stone.] These he carried with him; but
the first Tables were given him when he came there, XXIV. 12. They seem to have
been thin, being no heavier than that he could carry them in one hand.

Ver. 5. And the LORD.] The SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty; called also the
Glory of the LORD.

Descended in the Cloud.] Wherein it had been wont to appear from the beginning
of their deliverance out of Egypt; and had lately appeared to Moses in the
Tabernacle (XXXIII. 9.) when the Cloudy Pillar descended, and stood at the door
of it, while the LORD talked with Moses there. And it seems, when that was
done, the Glory of the LORD in the Cloud went up again toward Heaven, and now
came down upon this occasion.

And stood with him there.] The Cloudy Pillar, wherein the Glory of the LORD
was, rested upon the top of the Mount where Moses now was, v. 2.

And proclaimed the Name of the LORD.] Gave him notice of his Presence, as he
had promised XXXIII. 19. and is more fully expressed in the next Verse.

Ver. 6. And the LORD passed by before him.] Which Onkelos translates the LORD
made his Majesty to pass before him. Which Exposition Maimonides acknowledges
to be right; and confirmed by the Scripture it self, when it says XXXIII. 22.
While my Glory passes by, etc. which he confesses signifies not the Divine
Essence it self; but some created Splendor, which no Eye was able to behold,
More Nevoch. P. I. c. 21.

And proclaimed.] As the Glory of the LORD passed by, he heard a Voice
proclaiming this Description of the Divine Nature.

The LORD.] Some join the next word to this, as if the Voice said, the LORD,
the LORD; the more to awaken his Attention, to mind what he heard. See XXXIII.
19. And this Name of his signifies, his Self-Existence, and his absolute
Dominion over all Creatures, which received their being from him. See VI. 3.

God.] The Hebrew word El signifies Strong and Mighty; in one word, his
Irresistible Power, Job IX. 4.

Merciful.] The word Rachum signifies that which we call tender Mercies; such
as Parents have to their Children, when their Bowels yern toward them.

And gracious.] We call that Chaninah (Grace or Favor) says Maimonides, which
we bestow upon any Man to whom we owe nothing, XXXIII Genesis 5, 11. And therefore
God is here called Chanum (Gracious) with respect to those whom he created,
preserves and governs, but is not obliged by any right to these things; as his
words are More Nevoch. P. I. cap. 54.

Long-suffering.] So slow to Anger, that he does not presently punish those
that offend him; but bears long with them.

Abundant in goodness.] The Hebrew word Chesed, which we translate Goodness,
signifies, as Maimonides says ( More Nevoch. P. III. cap.) the excess and
highest degree of any thing, whatsoever it be; but especially the greatest
Benignity. And therefore, with the addition of rabh (abundant) denotes long
continued Kindness; as is more fully declared in the next Verse.

And truth.] Most faithful and constant to his Promises; which he steadfastly
keeps throughout all Generations. The word abundant refers both to this and to
his Benignity, CXLVI Psalm. 6.

Ver. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands.] The same word Chesed, which before we
translated Goodness, we here translate Mercy: and the Hebrews observing the
^etter Nun to be greater in the word Notzer (keeping) than is usual, fancy that
it denotes the immense Treasures of the Divine Bounty. But the word thousands
fully explains how abundant his Mercy is.

Forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin.] Here are three words to
signify all sorts of Offenses, which he passes by, tell Men grow intollerably
wicked. But some distinguish them, by making Iniquity signify Offenses against
Men; and Transgressions, Offenses against God himself; and Sin, all the
Errors, Childishnesses and Follies, which Men are guilty of, in the Conduct of
themselves. But they may as well signify the Offenses which were committed
against the Moral, Ceremonial, and Political Laws.

And that will by no means clear the guilty.] These words, according to
Maimonides, belong still to the loving kindness of God, as all the foregoing
do; signifying, that when he does punish, he will not utterly destroy and make
desolate. For so the Hebrew words, Nakkeh lo Jenakkeh, he thinks are to be
literally rendered, in extirpating, he will not extirpate; as the word Nakah
he observes is used, III Isaiah 26. She shall sit desolate on the Earth. And to
the same sense these words are expounded by many Modern Interpreters;
particularly Lud. de Dieu, When he empties, he will not empty; or make quite
desolate. For the Maxim of the Hebrew is (as Maimonides there observes, More
Nevoch P. I. c. 54.) that, the property of Goodness far excels that of
Severity. For here being thirteen Properties of God mentioned (I can find but
ten, besides the Name of LORD) there is but one of them that belongs to the
latter ( viz. that which follows) all the rest belong to the former. And
indeed, we find that Moses urges these very words, among other, why God should
not destroy the Israelites, as one Man, XIV Numb. 18. which had been very
improper, if God would, by no means clear the guilty.

Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children.] This is meant, says
the same Maimonides, only of the Sin of Idolatry; unto which God threatens, in
the second Commandment, this Punishment to the third and fourth Generation,
upon those that hate him. For no Man is called a hater of God, but only an
Idolater; according to what we read XII Deuteronomy. 31. Every abomination which the
LORD hates, etc.

Unto the third and fourth Generation.] He mentions, says the same Author,
none Beyond these; because the utmost that any Man can live to see of his Seed,
is the fourth Generation. And therefore when an Idolatrous City was destroyed,
the old Idolater, with Children, Grandchildren, and Great-grand-children, were
all cut off; according to the Precept XIII Deuteronomy. 15. Destroy it utterly, and
all that is therein.

The sense of the whole seems to be, That this is the Glory of the Divine
Majesty, that he has a Sovereign Dominion over all, because he is the Fountain
of Being, the Original of all things; most powerful to do what he pleases; and
so merciful that he delights to bestow his Benefits unasked; and so gracious,
as to continue them to the unthankful: bearing long with them, when they
provoke him; multiplying Favors on those who have no Deserts; and faithfully
performing his Promises, though never so great; doing good unto a thousand
Generations of those who adhere faithfully to him, and do not apostatize from
him: for he pardons innumerable Offenses, of all sorts, that are committed
against his Laws; and when the Provocations are so great, that they are fit to
be punished, he proceeds not to the utmost Extremity, till there be no Remedy;
then he punishes Idolaters terribly, to the third and fourth Generation.

Ver. 8. And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the Earth, and
worshipped.] Being transported with Joy at so glorious a sight, and such
gracious words, he immediately worshipped God with the humblest Reverence,
acknowledging his great Condescension to him.

Ver. 9. And he said.] Which encouraged him to renew his Request to God.

If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord.] He does not doubt of it; but
the meaning rather is, Since I have found grace, etc. as appears from what he
granted him XXXIII 17, 18, etc.

Let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us.] Upon the mention of the last Property
of the Divine Majesty [ visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,
etc.] Moses seems to have been afraid he might be provoked to proceed to such
Severity with the Israelites, who had lately apostatized from him. And again
beseeches him, he would be so gracious, though they should again offend him, as
to continue his Presence among them, which he had threatened to withdraw XXXIII.
3.

For it is a stiff-necked people.] If we adhere to this Translation, the
meaning is, they needed such a Governor, by whose Authority and Presence they
might be kept in awe, and cured of their perverseness. But the Particle ki,
which we here translate for, often signifies though; and may be very fitly so
rendered here: and then the meaning is, Though they be very Refractory, (XXXII.
9.) yet do not forsake them, and leave them to themselves; but still conduct
them, as thou have done.

And pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for their inheritance.] Since
thou art so ready to forgive ( v. 7.) do not cut us off for our late Offenses;
but still continue to own us for thy peculiar People. This Moses had begged of
God before, and obtained a Promise of it, XXXIII. 16, 17. (and see XIX. 5.) and
now he beseeches him, out of his Goodness which he had proclaimed, to confirm
that Promise, and not to revoke it upon every new Provocation.

Ver. 10. And he said, behold, I make a Covenant.] Herein God verified the
truth of what he had proclaimed: being so merciful and gracious, as not only to
confirm his Promise, but to turn it into a Covenant, like that at the giving of
his Laws from Mount Sinai, XXIV. 3, 7, etc. which he renews with them in the
next Verse. Where he engages to drive out the Inhabitants of Canaan before
them; and then requires them to take care not to imitate their Idolatry.

Before all thy people will I do marvels, such as have not been done in all the
Earth, etc.] This seems to relate to all the wonderful Works he intended to do,
in their Introduction into the Land of Canaan, by making the Waters of Jordan
retire, and the Walls of Jericho fall down; with the rest that followed, till
they got possession of their Inheritance.

For it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee] Such as shall declare the
Almighty Power of the Divine Majesty; and strike a Terror into all those that
oppose him, but demonstrate (in an astonishing manner) his Fidelity to his
People. For all this is said to confirm their belief of the Covenant he said he
would make with them in the beginning of the Verse.

Ver. 11. Observe thou that which I command thee this day.] Doubt not of what I
say; but only mark, and take care to do all that I now enjoin thee.

Behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, etc.] To
encourage them so to do, he premises what he intended to do for them; which he
put at the Conclusion of his Covenant, when he first declared it, XXIII. 23,
28. but here puts it in the front of it, that they might be the more sensible
of the reasonableness of those Commands to which he expected Obedience.

Ver. 12. Take heed to thy self.] He now renewing that Covenant with them,
which they had broken by the worshipping the golden Calf, repeats the principal
Precepts which concerned his Worship and Service (which had been delivered to
them before) and excites them to the observance of them, by the addition of a
very gracious Promise, v. 24.

Lest thou make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land whether thou
go.] Nothing could be more reasonable than this, that they should not enter
into Friendship with those Nations, whom he commanded them to expel, for their
abominable Wickedness; unless they would renounce their Idolatry, and come
under their Government. See XXIII. 32. and Mr. Seldom L. VI. de Jure N. and G.
in the latter end of the 13th Chapter, and beginning of the next.

Lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee.] Lest they inveigle thee to
imitate their manners.

Ver. 13. But ye shall destroy their Altars, break their Images, and cut down
their Groves.] This more largely explains what was briefly and summarily
delivered in XXIII. 32. Thou shall not make a Covenant with their Gods. And v.
24. Thou shall quite break down their Images. Which Images and Altars were
usually set in Groves, as sacred places; being the Temples of their Gods. See 2
Kings XXIII. 24. For when Tacitus says ( Lib. de Moribus Germanorum) that the
old Germans went to War as if God commanded them, whom they believed to be
present with them; he tells us, Effigiesque and signa quaedam detracta lucis id
praelium faerunt, they carried with them into the Battle, certain Images and
Signs, which they took out of their Groves. These, in all probability, were the
Images of their Gods, who they thought fought for them, as Joh. Filesacus
conjectures, L. II. Selectorum c. 5. de Caeremoniis, sect. 7. where he
observes, that these Groves were impure places, not only because there were the
Images and Altars of their false Gods; but all manner of filthiness and
leudness was committed under those Shades. Which made Horace call them parum
castos lucos, Lib. I. in the latter end of the XIIth Ode.

Some of the Hebrews restrained this Precept only to the Land of Canaan: where
they were bound to dedestroy all Things belonging to the Religion of those
Idolatrous People, in whose place they were planted, that they might not be
infected with their Impiety. See XII Deuteronomy. 2, 3. But in other Countries which
they conquered, they fancied they were not bound to root it out. Yet afterward
they saw it necessary to extend this Precept to all Idolatrous Countries, which
came under their Power, where they destroyed their Idols, as they had done in
Canaan: lest by imitation (...), their Polity should have been quite subverted,
as Josephus speaks. See Mr. Seldom L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 2.

Ver. 14. For thou shall worship no other God.] This being the great Principle
of their Religion, The LORD thy God is one LORD, VI Deuteronomy. 4. and there is no
other God beside him.

For the LORD whose name is Jealous.] So he calls himself, XX. 5. and gave
himself this peculiar Name, because he could not bear any other God to be Rival
with him, after the manner of the Gentiles. Whose Gods suffered a number of
other Gods, to share in the Worship that was given to them, by offering
Sacrifices, and burning Incense, and bowing down to them.

Is a jealous God.] As is his Name, so is he himself: he will not endure any
other to be worshipped with him.

Ver. 15. Lest thou make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land.] That is,
a Covenant of Marriage (for Covenants in general were forbidden before v. 12.)
which he commands them not to contract with the Inhabitants of Canaan: no, nor
with any Idolaters whatsoever. For though some of the Jews would restrain this
to the VII Nations only; yet the generality of them resolve it is meant of all
other Idolatrous People. And there is an illustrious Argument of it, in the
Ninth and Tenth Chapters of Ezra, and in XIII Nehemiah 25. This they will have
to have been as old as the Law of Circumcision; which they gather from XXXIV
Genesis 14. and it held throughout all following Ages. Insomuch that Mahomet
forbids any of his Religion to marry any one that is not made a Muselman, i.e.
a Believer of his Doctrine. As for such as turned from Idolatry, it was always
lawful to marry them; but they were so far from having to do with others, that
the Talmudists held it as unlawful to lie with a Gentile Woman, as with a Woman
in her Uncleanness. Whence that Character which Tacitus gives of the Jews,
Projectissima ad libidinem Gens, alienarum concubitu abstinet. See Seldom Lib.
V. de Jure N. and G. c. 12.

And they go a whoring after their Gods, and do Sacrifice to their Gods.] Of
which there was very great danger if they loved their Wives; who would have
great power over them (as appears by Solomon, 1 Kings XI. 2, 3, etc.) to entice
them to their Religion. Of this Phrase, Going a whoring after their Gods, see
Seld. Vxor. Hebr. L. III. c. 23.

And one call thee.] Invite thee (as the manner was) to the Feast that was
usually made, upon the Sacrifices offered to their Gods: as the Israelites eat
of the Peace Offerings, and invited their Friends to partake with them.

And thou eat of his Sacrifice.] By this we see how ancient and universal the
Custom was of Feasting upon Sacrifices: which Mr. Mede truly calls Epulae
Faederales, Faederal Feasts (upon 1 Malachi II. chap. 7.) For the Meat was
God's, being set upon his Table; of which he inviting the Offerers to partake,
they were his Guests; whom he entertained at his Table, in token of
Reconciliation and Friendship with him. And therefore whosoever eat of the
Sacrifices offered to other Gods, professed themselves to be their Worshippers
and Servants. Which made the Jews so cautious in this matter, that they would
not so much as drink the Wine, or the Water, or use the Salt of an Idolater,
not knowing but it might have been set before an Idol. So R. Levi Barzolonita
in the Explication of the CXII. Praecept. This explains that Discourse of the
Apostle 1 Corinthians. X. 20.

Ver. 16. And thou take of their Daughters unto thy Sons, etc.] If they
themselves married Idolaters, there was the greater danger they might be
content, to let their Sons and Daughters marry with them; especially if they
were Rich or Beautiful: and so the whole Family be undone.

Ver. 17. Thou shall make thee no molten Gods.] Images are called by the Name
of Gods; because they were worshipped together with them, as Symbols of their
Presence. And though molten be here only mentioned (upon occasion of their late
Sin, in worshipping the molten Calf, XXXII. 4.) yet all other Images are
intended, as appears by XX. 4, 23.

Ver. 18. The Feast of unleavened bread shall thou keep, etc.] See all this
explained, XII. 15, 16, etc. XIII. 6, 7. XXIII. 15.

As I commanded thee in the time of the month Abib, etc.] See XIII. 4. XXIII.
15.

Ver. 19. All that opens the Matrix is mine, etc.] See XIII. 12. XXII. 29, 30.

Ver. 20. But the firstborn of an Ass shall thou redeem, etc.] See XIII. 13.

And none shall appear before me empty.] See XXIII. 15.

Ver. 21. Six days shall thou work, etc.] See XX. 9. XXIII. 12. XXXI. 15. where
this is sufficiently explained. But here, to show the necessity of forbearing
labor on this day, they are not permitted it, in earing or in harvest. That
is, in the two most busy times of the year; when they plowed and sowed their
Ground, and when they reaped the Fruits thereof. See XLV Genesis 6.

Ver. 22. And thou shall observe the Feast of Weeks, etc.] This Verse also has
been explained before, XXIII. 16. Only here observe that the first-frruis of
Wheat-harvest being now offered at this Feast, there was an Harvest before
this, which began at the Passover, when they offered the first fruits of barley
harvest, XVI Deuteronomy. 9.

Ver. 23. Three times in the year shall all your Males appear before the LORD,
the God of Israel.] This likewise was explained XXIII. 14, 17. And nothing need
be added, but that these peculiar Laws are here repeated (together with those
that follow v. 25, 26.) upon this occasion; because they were ordained to
preserve the People in the Worship and Service of the true God, from whom they
had lately departed. Who therefore puts them in mind, in the last words of this
Verse (which was not said before) that he was the God of Israel, to whom they
were devoted by especial Obligations.

Ver. 24. For I will cast out the Nations before thee.] Till this was done,
they were not bound to observe the Precept, of appearing three times in the
year before the LORD.

And will enlarge thy borders.] Beyond the Land of Canaan, as he had promised
before, XXIII. 31.

Neither shall any man desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear before
the LORD, etc.] To remove all fear of their Mind, that their Neighbors might
Invade them, when all the Men were gone, and none but Women and Children and
Old men left at home, he adds this Promise to all he had made before (or rather
makes it a part of his Covenant, which he now renews) that he would lay such
Restraints upon their Enemies, that they should not so much as think of
Invading them at those three Feasts; much less make any actual Incursions into
their Country.

Ver. 25. Thou shall not offer the blood of my Sacrifice, etc.] At the
Passover. See this fully explained XXIII. 18.

Ver. 26. The first of the first fruits of thy Land thou shall bring unto the
House of the LORD thy God.] At Pentecost, which was the Feast of First Fruits.
See XXIII. 19.

Thou shall not seethe a Kid in its mothers milk.] This concerns the other
great Feast, that of Tabernacles. See in the same place.

Ver. 27. And the LORD said unto Moses.] Having recited the principal part of
his Covenant mentioned v. 10. he gives the following order.

Write thou these words.] From v. 11. to this place: just as he did those words
contained in the XXI, XXII, XXIII Chapters of this Book (See XXIV. 4.) out of
which these words are extracted, as the chief things respecting the Worship of
God; which he requires him to write in a Book by it self.

For after the tenor of these words have I made a Covenant with thee, and with
Israel.] See XXIV. 7. Where the Covenant, containing these words and many
other, was Sealed with the Blood of a Sacrifice.

The Jews are so blind as to found their Oral Tradition upon this place, and
upon one small word (Pi) which signifies indeed mouth; but withal is an
expletive Particle, denoting the manner and value of any thing, as appears from
XLIII Genesis 7. XXVII Lev. 18. and therefore here rightly translated the tenor of
these words. Yet R. Johannes, in the very beginning of Halicoth Olam, gathers
from hence, That God made a Covenant now with their Fathers, concerning all the
unwritten Laws delivered by word of Mouth. Unto which which while they adhere,
they can never understand their Divine Writings: For what can be more plain,
that the Covenant here mentioned, was ordered to be written?

Ver. 28. And he was there with the LORD.] This says Maimonides, was the
highest degree of Prophecy, which none attained but Moses: whose Thoughts were
wholly taken off from all other things, and fixed upon God, while he was with
him in the holy Mount; that is, asked and received Answers from the LORD, More
Nevochim. P. III. c. 51.

Forty days and forty nights.] As he had been at the first, XXIV. 18. Which was
partly to make a new trial, how they would behave themselves in his Absence;
and partly to give the greater Authority to the Laws he brought them from God,
which he renewed, as we read in the end of this Verse.

And did neither eat bread, nor drink water.] But was supported by Influences
from the Almighty, who kept up his Spirits in their just height, without the
common Recruits of Meat and Drink. Which, when they give us Refreshment,
likewise make us drowsy; See XXIV. 18. To which add what Maimonides says in
the place now named, That the Joy wherewith he was transported, made him not
think of eating and drinking; for his intellectual Faculties were so strong,
that all Corporal Desires ceased.

It seems to me very probable, That during this time, he saw again the Model of
the Tabernacle, and all its Furniture, with every thing else he was ordered to
make when he went first into the Mount, from the beginning of the XXVth to the
end of the XXXth Chapter; which are briefly summed up XXXI. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. He
seems also to have spent much of this time in Prayer to God for the People,
That he would restore them entirely to his Favor, and bring them to their
Inheritance, IX Deuteronomy. 18, 19, 25, 26. X. 10.

And he wrote upon the Tables the words of the Covenant, etc.] That is, the
LORD wrote (as he said he would v. 1.) not Moses: who wrote the foregoing words
in a Book; but not these, which were written by the Finger of God in the Tables
of Stone. So Moses tells us expressly, X Deuteronomy. 4. Jacobus Capellus, and others
following the Hebrew Doctors, imagine that Moses was three times with God in
the Mount, for the space of XL. days; and that this was the last time. Between
which and the first they place another, which they fancy is mentioned XXXII.
30, 31. compared with IX Deuteronomy. 18, etc. But I see no solid ground for this: for
God called him up into the Mount but twice; and he durst not have adventured to
go so near him, as he was both these times, without his invitation.

Ver. 29. And it came to pass when Moses came down from Mount Sinai.] Which was
upon the XXV. of our August, according to the former Computation, v. 2.

With the two Tables of Testimony in Moses hand, when he came down from the
Mount.] So he came down at the first, XXXII. 15.

That Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone.] There was a radient
Splendor in his Countenance; which is the import of the Hebrew Karan, which
the Vulgar translates horned. Not imagining that Moses had Horns, but Rays of
Light, which imitated Horns. And therefore the Hebrew word Karnaim signifies
both; and R. Solomon Jarchi upon this place calls these Rays on Moses's Face,
Horns of Magnificence, as Mr. Seldom observes, L. II. de Jure N. and G. c. 6.
p. 292. It is not improbable that the Hair of his Head was inter-spersed with
Light, as well as that Rays came from his Face; which perstringed the Eyes of
Beholders. And Painters had done more reasonably, if instead of Horns upon
Moses his Forehead, they had represented him with a Glory crowning his Head, as
the Saints are usually painted in the Roman Church. Which perhaps came from the
ancient Custom among the Heathen, who thus represented their Gods, as Tho.
Bartholinus observes ( de Morbis Biblicis cap. 5.) out of Lucian de Dea Syria,
where he says she did (...) carry Beams upon her Head. Whence it was that the
Roman Emperors, who were raised so much above the rest of Mankind, that they
honored them as a sort of Deities, were thus represented; as appears by many
Testimonies, particularly Pliny, who in his Panegyric to Trajan, laughs and
jeers at the radiatum Domitiani caput.

While he talked with him.] While he conversed so famaliarly with the Divine
Majesty, and both saw his Glory and heard him proclaim his Name, v. 5, 6, 7. At
his first being in the Mount, there was no such Brightness left upon his
Countenance; for he did not see the Divine Majesty in so great a Splendor as
he did now; when the LORD, upon his Petition, vouchsafed him such a sight of
his Glory, as he could bear, XXXIII. 18, 23. Which was so exceeding piercing,
that it altered the very Skin of Moses his Face, and made it luminous. Of which
Moses does not seem to have been sensible, till some time after he came down
from the Mount (when Aaron, as well as others, were afraid to come nigh him)
having his Thoughts wholly possessed with the far more transcendent Glory of
the Divine Majesty, of which he had a Glimpse.

From this familiar Conference which Moses had with God, it is likely the
Heathen took occasion to invent the like Stories of their Zamolxis, who
pretended to receive his Laws from Vesta; and Minos and Lycurgus, who said they
received theirs from Jupiter and Apollo: with several others mentioned by
Diodorus Siculus L. I. who then adds Moses had his from the God Jao; so they
pronounced the Name Jehovah. But they had no such Testimony as this of their
Communication with the Divine Majesty; much less were their Laws confirmed by
such Miracles, as lasted for the space of XL. years under the Conduct of Moses,
in the sight of all People.

Ver. 30. And when Aaron and all the Children of Israel saw Moses, behold the
skin of his face shone.] This highly established his Authority, and bred in
them a Reverence to the Laws he brought, that they were all Witnesses of the
brightness or glory of his Countenance (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. III.
7.) which demonstrated he had been with God, as he affirmed, and had beheld the
Glory of his Majesty, and received from him the Tables of Testimony. By all the
Children of Israel in this Verse, seems to be meant all the Rulers of the
Congregregation mentioned in the next.

And they were afraid to come nigh him.] The Light which shone from his
Countenance was so great, that it dazzled the Eyes of Beholders; even of Aaron
himself: who did not know whether it would be safe to approach him. This was an
illustrious Testimony, that he had been with God, who dwells, as the Apostle
speaks, in light inaccessible.

Ver. 31. And Moses called unto them.] Invited them to come near him, and not
to fear any hurt.

And Aaron, and all the Rulers of the Congregation, returned unto him.] Viz.
After he had put a Vail upon his Face, till which they could not steadfastly
look upon it, (as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. III. 7.) the Light of it being so
strong, that it hurt their Eyes, if they fixed them there.

And Moses talked with them.] Acquainted them with what he had seen and heard.

Ver. 32. And afterward all the Children of Israel came ^igh, etc.] There was a
general Assembly of all the Tribes summoned, that he might deliver to them all
that which he had received from God. See XXXV. 1.

And he gave them in Commandment all that the LORD had spoken with him in Mount
Sinai.] All the Orders he had given about the Building of the Tabernacle, and
the rest contained in the XXV, XXVI Chapters, and those that follow to the
XXXII. For at his first coming from the Mount, finding them in an Apostasy from
God, he said nothing to them about these matters: but, in abhorrence of their
foul Idolatry, broke the Tables of Testimony, which God had given him to
deliver to them.

Ver. 33. And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his
face.] This seems to belong as well to v. 31. as to the 32d, and accordingly I
have interpreted it. Though there are those who think, he persuaded Aaron and
the Rulers to approach without a Vail: but put it on, when he spoke to the
People, who were less able to bear it. But there seems to be the same reason
for both; Aaron being no less afraid than any of them. And the Majesty of his
Countenance appeared sufficiently, even when it was veiled: for the brightness
was not quite obscured, though very much shaded by it.

Ver. 34. But when Moses went in before the LORD to speak with him, he took the
vail off, till he came out.] He went into the Tabernacle, where he spoke with
him face to face, as a Man speaks to his Friend, XXXIII. 9, 10, 11.

And he came out, and spoke unto the Children of Israel, that which he was
commanded.] This seems to relate unto the frequent occasions Moses had to go
and consult with God in difficult Cases; whose Mind he declared to them when he
had received it.

Ver. 35. And the Children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of
Moses face shone, etc.] Some great Men have thought that the brightness
continued on Moses's Face till his death; so that he spoke to them with a Vail
on his Face, from this time as long as he lived. Of which we cannot be certain;
though thus much is evident from this and the foregoing Verse, that the
Splendor of his Countenance did remain for some time after he came down from
God's Presence in the Mount. During which, as often as he went in to speak with
God he took off his Vail, and when he came out to speak with them, he put it
on; until he went in to speak with God again, as this Verse concludes. How long
it was before it vanished, none can resolve. Perhaps not till he had set up the
Tabernacle, and consecrated Aaron and his Sons, and delivered all the Laws he
had received about the Service of God, which are recorded in the Book of
Leviticus. That is, all the time they stayed near Mount Sinai; from whence they
removed a little more than half a year after this, X Numb. 11, 12.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse 1. AND Moses gathered all the Congregation of the Children of Israel
together.] Having told them what orders he had received from the LORD, and
sufficiently convinced them of his Authority (XXXIV. 32, 33.) he now proceeds
to put them in Execution. And in order to it, he gathered Col-hadath, all the
Congregation: which sometimes signifies all the Elders and Judges, etc. (the
prime Governors of the People) and sometimes the whole Body of the People, as
Corn. Bon. Bertram observes, de Repub. Jud. cap. 6. It seems here to be used in
the first Sense; for he could not speak these words to the whole Body of the
People, but to the principal Persons of the several Tribes, by whom what he
said was communicated to all Israel.

These are the words which the LORD has commanded, that ye should do them.]
Before they entered upon the work, he admonishes them that none of it must be
done upon the Sabbath.

Ver. 2. Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to
you an holy Sabbath, etc.] This Commandment was particularly repeated to Moses,
at the end of all the directions about the building of the Tabernacle, (See
XXXI. 13, 14, 15.) and now repeated to them (as it was at his late renewing his
Covenant with them, XXXIV. 21.) that they might not imagine any of the work
here commanded to be done about the Tabernacle, etc. would license them to
break the Sabbath. The observation of which being the great Preservative of
Religion, that is the reason it is so often enjoined, and particular care taken
to secure it. And it is not to be omitted, that (to show of what great concern
it is) he calls it here as he did XXXI. 15. where the end and use of it is set
down, the Sabbath of Sabbaths, that is, the great Sabbath or Rest.

Ver. 3. Ye shall kindle no fire in your Habitations, upon the Sabbath Day.] To
dress their Meat, or for any other work: otherwise they might kindle a Fire to
warm themselves in cold Weather. This is sufficiently comprehended under the
general Command, Thou shall not do any work, XX. 10. Therefore the meaning is,
Thou shall not so much as kindle a fire, for any such purpose. For that is the
Rule they give in Halicoth Olam cap. 2. that such particular Prohibitions
forbid the whole kind, i. e. all manner of work whatsoever; which is here
mentioned, to show they might not kindle a fire for this work of the Tabernacle.

Ver. 4. And spoke unto all the Congregation, etc.] See v. 1.

This is the Thing which the LORD commanded.] Having secured the observation of
the Sabbath, according to the Direction given just before he came down from the
Mount the first time, (XXXI. 13, 14, 15.) he now relates to them what Commands
he received from God, concerning all that follows.

Ver. 5. Take ye from amongst you an offering unto the LORD.] And first he
makes a motion to them from the LORD, that they would make a free Oblation of
Materials for the Building of the Tabernacle, and all other things which the
LORD commanded to be made, v. 10, etc.

Take ye, is as much as bring ye, and so we translate it XXV. 2. See there.
Where it appears that this was the very first thing God said to him (concerning
a voluntary Offering, which was the Foundation of all the rest) and therefore
is first propounded to the People by him.

Whosoever is of a willing heart, etc.] See there XXV. 2.

Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. All these have been explained in the XXV Chapter, v. 3, 4, 5,
etc.

Ver. 10. Every wise-hearted among you, shall come and make all that the LORD
has commanded.] Every skilful Person in the Art of making the things
following. The same is said of the Women, v. 25. The Hebrew word Cochmah, which
we translate Wisdom, is used variously, as Maimonides observes; sometimes for
the understanding of Divine things; sometimes for Moral Virtue; and sometimes
for skill in a^^ Art (of which he alleges this place as an instance) and
sometimes for Craft and Subtilty. See More Nevochim P. III. c. 54. The word leb
(or heart) is used here according to the Vulgar opinion of those days, that the
Heart is the Seat of the Understanding. And thus I observed before upon Chap.
XXV. that excellent Artists are by the Heathen called Wisemen. Since which I
have observed that this is the Language of Homer himself; whose Verses
concerning Margites are quoted by Aristotle in more places than one ( L. VI.
Moral. ad Nicomach. c. 7. and L. V. Moral. ad Endemum c. 7.) where he says he
was so foolish, that (...)
(...)
The Gods neither made him a Ditcher, nor a Plough-man, nor any other sort of
Wiseman. Upon which Aristotle notes, (...) We ascribe Wisdom in Arts to those
who excel in them; and then he instances in Phidias a Stone-Cutter, and
Pobycletus a Statuary.

Ver. 11. The Tabernacle.] This signifies sometimes the whole Structure of the
House of God; but here only the fine inward Curtains, mentioned XXVI. 1, 2, etc.

His Tent.] This signifies the Curtains of Goats-hair; which were laid over the
other, XXVI. 7, etc.

His Covering.] Of Rams-skins and Badger-skins; which were thrown over the
other two, XXVI. 14.

His Taches, and his Boards, his Bars, his Pillars and his Sockets.] All these
are explained in that Chapter.

Ver. 12. The Ark and his Staves, with the Mercy-seat.] See XXV. 10, 13, 17.

And the Vail of the Covering.] Whereby the Holy was separated from the most
Holy Place. Which is here fitly mentioned between the Mercy-seat, which was
within; and the Table, etc. which were without this Vail.

Ver. 13. The Table and his Staves, and all his Vessels.] See all these
explained XXV. 23, 24, etc.

And the Shewbread.] This is a short Expression, one word (as is usual) being
cut off, viz. the Dishes, in which the Shewbread was set. For Moses had not
order to make the Bread it self, but the Dishes (as I said) on which the Loaves
were laid, XXV. 29.

Ver. 14. The Candlestick also for the light, and his Furniture and his Lamps.]
See XXVI. 31, 32, etc.

With the Oil for the Light.] See XXVII. 20, 21.

Ver. 15. And the Incense Altar and the Staves.] See XXXI. 1, 2, etc.

And the anointing Oil.] XXXI. 23, 24, etc.

And the sweet Incense.] XXXI. 34, etc. He mentioned before the Materials for
them ( v. 8.) and now the things themselves.

And the hanging for the door, at the entering in of the Tabernacle.] Of this
see XXVI. 36.

Ver. 16. And the Altar of Burnt-offering, with his brazen Grate, his Staves.]
These are explained XXVII. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7.

And all his Vessels.] See there v. 3.

The Laver and his foot.] See XXIX. 17, 18.

Ver. 17. The hangings of the Court, his Pillars and their Sockets.] See XXVII.
9, 10, etc.

And the hangings for the door of the Court.] See there v. 16.

Ver. 18. The Pins of the Tabernacle, etc.] XXVII. 19.

Ver. 19. The Clothes of the Service, to do Service in the holy place, the holy
Garments for Aaron the Priest, and his Sons, etc.] Of which there is an account
in the whole XXVIIIth Chapter. And Moses here makes this large enumeration of
all the things which God had commanded ( v. 10.) that they might be stirred up
to be the more liberal in their Offering, when they saw how many things were to
be done.

Ver. 20. And all the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] Whom he had
summoned to meet together, v. 1.

Departed from the presence of Moses.] When he had reported to them what Orders
he had received from the Divine Majesty in the Mount, v. 4, 5, etc.

Ver. 21. And they came.] Being dismissed to their own Tents, they went thither
only to fetch an Offering to the LORD; which they came and brought immediately.

Every one whose heart stirred him up.] Whose Mind was raised to a free and
cheerful readiness. The Hebrew words are lifted him up; that is, had animum
excelsum, a noble Mind; or was of a generous Spirit; as the following words
import, Every one whom his Spirit made willing.

And they brought the LORDS Offering.] An Offering to the LORD, as Moses
exhorted v. 5.

To the work of the Tabernacle.] For the building a Sanctuary, wherein God
might dwell among them, XXV. 8.

And for all his Service.] For all that belonged to the Furniture of it, both
within and without, which are mentioned in the Verses before-going.

And for the holy Garments.] That the Priests might Minister there in their
Office, v. 19.

Ver. 22. And they came both Men and Women, as many as were willing-hearted.]
Who seem to have been the greatest part of the Congregation.

And brought Bracelets, and Earrings and Rings.] They were no less forward to
offer to the Service of God, than they had been to the making the Golden Calf,
XXXII. 2, 3. for which offense they now make some sort of Satisfaction; being
more liberal in contributing to this Work, than they were to that. For we read
there only of their Earrings which they break off from their Ears, and brought
to Aaron; but here of their Bracelets also, and Rings, with other things. For
though they may be supposed to have parted with a great deal, on that wicked
account; it did not make those who were touched with what Moses said, less
willing to give a fresh to an holy use.

Tablets.] The Hebrew word Comaz or Camaz, is of very uncertain signification;
for some make it an Ornament of the Arms, and others of some other part: But
the Chaldee takes it for something about the Breast; a Fascia (says Elias)
wherewith Women tied up and compressed their Breasts, to make them appear more
beautiful, by being round. This Bochartus approves in his Canaan, L. II. c. 5.

All Jewels of Gold.] All the four forenamed sort of Ornaments were of Gold.

And every Man that offered, offered an Offering of Gold unto the LORD.] The
first Oblations that were brought, either by the Women, or the Men, were all of
Gold: and then followed meaner things, which the People of lower Condition
brought to the LORD.

Ver. 23. And every Man with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
sine linen, etc.] The common sort of People also offered such as they had,
Yarn, and sine Linen, Goats-hair, and Skins. See XXV. 4, 5.

Ver. 24. Every one that did offer an Offering of Silver and Brass, etc.] Those
of a middle Condition, offered Silver, and Brass, and Shittim-wood. All which
were necessary for several uses: For the Ark, and the Table, were to be
overlaid with Gold; of which the Candlesticks, and several other things, were
to be made. See Chap. XXV. The inward Curtains were to be made of the Yarn; and
the outward of Goats-hair; and the Covering of both, of Skins. The Foundations
of the Tabernacle were of Silver; and the Taches of the Curtains, and Altar of
Burnt-offering, of Brass; and Shittim-wood was used about the Boards of the
Tabernacle, the Ark, Table, etc. See Chap. XXV, XXVI, XXVII.

Ver. 25. And all the Women that were wise-hearted, did spin with their hands,
and brought that which they had spun, etc.] Not only the Men, but the Women
also brought Materials for the House; and more then that, such as were skilful
among them spun both Yarn and Thread: which was the proper work of Women, not of
Men. Unto which work alone they were bound to apply themselves; if by the
custom of the place no other work (such as knitting and sewing with their
Needle, etc.) was usually performed by them, as Mr. Seldom observes L. III. de
Vxor. Hebr. c. 10. where he treats of all the Employments of their Women.

Ver. 26. And all the Women whose heart stirred them up.] Whose Minds were
elevated to excellent Contrivances.

In Wisdom, spun Goats-hair.] With great Art spun Goats-hair; which was not so
easy, as to spin Wool and Flax. For though their Goats were shorn in those
Countries, as Sheep are here (their Hair being longer than ours) yet there was
a great deal of Skill required to work it into a Thread, and to make Stuff of
it. See Bochart. Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. c. 51. In old time also Women were
wont to weave as well as spin, as appears, not only out of the Sacred Books,
but out of Homer, Plato, Cicero, and many other Authors mentioned by Braunius
in his Book de Vestitu Sacerd. Hebr. L. I. c. 17. where he observes ( N. 33.)
out of Herodotus, that he showing the Egyptian Customs to be different in many
things, from those of other Nations, mentions this among the rest, that their
Men (...), sat at home and weaved, while their Women went abroad and bought and
sold, L. II. c. 35.

Ver. 27. And the Rulers brought Onyx-stones, and Stones to be set for the
Ephod, and for the Breast Plate.] The great Men also offered suitable to their
quality; such things as the People could not furnish, viz. precious Stones for
uses mentioned XXV. 7. XXVIII. 9, 17, 18, etc.

Ver. 28. And Spice, and Oil for the light, and for the anointing Oil, etc.]
Such principal Spices (as we translate it) mentioned XXX. 23, 34. together with
Oil for the Light, XXVII. 20. which was so pure, that ordinary Persons had it
not. For there were several sorts of Olives (as Fort. Scacchus shows Myrothec.
Sacr. Elaeochrism. P. I. c. 4, 5.) some of which were not so common as the
other, and therefore of greater value.

Ver. 29. The Children of Israel brought a willing Offering, etc.] To sum up
all, in a few words, they brought whatsoever was necessary for all manner of
work which the LORD had commanded to be made.

By the hand of Moses.] Whom he employed to deliver these Commands to his
People.

Ver. 30. And Moses said, See, the LORD has called by name, etc.] Has
principally made choice of Bezaleel to undertake and perform this work. This he
said, that they might not be solicitous about Artists, to make all that was
propounded; for they knew that there were none among them, bred to such
Employments. Moses therefore informs them in the first place, that God had
provided himself of a Master-Workman, as he told him XXXI. 1, 2, etc.

Ver. 31. And he has filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, etc.] This
Verse is explained before XXXI. 3, 6. only I shall add, That the extraordinary
Skill which any Man had, without teaching, in common Arts, was by the Heathens
ascribed to their Gods. There are several Instances of it observed by Maximus
Tyrius Dissert. XXII. Where he argues that it should not be thought strange, if
a Man be made virtuous by a Divine Inspiration, when some have no otherways
become admirable Artists. Among which he mentions Demodocus, a Musician whom
Homer introduces, speaking thus of himself, (...). I was never taught by any
body, but the Gods bestowed on me the gift of singing. The latter end of which
Verse is a little otherways in Homer, as we now have him ( Odyss. X.) but to
the same sense, and it is Phemius, not Demodocus who there speaks, as Petrus
Petitus has observed in his Miscell. Observe. L. 1. c. 19.

Ver. 32. And to devise curious works.] The Hebrew word Chaschab signifies to
devise, and excogitate; whence Macheschaboth, which we translate curious works
(and in the end of the next Verse cunning works) is as much, as ingenious
Inventions, devised with much Art. Such were the Engines made by King Vzziah,
which are said to be invented by cunning men, or excellent Engeniers, as we now
speak, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 15. See XXXI. 4. where this Verse has been explained.

Ver. 33. And in the cutting of Stones, etc.] See XXXI. 5.

Ver. 34. And he has put in his heart that he may teach.] Instruct others in
his Arts. For this was a gift of God, as much as any of the rest, to be able to
inform others dexterously, in those things which he knew himself: As it was, to
be able to comprehend, what Moses told him God had ordered, and put it in
execution. For God gave Moses the pattern, according to which all things were
to be wrought: and as it was a peculiar gift of God which enabled him to
represent to Bezaleel, what had been set before him; so it was by an
extraordinary operation on his Mind, that he conceived presently what was
represented, and had Skill to perform it, according to direction.

Ver. 35. Them has he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work,
etc.] This is repeated so often, and such particular mention is here made again
of their Skill in every thing, though of never so difficult Contrivance; to
assure the Israelites that they were so well qualified for the work, that they
might be entrusted with the Offerings they had made. And accordingly they were
XXXVI. 3.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse 1. THen wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, etc.]
This Verse is only a general Account of what follows more particularly,
concerning the Execution of that which God had commanded, and for the effecting
of which the People had liberally contributed. It is not said where they
wrought, but some think it was in that very space of ground where the
Tabernacle was set up, when perfected.

Ver. 2. And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in
whose heart the LORD had put wisdom.] It appears by this that all the lower
Artificers, who were taught by the Master-workmen Bezaleel and Aholiab, were
also disposed by God to learn; he giving them a quickness of apprehension and
sagacity, beyond what was natural to them.

Even every one whose heart stirred him up, to come unto the work to do it.]
Yet this signifies, they had also a natural Genius, which inclined and prompted
them to such Employments.

Ver. 3. And they received of Moses all the Offerings which the Children of
Israel had brought for the work of the Sanctuary, etc.] Into the hands of all
these Artists, Moses delivered the Offerings that had been made; and directed
them what to do with them.

And they brought yet unto him Free-offerings every morning.] The hearts of the
People were so enlarged, that every day they brought new Contributions unto
Moses; who sent them (as appears by the next Verse) to the Workmen, as soon as
he received them.

Ver. 4. And all the wise men which wrought all the work of the Sanctuary, came
every man from his work which he made.] After they had continued some time at
their work, they all agreed to desist a while, and go to Moses, to let him know
that there needed no further Offerings, for they had sufficient already; nay,
more than enough, as it follows v. 5.

Ver. 5. And they spoke unto Moses, saying, the People bring much more than
enough, for the service of the work, etc.] A wonderful instance of Integrity,
that there should not be one Man found among them (for the words in the Hebrew
are very emphatical, isch, isch [man, man] that is, none excepted) who was
inclined to purloin any thing for his own proper use: but by common consent,
they left their work, to put a stop to all further Contributions. A sign they
were Men endued with extraordinary Virtue, as well as Skill in their
Employments.

Ver. 6. And Moses gave Commandment.] To those that attended on him; or perhaps
to Bezaleel and Aholiab, and the rest.

And they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the Camp.] By some
Underofficers, who, it is likely, were wont to execute such Commands.

Saying, let neither man nor woman make any more work for the Offering of the
Sanctuary.] It seems some Men prepared and made ready some of the things which
they offered; as the Women spun Yarn and Hair, and brought them to Moses. For
it was not hard to plain Boards (for instance) though the joining them
together, as God appointed, was beyond the Skill of common People.

Ver. 7. For the stuff they had were sufficient, etc.] There were Materials of
all sorts, for every thing that was to be made, beyond what was necessary.

Ver. 8. And every wise-hearted man among them that wrought the work of the
Tabernacle, etc.] They began first (as was but fit) with the House of God,
before they made the Furniture. For that was first ordered in general words,
XXV. 8. though the Structure of it be not directed till the XXVIth Chapter.
Where every thing mentioned in this is explained; and therefore there will need
no more to be done here, but to point to a few things, which are explained
elsewhere particularly in the foregoing Chapter.

Ver. 14. He made Curtains of Goats-hair for the Tent over the Tabernacle.]
What is here meant by Tent, see XXXV. 11.

Ver. 19. He made a covering for the Tent.] This Curtain covered the Tent, as
the Curtain of which the Tent was made covered the Tabernacle. See XXVI. 14.
XXXV. 11.

Of Rams-skins died red.] The Particle Mem here is cut off before Skins; as it
is in several Verses of this Chapter, 8, 34, 35. and others.

Covering of Badgers-skins.] I observed on XXVI. 14. that THACAS does not
signify a Badger, but a certain Color, and alleged that place in XVI Ezekiel.
10. for the proof of it, where God setting forth his kindness to Israel, under
the figure of a most loving Husband, who denies his Wife nothing, though never
so costly, says he shod her with Thacas; which I since sind translated by an
Anonymous Author, with purple shoes.

CHAP. XXXVII.
IN this Chapter Moses gives an Account of the making of all the Furniture of
the Tabernacle; with such exactness as he describes the making of the
Tabernacle it self, in the foregoing Chapter. To show that God's directions
about the making every thing, was punctually observed; nothing being omitted or
added, but all made according to the Pattern in the Mount, XXV. 9, 40. In which
Chapter most of the things here mentioned, are explained; and there needs
little to be added here.

Ver. 1. And Bezaleel made the Ark of Shittim-wood, etc.] Abarbinel fancies,
that though other things were made by inferior Artificers, whom Bezaleel
directed; yet the Ark, because of its dignity and pre-eminence, above all other
things was made by him, without the help of any other. And so Rambam also; from
whence the Jews commonly called it (as Buxtorf observes) the Ark of Bezaleel.
But this has no good foundation; for he is said to have made also every thing
else in the Tabernacle; the Table, and all its Vessels: in short, every thing
mentioned in this Chapter, and in the next also, and in the foregoing, v. 10,
11, etc. He therefore is said to have made the Ark, etc. because he gave
directions to the under Workmen, and saw them make it.

Ver. 10. And he made the Table of Shittim-wood, etc.] Next to the Ark, the
Mercy-seat, and the Cherubims which belong to it; the Table and the Vessels
appertaining to it, were the principal things within the Tabernacle. See XXV.
23, etc. where all the things, mentioned between this Verse and the
Seventeenth, are explained.

Ver. 17. And he made the Candlestick, etc.] The orders which Moses received
for the making this, the Branches and the Lamps thereof, and every thing
appertaining to it, are set down XXV. 31, 32, etc. which Bezaleel exactly
followed.

Ver. 25. He made the Incense Altar, etc.] This and all that follows in the
three next Verses, see explained XXX. 1, etc.

Ver. 29. And he made the holy anointing Oil, etc.] See XXX. 31, etc.

And the pure Incense, etc.] XXX. 34, etc.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse 1. AND he made the Altar of Burnt-offering, etc.] Having given an
Account of the making of all the Furniture of the House, he proceeds to show
how all things were made without doors, with the same exactness, according to
the Divine Prescriptions. All which Bezaleel could not make with his own hands;
but he was chief Director in these things, as well as the rest of the Work.

Five Cubits was the length thereof, etc.] See XXVII. 1, 2, etc. where this,
and the six following Verses are explained.

Ver. 8. And he made the Laver of brass, etc.] See XXX. 18. where order is
given for the making of this Laver, and its situation directed: but neither
there, nor here are we told the figure or dimensions of it; but have a
particular remark, in this place, concerning the Materials out of which it was
made in the following words.

Of the Looking glasses.] So we interpret the Hebrew word Maroth; because now
such things are commonly made of Glass: but anciently of polished Brass; which
they looked upon as far better than Silver, for that made a weaker reflection,
as Vitruvius informs us, L. VII. c. 3. And the best of these Specula were,
among the ancient Romans, made at Brundusium, of Brass and Tin mixed together,
as Pliny tells us, L. XXXIII. 9. XXXIV. 17. This shows the Laver was made of
the finest and most pure Brass.

Of the Women assembling, which assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] The Hebrew word Hattzobeoth signifies that they came by Troops
to make this Present to the LORD. And the LXX. and Chaldee understanding it, of
such Women as came together to serve God, by Fasting and Prayer (for there is
the same word used in 1 Samuel II. 22.) most Interpreters think, they that made
this Oblation, were very devout Women, who were wont to spend much time at the
Tabernacle, where the Presence of God was. For Moses his Tent, served instead
of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and was so called, till this Tabernacle
was built, XXXIII. 7, etc. Thus Aben-Ezra also observes, upon these words; That
these Women making a Freewill Offering of the Looking-glasses, wherein they
were wont to behold the Beauty of their Faces, and to dress and adorn their
Heads; it seems to argue their very Religious Mind, despising the Vanity of the
World, and delighting far more in the Service of God.

Ver. 9. And he made the Court, etc.] All that follows from this place to v.
21. is explained in the XXVII Chapter, from v. 9. to v. 20. except two or three
words, which I shall here take notice of.

Ver. 17. The Chapiters of Silver.] There is no mention of Rashim (Chapiters)
in the XXVII Chapter; but only of Vauim (or hooks) which were of Silver, v. 10.
and 17. But this Verse shows that those hooks, were in the Chapiters, or Heads
of the Pillars, out of which those arose, as an Ornament to them.

Ver. 18. And the height in the breadth, etc.] This is an Hebrew Phrase,
signifying the height of the Hanging it self: whose breadth when it lay along,
was called its height when it was hung up. And that was five Cubits;
proportionable to the Hangings of the Court, which was five Cubits high, XXVII.
18.

Ver. 21. This is the sum of the Tabernacle, even of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony, etc.] Some will have this relate to the forenamed things, mentioned
in this and in the foregoing Chapters. But I take it rather to be a Preface to
the Account which Moses ordered to be taken of all the Gold, Silver and Brass
that was employed in building of the Tabernacle. Which being summed up,
amounted to so many Talents as are mentioned v. 24, etc.

For the Service of the Levites.] Rather, By the Ministry of the Levites; whom
Moses appointed to take the Account of all the Expenses.

By the hand of Ithamar, Son to Aaron the Priest.] Under the Conduct of
Ithamar, the youngest Son of Aaron; whom he appointed to preside over the
Levites, in taking this account.

Ver. 22. And Bezaleel the Son of Uri, made all that the LORD commanded Moses.]
Which Gold, Silver and Brass was committed into the hands of Bezaleel (though
in the Presence of all the rest of the Workmen, XXXVI. 2, 3.) as the principal
Person, who was to see it employed, in making every thing which the LORD
commanded Moses.

Ver. 23. And with him was Aholiab, etc.] Unto whom God joined Aholiab as his
Associate in so great an Undertaking; who made use of several others, whom they
taught in those Arts, which God by an extraordinary Inspiration had made them
to understand, XXXV. 30, 31, 34, 35.

Ver. 24. All the gold which was occupied for the work, etc.] About the Ark,
the Table, the Candlestick, and all belonging to them, XXXVII. 2, 11, 17, 24,
26. and about the holy Garments mentioned XXXIX. 5, etc. 15, 25, 30.

What was not employed about this work (for the People brought more than
enough, XXXVI. 5, 7.) it is very probable was laid up in the Treasury, for
Sacred Uses, as there should be occasion.

Twenty and nine Talents, and seven hundred and thirty Shekels.] It has been
noted before, that a Shekel is near half a Crown of our Money: Now it is
evident (from v. 25, 26.) that there were Three thousand Shekels in a Talent;
so that a Talent of Silver, as Dr. Cumberland, now Bishop of Peterburgh,
computes it (in his learned Treatise of Scriptures of Weights and Measures, c.
4.) amounts to Three hundred fifty three pound, eleven shillings, and some odd
pence, in our Money. And a Talent of Gold (reckoning Gold to be above fourteen
times in value) to Five thousand seventy Six pound, three shillings and ten
pence.

Ver. 25. And the Silver of them that were numbered of the Congregation was an
hundred Talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen
shekels, etc.] There being Six hundred, and three thousand, five hundred and
fifty men, that offered each of them half a Shekel (as the next Verse tells us)
they make Three hundred and one thousand, seven hundred and seventy five
thousand Shekels. Which amounting to an Hundred Talents, with 1775. Shekels
more, demonstrates that a Talent contains Three thousand Shekels. For no Number
(as the same Learned Bishop has shown) but Three thousand, dividing 301775.
will produce an Hundred, and leave 1775 in Remainder.

Ver. 26. A Bekah for every man, that is half a Shekel, etc.] See XXX. 13. Some
may possibly think it unaccountable, that so great Treasures should be found
among the Israelites in the Desert; and especially that they should be
furnished with such precious Stones, as are mentioned in the next Chapter v.
10. etc. as they were before, XXVIII. 17, 18, etc. But such Persons should
consider, that their Ancestors were very great Men, and had gathered great
Riches, before they came into Egypt: where Joseph, it is likely, left them no
small Treasures: And though Pharaoh perhaps squeezed them (as I said upon
Chapter the first) yet they preserved most of their Riches, and were
re-imbursed what they lost, by what they borrowed of the Egyptians. From whose
dead bodies, thrown on the Seashore, we may well suppose they got still more;
as they did also from the Amalekites, who being a People near to Arabia (from
whence a great part of the precious Stones came) we may likewise suppose were
not unfurnished with them. And besides all this, they had Shittim-wood good
store in the Wilderness (as I noted Chap. XXV.) and some of the Jews,
particularly Abarbinel, think it not improbable, that they traded with the
Neighboring Nations, who bordered upon the Wilderness, while they continued in
it.

Ver. 27. And of the hundred Talents of Silver were cast the Sockets of the
Sanctuary, etc.] It appears by the XXVI Chapter, that there were just an
Hundred of these Sockets, which were the Foundation of the House of God, v. 19,
21, 25, 32. To the making of every one of which there went a Talent of Silver.

Ver. 28. And of the thousand seven hundred seventy five shekels, he made,
etc.] An hundred Talents being spent in making the Sockets, the Remainder,
which was 1775 Shekels ( v. 25.) was laid out upon Hooks, and Chapiters, and
Fillets about the Pillars. Which make up the whole Account of the Silver.

Ver. 29. And the brass of the Offering, etc.] This Verse gives an account of
the value of the Brass, which the People offered; as the former Verses of the
Gold and Silver.

Ver. 30. And therewith he made the Sockets to the Door of the Tabernacle, and
the brazen Altar, etc.] This Verse and the next gives an Account how the Brass
was employed, according to God's Order beforementioned, XXVI. 37. XXVII. 2, 3,
4.

Ver. 31. And the Sockets of the Court, etc.] See XXVII. 10, 17, 18, 19. Here
is not such a particular Account given, upon what things the Gold was employed
(but only in general, in all the work of the holy place, v. 24.) because all
things that were not made of Silver and Brass, were made of Gold; and a great
deal, it appears by the next Chapters, was employed in making Aaron's glorious
Attire.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse 1. AND of the blue, and purple, and scarlet.] These Artisicers proceeded
in the most natural order, to make all that God commanded. For first they made
the House it self, in which he was to dwell, Chap. XXXVI. then all the
Furniture belonging to it, Chap. XXXVII. and then the outward Court, and all
that was therein, Chap. XXXVIII. and now Moses relates how they made the
Priestly Garments, without which they could not minister to God in this House.

They made.] This shows how all that goes before (where it is said he made) is
to be interpreted. Bezaleel and Aholiab, and all that were employed under them,
had a hand (as we speak) in these Garments: the principal Artists directing,
and the rest working all that is here mentioned.

Clothes of Service.] To be put on when they ministered unto God, in the
Priest's Office, XXVIII. 4. XXX. 10. XXXV. 19. not to be worn abroad, but only
in the Sanctuary. As Mr. Seldom observes Lib. III. de Synedr. c. 11. p. 145.
where he looks upon the following words, To do service in the holy place (or,
to serve in the Sanctuary) as determining them to be used here, and no where
else.

Ver. 2. And he made the Ephod, etc.] Gave direction for the making it, of such
Materials as here follow. See XXVIII. 6, etc.

Ver. 3. And they did beat the Gold into thin plates, etc.] The under Workmen
by Bezaleel's direction, did first beat the Gold into very thin Plates, and
then slice them into Wires, or small Threads of Gold. For in those days they had
not the Art which we have now, of drawing a piece of Gold into round Wires or
Threads, of what length we please: but, as Moses here describes it, they beat it
first into broad thin Plates, and then cut off lesser, and narrower Wires (as
we call them) which were not round, but of a very small breadth; which they
wove with the other Materials here mentioned. But nothing is here said of
Silver thus wrought; for they had not the Art of weaving Silver in this manner,
in ancient times, as Salmasius observes upon Vopiscus in the Life of Aurelian.
In whose days the Art of making Silver into Threads, and weaving it with their
Garments, was not known: but was much in use in the time of the latter Greek
Emperors.

To work it in blue, and in purple, etc.] The manner of it was thus, (as
Maimonides says) They took one Thread of Wire of Gold, and joined it with six
Threads of blue, and twisted all seven into one. And so they mingled the like
Thread of Gold with six of purple; and another with six of scarlet, and another
with six of fine linen: So that there were twenty eight Threads in all. Which R.
Solomon Jarchi expresses thus upon XXVIII. 8. These five kinds (blue, purple,
scarlet, fine linen, and gold) were twisted into one Thread. For the Gold being
stretched into a thin Plate, and Threads cut out of it, they weaved a Thread of
Gold, with six Threads of Blue (and so they did with the rest) after which they
twisted all these Threads into one. See Joh. Braunius de Vestitu Sacerd. Hebr.
L. I. c. 17. n. 26.

Cunning-work.] See XXVIII. 6.

Ver. 4, 5. See XXVIII. 7, 8.

Ver. 6. They wrought Onyx-stones.] See XXVIII. 9.

Ver. 7. For a memorial.] See XXVIII. 12.

Ver. 8. He made the breast plate, etc.] See this explained, and all that
follows to v. 22. in XXVIII. 15, 16, etc. only observe, that there is not a
word here said of his making Vrim and Thummim: which confirms what I said
there, that they were not distinct things from the precious Stones in the
Breast Plate.

Ver. 22. And they made the robe of the Ephod, etc.] See this and the two
following Verses explained XXVIII. 31, 32, 33.

Ver. 24. And twined Linen.] In the Hebrew there is only the word twined: but
the Masora rightly observes, that Schesch is to be understood; which we have
therefore justly supplied in the word Linen. And so the LXX.

Ver. 25. Bells of pure Gold, etc.] See XXVIII. 33, 34. where this and the next
Verse are explained.

Ver. 27. And they made Coats of fine Linen.] Coats were ordered to be made for
Aaron and his Sons, XXVIII. 40. but the matter of them not mentioned: which is
here therefore ordered to be of fine Linen. For white Garments, being pure,
bright, unmixed, and also splendid and stately (for anciently the greatest
Persons were so clothed, as appears by Joseph, when he was honorably arrayed
by Pharaoh, XLI Genesis 42.) were used by all Nations in the Service of God. And
what was most suitable to nature, God thought fit to continue in his Service,
though used perhaps by Idolaters before this time. Only his Priests wore these
Garments no where, but in the Sanctuary; whereas the Priests of Isis (for
instance) went every where clothed in white.

Of woven work.] Not sowed with a Needle: for such Coats may be made without
any Seame; and Braunius has shown the manner of weaving them, L. I. de Vestitu
Sacerdot. Hebr. c. 16.

Ver. 28. Mitre of fine Linen.] XXVIII. 39. and of Bonnets and Breeches. See
there v. 40, 42.

Ver. 29. And a girdle of fine twined Linen, etc.] XXVIII. 39.

Ver. 30. And they made the Plate of the holy Crown.] See XXVIII. 36. To which
I shall only add, That the Priests, both Men and Women, among the Gentiles, had
ordinarily the Epithete of (...) from the Crowns they wore upon their Heads;
which were sometimes of Gold, sometimes of Laurel. See Cuperus in his
Harpocrates, p. 137.

Ver. 31. A Lace of blue, etc.] See XXVIII. 37.

Ver. 32. Thus was all the work of the Tabernacle, of the Tent of the
Congregation finished, etc.] Every thing belonging to the House of God (which
he commanded Moses to make) was completed exactly according to his directions:
though they were not yet set in their place, which God orders in the next
Chapter.

Tabernacle of the Tent, etc.] See XL. 2.

And all the Children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded
Moses, so did they.] This has a more particular respect to the Workmen; yet
all the Materials being brought by the Body of the People, they are also
comprehended in this Expression.

Ver. 33. And they brought the Tabernacle unto Moses, the Tent, and all its
Furniture, etc.] In this and the following Verses he makes a recapitulation of
all the particulars mentioned in the foregoing Chapters: which they brought to
Moses, that he might see whether they were made according to his order. It is
probable that the whole Congregation, or the Heads of them, accompanied
Bezaleel and the other Artificers, when they brought these things to Moses for
his approbation.

Ver. 34. And the covering of the Rams-skins, etc.] Of this Covering, and of
the next, see XXVI. 14. XXXVI. 19.

And the vail of the covering.] See XXVI. 36.

Ver. 37. The pure Candlestick.] Of pure Gold, as we read XXV. 31. XXXVII. 17.

Ver. 42. So the Children of Israel made all the work.] Here again the whole
Body of the People are said to have made all the work forementioned, (see v.
37.) because they contributed to it, and also helped to prepare some Materials
for the Workmen, XXXV. 25. XXXVI. 6.

Ver. 43. And Moses did look upon all the work.] Took a solemn view of it; and
examined it carefully whether it was performed according to the order they had
received.

And behold, they had done it as the LORD commanded.] This is the tenth time
that Moses, in this one Chapter, says all was done as the LORD commanded, v.
1, 5, 7, 21, 26, 29, 31, 32, 42. and here in this last Verse: to show how exact
they were in their obedience; and that nothing was done according to their own
Reason and Opinion, but all according to the Divince Precept, without Addition
or Detraction. They are the words of the Author Sepher Cosri, Pars III. n. 23.
who well observes, that all was done and brought to perfection, by two things,
which are the Pillars of the Law: the one is, That the Law is from God: and the
other, that it be accepted by the Church with a faithful heart. And thus was
the Tabernacle ordered by the Divine Precept; and it was made by the whole
Church or Congregation, XXV. 2.

And Moses blessed them.] Both the Workmen, who had done their work faithfully;
and the Children of Israel, who had contributed the Materials, and also now,
together with Bezaleel and the rest of the Artificers, presented the whole to
him.

CHAP. XL.
Verse 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] After he had taken a Survey
of all the Work beforementioned, God gave him the following Command (in the
latter end, it is probable) of the twelfth Month.

Ver. 2. On the first day of the first month.] Of the second year after their
coming out of Egypt ( v. 17.) which was a complete year (within fourteen days)
after that great Deliverance.

Shall thou set up the Tabernacle of the Tent of the Congregation.] This is a
full description of the place, which was made for an Habitation of the Divine
Majesty (XXV. 8.) and therefore called Mischcan, which we translate Tabernacle,
but properly signifies a dwelling. But was a moveable House, to be set up and
taken down, as there was occasion; and therefore called Ohel, a Tent; such as
Shepherds dwell in, IV Genesis 24. See XXIX. of this Book 11. Or, the word
Tabernacle may be thought to signify, the inward part of this House; as Tent,
the outward part which covered the inward: See v. 17, 19, 29.

Why it is called Ohel moed, [the Tent of the Congregation] see XXIX. 44.

Ver. 3. And thou shall put therein the Ark of the Testimony.] This was the
principal end of building this House, that God (as was said before) might dwell
among them; and his Residence was over this Ark. Which therefore is ordered, in
the first place, to be brought into the Holy of Holies, prepared for it, as
soon as the House was erected. Why called the Ark of the Testimony, see XXVI.
20, 21.

And cover the Ark with the vail.] Which hung before it; that no Body (not the
Priests themselves) might see it, XXVI. 33.

Ver. 4. And thou shall bring in the Table, etc.] When the Ark was placed in
the Holiest of all, then the Table, with all belonging unto it, and the
Candlestick (whose Lamps were to be lighted) are ordered to be set in the
Sanctuary, which was divided by the Vail from the other, XXVI. 35.

Ver. 5. And thou shall set the Altar of Gold for the Incense, before the Ark
of the Testimony.] See XXX. 6.

And put the hangings of the door to the Tabernacle.] XXVI. 36, 37. This is
ordered to be hung up, when the Table, Candlestick, and Altar of Incense were
put into the Holy Place, because there were no more things but these three to
be there.

Ver. 6. And thou shall set the Altar of Burnt-offering, etc.] In this and the
two following Verses, he is ordered to place the Altar of Burnt-offering, and
the Laver, as he had been before directed (XXX. 18.) and to set up the outward
Court, and the Hanging at the Gate of it, in order to place the Altar and the
Laver there, XXVII. 9, etc.

Ver. 9. And thou shall take the anointing Oil.] Mentioned in the XXX. 23, etc.
Every thing being disposed in its proper place; now follows their Consecration.
For they were not Consecrated separately, before the House was erected, and its
Furniture brought in: but after every thing was set in the order which God
appointed.

And anoint the Tabernacle and all that is therein, etc.] As was before
directed, and now ordered to be put in execution, XXX. 26, 27, 28, 29. where
this and the two following Verses are explained.

Ver. 12. And thou shall bring Aaron and his Sons to the door of the
Tabernacle.] The Laver being sanctified, v. 11. many think that the
Sanctification of Aaron and his Sons ( i. e. their Separation to their Office)
began in their being washed with Water. But I look upon this as a Mistake,
there being a washing prescribed, before the Laver was ordered (XXIX. 4.) where
they were to wash only when they went in to Minister, XXX. 19, 20, 21.

Ver. 13. And thou shall put upon Aaron the holy Garments.] Mentioned in the
XXVIIIth Chapter.

And anoint, and sanctify him, etc.] XXX. 30, 31.

Ver. 14. And thou shall bring his Sons, and clothe them with Coats.] See
XXVII. 40, 41.

Ver. 15. And thou shall anoint them, as thou did their Father.] See
concerning this XXIX. 7. where both their anointing and their Fathers is
explained.

For their anointing shall surely be an everlasting Priesthood, etc.] Not only
consecrate them to the Priest's Office, as long as they live; but consecrate
their Posterity also, who shall need no other anointing in succeeding
Generations: but Minister to God by virtue of this anointing, as long as that
Priesthood lasted. So the Hebrews interpret it. None of them needed in after
times, says R. Levi ben Gersom (upon 1 Kings 1.) to be anointed, but only the
High Priest; whose Successors were to be anointed, as they gather from VI
Levit. 22. The Priest of his Sons, who shall be anointed in his stead, etc. See
Seldom de Succession. in Pontisicat. L. II. c. 9.

Ver. 16. Thus did Moses; according to all that the LORD commanded him, so did
he.] He took the same care in erecting the Tabernacle, and disposing every
thing in its place, that the Workmen had done in making all things according to
God's mind, XXXIX. 43.

Ver. 17, 18, etc. And it came to pass, in the first month, etc.] This and the
following Verses, to Verse 34. give an account of the Execution of what God
commanded, in the foregoing part of this Chapter. But it is not easy to
resolve, whether every thing was executed at this very time, or no. For full
understanding of which, it will be necessary to mark diligently, the order
wherein God requires all the foregoing Commands to be performed. And first he
bids him set up the Tabernacle, and put every thing belonging to it, in its
place, v. 2, 3. and so forward to v. 9. And next to consecrate it, and all the
Vessels thereof, with the Altar of Burnt-offerings and its Vessels, etc. v. 9,
10, 11. And then to proceed to consecrate Aaron and his Sons, v. 12, 13, 14,
15. Now it is expressly here affirmed, that Moses did perform the first of
these, that is, set up the Tabernacle, and put every thing appertaining to it,
in its right place, on the first day of the first month, of the second year
after their coming out of Egypt. At which time we must suppose also he began to
consecrate it, and spent seven days in the Consecration of it and of the Altar
of Burnt-offering, as is appointed XXIX. 37. But the difficulty is to
determine, when he consecrated Aaron and his Sons, as he is here required, in
which seven days were also spent as we read VIII Lev. Some think there were but
seven days in all set apart for this work, and consequently they were
consecrated together. So Torniellus in his Annals, and Abulensis before him,
who follow Seder Olam and other Jewish Writers, who are of this Opinion. The
ground of which is, that the Tabernacle being erected on the first day of the
month beforementioned, and its Consecration finished on the eighth, there was
a Solemn Passover kept upon the fifteenth (IX Numb. 1, 2, etc.) which could not
be held, they suppose, unless there were Priests to offer the Passover: who
therefore were consecrated at the same time with the Tabernacle; because on the
eighth day another business began, which was the offering made by the Princes
of the Tribes, every one in their day, VII Numb. 1. But the principal ground
is, that in VIII Lev. 10, 11, etc. Moses speaks of the anointing (i. e.
Consecrating) the Altar, and of Consecrating Aaron and his Sons, as done both
at the same time. But there is a weighty Objection against all this; which is,
that in the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, there were three Sacrifices
offered upon the Altar, one for a Sin-offering, another for a Burnt-offering,
and the Ram of Consecration for a Peace Offering (VIII Lev. 4.18, 22.) None of
which could be acceptable for their Sanctification, till the Altar it self was
made holy. And therefore the seven days appointed for that purpose were ended,
before the Consecration of the Priests began, which continued seven days more;
and then the next day was the Feast of unleavened Bread. Which was famous on a
double account; first, because it was the first day of unleavened Bread; and
then it was the Octaves of the Consecration. And this appears more plainly from
I Lev. 1. where we find the following Commands were given to Moses out of the
Tabernacle by the Divine Majesty; who therefore dwelt there, when he commanded
the Priests to be consecrated, which he did not, till the Tabernacle was
solemnly consecrated to be his Habitation. There the Priests also are commanded
to abide during the seven days of their Consecration, VIII Lev. 33. which shows
that all things belonging to its Sanctification were finished, before their
Consecration began. As to that which is alleged from VIII Lev. 10, 11, etc. I
shall consider it there.

Ver. 19. And he spread abroad the Tent over the Tabernacle.] The Ohel, which
we translate Tent, sometimes signifies the whole House of God, (See v. 19.) but
here only the external part of it, which covered that which was properly called
Mischchan [the Tabernacle]. Which Moses having erected with all its Sockets
Boards, Bars and Pillars ( v. 18.) (and hung it, we must suppose, with the
inward Hangings, which were the richest) he spread abroad over them the
Curtains of Goatshair, called the Tent, XXVI. 11. to be a covering over the
Tabernacle, XXVI. 7. XXXVI. 14, 19. So the Tabernacle was an House within an
House; enclosed with strong Walls (as we call them) to secure it from the
injury of the Weather.

And put the covering of the Tent upon it.] Mentioned in XXVI. 14.

Ver. 20. And he took and put the Testimony into the Ark.] The two Tables of
Stone, as he had been commanded, XXV. 16. which he mentions again in the
repetition of the Law, X Deuteronomy. 5. Hence the Ark is called, the Ark of the
Covenant or Testimony in the next Verse, and v. 3. of this Chapter.

Ver. 21. And he brought the Ark into the Tabernacle.] It is probable that he
had placed the Ark, after it was made, in his own Tent, which for the present
was called the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and had the Glory of the LORD in
it, XXXIII. 7, 9. but now he brought it into this Tabernacle, which by God's
order was prepared for it.

And set up the Vail of the Covering, etc.] See v. 3.

Ver. 22. And he put the Table in the Tent of the Congregation. Here the whole
House is called the Ohel (or Tent) as I observed upon Verse 19. But immediately
the word Mischchan (which we translate Tabernacle) is used as the most proper
expression for the inside of the House, as the other most properly denotes the
outside of it. All is made more clear in the 34th Verse; where we read that the
Cloud covered the Tent of the Congregation, that is the outside of the House;
and the Glory of the LORD filled the Tabernacle within. Though afterward, v.
38. the Cloud is said to be upon the Tabernacle, as v. 36. it is said to be
over the Tabernacle, because it was over the Tent which covered it.

Ver. 25. And he lighted the Lamps before the LORD, etc.] In this and all that
follows, of burning sweet Incense, v. 27. offering the Burnt-offering and
Meat Offering, v. 29. Moses acted as a Priest, appointed by an extraordinary
Commission from God, only for this time; that he might Consecrate the House of
God, and the Priests that were to minister therein; which being done, his
Priesthood ceased. And he did all that is mentioned in these Verses, when the
Tabernacle was Consecrated, and the Glory of the LORD had filled it; testifying
the Divine Presence to be there.

Ver. 31. And Moses, and Aaron and his Sons, washed their hands, etc.] This
shows that Moses acted now as a Priest, and therefore washed himself before he
went to Sacrifice at the Altar, as the Priest afterward were always bound to
do, XXX. 19, 20, 21. But it must be understood, that neither this washing here
spoken of, nor his offering Sacrifice, mentioned v. 29. was till some days
after this. See v. 17.

Ver. 33. So Moses finished the work.] And then anointed the Tabernacle, and
all contained in it, according to God's order, v. 9, 10, 11. the execution of
which, though now not here mentioned, in so many words, is expressly said to be
on the same day that he had completely set up the Tabernacle, VII Numb. 1.

Ver. 34. Then a Cloud (or, then the Cloud) covered the Tent of the
Congregation.] After it was anointed and sanctified for the Divine Residence
(and the Princes perhaps had also finished that large Offering which we read
VII Numb. was made on this day) God was pleased to fill this place with his
glorious Presence. For the cloudy Pillar, which descended upon Moses his Tent,
and stood there before the door of it, XXXIII. 9. removed now from thence and
came hither; not standing at the door of it in the form of a Pillar, but
spreading it self all over the outside of the Tabernacle, so that it was
covered with it, as we read also IX Numb. 15.

And the Glory of the LORD filled the Tabernacle.] See v. 22. What God promised
XXV. 8, 22. he now performed, notwithstanding their Revolt from him, by
worshipping the Golden Calf. Which made him withdraw himself from them, XXXIII.
7, etc. till upon Moses's earnest Intercession for them, and their Repentance,
he graciously consented to return to them, and abide among them, v. 14, 15,
etc. As now he did, by settling his glorious Presence in this Tabernacle which
was set up in the midst of them. For whereas the other Tabernacle of Moses was
removed a Mile or two from their Camp, XXXIII. 7. this Tabernacle was pitched
(a month after this, I Numb. 1.) in the midst of their Camps, as we read II
Numb. 2, 17.

Ver. 35. And Moses was not able to enter into the Tent of the Congregation.]
For the Glory of the LORD shone so bright and so strong, beyond all that it had
ever done, that no Eye could look upon it. And it filled not only the most holy
Place, but the whole Body of the Tabernacle; so that he durst not adventure to
come within it, tell he was called, I Lev. 1. After which time he seems to have
had liberty to go in unto God, when he pleased, VII Numb. 89. IX. 8, 9. For
after this great day, the Glory of the LORD retired into the most holy Place,
within the Vail; and resided constantly there, over the Ark of the Testimony:
from whence he spoke to Moses, when he came to consult him in the holy Place,
See the forementioned VII Numb. 89. Whence he is said to dwell between the
Cherubims; though on some occasion, this Glory appeared without upon the
Tabernacle (but over the Ark, it is likely) XVI Numb. 42. And so perhaps it did
XI. 17, 25. and sometimes at the door of the Tabernacle, XXXI Deuteronomy. 14, 15.

Because the Cloud abode thereon, and the Glory of the LORD filled the House.]
The Cloud, and the Glory of the LORD were not two different things; but one and
the same, as the Pillar of Cloud and of Fire were. For outwardly it was a
Cloud, and inwardly a Fire: and accordingly here, the External part of it
covered the Tabernacle without; while the Internal part shone in full Glory,
within the House. Thus it was upon Mount Sinai, where Moses is said to draw
near to the thick Darkness where God was, XX. 21. That is, the Glory of the
LORD was in that thick Darkness. And so we read before, that the Glory of the
LORD appeared in the Cloud, XVI. 10. And so those words are to be interpreted,
XXIV. 16. The Glory of the LORD abode upon Mount Sinai, and the Cloud covered
it, (that is, covered the Glory of the LORD, not the Mount) six days. After
which, on the seventh day, the Glory of the LORD broke through it, and appeared
like devouring fire, in the sight of all the People, v. 17.

Ver. 36. And when the Cloud was taken up from over the Tabernacle, the
Children of Israel went onward in their journeys.] That is, the LORD (whose
glorious Presence was in this Cloud) led and conducted them in all their
Removals. And therefore they are said to have journeyed at the commandment of
the LORD: because when the Cloud (wherein the LORD was) was taken up, then they
journeyed, IX Numb. 17, 18, 20, 23.

Ver. 37. But if the Cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not, till the
day that it was taken up.] They were wholly governed by its motions, and
followed its directions.

Ver. 38. For the Cloud of the LORD.] So it is called also in X Numb. 34.
because the Glory of the LORD was in it.

Was upon the Tabernacle by day.] And so it was by Night, but then had another
appearance, as it here follows.

And fire was on it by night.] The Fire and the Cloud (as I said v. 35.) were
not different things; but the same Pillar which was dark by day, when there was
no need of light, shone like fire by night, when the dark part of it could not
be seen, to lead and conduct them. It appeared therefore like a Cloud by day,
and turned the light side to them (which was bright as fire) by night, that
they might march, if there were occasion, by its direction both day and night.
And thus it is described XIII. 21, 22. IX Numb. 15, 16, etc. And so this Verse
may be translated, The Cloud of the LORD was upon the Tabernacle by day, and
the Fire was [bo] in it (i.e. in the Cloud) by night. For so they are elsewhere
described, as one within the other, V Deuteronomy. 22. The LORD spoke unto all your
Assembly out of the midst of the fire, of the Cloud, and of the thick Darkness.

In the sight of all the Children of Israel, throughout all their journeys.]
The whole Congregation had constantly this comfortable Token of God's Presence
among them, by the Cloud in the day time, and Fire in the night: which never
left them all the time they were in the Wilderness, but brought them to Canaan.

The End of the Book of EXODUS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 1. read See Genesis L. 26. l. 27. dele now before more p. 5. l. 24.
r. Aben-Ezra p. 12. l. 6. r. the Hebrews. p. 27. l. 12. r. Schalschalah. p. 31.
l. 5. r. he called his Son p. 41. l. 31. r. (...) p. 51. ult. r. his words p.
56. l. 1. for exciting r. exerting p. 62. l. 19. r. because he came with an
unusual p. 68. l. 20. r. (...) p. 70. l. 10. r. all this converse l. 19. r.
Temara p. 71. l. 9. r. though not very far p. 73. l. 11. r. kashah p. 75. l.
17. r. such knives p. 80. l. 22. r. should not go alone p. 81. l. 13. r.
Schalshalah Hakkabalah p. 86. l. 17. r. Taskmasters p. 114. l. 14. r. Gaulmyn
p. 136. l. 12. r. Quastiones Alnetanae p. 138. l. 23. r. (...) p. 139. l. 4. r.
(...) p. 141. l. 23. for Aretius r. Huetius l. 25. r. (...) p. 143. l. 17. r.
as the Jews did long p. 153. l. 20, 31. r. Schechin. p. 163. l. 22. r. as the
Wheat and the Rye 23. r. Trees were not broken p. 193. l. 1. r. expressly p.
197. l. 4. r. Elaeochrisin p. 220. l. 22. r. without the profession p. 242. l.
14. r. (...) p. 249. l. penult. r. so long p. 250. l. 28. r. the next verse p.
251. l. 12. r. to protect them p. 256. l. 29. r. (...) p. 262. l. 4. r. tells
this story p. 268. l. 13. r. compact p. 278. l. 25. r. distress p. 285. l. 12.
r. when we sat p. 294. l. 10. r. who therefore tells them p. 309. l. 24. r.
some other Stations p. 324. l. 17. r. German Jews p. 345. l. 6. r. of our minds
p. 351 l. 21. r. phrase imports p. 366. l. ult. r. and not in any p. 370. l.
18. r. they are the words p. 376. l. 16. r. backward p. 377. l. antepenult. r.
Gem. Bab. p. 380. l. 25. r. therefore ought not p. 427. l. 15. r. opprobrious.
p. 443. l. 31. r. where he pleases p. 449. l. 14. r. eat and drink p. 460. l.
3. r. to be true p. 462. l. 9. r. here p. 464. l. 26. r. having owned him p.
466. l. 31. r. he speaks p. 487. l. 3. r. when they were p. 488. l. 13. r. the
ten words p. 501. l. 24. r. so in the six p. 511. l. 15. r. (...) p. 513. l.
33. r. set it up p. 520, l. 19. r. make for it p. 545. l. 31. r. Jaspis p. 559.
l. 2. r. letters deep p. 567. l. 1. r. and his sons, and his sons garments p.
572. l. 24. r. which went round p. 573. l. ult. r. the Jews say p. 580. l. 18.
r. in the first p. 585. l. 30. r. that he might p. 586. l. 11. r. at his
entrance p. 608. l. 19. r. Periegetes p. 609. l. 15. r. unto thee p. 614. l. 9.
r. take to the Rosamim l. 11. r. take to thee p. 617. l. 6. r. contented
themselves p. 623. l. 13. r. were ordered p. 631. l. 8. r. rebuking them p.
640. l. 11. r. the word (...) p. 642. l. 30. r. make thee Prince p. 666. l. 18.
r. v. 20. p. 674. l. 25. r. till men p. 677. l. 16. r. thine inheritance p.
679. l. 17. r. ad praelium ferunt p. 683. l. 20. r. fear oct of their p. 714.
l. 9. r. Author of Sepher l. 26. r. in the latter end (it is probable) p. 721.
l. 7. r. as the Priess
Books Written by SIMON PATRICK, D. D. now Lord Bishop of ELY; and Printed for
Richard Chiswell.
THE Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The 6 Edition, 4to. 1681. --
Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper:
In which the Ends of its Institution are so manifested, our Addresses to it so
directed, our Behavior there and afterward so composed, that we may not lose
the Profits which are to be received by it. With Prayers and Thanksgivings
inserted. To which is annexed -- Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse concerning
Baptism: In which is inserted a Discourse to persuade to a confirmation of the
Baptismal Vow. 8vo. -- Jewish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the present Generation.
Wherein is shown both the false and the true way to a Nations or Persons
complete Happiness; from the sickness and recovery of the Jewish State. To
which is added, a discourse upon Micah, 6. 8. belonging to the same matter.
8vo. -- Divine Arithmatick: A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Jacomb,
Minister of St. Mary-Woolnoth-Church in Lombard Street, London. With an Account
of his Life. 8vo. -- A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Grigg, Rector
of St. Andrew-Vndershaft, London. 4to. -- An Exposition of the Ten
Commandments. 8vo. -- Heart's Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles. With a
Consolatory Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost their
Friends and Rekitions. To which is added Two Papers, printed in the time of the
late Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12mo. 1695. -- The Pillar and Ground
of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church falsely claims to be That
Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St. Paul, in 1 Timothy 3. 15.
4to. -- An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz. A
NTIQVITY. 4to. -- An Examination of the Texts which Papists cite out of the
Bible to prove the Supremacy of St. Peter and of the Pope over the whole
Church. In Two Parts. 4to. -- A private Prayer to be used in difficult times.
-- A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance. -- A Prayer for Charity,
Peace and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent. -- A Sermon preached upon St.
Peter's Day; printed with Enlargements. 4to. -- A Sermon preached in St.
James's Chapel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan. 20. 1688. on Isaiah 11. 6.
-- A Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text.
Preached in Covent Garden. -- A Sermon preached before the Queen in March
1688/9. on Colos. 3. 15. -- A Sermon against Murmuring, preached at
Covent Garden in Lent, 1688/9. on 1 Cor. 10. 10. -- A Sermon against Censuring;
preached at Covent Garden in Advent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 4. 10. -- Fast-Sermon
before the King and Queen, Apr. 16. 1690. on Prove. 14. 34. -- A
Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for reducing of Ireland,
and the King's safe Return. On Deuteronomy. 4. 9. -- A Fast-Sermon before the Queen,
Apr. 8. 1692. On Numb. 10. 9. -- Sermon before the Lord Mayor at St. Brides
Church, on Easter-Munday, 1696, on 2 Timothy 2. 8. -- A Commentary on the First
Book of Moses, called Geneses, 4to. 1695. -- A Commentary on the Second Book of
Moses, called Exodus, 4to. 1697. -- A Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 5. 1696. on
Dan. 4. 35.

