A COMMENTARY UPON THE Fifth Book of MOSES, CALLED DEUTERONOMY.

BY The Right Reverend Father in GOD, SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1700.

A COMMENTARY UPON DEUTERONOMY.

Chapter I.
THE Fifth Book of MOSES, CALLED DEUTERONOMY.
CHAP. I.
THIS Book had the Name of DEUTERONOMY given it by the Greeks, from the
principal Scope and Design of it; which was to repeat unto the Israelites,
before he left them, the chief Laws of God, which had been given them: that
they who were not then born when they were first delivered, or were incapable
to understand them, or had not sufficiently regarded them, might be instructed
in them, and awakned to attend to them. See v. 1. and 5. In order to this he
premises a short Narrative, of what had befaln them since they came from Mount
Sinai, unto this time; in the three first Chapters: And then in the fourth
urges them by a most pathetical Exhortation, to the observance of those Laws,
which he had taught them; especially the Ten Commandments, with which he begins
the fifth Chapter. Where he makes a solemn Rehearsal of the Covenant God made
with them in Horeb; and what immediately followed upon the delivery of the Law
by God himself, from Mount Sinai. And then, having earnestly pressed the
observation of the first Commandment, in the former part of the sixth Chapter;
and in the latter part of it, and in several Chapters that follow (to the end
of the eleventh) reminded them of a great many things which God had done for
them, and given them several Cautions, lest they let them slip out of their
Minds, and used many Arguments from several Topics (as we call them) to move
them to be obedient to all the other Commandments: he proceeds in the twelfth
Chapter, and so forward to the twenty eighth, to remember them of a great many
other Laws besides the Ten Commandments, which he had delivered to them. Some
of which he explains; others he inforces with further Reasons; and in several
places adds new Laws, for the greater Security of the whole, (particularly, he
orders the writing of God's Law upon Stones, when they came into the Land of
Canaan, Chapter XXVII.) And then pronounces those Promises, which God had made
to the Obedient, and his Threatenings to the Disobedient; more largely, and with
greater force, then he had done in the XXVIth of Leviticus. After which he
again remembers them of several wonderful Works of God for them, (Chapter
XXIX.) and renews the Covenant between God and them; using several Arguments to
persuade them to a dutiful observance of God's Law: Which he commands (Chapter
XXXI.) to be read to all the People, in the conclusion of every Seventh Year;
that none might pretend ignorance of it. And then concludes all with a most
admirable Song, which he orders every one to learn; and with a Blessing upon
the Twelve Tribes.

All this was done in the two last Months, of the last Year of Moses his life.
But not all at once; as plainly appears by several parts of the Book: in which
he writes what he delivered to them, at several times. Which is the reason of
the Repetition of the very same thing, over and over again: that he might make
it sink into their Minds, by being often inculcated. Some have been so foolish,
as to make this an Objection against this Book being composed by Moses. But it
shows their great ignorance; all wise Men having ever judged it necessary to
say (...), the very same things, concerning the same things; that they might be
thoroughly understood, and fixed in the memory of their Auditors, and settled in
their Hearts and Affections. Particularly Epictetus (as David Chytraeus long
ago observed) delivered this as a profitable Rule in all Studies; (...). This
must be known, as a certain Truth, that it is not easy for a Man to attain the
solid knowledge of any thing, unless he both read and hear the same things
every day; and also set himself to the practice of them. This Course Moses took
with the Children of Israel: spending every day, it is likely, of the latter
end of his life, in calling to their mind, again and again, what he had taught
them; and the reason they had to do accordingly.

Verse 1. THese be the words.] This Book contains the words

Which Moses spoke unto all Israel.] All the People could not hear what he
said, but he ordered the Elders and Heads of the several Tribes, to communicate
to the whole Congregation what he delivered to them, in the Audience of many of
the People who were assembled with them. Thus these words are commonly
understood. But considering the great weight of what is here said, I rather
think that Moses himself, at several times, spoke what here follows, in the
Ears of the People. See V. 1.

On this side Jordan.] The Vulgar Latin having translated the Hebrew words
[beeber] on the other side Jordan, it has furnished some ill disposed Minds
with an Argument, that Moses was not the Author of this Book: For he that wrote
plainly shows that he was in Canaan, when he wrote it. But a very little
consideration would have prevented this frivolous Objection; there being
nothing more certain, than that the Hebrew words signify indifferently, either
one side or the other; and may be literally translated, in the passage over
Jordan, or as they were about to pass over it; as Huetius observes and proves
by plain Examples, that the Hebrews have no other word to express their mind,
when they would say either on this side or beyond. See Demonstr. Evang. Propos.
IV. Cap. XIV. To which another learned Writer since him (Hermannus Witsius,
Lib. I. Miscel. Sacr. Cap. XIV.) has added several other places which
evidently show that beeber is a word, that indifferently belongs to either side
of any place, (See 1 Samuel XIV. 40.) and must be determined, by the Matter in
hand, to which it is to be applied. And here undoubtedly it is to be rendered
on this side Jordan. See III. 8.

In the Wilderness in the Plain.] In the Plain of Moab, where they had remained
a long while; as appears from the foregoing Book, XXII Numb. 1. XXVI. 3, 63.
XXXI. 12. XXXIII. 48, 49. XXXV. 1. XXXVI. 13.

Over against the Red Sea.] There is no word in the Hebrew Text for Sea; and
therefore the Marginal Translation is to be preferred, which is, over against
Suph: which was a place in the Country of Moab, (See XXI Numb. 14.) over
against which they now lay encamped; but were so far distant from the Red Sea,
that there can be no respect to it here.

Between Paran.] He does not mean the Wilderness of Paran, frequently mentioned
in the foregoing Book (for that was as remote from hence, as the Red Sea) but
some place in the Country of Moab; as Zuph was, and the rest of the places
which here follow.

And Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizabah.] There was a place called
Hazeroth, where they had encamped a long time ago, XI Numb. 35. XXXIII. 17. but
it was in another Wilderness far from this place, as appears by the account
Moses gives of their Removals from that place to this where they now lay,
XXXIII Numb. 17, 48, 49. And therefore I take this, and the other three places
here mentioned, to have been frontier Towns in the Country of Moab, which lay
upon the borders of this Plain. The last of which, Dizabah, is translated by
the LXX. and the Vulgar, as if it signified a place where there were Mines of
Gold.

Onkelos and the Jerusalem Targum, who take Suph to signify the Red Sea, and
Paran for the Wilderness through which they had come many years ago, etc. are
forced to add several words to make out the sense of this Verse, in this
manner; These be the words which Moses spoke unto all Israel on this side
Jordan, etc. reproving them because they sinned in the Desert, and provoked God
in the Plain over against the Red Sea; and murmured in Paran, about Manna; and
at Hazeroth for Flesh, etc. And so they proceed to mention other Sins committed
in other places; but not in these here named: which they force from their
natural sense, to comply with this Conceit.

There are eleven days journey from Horeb, etc.] Or eleven days (we were a
coming) from Horeb, by the way of Mount Seir, unto Kadesh-Barnea. Which cannot
be understood of the whole time they spent between these two places, but only
of the time they spent in traveling: For they stayed a Month at
Kibroth-Hattaavah, and a Week more at Hazeroth, XI Numb. 21. XII. 15, 16.
before they came to Kadesh-Barnea. This he represents to them, to make them
sensible, they had been kept in the Wilderness so many years, as had passed
since they came out of Egypt; not because it was a long way to Canaan, but for
the reason mentioned in the XIVth of Numbers. For from Horeb (whither he
ordered them to go, when they came out of Egypt) they came in eleven days, and
took no long Journeys, to the borders of the Land of Canaan; where
Kadesh-Barnea lay. So Maimonides; the way was plain and known between Horeb
(whither God brought them on purpose to serve him) and Kadesh: which was the
beginning of an habitable Country; according to what he says XX Numb. 16. See
More Nevochim P. III. Cap. L. See XIII Numb. 26.

By the way of Mount Seir.] The Country of the Edomites. Chapt. II. v. 12.

Unto Kadesh-Barnea.] How they were ordered to come hither, and what they did
here, he relates, v. 6, 19. and so proceeds to give an account of several
remarkable things, which befell them, unto the time when he wrote these things;
which he sets down in the next Verse.

Ver. 3. And it came to pass in the fortieth year.] Egypt.

In the eleventh month, on the first day of the month.] In the first Month of
this fortieth Year, they came into the Wilderness of Zin, unto another Kadesh,
XX Numb. 1. From whence they removed to Mount Hor; where Aaron died on the
first Day of the fifth Month of this Year. See there v. 28. Where it appears v.
29. they mourned for him thirty days: that is, till the beginning of the sixth
Month. In which they fought with King Arad, XXI Numb. and from Mount Hor
traveled from place to place (as we read there, and XXXIII Numb.) till they
came to these Plains of Moab. In which Journeys, and in the rest of the
Transactions, mentioned in the latter end of the Book of Numbers, they spent
the other five Months of this Year; as I have observed in their proper places.
And now began the eleventh Month, when Moses, being to leave the World before
the end of this Year, spoke all that follows in this Book. And this Speech
(which he begins v. 6. and continues to the fortieth Verse of the fourth
Chapter) the great Primate of Ireland thinks, he made to the People on the
twentieth of February, and on the Sabbath Day: as the Reader may find in his
Annals.

That Moses spoke unto the Children of Israel, according unto all that the LORD
had given him in Commandment unto them.] Made a Rehearsal of all that, at
several times, he had received from the LORD, and delivered unto them.

Ver. 4. After he had slain Sihon the King of the Amorites, About five Months
ago: for it was after Aaron's death, which was the first Day of the fifth
Month, XXXIII Numb. 38. and they mourned for him all that Month. See XXI Numb.
21, etc.

And Og the King of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth.] This was a City in the
Country of Bashan, (XIII Josh. 31.) and a City it was of very great Antiquity,
as appears from XIV Genesis 5. See there. From whence some think the famous
Goddess Astarte had her Name, being here worshipped. But whether that Goddess
took her Name from this City, or the City from the Goddess, is not certain; as
Mr. Seldom observes in his Syntagma II. de Diis Syris, cap. 2. But that the
Heathen Deities were wont to have their Names from the Groves, Mountains,
Cities, and Caves, where they were worshipped, is as certain; as it is
uncertain from whence Astarte, or Astoreth (as the Scripture Name is) was so
called.

In Edrei.] His Royal Palace was at Astaroth, (as Sihon's was at Heshbon) but
he was slain in Edrei, XXI Numb. 33.

On this side Jordan, in the Land of Moab.] In the Plains of Moab; before they
passed over Jordan. See v. 1.

Began Moses to declare this Law, saying.] To call to remembrance that which
any one had forgotten; and to explain that which any one did not understand. So
Maimonides expounds these words in Seder Zeraim. In the end of the fortieth
Year, in the beginning of the Month Shebat, Moses called the People together,
saying; The time of my Death draws near, if any one therefore has forgot any
thing that I have delivered, let him come and receive it; or if any thing seem
dubious, let him come that I may explain it. And so they say in Siphri, If any
one have forgotten any Constitution, let him come and hear it the second time;
if he need to have any thing unfolded, let him come and hear the Explication of
it. For which he quotes this Verse; and says that Moses spent all his time in
this, from the beginning of the Month Shebat, to the seventh day of Adar. And
what he now said was likely to be the more regarded, because these were, in a
manner, his dying words; for he lived but till the seventh day of the next
Month: and seems to have composed this Book as a Compendium of his whole Law,
for the familiar use of the Children of Israel: from whence it is called
Deuteronomy, i. e. a second Law. See Huetius in his Demonstr. Evang. Propos.
IV. Cap. 1.

Ver. 6. The LORD our God spoke unto us in Horeb, X Numb. 13.

Ye have dwelt long enough in this Mount.] From the third Month of the first
Year (XIX Exodus 1.) to the twentieth day of the second Year after they came out
of Egypt, (X Numb. 11.) they stayed at Mount Sinai, which is the same with
Horeb: they being only two tops of the same Mountain; one of them something
higher than the other, as they are described by those who have taken a view of
them. For Moses was twice with God, for the space of Forty days in in this
Mount: and here the Tabernacle, and all things belonging to it were made,
according to the Orders he there received; and then was erected and
consecrated; and the People all numbered and disposed under their several
Standards, to march in such order as God appointed, II Numb. 3, 10, 17, etc. X.
14, 15, etc.

Turn you.] From this Mountain.

And take your Journey.] Resume your Journey, which you have so long
intermitted.

And go to the Mount of the Amorites.] A Mount on the South part of Canaan,
inhabited by the Amorites, together with some Canaanites and Amalekites, XIV
Numb. 25, 43, 45. But the principal Possessors of it were Amorites, as is
expressed more than once in this Chapter, v. 19, 20, 44. This is the Mountain
to which Moses bid the Spies go up, XIII Numb. 17. and so they did v. 22.

And unto all the places nigh thereunto.] And so pass into all the neighboring
Country, which lies near it.

In the Plain, in the Hills, and in the Vale.] This is a Description of the
Country nigh unto this Mountain: some of which was Champion (as we speak) and
other parts of it consisted of Hills and Dales.

And in the South, and by the Seaside, to the Land of the Canaanites, and unto
Lebanon, and unto the great River the river Euphrates.] And so go into all the
rest of the Land of Canaan: the several quarters of which he here sets forth.
The Southern part lying toward this Mountain; the Western upon the Sea, (where
the People properly called Canaanites dwelt) the Northern toward Lebanon; and
the Eastern toward the River Euphrates. Which by other Authors, as well as
Moses, is called the great River. So Callimachus in his Hymn to Apollo, v. 103.
(...) -- The great Flood of the Assyrian River: which the Scholiast observes is
meant of Euphrates. And Lucan -- cum Tigride magnus
Euphrates --
L. III. v. 253.

Ver. 8. Behold, I have set the Land.] In the Hebrew, Given the Land: i. e.
bestowed it upon you, and am ready to bring you into the possession of it.

Before you.] That every one of you may have his share of it. Or, that you may
go whether you please, and settle your selves in it, XIII Genesis 9. XXXIV. 10.

Go in and possess the Land.] Therefore make no longer stay here in the
Wilderness; but go and take possession of my Gift.

Which the LORD swear unto yuor Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc.] XV
Genesis 18. XVII. 7, 8. XXVI. 3. XXVIII. 13.

Ver. 9. And I spoke unto you at that time, saying;] Horeb, or Mount Sinai. For
the Story of Jethro, unto which this relates, preceded that immediately, XVIII
Exodus Many great Men place it after the giving of the Law: Of which see Seldom
L. II. de Synedr. Cap. 2. N. IV.

I am not able to bear you alone.] We do not read, before now, that Moses spoke
thus to the People. But Jethro spoke in this manner to him, XVIII Exodus 18. and
gave him advice to take some others to his assistance, v. 21. which advice he
followed, v. 24. And then spoke to the People what Jethro had said to him; and
enlarged upon it in the words we read here, in the following Verses: where he
gives them the reason why he could not perform the Office of a Judge alone.

Ver. 10. The LORD your God has multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day,
as the Stars of Heaven for multitude.] Increased unto a greater number then can
easily be told.

The LORD God of your Fathers make you a thousand times so many as you are.] As
if he had said, I am not troubled at your vast increase; but bless God for it:
and beseech him to make you a thousand times more numerous, then at present you
are.

And bless you, as he has promised you.] In the Promise often repeated to
their Fathers, XII Genesis 2. XV. 5. XVII. 5, 6. XVIII. 18. XXII. 17. XXVI. 4.
XXVIII. 14.

How can I my self alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your
strife?] But how is it possible for one Man alone to undergo the labor of
hearing all the Complaints of such a Multitude; and of remedying all their
Grievances, and determining all their Controversies? So the last word
signifies, Suits at Law (as we speak) as the two former signify other
Differences; which arose between one Man and another, about such things as are
mentioned in the XXI, XXII, and XXIII Chapters of EXODUS. The first word which
we translate cumbrance, signifies tediosam litigantium serram (as Hottinger
interprets it in his Smegna Orientale, Lib. I. Cap. 6.) the tedious Pleadings
of those that manage Causes before a Judge; by Bills and Answers (suppose) and
Rejoynders, etc.

Take ye.] In the Hebrew it is, Give ye, i. e. present unto me such Persons as
you think fit, according to the following Characters.

Wise men and understanding, and known among your Tribes. Men of known Wisdom,
Prudence, and Integrity; skilful in Divine and Humane Laws. See XVIII Exodus 21.
Some take Wise men to signify such as knew much; and understanding such as had
prudence to make use of their knowledge, being Men of Experience: and they were
to be noted for both these; otherwise the People would not have reverenced them.

Ver. 14. And ye answered me and said, The thing This Consent of the People is
not recorded before: but sufficiently implied in their Submission to this
Regulation, mentioned XVIII Exodus 26.

Ver. 15. So I took the chief of your Tribes, wise men From among those Men
that they presented to him, he took, I suppose, such Persons among the chief of
their Tribes, as were endowed with the Qualities here named, and were known by
all so to be. For obscure Persons, either for Birth, or Experience in Affairs,
would have been contemned: and therefore he chose the noblest of those that
were presented to him, (called here the chief of their Tribes) if they were no
less worthy than others. For some such no doubt there were among their great
Men, as might be thought fit for this high Employment. And they were the
fitter, because being Men of Quality (as we speak) they were less liable to be
corrupted by Bribery. From which Moses took care all Judges should be so free,
that he expressly requires they should be Men, hating Covetousness, XVIII Exodus
21. And Solon did not forget to make this a part of the Oath, which every Judge
in Athens took, (which is mentioned at large by Demosthenes in his Oration
against Timocrates) (...), etc. I will receive no Gift upon the account of my
Sentence; neither I my self, nor any body else for me; nor others with my
knowledge, by any artifice or device whatsoever.

And made them Heads over you.] Set them to govern and rule the People, (as it
is expressed v. 13.) by deciding all Causes which were brought before them; as
far as they were able to understand them.

Captains over thousands, and Captains over hundreds, and Captains over
fifties, and Captains over tens.] It is a question, whether they were
Commanders over so many Families, or Persons; as I observed upon XVIII Exodus
25. Hermannus Conringius thinks they were Rulers (as the word signifies) over
so many Fathers of Families, understanding by a Family, that which we now call
an Household, De Republ. Hebraeorum, Sect. XVIII.

And Officers among your Tribes.] The same great Man, in the XXVIth Section of
the same Book, takes Schotrim to have been Judges, as well as the rest. His
great reason is, because the Seventy Elders were ordered to be chosen out of
them, among others, XI Numb. 16. Now it is altogether improbable, he thinks,
that such a Prophetical College as that was, should be chosen out of such mean
Officers, as the Hebrew Doctors make these Schotrim to have been. But see what
I have noted upon V Exodus 14. and XI Numb. 16. And let me here add, that if
they were Judges (and not Attendants upon them) they were very mean ones, being
put below the Rulers of ten. But howsoever this be, it is certain some of these
Judges had greater Authority then others, being entrusted with a larger
Jurisdiction: and its likely, greater Abilities were required in those over
thousands, than in those over tens. As in the great Sanhedrim afterward, the
Jews make more things necessary to qualify Men for a Place in it, then were
requisite for those in lower Courts. Where no Man could sit (much less in the
highest) unless these seven things were remarkable in him, (as Maimonides says
Halacah Sanhedrim, Cap. IV. Sect. 7.) Wisdom, Humility, the Fear of God,
Contempt of Riches, Love of Truth, a good Fame; and he was beloved also of
others.

Ver. 16. And I charged your Judges at that time, As the quality of their
Persons, and their Endowments made them considerable, so they were dignified
with the honorable Name of Schofetim: and were also called Elders, which had
been, a long time, a Title of Honor among the Jews, and in other Nations.

Hear the Causes between your Brethren.] This was a necessary quality in a good
Judge, to give Audience to every one that brought a Cause before him; and not
to delay any Man. But the Jews infer from these words, that it was not lawful
to hear any Man, when his Adversary was absent; but both Parties were to be
there present. And they were also to be heard speak for themselves, if they
pleased: Which was part of the forenamed Oath which Solon ordered all the
Athenian Judges to take, (...), I will hear the Accuser and the Defender, both
alike.

And judge righteously.] The next thing required of a Judge, was to be upright
and impartial: not considering what the Man was, but his Cause. This is implied
in the following words.

Between every Man and his Brother.] i. e. Between one Israelite and another.

And the Stranger that is with you.] i. e. Between an Israelite and a
Proselyte: whether he were received into the Covenant by Circumcision, or not.
For of this latter sort there were, no doubt, a great number, amongst that mixed
multitude, who came with them out of Egypt, XII Exodus 38. And while they were
in the Wilderness, there was not a distinct Court for Israelites, and
Proselytes: but their Causes were tried in one and the same, as Mr. Seldom
observes, Lib. II. de Synedris Cap. III. N. 1.

And ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment.] Not be swayed by particular
Affection, or Interest: but judge sincerely, without respect to Relation, or
any Benefit or Injury received.

Ye shall hear the small as well as the great.] Be equally disposed patiently
to attend to the Cause of a poor Man, as of a great: and to do him as speedy
and impartial Justice. See XIX Lev. 15. And here the Hebrew Doctors tell us, of
some singular Practices in their Courts, to preserve the dispensation of exact
Justice. For if one of the contending Parties came into them richly clothed,
and the other poorly, they would not hear them till both were clothed alike.
Nor would they suffer one of them to sit, and the other stand: but both of them
either sat, or stood. And if they sat, one of them was not permitted to sit
higher than the other: but they sat by each others side, etc. See Seldom Lib.
II. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. N. 10.

Ye shall not be afraid of the face of Men.] Courage and undaunted Resolution
is another necessary qualification in a Judge: who must not be overawed by
what any Man can do unto him; but remember as) it here follows) that he is in
God's place.

For the judgment is Gods.] God gave them their Commission by Moses; so that
they were his Ministers, and acted by his Authority: and therefore might be
confident he would defend them in the discharge of their Office. This shows
that though Moses alone acted by immediate Authority from God, yet these also
being constituted by him, were to be looked upon as pronouncing Sentence in his
Name; who, after a peculiar manner, was the King, and Supreme Governor of the
People of Israel.

And the Cause which is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will hear
it.] Another quality, is Humility; in not adventuring to judge of Things above
their reach. Some think there were certain Causes reserved to the cognizance of
Moses, (as I observed upon XVIII Exodus 12.) but the contrary appears by these
words, that all manner of Causes were brought before these Judges: and they,
not the People, brought such Causes before Moses, as they found too hard for
them to determine. So that they, not the Person whose Cause it was, judged of
the difficulty of the Cause. See Seldom Lib. I. de Synedris, Cap. XVI.

Ver. 18. And I commanded you at that time, all As he rightly informed their
Judges; so he instructed the People also in their Duty, before they went from
Horeb: by delivering to them the judgments which God commanded him to set
before them, XXI Exodus 1. contained in that and in the two following Chapters;
whereby both they and their Judges were to govern themselves.

Ver. 19. And when we departed from Horeb.] See Numb. 2.

We went through all that great and terrible Wilderness.] It may well be called
great, because it extended a great way. For after three days Journey (X Numb.
12.) they settled at Kibroth-hattaavah; which was in this Wilderness of Paran.
From whence they went to Hazeroth, which is still said to be in this
Wilderness, XI Numb. 35. And when they went from thence, they were in the same
Wilderness, XII. 16. where Kadesh was, XIII. 26. and see XXXIII. 19. And this
Wilderness was very terrible, or dreadful; because there were no Inhabitants in
it, but wild Beasts.

Which you saw by the way of the Mountain of the Amorites.] All the way you
went toward that Mountain. See v. 7.

As the LORD our God commanded us.] According to the direction which God gave
them, by the motion of the Cloud that went before them.

And we came to Kadesh-Barnea.] Where they rested at the foot of that Mountain,
in the Wilderness of Paran, XIII. Numb. 2, 26.

And I said unto you, ye are come to the Mountain of the Amorites, which the
LORD our God does give unto us.] For this was part of the Country, which God
bestowed upon them, for their Possession; as appears from XXXIV Numb. 4. Where
Kadesh-Barnea is mentioned as a frontier Place in their South-border. And
indeed the Amorites, wheresover they found them, were to be expelled: as they
had already dispossessed them of the whole Kingdom of Sihon, who was King of
the Amorites, XXI Numb. 21, 25, 26.

Ver. 21. Behold, the LORD thy God has set the Land before thee.] All the
Country beyond this Mountain, v. 8.

Go up.] For there was a great ascent to it, XIII Numb. 17.

And possess it.] Enter upon the Possession of it.

As the LORD God of thy Fathers has said unto thee.] According to the Promise
made by God long ago, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (See v. 8.) which he is now
ready to perform.

Fear not, neither be discouraged.] Do not dread either their number, or their
strength: but trust in the LORD (whose Name he repeats four times, in these
three Verses) that he will make good his word.

Ver. 22. And ye came near unto me every one of you.]

And said, we will send Men before us.] Some select Persons.

And they shall search out the Land.] Give us an account how it lies, and what
kind of Country it is.

And bring us word again by what way we shall go up.] Inform us which way to
direct our march into it.

And into what Cities we shall come.] What Cities we shall first attack, to
make our way the clearer into the Country. Moses also charges the Men that went
to search the Land, with many other Enquiries, (XIII Numb. 18, 19, 20.) that
the People might receive the fullest satisfaction.

Ver. 23. And the saying pleased me well.] He thought

And I took twelve Men of you, one of a Tribe.] That every body might be
satisfied, when they heard the report of their Brethren, XIII Numb. 2, 3, 4.
etc. and God directed him so to do, as we read there.

And they turned.] From Kadesh-Barnea.

And went up into the Mountain.] XIII Numb. 17, 21.

And came unto the Valley of Eschol.] It appears by the relation XIII Numb. 21,
22, 23. that this was the last place, unto which they came when they had ended
their search.

And searched it out.] After they had gone through all the quarters of the
Country.

And they took of the fruit of the Land, in their hands, and brought it down
unto us.] Both Grapes, Pomegranates, and Figgs, XIII Numb. 23.

And brought us word again, and said, It is a good Land which the LORD our God
does give us.] So they all said unanimously, and brought along with them a
demonstration of it, XIII Numb. 27. only they added, that they were not able to
deal with the Inhabitants of it.

Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the Commandment of
the LORD your God.] Who bad you go up, and not be afraid, v. 8, 21. Which was
the greater sin; because he had not only brought them to the Borders of the
Land, but convinced them that he had not deluded them with fair Promises of a
better Country, than really it was. For they all saw the goodly Fruit which it
produced; and ought therefore to have believed he would fulfill his word, and
give them the possession of it.

And ye murmured in your Tents.] After great Lamentations for a whole Night
together, XIV Numb. 1.

And said, because the LORD hated us, he has brought us forth out of the Land
of Egypt.] Unto which therefore they desired and conspired to return, XIV Numb.
4.

To deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to destroy us.] Nothing can be
more pernicious (as Grotius here observes) than a persuasion that God does not
love us; but has a design upon us, to destroy us.

Ver. 28. Whither shall we go up?] Moses, I suppose,

Our Brethren have discouraged our hearts.] The Men that you your self sent to
search the Land, have dispirited us by the Report they have brought us. Which
would not have had that effect upon them, if they had minded one part of it, as
much as the other; and calmly considered what Caleb and Joshua said: who made
no doubt of Success.

Saying, The People is greater and taller than we.] More numerous; and of far
greater stature and strength, XIII Numb. 28.33.

The Cities are great, and walled up to Heaven.] The Spies only told them that
there Cities were walled, and very great, XIII Numb. 28. but their fear and
confusion of Thoughts, augmented the danger of attempting the Conquest of them.
Yet Moses himself thinks good afterward to use the same hyperbole, IX. 1.
which is common in the best Authors. For thus Homer in Odyss. E. v. 239. speaks
of a Firr-tree as high as Heaven; i. e. exceeding tall: -- (...). Many other
Instances may be seen in Bochartus his Phaleg. Lib. I. Cap. XIII.

And Moreover, we have seen the Sons of the Anakims there.] See XIII Numb.
28.33. Constable. L'Empereur will rather have it translated the Sons of the Giants,
as the LXX. and Onkelos take it. Yet he acknowledges that Anak seems to have
been the first Parent and Propagator of the Race of Giants after the Flood: and
therefore it may be properly translated, as we do. See Annot. in Itiner.
Benjamini Tudelensis, p. 136.

Then I said unto you.] Moses here at large relates, what he said unto their
Fathers, upon this occasion; which he does not mention in the Book of NUMBERS,
(where we read only of his falling down before God) that he might awaken this
Generation, to a greater confidence in God, and a dread of his Judgment.

Dread not, nor be afraid of them.] Do not consider so much how strong they
are; as how powerful the LORD your God is, who has promised you this good Land.

The LORD your God, which goes before you.] In a glorious Pillar of Cloud and
Fire.

He shall fight for you.] As he had done hitherto, XIV Exodus 14. XVII. 8, etc.

According to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes.] Why should
you think he is less able to bring you into Canaan, than he was to redeem you
from Egypt; where you were oppressed by very powerful Enemies?

And in the Wilderness.] Ever since they came from thence through the
Wilderness of the Red Sea, XIII Exodus 18. and the Wilderness of Sin, XVI Exodus
1. and the Wilderness of Sinai, XIX Exodus 1, 2. and then through that terrible
Wilderness of Paran. See above v. 19.

Where thou have seen how the LORD thy God bare thee, as a Man does bear his
Son.] The long Experience they had had of his tender care over them, (which was
as indulgent as that of a kind Father toward his only Son, when he is a Child,
whom he carries in his Arms) should have made them confident of his gracious
Providence for the future.

In all the way that ye went, until ye came to this place.] He made provision
for them in the most desolate places: bringing them Water out of a Rock;
sending Bread down to them from Heaven; defending them from wild Beasts, and
from their fiercer Enemies, etc.

Ver. 32. Yet in this thing ye did not believe the He could not prevail with
them to trust God; and go up, as he commanded, in his Power and Might to
possess the Land. Nor could all that Caleb and Joshua said, at all move them,
XIV Numb. 7, 8, 9.

Ver. 33. Who went in the way before you.] Never Exodus 22.

To search you out a place to pitch your Tents in.] But always marked out your
Encampments, where they should be, X Numb. 17.

In fire by night, to show you by what way you should go, and in a cloud by
day.] That they might be able to travel by Night, as well as by Day: which was
most convenient in Summer time, when the Sun was very scorching in a
Wilderness, where there was no shelter, XIII Exodus 21. X Numb. 16, 21.

Ver. 34. And the LORD heard the voice of your words.] They not only distrusted
God, ( v 32.) but murmured against their Leaders, and against God, in Egypt,
XIV Numb. 1, 2, 3, 4. And moreover spoke of stoning Caleb and Joshua for their
good Advice, v. 10.

And was wroth, and swear, saying.] Which so provoked the Divine Majesty, that
he irrevocably determined what follows; confirming it with an Oath, XIV Numb.
21.

Surely there shall not one of these Men of this evil Generation, see that good
Land, etc.] See XIV Numb. 21, 28, 29.

Save Caleb the Son of Jephunneh.] And Joshua the Son of Nun. See XIV. 24, 30.
and see below v. 38.

He shall see it, and to him will I give the Land that he has trodden upon,
etc.] This was as exactly fulfilled, as their disinheriting was, XIV Josh. 9,
12. Where the particular Portion of Land is mentioned, which God promised to
him, and which Joshua gave him in the Mountain where the Anakims dwelt. For
such was the wonderful Faith and Courage of Caleb, that he doubted not to
dispossess those, whom the rest of the Israelites dreaded as invincible.

Also the LORD was angry with me.] Not at that time, but afterward; when they
came into the Wilderness of Zin; to another Kadesh, XX Numb. 1, 12.

For your sakes.] By occasion of their fresh discontents, and mutinous
upbraidings of him, (XX Numb. 2, 3, 4.) which provoked him so, that he spoke
unadvisedly with his Lips, as the Psalmist observes, CVI Psalm. 31, 32. This was
an high aggravation of their guilt; that they not only undid themselves, but
brought great Displeasure upon their worthy Leader and Governor: whom they
wearied with their Tumults and Rebellions. Or the meaning may be (which does
not much differ from the account now given) that they murmuring, in a
tumultuous manner, when they saw the Water did not flow out of the Rock at the
first stroke, he himself also was put into such a Commotion, that he began to
doubt, and say God would do nothing for such a rebellious People; though he had
declared he would. If this be true, he soon recovered himself, and smote the
Rock again, in confidence God would be as good as his word. But God was so
angry at the words he had spoken, that he so far punished him for them, as to
deny him entrance into Canaan.

Saying, Thou shall not go in thither.] Which threatening is renewed a little
before his death, XXVII Numb. 13, 14. and he could not get repealed by any
Entreaties, as we read in this Book, III. 26.

Ver. 38. But Joshua the Son of Nun, which stands Waits upon thee.

He shall go in thither.] So God promised when he, as well as Caleb,
endeavored to put Courage into the People to go and possess the Land, XIV
Numb. 6, 7, etc. 30.

Encourage him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.] Not only go thither,
and have his Portion there, but be the Captain of Israel, and conquer the Land
for them, and divide it among them. This intimates as if Joshua was afraid, he
might be excluded as well as his Master; being extremely troubled, it is
likely, that he was not suffered to reap the Fruit of his long Labors.
Therefore God bids Moses encourage his hope, and command him to take heart, (as
we speak) for undoubtedly he should do more than go into Canaan. Which may be
the reason, why his Name is not put into the Exception ( v. 35, 36.) together
with Calebs; but they are mentioned separately; because there was something to
be said peculiar to each of them.

Moreover, your little ones, whom ye said should be a prey.] See XIV Numb. 31.

Which in that day had no knowledge of good and evil.] And consequently did not
provoke God by their Disobedience.

They shall go in thither, etc.] Their innocence moved pity toward them:
though Children, in some cases, were cut off for their Fathers sins.

But as for you, turn you.] From the Land of Canaan; to which they were not
permitted to go.

And take your journey into the Wilderness.] And get you back again into the
Wilderness out of which I have brought you, XIV Numb. 25.

By the way of the Red Sea.] Thus they had their desire, in some part, of
returning into Egypt, (XIV Numb. 4.) which was not far from the Red Sea.

Then you answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the LORD. They
repented, when it was too late to do them any good. See XIV Numb. 40.

We will go up and fight, according to all that the LORD our God commanded us.]
Now they resolve to encounter those Enemies, of whom they were before so
afraid, as to speak of stoning those, who exhorted them not to fear them, XIV
Numb. 9, 10.

And when you girded on every Man his Weapons of War, ye were ready to go up
into the Hill.] They not only made a stout Resolution, but actually prepared
themselves for the Onset: as if there were no difficulty in that, which a
little before they dreaded to think of. So de Dieu translates the last words,
Ye thought it an easy matter to ascend the Hill; or ye despised going up the
Mountain: in our Language, made nothing of it.

Ver. 42. And the LORD said unto me, say unto XIV Numb. 41, 42.

Neither fight.] Much less think of fighting.

For I am not among you.] By my powerful Presence to subdue your Enemies; or to
defend you from them, (so the Phrase is often used) for the Ark of the
Covenant, the Token of God's Presence, did not go with them, XIV Numb. 44.

Lest ye be smitten before your Enemies.] Which would be a far greater
Disgrace, than marching away from them.

Ver. 43. So I spoke unto you.] XIV Numb. 42, 43.

And ye would not hear.] No more than before; when he bad them go up.

And rebelled against the Commandment of the LORD.] For now it was against his
will, as before it was his will, that they should go up.

And went presumptuously up into the Hill.] Would venture against the express
command of God; which was the highest presumption.

Ver. 44. And the Amorites which dwelt in that Mountain As soon as they saw the
Israelites ascend to assault them, they came down upon them, XIV Numb. 45.

And chased you as Bees do.] Which pursue those that disturb their Hives in
great swarms, and with great fury, CXVIII Psalm 12. For though Bees have very
small Bodies, yet they have great Spirits, and a vast Force, as Bochart
observes in many instances, to make out the aptness of this Comparison, in his
Hierozoicon P. II. Lib. IV. Cap. X.

And destroyed you in Seir.] It seems they fled toward that part of Idumaea
where Mount Seir was; which they afterward compassed many days (II. 1.) when
they removed from Kadesh-Barnea. And there some of them fell by the Sword of
the Amorites, who were the fiercest of all the People of Canaan: and might, on
that account, be well compared to Bees; who cease not their pursuit, till they
have fixed their stings.

Even unto Hormah.] See XIV Numb. 45.

And ye returned.] After the Amorites retreated.

And wept before the LORD.] Beseeching him to go along with you, and assist you
to conquer the Land.

But the LORD would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.] To
consent that they should now go and possess the promised Land, or stay near to
it: but remained sixth in his resolution, that they should go back again, and
wander in the Wilderness as long as they lived.

So ye dwelt in Kadesh many days.] God had commanded Moses to lead them into
the Wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea, the very next Morning after their
mutiny, upon the return of the Spies, XIV Numb. 25. But they prevented this, by
their early rising next Morning to Assault the Amorites in the Mountain, v. 40.
After which, they being discomfited, he permitted them to stay some time here,
to bemoan themselves. But how long, is not certain: for sometime the Cloud
stayed but two days, sometime a month, sometime a year, before it stirred from
the Tabernacle; which was the sign of their removal, X Numb. 22. And in some
Stations, it is likely, they stayed several Years: for from the time of their
removal from Kadesh-Barnea, till they came to Mount Hor, which was thirty seven
Years, we find but Nineteen Stations. See XXXIII Numb. from v. 18. to v. 37.

According to the days that ye abode there.] Some expound it, as long as they
did in all the rest of their Stations; i. e. nineteen Years, as the Jews
compute in Seder Olam. But, as the learned Dr. Lightfoot thinks, it signifies,
as long as they did at Mount Sinai: and so they stayed near a whole Year, as
they had done at Sinai. But the most simple Explication seems to be, that they
tarried here so long after this, as they had done before it; at least forty
days; which was the time the Spies spent in searching out the Land. Though
there is no necessity to confine it to that number; but simply to interpret it,
that as they stayed there many days before this mutiny, so they did as many
after it.

Chapter II.
CHAP. II.
AND we turned, etc.] From the Borders of the Land of Canaan, to go Southward,
till they came to the very shore of the Red Sea. Which, as David Chytraeus
computes it, was thirty German miles, from Kadesh-Barnea.

As the LORD spoke unto me.] According to the command formerly mentioned, XIV
Numb. 25.

And we compassed Mount Seir.] The mountainous Country of Edom; whereof Mount
Seir was but a part. For when they came to Ezion-gaber, which was upon the
Red Sea, they were still in the Country of Edom, 1 Kings IX. 26. 2 Chronicles. VIII.
17. For it stretched a long way; from the Confines of Canaan, unto Elato and
Ezion-geber, on the Red Sea.

Many days.] Some think that they were marching to and fro along the Borders of
this Country, all the time they spent from this removal, till they returned to
go toward Canaan again. So that by many days they understand the whole XXXVIII
years, which passed between their departure from Kadesh-Barnea, till they came
over the Brook Zered, v. 14. For when they were at Ezion-gaber (which was
farthest from Canaan) they were, as I said, upon the Borders of Edom: and so
they were when they came back again, seven and thirty Years after at Mount Hor,
XX Numb. 23. XXI. 4. But this must not be understood, as if all the Stations
mentioned XXXIII Numb. after they left Kadesh-Barnea, till they came hither
again, were near to the Country of Edom: Some of them might be remote, though
they all lay in that Wilderness, which reached from one end of Idumaea to the
other.

Ver. 2. And the LORD spoke unto me, saying.] This was in the end of the
XXXIXth Year after their Egypt; when they had spent XXXVII Years, going to and
fro since their departure from Kadesh-Barnea. In all which time he gives us no
account what passed, either in the foregoing Book, or in this: but only sets
down the places of their abode, as I observed in the XXXIIIth of NVMBERS.

Ver. 3. Ye have compassed this Mountain long enough.] The mountainous Country
of Edom, mentioned v. 1.

Turn ye northward.] From Ezion-gaber, which was in the South, toward the
North: that is, directly toward the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 4. And command thou the People, saying, Ye For they went from Ezion-gaber
to Kadesh, XX Numb. 1. and from thence to Mount Hor, v. 22. (which was in the
edge of the Land of Edom, XXXIII Numb. 37.) and from thence they traveled to
compass the Land of Edom, XXI. 4. i. e. the Eastern quarter of it. So that
though they did not pass through the Coast of Edom, as we translate it; yet
they passed by it, and very near unto it; as the Particle beth frequently
signifies, XXXVII Genesis 13. V Josh. 13. 1 Samuel XXIX. 1. Though they may be truly
said to pass through their Coast; if thereby we understand their Border, or the
Confines of their Country.

And they shall be afraid of you.] Lest, wanting a Settlement, the Israelites
should seize upon their Country. Accordingly we find, they raised all the force
they could make to oppose them, XX Numb. 20.

Take ye good heed to your selves therefore.] Let not that encourage you to
assault them.

Meddle not with them.] Make not the least attempt upon them.

For I will not give you of their Land, no not so much as a foot breadth.] i.
e. Not the smallest Portion.

Because I have given mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.] So Joshua says
expressly, XXIV Josh. 4. wherein he made good the Blessing of Isaac, XXVII Genesis
39.

Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat, etc.] If you have a mind
to any Provision that their Country affords, you shall not take it, but
purchase it; as they did their very Water, ( v. 29.) which was a scarce thing
in those dry Countries. And so the Israelites offered to do, when they treated
with them about a passage through their Country, XX Numb. 19.

For the LORD thy God has blessed thee in all the works of thy hand.] Or,
though the LORD has blessed thee, etc. That is, though there is no need of it,
God having abundantly provided you with all things necessary. But if we follow
our translation, the sense is plain; You have wherewith to buy of them what you
need, or desire; therefore do not take it away by force.

He knows thy walking through this great Wilderness.] Has directed and
prospered thee (as the word knows signifies in many places, I Psalm. 6. XXXI.
7.) in thy Travels through a dangerous Wilderness.

These forty years the LORD thy God has been with thee; thou have lacked
nothing.] He had mercifully provided for them so constantly, that he let them
want nothing necessary for their support. This was the Sum of the Argument why
they should not molest the Edomites, nor take any thing by stealth from them;
because they were in no need; and God has given that Country to the Children
of Esau, as he intended to give Canaan to the Israelites.

Their being in the Wilderness forty Years, is mentioned also VIII. 2. XXIX. 5.
besides other places of Scripture. For from the fifteenth day of the first
Month, in which their Fathers came out of Egypt, (XXXIII Numb. 5.) to the tenth
day of the same Month in which they went over Jordan into Canaan, (IV Josh.
19.) there were but five days wanting of complete forty Years. I cannot but
here note also, that this is one of those places wherein Onkelos mentions the
MEMRA, i. e. WORD of Jehovah, which can signify nothing but a Divine Person:
For thus he tranlates these words, The WORD of the LORD thy God has been thy
helper: thou have not wanted any thing.

Ver. 8. And when we passed by from our Brethren the Through the Wilderness of
Zin.

From Elath and from Ezion-gaber.] Two places upon the Red Sea: the last of
which [Ezion-gaber] signifies as much as the Spine, or Backbone of a Man. So
called, because there were great ragged Rocks in that Port, (as Bochart
observes) like those at Dyracchium in Macedonia: which had its Name also from
thence, Lib. I. Canaan. Cap. XLIV.

We turned.] After they were denied passage through their Country, and had gone
through those Stations mentioned XXXIII Numb. 41, 42, etc.

And passed by the Wilderness of Moab.] See XXI Numb. 11. Going by the East
side of their Country, XI Judge. 18.

And the LORD said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with
them in battle.] He would not have them force their way through his Country;
because the King of Moab refused them a passage, as the King of Edom had done,
XI Judge. 17. For their Country now was but small, since Sihon King of the
Amorites had taken from them all the best of it, which lay between Arnon and
Jabbok: of which the Israelites had possessed themselves by the conquest of
Sihon. So that they had only that Portion remaining, which lay upon the
Dead-Sea: which David, in after times, subdued.

For I will not give thee of their Land for a possession.] No more than of
Edom, v. 5.

Because I have given Ar.] It is likely the Capital City gave Name to the whole
Country about it. At least Ar (which was the chief City of Moab, XXI Numb. 15,
28.) is put here for all the Land of Moab; as Mount Seir for all the Land of
Edom, v. 1.

Unto the Children of Lot for a possession.] Though the Moabites were now a
wicked People; yet for their pious Ancestors sake, from whom they were
descended, God would not have them dispossessed.

And the Emims dwelt there in time past, etc.] A terrible People, as the very
Name imports, both for their number and for their strength; being of a large
size like Anakims. See XIV Genesis 5.

Which also were accounted Giants, as the Anakims, etc.] Which seems to have
been their name; or else Rephaim: but to distinguish them from others of that
name in Canaan, the Moabites called them Emims.

Ver. 12. The Horims also dwelt in Seir before-time.] They were the ancient
Inhabitants of Mount Seir; as the Emims were of the Country of Moab, XIV Genesis
6. XXXVI. 20.

But the Children of Esau succeeded them.] Planted themselves in that Mountain.

When they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their Land.] When
the Children of Esau expelled the Horites, or the Children of Lot the Emmims,
is no where recorded; nor who were their Leaders in these Expeditions. But they
seem to be here remembered, as an Encouragement to the Israelites to hope; that
they might drive out the Inhabitants of Canaan, (who were not stronger than
these) as they had already driven the Amorites out of the Country of Sihon, as
it here follows.

As Israel did unto the Land of his possession, which the LORD gave unto them.]
Some have argued from hence, that this Book was not written by Moses, but by
some body else, after they had got possession of the Land of Canaan. But it is
manifest, this may relate to what they had done already in dispossessing Sihon
King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, of their Country: which, it is
expressly said, Moses had given for a possession to the Tribe of Reuben and Gad,
and the half Tribe of Manasseh; and that by God's direction, XXXII Numb. 33.
XXXIV. 14, 15. and in this Book, XXIX. 8. This has been observed by many;
particularly by Huetius in his Demonstratio Evangelica, Propos. IV. Cap. XIV.
N. XV.

Ver. 13. Now rise up, said I, and get you over the etc.] Which elsewhere we
translate, the Valley of Zered. See XXI Numb. 12.

Ver. 14. And the space in which we came from Kadesh-Barnea, until we came over
the Brook Zered, was thirty eight years.] For it is evident by the story in
Numbers that they came to Kadesh-Barnea about the fourth Month of the second
Year after they came out of Egypt. See upon XII Numb. 16. And if we suppose
that they removed from hence in the seventh or eighth Month of that Year; it is
certain that they could not come to this Brook, till the seventh or eighth
Month of the fortieth Year. For Aaron died at Mount Hor on the first day of the
fifth Month of this Year; and we must allow two or three Months time, for all
that followed between that and this, viz. the conquest of King Arad, and of
Sihon, and Og, etc.

Until all the Generation of the Men of War.] So they were called, who were
above twenty years old, I Numb. 3.

Were wasted out from among the People.] Utterly consumed, so that not one of
them was left, XXVI Numb. 64, 65.

As the LORD swear unto them.] See XIV Numb. 28, 29.

For indeed the hand of the LORD was against them to destroy them from among
the Host. Some of them, it is likely, died a Natural death; but many of them
might in the course of Nature have lived longer, if God had not several ways
cut them off before their time.

Until they were consumed.] By one Plague or other, which God sent among them:
So that a great deal of their time, in the thirty eight Years before mentioned,
were spent, it is likely, in burying, and mourning for their dead.

So it came to pass, when all the Men of War were consumed and dead from among
the People, that the LORD spoke unto me, saying.] This was spoken, it is
probable, just as they passed over the Brook Zered; or in their next Station at
Dibon-Gad, XXXIII Numb. 45.

Ver. 18. Thou art to pass through Ar, the Coast of Or rather, to pass by the
Border of Moab: for they were not permitted to come into their Country, v. 9.
See upon v. 4.

Ver. 19. And when thou come nigh over against the As they did after the
conquest of Sihon King of the Amorites: whose Country bordered upon the
Ammonites, XXI Numb. 13, 24.

Distress them not, neither meddle with them.] The same command with that about
the Edomites and Moabites, v. 5, 9.

For I will not give thee of the Land of the Children of Ammon any possession.]
As he had said before of the Land of Moab, v. 9.

Because I have given it unto the Children of Lot for a possession.] To the
Descendants of his youngest Son; as he had done the Country of Moab to the
Children of the eldest.

Ver. 20. And that also was accounted a Land of Giants, Rephaim: for People so
called inhabited it.

And the Ammonites called them Zamzummims.] Changed their Names, it is
probable, from Zuzims, (See XIV Genesis 5.) as they were called before, into
Zamzummims. But why they were called, either by the one Name or the other, it
is but conjectured. Some conceive they were called Zuzims, from their
swiftness, or nimble running; which in Warriors, was a quality always highly
valued: and Zamzummims from their abominable Wickedness; or their craft and
cunning in doing Mischief.

Ver. 21. A people great, and many, and tall as the Anakims.] The same
description which he gave of the Emims, v. 10.

But the LORD destroyed them before them.] i. e. Before the Ammonites; who
expelled them out of their Country, and it is like cut off the most of them.

And they succeeded them, and dwelt in their Land.] This is so often repeated,
to possess the Minds of the Israelites, with a sense of God's Providence, which
rules every where; displacing one People, and settling another in their stead;
and fixing their Bounds also, which they shall not pass without his leave.

As he did to the Children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the
Horites from before them, etc.] He repeats this (which he had said before v.
12.) because it was a fresher Instance of God's disposal of Countries unto what
People he pleases: and nearly touched the Israelites, because they were their
Brethren.

And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah.] Unto which he adds an
instance, which seems to be elder than any of the former, concerning a People
called Avims; who inhabited some part of the Land of Canaan, whither they were
going. For though we do not read of Hazerim in any other place; yet Azzah, i.
e. Gaza, was in the Country of the Philistims; who expelled these Avims. And
David Chytraeus thinks that Hazerim was a Town, afterward in the Tribe of
Judah, called Haza-gaddah, XV Josh. 27.

The Caphtorim which came out of Caphtor.] That is, some People of Cappadocia;
who were near of Kin to the Philistims. See X Genesis 14.

Destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.] Concerning which, see in the place
abovenamed. Unto which I shall only add, That the Avims being expelled out of
Canaan by the Caphtorims, went, it is very probable, over Euphrates and settled
there; till the King of Assyria brought some of them back again, to plant the
Country of Samaria, 2 Kings XVII. 31. where we translate this word Avites. See
Bochart. in his Phaleg. Lib. IV. Cap. XXXVI.

Ver. 24. Rise ye up, take your Journey, and pass over See XXI Numb. 13, 14.

Behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon King of Heshbon, and his Land, etc.]
You your selves shall do to him, what your Brethren, the Children of Esau, did
to the Horites, and the Moabites to the Emims, and the Children of Ammon to the
Zamzummims, and the Caphtorims to the Avims. By which their Fiaith might still
be more confirmed, that the People of Canaan, though never so mighty, should
not be able to stand before them.

Ver. 25. This day will I begin to put the dread of thee, Especially upon the
Canaanites; wno were struck, no doubt, with Terror by this Conquest, as they
had been by all that befell the Egyptians, II Josh. 10, 11.

Who shall hear the report of thee.] This explains what he means by the
hyperbolical expression before going, the Nations under the whole Heaven; that
is, as many as shall hear of these things.

And shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.] As Women in travel are.

Ver. 26. And I sent Messengers out of the Wilderness There is a City of this
Name mentioned by Joshua XIII. 18. from whence this Wilderness had its
denomination. Some take it to be the same with that called Jeshimon, XXI Numb.
20.

Unto Sihon King of Heshbon with words of peace.] A friendly Message, desiring
there might be no quarrel between him and the Israelites; who desired nothing
but the common Offices of Humanity.

Let me pass through thy Land.] Which was the direct way to the Fords of Jordan.

I will go along by the high way.] Not turning into the Fields or Vineyards, as
it is expressed XXI Numb. 22. In the Hebrew the word is doubled, bederech
bederech, by the way, by the way: which seems to be a vehement affirmation, to
assure them they would not stir out of the Highway.

I will neither turn unto the right hand, nor to the left.] Not step aside, out
of the common Rode, (called the King's Highway) which was free for all People.

Thou shall sell me meat for money, that I may eat, etc.] They offered to pay
for whatsoever they wanted; which is included in Meat and Drink.

Only I will pass through on my feet.] Barely have a passage through his
Country.

As the Children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in
Ar, did unto me.] He does not mean that they granted Israel a passage through
their Country; but that they did not deny to sell them Meat and Drink for their
Money, as they passed by their Coasts.

Until I pass over Jordan, unto the Land which the LORD our God gives us.]
This was said to move Sihon to consent to their desire; by letting him
understand they intended nothing against his Country: being secure of a
Settlement in the Land of Canaan; unto which they prayed him to let them pass
quietly.

Ver. 30. But Sihon King of Heshbon would not let us Refused to agree to this
reasonable demand.

For the LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, etc.]
Gave him over to his own inflexible Humor, which was set upon violent Courses;
from which God did not divert him, (because he intended to destroy him) but
rather ordered things so, that his Mind should be enraged and disturbed, and so
unable to consider things prudently, and discern what belonged to his peace:
which is the utmost that can be meant by hardening his Spirit, and making his
heart obstinate. Which as it is a sin, cannot be ascribed unto God: but as it
is a punishment, might justly be inflicted by him upon Sihon for his former
sins.

Ver. 31. And the LORD said unto me, behold, I This was said when Moses saw him
coming out to battle against them, (as it follows in the next Verse) at which
time he is said to begin to give them his Country, because he had absolutely
resolved it: and, it is probable, so confounded his Forces, that they were as
good as already conquered.

Before thee.] Into their Power: that they might go into it at their pleasure.

Begin to possess, that thou may inherit his Land.] In the same sense he
bids Moses begin to possess, i. e. prepare to take possession of it. See III. 2.

Ver. 32. Then Sihon came out against us, he and all See XXI Numb. 23.

Ver. 33. And the LORD our God delivered him before us, and we smote him, and
his Sons, and all his People.] They won the Field, and killed him, his R.
Solomon says his Sons were like himself, very great Men.

And we took all his Cities at that time.] After this Victory, they took his
whole Country, as is related XXI Numb. 24, 25. and the Cities belonging to it,
are mentioned XXXII. 34, 35, etc.

And utterly destroyed the Men, and the Women, and the little Ones of every
City, we left none to remain.] They being part of those wicked People the
Amorites; whom God had condemned to utter destruction. For the Amorites came
out of Canaan, and took this Country from the Moabites and the Children of
Ammon.

Only the Cattle we took for a prey unto our selves, etc.] They had the Divine
Warrant for this, no doubt; as they had for the Extirpation of the People.

From Aroer which is by the brink of the River Arnon.] This River divided Moab
from the Kingdom of Sihon, (XXI Numb. 13, 24.) upon which the City of Aroer
stood: which was now in the possession of Sihon, though belonging formerly to
the Moabites.

And from this City that is by the River.] This some take to be the City Ar,
XXI Numb. 15. But I think these words should rather be translated, even the
City in the River: meaning Aroer still, as a remarkable place, being
encompassed with the River, XII Josh. 2. For Ar, I think, was never in the
possession of the Amorites; being the capital City of Moab.

Even unto Gilead.] Chapter III.
For half of Gilead belonged to the Country of Sihon, XII Josh. 2. and given to
the Tribe of Gad, XV Josh. 2. And the other half belonged to the Kingdom of Og,
(as we read in the same place, XII Josh. 5.) and was given to the half Tribe of
Manasseh, XIII Josh. 31.

Ver. 37. Only unto the Land of the Children of Ammon That is, into no part of
their Country, which was then in their possession: but all that the Amorites
had taken from them was given to the Gadites, XIII Josh. 25.

Nor unto any place in the River Jabbok.] To no place beyond that River, which
was the Border of the Children of Ammon, XXI Numb. 24. XII Josh. 2.

Nor into the Cities of the Mountains.] Much less into the mountainous parts of
the Country of the Amorites.

Nor unto whatsoever the LORD our God forbad us.] The words in the Hebrew are,
And all whatsoever the LORD our God commanded us, i. e. not to meddle withal.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. THen we turned and went up by the way of etc.] See XXI Numb. 33.
where there are the very same words.

Ver. 2. And the LORD said unto me, Fear him not; etc.] The same words in XXI
Numb. 34. Only there he says, I have delivered him into thy hand; that is,
resolved to do it. Which may interpret what is said in the foregoing Chapter of
this Book, v. 31. concerning Sihon.

So the LORD our God delivered into our hands Og also the King of Bashan, etc.]
See XXI Numb. 35.

And we took all his Cities at that time, all the Cities, etc. threescore
Cities.] See upon XXXII Numb. 41.

All the Region of Argob.] A small Province lying between Jordan and the
Mountains of Gilead; a little above the Sea of Tiberias: which Region was
afterward called Trachonitis, from the asperity of the Mountains.

The Kingdom of Og in Bashan.] Belonging to his Kingdom in Bashan, v. 13. and 1
Kings IV. 13.

All these Cities were fenced with high Walls, Gates and Bars, etc.] So they
are described 1 Kings IV. 13.

And we utterly destroyed them, etc.] For they were Amorites, and therefore
under the Curse of God: being part of the seven Nations of Canaan, devoted to
destruction. See II. 34.

But all the Cattle, and the Spoil of the Cities, we took for a prey to our
selves.] As they had done before, when they destroyed Sihon and his People, II.
35.

And we took at that time out of the hand of the two Kings of the Amorites, the
Land which was on this side Jordan.] Which was given to the two Tribes of
Reuben and Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, v. 12, 13. If Men were not
blinded with prejudice, they could not but see from hence, that the word
beeber, in the first Verse of this Book, is rightly translated on this side:
for beyond Jordan (as they would have it signify) in the Land of Canaan, these
two Kings had no possessions; nor did Moses make any Conquest there.

From the River of Arnon unto Hermon.] This River was the Bounds of their
Country on the South: and Hermon which was one of the Mountains of Gilead,
(where it joins to Libanus) was their Bound on the North.

Ver. 9. Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion.] Psalm. 6. and joined with
Lebanon: for it was as much a part of Libanus, as of Gilead; these two
Mountains there meeting together. Whence Jeremiah calls Gilead the Head of
Lebanon, XXII. 6. because Libanus begins where Gilead ends.

And the Amorites call it Shenir.] And so it is called XXVII Ezekiel. 5. and had
this Name, as Bochart conjectures, from the multitude of wild Cats which were
in this Mountain. For the Arabians called that Creature Sinaur or Sinar. See
Hierozoicon. P. I. Lib. III. Cap. XIV.

Ver. 10. All the Cities of the Plain.] All the flat Misor; for they retain
here that Hebrew word.

And all Gilead.] i. e. All that part of it, which belonged to him: which was
but half, as I observed before, II. 36.

And all Bashan.] That part of his Country, which was properly and peculiarly
called Basan: which being the most rich and fertile, (as the word signifies)
gave denomination to his whole Kingdom.

Unto Shalchah and Edrei, Cities of the Kingdom of Og in Bashan.] The former of
these is mentioned XIII Josh. 11. (just as it is here) as the Bounds of Bashan
toward Mount Hermon or Lebanon: So Chytraeus, A Town in Basan in the Mountains
of Libanus near to Machati. And Edr^i was the place where they fought with Og
and overthrew him, XXI Numb. 33.

For only Og King of Bashan remained of the remnant of the Giants.] Or of the
Rephaim, a very ancient People in this Country, (XIV Genesis 5.) who were either
descended from the Amorites or mingled with them: and Og was the very last of
them; so that he and his People being destroyed, none of them remained.

Behold, his Bedstead was a Bedstead of Iron.] Which was no unusual thing in
ancient days; though far later than this. For Thucydides says, that when the
Thebans took Plateae, they made Beds of the Brass and Iron they found there:
which they dedicated to Juno. And Beds of Silver and Gold are mentioned by
diverse Authors, as Huetius observes in his Demonstr. Evangel. Propos. IV. Cap.
XIV. N. VII.

Is it not in Rabbath of the Children of Ammon.] This is thought by some to be
a considerable Objection against Moses being the Author of this Book. For how
should this Bedstead, say they, come to the Children of Ammon in his days? No
doubt, they imagine, it would have remained in Bashan whilst Og lived; though,
in length of time, it might be carried into the Country of the Ammonites: As if
Og, fearing the worst, might not send his Bed, and his best Furniture, unto the
Ammonites: knowing they would be safe among them, because the Israelites were
forbid to make War upon them. Or Moses, having conquered the Country, and kept
all the Spoil, ( v. 7.) might not sell this, among other Goods, to the Children
of Ammon; who preserved it in their capital City. No body can see an
unreasonableness in either of these Suppositions of the same Huetius. Nor do I
see how the Conjecture of another learned Person, ( Andraeas Masius upon the
XIIth of Joshua) can be confuted; which is, That when the Ammonites drove out
that monstrous sort of People, mentioned II. 21. Og might possibly escape, (and
so is said here, to be left of the remnant of the Giants) who flying hither to
the Amorites, was made their King, because of his goodly Presence, and great
Valor. But the Ammonites kept his Bedstead, and showed it as a Monument of
that illustrious Victory: which they got over the Rephaim, or as they called
them, the Zamzummims in that Country.

Nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits was the breadth thereof.]
This is mentioned to show of what a vast Stature Og was: For Bedsteads being,
according to the common Custom, made a third part longer than the Persons that
lie in them, he was six Cubits high, as Maimonides computes: that is, as high
again as any other Man, More Nevochim. P. II. Cap. XLVII. Which is very sober
Discourse in comparison with what other Jews say of him. See S^kikkard in his
Bechinah Happeruschim, p. 120.

After the cubit of a Man.] According to the Cubit of ordinary Men, says the
same Maimonides (which is a little more than half a yard) not of Og before
mentioned. But what need was there, say the former Objectors, to mention this,
since the Israelites saw Og lie dead before them, on the Ground; and needed not
to be told by Moses how tall he was? And therefore they conclude this was
written by some body else, in after times. As if Moses did not write for the
benefit of those that came after, as well as for the present Generation. Who,
that they might be satisfied what a vast Man Og was, he left it upon record how
large his Bedstead was, and where it might be seen; whereby they might judge of
his Stature. Besides, there were in the present Generation, great numbers of
Children, old Men, Women and Servants, who could not go to see Og lie at length
upon the Field: but by this means were instructed, from what a terrible Enemy
God had delivered them.

They that question the truth of this Relation, may read, if they be able, what
the learned Huetius has at large discoursed concerning Men of a portentous
bigness in all Countries (in his Quaestiones Alnetanae, Lib. II. Cap. XII. N.
III.) of which no Man can doubt, who is not resolved to disbelieve all the
World. In his Demonstratio Evangelica also he observes that Homer makes Tityon,
when he was dead, to have lain stretched out upon (not nine Cubits, but) nine
Acres of Ground: -- (...). Which Hyperbole may excuse the Jewish Rabbis when
they say, that Og was nine Cubits long, when he lay in his Cradle. See Propos.
IV. Cap. VIII. N. IV.

And this Land which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which is by the
River Arnon.] See II. 36.

And half mount Gilead, and the Cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites, and
to the Gadites.] See XXXII Numb. 34, 35, etc. but especially XIII Josh. 15,
etc. where he distinctly relates what Portion of this Country was given to the
Reubenites; and v. 23, 24, etc. what was given to the Gadites. And it appears
that none of Gilead belonged to the Reubenites; but the Gadites had one half of
it, as the Manassites had the other.

Ver. 13. And the rest of Gilead.] Which was not Gadites.

And all Bashan, being the Kingdom of Og.] That is, all that was taken from Og,
of which he was King.

Gave I unto the half Tribe of Manasseh; all the Region of Argob, with all
Bashan.] It is repeated again, lest any one should think that Argob, which was
a distinct Province in that Kingdom, was not given to them by this Grant. See
v. 4.

Which was called the Land of Giants.] Where the Rephaims formerly inhabited;
of whom Og was the last. See XIV Genesis 5. compared with XV. 20. XIII Josh. 12.

Ver. 14. Jair the Son of Manasseh took all the Country This is one reason why
he gave this Country to them. See XXXII Numb. 41.

Unto the Coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi.] We had no mention of these places
before; which were in the Northern part of this Country; as appears from XII.
Josh. 4, 5. XIII. 11. But the People of these places they could not expel, XIII
Josh. 13.

And called them after his own Name.] XXXII Numb. 4.

Unto this day.] From hence likewise Cavils are raised against Moses being the
Author of this Book: when the most that can be concluded from hence is, that
upon the revising of these Books by Ezra, he put in these few words to certify
the Reader, that still they retained this Name; as some body, no doubt, added
the History of Moses his death, at the end of this Book. This the greatest
Defenders of the Authority of these Books, as written by Moses himself, make no
scruple to allow: particularly Huetius, and since him Hermannus Witzius in his
Miscellanea Sacra, Lib. I. Cap. XIV. Sect. 47. But there is no necessity to
yield so much; for Moses might say this himself, though it was not long before
he wrote this Book. For so the holy Writers do sometimes mention places, which
had their Name but newly given them, from a particular Fact, that Posterity
might know the Original of it. See I Acts 19.

And I gave Gilead.] All that was not possessed by the Gadites.

Unto Machir.] To the Posterity of Machir, XXXII Numb. 40.

And unto the Reubenites, and unto the Gadites.] Here is a more exact
Description of that part of the Country, which was given to the other two
Tribes.

I gave from Gilead.] Half of which, as I observed, was given to the Gadites,
v. 12.

Even unto the River Arnon.] Which was the Bounds of the Country toward Moab.
See II. 36.

Half the Valley.] The same word, in the Hebrew Language, signifies both a
Valley, and a Brook or River: and being translated in the foregoing words, the
River, it should be so here likewise, half the River. That is, to the middle of
the River Arnon; by which the Bounds of their Country is most exactly set. And
thus not only the LXX. and the Vulgar, but Onkelos also translates it, the
middle of the Torrent: yea, we our selves also in the XIIth of Josh. 2. where
there are the same words; which in the Hebrew run thus, Unto the River Arnon,
the midst of the River: where the City of Aroar stood, encompassed by the
River, as I observed in the foregoing Chapter, v. 36.

And the border.] Something is understood, viz. went (as the Phrase is XV Josh.
6, 7, etc.) or reached, or some such word. Or the meaning must be, the Country
bordering upon that River.

Even unto the River Jabbok, which is the border of the Children of Ammon.]
This River was the other Boundary of the Country.

Ver. 17. The Plain also and Jordan.] The flat Jordan: which was the Western
Bounds of this Country of Sihon; as the River Arnon was the Southern, and the
River Jabbok the Northern; the Country of the Children of Ammon being on the
East.

And the Coast thereof, from Cinnereth.] The word thereof is not in the Hebrew:
therefore these words may be better rendered the Coast from Cinnereth. Called
the Sea of Cinnereth, XII Josh. 3. XIII. 27. it lying upon a Country and a City
called by that Name, XI Josh. 2. XIX. 35. Which gave the Name to this Sea,
called in the New Tastament, the Sea of Galilee, and the Sea of Genesareth, and
at last the Sea of Tiberias; in honor of the Emperor Tiberius. See upon XXXIV
Numb. 11.

Even unto the Sea of the Plain, even the Salt-Sea.] The Dead-Sea, as it is
called in other places: which, before the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, had
been a most pleasant Plain.

Under Ashdoth Pisgah.] The Name of a City in this Country, XIII Josh. 20.

Eastward.] Which lay East of the Salt-Sea and Jordan: which was the Western
Bounds, as I said, of this Country.

And I commanded you at that time.] That is, he gave this Charge to the two
Tribes of Reuben and Gad, and to the half Tribe of Manasseh before mentioned.

The LORD your God has given you this Land to possess it, etc.] According to
their own desire: but on condition they should help their Brethren to conquer
the Land of Canaan. See XXXII Numb. 20, 21, 22.

But your Wives and your little Ones, and your Cattle* (for I know you have
much Cattle) shall abide in your Cities which I have given you.] See XXXII
Numb. 16, 24, 26.

Until the LORD have given rest unto your Brethren, as well as unto you, etc.]
Brought them to a Settlement in the Land of Canaan, and given them a peaceable
possession of it. After which, we read that Joshua dismissed these Tribes, and
sent them to their Wives and Children, XXII Josh. 4.

And I commanded Joshua at that time.] About that time; when by God's order he
appointed Joshua to be his Successor, and took him to be his Associate in the
Government, XXVII Numb. 18, etc.

Thine eyes have seen all that the LORD your God has done unto these two
Kings: So shall the LORD do unto all the Kingdoms whither thou passest.] This
seems to be the Preface to the Charge, which by God's Command he gave to Joshua
at that time, XXVII Numb. 19, 23.

Ver. 22. Ye shall not fear them: for the LORD your This is part of the Charge
it self; which he had heard him give all the People, eight and thirty years
ago, I. 21, 29, 30.

Ver. 23. And I besought the LORD at that time, Being told by God at the same
time (XXVII Numb. 12, 13.) that he should shortly dye, and only see the Land of
Canaan, but not enter into it; Moses made his humble Supplication to God that
he would not execute the Sentence, which he had denounced against him. For the
word besought signifies Supplication to one that is offended.

Ver. 24. O LORD God, thou have begun to show In subduing the two Kings of the
Amorites.

For what God is there in Heaven, or in Earth, that can do according to thy
works, and according to thy might?] He speaks according to the Language of
those times, when Men worshipped many Gods, of several sorts: None of which, he
acknowledges, were able to bring to pass, such things as the LORD had done.

Ver. 25. I pray thee let me go over, and see the good To see is here to enjoy
it, as the rest of the Israelites were to do: For God bad him go up into a
Mountain and behold it; but threatened he should not enter into it. Which
Threatening he might well think was reversible, as others had been against the
People of Israel upon his Prayer for them; though they had more highly offended
the Divine Majesty than he had done. For though he doubted at the first,
especially when he saw no Water come out of the Rock at the first stroke; yet
he presently recovered himself, and smote it the second time, believing God
would relieve them.

That goodly Mountain.] Most think that he desired to go so far into it, as to
see the place where God intended to settle his Divine Presence: which proved to
be Mount Moriah. But nothing was known of this, a long time after: unless we
suppose it was revealed unto him, that where Abraham offered Isaac, there the
LORD would dwell. It seems to me that he means, that goodly Country, full of
noble Mountains: for thus the word Mountain is often used; particularly XIII
Numb. 29. where the Spies say the Amorites dwell in the Mountain, i. e. in that
mountainous part of Canaan.

And Lebanon.] He desired to go through the whole Country, as far as Lebanon;
which was the most Northerly part of it, (famous for goodly Cedars) as the
Mountain before spoken of, was in the South of Canaan.

But the LORD was wroth with me for your sakes.] See I. 37.

And would not hear me.] Refused to grant my Petition.

And the LORD said unto me, Let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this
matter.] This suggests that Moses renewed his Petition, after the first denial;
and more earnestly begged this Favor of God: which he could not obtain; but
was enjoined silence. This argues great displeasure: and is mentioned by him,
as an Admonition to the Israelites, Chapter IV.
to be fearful to offend the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 27. Get thee up to the top of Pisgah.] See what I have noted upon XXVII
Numb. 12.

And lift up thine eyes Westward, and Northward, etc.] Take a full view of the
Country in all the Quarters of it: which might be seen from the top of this
Mountain, which was called Nebo. See XXXIV. 1, 2, 3.

Ver. 28. But charge Joshua, and encourage and etc.] Bid him not doubt, that I
will bring my People thither under his Conduct; though I deny thee entrance
into it.

Ver. 29. So we abode in the Valley over against It is likely that there was a
Temple built to Baal-Peor which fronted this Valley: for so Beth signifies an
House or Temple of Peor. Which gave the Name to a City wherein it stood; which
was part of the Inheritance of the Reubenites, XIII Josh. 20. In this Valley
Moses was buried, XXXIV. 6. where he made this most excellent Exhortation to
all the People.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. NOW therefore hearken, O Israel.] Having Egypt, and the giving of the
Law at Mount Sinai; with several severe Punishments which he had inflicted on
them for their Disobedience to it; Moses proceeds now to exhort them earnestly
to the observance of it.

Unto the Statutes.] These seem to be such Laws as concerned the Worship of God.

And the Judgments.] And then these were such as concerned their Dealings one
with another. Which two words comprehend all that is signified by Testimonies
and Precepts also, in other places.

Which I teach you, for to do them.] Which he was about to set before them; and
press upon their Practice.

That ye may live, and go in, and possess the Land, which the LORD God of your
Fathers gives you.] Not perish as their Forefathers had done in their
Rebellion: but be happy, and enjoy what God had promised, and was ready now to
bestow upon them.

Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish
from it.] This is thought by some to signify, that they should not make the
least alteration in the Laws he had given them, about the Rites of Divine
Worship, and Abstinence from several Meats, and such like things: which were
distinctive Marks, whereby they were separated from other Nations to be a
peculiar People to him. Thus Chiskuni interprets these words, Thou shall not
add fear, upon the fear of the blessed God. That is, any other Worship to the
Divine Worship prescribed by these Laws, nor diminish that Worship. Which
Interpretation seems to be warranted, by what follows, Thy eyes have seen what
the LORD thy God did, because of Baal-Peor. But in the words beforegoing (which
introduce these) Judgments being mentioned as well as Statutes, there must be a
larger sense of this Injunction, which relates to all the Laws of God: and the
meaning seems to be, Ye shall not transgress any of these Precepts, either by
doing any thing contrary to them, which was to add; or omitting any thing which
they required, which was to diminish. Thus Grotius interprets it upon 2 Corinthians. XI. 24. Addere ad legem est facere quod lex vetat, diminuere est
omittere quod lex jubet. But which way soever we take it, nothing is more
certain than that this Prohibition preserved these Books from any alteration,
since the time they were written: For the whole Body of the People
acknowledging their Divine Authority, none of them dared to change any thing,
either by addition, or diminution. Of which there is a wonderful instance in
the People that came out of Assyria, (in the room of the Israelites, who were
transported thither) to inhabit the Country of Samaria; who receiving this Law,
their Posterity have kept it all along to this day, as uncorrupted, as the Jews
themselves have done; although they were their mortal Enemies, and have been
exposed to all the Changes and Revolutions that can befall a Nation, during the
long interval of Two thousand and four hundred years. Thus the most learned Dr.
Alix observes, in his Reflections upon the four last Books of Moses, p. 144.
And I do not see, why the perfection of the Scripture, without the Oral Law of
the Jews, should not be thought to be established by these words, as another
learned Person (Joh. Wagenseil) understands them in his Confut. Carminis
Lipmanni, p. 585. Yet, as the forenamed Chiskuni notes, it does not seem
reasonable to conclude from hence, that they were prohibited to add any
Constitutions, as a Hedge and Fence to the Law; or as an Explication of it,
when the sense was doubtful. See Mr. Thorndike in his Rights of the Church in a
Christian State, p. 180, etc.

That ye may keep the Commandments of the LORD your God, which I command you.]
This justifies the Explication I gave of the foregoing words, as respecting all
God's Laws: and XII. 32. makes it more plain. And indeed, God being their
Lawgiver, it was the highest presumption to make any Alteration in any of his
Laws.

Your eyes have seen what the LORD did because of Baal-peor, etc.] How he cut
off Twenty four thousand by a Plague, and by the Hand of Justice, who had been
guilty of Idolatry by the enticements of the Midianitish Women, XXV. Numb. 5,
9. Which seems to be a reason, why they should take a special Care about the
Worship of God; that nothing were done contrary to the Laws he had ordained
concerning it.

For all the men that followed Baal-peor, the LORD thy God has destroyed them
from among you.] The Judges put to death all those that they knew to be guilty;
and the Hand of God found out all the rest; so that there was not a Man of them
left, who was not swept away by the Pestilence.

But ye that did cleave unto the LORD.] Did not depart from his Worship; but
bewailed the Apostasy of some of their Brethren, XXV Numb. 6.

Are alive every one of you this day.] A singular Providence watched over them,
to preserve them in such good health, that not one in so many Thousands was
dead since that time. Nor in the War with the Midianites, wherein they slew all
the Males, did they lose so much as one Man, XXXI Numb. 7, 49.

Ver. 5. Behold, I have taught you Statutes and Judgments.] 1.

Even as the LORD my God commanded me.] Sincerely and uprightly; without adding
any thing of my self, or diminishing any thing that he said.

That ye should do so in the Land whither ye go to possess it.] To be the Rule
of your Life, when ye come into the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 6. Keep therefore and do them, for this is your It is your interest to
observe them, as you will soon find by experience: which will teach you that it
is not only the wisest Course in it self, but will get you the reputation of
being a wise People among all your Neighbors.

Which shall hear of all these Statutes.] There being mention before ( v. 1,
5.) of Judgments, as well as Statutes, and here only of the latter, Abarbinel
thence infers, That even those Laws which depended wholly upon the Will and
Pleasure of God, and for which they could give no reason, (for such they
understood by Chukkim) would procure them very great Honor, if they were
carefully observed. For the Nations seeing how wonderfully they prospered,
would be apt to impute it to these extraordinary Prescriptions which they
followed. Just, says he, as a Physician, who cures desperate Diseases, by some
small trifling Remedies (as they seem to others) is highly applauded for the
profoundness of his Knowledge and Wisdom. But Maimonides takes this word
Statutes to comprehend all the Laws of God; and undertakes to show that all the
Six hundred and thirteen Precepts, have a wise End in them, for the Profit and
Benefit of those that observe them; either to beget some wholesome Opinion in
their Mind, or to pull out some perverse one; either to institute some good
Order, or to take away Iniquity, etc. See More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXXI.

And say, Surely this Nation is a wise and understanding People.] Who continued
in Safety, Liberty, and Prosperity, abounding with all manner of Blessings,
while they continued all to go up to worship One God sincerely, at one Place,
at certain Set-times; as if the whole Nation was but one Family. All the rest
of their Laws, also, were admirably fitted to unite them unto God, and one to
another; and consequently, to make them appear a wise People, in the Eyes of
other Nations; whose Writers have not only highly magnified Moses, but their
Lawgivers have transcribed several of his Laws into their own Constitutions.
This appears by the old Attick Laws, and those of the Twelve Tables, as many
learned Men have observed: Nay, the Oracle reported by Porphyry, in Eusebius
his Praeparatio Evangelica, Lib. IX. Cap. X. thus extols this Nation: (...)
(...).
The Chaldaeans and the Hebrews, (who came from Chaldaea) are the only wise
People, who worship God, the Eternal King, in a pure manner. And the Oracle of
Apollo Clarius, recorded by Macrobius, Lib. I. Saturnal. Cap. 18. is no less
remarkable: (...). Acknowledge Jao, (so they pronounced the Name JEHOVAH) to be
the highest God of all. For though Macrobius fancied the Sun to be here called
(...), (no Body can tell why) yet Diodorus Siculus acknowledges (...) to be the
God, from whom Moses pretended to have his Laws, i. e. JEHOVAH.

Ver. 7. For what Nation is there so great, who has Both Onkelos, and the
Paraphrase of Jonathan, and likewise the Jerusalem Targum, are very
significant upon this place: What People is there who have a God that
approaches to them, so as the LORD our God does to us? At whatsoever Hour we
cry unto him, he answers us. It is the manner of other People, to carry their
Gods upon their Shoulders, to show that they are near to them; when, alas! they
are afar off, and cannot hear them. But the LORD our God sits on his Throne on
high, and hears our Prayers, whatsoever time we call upon him, etc. To which
may be added, that they had a Symbol of God's Presence continually among them,
in the Holy Place, where he dwelt with them, and Moses, whenever he pleased,
consulted him in all difficult Affairs; as their High Priest might do, with the
Vrim and Thummim, in all times to come.

Ver. 8. And what Nation is there so great, that has The true Greatness of a
Nation, (it appears by this and the foregoing Verse) consists in the sincere
Worship of God, and in the upright Administration of Justice. Both which were
so provided for by the Divine Laws among the Jews, that no Nation could compare
with them, or was really so great as they were: For though their Country was
but small, and they were often oppressed by several cruel Enemies, who desired
their Extirpation; yet they recovered themselves, and kept their Laws in their
worst Condition (when commonly they best observed them:) Insomuch, that as a
very learned Person of our own Church, long ago, observed: After so many
Changes and Alterations as there were in their State, from better to worse, and
back again; after so many Victories got by them over others, and so many
Captivities of their Persons, and Desolations of their Country, as others had
wrought, they continued still one and the same People, governed by the same
Laws, under several great and potent Monarchies. The successive Rise and Fall
of Three, of which they were preserved to behold; and in their declining State,
able to stand out a great while against the Fourth, the mightiest that ever was
on Earth, and that when this Monarchy was in its full strength. This is a plain
Demonstration of the Truth of these Words of Moses, That no Nation was so great
as they. See Dr. Jackson's First Book upon the Creed, Chap. XXI.

Maimonides observes, That the word Zaddikim, which we translate righteous,
signifies as much as equal and proportionate: Such, says he, were all these
Laws of God; in which there was no excess, by the prescription of long
Pilgrimages, or severe Fastings; nor any defect, which might open the Window to
any Vice, or make them careless in the Practice of Virtue. More Nevochim, P.
II. Cap. XXXIX.

Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget the
things which thou have seen, etc.] Their only danger was, lest they should grow
careless and unmindful of all the wonderful Things that God had done for them:
Which he therefore exhorts them to think of frequently, and to keep in Memory
and lay to Heart; so that they might preserve the Sense of them as long as they
lived, and likewise teach all Posterity to be mindful of them.

Ver. 10. Especially the Day that thou stoodest before But above all, that
memorable Day, when the LORD delivered his Law to them from Mount Sinai; at
which the oldest of them were present, and had seen and heard what he said, and
how it was delivered.

When the LORD said unto me, Gather me the People together.] Unto the foot of
Mount Sinai; where they stood at such a distance from it as God prescribed, XIX
Exodus 10, 11, 12, 13.

And I will make them hear my Words] XIX Exodus 9, etc. XX Exodus 1, etc.

That they may learn to fear me all the Days that they shall live upon the
Earth, etc.] For those Words which they heard, were pronounced in so terrible a
manner, as to make them dread to offend his Majesty, and to instruct their
Children to stand in awe of him.

Ver. 11. And ye came near, and stood under the XIX Exodus 17.

And the Mountain burnt with Fire.] XIX. Exodus 16, 18.

Into the midst of Heaven.] Into the middle of the Air, which is frequently
called Heaven in Scripture; as the Fouls of Heaven are the Fouls of the Air:
But whether the Fire flamed up precisely, into the very midst of the lower
Region of the Air, or only a great height, is not material; either way, the
Expression is proper enough.

Ver. 12. And the LORD spoke unto you out of the midst of the Fire.] XIX Exodus
20. XX. 1, 22.

Ye heard the Voice of the Words.] XX Exodus 19.

But saw no Similitude.] Though sometimes the Divine Majesty seems to have
appeared in a visible Shape, (VII. Dan. 9, 10.) yet when he came to give them
his Law, he would not appear in the Figure of a Man, or any other thing, that
might seem to represent him to their outward Senses, or their Imagination: For
it had been dangerous then to manifest himself, under any Resemblance, when he
forbad them to make any Resemblance of him. They would have thought, he forbad
them to make any other Resemblance, but that wherein he showed himself to them;
in which they would have concluded, it was lawful to represent him.

Only ye heard a Voice.] From hence some of the Jews would gather, that the
People only heard the Sound of God's Words, when he spoke the Ten Commandments;
but not the Distinction of the Sound, so as to understand the Sense of what he
said. Thus Maimonides, in his More Nevochim, P. 2. Cap. XXXIII. Which is
manifestly false, as appears from Ver. 10. and 13. and XX Exodus 22. For
therefore the Day wherein he spoke to them in Horeb was so remarkable, as never
to be forgotten; because he made them hear his Words, so that they might learn
to fear him, etc. For though he did not appear in the likeness of any thing to
them, yet he vouchsafed to speak to them plainly in their own Language, that
they might be instructed in their Duty; both which was to keep them from
Idolatry. He did not let them see any Shape, that they might not make any Image
of him, to worship it or him by it, after the manner of the Heathens; but he
let them hear his Voice, that they might not go and worship any other Gods,
which the Heathens pretended spoke to them.

Ver. 13. And he declared unto you his Covenant, which These were the principal
Laws which they covenanted with him to observe, though afterward he added
others, after the Tenor of which he made a Covenant with them, XXXIV Exodus 27.

And he wrote them upon two Tables of Stone.] XXIV Exodus 12. XXXIV. 28.

Ver. 14. And the LORD commanded me, at that This does not signify, that they
themselves did not hear the Ten Words from Mount Sinai, but were taught them by
Moses, (as Maimonides fancies in the forenamed place) for it plainly relates to
the rest of the Laws, which God immediately after gave him, ( Exodus XXI. XXII.
XXIII.) It being their own desire, that God would speak to them no more by
himself, but communicate the rest of his Will by Moses, XX Exodus 19. And
accordingly he told the People, all the Words of the LORD, and all the
Judgments, which he delivered to him, XXIV Exodus 3.

All this will appear more plainly from the next Chapter of this Book, v. 22,
etc.

It is a mere Imagination of those Jews, who take the Statutes and Judgments
here mentioned, for their Oral Law, as Aben Ezra, R. Solomon, R. Bechai, and
others do, upon this place: Who say, That when God gave Moses the written Law,
he expounded it to him: Which Exposition he delivered to Joshua, and he to the
LXX Elders, etc. so that it came down to them in a successive Tradition.

Ver. 15. Take ye therefore good heed to your selves, (for ye saw no manner of
similitude on the Day that the He gives them a special Caution about this,
because the Nations of the World were so prone to make Images of their Gods;
which he expressly forbids in the Second Commandment. Upon this Text the present
Jews ground the Third Article of their Faith; which is, that God is incorporeal.

Lest ye corrupt your selves.] By worshipping any thing but God himself alone.
Unto whom they being espoused, the giving Divine Worship unto any thing else,
was such a Corruption as Adultery is in a married Woman.

And make you a graven Image, the similitude of any Figure.] See the Second
Commandment, XX Exodus 3, 4.

The likeness of Male or Female.] The representation of God in Humane Shape is
first forbidden, because it was most common among the Heathens. Therefore I
cannot think this relates to the Egyptian Worship, who honored Oxen as sacred
to Osiris, and Cows as sacred to Isis. Unto which Mr. Seldom thinks the LXX.
had respect, when they translated these words, (...). De Diis Syris, Syntag. I.
Cap. IV.

The likeness of any Beast that is on the Earth, etc.] The word Or is to be
here supplied, and in all that follows, in this manner: Or the likeness of any
Beast that is on the Earth; or the likeness of any winged Fowl that flies in
the Air: Where Col tzippor Canaph, which we translate, Any winged Fowl,
signifies all Birds, and Insects, that fly in the Air: For in the shape of such
Creatures also, the Heathen represented their Gods, or some of their Qualities:
For not only Oxen were sacred to Apis, and Rams to Jupiter Ammon, but Hawks,
and Eagles, and even Beetles to other Deities.

Ver. 18. Or the likeness of any thing that creeps on Nothing was more common
among the Heathen, than the Worship of Serpents.

Or the likeness of any Fish that is in the Waters.] The famous Dagon, whom the
Philistims worshipped, was a Fish with an Humane Face, Hands, and Feet. Certain
it is, the Syrians worshipped a Fish, as Cicero tells us in his third Book of
the Nature of the Gods, Syri Piscem venerantur: Which Mr. Seldom thinks,
relates to the famous Goddess, Atazgatis; which is a word made out of the
Hebrew Addir-dag, i. e. magnificent, or potent Fish. See De Diis Syris, Syntag.
II. Cap. II. The Egyptians were famous, in Aftertimes, for worshipping all
sorts of Animals; and if one could find they were so in the Days of Moses, it
might be assigned as the most probable Reason of his cautioning the Israelites
against these things so particularly, they being lately come out of Egypt.

Ver. 19. And lest thou lift up thine Eyes unto Heaven.] Arabians was derived,
Take heed how thou gazest on the Splendour of the Stars: Which is in the first
Century of Arabic Proverbs, set forth by Erpenius, (Prove. XXVIII.) who says
he knew not what to make of it: But I take it to be a Caveat against Idolatry,
to which the ancient Arabians were addicted.

And when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of
Heaven.] The most ancient Idolatry of all other, seems to have been the Worship
of the Sun, and the rest of the heavenly Bodies, which began among the
Chaldaeans: For there is not any God, or Goddess, among the ancient Gentiles,
but has a respect to the Sun, or the Moon, as Gisbertus Cuperus has very
plainly demonstrated in his Harpocrates, P. 87, etc. 108, etc. And a very
learned Man of our own, has lately said a great deal on the same Subject. See
Appendix to the Antiquity of Palmyra, Cap. IV. by Mr. A. Seller. And Maimon.
More Nevoch. P. III. Cap. XXX.

Should be driven to worship them, and serve them.] Drawn in, enticed, and
deceived, (as Onkelos, and the LXX. translate it) either by the instigation of
some evil Genius, or admiration of their Splendour, or imitation of other
Nations, or a vain Opinion that some Divinity inhabits such illustrious Bodies,
or out of a Sense of the Benefits Mankind receive by them: For the chief
Philosophers themselves were led by their weak Reasonings into this Error, as
appears even by Plato, who says, It is most just that the Heaven should be
worshipped with all the Gods and Demons, and that we should, (...), etc. as he
speaks in his Epinomis. See Eusebius, in his Praepar. Evang. Lib. XIII. Cap.
XVIII. where he shows how much better the Hebrews speak in this matter; and
quotes some Words of Plato, out of a Work of his, not now extant, for the
Explication of these Words of Moses. And to make this Idolatry seem more
reasonable, some of the Philosophers asserted the Sun to be endued with
Understanding; and therefore is called by Proclus, (...), The King of
Intellectual Fire, to distinguish it from other Fires, which are without
Understanding: And from thence, in one of the Coyns of Caracalla, there is over
the Sun, surrounded with Rays, the word PROVIDENTIA. In short, the World had
been so long settled in this Worship, that it was no easy matter, when the Son
of God came, to root it out: For the Essens (the best Sect among the Jews) seem
to have had a Tang of this Superstition, as Josephus represents them, Lib. II.
De Bello Judaico, Cap. VII. Some indeed excuse them, as if they only admired
the Sun, as the most excellent Work of God, which they expressed by some kind
of Adoration: But Josephus expressly tells us, That early in the Morning, they
directed to him, (...), as if they beseeched him to rise. And this stuck still
in the Minds of some who professed Christianity; particularly the Followers of
Basilides, and the Manichees, who called the Sun and the Moon by the Name of
Gods; and, sometimes, called the Sun, Christ, as Theodoret tells us, Lib. I.
Cap. XXVI. And Epiphanius, and St. Austin, say the same, in more places than
one. No wonder therefore, that Julian the Apostate should say, that God
produced, (...), Out of himself the Sun, the greatest God, in all things like
unto himself: For which he quotes Plato, in his famous Oration, in praise of
the Sun: Where he says, The same Sun has filled the Heaven with innumerable
other Gods, page 146. (...), The whole Heaven is full of Gods from the Sun.

Which the LORD thy God has divided unto all Nations under the whole Heaven.]
The Sense is very plain; that all Nations under Heaven have the Benefit of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, as well as the Jews; who were therefore to worship him
alone, who is the LORD of them all, and has made them to be Ministers unto us.
This R. Solomon saw, and yet he could not stick to it, but fell into the vain
Fancy of the generality of the Jews, that God has distributed the Nations of
the World under the Government of several Stars, which Stars are under the
Government of Angels; but the Jews under the Government of God alone, and not
subject to any Planet. Which has no Foundation at all; much less can we think,
that God appointed the Nations of the World to worship the heavenly Host, lest
they should be Atheists, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Justin Martyr fancy from
this place: Unless they mean, that God for their Sins delivered them up to this
Impiety; which several great Men since have thought to be the true meaning of
these words: For there are no such words now to be found in the LXX. as they
allege, (...).

There is one who takes the word Chalak, which we translate Divide, to signify
to Blandish, and makes this the Sense: That God places these great Luminaries
in the Heavens, to invite and allure all Nations to admire and adore him, the
Creator of them. And indeed, in the Conjugation which the Hebrews call Hiphil,
this word does signify to soften and smooth, and consequently to allure; but
it never signifies so, in that they call Kall.

Maimonides makes the Sense of Moses's Argument to be this: God has made the
Sun and Moon to be Ministers; not to be worshipped: According to that, I Genesis
18. Which made the Psalmist so particularly call upon all the heavenly Bodies,
to praise the LORD, CXLVIII Psalm. More Nevoch. P. II. Cap. V.

But the LORD has taken you, and brought you forth out of the Iron Furnace.
This is a Phrase used also by Solomon, I Kings VIII. 51. and by Jeremiah XI. 4.
to express the most cruel Servitude; wherein God suffered them to be tried, as
Metals are in a Furnace of Iron, red hot: For he does not allude to their
making of Bricks (as some imagine), which were not wrought in an Iron Furnace.

To be unto him a People of Inheritance, as ye are at this Day.] These were two
powerful Arguments to induce them to be obedient: That they were not only
delivered from the hardest Slavery; but now made God's peculiar People, (see
XIX Exodus 5.) whom he had purchased for his Inheritance, i. e. to be his People
for ever.

From this Verse, Sir John Marsham gathers, That Moses had respect, in the
foregoing Verses, to the Egyptian Superstition; as if he had said, Excusso
servitutis jugo, etiam excutienda sunt Aegypti (...), having shaken off the
Egyptian Yoke, they were also to shake off their abominable Idols: For the
invisible God is not to be worshipped by Images, or Symbols. So that when he
forbids them, v. 16. To make a graven Image, the similitude of any Figure, the
likeness of Male and Female, he thinks Moses has respect to the Boves
utriusque sexus Sacri, The Sacred Beeves of both kind; the Males to Osiris, the
Females to Isis. And he mentions, the likeness of any Beast that is on the
Earth, v. 17. Because all the Egyptians worshipped not only the Creatures
beforementioned, but Canem and Felem, a Dog and a Cat: The Thebans and Saitae
worshipped Sheep; the Mendesians a Goat; and others of them, Wolves and Lions:
And he adds, The likeness of any winged Fowl that flies in the Air; because
all the Egyptians worshipped an Hawk, and the Bird called Ibis; and the Thebans
an Eagle. In v. 18. he mentions, the similitude of any thing that creeps on
the Ground; because about Thebes, Serpents were sacred to Jupiter: And the
likeness of any Fish that is in the Waters; because all Egypt worshipped
certain Fishes, and some of them the Crocodile, and the Hippotamus. And as for
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, v. 19. the worship of them was common to the
Egyptians, with all other Nations. All this he justifies out of good Authors;
and it might pass for Truth, had we any certainty that the Egyptians in the
time of Moses, were as sottish as they were in the time of Herodotus. See
Seculum IX. Sect. de Idololatria.

Furthermore; or rather, But

The LORD was angry with me for your sakes.] He remembers this again, (though he
had mentioned it twice before, I. 37. III. 26.) that they might be the more
deeply sensible of the danger of offending God, since such a Man as he was
excluded from the good Land, for one single Fault. Or hereby he would magnify
the Goodness of God to them, who though great Offenders, had a Privilege granted
to them, which was denied him.

And swear that should not go over Jordan, etc.] He only told him so at the
first, XX Numb. 12. but upon Moses's importunate Entreaty, that he would revoke
the Sentence, (of which we read in the foregoing Chapter of this Book) it seems
he silenced him, by confirming his Threatening with an Oath.

But I must die in this Land, I must not go over Jordan.] See XXVII. Numb. 12,
13, 14. His frequent Repetition of this, shows how near it went to his Heart.
But ye shall go over, and possess that good Land. God's Promise to them, he
would have them think, was as irrevocable as his Threatening against him.

Ver. 23. Take heed unto your selves, lest ye forget the Covenant of the LORD
your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven Image, etc.] For this
Sinai, mentioned alone; as if it was the only thing he had said unto them, XX
Exodus 22, 23. Ye have seen that I have talked with you from Heaven: Ye shall
not make with me Gods of Silver; neither shall ye make unto you Gods of Gold.

Ver. 24. For the LORD thy God is a consuming So he appeared upon the Mount,
when he delivered his Laws from thence in flaming Fire, XXIV Exodus 17. The
learned Huetius thinks, that from these Words of Moses, the ancient Persians
took up the Worship of Fire; at first, only as a Resemblance of God, or a
Symbol of him, (as Maximus Tyrius says, Dissert. XVIII.) but afterward, as
God himself, Demonstr. Evangel. p. 94.

Even a jealous God.] Who cannot endure any Rival in your Affection: See XX
Exodus 5. These were two awakening Arguments to keep them from Idolatry; that
God cannot endure it, and will be very terrible in his punishment of it.

Ver. 25. When thou shall beget Children, and Childrens When they were very
much multiplied, and had been long settled in the possession of the Land of
Canaan.

And shall corrupt your selves.] By the Worship of other Gods.

And make a graven Image, or the likeness of any thing.] Which he had strictly
prohibited, and solemnly cautioned them to beware of, v. 23.

And shall do evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to provoke him to Anger.]
By imitating the idolatrous Customs of other Nations.

I call Heaven and Earth to witness against you this Day.] A solemn kind of
Asseveration; that as surely as the Heaven and the Earth shall endure, they
should utterly perish.

That ye shall soon utterly perish from off this Land, whereunto ye go, etc.]
As soon as the Measure of your Iniquity is filled up, ye shall speedily be
destroyed without Remedy. Which the Hebrews refer to the Captivity by
Salmaneser, and Nebuchadnezzar; after they had been almost Eight hundred Years
in this Country; and so might be said, to have remained long in the Land.

And the LORD shall scatter you among the Nations.] See XXVI Levit. 33.

And ye shall be left few in number among the Heathen, etc.] XXVI Levit. 22.

And there ye shall serve Gods, the work of Men's Hands, Wood, and Stone, etc.]
The Idols of the Heathen: To the Worship of which he threatens to abandon them,
as a punishment for their Apostasy from God. And the Heathen sometime
compelled them to worship their Gods, as we read in the Third of Daniel.

Which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.] This is a Description of the
most stupid Idolatry, to which they should be delivered, if they fell from God.
See XXI Numb. 29.

Ver. 29. But if from thence than shall seek the LORD thy God.] When they were
scattered among the Heathen, v. 27.

Thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy Heart, If they then
repented sincerely, and became unfeigned Worshippers of the LORD their God
alone, he promises them forgiveness.

Ver. 30. When thou art in tribulation, and all these In great distress, by the
execution of the foregoing Threatenings.

Even in the latter Days.] In future Times, or in their most declining State.
The Jews themselves apply this to the present State, wherein they now are, and
have been many Years; as appears by the ancient Nitzacon, set forth lately by
Wagenseil, p. 254. where he says the whole Nation must repent, before God send
Deliverance unto them.

If thou turn to the LORD thy God, and shall be obedient to his Voice.] The
great end of punishment was to convert them, and make them more observant of
God's Commands.

Ver. 31. For the LORD thy God is a merciful God.] Exodus 6, 7. XIV. Numb. 17,
18.

He will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, etc.] He promises not to cast
them off, nor destroy them utterly, (though they were utterly thrown out of their
Land, v. 26.) but restore them to his Favor, according to the Covenant made
with their Fathers, and confirmed by an Oath, XVII Genesis 19. XXII. 16, 17. See
XXVI Levit. 44, 45.

Ver. 32. For ask now of the Days that are past, which etc.] Turn over the
Annals of the whole World, from one end of it to the other, ever since it was
made, and search, whether thou can find any thing like to that which God has
done for you. Which R. Isaac thus glosses in his Munimen Fidei, (lately set
forth by Wagenseil, p. 103.) From the Creation of the World, till their going
out of Egypt, there were passed Two thousand four hundred and forty eight
Years; and yet in all that long Tract of Time, there never were seen, or heard,
in any part of the World, such prodigious Miracles as were wrought to bring
them out of Egypt; and afterward, in leading them through the Red Sea; raining
Manna on them; and the appearance of the Divine Majesty at Mount Sinai, etc.

Did ever People hear the Voice of God speaking out of the midst of Fire, as
thou have heard, and live?] Here was a double, or rather tripple Prodigy, never
heard of before, that God should speak to them audibly and distinctly, so long
as to inform them in their Duty toward himself, and one another; and this out
of the midst of devouring Flames, and without the least hurt to any one of
them, XX Exodus 18. XX. 18. XXIV. 17.

Or has God assayed to go and take him a Nation from the midst of another
Nation.] Another Wonder, never before heard of; that God, by two Men alone,
Moses and Aaron, should demand the Delivery of a Nation, under the Power of
another Nation far greater and stronger than themselves, and effect it also, by
no other Means but such as here follow:

By Temptations.] This word may be thought to signify the grievous Trials of
the Israelites, whose Miseries were increased after the first Attempt for their
Deliverance; which seemed to them a strange way of proceeding, V Exodus 19, 22,
23. But by Temptations, may in this place be, in general, meant Miracles, as
the Hebrews understand it, and the Chaldee word Tenessin signifies. This, and
the two following words being of the very same import with the three words in
the New Testament, which we often meet withal, (and seem to be taken from
hence) (...), With Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, II Act. 22. 2 Corinthians. XII. II
Hebr. 4.

By Signs.] Which are mentioned, IV Exodus 9. VII. 9, 10.

And by Wonders.] This signifies all the Ten Plagues of Egypt: For Pharaoh
would not let the Israelites go, till God had multiplied his Wonders on the
Land of Egypt, as we read, VII Exodus 3. X. 1, 2. XI. 9, 10.

And by War.] This seems to relate to the Overthrow of Pharaoh, in the Red Sea;
where the LORD is said to fight for Israel, (XIV Exodus 14. XV. 3.) while they,
which is the greatest Wonder of all, were delivered without striking a stroke.

And by a mighty Hand, and a stretched-out Arm.] These are Phrases which we
often meet withal, when Moses speaks of their Deliverance out of Egypt. III
Exodus 19. VI. 6. XV. 12. and many other places. And the Hebrews think, that his
mighty Hand particularly refers to the grievous Murrain, and the Pestilence,
which are called the Hand of the LORD, X Exodus 3, 15. And his stretched-out
Arm, to have a particular respect to the killing of the Firstborn; the Angel
that was going to smite Jerusalem, appearing with a drawn Sword, and his Hand
stretched out, I Chron. XXI. 16.

And by great Terrors.] Wherewith the Minds of those were stuck who heard of
these things, XV Exodus 14, 15, 16. Or else he means the Frights in which the
Egyptians were, while they remained three Days in most dismal Darkness, (X
Exodus 23.) for the conclusion of this Verse signifies, that he speaks of all
that the LORD their God did for them in Egypt, before their Eyes.

Unto thee it was showed.] This was a particular kindness to the Israelites,
which God never before manifested to any other Nation.

That thou might know that the LORD he is God: there is none else besides
him.] That they might believe him to be the only true God, and worship none but
him. Which two Articles, says Maimonides, (More Nevochim, P. II. Cap. XXXIII.)
that God is, and that he is but One; are Fundamentals of Religion, which were
known not only by Prophets, but by every Body else.

Out of Heaven he made thee to hear his Voice.] See XX Exodus 22.

That he might instruct thee.] Teach them his Will, which was chiefly declared
in the Ten Commandments.

And upon Earth he showed thee his great Fire.] He means either that they saw
it as they stood upon the Earth; or, that it burnt upon the top of the Mount in
their sight, XXIV Exodus 17.

And thou heardest his Words out of the midst of the Fire.] Ver. 11, 12. and XX
Exodus 18, 19.

And because he loved thy Fathers, therefore he chose their Seed after them.
See XV Genesis 5, 6, 7. And many other Places in that Book, III Exodus 15, 16, 17.

And brought them out in his sight with a mighty power.] For as he led them the
way out of Egypt, in a Pillar of Cloud, and of Fire, (XIII Exodus 21.) So when
they were in danger by Pharaoh's pursuit of them, he came behind them, and they
marched in his sight, XIV Exodus 19.

Out of Egypt.] This is mentioned in Scripture as the highest Benefit, never to
be forgotten by them. So G. Sckickard observes, (in his Mischpat Hamelek, Cap.
III. Theorem X.) That they are put in Mind of this, in the Frontispiece of the
Decalogue, XX Exodus 2. in the Institution of Sacrifices, XXII Levit. 33. in the
Promise of a Blessing, XXVI. 13. and here, in the enumeration of God's
wonderful Works; and afterward, in the commendation of his Love, VII Deuteronomy. 8.
in his Dehortation from Ingratitude, VIII. 14. in his Institution of the
Passover, XVI. 6. in the Speech which the reproving Angel made to them, II
Judges 1. in the hope he gave them of Victory over the Midianites, VI. 9. in
his Answer to their Petition for a King, I Sam. X. 18. and on a great many
other occasions: For this was, Velut Fundamentum and initium Reipublicae, etc.
as another learned German speaks, ( Gierus on IX Dan. 15.) the Foundation as we
may call it, and the Beginning of their Commonwealth founded by God; which
comprehended in it abundance of Miracles, far exceeding all the Power of Nature.

Ver. 38. To drive out Nations before thee greater So mighty that they frighted
their Fathers from attempting the Conquest of them, XIII Numb. 28, 29, 31.

To bring thee in to give thee their Land for an Inheritance, as it is this
day.] That is, as he had given them a late Experiment, by overthrowing the two
Kings of the Amorites, and giving them their Land for a possession.

Know therefore this day, and consider it in thy Heart, that the LORD, he is
God in Heaven above, and upon the earth, and there is none else.] Be sensible
therefore, and settle this Belief in thy Heart, that the LORD is the sole
Governor of the whole World.

Thou shall therefore keep his Statutes and his Commandments, which I command
thee this day, etc.] Worship and obey him, as the only way to make them and
their Posterity live happily in the Land, which God was about to give them.

That it may be well with thee, and with thy Children after thee, and that thou
may prolong thy days upon the earth, etc.] Though Moses speak of their long
Life upon Earth, yet the better sort of Jews did not set up their rest here;
but from this word prolong, extended their hope as far as the other World: For
thus Maimonides says, (in his Preface to Perek Chelek) they were taught by
Tradition to expound these Words, That it may be well with thee, in the World
which is all good; and may prolong thy days, in the World which is all long,
i. e. never ends.

Then Moses severed three Cities.] I observed in the Preface to this Book, that
Moses did not deliver all that is contained in this Book, in one continued
Speech; but at several times, as appears even by the beginning of the next
Chapter, where it is said, He called all Israel, and said unto them, etc. Which
supposes, that after this Preface in these four Chapters, he dismissed them to
consider what he had said; and then some time after assembled the People again,
to put them in Mind of the Laws, which he so earnestly pressed them to observe.
But between these two times, (after he had spoken all that is contained in
these four Chapters, and before he rehearsed the Decalogue) he put in execution
the Command of God lately given, to set apart three Cities of Refuge on this
side Jordan: Which he here relates, in the order, I suppose, wherein it was
done.

On this side Jordan, toward the Sunrising.] On the East Side of Jordan,
according to what was ordered, XXXV Numb. 14.

Ver. 42. That the Slayer might flee thither, which etc.] See there, v. 11, 12,
etc.

Ver. 43. Namely, Bezer in the Wilderness, in the Thus they are set down also
in the Book of Joshua, XX. 8. XXI. 27, 36, 38.

Ver. 44. And this is the Law which Moses set before Now follows the Law, which
(after the forementioned assignation of the Cities of Refuge) Moses set before
all the People, and pressed them to the observance of it.

Ver. 45. These are the Testimonies, and the Statutes, As the next Chapter
contains the Law; that is, the Ten Commandments, which Moses set before them:
So, in several following Chapters, (after new earnest Exhortations to
Obedience) he represents to them the rest of God's Will, comprehended under
these three words; Testimonies, Statutes, and Judgments: Some of which belong
to the Divine Service, others to their Civil Government, and the rest to
Ceremonial Observations, for the better security and preservation of both the
former.

Which Moses spoke unto the Children of Israel, after they came forth out of
Egypt.] Which he had formerly delivered to them, after they were come out of
the Egyptian Bondage, in the XXI, XXII, XXIII Chapters of Exodus, and in the
following Books.

On this side Jordan, etc.] In this, and the two following Verses, he again
mentions the place and the time, when and where he set before them the Law, and
the Testimonies, Statutes and Judgments, recorded in the following part of this
Book: Which he repeats, that all Posterity might observe, these Discourses were
made a little before he died.

In the Valley over against Beth-peor.] III. Vlt.

In the Land of Sihon King of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.] II. 24, 31,
etc.

Whom Moses and the Children of Israel smote, after they were come forth out of
Egypt.] In the fortieth Year after their departure thence: As appears from XXI
Numb. 24. XXXIII. 38.

And they possessed his Land, and the Land of Og King of Bashan, etc.] See XXI
Numb. 33, etc.

From Aroer, which is by the Bank of the River Arnon, even unto Mount Sion,
which is Hermon.] The Mount here called Sion, is not that which was so famous
in Aftertimes, when David made it the Royal Seat; for that was on the other
side Jordan, and is written with different Letters in the Hebrew: But in all
probability, is a Contraction of Sirion; which is the Name by which the
Sidonians called Hermon: For the Bounds of this Country are so described, III.
8, 9, 12. to extend from the River Arnon, to Mount Hermon, which is called
Sirion. Chapter V.


Ver. 49. And all the Plain on this side Jordan Eastward, even unto the Sea of
the Plain.] See III. 17.

Under the Springs of Pisgah.] The same place there called Ashdod-Pisgah. Which
is exactly described after the same manner, by Benjamin Tudelensis, in his
Itinerary, set forth by L'Empereur, p. 51. Where he says, that Jordan is
called at Tiberias, the Sea of Genesareth; and coming from thence with a great
force, falls, at the foot of this Hill, into the Sea of Sodom, which is called
the Salt Sea.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. AND Moses called all Israel, and said unto That is, summoned all the
Elders, and Heads of their Tribes, who were to communicate what he said to the
rest. Thus it is commonly expounded: But that which he says, XXIX. 10, 11.
seems to direct us to another Interpretation; that he himself went from Tribe
to Tribe, and repeated these Ten Words, (as they are called) placing himself in
several parts of their Camp, that every one might hear what he said. And this
was sometime after he had, in like manner, exhorted them to Obedience, in the
foregoing Preface. See IV. 41.

Hear, O Israel, the Statutes and Judgments, which I speak in your Ears this
day.] Mind what I now say unto you.

That ye may learn them, and keep and do them.] That ye may not be ignorant of
such important Truths, nor negligent in the Practice of them; which is the End
of Knowledge.

The LORD our God made a Covenant with us in Horeb.] See XXIV Exodus 3, 5, 6, 7,
8.

The LORD made not this Covenant with our Fathers.] Viz. Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: With whom he covenanted to give their Posterity the Land of Canaan; but
did not make to them this discovery of his Will, which was the matter of the
Covenant at Horeb.

But with us, even us, who are all here alive this day.] A great part of those
who were then at Horeb, were now alive, viz. all under twenty Years old. And if
they had been all dead, Moses might have said, He made it with us; because they
were still the same People, though the particular Persons were dead, with whom
the Covenant was made, not only for themselves, but for their Posterity.

The LORD talked with you Face to Face in the Mount, etc.] Openly, clearly, and
distinctly; or by himself, without the Mediation of Moses; but in no visible
shape, for that is expressly denied in the foregoing Chapter, IV. 12, 15.

I stood between the LORD and you at that time, to show you the Word of the
LORD. As a Mediator, whom God employed to prepare them to meet him, (XIX. Exodus
10, 11, etc.) and to prescribe them the Bounds, at what distance they should
keep, ( v. 12.) and to bring them forth to meet with him, ( v. 17.) and to
charge them to keep within their Bounds, v. 21. And on the other side, to
represent their Desires unto God, after he had spoken to them, XX Exodus 19. So
that he was truly a Mediator between God and them; and stood also in a middle
place, at the foot of the Mount, while they stood further off.

For ye were afraid by reason of the Fire.] XX Exodus 18.

And went not up into the Mount.] XIX Exodus 17. XX. 21.

Ver. 6. I am the LORD thy God, which brought This Preface to the Ten
Commandments is explained, XX Exodus 2.

Ver. 7. Thou shall have none other Gods before me.] Exodus 3. It is wisely
observed by Grotius, (Lib. 2. de Jure Belli and Pacis, Cap. XX. Sect. XLV.)
That true Religion was ever built upon these Four Principles: First, That there
is a God, and that he is but One. Secondly, That God is nothing of those things
that we see with our Eyes, but something more sublime than them all. Thirdly,
That he takes Care of Humane Affairs, and judges them most justly. Fourthly,
That he is the Maker of all things whatsoever. Which Principles are explained
in these first four Precepts of the Decalogue; the Unity of the Godhead being
delivered in the first place.

Ver. 8, 9, 10. Thou shall not make thee any graven etc.] The Second Principle,
That God's Nature is invisible, is contained in this Second Commandment: Being
the Ground of this Prohibition, to make any Image of him. Which the best of the
Heathen forbad also for this very reason, (...), Because it is impossible to
conceive God otherwise, but by the Mind alone, as Plutarch reports the sense of
Numa among the Romans. And we find the same as plainly said by Antisthenes
among the Greeks, in Clemens Alexandrinus, (...): He is not seen by the Eyes,
nor is like to any thing; and therefore none can learn any thing of him by an
Image. Nor could the Vulgar, I am apt to think, have been kept so long, and so
generally as they were, to the worship of them, if it had not been by bold
Fictions, that some of them were (...), Fallen down from Heaven; and that all of
them were, (...), Divine Things, and full of a Divine Communication, as
Jamblichus speaks. And to make them more reverenced, while some of them were
(...), conspicuous to all the People; others were kept secret in the inmost
part of their Temple, as having hidden in them a Symbolical Presence of God, as
Proclus speaks upon Timaeus. Which Ezekiel Spanhemius justly thinks, was done in
imitation of what Moses says concerning God's Presence upon the Mercy-Seat, in
the Holy of Holies. Observationes in Callimachum, p. 586, etc.

See upon these three Verses my Annotations on XX Exodus 4, 5, 6.

Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy God in vain, etc.] This contains
the Third Principle beforementioned, that God takes Notice of all things, even
of our Thoughts, and governs all our Affairs: For it is the Foundation of an
Oath, that God knows our very Hearts, and is Witness to our Meaning, as well as
our Words; and will, if we swear falsely, punish us for it: Which is an
acknowledgment also both of the Justice, and the Power of God. See upon XX
Exodus 7.

Ver. 12. Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it.] They were to keep it in
Memory, that they might sanctify it, as it is XX Exodus 8. see there. And it
was sanctified, Abarbinel speaks upon these Words) and might learn the Divine
Law, together with the Kabalah, or Traditional Exposition of the Words, and
mark well the Niceties of it: For which he quotes a Saying out of the Gemara of
the Jerusalem Talmud, Sabbaths and Feasts were not given, but to learn the Law
upon them. Which is the reason he says of another Speech of theirs, in their
Midrasch, or Allegorical Exposition upon Exodus, That the Sabbath weighs
against all the Commandments: Because it was a principal means to make them
known and observed. There is not much said indeed, in express Words, concerning
this End of the Rest of the Sabbath: But common Reason told the Jews, it could
not be intended merely as a Day of Ease from Labor; but for the solemn Service
of God, and Instruction in their Duty to him.

As the LORD thy God commanded thee.] At Marah say the Jews commonly, where he
gave them a Statute and an Ordinance: See XV Exodus 25. But one of them says
better, At Marah it was designed, and at Sinai it was commanded. But they do
not look back far enough for the Original of this Commandment: For there being
two Things in this Day, the Rest of it, and the Religion; the Rest of it was in
Remembrance of their Deliverance out of Egypt, and the Overthrow of Pharaoh in
the Red Sea, which completed their Deliverance; immediately after which, they
kept their first Sabbatical Rest. The Religion was in Remembrance of the
Creation of the World; and so this Day had been observed from the beginning by
the Patriarchs, though we find no mention made of their Resting: And that may
possibly be the meaning of these Words, As the LORD thy God commanded thee.
That is, immediately after he had finished the Creation of the World.

Six Days shall thou labor, and do all thy Work.] See upon XX Exodus 9.

But the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the LORD thy God, in it thou shall not
do any Work, etc.] The reason why they might not do any Work on this Day, is
given in the XX Exodus 11. which is wholly omitted here; because Moses had
another Reason to add, for the Inforcement of this Precept: And refers them (in
the foregoing Words, v. 12. As the LORD thy God has commanded thee) to what he
had said in the Book of Genesis and Exodus; where he had set down the Reason
which God himself gave with his own Mouth, for the Religious Observation of
this Day; because in Six Days the LORD made Heaven and Earth, etc. So that this
Commandment was designed to establish the Fourth Principle I mentioned, that
God is the Maker of all Things. To preserve the Memory and Sense of which, (as
the Author of the Answer, Ad Orthodoxos, observes, LXIX.) this Rest was
instituted, to be observed with a more than ordinary Sanctity. It being of such
great moment, that the first Sabbath-breaker was punished with Death; because
the voluntary Violation of it, contained in it a Denial, that the World was
created by God.

That thy Manservant and thy Maidservant may rest as well as thou.] Mercy
toward Men, as well as Piety toward God, was a Reason for the observation of
this Sabbatical Rest.

Ver. 15. And remember that thou wast a Servant in etc. therefore the LORD thy
God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day. This is a new Ground for the
observation of the Sabbath; because God had given them rest from their hard
Labor in Egypt: Which obliged them to keep that Seventh Day, which God
appointed at the giving of Manna, (being the Day on which he overthrew Pharaoh
in the Red Sea) as the Memory of the Creation of the World obliged them to keep
one Day in seven. So our Mr. Mede has explained it: See my Annotations on XIV
Exodus 30. And Maimonides has something to the same purpose, in his More
Nevochim, P. II. Cap. XXXI. See upon XX Exodus 11.

Ver. 16. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, as the In the Twentieth of Exodus,
v. 12. See there. To which I shall here add, That the Laws of Solon made those
Children infamous, who did not afford Sustenance to their Parents, and provide
them an Habitation. And by the ancient Law of Athens, he that reproached his
Parents, was disinherited; if he struck them, his Hand was cut off; if he left
them unburied, he lost their Estate, and was banished his Country: And another
Law punished this Ingratitude with Death. See J. Meursius, in his Themis
Attica, Lib. I. Cap. 2, 3. where he shows, That by Parents they understood, not
only Father and Mother, but Grandfather, and Grandmother; nay, (...) i. e.
Great Grandmother, and Great Grandfather, if they were yet alive, as Isaeus
tells us, Orat. VII. And the Ground of all these Laws, was, a Sense they had,
as Aeschines tells us, That Men ought to honor their Parents, as they did the
Gods, (...). See Sam. Petitus, in Leges Atticas, Lib. III. Tit. 3. Whence
Hierocles calls Parents, (...), Earthly Gods. And Philo upon the Decalogue,
(...), etc. Visible Gods, who imitate him that is unbegotten, by giving Life.
And accordingly, next to the Precepts concerning the Worship of God, Moses here
places immediately the Duty owing unto Parents.

That thy Days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, etc.] These
last Words are added to what God spoke, (XX Exodus 12.) as an Explication of the
foregoing. Whereby they are excited to Obedience, by the Promise not only of a
long Life, but of an happy. I say Obedience, for that is included in Honor, as
the Apostle explains it, III Coloss. 20. Children obey your Parents in all
things: Where God, that is, has not commanded the contrary, and where it is
not inconsistent with the Public Good; which is always to be preferred ever
before the Duty that is owing to Natural Parents. Insomuch, that common Reason
taught the Heathen, that for the Good of the Society, the Son is to lay aside
the Reverence he should pay to his Father, and the Father to pay it unto the
Son; that is, when he is in Public Office: Thus the famous Fabius Cunctator,
commended his Son, for making him light off from his Horse, when he met him in
his Consulship, as Plutarch tells us. And see A. Gellius, L. XI. Noct. Attic.
Cap. I. and Lib. XIII. Cap. ult. and Lib. XIV. in the beginning.

Ver. 17. Thou shall not kill.] If a Man killed another involuntarily, he was
banished, by the Laws of Athens, from his Country for a Year: But if he killed
Demosthenes speaks, out of forethought, and designedly, he was put to Death:
See Sam. Petitus, Lib. VII. in Leges Atticas, Tit. 1. p. 508, 512. Yea, so
detestable was this Sin accounted, that even, (...), Liveless Things, such as
Wood, or Stone, or Iron, wherewith a Man was killed, Draco ordered to be thrown
out of their Coasts. Ib. p. 523.

Ver. 18. Thou shall not commit Adultery.] This Draco. Solon indeed, left it to
the Liberty of the Husband, who caught another Man in Bed with his Wife, either
to kill him, if he pleased, or to let him redeem his Life with a Sum of Money.
But if after this he lived with his Wife, he was infamous, as Demosthenes tells
us; who says, she might not come publicly into their Temples: If she did, any
Man might treat her as he pleased, only not kill her: So that she was so odious
as to be thrown, (...), Both out of the House of her Husband, and out of Holy
Places of the City. Nor might she go abroad with any Ornaments, ((...), is the
Law of Solon). If she did, any Body might take them away from her, and tear her
Clothes in pieces, and beat her; only not maim her in any part of her Body. See
the same Petitus, Lib. VI. Tit. 4.

Ver. 19. Neither shall thou steal.] The Laws of Draco punished all Theft with
Death: Which Solon thought too severe, and therefore changed that Punishment
into making Satisfaction, by restoring double; yet still making it Death, if
any Man stole above such a Value; or took any thing out of the Public Baths,
and suchlike places, though of never so little Value. See in the same Author,
Lib. VII. Tit. 5.

Neither shall thou bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.] There was an
Action at Athens lay both against false Witnesses, and him that produced them:
Who had a Fine set upon them, and were made infamous. And if they were found
thrice in the same Fault, (...), Both they themselves, and all their Posterity,
were made infamous. As Andocides speaks. See Ib. page 559.

Neither shall thou desire thy Neighbor's Wife, neither shall thou covet thy
Neighbor's House, etc.] It is observed by some, that an exact Order is
observed in the delivery of these Precepts: For first he places such Offenses
as are consummate, and then those that are but begun, and not perfected. And in
the former he proceeds from those that are most heinous, unto those that are
less grievous: For those Offenses are the greatest which disturb the Public
Order, and consequently do mischief unto a great many. Such are those that are
committed against Governors and Rulers, who are comprehended under the Name of
Parents; by whose Authority Humane Society is preserved. And then among those
which are against particular Persons, those are the greatest which touch a
Man's Life: Next, those that wrong his Family; the Foundation of which is
Matrimony: Then those that wrong him in his Goods, either directly by Stealth,
or more craftily by bearing False-witness. Then in the last place, those Sins
are mentioned, which are not consummate, being gone no further than desire;
which in Exodus, (XX. 17.) are expressed by one and the same word, but here by
two; which we translate desire and covet: Between which I know no difference;
unless they express higher and lower degrees of the same Sin. The contrary to
which, is contentedness with our Portion, and thankfulness to God for it; which
will not let us covet any thing belonging to another Man, with his loss and
damage.

Ver. 22. These Words the LORD spoke unto all the XIX Exodus 16. XX. 18. This
confutes the foolish Fancy of the Jewish Doctors, that the People heard only
the first Words of God, I am the LORD thy, etc. thou shall have no other Gods
but me, i. e. They heard him declare his Existence, and his Unity; but all the
rest were reported to them by Moses. Nothing can be more contrary to what he
here says, that all these Words (that is, the Ten Words before mentioned) were
spoken to their whole Assembly. See More Nevochim, P. II. Cap. XXXIII.

With a great Voice.] That is, so loud that it might be heard by the whole Camp.

And he added no more.] All the rest of the Commandments, which follow in the
XXI, XXII, and XXIII of Exodus, were delivered to Moses alone, and by him to
the People, according to their own desire, XX Exodus 19. XXI. 1. XXIV. 3.

And he wrote them in two Tables of Stone, and delivered them unto me.] That
is, the Ten Commandments, and no more, XXIV Exodus 12. XXXI. 18. XXXIV. 1, 28.
Lest what they heard with their Ears, should quickly slide out of their Minds,
he took care to have it engraven with his own Hands, in these Tables.

And it came to pass, when ye heard the Voice out of the midst of the Darkness,
(for the Mountain did burn with Fire) that ye came near unto me; even all the
Heads of the Tribes and Elders.] After they had recovered out of the Fright
wherein they were, at the Conclusion of these Words: When the Thunderings,
Lightnings, and Noise of the Trumpet was so terrible, that they removed and
stood afar off, XX Exodus 18.

And ye said, Behold the LORD our God has showed us his Glory, and his
Greatness, and we have heard his Voice out of the midst of the Fire.] Here
Moses relates more largely, what he said in short, XX Exodus 19.

We have seen this day, that God does talk with Man, and he lives.] This looks
like a thankful Acknowledgment of the great Goodness of God, in vouchsafing
them such a Favor, as never any Men had before, and which they could not
expect again. And accordingly Moses makes use of it, as an Argument to be very
observant of God's Commands, XX Exodus 22, 23.

Now therefore why should we die? For this great Fire will consume us: For if
we hear the Voice of the LORD our God any more, then we shall die.] It is an
ungrounded Conceit of Maimonides, (in the place abovementioned) that when they
had heard the first Words, they fell into a Swoon, and did not recover
themselves till all the rest was spoken; which made them conclude, that they
should really die, and never come to themselves again, (as we speak) if they
should hear him speak to them any more. The plain meaning is, that mortal Men
could not endure to hear him speak in that manner: For the Voice was so loud,
and accompanied with such Flashes of Fire, and such Claps of Thunder, as made
them conclude, if it had continued longer, they should have expired.

Ver. 26. For who is there of all Flesh?] i. e. Of all Flesh denotes.

That has heard the Voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of Fire
(as we have) and lived.] There is no Instance of such a thing as this; which
made them afraid of hearing him speak, in this manner, any more: For they did
not mind God's End and Intention in this, (which Moses suggests to them in the
XX Exodus 20.) but in a confusion of Thoughts imagined, that though they had
escaped once, the Flames out of which he spoke might devour them, if they came
near them again.

Ver. 27. Go thou near and hear all that the LORD See XX Exodus 19. This shows
their Opinion of Moses, that he could be able not only to endure that without
disorder, which made them ready to die; but go into the very midst of the
Darkness, out of which those Flames came.

Ver. 28. And the LORD heard the Voice of your etc.] As Moses here reports more
largely what they said to him, than he did in Exodus; so he likewise gives a
larger Account what God bad him say to them, in answer to their desire.

They have well said, all that they have spoken.] It very much becomes them,
out of a sense of their meanness and unworthiness, and of the inconceivable
Majesty of God, to desire he would speak to them by a Mediator.

O that there were such an Heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always.] The words are wonderful emphatical in the Hebrew, Who
will give, that there may be such an Heart in them. Which is an Expression of
the most earnest desire; but withal signifies, that if what he had done for
them, would not move them to fear and obey him, it was impossible to persuade
them to it. Not but that he could miraculously work upon them, and change their
Hearts, (says Maimonides) if he pleased, as he miraculously changed the Nature
of other things; but if this were God's Will, to deal with them after this
fashion, there would have been no need to send a Prophet to them, or to publish
Laws, full of Precepts and Promises, Rewards and Punishments; by which (says
he) God wrought upon their Heart, and not by his absolute Omnipotence. More
Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXXII.

That it might be well with them, and with their Children for ever.] For God
desired nothing more than this, which they themselves promised, ( v. 27.) which
moved him to vouchsafe such a special Privilege to them, as first to speak to
them himself, and at their desire, consent to speak to them by his Prophet.

Go, say to them, get you into your Tents again.] All this shows, that Moses
was a Mediator between God and them, and between them and God.

Ver. 31. But as for thee, stand thou here by me.] He invites Moses unto the
nearest approaches unto his Majesty; and the most familiar converse with him,
Exodus 21. XXIV. 2, 18. For this was the highest degree of Prophecy, as
Maimonides calls it, in his More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. LI. And in his Preface
to that Book, he says, This is the greatest degree of Illumination of a
Prophet, concerning whom it is said, Stand thou here with me: And again, The
Skin of his Face shone. Which he supposes signified, that his Mind was always
full of light; whereas other Prophets were sometime in darkness, and saw
nothing.

And I will speak unto thee all the Commandments, and the Statutes, and the
Judgments, which thou shall teach them.] According to their own desire, v. 27.
See VI. 1.

And that they may do them, in the Land which I give them to possess it.]
According to their Promise, in the same, v. 27.

Ver. 32. Ye shall observe to do therefore as the LORD Being obliged by such
singular Benefits as no other Nation ever had the like, ( v 24, 25, 26.) and
having engaged themselves so solemnly to be obedient, v. 27.

Ye shall not turn aside, to the right hand, or to the left.] This is a Phrase
often used to signify, a strict observance of God's Laws; neither
superstitiously adding to them, nor profanely laying aside any of them, XVII.
20. XXVIII. 14. 1 Josh. 7.

Ver. 33. Ye shall walk in all the ways which the LORD That is, observe all his
Laws, and make them the Rule of their Lives.

Chapter VI.
That ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye way prolong
your Days, in the Land which ye shall possess.] Universal Obedience, he would
have them sensible, was the only way to make them live happy, and long, in that
good Land which he was about to bestow upon them. This he inculcates again in
the next Chapter, VI. 3. For all Mankind thought long Life a very great
Blessing, as appears by Callimachus's Hymn to Diana, Ver. 132, 133. when he
promises to those whom she favors, -- (...)
(...).


i. e. They shall not come into their Grave, till they have reached a great old
Age.

CHAP. VI.
NOW these are the Commandments, the Statutes, and the Judgments.] Which God
promised to deliver to him, in the foregoing Chapter, v. 31. and Commandments
are thought commonly, to relate unto the Moral Laws; Statutes to Rites and
Ceremonies, which have no natural Reason for them; and Judgments to Civil
Government.

Which the LORD your God commanded to teach you, that ye may do them in the
Land whither ye go to possess it.] They are the Words of God himself, in the
place before named, v. 31.

This, I suppose, was spoken by Moses to them, a little time after he had
delivered what is contained in the foregoing Chapter: being a Preface to the
rest of the Laws which he received from God in Mount Sinai, as they desired.

Ver. 2. That thou might fear the LORD thy God, etc.] The prime Intention of
God's speaking to them by himself, and by Moses, was, to implant his Fear in
their Hearts, as the true Principle of Obedience: Which so certainly flows from
it, if it be preserved in its power and force, that it frequently in Scripture
signifies the whole Duty we owe to God. But here more particularly it seems to
signify their adhering to him as the only God: So it is used, 1 Kings XVIII.
3, 12. and in the New Testament most plainly, X Act. 2, 35.

Ver. 3. Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do Mark therefore so well
what I say, as to do accordingly.

That it may be well with thee, etc.] As the only way to be happy, and to grow
a mighty Nation, and in short, enjoy all that God had promised to their pious
Ancestors.

Ver. 4. Hear, O Israel.] He repeats it again; because

The LORD our God is one LORD.] Being to remind them of all the Laws which God
delivered to them by him, and to endeavor to beget an holy Fear of him, as the
Principle of Obedience; he most earnestly presses upon them, before he proceed
further, the First of the Ten Commandments: Which is, that there is but One
God, who alone is to be worshipped; and that he is their God: Whose Laws
therefore could not be controuled by the Authority of any other pretended God.

Many of the ancient Fathers, particularly Theodoret, and Greg. Nyssen, think
there is a plain intimation of the Blessed Trinity in these words, The LORD our
God is one LORD: And some of the Jews themselves have thought, there was
something extraordinary in it, that the Name of God should be thrice mentioned,
as it is in this Sentence: Which signifies three Midoth, or Properties, they
confess; which they sometimes call three Faces, or Emanations, or
Sanctifications, or Numerations, though they will not call them three Persons; as
Joseph de Voysin observes, in his Book against: an Anonymus Antitrinitarian, p.
58, 63, 71, 72. And the Cabbalists say as much, who asserting ten Sephiroth in
God, (which they take to be something different from the Essence of God, and
yet not Creatures, but Emanations from it, as Manasseh Ben Israel explains
their Words) they make the Three First of them to be more than the other Seven;
and call them Primordial. The First of which they call the Wonderful
Intelligence, and the First Intellectual Light, (as St. James calls God the
Father of Lights) and the First Glory. The Second they call, among other Names,
the Illuminating Intelligence, (just as St. John says, the Eternal WORD
enlightens every one that comes into the World) and the Second Glory. And the
Third they call the Sanctified Intelligence, (so the word (...), which is in
Pual must be translated, not Sanctifying, as Rittangelius takes it) or they may
mean no more than the Holy Intelligence; which is the very same with the Holy
Spirit. All this we find in the Book Jetzira, which they fancy was made by
Abraham: From whence we cannot but learn, that they had an obscure Notion of
the Blessed Trinity; and that the Apostles used no other Language about it,
than what was among the Jews. The best of which are so sensible of such things
as I have mentioned, that they think we Christians are not Idolaters, though we
believe Three Persons in the Godhead, (which they fancy inclines to Polytheism)
because we believe the Unity of God; and therefore may be saved as well as
they. So J. Wagenseil shows in his Annotations upon Sota, Cap. VII. p. 751,
etc. And Arnoldus in his Spicilegia after him, p. 1218.

Ver. 5. And thou shall love the LORD thy God with etc.] Our blessed Savior
alleging these two Verses, XII Mark 29, 50. looks upon these Words, as a part
of the First Commandment: For after he had said, The first of all the
Commandments is, Hear, O Israel, the LORD our God is one LORD; and thou shall
love the LORD thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, etc. he thus
concludes, This is the first Commandment. For to own him to be the only God,
the Author of our being, and of all things, does necessarily include in it a
love of him above all things whatsoever; which requires us to love him, who
has made them so lovely. This is another Principle or Spring of Obedience,
inseparable from the Fear of God beforementioned: Which does not drive us away
from him, but draw us to him; being such a Reverence toward him as Children
have to their kind Parents, which is ever mixed with Love to them.

With all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might.] For
there being no other God but he alone, none else could have any Right to their
Love and Service, but he only: Whose Nature is so excellent, that it requires
the utmost we can do, to testify our regard to him. This one of the Jewish
Writers has admirably expressed in this manner: Whosoever serves God out of
love, he gives himself to the Study of his Laws, and unto Good Works, etc.
which excite him to love God with the most flagrant Affection; not for the sake
of any thing in this World, nor for the fear of any Evil; but he serves God
truly, because he is the Truth, and the chiefest Good; that he may be admitted
to Communion with him. And a Man ought to love him with the most vehement and
intense Affection; so that he languish with love to him, just as a Man that is
in love with one he desires to make his Wife: Wheresoever he is, at home or
abroad, when he eats and drinks, when he lies down and rises up, he thinks of
her. To which Solomon compares the Love of the Spouse, who says, I am sick of
Love, 2 Cant. 5. To this purpose, Baal Chasidim, mentioned by Wagenseil, upon
Sota, Cap. V. p. 611.

By the Heart may be here meant the Will, which is the Original of all that a
Man does, (as the Jews speak) whether Good or Evil: By the Soul, the
Affections, (to which St. Mark adds the Mind, i. e. the Understanding, or
Rational Faculty) and by Might or Strength, is meant the Power of the Body for
Action; which four all together make up the whole Man. And the word ALL added
to each of these, does not exclude all other things from any share in our
Thoughts and Affections; but only from an equal Interest in them. The Love of
God ought to be superior, and direct all our other Motions to serve him, as
Maimonides expresses it in his Preface to Pirke Avoth.

Ver. 7. And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children.] In the Hebrew
the words are, (as our Margin observes) shall whet or sharpen them: signifying,
De Dieu rather thinks it signifies, Beat them into them; as things are hammered
on an Anvil with repeated Strokes. Which the famous Bochartus does not so well
approve; who observes, that the word Sanan, which in Arabic signifies in the
first place to sharpen or whet; signifies also Exquisite docere, etc. to teach
exquisitely; so that he who is taught, be made thereby more acute and
perspicacious. Which is the intention he thinks of the Hebrew word here, L. 2.
Canaan, Cap. XVII. However it be expounded, it imports the Diligence they
should use, (as we translate it) to instill this Principle into their Children's
Minds, that there is but One God; and to work in them a fear and love of his
Divine Majesty: For to that which goes before, ( v. 4, 5, 6.) these words have
a particular respect. By which it appears, that Moses thought his Law was so
plain, that every Father might be able to instruct his Sons in it, and every
Mother her Daughters.

And shall talk of them when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.] As much as to
say, they should take all occasions to inculcate this great thing, at home and
abroad, Night and Day; never ceasing their most earnest Endeavors, to persuade
their Children, not to worship any other God; nor to fail to worship the LORD
their God, with sincere Affection.

The Jews have made from hence, one of their affirmative Precepts, That twice a
Day, at least, they should recite these words, Hear, O Israel, etc. which is a
very dilute Sense of this Precept: Wherein Moses requires not merely their
saying these words (in which there might be a great deal of Superstition) but
taking all opportunities to imprint them upon the Minds and Hearts of their
Children.

And thou shall bind them for a Sign upon thine Hand, and they shall be as
Frontlets between thine Eyes.] Just thus he commands them to preserve the
Memory of their Deliverance out of the Land of Egypt, almost in the same words:
See XIII Exodus 9, 16. where this is sufficiently explained. And it appears to
be a Proverbial Speech from XLIX Isa. 16. There are some learned Men indeed,
who take these words literally, notwithstanding St. Hierom has delivered his
Opinion to the contrary, that there is no Command for Phylacteries, which are
grounded upon these words; particularly Jos. Scaliger, in his Elench.
Trihaeres. Nic. Serarii, Cap. 7. 8. Where he thinks God gave this Command to
the Israelites, to prevent their following the Rites of other Nations; who
armed themselves against Dangers, with superstitious Amulets in their
Foreheads; which the Egyptians, he thinks, called Totaphot. But since, neither
here, nor in Exodus, there are any such words, as thou shall make thee
Frontlets; but Moses only says the things he is speaking of, shall be for
Frontlets between their Eyes; I take it not to be meant literally. Though it is
likely they intended well, who so understood it: For our blessed Savior does
not seem to reprove the Jews for wearing Phylacteries; but for their
Ostentation, in making them broader than ordinary.

Ver. 9. And thou shall write them upon the Posts of thy House, and on thy
Gates.] This looks more like a literal Command, than the former; and it might
Hear, O Israel, the LORD thy God is one LORD, etc. But the Jews are too
scrupulous about the Words they should write, and upon what part of the Posts
and Gates they were to put them, etc. as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. III. De
Synedr. Cap. XIII. N. 2. Though after all, it may be, this was not intended; but
only, that they should never let this Principle slip out of their Mind, but
think of it when they went out and came in as well as when they were in their
Houses, and by the Way; when they rose up, and when they lay down. Yet it must
be observed, that other Nations used to write their Laws upon their Gates, as
Huetius notes in his Demonstratio Evangelica, p. 58. which it is likely they did
in imitation of the Jews; who to this Day have written in a Parchment these
Words, from v. 4. to the end of this Verse, (with that other passage, Chap. XI.
from v. 13. to v. 20.) which they roll up, and writing on it the Name of
Shaddai, put it into a piece of Cane, or other hollow Wood, and fasten it to
the Doors of their Houses, and of each particular Room in them; and as often as
they go in and out, they make it a part of their Devotion, to touch this
Parchment, and kiss it: As Leo Modena tells us, in his History of the Jews, P.
1. Cap. 2.

Ver. 10. And it shall be, when the LORD thy God etc.] Of this he speaks with
the greatest assurance; there being no doubt to be made, that God would
immediately give them possession of the good Land promised to them. The only
danger was, lest they should be thrown out of it for their Disobedience.

Great and goodly Cities, which thou buildedst not.] For they did not lay all
waste, as they did Jericho, (for which there was a particular Reason) but dwelt
in them, after they had destroyed the Inhabitants.

And Houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, etc.] In this,
and what follows in the rest of the Verse, he sets forth the great Bounty of
God to them; who intended to enrich them with all manner of Good Things,
without any Labor of their own to purchase them.

Then beware lest thou forget the LORD, which brought thee forth out of the
Land of Egypt, etc.] In Prosperity we are too prone to forget our Benefactors.

Thou shall fear the LORD thy God, and serve him.] Preserve an awful Sense of
him in thy Mind, and be constant in his Worship and Service; which was never
more necessary, than when they enjoyed so many Blessings from him.

And shall swear by his Name.] When there was any need for it: As in making
Covenants with their Neighbors, or in bearing their Testimony before a Judge,
they were to swear only by the Name of God; not by any Idol, nor by the Heaven,
or the Earth, or any thing therein; for they can bear Witness to nothing: See
XXIII Joshua 7, 8. Nor was it lawful, as Maimonides observes, (in his Treatise
called Shebuoth) to join any other thing with the Name of God. But it was all
one, whether a Man swear by the proper Name of God, or by any of his
Attributes, as by the Name of him who is merciful, or gracious, or
long-suffering, etc. for this is a perfect Oath: See Seldom, L. 2. De Synedr.
Cap. XI. N. 2. And see N. 7. concerning other Oaths.

Ver. 14. Ye shall not go after other Gods, of the Gods of the People which are
round about you.] This shows, Great Commandment.

Ver. 15. For the LORD thy God is a jealous God.] Exodus 5. XXXIV Exodus 14.

Among you.] In the Hebrew, In the midst of you; to observe all you do, though
never so secretly.

Lest the Anger of the LORD thy God be kindled against thee, and destroy thee
from off the face of the Earth.] For this was the most provoking of all other
Sins: And therefore we never read, either in the Law, or in the Prophets, the
word Charon (i. e. Fury), or Aph (Anger), or Caas (Indignation), or Kinah
(Jealousy) ascribed unto God, but when mention is made of Idolatry: So
Maimonides observes, More Nevoch. P. I. Cap. XXXVI.

Ver. 16. Ye shall not tempt the LORD your God, as Never distrust God's good
Providence, nor murmur against him in any distress: For that was the Temptation
at Massah, XVII Exodus 2, 7.

Ver. 17. You shall diligently keep the Commandments As if he had said, I
cannot too often press this upon you; nor can you use too great care in this
matter.

Ver. 18. And thou shall do that which is right and As they loved themselves,
he charges them not to follow their own Desires, (which is called doing that
which is good in their own Eyes) but govern themselves by his Holy Will.

And that thou may go in and possess the good Land.] Or rather, After thou
have gone in, and possessed the good Land which the LORD swear unto thy
Fathers: For there was no doubt of their going in; but only of their behavior
there, after they were made so happy, v. 10, 11, 12.

To cast out all thine Enemies from before thee, as the LORD has spoken.] He
seems particularly to charge them to drive out the People of Canaan, as God had
commanded, XXXIII Numb. 32. For otherwise, they would tempt them to forget this
great Principle of their Religion, that the God of Israel was the only God, and
entice them to serve their Idols, v. 14.

And when thy Son asks thee in time to come, saying, What mean the
Testimonies, and the Statutes, and the Judgments, which the LORD our God has
commanded you?] Abarbinel thinks, that their Posterity, in future Ages, might
observe three sorts of Precepts in the Law, viz. Testimonies, which in Hebrew
are called Eduth, which were such Constitutions as bare witness of some great
thing God had done for them, and preserved the Memory thereof; such was the
Passover. And then, Secondly, There were Chukkim (Statutes), which are such
Precepts the Reason of which is unknown. And, Thirdly, Mischpatim (Judgments),
which are such whose Reason is evident. Now they might desire to know the
Reason, why such several Laws were given: And he thinks Moses teaches them to
give a distinct Answer to their Children, about each of these.

Ver. 21. Then thou shall say unto thy Son, we were Pharaohs Bondmen in Egypt,
and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty Hand.] As if he had said,
Tell them the Reason why he gave us the first

Ver. 22. And the LORD showed Signs and Wonders, etc.] Particularly slew all
their Firstborn, and spared those of the Israelites: The Memory of which he
ordered to be preserved, by giving their Firstborn unto him, XIII Exodus

Ver. 23. And he brought us out from thence, that he This is the Reason,
Abarbinel fancies, of giving them the Judgments beforementioned: God brought
us out, says he, to place us in this good Land, and settle us here, under a
Government of our own. Now Civil Society cannot be preserved, without just
Judgments; and therefore, that we might live in good Order, God gave us these
Political Laws.

Ver. 24. And the LORD commanded us to do all As for the third sort, which are
Statutes, give your Children this Answer: That though we do not know the Reason
of them, yet the benefit of them is manifest; for they lead us to the Fear of
God: And nothing is so much for our Good, as that; both for the eternal Good of
our Souls, and for the long Life of our Bodies. So he interprets the last Words
of this Verse: And so does Maimonides.

For our Good always, that he may preserve us alive, as it is at this Day.] The
first Words in the Hebrew are, That it may be well with us all our Days: Or
more literally, For good to us all our Days. That is, say our Rabbis, (they
are the Words of Maimonides, P. III. More Nevochim, Cap. XXVII. where he
repeats what I observed before, upon IV. 40.) That it may be well with us in
that World which is wholly good; and our Days may be prolonged in that World
which is wholly long. Or in short, that thou may come into the World, which
is wholly good and long; which is a perpetual Subsistence. As for the last
Words, they belong, he thinks, to their Corporeal Subsistence here, which
endures but for a time; and therefore he says, As at this Day; to show he
speaks of the present World, wherein they should live happily by observing his
Laws.

And it shall be our Righteousness, if we observe to do all these
Commandments.] Their Children might say, If there be such Benefits in observing
the Statutes, which lead to the fear of God, and to Happiness here and
hereafter, what need we trouble our selves about the other two? Unto which
Abarbinel imagines, they are taught to give this Answer: It is our
Righteousness, if we observe to do ALL these Commandments, i. e. We cannot be
righteous before God, if we have not respect to all his Precepts, whether
Testimonies, Statutes, or Judgments; which are all comprehended in this word
Mitzvoth, or Commandments. This is something nice and curious, Chapter VII.
but there is a great deal of Truth in it.

The word Righteousness also, it must be acknowledged, often comprehends Mercy
in it: And thus the LXX. and the Vulgar Latin here understand it. And to take
in this Sense, these Words may be thus expounded: If we observe to do all these
Commandments, God will account us a righteous People, and be kind to us.

Before the LORD our God, as he has commanded us. Having a sincere Respect to
God, in all that we do.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. WHen the LORD thy God shall bring thee That is, when he had put them
into possession of it.

And has cast out many Nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites,
and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, etc.] There were Ten Nations inhabited this Country in the Days
of Abraham: But Three of them were either worn out since that time, or being
but a small People, were incorporated with the rest: For the Kenites, and the
Kenezites, (see XV Genesis 19.) are not mentioned after that time, and the Rephaim
possessed but a little part of Canaan; the great Body of them being in Bashan,
on this side Jordan, where Moses now was: See upon XV Genesis 19.

Seven Nations greater and mightier than thou.] The Amorites alone seem to have
been mightier than the Israelites, (for there were no less than five Kings of
them, that dwelt in the Mountains, X Josh. 5, 6. besides those in other parts)
and therefore all the Seven Nations, were much superior to them in strength.

And when the LORD thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou shall smite
them, and utterly destroy them, etc.] He still pursues his Intention, to
preserve in them a due care to observe the First Commandment, of which he began
to treat in the foregoing Chapter: For that is the Reason, why they were to
destroy these Seven Nations, that they might not be in danger to be seduced by
them, to serve other Gods, v. 1. But whether they were not first to offer them
Terms of Peace, according to the Directions in the Twentieth Chapter of this
Book, is a Question which I have endeavored to resolve in another place, upon
XXIII. Exodus 33. Certain it is, that if they refused their Offers, there was
the greater Reason to be severe to them: And without offering them any Terms,
God might, in Justice, order the Israelites to destroy them: For every King
has Power in his Dominions, to cut off Evildoers; and therefore much more the
King of Kings: Who might order whom he pleased, (as other Kings do) to be
Executioners of his Vengeance upon these Seven Nations, for their abominable
Idolatries, beastly Lusts, and horrid Cruelties, and other suchlike Sins, of
which they were guilty.

This was a thing of such moment, that God ordered Moses to give them this
Charge, some time ago, XXXIII Numb. 52. which he now renews.

Thou shall make no Covenant with them.] To suffer them to live with them, in
the same Country, XXXIV Exodus 12.

Nor show Mercy to them.] For that had been Cruelty to themselves, and their
Posterity, to spare such incurable Idolaters. How far the Talmudists extend
this, see in Dionys. Vossius, upon Maimonides's Treatise of Idolatry, p. 139.
and Maimon. himself, in the following Paragraphs, 4, 5, 6.

Ver. 3. Neither shall thou make Marriages with them: See XXXIV Exodus 15. Some
of the Jews think they might marry with them, if they became Proselytes of
Justice, (as they called those who received Circumcision, and undertook to
observe the whole Law) and they that think this was not lawful, yet think, that
they might marry with the Children of such Proselytes: See Seldom, Lib. V. De
Jure Not. and Gent. etc. Cap. XIV, XV. And the Talmudists say, this Law did not
extend to Proselytes, who might marry with any of these Nations, as he shows
there, Cap. XVIII.

Ver. 4. For they will turn away thy Sons from following etc.] There was great
danger, if they loved their Wives, that they might draw them to their Idolatry;
in which they were so rooted, that there was little hope of converting them to
the true Religion. Therefore this is opposed to the Love of the LORD their God;
for the preserving of which in their Hearts, they are forbidden such Marriages,
XXIII. Josh. 11.12. And indeed it was but a piece of Natural Equity, that they
should abstain from such familiarity with those, who would certainly undo them.
Which made Abraham, before this Law, charge his Son Isaac, not to take a Wife
from among the Canaanites; and the same care was taken of Jacob. And when this
Law of Moses was abolished, the Apostle warns Christians themselves against
such unequal Matches, 2 Corinthians. VI. 14. The danger of which David had noted,
CVI Psalm. 35, 36. So will the Anger of the LORD be kindled against you, etc.
See VI. 15.

But thus shall ye deal with them: Or, therefore thus shall ye deal with them.]
That is, to prevent the forementioned Mischief, he orders them to leave no
Relick of their Idolatry remaining.

Ye shall destroy their Altars.] The very same Precept XXXIV Exodus 13.

And break, down their Images.] The very same words with these, are in XXIII
Exodus 24. (only there it is said, quite breaks down) and in XXXIV Exodus 13.

And cut down their Groves.] There is the same mention of Asherim, (which we
translate Groves) in the place last named; only another word for cut down: See
there. But Mr. Seldom, both there, and here, understands by Asherim, wooden
Images of Astarte; a great Goddess worshipped in that Country: For which, among
other Reasons, he gives this, that Gideon is said to have thrown down the Altar
of Baal, and cut down the Grove that was by it. So we translate it, VI Judge.
25, 28. where, in the Hebrew, the last word is Alau; which signifies, upon it,
and not by it: And so the LXX, (...). And therefore the Asherah, which is said
to be upon the Altar, must not signify a Grove, but an Image; and none more
likely than that of Astarte. See De Diis Syris Syntagm. 2 Cap. 2. and 2 Kings
XXIII. 6, 7.

And burn their graven Images with Fire.] As he was commanded to destroy their
molten Images, XXXIII Numb. 52. that so no sort of Image, nor any Monument of
their Worship might be left in the Country; but all so entirely abolished, that
they might have no Incentive to Idolatry. This was the work of the Supreme
Governor, as Grotius prudently observes: For though out of private places, it
belonged to the Lord of the place; or if he were negligent, to the King, to
remove Idols, yet none but the Supreme Power might remove them out of public
places, or such Persons who were delegated thereby to that Office: See L. de
Imper. Sum. Potest. circa Sacra, Cap. VIII. Sect. 3.

Ver. 6. For thou art an holy People unto the LORD This is an Argument
frequently used, particularly in the Book of Leviticus, why they should cleave
to God alone: because he had separated them to himself by many peculiar Laws,
which no other People had but they. XI Levit. 44, 45. XIX. 2. XX. 7, 26.

The LORD thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above
all People that are upon the face of the Earth.] As he had distinguished them
from all other People by peculiar Laws; so by special Favors and singular
Privileges, which no other Nation whatsoever enjoyed. See XIX Exodus 5, 6. Some
interpret the Words special People, to signify that they belonged to none but
him; and he had no other People but they; whom he had espoused to himself. From
whence it is, that as the Israelites are called God's People, so that Country
is called his Land (LXXXV Psalm. 1.) for there he dwelt by his special Presence.
And the King of that Country is called God's King, (XVIII Psalm. 50.) and he is
said to sit on God's Throne; and to be Nelech le Jehovah, King for the LORD, 2 Chronicles. IX. 8. and the Kingdom is called the Kingdom of the LORD, XIII. 8. and
therefore with this Argument Asa addresses himself to God in the next Chapter
(XIV. 11.) for Help in time of Distress, because he was their God; and would
not, he hoped, let their Enemies prevail against himself. And accordingly these
Enemies are said to be destroyed before the LORD and before his Host, v. 13.
Jehoshaphat also exhorts the Judges in that Book, to great Caution, 2 Chronicles.
XIX. 6. because they judged not for Man, but for the LORD. And the Prophet
exhorts in the following Chapter, XX. 15. not to be afraid of a mighty Host
which came against him, because the Battle is not yours but Gods; the Cause in
which they fought being his, more than their own.

The LORD did not set his Love upon you, nor choose you.] To be his special
People, as he calls them in the foregoing Verse.

Because ye were more in Number than any People; for ye were the fewest of all
People.] When God declared his Love first to Abraham and his Posterity, he had
no Child, XII Genesis 1, 2, 3. XV. 1, 2. And when he had, his Family continued so
small, after there were XII. Heirs of the Promise, that in the space of Two
Hundred Years, they were but LXX. Persons, XLVI Genesis 27. Nor do we read of any
great increase of them till after the Death of Joseph, which was near Fourscore
Years more, I Exodus 7, 8, etc. So St. Steven observes, VII Acts 17. When the
time of the Promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the People grew
and multiplied in Egypt.

Ver. 8. But because the LORD loved you.] Because it was his good Pleasure to
single them out from all other People; to receive special Tokens of his Favor
to them.

And because he would keep the Oath, which he had sworn unto your Fathers, has
the LORD brought you out with a mighty hand, etc.] Not for any desert of
theirs; but to make good his Promise confirmed with an Oath, did he work their
wonderful Deliverance out of Egypt, XV Genesis 13, 14. XXII. 16, etc.

Ver. 9. Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he He exhorts them therefore to
preserve this Sense in their Mind, that their God is the only God.

The faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him,
and keep his Commandments, etc.] Who will not only faithfully keep his Word and
make good his Promises, but do abundantly more than he has promised, to those
that cleave unto him alone, and serve no other God. For it appears by the
Second Commandment, that is peculiarly meant, by loving him.

To a thousand Generations.] See XX Exodus 6.

Ver. 10. And repay them that hate him.] Punish all haters of God; as I have
often observed. See XX Exodus 5.

To their Face.] They themselves should live to see and feel the Punishment of
their Idolatry. So the Chaldee Paraphrases it Becajehon, in their Life.

He will not be slack to him that hates him, he will repay him to his Face.]
Though he do not punish him immediately, yet he will not defer it long; but be
avenged of him, before he die. Therefore when he threatens to punish them to
the Third and Fourth Generation, the meaning is not, that he will only punish
their Posterity, but them, with their Posterity: whom they shall see destroyed
before their Face. For the Fourth Generation (as Maimonides observes) is as
much as the oldest Men commonly live to see.

Thou shall therefore keep the Commandments, and the Statutes, and the
Judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.] All the Laws of God (see
VI. 1.) especially this great Commandment, to have no other God but him.

Wherefore it shall come to pass if ye hearken to these Judgments, and keep,
and do them; that the LORD thy God, shall keep unto thee the Covenant and
Mercy, which he swear unto thy Fathers.] As faithfully fulfill his Promises to
them, as he did to their Fathers.

And he will love thee.] Continue his Love to them.

And bless thee and multiply thee.] This was the great Promise made to their
Fathers, that he would make their Posterity as numerous as the Stars of Heaven,
and the Dust of the Earth, XV Genesis 5. XXII. 17. XXVIII. 14.

He will also bless the Fruit of thy Womb.] Preserve them from Miscarrying,
that so they might multiply.

And the Fruit of thy Land, thy Corn, and thy Wine, and thine Oil.] By giving
them Rain in due Season, etc. See XXVI Levit. 4, 5.

The increase of thy Kine.] The Hebrew Word Segar, which we translate Increase,
the LXX. Vulgar and Syriac render the Herds. But Onkelos and Jonathan translate
it as we do, the young ones which the Mothers bring forth. See Bochart, P. I.
Hierozoicon. L. II. Cap. XXX.

And the Flocks of thy Sheep.] The Hebrew Word Ashtaroth, comprehends Focks
both of Sheep, and of greater Cattle, as the same Bochart observes, P. 1.
Hieroz. L. III. Cap. XLIII. and in his Canaan, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. where he
observes that the Goddess Astarte in those Countries was thought to preside,
over Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Oxen.

Ver. 14. And thou shall be blessed above all People.]

There shall not be Male or Female barren among you, or among your Cattle.] See
XXIII. Exodus 26.

Ver. 15. And the LORD will take away from thee all Or, remove from them the
common Diseases and Infirmities of Mankind; so that they should die in a good
old Age (as the Scripture Speaks) which tended manifestly to their Increase and
Multiplication.

And will put none of the evil Diseases of Egypt (which thou know) upon
thee.] Neither those Blotches, or Boils, which God by an immediate Hand smote
them withal, IX Exodus 9. XV. 26. Nor any other which they in that Country were
subject unto; peculiarly their filthy Ulcers called Aegyptiaca and Syriaca, as
Casaubon observes upon Persius Sat. V. p. 467. with which the Priests of Isis
were wont to threaten and terrify poor People, if they did not worship her. In
Opposition to which our very learned Dr. Spencer thinks God made this special
Promise to his People, to preserve them from all such evil Diseases, if they
kept themselves pure from that Egyptian Idolatry. Which is very ingenious, if
the Worship of Isis was so ancient as the Days of Moses. See L. I. de Legibus
Hebr. Ritual. Cap. III.

And will lay them upon all them that hate thee.] And thereby disable them to
hurt his people.

Ver. 16. And thou shall consume all the people, which Utterly destroy all the
people of Canaan, when they had Conquered them; as he commanded them before, v.
7.

Thine eyes shall have no pity upon them.] The reason of this severity was,
because of their abominable wickedness, as I there observed.

Neither shall thou serve their Gods, for that will be a snare unto thee.] In
the Hebrew, and thou shall not serve their Gods, etc. This severity was used to
prevent their being enticed by them to their Idolatry; if they had suffered
them to live among them.

If thou shall say in thine heart, these Nations are more than I, how shall I
dispossess them?] If such a diffidence began to arise in their hearts, as
possessed their forefathers, XIV. Numb.

Thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well remember what the LORD thy
God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt.] He requires them immediately to
expel all fear, by Faith in God: which the remembrance of what God had done for
them, if seriously reflected on, might well work in them.

The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders,
and the mighty hand, etc.] Of all these he had put them in mind before, IV. 34.
and now renews the remembrance of it, that the experience they had of Gods
power and goodness, might banish all fear out of their hearts.

Moreover the LORD thy God will send the hornet among them.] Raise up enemies,
which they think not of to infest them; that is, unusual swarms of hornets, and
of an unusual bigness, it is like, which came like an Army upon them. See XXIII
Exodus 28.

Until they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.] Which
should pursue those that fled from the Israelites, and sting them to Death in
their lurking Holes.

Ver. 21. Thou shall not be afrighted at them.] Let

For the LORD thy God is among you, a mighty God and a terrible.] The Sovereign
of the World, of whose Goodness you have had such long Experience, dwells among
you, and conducts and leads you, wheresoever you go: And who can stand before
him? See XVII Exodus 7.

Ver. 22. And the LORD thy God will put out these Be not discouraged, though they
be not destroyed all at once: There is great Reason against that; concerning
which, see XXIII Exodus 21. where this Verse is explained.

Ver. 23. But the LORD thy God shall deliver them In time he will deliver them
all up into thy Hands; and thou shall so over power them, as to leave none of
them remaining.

Ver. 24. And he shall deliver their Kings into thy As he did, we read in the
Book of Joshua, XII. 7, 8, 9, etc. where XXXI Kings are enumerated, who were
conquered by him.

And thou shall destroy their Name from under Heaven.] There shall no Memory,
of so much as the Names of such Men, be left any where.

There shall no Man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed
them.] The Kings, and great Men of the Country being destroyed, their Victory
was easier over the rest.

The graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn with Fire.] This he had required
before, v. 5. but mentions it again; to let them know, that if they did not
perform their part of the Covenant (of which this was the chief) God would not
destroy the Inhabitants of Canaan totally. As we find he did not, II Judge. 2,
3. and for this very Reason, as Joshua had told them, XXIII. 12, 13.

Thou shall not desire the Silver and Gold that is upon them.] The Jews are too
nice and curious, who expound this only of the Gold and Silver Clothes, or the
Chains, or other Jewels of Gold and Silver, wherewith their Images were
adorned; because he says upon them. There is no reason to doubt, but he means,
that they should be destroyed, if they were entirely made of massy Gold and
Silver; which they were not to convert to their own use: For thus Moses did
with the Golden Calf, XXXII Exodus 20. and Jacob in ancienter time buried all
the strange Gods, as well as the Earrings that were in their Ears, XXXV Genesis
4. And Josiah, in future Ages, burnt every thing that had been employed to
Idolatry; even the Vessels that were made for Baal, as well as the Images, etc.
and stamped them to Powder, 2 King. XXIII. 4, 6, 14, 15.

Nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein.] Be drawn into a Conceit,
that there was something sacred in it; and so tempted to worship it.

For it is an abomination to the LORD thy God.] Whatsoever has been employed
to such idolatrous Worship, is so detestable unto the Divine Majesty, that he
will not have it converted to any ordinary and common use, but utterly
destroyed.

Ver. 26. Neither shall thou bring an Abomination into And therefore he
requires them, not to bring any of that Silver and Gold, which had belonged to
those Idols, (which he calls an Abomination) into their Houses, to be employed
unto any private use whatsoever: So the Jews understand these words, having
made from hence one of their affirmative Precepts: That no Man should seek the
least profit or benefit, from any thing appertaining to an Idol.

Lest thou be a cursed thing like it.] Every thing that was idolatrous, was a
Cherem, devoted to Destruction, as he says in the last words, It is a cursed
thing; which no Man might meddle withal, XIII. 17. If he did, he became an
accursed thing, i. e. was devoted to destruction, as the thing it self was.
This was apparent afterward, in the Example of Achan, in the VII Josh. who
took a Wedge of Gold, and a Babylonish Garment, for his own private use, when
it had been made a Cherem by God's express Command, (VI Josh. 17.) and
therefore was stoned to Death.

But thou shall utterly detest it, and thou shall utterly abhor it.] Not only
look upon it, as useless and unprofitable, but as hateful and execrable in the
highest degree; and therefore to be entirely destroyed. All this tended to
their preservation in the true Religion; which taught them to have every thing
contrary to it, in the utmost detestation: Insomuch, (as Maimonides interprets
this Precept in his More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXXVII.) that if any Man broke
such Images, Chapter VIII.
or melted them down, and then sold the Silver and Gold, he committed an
Abomination; and the Price of this being mingled with his other Riches, proved
the Rust of them all. This he thinks is the meaning of bringing an Abomination
into their House. Which was so far from bringing a Blessing, (as the Heathen
imagined) that it brought a Curse upon all that they had.

The Jews were so sensible of all this, after they had severely smarted for
their Idolatry, that they thought it unlawful, to use any Vessel that had been
employed in sacrificing to a false God: Nay, to warm themselves with the Wood
of a Grove that was cut down; or to sit under the Shadow of it, for Coolness
sake, while it was standing; or so much as to use the Ashes of the Wood, that
were left after the Grove was burnt. See Seldom, Lib. II. De Jure Not. and
Gent. juxta Discipl. Hebr. Cap. VII. page 215, 216, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
ALL the Commandments which I command thee this day, shall ye observe to do.]
He seems still to press them, to have a special care to observe the Ten
Commandments; and especially the first of them (VI. 4, 5, 6.): For it appears
by the later end of this Chapter, that he has a regard to that.

That ye may live.] Long and happily: For Life every one knows, frequently
signifies all the Comforts of Life, as Death signifies all manner of Miseries.

And multiply.] Which is the effect of a long and happy Life.

And go in and possess the Land, etc. Or, After ye go in and possess the Land,
which the LORD swear unto your Fathers.] See VI. 18.

Ver. 2. And thou shall remember all the way, which Whereby they were severely
punished for the Rebellion of their Forefathers against him; which should be an
Admonition to them to be more dutiful. Others expound it of the care of God
over them, in providing for them, and protecting them, as well as leading them
by a glorious Cloud, all that time: Which does well enough agree with what
follows. See II. 7.

To humble thee.] Or to afflict thee with tedious Wanderings up and down,
backward and forward, without any certain Dewlling Place.

And prove thee.] To try whether they would be better, by being kept so long
out of the good Land promised unto them.

And to know what was in thine Heart, whether thou would keep his
Commandments, or no.] God knew perfectly how they were disposed toward him;
but it was fit, that they should know themselves better, and Posterity be
instructed by their Behavior.

Ver. 3. And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to He afflicted thee, by
suffering thee to want Bread to eat, XVI Exodus 2, 3.

And fed thee with Manna.] But it was, that he might have an opportunity to
make a bountiful Provision for such a vast multitude of People, as were fed by
him every Day from Heaven, and teach them to depend on his good Providence.

Which thou knew not, neither did thy Fathers know.] XVI Exodus 15. He made
an unusual, as well as an unexpected Provision for them.

That he might make thee know, that Man does not live by Bread only.] That it
is not only our common Food that preserves us.

But by every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, does Man live.] But
by any thing whatsoever, (for so Word often signifies) which God shall please
to command to give us Nourishment. This was a wonderful encouragement to
Obedience; that God would rather work a Miracle, than suffer them to want
Necessaries; and by a light aerial sort of Bread, give them as great strength
and vigor, as the most solid Nourishment was wont to afford them. The
remembrance of which could not but excite their Posterity to love God, and
serve him, if they often and seriously reflected on it.

Thy Raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy Foot swell these forty
Years.] These were two other wonderful Benefits, which, if well considered,
could not but incline them to be obedient to him, who multiplied Miracles to
nourish and strengthen their Faith and Hope in him. The Jews, to increase the
Miracle, say, Their Clothes enlarged, as they grew bigger, from Children to
Men; and so did their Shoes also. But there was no need of this, for the
Clothes and Shoes of those Men that died, might serve their Children when they
grew up to their stature. And it was sufficiently amazing, without such
additions, that their Clothes should not so much as decay, nor their Feet by so
long traveling in hot and stony places, have the least swelling in them: Or,
as some translate it, grow callous. There are those that refer this last Clause
not to their Feet, but to their Shoes; according to what we read, XXIX. 5.

Ver. 5. Thou shall also consider in thine Heart.] Often reflect and ponder.

That as a Man chastneth his Son, so the LORD thy God chastneth thee.] All the
Afflictions which God had sent upon them, he would have them think, were not
for their undoing, but for their amendment, and correcting what was amiss in
them; and therefore ought to be thankfully acknowledged, as well as his
Benefits.

Ver. 6. Therefore thou shall keep the Commandments Howsoever therefore he
dealt with them, it ought to have led them to Obedience. In the repetition of
this so often, Moses does but practice his own Lesson, which he had taught
them, VI. 7. That they should teach these Words diligently to their Children,
etc.

Ver. 7. For the LORD thy God brings thee into a Therefore there was the
greater need they should enter into it, with the pious Resolution
beforementioned, to fear God, and walk in his ways. Otherwise, they would be
in great danger to be corrupted by such plenty and variety of all good things,
as this Land afforded.

A Land of Brooks of Water, of Fountains, and Depths that spring out of Valleys
and Hills.] The Hebrew word Tehom, which we translate deep, and in the plural
Number, Depths, signifies sometimes those great Caverns of Water, that are
within the Ground; which were made by the plentiful Rains, which God sent upon
this Country, while they were obedient to him: Which both made it fruitful,
(though now barren) and abounding also with Water for their Cattle, LXXVIII Psalm.
15. XXXI Ezekiel. 4. But it is here commonly interpreted Lakes, or Wells of Water.

A Land of Wheat and Barley, and Vines, and Fig Trees, and Pomegranates.]
Plentifully stored with all things necessary, for the support and pleasure of
Life.

A Land of Oyl-Olive and Honey.] The same word Debas, which signifies Honey,
signifies also Dates. And so de Dieu thinks it most reasonable to translate it
here; being joined with four other sorts of Fruits: And so Kimchi, says the
ancient Jews, expounded it in this place, and in 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 5. where it is
said, That Israel brought in abundance, the first Fruits of Corn, Wine, Oil,
and Honey, or Dates, as we there translate it in the Margin.

A Land wherein thou shall eat Bread without scarceness.] Be in no want of any
sort of Provision, which is comprehended under the Name of Bread.

Thou shall not lack any thing in it.] No other Conveniences of Life.

A Land whose Stones are Iron, and out of whose Hills thou may dig Brass.]
Where there are useful Minerals, as plentiful, as Stones are in other places.
These are the rather mentioned, because there were no such Mines in Egypt,
where they had long dwelt, and were stored with plenty of other things, XI
Numb. 5.

When thou have eaten, and art full.] After a liberal Meal.

Then thou shall bless the LORD thy God, for the good Land which he has given
thee.] Give solemn Thanks to God, not only for that present Repast, but for the
plentiful Provision he had made for them of all good things, in the Land he had
bestowed on them. From this place the Jews have made it a general Rule, or as
they call it, an affirmative Precept, That every one bless God at their Meals.
That is, as I said, give him Thanks for his Benefits: For he blesses us, when
he bestows good things upon us; and we bless him, when we thankfully
acknowledge his Goodness therein: Which is a natural Duty, which we owe to the
Fountain and Original of all Good.

Ver. 11. Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy He would have their
Thanksgiving for his Benefits, leave such a sense of God upon their Minds, as
should make them careful to yield him an entire Obedience.

Ver. 12. Lest when thou have eaten, and art full, Feasted in stately Houses,
wherein they enjoyed their Ease.

Ver. 13. And when thy Herds and thy Flocks are multiplied, The sense of these
two Verses is, when they had great abundance of all good things, within Doors
and without.

Ver. 14. Then thine Heart be lifted up.] Which is Euripides observes in that
known Saying of his, (...), Wealth breeds Pride, Scorn, and Contempt of others:
This Moses Kotzensis thought so great a Sin, that he puts it among the Negative
Precepts; and pretends, he was warned in a Dream so to do, though Maimonides, and
others, had omitted it. And when he awaked, he was confirmed in it, by reading
a place in the Gemara upon Sota, Cap. I. which says, Wheresoever we find these
Words in Scripture, Take heed lest, there is a Prohibition, as there is, v. 11.
and here, to take heed of Pride: For whosoever is proud, he shall be brought
low, as the Gemara there adds; which are, in a manner, the Words of our blessed
Savior, XVIII St. Luke 14.

And thou forget the LORD thy God.] This is another common effect of large
Possessions, which make the Owners of them fall into Sloth and Luxury, and such
Forgetfulness of the Donor of all good Things, that they trust in uncertain
Riches, (as the Apostle speaks) and not in the living God, imagining now they
can never want; not because God is so good, but because they have such store of
good Things laid up for many Years.

Which brought thee forth out of the Land of Egypt, and from the House of
Bondage.] No wonder if they forgot all his former Benefits, when they were
unthankful for the present.

Who led thee through that great and terrible Wilderness.] See I. 19.

Wherein were fiery Serpents.] See XXI Numb. 6.

And Scorpions.] These are commonly joined with Serpents in Scripture; even in
the New Testament, X Luke 19. XI. 12, 13. being found in the same places,
especially in this Desert of Arabia.

And Drought.] The Hebrew word Tsimmaon signifies a dry place, as we translate
it, CVII. Psalm. 33. XXXV Isa. 7. And that best agrees with what here follows,
Where there was no Water.

Who brought thee forth Water out of a Rock of Flint.] From which one would
have sooner expected Fire than Water, XX Numb. 11.

Who fed thee in the Wilderness with Manna, which thy Fathers knew not, v. 3.]
The great Salmasius, in a Treatise on purpose about Manna, has said a great
deal to prove, that the Manna which God sent the Jews, did not differ in its
form or substance, from that which commonly fell in those Countries, and does
so at this Day. But herein consisted the Miracle, that he gave it them in a
prescribed Measure, and so abundantly, as to suffice such a vast Number; and
that every Morning, in all Seasons of the Year: This made it a Divine Manna;
for the common fell only in small Quantities, and not always, but at some times
in the Year.

That he might humble thee.] This word is commonly understood of humbling by
Affliction; which may seem not to belong to Manna: For that was a singular
Benefit, being an excellent Nourishment, and of a delicious Taste: But they
having nothing else beside this to live upon, were soon tired with it, (as we
find XI Numb. 6.) and much more did it seem an Affliction to them, to live upon
one thing alone, for forty Years together. And God intended by it to humble
them, at the same time that he was extraordinary kind to them.

And that he might prove thee.] Whether they would be thankful that they were
not starved, and submit to his wise Providence, and obey his Laws; which they
had the greater reason to observe, because it was evident they owed their very
Life and Being to him every Moment: For without new Supplies every Day from
Heaven, they had been famished in that desolate Wilderness.

And do thee good at thy latter end.] That in Conclusion his kindness to them
might be more thankfully received, and more safely enjoyed. So Maimonides
expounds this Passage in his More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXIV. God was pleased
to accustom them to labor in the Wilderness, that he might increase their
happiness, when they came into the Land of Canaan. For this is certain, A
transition from labor to rest, is far sweeter than continual rest. Nor could
they so easily have subdued the Land, and overcome the Inhabitants of it,
unless they had endured some hardship in the Wilderness. For rest and idleness
takes away Men's Courage, but labor and hard fare augments it. And this is the
good, says he, which was in the issue to redound to them, by this wise
dispensation of God's Providence.

And thou shall say in thine heart, my power, and the might of my hand, has
gotten me this wealth.] Such vain Conceits are apt to arise in Men's minds, if
they preserve not a sense of God, and of all his Mercies to them.

But thou shall remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that gives thee power
to get wealth.] Continually call to mind, that they owed all they had, and the
increase of it, to his Almighty Providence; without whom they could never have
gotten possession of this Land, nor have prospered in it.

That he may establish his Covenant which he swear unto thy Fathers, etc.] He
would have them sensible of their own unworthiness also (which would make them
more grateful to him) of all the Blessings God had bestowed on them, and
acknowledge them to his mere goodness, and fidelity to his Promises; for they
had been a murmuring and rebellious People.

Ver. 19. And it shall be if thou do at all forget the Luxury and Pride (the
usual effects of Fullness) naturally made them unthankful and unmindful of God:
And neglect of God's Service made them easily fall to Idolatry.

And walk after other Gods, and worship and serve them.] The two last
Expressions are the Explication of the first: for then they walked after the
Idols of the People, (as Onkelos paraphrases it) when they worshipped and
adored them. It is evident by this, that the drift of Moses in all this
Discourse, is (as I observed before) to press upon them the first and great
Commandment.

I testify against you this day, that ye shall utterly perish.] See IV. 26.

Ver. 20. As the Nations which the LORD destroys He speaks in the Present
Tense, because he was about to destroy them: and when he began, he destroyed
them by little and little, (VII. 22.) and there were still more to be destroyed.

So shall ye perish, because ye would not be obedient to the voice of the LORD
your God.] It was but just that they should perish as those Nations did,
because they fell into their Sins.

Chapter IX.
CHAP. IX.
HEar, O Israel.] He begins a new Exhortation to them; at some distance of time
from the former: but still aiming at the same thing, to represent to them the
danger of Idolatry.

Thou art to pass over Jordan this day.] That is, shortly; not long hence; for
it cannot be meant precisely: all these things being spoken in the eleventh
Month of the last Year of their Travels, and they passed not over Jordan till
the first Month of the next Year. Between which and this time, Moses died, and
they mourned a whole Month for him.

To go in to possess Nations.] A Country inhabited by Nations: for the People
themselves they were to destroy.

Greater and mightier than thy self.] Whom notwithstanding God would deliver up
into their Hands.

Cities great and fenced up to Heaven.] As the Spies had represented them, I.
28. and they were indeed very strong Cities, whose Walls could not easily be
scaled.

A People great and tall.] XIV Numb. 28, 32.

The Children of the Anakims whom thou know.] Who seem to have been the
chief of those Nephilim, or Rephaim (which we sometimes translate Giants) in
those parts, XIII Numb. 22, 28, 33.

Of whom thou have heard say, who can stand before the Children of Anak?] A
common Proverb in those days. The Children of Anak being so famous, that the
whole Nation (as Bochartus thinks) took it is Name from them. For Bene-Anak (i.
e. Children of Anak) or Pheneanak is easily changed into Phaenicia. These
Anakims were vanquished by Joshua, who drove them out of the Cities where they
dwelt, and made them flee to the Philistims. Where a Remnant of them seemed to
have lived till the days of David. For Goliath and his Brethren Lahmi, Sippai
and Ishbibanob (1 Chronicles. XX. 4, etc.) were Anakims; and so was that Man with
six Toes on each Foot, and six Fingers on each Hand, (2 Samuel XXI. 16.) for they
were all born at Gath: which was one of the Cities to which the Anakims fled,
XI Josh. 22. Some think that from hence Kings, among the Greeks, were called
(...), because commonly they chose those to rule over them, who were Persons of
a great Stature, and carried Majesty in their Faces. But it is not improbable
(as I observed before) that some of the Anakims fled into Greece, and settled
there, when they were driven out of Canaan.

Ver. 3. Understand therefore this day.] Settle this Jordan, as undoubted truth.

That the LORD thy God is he that goes before thee.] Over Jordan, III Josh. 3,
4, etc.

As a consuming fire.] Before whom none can stand, IV. 24.

He shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face.] See III
Josh. 10, 11. The Hebrews have a conceit, that the Fire which burnt upon the
Altar appeared in the Form of a Lion: to show what God would be to their
Enemies, if the Israelites obeyed him; otherwise, what he would be to them.

So shall thou drive them out, and destroy them utterly, as the LORD has said
unto thee.] Not the whole seven Nations entirely; whom he said God would drive
out by little and little, (VII. 22.) but so many, as to make a Settlement for
themselves in Canaan, without much difficulty.

Speak not in thine heart, after that the LORD thy God has cast them out.]
When this is done, do not so much as entertain a Thought.

For my righteousness has the LORD brought me in to possess this Land.]
Nothing is more dangerous than Pride and Self-conceit: And therefore as he
taught them before, VIII. 7. to have an humble Opinion of their own Power; so
now not to arrogate any thing to themselves, on the account of their own
Righteousness.

But for the wickedness of these Nations the LORD does drive them out from
before thee.] XVIII Lev. 24, 25, 27, 28.

Not for thy righteousness, or the uprightness of thine heart, do thou go to
possess their Land; but for the wickedness of these Nations, etc. and that he
may perform the word which the LORD swear unto thy Fathers, etc.] It was of
great moment (which makes him repeat it again) that they should understand the
true Causes why God expelled these Nations, and gave their Land to the
Israelites; which were these two: First, The abominable wickedness of the
Canaanites; for which they deserved to be rooted out. Secondly, God's gracious
Promises to the pious Ancestors of the Israelites, with whom he made a
Covenant, and confirmed it with an Oath, to plant them there, in the room of
the former Inhabitants.

Ver. 6. Understand therefore that the LORD thy God gives thee not this good
Land to possess it, for thy He repeats it a third time, that if it were
possible, he might root out of the Israelites the Opinion of their own Deserts,
before he rooted the Canaanites out of their Country.

For thou art a stiff-necked People.] So far from being Righteous, that they
were very Refractory. Of which God often complained, XXXII Exodus 9. XXXIII. 3,
5. and Moses acknowledges it in his Prayer to God for them, XXXIV. 9.

Ver. 7. Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst In order to destroy the
Opinion of their own Righteousness, it was necessary to call to mind some of
their most notorious Provocations; which he exhorts them carefully to preserve
in their Mind, as a Means to keep them humble.

From the day that thou did depart out of the Land of Egypt, until you came
to this place, ye have been rebellious against the LORD.] This appears by the
many Murmurings we read of in the two first Years after they came out of Egypt;
and likewise in the last: of which only we have a particular Account; but their
behavour, all the rest of the time they spent in the Wilderness, was no better.

Ver. 8. Also in Horeb ye provoked the LORD to Or rather, Even in Horeb, (for
there is an Emphasis in this, and he speaks it with some Indignation) when they
had newly received the Law; and had a visible Appearance of God in great Glory,
upon Mount Sinai; and had entered into Covenant with him; they so shamefully
revolted from him, that he thought to have destroyed them, XXXII Exodus 7, 8,
etc.

When I was gone up into the Mount to receive the Tables of Stone, even the
Tables of the Covenant which the LORD made with you.] See XXIV Exodus 11.

Then I abode in the Mount forty days, and forty nights, I neither did eat
bread, nor drink water.] See XXIV Exodus 18. XXXIV. 28.

And the LORD delivered unto me two Tables of Stone, written with the finger of
God.] See XXXI. Exodus 18.

According to all the words which the LORD spoke with you in the Mount.] See
XXXIV Exodus 28.

Out of the midst of the fire, in the day of the Assembly.] When the whole Body
of the People were assembled, and heard God speak these Ten Words out of the
midst of the Fire. See IV Deuteronomy. 10, 11, 12, 13.

And it came to pass, at the end of forty days and forty nights, that the LORD
gave me the two Tables of Stone, etc.] That is, having given him the two
Tables, as was said before v. 10.

The LORD said unto me.] Immediately after he had delivered to him the Tables,
XXXI Exodus 18. XXXII. 7.

Arise, get thee down quickly from hence, for the People which thou have
brought forth out of Egypt, have corrupted themselves, etc.] See XXXII Exodus 7,
8.

Furthermore, the LORD spoke unto me, saying, I have seen this People, and
behold it is a stiffnecked People.] Who will not bend to the Yoke of my Laws,
XXXII Exodus 9.

Ver. 14. Let me alone.] Do not make any Intercession to me for them.

That I may destroy them, and blot out their Name from under Heaven; and I will
make of thee a Nation See XXXII Exodus 10.

Ver. 15. So I turned, and came down from the Mount.] Exodus 15.

And the Mount burnt with fire.] Was all in a flame; in token of God's high
displeasure against them; and as if he intended presently to consume them.

And the two Tables of the Covenant were in my hand.] XXXII Exodus 15.

Ver. 16. And I looked, and behold ye had sinned against About which he found
them dancing, XXXII Exodus 19.

Ye had turned aside quickly out of the way, which the LORD had commanded you.]
For a few Weeks before he had commanded them with his own Mouth, not to make to
themselves any graven Image, etc. XX Exodus 4. And immediately after commanded
Moses to repeat this Precept particularly to them, Not to make with him, Gods
of Silver or Gold, v. 22, 23.

Ver. 17. And I took the two Tables, and cast them By God's order, no doubt; in
token that they had broken his Covenant, and were unworthy to be owned by him
for his People, (XXXII Exodus 19.) or that the Covenant was made void, and God
no longer engaged to them.

Ver. 18. And I fell down.] To pray God for Pardon; though not presently: but
after he had broken the Calf in pieces, reproved Aaron, and made a Exodus 20,
21, etc.

As at the first.] When he first heard of their Sin, XXXII Exodus 11, 12, 13.
and the next Morning after he had broken the Calf, and done Execution upon the
Offenders, v. 30, 31, 32.

Forty days and forty nights, I did neither eat bread, nor drink water.] XXXIV
Exodus 2, 28.

Because of all your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of
the LORD, to provoke him to anger.] He spent this time, very much, in earnest
Supplication to God, to forgive not only this, but all their other sins,
whereby they had deserved to be cast off by him. For they provoked him at
Marah, XV Exodus 23. and in the Wilderness of Sin, XVI. 2, 3. and at Massah,
XVII. 2, 3, 4.

For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure wherewith the LORD was wroth
against you, to destroy you.] Which God had expressed both before he came down
from the Mount, and after, XXXII Exodus XXXIII. 3, 5. Insomuch that the LORD
removed out of the Camp; and would not for the present, dwell among them, v. 7.

But the LORD hearkened unto me at that time also.] See XXXIV Exodus 8, 9, 10.
Where the LORD tells him, he expected they should be more faithful hereafter,
in observing their Covenant with him; particularly this part, of worshipping no
other God. See there v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Ver. 20. And the LORD was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him, etc.]
This shows the heinousness of this Sin, which had like to have cost Aaron his
Life: though he merely complied with the impetuous

Ver. 21. And I took your sin.] So Idols are termed Isa. 7. The Object or
Occasion of Sin, as well as the Punishment of it, being called by the Name of
Sin.

The Calf which you had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and
ground it very small, etc.] This he did before he went up the second time into
the Mount, XXXII Exodus 20.

And I cast the dust thereof into the Brook that descended out of the Mount.]
From the Rock which Moses smote with his Rod, XVII Exodus 6. which constantly
supplied them with Drink: which for the present they could not have, but mixed
with their Sin; as we read XXXII Exodus 20.

Ver. 22. And at Taberah.] Besides this great Sin Horeb, he puts them in mind
of several other; that they might be the more humbled, and have no Opinion of
their own Righteousness remaining in them. See concerning this XI Numb. 1, 2, 3.

And at Massah.] As the foregoing Sin was committed after the making the Golden
Calf; so this was before it, XVII Exodus 7.

And at Kibroth hattaavah ye provoked the LORD to wrath.] This Provocation was
immediately after that at Taberah, XI Numb. 33, 34. All which three places had
their Names from the Sin of the Israelites, or from their Punishment.

Ver. 23. Likewise.] And yet this was not all.

When the LORD sent you from Kadesh-Barnea, saying, Go up and possess the Land
which I have given you.] Numb. 1, 2, 3.

Then ye rebelled against the Commandment of the LORD your God; and ye believed
him not, nor hearkened to his word, XIV Numb. 1, 2, 3. of which unbelief God
there complains, v. 11.

Ye have been rebellious against the LORD, from the day that I knew you.] To
comprise all in a few words, You have been a disobedient People ever since I
was acquainted with you. So he suspected they would prove, IV Exodus 1. and,
upon the first disappointment, found it to be true, V Exodus 24, 25.

Thus I fell down before the LORD forty days and forty nights, as I fell down
at the first; because the LORD had said he would destroy you.] Having
interposed some other Instances of their rebellious Disposition, besides their
making the Golden Calf, he returns to what he had begun to say concerning his
Intercession with God for a Pardon; which he could not obtain without long
Importunity. For we cannot from these words gather, as some of the Jews do,
that Moses was three times in the Mount forty days and forty nights: it being
plain, that he speaks here of the same time, which he mentioned v. 18. And if
we should think he intended any other, we might conclude he was four times in
the Mount so many days and nights; because he mentions it over again in the
next Chapter, X. 10.

Because the LORD had said he would destroy you.] XXXII. Exodus 10. XXXIII. 5.
This wade him so earnest to obtain an Assurance from God, that he would
continue to be as gracious to them, as he had been: of which he had given him
some hope before he went up into the Mount. See XXIII Exodus 17. XXXIV. 9, 10.

Ver. 26. I prayed therefore unto the LORD, and said, etc.] He used the same
Argument, in his Petition for them when he went into the Mount the second time,
which he had urged before he came down the first time from it, XXXII Exodus 12.

Ver. 27. Remember thy Servants, Abraham, Isaac The very same he had said
there, v. 13.

And look not unto the stubborness of this People, nor to their wickedness, nor
to their sin.] He prays that the gracious Promise of God to their pious
Forefathers, would move him to overlook the high Provocations of their
Posterity. Which he aggravates in several words; the more to humble them, and
to magnify God's Mercy in granting them a Pardon. The word Stubborness seems
to relate to their very evil Disposition of Mind; and their Wickedness to all
their undutiful Murmurings; and their Sin to their Idolatry; which is often
called in Scripture peculiarly by the Name of Sin: It being the highest
Provocation; from whence sprang all manner of Wickedness. Thus Jeroboam is said
to have made Israel to sin, by setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel to be
worshipped.

Ver. 28. Lest the Land whence thou broughtest them Wilderness. Chapter X.
The sense of this also he had before urged, XXXII Exodus 12.

Ver. 29. Yet they are thy People, and thine Inheritance, etc.] They were
redeemed by him out of the Land of Egypt, and after a wonderful manner
separated from all other People, to be his peculiar, (XIX Exodus 4, 5, 6.) and
besides, having repented of this Sin in making the Golden Calf, God had again
owned them to be his, and promised his Presence should go with them, XXXIII
Exodus 14. Insomuch that Moses there says, before he went into the Mount again,
v. 13. Consider that this Nation is thy People. And see v. 15, 16.

CHAP. X.
AT that time the LORD said unto me, Hew the two Tables of Stone like unto the
first, and come up unto me into the Mount.] After his Anger was something
appeased, he ordered Moses to come up to him where he had been before, and
bring with him two Tables of Stone like those he had broke, that God might
renew his Covenant with them. But there was this difference (as I observed
XXXIV Exodus 1.) that God himself made the former Tables; but he bad Moses make
these: which signifies some Abatement of his Favor.

And make thee an Ark of Wood.] This Command was given at his first going up
into the Mount, XXV Exodus 10. and perhaps was renewed again now, upon the
occasion of making these new Tables which were to be put into it.

Ver. 2. And I will write on the Tables the words that were in the first Tables
which thou brakest.] So we read he told him, XXXIV Exodus 1.

And thou shall put them in the Ark.] As soon as it

Ver. 3. And I made an Ark of Shittim-wood.] This Moses, wherein he put the
Tables of Stone that were broken, and those that were renewed, until the others
was made by Bezaleel: For we read expressly that Bezaleel made the Ark, XXXVII
Exodus 1. and here it is said that Moses made it. So that they conclude there
were two made: and this made by Moses they fancy was the Ark that went before
them in their Marches and Battles; which the other never did by God's order,
but only when they entered into Canaan, (III Josh.) for when of their own selves
they carried it forth in the days of Eli, God was angry with them, and
delivered it into the Enemies hand, 1 Samuel IV. 3, 4, 11. But Aben-Ezra,
Nachmanides, and Abarbinel have confuted this by strong Reasons to the
contrary, as may be seen in Buxtorf's Histor. Arcoe, p. 35, 36, etc. And as to
this place, they are of Opinion that Moses speaks of the Ark made afterward by
Bezaleel, which Moses is said to have made, because he commanded him to make
it: Just as Solomon is said to have built the Temple, because he caused it to
be built. Or if it be granted that Moses made an Ark before he went the second
time into the Mount, (which this Verse seems to Countenance) it will not follow
that there were two Arks in use among the Israelites; for this Ark now made was
of mere Wood, not overlaid with Gold, and designed only as a Chest wherein to
keep the Tables handsomely, till the Ark could be made by Bezaleel, and then
the Tables were translated into that, and this Chest of Moses laid aside.

And hewed two Tables of Stone like unto the first, and went up into the Mount,
etc.] See XXXIV Exodus 4.

And he wrote on the Tables, according to the first writing, the Ten
Commandments.] XXXIV Exodus 28.

Which the LORD commanded you in the Mount, out of the midst of the fire, in
the day of the Assembly.] When the whole Congregation was gathered together at
the foot of the Mount. See IX. 10.

And the LORD gave them unto me.] To carry down to the People.

And I turned my self.] From the Divine Presence, where he had been
supplicating for Mercy, and had received from thence the Tables of the Covenant.

And came down from the Mount.] At the end of Forty Days and Nights, XXXIV
Exodus 28, 29.

And put the Tables in the Ark which I had made.] Which he commanded to be made
by Bezaleel, (XXXVII Exodus 1.) and put into the Tabernacle as soon as it was
built, with these Tables in it, XL Exodus 20, 21.

And there they be, as the LORD commanded me.] Though Moses mention his making
the Ark, before his hewing the Tables, and going up into the Mount, ( v. 3.)
yet these words seem to determine that he speaks of the Ark made by Bezaleel,
according to his directions. For now that they were going over Jordan, the
Tables were in the Ark, which he is said here to have made. Which was certainly
the Ark of the Covenant, not that Chest, which some suppose Moses to have made,
to keep the Tables in, till the other could be sitted for their Reception.

Ver. 6. And the Children of Israel took their journey Not immediately; but
after they had passed through several other places, and made some stay in them.
For they went from Bene-Jaakan to Gudgodah, (or Hor-hagidgad) and so to
Jotbath, and the rest of the Mansions mentioned XXXIII Numb. 32, 33, etc. until
they came to Mount Hor.

There Aaron died, and there he was buried.] At Mosera; or the top of Mount
Hor: which was another part of the same Mountain, as Horeb was of Sinai.

And Eleazar his Son ministered in the Priests Office in his stead.] The
greatest difficulty is to give an account, how this comes in here; and what
connection this and the following Verse, have with what went before. All the
satisfaction that I can give to it, is this; that Moses having told them, that
he put the Tables of the Testimony or Covenant into the Ark, as a Token God was
reconciled to them; and that there they still were as the LORD commanded: he
puts them out of all doubt of it, by telling them, that though Aaron (who had
the special Care of the Holy Place, and all things in it committed to him) was
dead, yet Eleazar his Son was still alive, who could testify those Holy Things
remained, as when Moses first placed them there; he being Consecrated to the
Priests Office instead of Aaron, and in this very Mount (XX Numb. 25, 26, etc.)
which is the occasion of mentioning this Station here, when most of the rest
are omitted.

And from thence.] Not from Mosera, but from Bene-jaakan; as appears from
XXXIII Numb. 32. where a full Account is given of their Removals, which are but
just touched here.

They journeyed to Gudgodah.] Called in the Book of Numbers, by the Name of
Hor-hagidgad. And none will think it strange that there is such variation in
the proper Names of Places and of Men, in Profane Writers as well as the
Scriptures, who considers (as Conradus Pellicanus here notes) how differently
the Names of Places are pronounced now, from what they were in former Ages; and
how much one Nation differs from another, when they speak of them; and what
Alterations are made, from the first Founders of Nations and Cities, by those
that conquer them, and change all Names to their own Glory. See how Names were
changed among the Israelites in no long time, XXVI Numb. 15, 16, 17, 23, 24,
35, 38, 39, etc.

And from Gudgodah to Jotbath.] And so to the rest of the Places (mentioned
XXXIII Numb. 34, 35, 36.) till they came to Mount Hor.

A Land of Rivers of Waters.] A place where there was plenty of Water; which he
mentions, I suppose, that they might reflect upon their foul distrust of God's
Providence a little after, when they murmured for want of Water at Kadesh, XX
Numb. 3, 4, etc.

At that time.] Not long after Moses came down from the Mount the second time;
of which he had been speaking, v. 5.

The LORD separated the Tribe of Levi.] To his own special Service, as we read
III Numb. Some think that God renewed his Choice of them to the Employment here
mentioned, after Aaron's death, when he confirmed them in their Office. But we
read of no such thing: and it cannot be inferred merely from these words at
that time, which may well relate to the time mentioned, v. 5.

To bear the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD.] Here are three parts of their
Office mentioned, in these and the following words. The first of which was to
carry the Ark; which peculiarly belonged to the Kohathites, (III Numb. 27, 31.)
when the Camp removed from one place to another. Who were good Witnesses that
the same Ark still remained at that day, wherein Moses first placed the Tables
of the Covenant; for it never stirred but by their means.

To stand before the LORD.] This is a Phrase used of Servants that wait upon
their Masters, before whom they are said to stand. Thus Gehazi attended the
Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings V. 25. And the Prophets tnemselves are thus said to
stand before the LORD, 1 Kings XVII. 1. XVIII. 15. Therefore here signifies
that the Levites were separated to be God's Ministers, as it follows.

To minister unto him.] As Assistants to the Priests in the Tabernacle, III
Numb. 6. and as a guard to the Tabernacle, v. 7, 8. Which was the second part
of their Office.

And to bless in his Name, unto this day.] This was the greatest thing of all,
and was peculiar to the Priests; who were a part of the Tribe of Levi; but had
the sole Privilege among them to bless in the Name of the Lord, as we read
expressly, VI Numb. 23, 24. If indeed it could be made out, that by blessing in
the Name of the LORD, is meant only to bless the Name of the LORD; that was
common to all the Levites, who sang Praises and gave Thanks continually to him
in the Temple, as I suppose they did in the Tabernacle. But I find no Example
of the use of this Expression in this sense. And therefore it must be
restrained to the Priests, who were Sons of Levi, as well as the rest; and are
so called when Moses mentions this part of their Office, XXI Deuteronomy. 5.

Wherefore Levi has no part nor inheritance with his Brethren.] Because God
would have them only attend to this Service, and not look after other Affairs.
Particularly, of guarding the Sanctuary, and keeping constant watch there, to
secure all the Holy Things, especially the Ark; which they took care none
should meddle withal. And therefore the People might be sure it remained as
Moses left it, when he put it into the Tabernacle, with the Tables of the
Covenant in it.

The LORD if his Inheritance, according as the LORD thy God promised him.] He
took care to provide for the Levites, without having any Land to plough or sow,
etc. See XVIII Numb. 20.

And I stayed in the Mount, according to the first time, forty days and forty
nights.] This does not signify that after the separation of the Levites, he
went up again into the Mount: but having confirmed what he said concerning his
putting the Tables of Stone in the Ark, which he made after he came the second
time down from the Mount, ( v. 5.) he returns to what he was speaking of in the
beginning of the Chapter, and had begun to say before (IX. 25.) how he prayed
to God for them, when he went to carry the Tables he had hewn up unto God in
the Mount; that now he might relate to them the Success of his Prayers; which
follows in the next words.

And the LORD hearkened unto me at that time also, and the LORD would not
destroy thee.] As he feared he would, because he had so threatened, IX. 15.

Ver. 11. And the LORD said unto me, Arise, take etc.] This cannot refer to
what he said unto him after the making the Golden Calf, (as I find some take it
from XXXIII Exodus 1.) for that was before he went up into the Mount again. But
to what he said at the Conclusion of their Removals from place to place, (some
of which he mentions here, v. 6, 7.) for then he orders them what to do when
they entered into Canaan, which, he says, I have given you to possess it,
XXXIII Numb. 51, 52, 53.

Ver. 12. And now Israel, what does the LORD thy Unto whom he has given
Tables, wherein he himself has wrote his Will, with his own Hand, v. 4, 5. and
has graciously pardoned your foul Breach of his Covenant, upon my
Intercession, v. 10.

But to fear the LORD thy God.] The Fear of God sometimes includes in it all
Religion; but here seems to signify one of the great Principles of Obedience.
See VI. 2.

And to walk in all his ways.] Unto which the Fear of God inclines Men, when
their Hearts are possessed with it.

And to love him.] Especially if the Love of God be in them: which is still a
stronger Principle of Obedience, VI. 1.

And to serve the LORD thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.]
Being constant in his Worship and Service; and worshipping him alone, VI. 13.
XIII. 3. For loving him with all the Heart and Soul, seems here to have
particular respect, to their having no inclination to serve other Gods, 1 Kings
VIII. 23, 48. Which the Jews, after they had smarted for their Idolatry,
understood to be the great Commandment. As their Father Jacob, they say, taught
his Twelve Sons, when they came about him on his Deathbed, saying to them: Ye
perhaps worship the Idols which Terah the Father of Abraham worshipped; or
those which Laban my Mother's Brother worshipped; or ye worship the God of
Jacob. To whom they all made this Answer, with a perfect Fear, Hear, O Israel,
our Father, THE LORD OUR GOD IS ONE LORD. Whereupon Jacob said, LET HIS GREAT
NAME BE BLESSED FOR EVER. Thus the Jerusalem Targum upon VI. 4. of this Book.

To keep the Commandments of the LORD, and his Statutes which I command this
day for thy good.] Self-love should have inclined them to obedience to God's
Commands, which he gave them for their good; though he rewarded their Obedience
to them, as if he had received the Benefit thereof.

Behold the Heaven.] Where the Sun, Moon and Stars shine.

And the Heaven of Heavens.] And all the glorious Regions beyond them.

Is the LORD's thy God.] Are all his Possession, as they are his Work.

The Earth also, with all that therein is.] As well as this Earth, and all the
Creatures that are in it.

Ver. 15. Only the LORD had a delight in thy Fathers to love them, and he chose
their Seed after them, etc.] He would have them sensible therefore, that the
Possessor of Heaven and of Earth, could have no need of them, or of their
Services, who were a very inconsiderable Part of his Creatures: But it was his
own mere good Will and Pleasure which moved him to show such Love to Abraham as
he had done, and to his Posterity for his sake, above all other Nations on
Earth.

Ver. 16. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your Do not satisfy your
selves therefore with the bare Circumcision of your Flesh (and the Observance
of such External Rites and Ceremonies) but cut off and cast away all your
naughty Affections, which make you insensible both of God's Mercies and
Corrections, and disobedient to his Commands.

And be no more stiff-necked.] As he had often before complained they were;
particularly XXXII Exodus 9. and see IX. 6. of this Book. It is a Metaphor, as I
observed, from Oxen, who when they are to draw in a Yoke, and go forward, pull
back their Neck and their Shoulder, to withdraw themselves from the Yoke. To
both which the Scripture alludes, IX Nehem. 29. And sometime severally we find
mention of them, as in the place before-named in Exodus, he speaks of their
stiff-neck: and in VII Zachar. 11. he says, They pulled away the shoulder. St.
Stephen puts both these together in his Character of the wicked Jews, that
killed our blessed Savior, VII Acts 51. that they were stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart. Therefore the contrary disposition, God promises
toward the Conclusion of this Book, as the greatest Blessing he could bestow
on them, XXX. 6.

Ver. 17. For the LORD thy God is God of gods, and Superior to all other
Beings; whether Kings on Earth, or Angels in Heaven.

A great God, a mighty, and a terrible.] Who can do what he pleases every
where; and therefore is to be greatly dreaded.

Which regards not persons, nor takes reward.] The most righteous Judge of
Men, who will not connive at your Sins because you are Circumcised; nor be
bribed by any Sacrifices to overlook your Wickedness, (XXIII Exodus 8. XIX Lev.
15. I Deuteronomy. 17.) Nor, on the contrary, reject those that uprightly obey him,
though they be not Jews. So St. Peter learnt to understand these words, X Acts
34.

He does execute the Judgment of the Fatherless and Widow.] Takes their part,
as we speak, and defends them against those that would oppress them.

And loves the Stranger, in giving him Food and Raiment.] Provideth for those,
who are driven unjustly out of their own Country; or traveling on their honest
Occasions, fall into want. For he seems here to speak of those who were neither
Proselytes of Justice, nor of the Gate, as the Jews speak, but were mere
Gentiles.

Love ye therefore the Stranger.] Be kind and hospitable to such distressed
Persons: which is a Virtue that flows from the Love of God, ( v. 12.) to which
it is in vain to pretend, if we love not all Mankind. This Love consists in
imitating God's Care of such Persons, whereof he speaks in the foregoing Verse;
viz. doing them Justice equally with others; and affording them Food and
Raiment.

For ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt.] This Virtue was peculiarly
required of the Jews; who had been in that Condition, which he commanded them
to pity. See XXIII Exodus 9. XIX Levit. 33, 34. And if they had sincerely
practiced this Duty toward Aliens, the Grace of God shown to the Gentiles in
our blessed Savior, would not have seemed so strange to them, as it did.

Ver. 20. Thou shall fear the LORD thy God, him This was explained before, v.
12.

To him shall thou cleave.] Serve, that is, and Worship none but him.

And swear by his Name.] See VI. 13.

Ver. 21. He is thy praise.] Whom thou ought

He is thy God.] Who has bestowed upon thee all the good things which thou
enjoyest.

That has done for thee all these great and terrible things, which thine eyes
have seen.] In bringing them out of Egypt, destroying Pharaoh in the Red Sea;
leading them through the Wilderness; giving them the Country of Sihon and Og,
etc. Whom therefore they were bound to Love and Serve, and to confide in his
Mercy, and not in their own Power or Righteousness, VIII. 17, 18. IX. 4, 5, 6.

Ver. 22. Thy Fathers went down into Egypt with See XLVI Genesis 27. I Exodus 5.
Their Family, he would have them remember, was very small, Chapter XI.
about Two hundred Years ago.

And now the LORD thy God has made thee as the Stars of Heaven for multitude.]
Vastly increased them, according to his Promise unto Abraham, XV Genesis 5. XII
Exodus 37. XXVI Numb. 51, 62. Which alone (as Conradus Pellicanus here notes)
was sufficient to fill their Hearts with his Love, and their Mouths with his
Praise.

CHAP. XI.
THerefore thou shall love the LORD thy God.] Who, of so small, has made thee
so great a Nation.

And keep his charge.] A Phrase used frequently concerning the Levites, III
Numb. 7, 8, etc. But here comprehends all the Particulars following, His
Statutes and his Judgments, and Commandments; which he had charged them to
observe. See VI. 1.

And know you this day.] Consider seriously what I have said to you, till you
be sensible of it, VIII. 5. IX. 6.

For I speak not with your Children, which have not known, and which have not
seen.] The words, I speak, are not in the Hebrew: and they may as well be
supplied thus, For not with your Children have these things been done, etc.
Which agrees well with v. 7.

The Chastisement of the LORD your God.] The Plagues he sent upon the Egyptians.

His greatness.] Which appeared by the many great things he did, only upon the
stretching out of Moses his Rod.

His mighty hand, and stretched out arm.] These are more words, to express the
same thing.

Ver. 3. And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt.]
Or, His miraculous Acts, etc. Egypt: which nothing could have effected, but
God's Almighty Power, declared in various Instances. This is the first Argument
wherewith he excites their Love to God, (which he pressed in the foregoing
Chapter, and begins this again with it) that God had loved them so much, as to
work many astonishing Miracles, rather than let them continue Slaves to Pharaoh.

Ver. 4. And what he did unto the Army of Egypt, Who pursued after the
Israelites, and overtook them, XIV Exodus 6, 7, 8. Whereby the kindness of God
appeared after he had delivered them, in preserving them from being brought
back to their Slavery.

How he made the water of the Red Sea to overflow them as they pursued after
you.] See XIV Exodus 23, 24, 27, 28.

And how the LORD has destroyed them unto this day.] Brought them so low, that
they have not recovered their strength, to attempt any thing against you since
that time.

Ver. 5. And what he did to you in the Wilderness, Provided for them,
protected, and preserved them Forty years; giving them possession also of the
Country of Sihon and Og, two Kings of the Amorites. These Benefits, if they
considered, which they could not but see, they owed to his Love alone, were
powerful Arguments to move them to love him.

Ver. 6. And what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of
Reuben.] XVI Numb. 1, etc. The remembrance and consideration of the terrible
Dathan and Abiram. He does not mention Korah: but they could not well forget
him, when they thought of his Confederates; though he suffered another
Punishment.

How the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their Households,
and their Tents, etc.] See XVI Numb. v. 32, 33, etc.

But your eyes have seen the great Acts of the LORD, which he did.] In Egypt,
at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, ( v. 3, 4, 5.) Some of which all of them
had seen; and there were none of them who had not seen some.

Therefore shall ye keep all the Commandments which I command you this day.]
Remembering what had befallen, both their Enemies and themselves.

That ye may be strong, and go in and possess the Land, whither you go to
possess it.] In hope that the same God would empower them to subdue the
Canaanites, and give them full possession of their Country.

And ye may prolong your days in the Land which the LORD swear unto your
Fathers to give unto them, and to their Seed.] This may relate both to the
present Generation, and to their Posterity; who, after their Fathers had lived
long in the Land of Canaan, should succeed them, and enjoy it in future Ages.
See v. 21.

A Land that flows with Milk and Honey.] This is a common description in all
Authors, of a rich and pleasant Country. Particularly in Euripides, (...),
(...)
(...) --
And the like Bochartus has observed in Virgil, Horace, and other Writers,
Hierozoic. Lib. IV. P. I. Cap. XII.

Ver. 10. For the Land whither thou go to possess He uses all manner of
Arguments to persuade them to Obedience; from a grateful remembrance of God's
former Mercies, ( v. 2, 3, etc.) from the terrible Punishment of the
Disobedient, ( v. 6.) from the Benefits that would redound to themselves, by
their Obedience, ( v. 9.) and now he represents to them what a noble Country he
was going to bestow upon them: but of such a Condition as would keep them in a
constant dependence upon his Favor, for the blessing of it.

Where thou sowedst thy Seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a Garden of
Herbs.] This does not signify that the Land of Egypt was not so fruitful as
the Land of Canaan, (for their Fertility is not to be compared) but that there
they reaped the Fruits of their Labor with more pains. Diodorus Siculus
indeed, and Herodotus say, that the Egyptians take the least pains of all other
Men about their Corn: insomuch that it may be affirmed, (...). they bring in
the Fruits of the Earth without Labor, being at no such trouble about
ploughing, as other Men are, etc. See in his Euterpe, Cap. XIV. Yet it must be
considered, that as the Nile, which made this fruitfulness, failed them
sometimes, and did not overflow all the flat Country; so the upper parts of
Egypt had not the benefit of it; nor all the lower neither, without great
pains, in cutting Rivers to bring the water to them. Which Pliny calls rigua
Nili: For the word rigua properly signifies the little Rivers, and (...) Cuts,,
which were made to derive Water from the Nile, into places at a distance from
it, as Salmasius observes, p. 588. in Solinum. Hesychius calls them, (...),
Receptacles of Water; Ditches or Dikes, which we now call Canals, as the same
Author observes, p. 908. And this I find Strabo speaks so plainly in his
Geography (Lib. XVII. page 788.) that his words may serve as a good Commentary
upon those of Moses. Nature, says he, does much for Egypt by the Nile; but
Industry and Art about that River, does a great deal more. For the higher it
flows, the more ground it naturally waters and makes fruitful; (...), etc. but
Industry sometimes has prevailed, when Nature has failed: insomuch, that as
great a part of the Country has been watered, in the smallest rise of Nile, as
in the highest. Which was effected (...), by the Cuts and Banks which were made
by Art. For before the time of Petronius, he says, there was the greatest
fruitfulness when Nile rose fourteen Cubits; and when it rose only eight there
was a Famine. But in the time of his Government, there was as great Plenty when
it rose only twelve Cubits; and no Man felt any want when it rose only eight.
This was by the Care and Industry of the People, who were forced also sometimes
to carry Water from these Cuts, as well as from the River, in Vessels, to
moisten the Ground when the Mudd, which the Nile left, was baked into a Crust
by the great Heat of the Sun. So that the Ground of Egypt, might properly be
said to be watered by the foot, as we water our Gardens, when there wants Rain.
Concerning which Expression, see Dr. Hammond upon the Psalms, p. 7. col. 2. of
the first Edition.

Ver. 11. But the Land whither ye go to possess, it is Not a low, flat Country,
like that of Egypt; but full of Hills, which could not be made fruitful but by
Rain from Heaven; which seldom fell in Egypt: but the Israelites might expect
in due season, if they were obedient to God. Who, by this means, after they had
ploughed their Ground, and sowed their Corn, made it spring up plentifully
without any further Labor or Care of theirs. Such a Country also was more
pleasant and healthy than that of Egypt; whose Ground next to Nile being
overflowed more or less every Year, by the rising of Nile to the fall of it,
(which was from the Solstice to the Aequinox, or as some say, an hundred Days,
See Salmasius upon Solinus, p. 427, etc. 436, etc.) they could not walk abroad
into their Fields: and many times there followed, after the Water was gone off,
great Sicknesses and Diseases, by the smell of the Silt which it had left
behind.

Ver. 12. A Land which the LORD thy God cares Takes care that it want not
Water; by sending Showers of Rain plentifully from Heaven, in their proper
Season.

The Eyes of the LORD thy God.] That is, the Providence of God; whose Majesty
dwelt in the Sanctuary.

Are always upon it.] To see what is wanting, and to supply it.

From the beginning of the Year, even unto the end of the Year.] At all
Seasons, to give them both the first and latter Rain, (as he speaks v. 14.) and
such Weather as might both produce and kindly ripen the Fruits of the Earth.
This he mentions as an Argument to Obedience; in which if they failed, he
plainly tells them, the Land should not yield her Fruit, v. 17. For this
Country was not so Fertile of it self, as by the peculiar Blessing of God upon
it, whilst they kept his Laws.

And it shall come to pass, if ye will hearken diligently unto my Commandments
which I command you this day.] To hearken diligently, here signifies to
consider them seriously, and lay them to heart.

To love the LORD your God, and to serve him with all your heart, and all your
soul.] He repeats this so often, because it is the Great Commandment (as our
Savior speaks) and because nothing is more natural than to love our
Benefactors: God especially (our greatest Benefactor, who gave us our being)
with all our Heart, and with all our Soul. See X. 12. And being the first and
great Commandment, it draws along with it Obedience to all the rest; and is, in
effect, the whole Duty of Man to God. For constant Experience shows us, that
whosoever gets the firm hold of this Affection, governs a Man as he pleases..

Ver. 14. That I will give you the Rain of your Land.] as much as is
sufficient, for such an hilly Country.

In his due season.] At the proper times; which

The first Rain.] Before the sowing of their Seed, to prepare the Ground; and
after it was sown, that it might take root in the Earth, and spring up.

And the latter Rain.] When the Corn was grown up toward earing time; and
after it was eared, to make the Ears full and plump. This appears from IV Amos
7. where he speaks of withholding the Rain from them, while there were yet
three Months to the Harvest. Which is meant of this latter Rain, whereby their
Corn was brought forward, when it was but in the Blade, to earing, and so on to
Harvest.

That thou may gather in thy Corn, and thy Wine, and thine Oil.] Till the
Corn, and all the Fruits of the Earth, be brought to maturity.

Ver. 15. And I will send Grass in thy Fields for To make them fat; or to give
plenty of Milk.

That thou may eat, and be full.] Eat Flesh if they pleased, as well as the
Fruits of the Earth, in great Plenty.

Ver. 16. Take heed to your selves that your heart be By the specious Colors
that other Nations put upon their Idolatry, (as the Antiquity of it, Universal
Consent, etc. there being no part of the World at that time, as Maimonides
observes, where all were not accustomed to worship Images, etc.) whereby the
Israelites were in danger to be seduced into an Imitation of their Neighbors.

And ye turn aside, and serve other Gods, and worship them.] By this it is
evident that Moses is still pressing them to Care in observing the first and
second Commandment.

And then the LORD's wrath be kindled against you.] For their being deceived
into Idolatry, by false Reasonings, which persuaded them what they did was
lawful, did not excuse them before God. Who expected they should have used
greater Caution, and governed themselves by his plain and express Commands.

And he shut up the Heavens that there be no Rain.] The contrary to this, is
called opening his good Treasure, XXVIII Deuteronomy. 12. signifying that they lived
upon the Royal Bounty of the King of Heaven, which their Sins would hinder from
flowing to them.

That the Land yield not her Fruit, and lest ye perish quickly from off the
good Land which the LORD gives you.] To withold Rain from them, was a sore
Judgment, which quickly brought a Famine; which was very grievous to those who
used to live so plentifully. And it was frequently attended with various
Diseases, whereby they were wasted and consumed.

Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart, and in your soul.] See
VI. 6.

And bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between
your eyes.] Always in sight; as the Rule whereby they should order their steps,
lest they trod amiss. This is one of the Portions of Scripture (from v. 13. to
the end of v. 21.) which the Jews write in their Tephilim, as they call them,
which they use when they say their Prayers, which they fancy are thereby made
more acceptable unto God. This Conceit began not long before our Savior's time
in the School of Hillel and Schammai: and took such Root in the Minds of the
most Religious, that it has grown to a great Superstition ever since. See upon
Chap. VI. v. 8, 9. Which is another Portion of Scripture, that they wrote in
these Parchments: though at the first (St. Hierom says upon XXIII Matthew. 5.)
they wrote only the Ten Commandments

Ver. 19. And ye shall teach them your Children.] That they ought themselves to
learn the Law of God, and to teach it unto others. And this they do so
diligently, that as soon as their Children are capable to understand any thing,
they make them carefully read the Holy Books; and instruct them so, that before
they can be called Youths, they are acquainted with the whole Law of God. In
which we must confess they shame a great many Christians, who scarce understand
so much of our Religion when they are Men and Women, as the Jews do of theirs,
when they are mere Children.

From the Hebrew word limmathtem in this Verse (ye shall teach them) the Jews
have framed a Conceit that their Talmud has its Name; signifying teaching, and
instruction, as R. Jechiel says in his Disputation with Nicolaus, page 9.

Speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, etc.] Taking all occasions to inculcate these Precepts upon them, (See
VI. 7.) and upon their Daughters, as well as their Sons: though the Jewish
Doctors commonly fancy, there is no command to instruct their Daughters in the
Law. See Mischna Sota, Cap. III. Sect. IV. with Wagenseil's Annotations, and
the Gamara there, p. 471, and 501.

And thou shall write them upon the Doorposts of thy House, and upon thy
Gates.] See VI. 9. By this means God's Word being so rooted in the hearts of
the Parents (to use the words of Dr. Jackson) as to bring forth this good Fruit
in their Practice; the Seed of it might be sown in the tender Hearts of their
Children, and be propagated from one Generation to another.

That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your Children, in the Land
which the LORD swear unto your Fathers to give them.] Nothing is wont to move
Men more, than Love to themselves, and Love to their Children, whom they Love
next to themselves.

As the days of Heaven upon the Earth.] As long as this World shall last. Which
the Psalmist, speaking of David, expresses in this manner, His Seed shall
endure for ever, and his Throne as the days of Heaven, LXXXIX Psalm. 29. Which
does not signify absolutely for ever, but a long time. For thus Baruch says,
the Jews in Babylon were commanded to pray for the Life of Nebuchadnezzar, and
the Life of Baltasar his Son, (...), that their days might be as the days of
Heaven upon Earth. Which is the very Phrase of Moses here in this place,
importing a very long Life. And such Hyperbolical Expressions every one knows
are used by the Heathen; particularly by Virgil. Aeneid. 1.

-- Convexa polus dum sidera pascet. Ver. 22. For if ye shall diligently keep
all these Commandments, v. 13. and X. 20.

To walk in all his ways.] In observance of his Laws, which was the Fruit of
true love to him.

And to cleave unto him.] So as to serve no other God, but to persevere in the
Worship of the LORD their God alone. The Jews make this one of the DCXIII.
Precepts of the Law (as they count them) distinct by it self: but they
interpret it foolishly; of sticking to the CABALA of their wise Men, whereby
they fancy themselves united unto God.

Ver. 23. Then will the LORD drive out all these As he had often promised, VII.
23. XXIII Exodus 27.

And ye shall possess Nations greater and mightier than your selves.] VII. 1.

Ver. 24. Every place wherein the soles of your feet That is, every place of
the promised Land; as it is explained in the next words.

From the Wilderness.] Viz. of Sin, which was on the South of Canaan.

And Lebanon.] Which was its Bounds on the North.

From the River, the River Euphrates.] Which was the Eastern Limits; when in
the days of Solomon their Empire reached hither; according to the Promise unto
Abraham in XV Genesis 18.

Even unto the uttermost Sea shall your Coast be.] Which is now called the
Mediterranean, or the Midland Sea: which bounded it on the West. See XXXIV
Numb. 6. where it is called the Great Sea: and in that Chapter the Bounds of
their Country round about are described.

There shall no Man be able to stand before you.] See VII. 24.

For the LORD your God shall lay the fear of you, and the dread of you, upon
all the Land that ye shall tread upon, as he has said unto you.] For God had
promised to terrify the Inhabitants of Canaan, and take away their Courage,
XXIII Exodus 27. And accordingly the Spies whom Joshua sent, brought him an
account of the great Consternation wherein the whole Country was, when they
were about to enter into it. II Josh. 9, 24.

Behold, I set before you this day a Blessing and a Curse.] That is, he
proposed them to their choice.

A Blessing, if you obey the Commandments of the LORD your God, which I command
you this day.] Which he more largely explains XXVIII. 2, 3, 4, etc.

And a Curse, if ye will not obey the Commandment of the LORD your God.] Which
is also more particularly laid before them, XXVIII. 15, 16, 17, etc. The whole
Historical Part of the Old Testament witnesses the Truth of this, that God
blessed or cursed them, according as they observed or broke his Laws. And if
the People of Israel had diligently marked, considered, and laid to heart, that
their Happiness or Misery, were always correspondent to their good and bad
Behavior toward God; it would have confirmed their Belief of their Law, as
much as if they had seen all the Miracles done before their Forefathers; and
supplied the want or the rarity of them in after Ages. Nay, this would have
done more than all the Miracles did, which were forgotten in a short time:
whereas their own daily Experience of the happy Fruits of Obedience, and the
Mischief of Disobedience, would have sealed these Truths unto their Conscience.

But turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other
gods which ye have not known.] It was not every sin that turned God's favor
from them; but their Idolatry and Apostasy from him: against which he
principally warns them, throughout all these Chapters, IV. 3, 4, 15, 16, 23. V.
32. VI. 4, 14. VII. 4, 5, 25. VIII. 19. IX. 12. X. 20.

Ver. 29. And it shall come to pass, when the Lord thy To quicken them unto a
strict care in their Obedience, Blessings and Cursings were to be pronounced
with great Solemnity, at their first entrance into the Land of Canaan; as is
more fully ordered XXVII. 11, 12, etc. and performed by Joshua, VIII. 33, 34,
35. And Moses seems to enjoin them the like Solemnity every Seventh Year, XXXI.
10, 11, 12, 13.

Ver. 30. Are they not on the other side Jordan.] Moses now was, the Mountains
he mentions were on the other side of Jordan, in the Land of Canaan. In which
they had no sooner got footing, but Joshua took care to execute this Command:
that their hearts might be possessed with a sense upon what terms they were to
enjoy it. And he describes the places so particularly, that they might be sure
to know them.

By the way where the Sun goes down.] On that side, which inclined to the West.

In the Land of the Canaanites.] The People particularly so called, who were
one of the Seven Nations: Some of which lived here in the East, and others near
the Mid-land Sea. As I have observed upon XV Genesis 21.

Which dwell in the Champian over against Gilgal.] Some think these Mountains
were at such a considerable distance from Gilgal, that they cannot be said to
be over against Gilgal; because this Phrase signifies them not to be far off
one from the other. And therefore they translate these words, looking toward
Gilgal. But it is not said, that the Mountains were over against Gilgal: but
the dwelling of the Canaanites (in whose Country these Mountains were) was over
against it.

Beside the Plain of Moreh.] Of which mention is made XII Genesis 6. Where the
Canaanites are also mentioned, as in that Land, when Abraham came into it.
Which suggests to us, that these Blessings were pronounced in that very place
where Abraham anciently dwelt, and where he worshipped God, who there appeared
to him.

For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the Land, which the LORD
your God gives you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.] He would have
them be as careful in this Matter, as it was certain that they should shortly
go over Jordan, to take possession of the Country which God was about to bestow
on them. Which he assures them they should get possession of, and settle
themselves therein.

Ver. 32. Chapter XII.
And ye shall observe to do all the Statutes and Judgments which I set before
you this day.] But then do not forget what I have so often said to you; which
he thought he could not inculcate enough. See

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. THese are the Statutes and Judgments etc.] Now, I suppose, he begins
a new Exhortation: which he made to them, at some small distance from the
former. And he enters upon it with the same words, which he used before, VI. 1.
IX. 1. which could not be too often repeated; considering the great proneness
of the People to neglect their Duty.

Ver. 2. Ye shall-utterly destroy all the places wherein So that no Opinion
should be left of their being Sacred Places, by any Relick or Memorial of the
old Idolatry remaining there. It was not sufficient that the Gods which the
Seven Nations worshipped were abolished; but the very places also where they
were worshipped, were to be made common, and employed to other uses.

Upon the Mountains, and upon the Hills, and under every green Tree.] These
were the places where the ancient Heathen chose to worship their Gods;
imagining their Sacrifices were more acceptable upon Mountains than in Valleys.
Lucian himself gives this Reason for it, Because Men were then nearer to the
Gods, and so more easily obtained Audience: (...). And Tacitus says the same
in the last of his Annals. Demons also were wont to haunt Woods and shady
places, and there appear to Men: And were thought also to be the Presidents of
Mountains; others of Woods and Forests. And accordingly the Heathen erected
Altars to them in these and such like places; particularly under great Oaks,
which were held Sacred Places, where their gods were thought to have a peculiar
power. By this Law therefore God intended to root out this Superstition; and
commanded his Tabernacle to be built low and humble. And though afterward the
Temple was set upon an Hill, there was only one, and no more: and therefore it
could not be thought to be out of any Opinion that an Hill was more Sacred than
another place.

And under every green Tree.] Nothing can illustrate these words more, than
what Pliny says in the Twelfth Book of his Natural History, concerning Trees:
which thus begins; Haec fuere Numinum Templa, etc. These were the Temples of
the gods; and even now the simple People, after the ancient Rites, dedicate to
god such Trees as excel the rest. Nor do we more adore the Images glittering
with Gold and Ivory, quam lucos, and in iis silentia ipsa, than we do the
Groves, and the solemn Silence therein. And then he reckons what Trees were
peculiarly sacred to Jupiter, Apollo, Minerva, etc. concluding that several of
their gods, such as the Sylvani, Fauni, and some of their Nymphs, had their
Names from the Woods. This was a thing so notorious, that in their most Sacred
Solemnities, they were wont to present the gods whom they worshipped, with a
Crown or Garland made of the Boughs and Leaves of such Trees, in which they
were thought to delight: As to Jupiter, a Crown of Oak; to Apollo of Laurel; to
Minerva of Olive; to Venus of Myrtle; to Bacchus of Ivy; to Rhea, Pan, Neptune
and Vulcan of Pine, etc. See Ezekiel. Spanhemius upon Callimachus his Hymn to
Diana, verse. 200.

Ver. 3. And ye shall overthrow their Altars, and break See VII. 5. and XXVI
Lev. 1. He mentions all these so particularly, because this is the very
foundation and hinge of the Law (as Maimonides speaks) that all Opinion of the
Sanctity of such things should be blotted out of Men's hearts, and the memory of
them extinguished, More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XXIX. where he reckons abundance
of things of this kind, which were among the old Idolaters called Zabij.

And destroy the Names of them out of that place.] From this and such like
places, the Jews have framed this Affirmative Precept, That the Gentile
Idolatry is by all means to be destroyed. For these Nations having forfeited
their Land by their abominable wickedness, and God having bestowed it upon the
Israelites (whom he took for his peculiar People, and among whom he dwelt, and
therefore calls this his Land, See VII. 6.) He, as the King of the Country,
might enjoin what Orders he pleased to have observed. And it was of the highest
concernment, that there should not be the least footstep of the old Idolatry
left in the Country: but that he who was the Lord of it, and the LORD of Heaven
and Earth, should be alone acknowledged and worshipped. And there was greater
Reason for this, than at first sight may be imagined: For as the Host of Heaven
was worshipped, as the glorious Bodies wherein their gods inhabited, (which was
the Notion of the best of the Heathen for this Worship) so their Demons were
supposed to dwell in the Images and Pillars which for that end were erected to
them. The Sovereign Caelestial Gods being worshipped in the Sun, Moon and
Stars, wherein they were thought to dwell: and these petty Deities, the Demons
were worshipped in Images and Columns; which were made for them, and for no
other Deities: as our Mr. Mede observes, P. I. page 778.

Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God.] That is, not serve him upon the
Mountains, nor in Groves, nor under green Trees. Which appears to be the sense,
both from the foregoing words, v. 2, 3. and from the following opposition in
the next Verse. And it is very probable, that during their continuance in the
Wilderness, none Sacrificed in High Places, but offered all at the Door of the
Tabernacle, which was not far from them. When they came into Canaan, and were
many of them at a distance from the Tabernacle, they did Sacrifice in High
Places; and we do not find them reproved for it, while they worshipped the LORD
alone, and had Priests who officiated there, and in other places, according to
the Precepts of the Law. But when the Temple was built, and the Ark of God's
Presence no longer removed from place to place, the Prophets required them not
to Sacrifice any longer in High Places, nor any where else, but only at the
Temple. And they blamed even good Kings for not taking away the High Places;
though no Sacrifices were offered upon them to any strange god, but to the true
God alone. Which Connivance proved, in time, a great Mischief; for here they
first began to worship strange gods; the Israelites being very prone to choose
Mountains, and such shady places (as the rest of the World did) wherein to set
up their Images, 2 Kings XVII. 10, 11. XX Ezekiel. 28. IV Hosea 13.

Ver. 5. But unto the place which the LORD your Unto one certain place which
God intended to set apart: unto which all the Tribes should resort, as the only
place where they might Sacrifice. By which means the Notion of the Unity of God
was preserved, and his Worship kept pure and sincere, as long as they kept to
this one place, where the Priests of God constantly attended, to see his
Service rightly performed.

To put his Name there.] By the Name of God is meant God himself, (as to call
upon his Name, is to call upon him) and therefore the Sense is, where he would
make his dwelling place, by settling the Ark, and the Cloud of Glory there,
which was the Token of his Presence. This place at first seems to have been
Mizpeh, and afterward Shiloh. And when that was destroyed, the Ark removed to
several places (Kirjath-jearim, Mizpeh, Gilgal, Nob, Gibeon, the House of
Obed-Edom) till at last it settled at Jerusalem. Where, when the Temple was
built, God says to Solomon, I have chosen this place to my self, for an House
of Sacrifice, 2 Chronicles. VII. 12. Which is the plain sense of these words, Choose
a place to put his Name there.

Even unto his Habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shall come.] This
explains what he means by the place where he would put his Name, viz. the place
where his Sanctuary was settled, which was his Habitation; where he placed his
Majesty (as Onkelos paraphrases) that all might repair thither, to seek his
Grace and Favor.

And thither ye shall bring your Burnt-offerings, and your Sacrifices,] By
Sacrifices, as distinct from Burnt-offerings, must be meant their Sin Offerings
and Peace Offerings. And the latter of these, were sometimes for Mercies
received, and sometimes Free-will-offerings, or Vows, as we read in VII Lev.
12, 16. Which if they had been bound, as often as there was occasion, to bring to
one certain place ( Jerusalem suppose) though they were at never so great a
distance from it, it would have been an intolerable expense to devout People.
And therefore the Jews think the meaning is, that they were bound to these
Sacrifices, either for Offenses committed, or for Mercies received, etc. at the
next Feast at the farthest; and not to defer them beyond that time. See Dr.
Lightfoot in his Temple Service, p. 99, 100. of the first Edition.

And your Tithes.] Not those which were to be paid to the Levites, or by them
to the Priests: but another Tithe which was to be set aside after that to the
Levites was paid, and employed as is directed, XIV. 22, 23, etc. See here below
v. 17.

And Heave-offerings of your hand.] The First Fruits, as the LXX. and Vulgar
Latin rightly translate it, viz. of Corn, and Wine and Oil, and other Fruits
of the Earth. Which are called the Heave-offerings of their hand, because they
brought them in their own hand; and having heaved them up to the LORD, they
gave them to the Priests. See XVIII Numb. 11, 12. and XVIII Deuteronomy. 4. XXVI. 4,
10.

And your Vows, and your Free-will-offerings.] Which were comprehended before
under the Name of Sacrifices; but here more particularly expressed, to
signify, That though they might choose whether they would offer them or no, or
whether they would vow them, yet they could not choose the place where they
should be offered, (if they vowed, or were disposed to it) but must be
determined by this Law.

And the Firstlings of your Herds, and of your Flocks.] This shows that the
Heave-offerings of their hand, comprehend only the First Fruits of the Earth:
besides which, these Firstlings also belonged to the Priests, XVIII Numb. 15,
16, 17.

Ver. 7. And there ye shall eat.] Their part of the Moses, to feast upon part
of the Sacrifices of Peace Offerings; as appears from XVIII Exodus 12. XXXIV.
13, 14.

Before the LORD your God.] Not in the Tabernacle, or Temple, where only the
Priests might eat the most holy things, which were peculiarly theirs, (XVIII
Numb. 10.) but in some place very near to the Sanctuary. It being the custom of
other People (and perhaps before the time of Moses) to feast with their gods in
their very Temples, or near their Altars; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. VIII. 10. Therefore God entertained his People also, at his own House;
commanding them here, and in other places, to eat their Sacrifices before him,
at his Sanctuary, and no where else: that is, in some place adjacent to the
Sanctuary. Whereby they declared that they had communion with him, and not with
Idols, by partaking with him at his Table, that is, his Altar. For there could
be no need of their eating there, but only to signify this, and to secure them
in his Religion by feasting in his Presence, and thereby owning themselves to
belong to him. This is repeated very often in this Book, v. 18. of this
Chapter; XIV. 23, 26. XV. 20. XVI. 5. but especially XXVII. 6, 7. where they
are required, before the Temple was built, to eat their Sacrifices near the
Altar, which was erected after they came over Jordan. This being a Profession
of the True Religion, to eat at God's Altar; as to eat of things sacrificed to
Idols, was to profess the Heathenish Religion. So all have understood it, as
Elmenhorstius has shown from a great heap of Authors, in his Annot. ad
Minutium Foelicem, Fol. LXIX.

And ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your Households,
wherewith the LORD thy God has blessed thee.] This signifies either that they
should rejoice at these Feasts, in the Goodness of God, who had blessed the
Labor of their Hands, (of which the Tithe they brought thither was a Fruit) or
that, doing thus, God would bless all their future Labors, and make them and
their Families prosper, and take comfort in all their Enjoyments.

Ye shall not do after all the things that ye do here this day.] This does not
signify, as if there was no Civil Government, or that the Courts of Justice
did not sit, and execute Judgment between Man and Man: but relates to the place
of offering Sacrifice, (as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. XV. n.
IV.) which, in their wandering condition, they did not so strictly observe, as
God expected when they came to be settled. Our Learned Dr. Spencer thinks it
relates also to other old Customs, which were rather childish than profane;
and therefore tolerated by God for the present. To which he thinks those words
of St. Paul have respect, XIII Acts 18. Many things also perhaps they omitted,
which they could not, or did not observe in the Wilderness; as their New Moons,
and other Solemn Days; with several Rites of Purification and Cleansing
prescribed by the Law of Moses.

Every Man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.] This does not import that
there was no good order kept among them; or that they were left at liberty to
Sacrifice where they pleased: but that in such an uncertain state, when they
were removing from place to place, many took the liberty in such matters, to do
as they thought good.

Ver. 9. For ye are not yet come to the rest.] This

To the Inheritance which the LORD your God gives you.] Where they were to
abide, as long as they observed God's Commands.

Ver. 10. And when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in When their Condition was
altered for the better, God expected that they should be so too.

And when he gives you rest from all your Enemies round about, so that ye
dwell in safety.] This intimates, that the fear they were in, while they
wandered in the Wilderness, of the Incursions of their Enemies, might make them
sometimes offer Sacrifice where they ought not, and commit other Disorders.

Then there shall be a place which the LORD your God shall choose, to cause his
Name to dwell there.] God was not pleased (as Maimonides observes) to declare
any where in the Law, where this place should be: But, though he often
determines them to one place, ( v. 26. XIV. 23. XVI. 6.) yet he leaves the
place undetermined. Which he imagines might be, for these three Reasons: First,
Lest the Gentiles should get possession of it, and make War upon that account;
thinking that this place was the end of the Law (as he speaks.) And secondly,
lest they in whose hands it was, should do all they could to destroy it. And
thirdly (which is the truest Reason) lest every Tribe should desire to have it
in their Lot, and Strife should arise among them about it. More Nevochim, P.
III. Cap. XLV.

Thither shall ye bring all that I command you, your Burnt-offerings, your
Sacrifices, etc.] All that he mentioned before, v. 6. This may seem an heavy
imposition, that they might not offer them in any place, and at any time: but
Maimonides makes this wise Reflection upon it; That God intended to teach them,
not to have so high an Opinion of Sacrifices, as of Prayers and Deprecations,
and such like parts of Divine Worship, ( viz. acknowledging his Goodness,
Praising him, and giving him Thanks) which are the Things God mainly intends,
and may be offered every where. Whereas Sacrifices are not of that account with
him; which made him limit them to one place where he should appoint them to be
offered; and not suffer any but one certain Family to discharge this Office.
These and such like things were to diminish the value of Sacrifices: for which
reason the Prophets often reprehend Men for their too great diligence and zeal
in bringing Sacrifices; of which God had no need, and did not principally
intend as the Worship he delighted in. For which he cites 1 Samuel XV. 22. I Isa.
11. VII Jerem. 22. Sacrifices being appointed, and one place for them; not for
any good in themselves, but only that all Idolatry might be abolished, and the
belief of the Unity of God preserved, More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XXXII.

All your choice Vows.] In the Hebrew the words are, as our Margin notes, The
choice of your Vows. So their Peace Offerings, which were Vows, were called;
because they were to be select out of those Creatures which were perfect, and
without the least desect. Whereas those Creatures which had something
superfluous, or lacking in any part, might be accepted for a
Free-will-offering, which a Man was not bound to make, but brought it merely
out of good will. So we read expressly in XXII Levit. 23.

Ver. 12. And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your The whole Family was to
feast with God, and one with another: whereby brotherly Love and Friendship was
increased and strengthened, by their meeting and eating together at one place.
And nothing is more joyful, than to see Brethren dwell together in Unity. See
v. 7.

And the Levite that is within your Gates, for as much as he has no part nor
inheritance with you.] See X. 9. This whole Tribe (as Maimonides well notes)
being devoted to the Divine Service, and the Study of the Law, neither minded
ploughing nor sowing, but were wholly consecrated unto God. And therefore we
find them very commonly reckoned among the Strangers, the Fatherless, and the
Widows; because they had no certain Possessions: which made it the more
reasonable they should constantly be entertained at these Feasts, which were
kept at God's House, More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XXXI.

Take heed to thy self, that thou offer not thy Burnt-offerings.] Under
Burnt-offerings are comprehended all the other Offerings beforementioned; for
these were the chief, and the most usual; and if they might not be offered, but
at a certain place, much less might any other, as every body might understand,
without repeating them all again.

In every place that thou see.] To be beautiful, lovely, and inviting, by its
situation, and shady Trees, and Fountains, etc. Such as are mentioned v. 2.
Which the Gentiles chose, perhaps, wherein to Sacrifice, because they were more
delightful or solemn than other. Whence Ezekiel, VI. 3. mentions Rivers and
Valleys (together with Mountains) where there were fine Pastures, and Springs
of Water; which were so pleasant and refreshing in those Countries, that they
fancied the gods delighted in them. So St. Hierom notes upon VII Jerem. that
this Gentile Error, omnes provincias occupavit, etc. spread it self in all
parts of the World, That they should offer their Sacrifices at the heads of
Fountains and delightful Groves.

But in the place which the LORD shall choose, in one of thy Tribes, there shall
thou offer thy Burnt-offerings.] This he had said before, v 5, 6 11. but
repeats it again, because of the great importance of it, to prevent all strange
Worship. Elijah indeed offered upon Mount Carmel, after the Temple was built,
but it was by a Prophetical Inspiration: and if any one at that time had asked
him, if they might take that liberty, he would have answered, by no means; but
he that offers out of Jerusalem shall be cut off, (XVII Levit. 4.) As for what
I do now, it is an extraordinary Case, to convince the lying Prophets of Baal,
etc. Thus Maimonides in Geder Zeraim.

And there thou shall do all that I command thee.] Bring their Tithes and
First Fruits beforementioned, v. 6. and eat and rejoice before the LORD, v. 7.

Ver. 15. Notwithstanding, thou may kill and eat For common Food.

In all thy Gates.] In any City, Town, or House. While they were in the
Wilderness indeed, they might not kill their Beasts, but only at the Door of
the Tabernacle; and consequently they eat nothing but Peace Offerings, which
had been first presented unto God, and part of them burnt at his Altar, XVII
Levit. 3, 4, etc. But when they went into Canaan, they were freely indulged to
kill their Beasts in any place, without bringing any part of them to the Altar.

Whatsoever thy Soul lusts after.] Of all sorts of Creatures, not prohibited
in the XIth of Leviticus.

According to the Blessings of the LORD thy God, which he has given thee.]
Suitable to every Man's Estate and Condition.

The unclean and the clean may eat thereof.] They who were under any Legal
Uncleanness might not eat of the Sacrifices: but of common Food, at their
ordinary Tables, they might as well as others.

As of the Roe-buck, and as of the Heart.] He instances in these, because there
was great plenty of them in that Country; as Aelian observes in the end of his
fifth Book. Where he says they were (...), in the highest Mountains of Amanus,
Libanus, and Carmel. These Creatures might not be sacrificed to God: but they
might eat of others, which were used in Sacrifice, (Sheep, Goats, Oxen) as
freely as of these which were not.

Only ye shall not eat the Blood.] But of the Blood of those Creatures they
might no more eat, than of those that were sacrificed at the Altar. But as
there, it was to be sprinkled upon the Altar, and then poured out at the foot
of it; so here it was to be poured on the Earth.

Ye shall pour it upon the Earth as water.] So that it might sink into the
Ground and disappear, as Water does when it is poured on the Earth. Which is so
strictly enjoined, though it was not the Blood of an Oblation, to prevent those
Superstitions which were exercised by the old Idolaters, about the Blood of
their Sacrifices. In which they thought their Demons delighted, and by eating
of which they hoped to have Communion with them; as Maimonides observes in his
More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLVI.

Thou may not eat within thy Gates.] In their own private Habitations.

The Tithe of thy Corn, or of thy Wine, or of thy Oil.] This cannot be meant of
the Tithe paid to the Levites, which the People might not eat any where, being
appropriated to the Levites alone. He speaking therefore of a Tithe which the
People might eat, though not at home, yet in the place where the Sanctuary was:
it must be meant of that which the Hebrews call the second Tithe, which was set
out after that to the Levites was paid. Concerning which he speaks XIV. 22, 23,
etc.

Or the firstlings of the Herds, or of thy Flock.] These were entirely the
Priests Portion, by an express Law, XVIII Numb. 15, 17, 18. and therefore could
not lawfully be eaten by the People, either at home, or at the Sanctuary. Which
makes it necessary to understand this of some other Firstlings: and it is not
improbable that it is meant of the Females which opened the Womb. For the Males
only were the LORD's (as appears from XIII Exodus, and other places) who gave
them to his Priests: but he would have the Firstborn Females also to be in
some sort Sacred, by requiring them to be eaten at his Sanctuary, where his
Priests had their share of them. For I see no ground to think that as there was
a secondary Tithe, so there was a secondary Firstling set apart by every Man to
this use.

Nor any of thy Vows which thou vowest, etc.] All such things were also wholly
the LORD's, XXVII Levit. 28. and given by him to his Priests, XVIII Numb. 14.
But that is only to be understood of what was vowed to God absolutely, without
mentioning any particular use to which it was designed. Besides which, they
might vow what they pleased to be spent in Solemn Feasts, with the Levites, the
Widows, the Fatherless, and other poor People: and of such Moses here speaks.

Or Heave-offerings of thine hand.] These were First Fruits of Corn, Wine and
Oil, as I said upon v. 6. which were also the Priests Portion, XVIII Numb. 12.
Therefore this can be meant of no other First Fruits, but such as Men freely
offered, without any obligation to it, to be spent in this fashion; for he was
speaking before of such kind of things. Unless we will understand this of the
First Fruits of young Trees, which might not be eaten in three Years after they
were planted; but in the fourth Year were to be holy, to praise the LORD
withal, XIX Levit. 24. which, as Josephus says, were spent in these Sacred
Feasts. See there.

But thou must eat them before the LORD thy God, in the place which the LORD
thy God shall choose, thou and thy Son and thy Daughter, etc.] See before v. 11,
12.

Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou live
upon the Earth.] He gives this Caution, lest Covetousness should make them
defraud the Levites of their Tithes, and not let them have convenient
Habitations; or profaneness make them not invite them to the Sacred Feasts
before spoken of. This is repeated XIV. 27. And in this the Jews were so
careful, that when there was such increase of the Levites that their Cities
could not contain them, they assigned them more than were given them at first:
For Joshua gave them only XLVIII. but before the Captivity of Babylon they had
XX. more added to them, as appears from 1 Chronicles. VI. 65, 66, etc. where, after
the mention of the old Number, there is an account given of XX. more added to
them out of several Tribes. For though they could not enlarge the Bounds
prescribed to their Cities; yet as the number of Levites increased, they might
give them new Cities. And so they did, that they might not be straightened in
their Dwellings among them.

Ver. 20. When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy That is, when he had brought
them out of this Wilderness, where they were encamped round about the
Tabernacle, into a spacious Country, where they might live far distant from it.

As the LORD has promised thee.] Which he promised to enlarge, even as far as
Euphrates, if they were obedient to him, XV Genesis 18.

And thou shall say, I will eat flesh.] Have a desire to eat it.

Because thy Soul longs to eat flesh.] There were several sorts of Flesh,
that were lawful to be eaten, which they could not have in the Wilderness; and
therefore might be supposed to desire them very much, when they came into
Canaan, which abounded with them. And besides, they would have more plenty of
such Cattle, as they now had; which might incline them to keep greater Tables.

Thou may eat flesh whatsoever thy Soul lusts after.] This was said
before, v. 15. and now repeated, with all the rest that belongs to this matter;
to let them see God did not intend to abridge them too much of their liberty.
For though they might not eat the Tithe of their Corn, Wine and Oil (and the
rest mentioned v. 17.) at their own home; because they were holy things, and
therefore to be eaten only in one certain place where God's Sanctuary was: yet
all sorts of Flesh, used at their private Tables, he now gives them leave to
kill any where, without bringing it to the Tabernacle, and offering the Blood
at the Altar, as they were tied to do while they were in the Wilderness, XVII
Lev. 3, 4, etc. For then the Tabernacle was very near to every one of them; but
when their Border was enlarged, it must needs be at so great a distance from
some of them, that it would have been too heavy a Burden to oblige them to kill
every thing they eat at the Tabernacle; and therefore he dispenses with it.

If the place, etc.] The Particle Chi may better be translated here because;
which makes these words a reason of the Allowance given in the foregoing Verse,
Because the place which the LORD thy God has chose to put his Name there, is
too far from thee, thou may kill, etc.

Of thy Herd, and of thy Flock.] Such Creatures as are now allowed for
Sacrifice; Oxen, Sheep, Lambs and Goats.

Which the LORD has given thee.] For Food as well as other uses.

As I have commanded thee.] Given thee leave to eat at home, without carrying
them to the Tabernacle: So it follows, And thou shall eat in thy Gates
whatsoever thy Soul lusts after: i. e. All manner of things, of which there
was great variety, not prohibited by this Law.

Even as the Roe-buck and the Heart is eaten, so may thou eat them.] Which
were Creatures not allowed to be offered to God in Sacrifice, (See v. 15.) and
therefore they might less doubt to eat of them, than of such as were peculiarly
appointed for that use. From which they might possibly have thought, that out
of Reverence to God they should abstain; but are here satisfied they might as
freely eat of them, as of the other.

The clean and the unclean shall eat of them alike.] Whereas while they were in
the Wilderness, only such as were clean might eat Flesh, because it was
sanctified by being killed at the Altar: now all are indulged the same liberty;
whether they were removed from holy things (as the Jerusalem Targum expresses
it) or were pure to use them, both might eat flesh alike.

Ver. 23. Only be sure that thou eat not the Blood.] be strong) use thy utmost
diligence to prevent this.

For the blood is the life, and thou may not eat the life with the flesh.]
See what I have noted upon IX Genesis 4. XVII Lev. 11, 14.

Ver. 24. Thou shall not eat it, thou shall pour it out Since they could not
pour it out at the Altar, where no body could meddle with it, they were to pour
it out on the Earth, that it might sink into it. Or, as the Law required in
Leviticus (XVII. 13.) cover it with Dust, that the Cattle might not lick it up.
Or the meaning may be, Pour it as a common thing (which Water is) without any
religious Rite used about it.

Ver. 25. Thou shall not eat of it.] This is repeated Leviticus, to show the
weightiness of this Command.

That it may go well with thee, and with thy Children after thee, when thou
shall do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.] When they neither
followed the Idolatrous Customs which the Gentiles used about the Blood; nor
profanely meddled with that which was peculiar to God, when it was offered at
the Altar. Which was the great reason, why they were prohibited to eat Blood.

Ver. 26. Only thy holy things which thou have, and thy vows, thou shall take,
and go unto the place which the LORD shall choose.] Only he would have them v.
17.) they were not to eat at home, but at the House of God, though it was never
so far distant from them.

And thou shall offer thy Burnt-offerings, the Flesh and the Blood, upon the
Altar of the LORD thy God.] No Sacrifices were to be offered any where but at
the Sanctuary, as he had said before v. 6. and now reminds them of it, that
they might observe it, and do accordingly.

And the Blood of thy Sacrifices shall be poured out upon the Altar of the LORD
thy God.] All their Peace Offerings, as well as others, were to be there
offered, and their Blood poured on the Altar, as a holy thing: whereas the
Blood of those Creatures they killed at home, was poured out, as a common
thing, like Water.

And thou shall eat the Flesh.] After God and his Priests had their parts.

Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well
with thee, and with thy Children after thee for ever.] This was the great
Commandment, to serve God alone: and the observance of it was the great
Condition upon which all their Happiness depended. Which makes him again press
their care in this matter.

When thou do that which is good and right in the sight of the LORD thy God.]
Pleased God, by a strict obedience to this Precept.

And when the LORD thy God shall cut off the Nations from before thee, whither
thou go to possess them, etc.] See IX. 1.

Ver. 30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by following them,
after that they be destroyed from before thee.] It is plain from hence, that in
this Chapter, as well as the foregoing, he is still endeavoring following
them, is meant, following their Fashions in their Clothes, and in their
Ornaments, (as it is explained in the Book Siphri) which might entice them to
imitate their Religious Rites, which, it appears by the next words, are
principally intended.

After that they be destroyed from before thee.] It was the most unaccountable
folly to worship the gods of those Nations, whom they saw expelled their
Country for their Idolatries.

And that thou enquire not after their gods.] They were not so much as to ask
what gods they worshipped.

Saying, How did these Nations serve their gods?] Nor endeavor to know the
manner of their Worship. Which was very different, as Maimonides observes,
according as their gods differed one from another; for that sort of Worship
which was acceptable to one god, might not be given to another. As they
uncovered themselves (if we may believe him) before Baal-peor; and threw a
Stone to Mercury. See his Tract concerning the Worship of the Planets, Cap.
III. Sect. 2, etc. and Dionys. Vossius his Annotations there. Where he
resolves, that if they uncovered themselves to Mercury, or threw a Stone to
Baal-peor, it was not Idolatry, because not their proper Worship. Which is a
foolish Opinion; for they were not to use any of their Religious Rites, no more
than to offer Sacrifice, burn Incense, or bow down to any of their Idols, which
he acknowledges was Idolatry. In short, if they gave the Idol the Worship
proper to him, or that Worship which was proper to the true God, he
acknowledges they were guilty.

Even so will I do likewise.] Though Men only resolved to do it, yet they were
guilty of committing this Sin. The Jews indeed make no great account of sins
committed in the heart, yet in this Case they are very strict, having framed
this Maxim, as R. Levi Barcelonita observes, Proecept. CCXXVI. which their
Rabbis industriously inculcate into their Scholars, That the blessed God
imputes no thought of any Transgression to an Israelite, as if it were the fact
it self, except only the thought of Idolatry, which is imputed to a Man, as if
he had committed Idolatry. Now it was a reasonable Presumption, that he who
enquired how the People of Canaan worshipped their gods, intended at least to
worship the God of Israel, as they did those Idols: And this gave too much
cause to suspect, that he had an inclination to worship their Idols instead of
God. For otherwise he would have rested content with that way of worshipping
God, which the Law had prescribed. Whereupon the Jews have determined (as our
Mr. Thorndike has observed) that there are four Ceremonies, which whosoever
performs to any thing but to God alone, must be understood to worship it for
God; which are Sacrificing, Burning Incense, Pouring out Drink Offerings, and
Adoration. But others there are, by doing which, Men cannot be concluded to
worship any thing but God, till they do it in that way and fashion as is done
by those who profess to worship it for God. See his Principles of Christian
Truth, Chap. XXVI.

Ver. 31. Thou shall not do so unto the LORD thy See v. 4. Of which the Reason
is here given.

For every Abomination to the LORD which he hates, have they done unto their
gods.] For instance; The Zabij, says Maimonides, I find in their Books,
offered to their great God the Sun, seven Batts, and seven Mice, and seven
other creeping Things: which alone may suffice to demonstrate how vile and
abominable their Worship was; and what reason there was so severely to prohibit
their Idolatry, and every thing pertaining to it, More Nevochim P. III. Cap.
XXIX.

For even their Sons and their Daughters they have burnt in the fire to their
gods.] This is the great Instance of their abominable Wickedness. Of which see
XVIII Levit. 21. XX. 2. This was notoriously practiced by the Carthaginians,
who, it is certain, derived it from the Phaenicians, the ancient Inhabitants of
this Country. Plato mentions it in Protagora; where he says, The Athenian Laws
did not permit them to sacrifice Men; but among the Carthaginians it was an
holy Rite; so that some of them permitted their Sons to be offered to Saturn.
Which wicked Custom at last overspread all Nations, even the Greeks themselves,
as Joh. Gensius has demonstrated, Lib. de Victimis Humanis P. I. Cap. XI. and
P. II. Cap. VI.

Ver. 32. Whatsoever thing I command you, observe to Keep close to the Precepts
I have given you about my Worship, v. 28. and see IV. 2.

Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.] They were not to add any
other Rites of Worship of their own devising, or from the Idolatrous Customs of
those Countries; nor omit any of those which God had commanded them to use. For
if they had used any of the Gentile Ceremonies, whereby they honored their
gods, it would easily have introduced the Worship of the gods themselves: and
if they had omitted any of the Rites which God had ordained, some other would
have easily stepped into their room, which were used by Idolaters.

Maimonides, from these words, labors to prove the Eternity of the Law of
Moses. But it is very strange that so great a Man should be so blind, as not to
see what some of his Brethren could discern, That God did not bind up himself,
neither to change nor alter these Laws, though he did not permit the Israelites
to do it. So the Author Sepher Ikkarim wisely glosses upon these words, Lib.
III. Cap. XIV. The Scripture prohibits us to add unto, or detract from these
Precepts, according to our Will and Pleasure; but what hinders the blessed God,
either to add or detract, when his blessed Wisdom shall think fit? Which he
illustrates in the foregoing Chapter, by this Example among others; A Physician
prescribes a Diet to his Patient, for such a time as he judges convenient,
which he does not declare to the sick Man. Now when the time comes that the
Physician has obtained his end, he changes the Diet, and permits his Patient
what he formerly forbad, and prohibits that which he formerly permitted. Which
exactly agrees to what our blessed Savior has done.

CHAP. XIII. Chapter XIII.

Verse 1. IF there arise among you.] In future

A Prophet.] One that pretends to have a Message from God delivered to him in a
Vision, or by the Word of the LORD. For there was a constant Succession of
Prophets (to whom God revealed his mind several ways) among the Jews, to
preserve them in the true Worship of God, and instruct them in their Law, and
admonish them, on some occasions, of things to come. Which was the more
necessary, because there were such kind of Persons among the Gentiles.

Or a dreamer of Dreams.] Who pretended God had appeared to him in a Dream (as
he did unto Jacob, XXVIII Genesis 11.) and revealed his mind to him. Such there
were in Jeremiah's time, XXIX Jerem. 8.

And give thee a sign.] Foretell something.

Or a wonder.] By what follows, one would think this belongs to the foregoing
words; which are to be understood, as if he had said, If he foretell some
wonderful thing, which shall shortly come to pass. Or it may be interpreted,
shall work a miracle: unto which the Heathen did not so much pretend, as they
did to Predictions, which were common among them.

Ver. 2. And the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof The Event confirm the
Prediction; so that he seem a true Prophet.

Saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou have not known, and let us
serve them.] And consequently he persuade you to worship other gods; which he
pretends is demonstrated to be lawful, by the fulfilling of his Sign and Wonder.

Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or dreamer of Dreams.]
Notwithstanding look upon him as a Liar, and not as a true Prophet. For God
cannot contradict himself, nor do any thing to persuade Men to forsake him, and
give his Worship to another. This shows that he still pursues his intention (in
this Chapter as well as all the foregoing) to establish them in the Belief and
Worship of one God, according to the first Commandment. From which nothing was
more likely to seduce them, than false Prophets; who were the great Instruments
of establishing the foulest Idolatry in Israel: As appears from 1 Kings XVIII.
19. where we read of no less then Four hundred Prophets of Baal; and Four
hundred and fifty Prophets of the Groves: that is, of other false gods,
particularly Astarte, as Mr. Seldom conjectures in his Syntagma II. de Diis
Syris, Cap. II. And there could not be a plainer Demonstration that a Man was a
false Prophet, than if he endeavored to draw them to the Worship of other
gods; or if he pretended to speak in the Name of any other god, (XVIII Deuteronomy.
20.) or if he commanded them to offer such Sacrifices as God abhorred. Thus
Aristander (as David Chytraeus notes) discovered himself to be a false Prophet,
though he foretold the destruction of Babylon; for he required Humane
Sacrifices to be offered. As Tiresias also predicted Victory to the Thebans,
provided Creon's Daughter was offered up in Sacrifice: and Chalcas the time of
the Siege of Troy, but together therewith commanded the Sacrifice of Iphigenia.
These, and such like things, plainly discovered they were not inspired by God,
who is the lover of Mankind, and cannot delight in their Blood.

For the LORD your God proves you, to know whether you love the LORD your God
with all your heart, and with all your Soul.] That there might be an open and
public discovery made, whether they sincerely loved God or no, or were
steadfast in their Religion. So Maimonides in his More Nevochim P. III. Cap.
XXIV. God would make known to the Nations of the World the measure of your
Faith, in the Truth of his Law; and of the Approbation wherewith you apprehend
it, etc. For it had been a great weakness to suffer even a Miracle to shake
their Faith, after it had been confirmed by so many Miracles.

Ver. 4. Ye shall walk after the LORD your God.] Maimonides interprets it)
declared by himself, More Nevochim P. I. Cap. XXXVIII. Which is a plainer and
more genuine Interpretation than that of the Gamera of Sota, Cap. I. Sect. 52.
where R. Chama expounds it of imitating God, in clothing the Naked, visiting
the Sick, burying the Dead, etc. For Beneficence is the beginning, and the end
of the Divine Law. Which is a pious sense, but not here intended.

And fear him.] Worship him alone, VI. 2.

And keep his Commandments.] The greatest of which is this, XI. 13.

And obey his voice.] Which you heard from Mount Sinai, saying, Thou shall have
no other gods but me.

And ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.] Steadfastly adhere unto his
Service, and not be drawn from it by any persuasion.

And that Prophet, or dreamer of Dreams.] These two signify Persons who
pretended to different sorts of Revelations; by Visions, or by Dreams.

Shall be put to death.] This the Jews interpret to signify Strangulation:
unto which, upon good proof of the Fact, he was to be Sentenced by the great
Sanhedrim. For that was a received Maxim among them, That a lying Prophet was
to be judged no where but by the Council of LXX. See Seldom Lib. III. de
Synedriis, Cap. VI. N. I.

Because he has spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God, who brought
you out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the House of Bondage.]
Persuaded you to forsake your God and his Service; to whom you owe your
Liberty, and all your Possessions in the Land of Canaan.

To thrust thee out of the way which the LORD thy God commanded thee to walk
in.] These words express how zealous such Impostors were in their
Importunities; and how restless in their Endeavors to draw Men to Idolatry:
pressing them so earnestly, as if they would force them to it.

So shall thou put the Evil away from the midst of thee.] i. e. The danger of
Idolatry: by taking away the Life of him that would have seduced others unto it.

If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother.] Who lay in the same Womb with him.

Or thy Son, or thy Daughter.] Who were dearer than a Brother.

Or the Wife of thy bosom.] Who was still dearer; sleeping in the same Bed with
him, as the Jerusalem Targum expounds it.

Or thy Friend, which is as thine own Soul.] Whom thou love as thou do thy
Life. He puts a Friend in the chief place, (as the Son of Sirach also does,
XXXIII Ecclus. 19.) which their Wives, by the ill choice they made of them, had
not always in their Affection.

Here is no mention of Father or Mother, because a Child, as the Hebrews fancy,
was to have more Reverence for them, than to Accuse them of any Crime
whatsoever. As if a greater regard was to be had to them, than to God himself.
The true Reason is, because there was no need to name them: for if their Piety
to God was to overcome their Love to all those Relations beforementioned, it
could not be supposed that Respect to Parents was to come into competition with
it.

Entice thee secretly.] In the foregoing Verses he speaks of an open Seducer;
and here of a secret one. There of one that came with Authority; and here of
one of the ordinary People.

Saying, Let us go and serve other gods.] The Jews think this is meant of one
who invited others to Idolatry, but did not press them with Reasons, as in the
former Case. Which is not likely, for all Men pretend some Reason or other, for
such a great Alteration as that to a new Religion.

Which thou have not known, thou nor thy Fathers.] This aggravates the Crime;
to entice them to forsake God, who was known to have done such Wonders for
their Fathers, and was so good to them, and go to serve gods with whom they had
no Acquaintance.

Ver. 7. Namely, of the gods of the People which are round about you, nigh unto
thee, or far off from thee.] Wheresoever they were (for several Nations had
several

From one end of the Earth, even unto the other end of the Earth.] The Enticer
might possibly suggest the Universality of the Worship to which he invited him,
as an Argument to embrace it.

Thou shall not consent unto him.] As many words as there are in this Verse,
the Jews think there are so many Precepts. The first of which is this, Not to
be led by Affection and kindness to yield unto his Motion. So they interpret
these words, Thou shall not love him.

Nor hearken unto him.] I do not see how this differs from the former; but they
interpret it, That they ought to hate him, as well as his Motion. So Maimonides
in his Book of the Worship of the Planets, Cap. V. Sect. 6, 7.

Neither shall thine eye pity him.] This, they fancy, signifies, that if he
were in danger of death, they should not help him, but let him perish.

Neither shall thou spare.] When he was brought before the Judge, they were not
to intercede for him, nor say any thing in his favor; nor assist him to defend
himself.

Neither shall thou conceal him.] Dissemble any thing that might make against
him. And no doubt, God intended by all these words to signify, that he ought
to be looked upon as his greatest Enemy; upon whom therefore they were to have
no Mercy, but to prosecute him unto death, as guilty of the highest Treason
against the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 9. But thou shall surely kill him.] Not privately, as he enticed others;
but by a Legal Process against him in a Court of Judgment. And that not Seldom
observes, Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. VI. The only difficulty was, how to prove
him Guilty, who enticed another secretly, (as the Text says) and not before
Witnesses. To which the Jews answer, That he who was enticed, was to dispose
some Persons as secretly near to the place of their next meeting, who might
hear all he said, and testify it in Court.

Thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death.] He was to be stoned to
Death; and the Accuser was to throw the first Stone at him, together with the
Witnesses, XVII. 7. For it would have weakened the Credit of his Accusation, if
he had not been the foremost in the Execution. See XVII. 7.

And afterward the hand of all the People.] Who were to assist in the
Execution of this Sentence.

The first words of this Verse, which we translate Thou shall surely kill him,
the Vulgar Latin translates, Thou shall forthwith kill him. And so the Jews
understand the Hebrew Phrase, Killing thou shall kill him; i. e. immediately
have him before the Court of Judgment. As the LXX. understood it, (...),
informing thou shall inform against him: that is, without delay. And
accordingly the Jews add, that after he was Condemned, he was immediately also
put to death. Whereas in other Crimes the Execution was respited, after the
Sentence was pronounced, for a Day and a Night, that the Man might have time to
clear his Innocence, if he were able, by any new Proofs. Such Severity was but
needful among a People prone to Idolatry, and encompassed on all sides with
idolatrous Nations.

And thou shall stone him with stones that he die.] But if upon Admonition he
desisted from his Enticement, and repented of what he had said to his
Neighbor, and resolved himself not to worship other gods; he was not bound to
inform against him.

Because he has sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc.] See v. 5. The very attempt of this
was Criminal, though he did not prevail in his Seducement.

And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness
as this among you.] The end of this Severity was to preserve the Body of the
People from the Contagion of Idolatry. Nothing being more apt to deter Men from
Crimes, than such exemplary Punishments of them. So Callimachus in his Hymn to
Ceres, Verse. 23. makes this the design of the Punishment she inflicted on
Erysichthon, -- (...) that others might shun the like Transgression.

And if thou shall hear say in one of thy Cities, which the LORD thy God has
given thee to dwell in, saying.] If the Infection was spread into a City, or a
considerable part of it, there was still more danger, and greater Severity was
to be used; to prevent the whole Country about it from being drawn away from
their Allegiance to the Divine Majesty. And therefore upon such an Information,
as follows in the next Verse (which is here meant by thou shall hear say) given
to the great Sanhedrim, they were to do as is directed v. 14.

Ver. 13. Certain Men, the Children of Belial.] So Judges 22. 1 Samuel I. 16. X.
27. XXV. 17, 25.) signifying lawless Persons, who had no regard either to God
or Men.

Are gone out from among you.] Left the Worship of God at the Tabernacle. For
it does not signify their forsaking the City (in which they continued to
seduce Men from their Religion) but forsaking their Communion in Divine
Service. By which many have well observed, that place in St. John may be
interpreted, 1 Epist. St. John II. 19.

And have withdrawn the Inhabitants of their City.] The Hebrew word which here
we translate withdraw, is twice before ( v. 5, 10.) translated thrust away:
signifying only earnest endeavors to seduce Men from their Religion. But here
it seems to signify also the Effect of those Endeavors, whereby they had
prevailed with Men to forsake the God of Israel, or to worship other gods with
him.

Saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known.] Strange
gods, as they are often called in Scripture, which the Nations round about them
worshipped ( v. 7.) but were always abhorred by true Israelites.

Ver. 14. Then shall thou enquire, and make search, The great Sanhedrim, who
only could take Cognizance of this Crime, were, upon this Information, to send
some, on whose fidelity they could rely, to examine the truth of the Report,
which was spread abroad, concerning the defection of a City to the worship of
other gods. Who were to use their utmost care and diligence in this
inquisition, and by all possible means endeavor to find, whether or no the
Information was true. For it was a matter of great concernment, that neither
the Innocent should suffer, nor Apostates go unpunished. But the Punishment
being so dreadful, there was the greater exactness used to be certain of the
Crime; and there were likewise a great many temperaments (as Mr. Seldom calls
them) found by the Jewish Lawyers (partly from the nicest Interpretation of
every Syllable in these two Verses, and partly from the pretended Tradition of
their Elders) whereby they mitigated the sharpness of this Law. For they would
not proceed upon it to destroy a City, though they found them Idolaters, unless
the Seducers were two, or more; and those also Men, not Women: because the Law
here speaks in the Plural Number, of certain Men, Children of Belial. As if
their forsaking God was not a Crime, whether they were persuaded to it, or no,
by others. They say also, it was not to be a mere Town or Village, but a City;
because the words here are, In one of thy Cities: in which there were more than
an hundred Houses. If there were fewer, it was no City, in their account, and
so escaped. They who seduced a City also, were to be of the same City; because
it is said here, These Men of Belial are gone out from among you. All which are
mere quirks, which have no solid Reason in them. They are all mentioned
together in the Title Sanhedrim, set forth by J. Coch. Cap. XI. Sect. 4. and by
Maimonides more largely in his Avoda zara, and our Seldom Lib. III. de Synedi.
Cap. V. N. 2.

But there are other temperaments of this Law, which have better Foundation in
Reason. As first, that a City was not to be destroyed, unless the major part of
the Inhabitants were fallen off to serve other gods. And secondly, that the Law
speaks only of lesser Cities, not of those which were so large that the
greatest part of a Tribe lived in it; for God would not have a whole Tribe cut
off by the Senate. Thirdly, They might not destroy any of the six Cities of
Refuge, because they were none of theirs, but God's: and the words of the Law
are, in one of thy Cities, which the LORD has given thee to dwell in; whereas
these were given for a further purpose. And fourthly some add, not a frontier
Town; because it is said, in the midst of thee, (so the words are in the
Hebrew, which we translate among you) to which they subjoyn a better Reason,
because the whole Country might have been exposed to be overrun with the
Gentiles. And lastly, they except Jerusalem from this Law, because it was God's
Seat: and (as Maimonides will have it) it was not distributed to any particular
Tribe. Which, how it is to be understood, see Seldom in the place abovenamed,
Sect. III, IV. where he touches upon all these. But if Jerusalem was to be
excepted from the Judgment of Men, God took care to have this Sentence executed
upon it by his own judgment; for he sent Nebuchadnezzar against it, whose
Soldiers burnt with fire, both the House of the LORD, and the House of the
King, and all the Houses of Jerusalem, LII Jerem. 13.

And behold, if it be truth, and the thing be certain, that such abomination is
wrought among you.] If the Inquisitors found, upon due Examinations, that there
was a plain and evident Proof of their Guilt, they were to make their Report to
the great Sanhedrim; who being satisfied that either the whole City, or the
greater part of them were fallen to Idolatry, sent to them two Men of
extraordinary Wisdom (who were Candidates for the Senatorial Dignity) to
admonish them, and by Arguments and Persuasions, to endeavor to reduce them to
the Worship of the LORD God of Israel. And if they prevailed, they were
pardoned, and no further Proceedings against them: but if they continued
obstinate, then the Sanhedrim commanded the People of Israel to raise an Army,
and besiege the place, and enter it by force, if they could not otherways. And
when the City was taken, several Courts were appointed to try and condemn all
that were guilty. Thus Maimonides, in the forenamed Treatise, reports the
method of proceeding, out of their ancient Authors. See Seldom Sect. VI.

Thou shall surely smite the Inhabitants of that City with the edge of the
Sword.] The same Author there says, that in the hearing of their Cause, every
one who was found guilty of Idolatry, after admonition, by two Witnesses, was
set aside: And if they proved to be the lesser part of the City, they were
stoned, (according to the Law against single Apostates) the rest being freed
from Punishment: but if they were the greater part of it, they were sent to the
great Sanhedrim, who adjudged them to be cut off by the Sword, together with
their Wives and Children. And thus the whole City was to be punished, if there
was an Universal defection.

Destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the Cattle thereof with
the edge of the Sword.] In the Hebrew the word is thou shall make it a Cherem,
or an accursed thing. And so the LXX. (...), where the Vulgar translate it as
we do, thou shall utterly destroy it: which is consonant to the notion of the
Hebrew word. See Seldom L. I. de Synedr. Cap. VII. p. 131. So that if any
righteous Man had any thing therein at that time, it was to be destroyed, as
the very words are in the Title Sanhedrim, Cap. XI. Sect. 5. But it is to be
supposed, that all who feared God would remove their Effects, together with
themselves, from so wicked a place, before Sentence was pronounced against
them. On the contrary, they say, the Goods of the Idolaters, wheresoever they
were found, whether within the City, or without, were to be burnt.

Ver. 16. And thou shall gather all the spoil of it, into Into the
Marketplace, as the Jews interpret it. Or if it had none, they were to make a
spacious place, into which all the Spoil and the Housholdstuff was to be
brought, and fire set to it to consume it, as an Anathema, or cursed thing.
What temperaments, as they called them, there were to mitigate the Severity of
this Sentence, see Mr. Seldom in the place forenamed, Sect. VII.

And shall burn with fire the City, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for
the LORD thy God.] For the Vindication of God's Honor, and preserving Men in
their Allegiance to him. R. Simeon in the Title Sanhedrim, interprets it in
this manner, Sect. VI. Thus says the LORD, if you do justice upon a City full
of Idolatry, I will account it, as if you had offered an whole Burnt-offering
unto me.

And it shall be an heap for ever, it shall not be built again.] The Hebrew
Doctors do not entirely agree in the Interpretation of these words. For some of
them say (in that place of the Sanhedrim now named) that they were not so much
as to make a Garden or Orchard in that place. Others of them say, though it
might not be restored into the form of a City, yet they might employ the Ground
in Plantations of Trees. But there are those who interpret the words so
rigidly, that they think it was not lawful to erect any Building there, not so
much as a Dove-house, but it was to lie waste. See Seldom Sect. VIII. If any
Man did attempt to build such a City, he was to be beaten, as the same great
Man observes, Lib. I. de Synedriis, Cap. XIII. p. 558.

And there shall cleave nothing of the cursed thing to thine hand.] They were
not to take the smallest part of the Spoil to their own use. For as long as the
Wicked are in the World (say the Jews in the forenamed Title Sanhedrim) the
fierce Anger of God will remain in the World; but when they are removed, the
Wrath of God also will cease. Now the wickedness of purloyning any thing that
was a Cherem, as the Hebrews call it, or an accursed thing, appears in the
story of Achan, who brought all Israel into danger by it, as we read in the
Seventh of Joshua. And Saul is an eminent Example of it also; for he lost his
Kingdom for this Sin, 1 Samuel XV. 3, 9, 19, 26, etc.

That the LORD may turn from the fierceness of his anger.] This explains, in
part, what he means in the former Verse, when he bids them burn the City and
the Spoil, for the LORD their God; i. e. To pacify the Divine Majesty, who was
highly incensed by such a wickedness. The punishment of which was, indeed, very
terrible, but very necessary; because the Crime was of so high a nature, that
it struck at the very Foundation of their Religion and Government.

And show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee.] Chapter XIV.
God promises to deal the better with them, for executing this Judgment upon
such dangerous Offenders.

And multiply thee, as he has sworn unto thy Fathers.] They were not to fear
any want of People, by cutting off such a Multitude; for God promises to
increase them by this loss.

Ver. 18. When thou shall hearken to the voice of the etc.] It was not
sufficient that they kept themselves from Idolatry, unless they also executed
his Vengeance upon Idolaters. For the inflicting the Punishment before-named,
was as right in his eyes, as the observance of any other of his Precepts.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. YE are the Children of the LORD your So the LORD had owned them to
be, when he sent Moses unto Pharaoh, to command him to dismiss Israel; telling
him he was his Son, even his Firstborn, IV Exodus 22, 23. This was a good
Reason therefore why they should own no other God but him; and consequently
follow none of the Customs of Idolatrous People, but be wholly governed by his
Laws.

Ye shall not cut your selves.] This might seem to forbid the making any
Incisions in their Body, as the Heathen did (at least in future times) who
marked themselves thereby to belong to such and such gods, (for the Israelites
had received the Mark of God in their Flesh, by Circumcision; which obliged
them to receive no other) if the following words did not plainly determine this
to their cutting themselves for the dead; which has been sufficiently
explained in XIX Levit. 28. yet it is fit to note that the Jerusalem Targum
expounds this of Incisions here and there for Idolatry. And it may be further
observed, that the Heathen were wont to cut themselves in pangs of Devotion,
(as appears by the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings XVIII. 28.) as well as when they
were full of Sorrow and Grief for the dead, XVI Jerem. 6. and in all Public
Calamities, XLI Jerem. 5. XLVII. 5. All which arose from an opinion they had,
that the more they afflicted themselves, the less they should be afflicted by
God.

Nor any baldness between your eyes for the dead.] Some of the Heathen, says
Theodoret (Quoest. XIII. upon this Book) cut off all their Hair, and offered it
to the Dead; others shaved their Beards; and others their Eyebrows and
Eyelids; or (which some think is the meaning of between their eyes) the Hair
in the forepart of their Head, or near their Temples, as R. Solomon interprets
it. Which seems to be the meaning of the Jerusalem Targum, which translates
it, Ye shall not make any baldness in the house of your Countenance. And
whether it were done with a Rasor, or they used any Art, by Plasters or
Ointments, to make the Hair fall off, it was the same Crime, as Maimonides
says, that is a piece of Idolatry. For this was practiced, not merely to make
themselves look rufully, but there was some respect to their gods in it; which
is the reason it is here prohibited. Certain it is, that in after times the
Gentiles pulled off their Hair, or cut it off, and laid it upon the Face, or
the Breast of the Dead, or in their Sepulchers, to pacify the Infernal gods.
We find Instances of it in Homer. And likewise they made Incisions in their
Flesh, and spilt their Blood at Funerals, with the same intention, to appease
the gods below, and make them kind to the dead. See our Learned Dr. Spencer,
Lib. II. Cap. XII. Sect. 2, 3.

All which shows that Moses still pursues the Argument, which he begun at the
Sixth Chapter, and has continued ever since, to press upon them the strict
observance of the first Commandment. Insomuch that he would not have them use
any of the Rites, which were used at their Funerals, by those that worshipped
other gods.

Ver. 2. For thou art an holy People unto the LORD The very same words, in a
manner, we had before, VII. 6. as a Reason why they should destroy the Images
of the Heathen, etc. Which shows he is still speaking of the Idolatrous Customs
which they should eschew; because they were separated to God, as a peculiar
People, by Laws different from all other Nations. The Author of Sepher Cosri
speaks not amiss, That the People of Israel were called God's Segullah, because
they were elected by him to enjoy special Privileges above other People; and
brought by him for that end out of the Land of Egypt in a wonderful manner; and
then had his Glory dwelling among them. From whence it is, that he does not say
in the Preface to the Ten Commandments, I am the LORD of Heaven and Earth, or,
thy Creator, and therefore thou shall have no other gods but me; but I am the
LORD thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc. To show that this
Law was given peculiarly to them; and that they were tied to it, by virtue of
their Deliverance out of Egypt, and God's placing his Glory among them.
Whereas, if they had been bound to it by virtue of their Creation, it would
have belonged to other Nations as well as to them. Pars I. Sect. 27.

Thou shall not eat any abominable thing.] All the Meats forbidden by God to be
eaten, are called abominable; not merely because his Prohibition made them so;
but because the Gentile Superstition had consecrated most of them to their
gods. See upon XI Levit. 2. However, after this Law was given, the Jews were to
look upon them as abominable; by which means they were kept from having such
free Conversation, as otherwise they would have had, with their Idolatrous
Neighbors. So that this Law also was intended to preserve them in the true
Religion.

These are the Beasts which ye shall eat.] The original of the difference of
Meats, see in the Learned J. Wagenseil in his Tela Ignea, p. 553, etc. where he
shows it was not to continue for ever. And it is a rational account of this
which I just now gave, That hereby they were preserved from common Conversation
with other Nations, and consequently from their Idolatries. But it is a mere
fancy, and indeed a proud Imagination which some of the Jews have (particularly
the Author of Schebet Judah) that, as Men are more excellent than Beasts,
because they have better Food; so Jews are more excellent than all other Men,
because they do not feed upon all sorts of Animals, but only of some certain
kinds: and that after much preparation, by rejecting the Blood and the Fat,
etc. whereby they fancy the Flesh is so much altered, that it is not so much
flesh, as some other food.

The Ox, the Sheep, and the Goat.] These were the only Beasts that were offered
in Sacrifice to God; and therefore are the first that are mentioned, as clean
for their use.

Ver. 5. The Heart and the Roe-buck.] These, and Canaan, XII. 15, 22.

And the Fallow-deer.] It is not very material what the word Jachmur signifies,
because we are not now concerned in this Law about difference of Meats;
therefore we may follow our Translation, as well as any other: and the famous
Bochartus has made it probable, that it signifies either a kind of Deer, or of
Goat, P. I. Hierozoic. Lib. III. Cap. XXII.

And the wild Goat.] So the Hebrew word Akko signifies, (which is no where else
to be found) the same Author proves in the same Book, Cap. XIX.

And the Pygarg.] This is also a kind of Do or Goat, (as he shows Cap. XX.)
which the Hebrews call Dison. We find mention of Pygargus in Juvenal's Eleventh
Satyr; where the old Scholiast gives this account of it, that it is a kind of
Deer, quoe retriores parts albas habet, whose hinder parts are white. From
whence it had its Name among the Greeks, who call the Buttocks (...).

And the wild Ox.] So we translate the Hebrew word Theo, or Tho. But herein
Bochartus dissents; because there were no such Creatures in Judaea (as he
observes there Cap. XXVI.) which are bred in colder Countries. And therefore he
reckons this also among the Deer, or Goats, Cap. XXVIII.

And the Chamois.] The Hebrew word Zemer he also thinks signifies, as the
former, a kind of Goat or Heart; of which there were great variety in those
Countries. And this he thinks of all other was maxim (...), remarkable for
jumping; which is the signification of the word Zemara in the Arabic Language.
See Cap. XXI.

And every Beast that parts the hoof, and cleaves the cleft into two Claws,
and cheweth the Cud, that shall ye eat.] He forbears to reckon up any more
Particulars; and only sets down the general Marks whereby they might be known;
which he had delivered in XI Levit. 3. See there.

Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat, of those that chew the cud, or of them
that divide the cloven hoof, etc.] These Exceptions from the general Rule have
been explained, XI Levit. 4, 5, 6.

And the Swine, because it divides the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it is
unclean to you.] See upon XI Levit. 7.

Ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcass.] See XI Levit.
8.

These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters, all that have fins and
scales shall ye eat.] See XI Lev. 9.

And whatsoever has not fins and scales, etc.] See XI Levit. 10, 11, 12.

Of all clean Birds ye shall eat.] He does not name any (as he did of Beasts)
but by enumerating those of which they might not eat, all the rest were left
free to be used for Food.

But these are they of which ye shall not eat, the Eagle, the Ossifrage, and
the Ospray.] All these are mentioned just as they are here in XI Levit. 13.

And the Glead, and the Kite, and the Vulture after his kind.] There are only
two of these mentioned in XI Levit. 14. the last of them, Hadajah, being there
omitted: for it is so near to Haajah, which goes before, that the Transcriber
(as Bochart imagines) might there leave it out. But rather, Moses now adds this
sort of Bird, which was not so like in Nature, as in Name; otherwise he would
not have distinctly forbidden it.

Ver. 14. And every Raven after his kind.] The same Levit. 15.

Ver. 15. And the Owl, and the Night-hawk, and the etc.] All the Birds
mentioned in this and the three next Verses, 16, 17, 18. are the very same
which are forbidden in XI Levit. 16, 17, 18, 19. And therefore I refer the
Reader to what I have noted there; only adding, that from hence it appears how
false their Opinion is, who think the Hebrew word Tzippor is a general Name
only for small Birds (such as Sparrows) for it is evident from this place, that
it is a Name for all Birds whatsoever; even the greatest, such as are here
mentioned.

Ver. 19. And every creeping thing that flies, is unclean See XI Lev. 20.

Ver. 20. But of all clean fowls ye may eat.] This is v. 11. for there he
speaks of Birds, but here of other winged Creatures, which are not Birds, but
Insects, as we call them. And in XI Levit. he describes the flying creeping
things which they might eat; and particularly mentions several sorts of them,
v. 22.

Ver. 21. Ye shall not eat of any thing that dies of it Unto this Discourse
about Food, it was very proper to add a Caution (which he had given before, XI
Levit. 39, 40.) that though they might kill and eat any clean Creature, yet if
it died of it self, it was unlawful to eat it, because the Blood was in it.

Some Verses ascribed to Phocylides contain this sense so fully, that one would
think he had read Moses. See Jos. Scaliger in Eusebium, p. 88.

Thou shall give it unto the Stranger that is within thy Gates.] The Proselytes
of the Gates (as they called them) who had not embraced their Religion, but
were not Idolaters, and therefore suffered to dwell among them, might eat such
Meat, having no obligation upon them to observe these Laws; for they were not
Circumcised.

Or thou may sell it unto an Alien.] To a mere Gentile, who might happen
then to be in their Country. For there were three sorts of People called by the
name of Strangers, being not of the Jewish Nation. First, Such as had received
Circumcision, and consequently embraced the Jewish Religion, who were called
Gere-tzedek strangers, or Proselytes of Justice. Others were not Circumcised,
but yet worshipped the God of Israel, who were called Strangers of the Gate, or
Gere-toshab, Strangers dwelling among them; because they were to abide in their
Country constantly. But there were a third sort, called Nocherim, which we here
translate Aliens, who were mere Gentiles, and not suffered to have an
habitation among them; but only to come and go, in their Traffic with them.

For thou art an holy People unto the LORD thy God.] This Reason was given in
the beginning of this Discourse, v. 2. and so it is in Leviticus, in the
Conclusion of it. See XI. 44, 45.

Thou shall not sees a Kid in its Mothers milk.] Now he plainly returns to
caution them against Idolatrous Customs. For this was practiced among the
Heathens in the end of Harvest, when they sprinkled their Fields and their
Gardens with this Broth, to make them fruitful. It is mentioned twice before.
See XXIII Exodus 19. and XXXIV. 26.

Ver. 22. Thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy This does not seem to
reach unto Herbs, as the Pharisees interpreted it: of which see Grotius on
XXIII Matthew. 4. But though Causabon and Drusius, and other great Men are of
this Opinion; yet the contrary is maintained by Persons of no small note;
because our Savior, when he determines this Case, says, These things ye ought
to have done, and not left the other undone.

As for the Tithe here mentioned, I have shown elsewhere that it was the manner
of the Eastern Princes, to receive the Tenth of the Fruits of their Country,
for the Maintenance of their Ministers and Officers; as we read 1 Samuel VIII.
15. In like manner God, the great King of all the Earth, and the peculiar
Sovereign of this Country, required a Tenth of all their Increase, for the
Maintenance of his Priests and Levites in his Service. After which he ordered
also a further Tithe to be taken out of the Nine Parts remaining (which was
called the Second Tithe) to be spent in Feasts at his Tabernacle. And this is
with great reason, thought to be particularly enjoined in these words; for of
such Tithes he speaks in the next Verse. It might seem indeed a little hard, to
give another Tenth Part, after they had paid one already, which they might be
tempted not to perform exactly; and therefore he says, Thou shall truly, that
is, faithfully, without any deceit or fraud, Tithe all the Increase of thy
Seed. And when this was done, he required also, once in three years, a third
Tithe, for the use of the Poor, (See v. 28.) that they might also be
entertained at his Cost, though not at that time at his House. For it was
suitable to his Royal Greatness, that all his Subjects should be feasted by his
order at his Palace; and that the poorest of them should not be neglected, but
some time or other partake of his Bounty; as they did at those Feasts I
mentioned, where their Menservants and Maidservants were to be entertained,
as well as the Levites, XII. 12, 18.

And thou shall eat before the LORD thy God in the place which he shall choose
to place his Name there.] See XII. 5, 6.

The Tithe of thy Corn, and of thy Wine, and of thine Oil.] This cannot be
meant of the Tithe paid to the Levites; of which the People were not to
partake: but only the Priests, to whom the Levites were to give a Tithe.
Therefore it must be understood of the second Tithe, separated (after the other
was paid) for this holy use. The design of which was, that they might be
secured in his Religion, by eating and drinking in his Presence; and thereby
professing that they belonged to him, and were his thankful Servants.

The observation of R. Bechai upon these words [thy Corn, thy Wine, and thine
Oil] is something curious, but it has a great deal of Truth in it. If thou pay
the Tithe, says he, then it is thy Corn; if thou do not, it is my Corn, and
not thine (in like manner, if they paid the Tithe of Wine and Oil) for it is
said in II Hosea 9. Therefore I will return and take away my Corn in the time
thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof. For they forfeited the whole, who
did not pay the Tenth, which was the Rent God reserved to himself. And the same
R. Bechai represents this as a very merciful Law. For it is the fashion of the
World, says he, if a Man have Ground of his own, to let it out to Tenants at
what rate he pleases, for an half, or third part to be paid to him. But it is
not so with the Almighty, whose the Earth is, and who raises Clouds, and Waters
it with Rain, and sends down drops of Dew, and makes fat the Fruits of the
Earth; and yet requires but one part of Ten, for his own uses. This made it
highly reasonable that Moses should admonish the Israelites so often,
diligently to pay their Tithe.

And the firstlings of thy herds, and of thy flocks.] See concerning these XII.
6.

That thou may learn to fear the LORD thy God always.] This justifies what I
said, that the design of this was to preserve them steadfast in their Religion,
by having Communion with him, in so solemn a manner every year: For that is
meant by fearing the LORD always; continuing in the Worship and Service of him
alone. See VI. 1.

Ver. 24. And if the way be too long for thee, so that etc.] If they lived at
so great a distance from the Sanctuary, or the way was so bad, that it would be
very troublesome and chargeable to carry those Tithes in kind, here they have a
liberty granted them to make Money of them; and with that to buy Provision for
the Feast at the Sanctuary, when they came thither; as it follows in the next
Verse. All things likewise, which would not keep so long as till they could go
to the House of God, they were to turn into Money: but things that were not
perishable, they were to carry in kind, if they did not dwell too far off from
it.

Ver. 25. Then shall thou turn it into Money.] Adding a fifth part to it, as
the Law is XXVII Levit. 31.

And bind up the money in thine hand, and shall go unto Put it into a Bag by it
self, and not mix it with other Money; but keep it bound up till the next
Feast; and then carry it in their hand, to the place where God's House was
settled.

God would not have them excused from going to that place, with these things in
kind, upon every slight reason: and therefore made it something chargeable to
exchange them into Money, by requiring a fifth part to be added. And besides,
the Elders made a Constitution, That this liberty should be allowed to none,
but those who lived above a days Journey from Jerusalem, which at last was the
fixed place of God's Worship. And that it might be known certainly what was a
days Journey, the places at that distance, were fixed from every Quarter, viz.
Lydda on the West; the River Jordan on the East; Aarabatta on the North; and
Elath on the South; as J. Wagenseil has observed in his Confutation of that
blasphemous Book called Toldos Jeschu, page 22.

And thou shall bestow that Money for whatsoever thy Soul lusts after, for
Oxen, or for Sheep, etc.] Purchase such Provision as they most delighted in, of
all Meats that God's Law allowed.

And thou shall eat there before the LORD thy God.] Make an holy Entertainment
at the House of God.

And thou shall rejoice, thou and thine Household.] Menservants and
Maidservants, as well as Sons and Daughters, (XII. 18.) together with the
Levites, Widows, Orphans, and Strangers.

Ver. 27. And the Levite that is within thy Gates, thou shall not forsake him.]
They were always to be invited to these Feasts. See XII. 19.

For he has no part nor inheritance with thee.] They Maimonides observes in
his More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XXXIX. See XII. 19.

Ver. 28. At the end of three year, thou shall bring forth The Opinion of the
Hebrew Doctors is, that this was not a distinct Tithe from that which they call
the second Tithe, paid every year, but the very same; which every third year
was not to be carried to the Sanctuary, but to be employed to the Comfort of
the Poor, in their own Cities and Houses. For thus they explain it, That in the
third year after the Year of Release, and in the sixth year, the Tithe that was
wont to be carried to the place where the Sanctuary was, and there spent in
Feasts before God, was to be spent upon the Poor in every Town, where they that
paid the Tithe lived: But every first, second, fourth, and fifth year from the
Year of Release, it was spent in holy Entertainments at the House of God. In
the Year of Release it self (which was every seventh year) no Tithes at all
were paid of any kind, because all lay common. So that every year the owner of
the Ground set out a second Tithe; but he was not bound to carry it every year
to Jerusalem: for in the compass of seven years, four of those years only were
appointed for their journey thither, and two they staid at home. See Seldom of
Tithes, and Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. p. 693. But this is contradicted by
other great Men; particularly by Bishop Mountagu, who asserts these to be two
distinct Tithes. See p. 332, etc. especially p. 346. and those that follow. And
Josephus seems plainly to be of his mind, p. 349. Old Tobit calls it (...), the
third Tithe, I. 8.

The Tithe of thine increase the same year.] i. e. Of the third year.

And shall lay it up within thy Gates.] It was not to be carried to the place
where God's House was; but to be spent at home.

And the Levite, because he has no part nor inheritance with thee.] See v. 37.

And the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the Widow, which are within thy
Gates, shall come, and shall eat, and be satisfied.] This Tithe was not spent
in Joy and Gladness, as the second Tithe was, ( v. 26.) when they went to God's
dwelling place; but merely in the Relief and Comfort of the poorer sort of
People, who otherwise might have been forced to beg, or to serve Strangers, and
thereby be in danger of being perverted from their Religion.

That the LORD thy God may bless thee, in all the work of thine hand which thou
do.] This Tithe, the Jews say, was called the Consummation of Tithes;
because herein the love of their Neighbors was most eminently apparent. For it
is likely they themselves had no share in this, as they had at the Feasts upon
the second Tithe, but is wholly spent upon the Persons here named. Whose hearts
could not but be moved to pray to God for his Blessing upon them in all their
Labors, which he here promises to bestow.

CHAP. XV. Chapter XV.

Verse 1. AT the end of every seventh year.] It v. 9. that this Phrase
signifies as much as every seventh year.

Thou shall make a release.] Perfectly free their Brethren from all their Debts
which they owed to their Creditors. This year was famous not only for this, but
for letting Servants go free (as some think) XXI Exodus 2. and for letting their
Ground rest, XXV Levit. 34. and for reading this Law publicly to all the
People, XXXI Deuteronomy. 10.

Ver. 2. And this is the manner of the release.] It is

Every Creditor that lends ought unto his Neighbor, shall release it.] It
was an entire acquittance, not of Debts contracted by Sale of Lands or Goods,
to those who were able to pay; but of Money lent to a Neighbor or Friend
merely to relieve his Poverty; not to carry on Trade, or to make a Purchase.
For nothing could have been more absurd, than to have extinguished such Debts,
whereby the borrower was enriched.

He shall not exact it of his Neighbor, or of his Brother.] Here the word
Brother is added to explain what is meant by a Neighbor, viz. an Israelite, or
a Proselyte entirely of their Religion, who had all the Privileges of an
Israelite. Some think that by not exacting Money lent to such a Man, is meant
no more but only forbearing to demand it in this year, because there was no
sowing or reaping in it: or if he did, that he should not have power to recover
it by Law this year, though afterward he might. But the plain meaning seems to
be, that he should be perfectly free from his Debt, as a Servant, after six
years, was from his Service: Though if afterward he grew rich, in good
Conscience he was bound to pay it.

Because it is the LORD's release.] In the Hebrew the words Schemitta laihova
signify that this year was a Release to the LORD, or, for the LORD. In honor,
that is, of him, who made this a year of great Charity: In obedience to whom
they were bound to be very kind to their poor Brethren. But the Jews fancy they
were not bound to be so kind as to make this Release, till the very last day of
the year. So that if a Man had borrowed Money in the beginning of it, he was
not acquitted till the year expired.

Of a forreigner thou may exact it again.] Of an Alien as we translate the
word Nocri, in the foregoing Chapter, v. 21. That is, of one who was neither an
Israelite nor proselyted to their Religion, but a mere Gentile. The only
question is, whether they were not to remit the Debts of a Proselyte of the
Gate, who, I think, is no where called their Brother in the Law; and therefore
they were not obliged to discharge them from what they owed.

But that which is thine with thy Brother, thine hand shall not touch.] This
seems to restrain it wholly to those who were Jews, or had all the Privileges
of Jews.

Save when there shall be no poor among you.] Whether we follow this
Translation, or that in the Margin of our Bibles, it appears that they were
obliged to acquit only their poor Brethren: Of whom they were not to exact
their Debts, least they should be tempted to flee to the Gentiles, and forsake
their Religion. So this was a Provision still against Idolatry. Or, if we
understand it as it is in the Margin, to the end that there be no poor among
you, the sense is the same: that they were, by this Charity, to keep Men from
extreme Necessity, which might force them to go a begging, or to seek for
Relief in strange Countries.

For the LORD shall greatly bless thee in the Land which the LORD thy God
gives thee for an inheritance to possess it.] He would not have them think
that they might become poor themselves by this means; for he assures them God
would prevent that, by sending his extraordinary Blessing upon them. Cardinal
Cajetan, and some others, understand this Verse as if it were all of it a
Promise, and contained no Precept in it, viz. That God would take care they
should not be burdened by this Law, for he would so bless them, that they
should have no Poor among them: and then they were not obliged to acquit those
of their Debts, who were able to pay them.

Ver. 5. Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice Particularly this, of
releasing their poor Neighbors from their Debts; which would entitle them to
the Blessing he promises again in the next Verse.

Ver. 6. For the LORD God blesses thee, as he promised God had many ways
blessed them already, and he promises to reward their Obedience with greater
Blessings.

And thou shall lend unto many Nations, but thou shall not borrow.] Grow so
very rich, that other Nations should come to borrow of them; but they be
beholden to none.

And thou shall reign over many Nations, etc.] I suppose he means no more than
Solomon does, when he says, The borrower is servant to the lender, XXII Prove.
7. But it may extend to their dominion over many Nations, whom they conquered,
till they enlarged their Bounds as far as Euphrates.

If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren, in any of thy gates,
in the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy
heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother.] As they might be inclined to
do, after the passing of this Law; thinking with themselves, that what they
lent to such a Man, they should never have again, but must lose it if he were
not able to repay it before the Year of Release. This seems to be the meaning
of this Verse, which the Jews interpret not of lending, but of giving Alms. It
is not much material which way we take it. For he that lent to a poor Man, was
willing to give what he lent, if he could not pay him before the Year of
Release, after which he could not demand it.

Thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shall thou shut thine hand from thy
poor brother.] Covetousness proceeds from want of Pity, Tenderness, and
Compassion toward others in their Miseries; unto which Nature it self inclines
us, especially toward Members of the same Society. And the Jews had several
particular Obligations to be tenderhearted, as they were all Children of God
after a peculiar manner, who had been wonderful kind and merciful to them, XIV.
2.

But thou shall open thine hand wide to him.] Bountifully supply him with what
he wants.

And shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanted.]
The Jews understood this not merely of affording him Food sufficient to
satisfy his hunger, and Clothes to cover his nakedness, and keep him warm, but
furnishing him with Houshold-goods (if he had been forced to sell all he had)
that he might live comfortably. Yea, they proceed so far, as to determine, that
the Neighborhood should join together, and make a Purse for him, to put him in
as good a Condition, as he was before he fell into this want. They determine
also the quantity that every Man should give: A very liberal Person the fifth
part of what he had, if need required; a Man of moderate Bounty, a tenth part.
If any Man gave less, when the Case required more, he was accounted a Niggard,
or, as they phrase it, a Man of an evil eye. But notwithstanding all these
Precepts, and their Interpretations, the Jews so little minded their Poor, that
their Governors were at last forced (as we now alas! do) to lay a Rate upon the
Rich for the Maintenance of the Poor, which they enabled their Officers to
exact. See Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. VI. and Maimonides de
Donis Pauperum, set forth by a very learned Friend of mine, Dr. Prideaux, Cap.
VII. who argues from this place, that if a poor Man wanted a Wife, they were
bound to provide him one, etc.

Ver. 9. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked If such a Thought
came into their Mind, that they should lose what they lent, because the seventh
year approached, they were bound to stifle it immediately, and not suffer it to
lodge there.

And thine eye be evil against thy poor brother.] This move thee to be unkind
and unmerciful to him. So a Man of an evil eye signifies in XXIII Prove. 6. one
that grudges what another eats at his Table.

And thou give him naught.] Lending was in this case giving; when a Man was
very poor, and the Year of Release so near, that he could have no prospect of
his being able to repay him.

And he cry unto the LORD against thee.] Make his doleful Complaint unto God,
finding no Relief from Men.

And it be sin unto thee.] God charge it upon thee, as an offense against his
Majesty; yea, a great offense. For so the word sin sometimes signifies, XV John
24. IV James 17.

Thou shall surely give him.] Not fail to relieve his Wants.

And thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him.] They were not
only to relieve him, but to do it cheerfully.

Because that for this thing the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thy
Works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto.] There is no difference
between, all their work, and all that they put their hand unto, (for all Works
are performed by the hand) unless one refer to what they did within doors; and
the other to their Labors in the Field.

For the poor shall never cease out of thy Land.] There would always be some or
other among them, who stood in need of the forenamed charitable Relief, by
which they might be preserved from extreme Poverty; which God intended to
prevent, as is plain from v. 4. See Grotius upon XXVI S. Matthew. 11. The
Jerusalem Targum understand this as if there should have been no Poor amongst
them, if they had been obedient to God's Precepts.

Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall open thine hand wide.] If any one
refused to give, or gave less than became him, Maimonides says in the
forenamed place, the Sanhedrim compelled him to it, and whipped him with the
stripes of rebellion, or contumacy ( i. e. very sorely) till he gave as much as
they judged he ought to do.

To thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy in thy Land.] Here are evidently
three different sorts of Persons mentioned as Objects of their Charity, which
may be looked upon as directing the excellent order of it. For first, they were
to relieve those that were nearest to them in Blood, called here their
Brethren. Then secondly, such as were in great Misery. And thirdly, such as
were low in the World, and required some help, but not so much as the former
sort. Some indeed will not admit such a difference between the words poor and
needy; but think the last signifies such whose Condition was Calamitous: About
which I think it is not worth the while to dispute. I shall rather observe,
that God took exceeding great care that none should come to very great want, by
the large Provision he made for the poorer sort of People; who had the benefit
of the third Tithe mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, which was wholly given
to them every third year; and of the Sabbatical Year, when all that grew of it
self was common to every Body; and of this Release of Debts in the same year;
and of the large quantity of Corn, which they were bound to leave every year,
in the Corners of their Fields, with the Ears that fell, and the Sheaf that was
left, etc.

Ver. 12. If thy brother an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew Whether sold by
themselves, or by the Court of Judgment for Theft. But there was some
difference between a Man and a Woman. See XXI Exodus 2, 3, etc. And the same
Law, they say, was to be observed about those who were sold by their Father; or
were born of Hebrew Slaves.

And serve thee six years, then in the seventh year thou shall let him go
free.] He does not speak of the Year of Release, as if he were then to be set
free, though he had served but one year, or perhaps no more than half a year
before that came; but of the seventh year from the time of his Sale: For he was
to serve six complete years, unless the Jubilee happened to intervene, when every
one was set free, though he had not served so long. But such Servants as were
taken in the Wars, or were sold by Canaanites, or born of them, might be kept
perpetual Slaves, unless they were maimed by their Masters, with the loss of
some Member of their Body.

And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go away
empty.] But bestow something upon him, for his more comfortable Subsistence
when he was a Freeman. And this comprehends Women as well as Men, as appears
by the foregoing Verse: but then it is to be understood of such as went out
free by virtue of this Law, after they had served six years; not of such as
were redeemed by their Friends, or redeemed themselves with their own Money,
(XXV Levit. 18.) For such might be supposed not to need their Masters kindness,
as they did who had nothing to help them out of their Slavery.

Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and
out of thy Wine Press.] That they might put themselves in a way of living well
in the World; which they were not able to do without this Assistance, because
what they got in their six years Service was wholly for their Master, and not
for themselves. He does not prescribe a certain measure to their Bounty, but
leaves every Man to express his Affection freely toward God and toward his
Neighbor. But the Hebrews say, they were bound to give them at least thirty
Shekels of Silver.

Of that wherewith the LORD thy God has blessed thee, that shall thou give
him.] Considering how God has enriched thee, even by his Service.

Ver. 15. And thou shall remember that thou wast a And did not bring them empty
out of their Slavery; but loaded with Silver, and Gold, and Raiment, XII Exodus
35. By which Bounty of God to themselves, they might take the best measure of
their Duty to their poor Brethren, when they were dismissed from Servitude.

Therefore I command thee this thing to day.] In remembrance of that great
Benefit, he enjoined this Benevolence to poor Slaves.

Ver. 16. And it shall be, if he say I will not go away Refused to enjoy his
Liberty, when his six years Service was expired.

Because he loves thee and thine house.] The Phrase in Exodus XXI. 5. being,
Saying shall say, I love my Master, etc. Abarbinel from thence gathers, that it
was necessary he should often profess how loath he was to leave his Master and
his Family, and make repeated Declarations of his Affection to them.

Because he is well with thee.] Lives happily. Out of these words Maimonides
infers, that there was to be reciprocal Love between the Servant and his
Master: for if the Servant loved his Master, yet if his Master did not love
him, his Ear was not bored; for he could not take Content in his staying with
him. But these words suppose his Master's kindness to him, by his good usage of
him.

Ver. 17. Then shall thou take an Awl, and thrust it through his ear unto the
door, etc.] But first he was to bring him before the Judges, that he might
there in Exodus 6. where all this is explained.

And also unto thy Maidservant thou shall do likewise.] This relates only to
the not sending Maidservants away empty; not to the boring their Ears, if they
had no mind to be freed: for that was not used, if we may believe the Hebrew
Doctors, to Maidservants. It was sufficient, if they had a mind to stay with
their Masters, that they addicted themselves, in solemn words, to their Service
for ever. But there were many differences between a Manservant and a
Maidservant, at least in some Cases, (See upon XXI Exodus 7.) which are
explained with great nicety by the Hebrew Doctors; with which I need not
trouble the Reader, because there is no such Slavery among us in these days.

It shall not seem hard unto thee when thou sendest him away free from thee.]
It is plain by this, that he returns to what he was speaking of v. 12, 13, etc.
concerning their not letting their Servants go away empty when they had their
Freedom: For this was the chief thing that could seem hard to them.

For he has been worth a double hired Servant to thee.] Who served at most
only for three years; and had Wages paid him all the time, XVI Isaiah 14.

In serving thee six years.] Twice as long as an hired Servant, and for
nothing. So that considering what Wages he gave the other, and how small a
price perhaps they paid for him, they would find themselves gainers by such
Slaves, and therefore should not think much to give them a Gratuity, when they
send them away.

And the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all that thou do.] He incourages
them to hope they should be greater gainers otherways by this Charity, which
would procure God's Blessing upon their future Labors. This Argument he had
pressed twice or thrice before in this Chapter, v. 4, 6, 10.

Ver. 19. All the firstling-males that come of thy herd, All the firstborn
Males were the LORD's, by a Law made at their coming out of Egypt; and he gave
them to his Priests for their Portion, XIII Exodus 2, 15. XVIII Numb. 15.

Thou shall do no work with the firstling of thy Bullock, nor shear the
firstling of thy Sheep.] Besides the Firstling-Males, which alone were
separated to the LORD, there were also Firstling-Females; which, though they
were not sanctified to him as the Males were, yet were not to be employed by
the Owners, as the rest of their Cattle, but offered as Peace Offerings to God.
Of which they themselves had a good share; though some part of them was given
to the Priests.

Ver. 20. Thou shall eat it before the LORD thy God.]

Year by year.] At their Solemn Festivals; when they were first to offer them
unto God; and then the Feast upon these Peace Offerings followed.

In the place which the LORD shall choose, thou and thy household.] With the
Levites and Strangers, etc. whom they were to invite to these Sacred
Entertainments: For this is but a Repetition of the Law twice or thrice
mentioned before, XII. 6, 7, etc. 17, 18, 26. XIV. 23. and upon this occasion
here again inculcated, because it was of exceeding great moment, to preserve
them in the Worship and Service of God alone.

And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or have any
ill blemish.] This is another Reason why he mentions these Feasts again, that
he might admonish them what to do with these First-lings, if there were any
blemish in them, which made them unfit for Sacrifice. These blemishes he had
spoken of in XXII Levit. 21, 22, 24. But here adds the Lame to those there
named. Which the Prophet Malachi also mentions (and so do the Heathens) as
unacceptable unto God, I Mal. 8.

Thou shall not sacrifice it to the LORD thy God.] No, not to make such a
charitable Feast at the Sanctuary.

Thou shall eat it within thy gates.] It was free for them to eat it at home:
though it is very probable God expected they should invite the Levites, and the
Strangers, the Fatherless and Widows, to partake of it, (as they did of the
third Tithe, (XIV. 29.) because if it had been without blemish, it must have
been so employed at the Sanctuary.

The unclean and the clean person shall eat it alike.] Whereas if it had been
sacrificed at their Feasts, only the clean could have eaten of it.

As the Roe-buck and the Heart.] See XII. 15, 22.

Only thou shall not eat the blood thereof; thou shall pour it upon the ground
as water.] He takes all occasions to mention this, because it was designed to
preserve them free from Idolatry. See XII. 16, 23, 24.

CHAP. XVI. Chapter XVI.

Verse 1. OBserve the Month of Abib.] Which God, Exodus 2. XIII. 4. XXXIV. 18.

And keep the Passover unto the LORD thy God.] He now begins in this Chapter,
to admonish them about their great Feasts which they were to keep; whereby the
whole Nation was preserved in the Worship of one only God, which Mosesstill
pursues to press upon them.

For in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt.] In
memory of which the Feast of the Passover was ordained.

By night.] For then Pharaoh pressed them to be gone when he saw his Firstborn
slain in the Night, XII Exodus 29, 30, 31. and then they immediately prepared
themselves for their Journey, and borrowed of the Egyptians Jewels of Gold and
Silver, v. 35. Insomuch that Moses calls this, a Night much to be observed unto
the LORD, and that Night of the LORD to be observed by all the Children of
Israel in their Generations, (XII Exodus 42.) though it was Daylight before
they began their March, as we read there, v. 22. So that Moses bids them
remember the day when they came out of Egypt, XIII Exodus 3. which comprehends
both that which is properly called Day, and Night.

Ver. 2. Thou shall therefore sacrifice the Passover unto the LORD thy God.]
The word Passover signifies here not only the Lamb (which was properly called
Pesach or Passover) which was offered on the Fourteenth day at even; but all
the Paschal Sacrifices which followed after; as appears by the next words, of
the flock and of the herd. Which Sacrifices were appointed for all the seven
Days of unleavened Bread, XVIII Numb. 17, 18, 19, etc. See Bochartus in his
Hierezoicon P. I. L. II. Cap. 50. where he shows at large that the word
Passover is here a general word, comprehending the Particulars after-mentioned
( p. 565, 566.) And thus translates these words (which he justifies by many
like instances) Thou shall therefore sacrifice the Passover unto the LORD thy
God, viz. of the Flock and of the Herd. Which last words are added
exegetically, to explain what that Passover was which they were to offer unto
the LORD. Such Sacrifices as were offered in the Solemn Passover of Ezekiah, 2 Chronicles. XXX. 22. and of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 7, 8, 9. where it is apparent,
that the King and the Princes gave to the People, and to the Priests, Oxen as
well as Sheep, lepesachim, for the Passover-offerings. And thus it is used in
the New Testament, XVIII John 28. where it is said the Jews would not go into
the Judgment-Hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the
Passover; i. e. these Passover-Offerings, which were holy things, of which none
might eat in their defilement.

In the place which the LORD shall choose to place his Name there.] At the
Sanctuary, as has been often said, XII. 5, 11, etc. where all Sacrifices were
to be offered.

Thou shall eat no leavened bread with it.] That is, with the Passover
beforementioned. Which is a Demonstration that all the Sacrifices of the Flock
and of the Herd, spoken of in the foregoing Verse, are comprehended under the
Name of Passover. For with the Lamb they could not eat unleavened Bread seven
days, it being to be eaten presently in the Evening when it was offered: after
which followed the seven days of unleavened Bread; which could not be eaten so
long with the Passover, unless Passover signify all the seven days Sacrifices.

Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread therewith.] See XII Exodus 15. XIII.
6, 7.

Even the bread of affliction.] So called, because it was insipid, and also
heavy upon the Stomach, and not easily digested. whence it had the Name of
Matzah, because it was lumpish, and could not rise as leavened Bread does.

For thou came forth out of the Land of Egypt in haste.] Wanting time to put
any leaven to their Dough, XII Exodus 34, 39.

That thou may remember the day when thou came forth out of the Land of
Egypt all the days of thy life.] That their Affliction there, and their speedy
Deliverance from thence, might never be forgotten. For their eating this Bread
seven days together every year, one would think, could not but make great
Impressions on their Mind: and the more to imprint the sense of God's Mercy
there, the Master of every Family, when he brake this Bread at the Paschal
Feast, and gave every one a piece of it, said, This is the Bread of Affliction
which your Fathers did eat in the Land of Egypt. So Maimonides and others tell
us. See XII Exodus 17.

Ver. 4. And there shall no leavened bread be seen with See XII Exodus 18, 19,
20. XIII. 3, 7.

Neither shall there any thing of the flesh which thou sacrificest the first
day at even, remain all night until the morning.] This is a plain description
of the Paschal Lamb, which was to be eaten in the Even wherein it was
sacrificed, (XII Exodus 10.) which he forbears here to call the Passover (though
that name properly belong to it) because he had called other Sacrifices by that
name, ( v. 2.) and would not have them confounded.

Thou may not sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates which the LORD
thy God gives thee.] Not at home, as they did when they first came out of
Egypt; and that because it was a Sacrifice: which were now required to be all
offered at the Sanctuary, as was said before, XII. 5, 11.

But at the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his Name in,
there thou shall sacrifice the Passover.] From whence Maimonides infers, that
even whilst High Places were allowed, the Passover could not be killed any
where, but at the Sanctuary. If any Man did offer it in a private High-place,
he was beaten, as he says in his Treatise concerning the Passover, Cap. I.
Sect. 3.

At even, at the going down of the Sun.] Between the two Evenings; concerning
which see XII Exodus 6. After the offering of the Evening Sacrifice, they began
to kill the Passover, and continued this Sacrifice till Sunset.

At the season that thou came forth out of Egypt.] Then they were preparing
themselves for their Journey, and had warning to be ready; and eat the Lamb
with their Staves in their Hands, as Men going forth to travel, (XII Exodus 11.)
though they did not actually go forth till the next Morning.

And thou shall roast and eat it in the place which the LORD thy God shall
choose.] See XII Exodus 8, 9.

And thou shall turn in the morning, and go unto thy Tents.] Unto their own
Habitations, which are called Tents, because they had no other dwelling when
these words were spoken. The only doubt is, whether he permits them to go home
the next Morning after the Even beforementioned; or the Morning after the
whole Feast of unleavened Bread was over. It seems most reasonable to expound
it of the former; that if Men's occasions called them home, they were not bound
to stay any longer at the place where the Sanctuary was, but till they had
eaten the Paschal Lamb; after which they might return home if they pleased. So
Bochartus; who from hence proves that the most Solemn Days of the Feast of
unleavened Bread, were not observed like a Sabbath; because Men might travel
home upon the first Day of unleavened Bread, as the whole Nation traveled out
of Egypt on this day, from Rameses to Succoth. Yet pious People, who were able
to bear so great a Charge, were wont, no doubt, to stay the whole seven Days
before they returned home; because the first and last Days of the Feast were
great Solemnities. So they did in the Passover of Hezekiah and Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
XXX. 21. XXXV. 17. And there being special Sacrifices to be offered every day
during this Festival, (as was before said) Solomon ben Virgoe observes, that
all the Country thereabouts brought their Oxen and their Sheep to be sold at
this time to those who came from far: so that the Mountains round about
Jerusalem were covered with them, and not a bit of Grass to be seen. He adds
also, That whosoever did not come up to this Feast, all his Goods were
forfeited and converted to Sacred Uses, Shebet Jehuda, p. 378.

Ver. 8. Six days thou shall eat unleavened bread, and This is to be understood
as if he had said, that after they had eaten unleavened Bread six days, they
should conclude the Solemnity upon the seventh day with a Solemn Assembly; or,
as it is in the Hebrew, with a restraint: but still continue also on this day
to eat unleavened Bread. For this Feast was to last seven days; and in all the
foregoing Books they are expressly required to ear unleavened Bread seven days,
XII Exodus 15. XXIII Levit. 6. XXVIII Numb. 17.

A Solemn Assembly.] Which the Hebrews call Atzereth: of the meaning of which
see XXIII Lev. 36.

Thou shall do no work therein.] That is, no Servile Work, as it is explained
XXVIII Numb. 25. but they might dress their Meat; which the LXX. seems to mean
by those words, which they add, (...), save only such things as shall be done
to preserve life.

Seven weeks shall thou number unto thee.] From the morrow after the Sabbath,
when they brought the Sheaf of the Wave-offering; as it is explained in XXIII
Levit. 15. See there.

Begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the
sickle to the Corn.] For they began to cut Barley at the Passover, as is
manifest from hence; that Joshua passed over Jordan to enter into Canaan, in
the time of Harvest, III Josh. 15. and this was in the month of Nisan, when
they kept the Passover, as appears from V Josh. 10. Which Month could not be
called Abib, or the Month of New Fruits, if some Corn was not then ripe, viz.
Barley. This Josephus confirms, Lib. III. Antiq. Cap. X. Which must be
understood, as Hermannus Conringius observes (in his Treatise de Initio Anni
Sabbatici, etc.) of that sort of Barley which was sown in Autumn (as it is this
day in Frisia) which required a stronger Soil than that sown in the Spring, and
produced a much richer Crop. See Mr. Mede's Works, p. 355. who observes how
very different their Climate was from ours.

Ver. 10. And thou shall keep the feast of weeks unto The reason of this Name
is given in the foregoing Verse. And see XXXIV Exodus 22. It was called also the
Feast of Harvest. See XXIII Exodus 16.

With a Tribute of a Free-will-offering of thine hand, which thou shall give
unto the LORD thy God, etc.] Besides those Offerings which are prescribed XXIII
Levit. 17, 18. XXVIII Numb. 27, etc. The quantity is not directed, but left to
every Man's Piety. And whatsoever it was he brought, it was wholly given to
God; and he that brought it had no share in it: but God gave it to his Priests.

According as the LORD thy God has blessed thee.] Though no quantity was
prescribed; yet God expected every Man should offer proportionably to his
Estate: and they who had a religious sense of God's goodness in blessing their
Labors, no doubt acknowledged it by a Liberal Tribute.

Ver. 11. And thou shall rejoice before the LORD thy etc.] This Feast was made
of such Offerings as are mentioned XII. 7, 17, 18, 19.

Ver. 12. And thou shall remember that thou wast a They are often put in mind
of this, as an Argument to Charity; particularly toward their Servants. See
XV. 15.

And thou shall observe and do these Statutes.] There was a particular reason
for keeping this Feast; because it was in remembrance of God's giving them his
Law from Mount Sinai; where he spoke with them himself.

Ver. 13. Thou shall observe the Feast of Tabernacles seven days, after that
thou have gathered in thy Corn and This is the third great Feast, at which all
their Males were bound to appear every year; as we read XXIII Exodus 16, 17.
XXXIV. 22, 23. Of which he puts them in mind again, XXIII Levit. 34, 35, 36.
and here v. 16.

And thou shall rejoice in thy Feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and
thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, etc.] There was the like Law at Athens,
where King Cecrops ordained (as Macrobius tells us, Lib. I. Saturnal. Cap. X.)
the Master of every Family should after Harvest, make a Feast for his Servants,
and eat together with them, who had taken pains with him in tilling his Ground;
Delectari enim Deum honor Servorum, contemplatu laboris, for God delighted in
the honor done to Servants, in consideration of their Labor. This, it is
likely, he learnt from Moses; for he reigned at Athens much about the same time
that Israel came out of Egypt; and was the first, as Eusebius says, who taught
the Greeks to call God by the Name of (...), ( Lib. X. Proepar. Evangel.) which
we may interpret the Living God. Though therein he seems to be a little
mistaken. For Pausanias says more than once (both in his Arcadia and his
Attica) That (...), He was the first that called Jupiter by the name of the
Most High, or Supreme. And the same we read in St. Cyril against Julian, Lib.
I. See Joh. Meursius de Regibus Atheniensium, Lib. I. Cap. IX.

Seven days shall thou keep a Feast unto the LORD thy God, in the place which
the LORD thy God shall choose.] In order to which, that it might be kept the
more Solemnly, it is once more enjoined, and all the Sacrifices that were to be
offered in each of the seven days appointed in XXIX Numb. from v. 12. to v. 35.
where he orders also the eighth day to be solemnly observed for a special
reason. See there.

Because the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the
works of thy hands.] Thankfulness to God for Blessings bestowed, was the way to
procure more.

Therefore thou shall surely rejoice.] In God the giver of all good things;
whom the whole Nation, by the Institution of this Feast, were incited to bless
and praise for the Fruits of his Bounty to them. And Peace Offerings were
sacrificed on purpose for this end, XXVII. 7. From the repetition of this
Command, Thou shall rejoice, the Jews infer, that though all Festivals were
Times of Joy, yet the Feast of Tabernacles was to be celebrated with greater
Joy than all the rest. And accordingly Maimonides tells us the whole Festival
was spent in Music, and Dancing, and Singing, Night and Day.

Ver. 16. Three times in the year shall all thy Males etc.] This is so
frequently enjoined (See v. 13.) because it was of the greatest Consequence,
that they should meet as often as they could conveniently, at one and the same
place, to worship the Divine Majesty; whereby the Notion of the Unity of God
was preserved among them.

And they shall not appear before the LORD empty.] This is also frequently
repeated, where the Feasts themselves are enjoined, XXIII Exodus 15. XXXIV. 20.
And from these and the following words, That every man should give as he was
able, etc. came the pious Custom in the beginning of our Religion, that the
People when they came to the LORD's Table, offered Bread, and Wine, and Corn,
and Oil, and such like things, for the Support of God's Ministers, and the
Relief of the Poor, every one according to their Ability. Which was done in
acknowledgment of God, as the Author of Life and of all good Things; for which
they, in this manner, showed their Gratitude to him. And the Priests, in the
presence of all the People, lifted them up, and gave God thanks, and beseeched
him to accept them: And out of these, in many places, they made their Agapae,
or Feasts of Charity, for the Poor. Mention is made of these Oblations in the
Canons ascribed to the Apostles, Cap. 3, 4. which, though not made by them, yet
contain a great many Apostolical Customs.

Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the LORD thy
God, which he has given thee.] It was but reasonable, that the more bountiful
God had been to them, the more liberally they should offer a grateful
Acknowledgment to him. For all the forenamed three Feasts had relation to the
Fruits of the Earth, which God had blessed them withal; as well as commemorated
former great Benefits bestowed on their Forefathers. The Passover being at the
beginning of Barley Harvest; Pentecost at the beginning of Wheat-Harvest; and
the Feast of Tabernacles, when they had gathered in all the Fruits of the
Earth. At which Seasons all Mankind were ever wont to be full of Joy, and to
offer Sacrifices. So Aristotle tells us, Lib. VIII. ad Nicomachum, Cap. II.
(...), etc. The ancient Sacrifices and Conventions seem to have been after the
gathering in of the Fruits of the Earth, as a First Fruits, at which time
chiefly they rested from their labors. And so Strabo likewise, Lib. X.
Geograph. p. 467. It is common, both to Greeks and Barbarians, to offer their
Sacrifices with a Festival intermission of their Labors, etc. (...), and so
Nature taught them to do; that is, to thank God, with Rejoicing and Cessation
from Labors. For which he gives this surprising Reason, (...). For remission
of Labor abstracts the Mind from Humane Affairs, and turns it toward God.
This certainly was the ancient intention of all such Festival Times, as the
Heathen themselves could discern.

Ver. 18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee.] Moses de Cotzi upon these
words, makes this difference between Schofetim and Schoterim, that the former
(viz. Judges) were the Senators in the several Courts, who decided Causes: and
the other (Officers) were no more than Ministers attending the Court, to keep
the People in order, with a Staff and a Whip; and to execute the Decrees and
Orders of the Judges: whom they appointed not only in the Court, but in the
Streets; looking after Weights and Measures in the Market, and correcting
Offenders. Maimonides also makes them the same with our Apparitors, or those
who in the Roman Law are called Officiales, as Constantine L'Empereur observes,
p. 362. upon Cornelius Bertram (who mistook them for a sort of Judges) and in
the Digests Executores; and in the New Testament (...), Exactors, XII Luke 58.
Josephus makes them to have been Public Criers; and so we find them employed
XX. 8. I Josh. 11. But then some of them at least seem to have been an
honorable sort, like our Heralds, XXIII Josh. 2. and all of them were Men of
Authority, though but young Men (as Maimonides describes them) who had not
attained the Years and Knowledge of Doctors of the Law, and therefore unfit to
be Judges. But the Jews place them next under their wise Men, or Doctors, and
above their Scribes and Clerks, as Mr. Thorndike observes in his Review of the
Rights of the Church, p. 94. But that they were certainly only under Officers,
and not Judges, there is another Argument; which is, That Solomon upon this
account commends the Ants, that they carefully do their business, though they
have no Schoter set over them (VI Prove. 7.) no (...) or (...), to force or
affright them into it.

In all thy gates.] That is, in every City, as Mr. Seldom observes out of the
Jewish Writers, Lib. VII. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. V. and more largely L.
II. de Synedriis, Cap. V. Sect. 1. where he shows they interpret it, in all the
Cities of Israel, both within the Land and without, where Israel had any
Jurisdiction. Which is so true, that they had Consistories wheresoever they
were dispersed, for the determining all Differences arising out of the Law,
though not as to the power of Life and Death, which was seldom granted them by
their Sovereigns. Thus, we learn from Philo, that there was such a Consistory
at Alexandria; and the little Chronicle, called Seder Olam Zuta, tells us of
the like in Babylonia. And after the destruction of the Temple, it is manifest,
not only by the Jewish Writings, but by Epiphanius and others, that there
continued a Consistory at Tiberias for many Ages, etc. See Mr. Thorndike's
Rights of the Church, p. 56, 57. and his Review of it, p. 56.

But though this be granted, yet these words, in all thy gates, may suggest
also the part of the City where they kept their Court; which was in the Gate.
For there, as I observed (XXXIV Genesis 24.) all Public Business was transacted
in the time of Abraham and Jacob, and continued so afterward. Insomuch that the
highest Court in Moses his time, met at the Door of the Tabernacle, XI Numb.
24. the Gate among the Hebrews being the same with the Forum, as I observed,
among the Romans. As we see by 1 Kings VII. 1. where Elisha foretells at what
low rates Provision should be sold on the morrow, in the gate of Samaria. Where
it is evident there was a place so spacious, that Ahab assembled Four hundred
Prophets there, before him and King Jehoshaphat; who had no doubt, both of
them, numerous Attendants, 2 Kings XXII. 10. And before this time, David, it is
said, upon the news of Absolom's Death, went up to the Chamber over the Gate
and wept; which we may well think was the Council Chamber, 2 Samuel XVIII. 33.
And when Joab advised him to come down, and show himself publicly, it is said,
he rose and sat in the Gate, and all the People came before him, XIX. 6. And
therefore in these Gates, which were so large, there was some place, I make no
question, where there were Benches for the Judges.

Which the LORD thy God gives thee throughout thy Tribes.] In the Cities of
every Tribe, there was to be such a Court erected, that People might have
Justice easily and speedily done them. And the Talmudists unanimously agree
that the number of Judges was proportionable to the greatness of the City
wherein they were placed, and of the Causes which they judged. Where there were
less than an Hundred and twenty Families in any Town or City, there was seated
the lowest Court of all, consisting of three Judges, which tried only Actions
of Debt, or Damages done by Man or Beast, or Defamation, etc. But in Cities,
where there were above an Hundred and twenty Families, there was placed an
higher Court, consisting of Three and twenty Judges, who tried Capital Causes.
Josephus indeed differs from the Talmudists about the number, for he says they
were but Seven. Both of them, it is likely, may say true, with respect to
different times and places: for it cannot but be presumed that both he and they
understood the state of their Country, in such Public Matters. But at the
place where God chose to settle his Sanctuary, unto which all the Country
resorted at certain times, there was the Supreme Court of all, consisting, as
the Talmudists say, of Seventy Persons, besides their President; who judged all
manner of Causes; and none but they could judge a false Prophet, or a City
fallen to Idolatry. All Appeals were made to them, but from them there was
none, their Sentence being final. See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. IV.

Such a Court, it is certain, there was in future Ages, whose number was
according to that of the Seventy Elders chosen by God himself to assist Moses
in the Government, and endued with the Spirit of Judgment to qualify them for
that Office, XI Numb. 25. In Moses his time they sat at the Door of the
Tabernacle, as I observed before: and afterward at Shiloh, or wheresoever the
Sanctuary was. Though it may be doubted, whether after Moses his death, and the
death of the Elders, there was a Court consisting of so many Judges. Nay, it is
highly probable that this Consistory it self was not constantly settled there,
according to Law, till the time of Jehosaphat: at least, not the Inferior
Consistories beforementioned, which were to be settled in every City. For if
they were, what Reason can be given, why the Judges (V Judge. 10. X. 4. XII.
14.) and Samuel should ride Circuit up and down the Country to minister Justice
according to the Law, when the People might have had it every day in their
several Cities? And for this Reason, it is likely, Jehosaphat himself desiring
to put this Law in force, first sent some great Men, who went about through all
the Cities of Judah, 2 Chronicles. XVII. 8, 9. and then settled Judges according to
this Law, throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City, as well as
in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. XIX. 5, 8. See Mr. Thorndike in his Rights of the Church
in a Christian State, Chap. IV. p. 226. where he observes that Josephus, in
express terms, rendering a Reason of the great Leudness, upon which the War
against Benjamin followed, attributes it to this, that these Courts of Judgment
were not established according to this Law, Lib. V. Antiq. Cap. II. But though
this, I think, be very evident, yet it is scarce credible that David, after he
was set upon the Throne of God in Peace, did not take care to settle these
Courts, as he did to regulate a great many other things. And indeed we find a
plain intimation of it in 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 29. but succeeding Kings, it is
probable, were negligent in keeping up this Constitution, till the time of
Jehosaphat; who exercised his Authority to enforce the exact practice of this
Law.

And they shall judge the people with just judgment.] According to the Rules of
this Law. The Judges, says R. Solomon, were to judge the People; and the
Officers, to constrain them to do as the Judges commanded.

Ver. 19. Thou shall not wrest judgment.] See XXIII Exodus 6.

Thou shall not respect persons.] See XIX Levit. 15. Deuteronomy. 17.

Neither take a gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert
the words of the righteous.] The very same is said XXIII Exodus 8.

That which is altogether just shall thou follow.] The words in the Hebrew are
far more emphatical, (as they are in the Margin) justice, justice shall thou
follow. Mind nothing but the justice of the Cause: and do it to all Persons
equally.

That thou may live, and inherit the Land which the LORD thy God gives
thee.] Be happy, and continue long in the Land of Canaan. For nothing
contributes more to the Establishment of a Government, than the exact and
impartial Administration of Justice.

Thou shall not plant thee a Grove of any Trees, near unto the Altar of the
LORD thy God, which thou shall make thee.] It is evident from this, that his
great aim is to keep them from Idolatry; which he still pursues, as he has
done from the beginning of his Exhortation, in this Book. And their History
teaches us, that it was very needful to inculcate this so often; for
notwithstanding all that Moses could say, they fell immediately after Joshua's
death, into the idolatrous Customs of Canaan; and could never be wholly purged
from their Idolatry, till the Captivity of Babylon. And these words may be
translated, Thou shall not plant thee a Grove, nor make any Wood (i. e. a
wooden Image) near to the Altar of the LORD thy God. So the LXX. for the very
word we translate Grove, sometimes imports the Idol in the Grove, as well as
the Grove it self. See 2 Kings XXIII. 6. and Seldom de Diis Syris, Syntagma II.
Cap. II. Certain it is, that nothing was more ancient in the East, than Altars
with Groves of Trees about them; which made the place very shady and delightful
in those hot Countries. They are so often joined in Scripture, that it would be
tedious to number all the places, XXXI Exodus 13. XII Deuteronomy. 3. VI Judges 25,
etc. Cadmus is thought by some to have brought this Custom into Greece, out of
the East. And they planted the Trees so thick, and they were so large and
shady, as to make the place very dark and solemn; whereby a kind of Horror was
struck into those, who went into them. And they became hereby the fitter for
the Devil to play his Pranks there; and for the practice of those obscene and
uncouth Rites whereby he was worshipped. For the Gentile Custom had made these
places proper to the Infernal Gods; and anciently consecrated them as
Sepulchers or Temples for their Heroes. That the Israelites therefore might be
preserved from sacrificing to the Dead, and from filthy Lusts, (by both which
they afterward polluted themselves) they are forbidden to place a Grove near
to God's Altar; nay, so much as any Tree, (as the words may be translated) for
the Heathen thought there was a sacredness in Trees themselves, which they
dedicated to their gods, and honored several ways. See XII. 2, 3. And
therefore the Jews say they might not plant Trees in the Court of the Temple,
or in the Mountain of the House (as they call it) for the Ornament or Beauty of
God's House. And they give this reason for it, because it was an idolatrous
Rite to plant Trees near their Altars, that the People might there meet
together. See Seldom Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. VI. p. 186. and Dr.
Spencer Lib. II. Cap. XVI. Sect. 1, 2. And more lately Ezekiel Spanhemius (in
his most Learned Observations upon Callimachus) has shown that they planted
odoriferous Trees in some Groves, to make them more inviting. Whence the Grove
dedicated to Pallas is called by that Poet (...), though chat may signify only
a Grove consecrated by many Sacrifices. And the vulgar Groves were planted with
Pines, Fir-trees, Cypress, Laurel, Olives, Vines, and other lovely Trees;
especially Oaks, which grew to a great height: in which both Altars and Temples
were erected. See in Hymn in Dianam verse. 38. p. 156. and in Palladem, verse.
61. p. 595. and in Cererem, verse. 38, 39. p. 689. where he mentions the black
Poplar as a Tree of which her Grove consisted; under the shade of which the
Nymphs delighted to Dance at Noon. And thence these shady places, consecrated
to their gods, were called (...), because of their refreshing Coolness, as he
observes out of Athenaeus, ad v. 47. p. 695. And indeed nothing is plainer in
the holy Scripture, than that these Groves related to Idolatry; for all pious
Princes took them away, and bad ones planted them. See 1 Kings XVIII. 4. 2
Kings XXIII. 14. 2 Chronicles. XIV. 3. XV. 16. And they are frequently joined with
Statues and Images, both here, and VII. 5. XII. 3. 1 Kings XIV. 23, etc.

Neither shall thou set thee up an Image.] The Hebrew word Matzebah is commonly
translated by the LXX. (...), a Pillar: and so we translate it in the Margin.
For as it was unlawful to set up the Statue of a Man, or any other Creature; so
it was as contrary to Religion to set up a Pillar, or an Altar, or any such
like Structure, for Public Assemblies to be held about them; though they
worshipped there the true God. So Maimonides reports the sense of their
Doctors; A Statue or Pillar signifies any Work raised up, that Religious
Assemblies may be made there, though they be for the Worship of the Divine
Majesty; for this is a practice among Idolaters. And so Pausanias confesses (in
Achaicis) that in the most ancient times, among all the Graecians, (...), rude
Stones had Divine Honors given them, instead of Statues or Images. See Seldom
Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. VI. in the beginning. And Maimonides of
the Worship of the Planets, Cap. VI. Sect. 8, 9, 10. and Dionys. Vossius his
Annotations there.

Which the LORD thy God hates.] Hence it sufficiently appears, that this was
an idolatrous practice: which is more odious to God than any thing else. And
thus the Israelites we see understood it; being ready to take Arms against
their Brethren on the other side Jordan, when they heard they had erected an
Altar there (taking it to be such a Structure as is here forbidden) but were
appeased when they understood, that it was not intended for Worship, XXII Josh.
18.

Chapter XVII.
CHAP. XVII.
THou shall not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any Bullock, or Sheep, wherein
is any blemish.] Having warned them, as he had done often, against idolatrous
Practices, he here interposes a Caution against Profaneness in the Worship of
the true God: For it was a great disrespect to him, to offer him any thing that
was not perfect; the Heathens being ashamed of such Sacrifices.

Wherein is any blemish.] Of this see XXII Levit. 20, etc.

Or any evil-favouredness.] In the Hebrew, any evil thing, or matter. That is,
if it had any disease, or was sick.

For that is an abomination unto the LORD thy God.] This is more than is said
in Leviticus, where the words are, for it shall not be acceptable for you. For
here he expresses the greatest disdain and abhorrence of such Sacrifices.

If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the LORD thy God
gives thee.] In any Cities or Towns within their Country.

Man or Woman, that has wrought wickedness in the sight of the LORD thy God.]
Now he returns to the business of Idolatry; which is the wickedness here said
to be wrought, as appears by the next words.

In transgressing his Covenant.] For this was the principal part of the
Covenant, That they should have no other Gods but him, XX Exodus 22, 33. upon
this all depended: so that the whole Covenant was void, if they served other
gods. Which was so foul a sin, that he would have none spared, who were guilty
of it. Which is the reason, as Maimonides thinks, ( More Nevochim P. III. Cap.
XXXVII.) why he here says, Man, or Woman; because Men are naturally more
tender toward the Female Sex, and inclinable to be favorable to them; against
which he warns them in case of Idolatry, and of profaning the Sabbath: in
which two Cases only he uses these words.

He had shown in the Thirteenth Chapter, what they should do with him that
seduced others to Idolatry, whether he were a pretended Prophet, or a private
Man, v. 1, 9, 10. And then what should be done with a whole City that was
seduced, v. 12, 13, etc. And now he shows how they should proceed against any
particular Person who apostatized from God.

Ver. 3. And has gone and served other gods, and The most ancient Idolatry (of
which Abarbinel makes account there were ten sorts) was the Worship of the
Heavenly Bodies, as I have observed before, IV. 19. and see XXXI Job 26. The
forenamed Doctor indeed places first the Worship of Angels; about which I will
not dispute: but only observe, that by condemning those who worshipped the Host
of Heaven, though very glorious Creatures, Moses suggests plainly enough how
vile they were who worshipped Images of Wood and Stone.

Which I have not commanded.] This is a way of speaking in this Language,
importing the quite contrary, which God had forbidden; and that most strictly.
See XVII Prove. 21. XXIV. 23. and many other places.

Ver. 4. And it be told thee.] Thou have had information

And thou have heard it, and enquired diligently.] Upon information they were
to make diligent search, whether the Report were true, or no.

And behold it be true, and the thing certain.] They were not to proceed upon
Rumors, nor yet to slight them: but endeavor to be satisfied, whether or no
there was ground for them. And if upon Examination they found there was no
doubt of the Truth of the thing, to do as is here directed.

That such abomination is wrought in Israel.] So Idolatry is frequently called.
See XIII. 14.

Then thou shall bring forth that man or that woman, which have committed that
wicked thing, unto thy gates.] Set them before the Court of Judgment in the
City to which they belonged, (See XVI. 18.) For particular Persons were tried
and sentenced in the lower Courts: but a Tribe or a City accused of Idolatry,
only by the highest Court of all; as Maimonides, and the rest of the Jewish
Doctors inform us. See Seldom Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. IV. N. 3. and Cap. V.
N. 1.

And shall stone them with stones that they die.] This was the Punishment of a
particular Person; as a City fallen to Idolatry was to be killed with the
Sword; and a false Prophet, who seduced others to Idolatry, to be strangled.
See XIII. 5.

At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of
death, be put to death.] No Man could be convicted, but by two Witnesses at
least; and those of a competent Age, of good Fame, and not convicted themselves
of having born false Witness, etc. Many other Qualifications of lesser moment,
the Jews required in a Witness; which Mr. Seldom reports, and the reason of
them, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. N. 11.

But at the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.] Because, Chapter
though the Witness was never so credible, it was possible he might be
mistaken. But it was not likely that two or three honest Men, agreeing in the
same Testimony, should all be deceived. Yet in pecuniary Matters, the Hebrew
Doctors say, the Testimony of one credible Witness, was sufficient to put a Man
to his Oath for his Purgation. And they set a Mark of Infamy upon him, who in
such Matters as are here spoken of, had such a single Witness against him. See
Maccoth Cap. I. Sect. VIII. and J. Coch his Annotations there.

Ver. 7. The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him, This was great
reason, that they might thereby still confirm the Truth an Certainty of their
Testimony, by being the first Executioners of the Sentence. Which no Men would
easily venture to be, who were not sure they had testified the Truth.

And afterward the hands of all the people.] From hence some infer, that he
was to be put to death at a public Feast.

So shall thou put away the evil from among you.] See XIII. 5.

Ver. 8. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Now he returns to speak
of the Courts of Judgment, which he had ordered to be erected in all their
Cities, when they came into the Land of Canaan, (XVI. 18.) who might find some
Causes to be so difficult that they could not determine them.

Between blood and blood.] The Jews, I think, interpret this absurdly
concerning menstruous Women, and the Tokens of Virginity, (See Mr. Seldom Lib.
III. de Synedr. Cap. II.) when there is a plain and obvious meaning of these
words; that there might be a doubt whether a Man had committed wilful Murder,
or only casual: and consequently, whether he should have the benefit of the
City of Refuge, or be taken from it.

Between plea and plea.] As the former words belong to Criminal Causes, so
these to Civil: such as Suits about Debts, or Purchases of Lands or Houses, etc.

Between stroke and stroke.] It does not seem reasonable to me, that this
should be interpreted of the Leprosy (which is often called a Plague, or
Stroke) though the Jews so understand it; for that was to be judged solely by
the Priests; whereas he speaks also of other Judges. Therefore the meaning is,
concerning any wound or hurt that was done to a Man in his Body. About which,
if the Judges could not agree, but were divided in their Opinions; either about
the Fact it self, or about the Punishment to be inflicted; an Appeal was to be
made to an higher Court.

Being matters of controversy.] Or Contention and Strife. That is, Disputes
arising about them; which could not be determined by the Judges in those Courts
below.

Within thy gates.] Where God commanded Judges and Officers to be settled, XVI.
18. and therefore here he speaks of the Inferior Courts of Judgment, that were
in the lesser Cities of their several Tribes.

Then thou shall arise, and get thee up unto the place which the LORD thy God
shall choose.] Where the Supreme Court was settled, in the chief City of the
Kingdom. While they continued in the Wilderness, the Captains of Thousands, and
Hundreds, and Fifties, and Tens (whom Moses constituted by the advice of
Jethro) judged the Causes of the People under Moses himself; to whom God joined
Seventy Persons for his Assistance; all hard Causes being brought before him.
But this Authority of the Captains lasted no longer than during their
Pilgrimage in the Wilderness; for when they came to Canaan the Law, as I now
observed, required Judges and Officers to be ordained in every City. Who, if
there fell any difference about the Law, are here ordered to repair to the
place where the Sanctuary was, for there the highest Court sat; as the
Successors of Moses and his Consistory of Seventy Elders, (mentioned XI Numb.
16, 24, etc.) who judged all difficult Causes while he lived.

Ver. 9. And thou shall come unto the Priests the Levites, Who must be supposed
to be resident in this place, where the Sanctuary was. And these words, the
Priests, the Levites, the Jews understand as if he had said, the Priests of the
Tribe of Levi, or the Sons of Levi: For so he speaks in XXI. 5. And Mr. Seldom
produces a great many other Instances of the like Phrase ( Lib. II. de Synedr.
Cap. VIII. N. 2, 3.) and shows they are so described (as the Jews think) to
exclude all others that had been Priests, before God took the Sons of Aaron
peculiarly to serve him in this Office. But the Levites, as well as Priests,
they unanimously agree, were capable to be Members of this great Sanhedrim.
Which they all likewise say, did not consist only of Priests and Levites, but
of any other Persons of other Tribes, who were fit to be promoted to this
Dignity. Nay, they say if there was not one Priest or Levite in the Court, it
was a lawful Judicature: For the High Priest himself, no more than any Man else
had a place here, merely for his Birth, unless his Learning in the Law was
answerable. So Maimonides and others. And those other Members, who were not
Priests, nor Levites, they think are comprehended under the word Judge; which,
though it be in the singular number, may be thought to signify more than one,
as appears from XIX. 17. where it is said expressly they shall bring the
Controversy there mentioned, before the Priests and the Judges. And further,
that Judge, after the manner of this Language may signify Judges, Constantine
L'Empereur gathers from v. 12. where Priest in the singular number is used for
those who are here called Priests in the plural, Annot. in Corn. Bertram. p.
389.

But howsoever this be, it seems to me that, though the Priests and Levites
were not the only Persons of whom this High Court consisted (the Members of
which might be chosen out of any Tribe, where they could find men qualified)
yet they are here first mentioned, because they were likely to be the most
capable Persons to exercise this Authority; especially in the first
Constitution of this Commonwealth, when they were newly entered into Canaan. For
all other Persons were then busily employed in looking after the Inheritance
that was fallen to them, and settling the Affairs of their several Families;
whereby they were rendered less able to attend unto this weighty Office. But the
Tribe of Levi having no Inheritance among them, (as is often repeated in these
Books) and no care about Husbandry, and such like Affairs, had a full leisure
both to study the Laws of God, and to judge according to them; especially being
appointed by God to teach Jacob his Judgments, and Israel his Law, XXXIII. 10.
Besides, this Court being settled at the place of God's Worship, where a great
many Priests and Levites always necessarily attended, they were most ready,
without any inconvenience to themselves, to execute this Office of Judges,
having their Maintenance from the Public, which no other Persons had. But
otherwise, as I said, they had no more right than other Men, to be Members of
this Court. Which we cannot certainly say consisted of Seventy Judges, together
with their Nasi, i. e. their Prince, or President; nor that they always sat at
the place here appointed. For there were sometimes great Troubles in the Land,
and they were under the power of their Enemies; which extremely disturbed their
Government, and made it necessary for God to raise them up extraordinary
Judges; because the power of this Court was broken in pieces. So Mr. Seldom
himself acknowledges, that there were great Intermissions of their sitting, in
the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, and of Herod the great, Lib. II. de
Synedriis, Cap. XIV. N. III. And therefore why not in the times, when they were
oppressed by the Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines, and other cruel Neighbors
in the days of the Judges? And thus Grotius, Hermannus Conringius (to name no
more) here understand the word Judge, who is joined with the Priest and Levites.

And unto the Judge.] The forenamed Authors thus translate this Verse, Thou
shall come unto the Priests the Levites, or unto the Judge that shall be in
those days. Where by Judge they understand such as Othniel, Ehud, Gideon,
Jephtah, Sampson, Samuel, and others, whom God raised up, when they were
oppressed by their Enemies, and in great Confusions, to govern his People:
which they did with the highest Authority, being equal to Kings, save only that
they kept not Royal State or Equipage; but are plainly called by that Name,
XVII Judge. 6. XIX. 1. XXI. 25. Now though the Priests and Levites (i. e. that
Court, of which they made a considerable part) were the ordinary Supreme Judges
of Controversies, yet the JUDGE, when God raised one up, was endued with an
extraordinary power above theirs; to whom the People therefore resorted for his
decision. For just as all ordinary Magistrates among the Romans gave place to a
Dictator, when they had one, so all the Hebrew Magistrates did to such a JUDGE
when God appointed him: who determined all manner of Controversies, as at other
times, the other Judges, whether Priests or others, were wont to do. See
Herman. Conringius de Republ. Ebraeorum, Sect. XXXIX.

I know but one Objection against this, which is, That those extraordinary
Judges were not fixed, as far as we can find, in the place where the Sanctuary
was; unless we may judge of all the rest by Eli and Samuel who seem to have
been settled there. But we must consider that they were not confined by their
Commission, which was not grounded on this Law, to any one certain place; but
left at liberty to live where they thought most convenient, for the discharge
of their Trust, in the Reformation of the People. And the truth of what I said
concerning their Supreme Power plainly appears in Samuel, who went up and down
the Country executing Judgment, when Shilo was destroyed, and had no Court,
like that which the Jews speak of, to assist him. But when he needed
assistance, he appointed his Sons to be Judges, 1 Samuel VIII. 1. of whom when
the Elders complained, v. 4. because they did not discharge their Duty well, it
was to himself, and not to any other Persons; and they desire not a Sanhedrim,
but a King to judge them, v. 5. Which Petition we do not find that he
communicated to the Sanhedrim, but only unto God: nor is any mention made of
them in the choice of a King, or after he was chosen, in the History of their
Kings, till Jehosaphat's time, no more than there is in the Book of Joshua and
Judges. Where we read, that when there was no King (that is, Judge) in Israel,
every Man did what was right in his own eyes: which is a sign that there wanted
such a Court to keep them in order. After the time of Jehosaphat, who settled
Judges in every City (as I observed XVI. 18.) they continued, it is plain, till
the Captivity: but what number there was of them we do not know. After the
Captivity Ezra and Nehemiah seem to have done all themselves, (See IX and X
Nehem.) which makes it very probable, that, though there were Judges appointed
according to the direction of this Law, yet the exercise of their Power was
often interrupted by the great Changes which were in that Nation; and that
there was no such Sanhedrim as the Talmudists describe, till the Time of the
Maccabees. For the very Name of Sanhedrim plainly shows its Original to have
been, when the Greek Tongue was common among the Jews; and that was, when the
Kings of Syria and Egypt (who were of the Macedonian Race) had the chief power
in Palestine. See Conringius in the forenamed Book, Sect. XXXVII.

And enquire.] They were to lay the Cause before this high Court, and desire
their Opinion in it.

And they shall show the sentence of judgment.] They were bound to determine
the Controversy; and whatsoever Sentence they gave, it was to stand good till
it was reversed by other Judges of the same Authority. For the Jews (who
understand all this of the great Sanhedrim, and scan every Syllable with great
nicety) will have the words just before [that shall be in those days] to
signify that every Sentence must hold in the time when it is given. So that if
this Court determined a Matter, which in after times by other Judges of the
same Court, should be judged otherways, that second Sentence was to stand,
being the Opinion of those days. For this Sentence was, in their judgment, the
meaning of the Law, by which they were all to be governed; and, if there was no
Tradition in the Case, they judged themselves as well as they could.

And thou shall do according to the sentence which they of that place.] That
is, the high Court which sits there; or the Judge who is in those days.

Which the LORD shall choose.] The Jews, who understand this only of the
Sanhedrim, say it was not lawful for them to judge Causes; at least, not those
which were Capital in any other place. See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedriis, Cap.
XV. N. VI, VII, X.

Shall show thee.] Shall pronounce.

And thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee.] Some
fancy that he speaks to the inferior Judges, who brought the Cause thither
to have the Opinion of this highest Court; who were then to pronounce Sentence
according to it. But as the Persons concerned in the Controversy brought it
before this Court (when the Inferior could not determine it) so they gave the
Sentence, in which he requires the contending Parties to acquiesce, and to do
according to their determination. Which did not concern questions of Faith, as
if Men were to believe whatsoever they should teach them; but such
Controversies as are mentioned v. 8. about Civil or Criminal Matters; which
they were finally to determine; so that Men should not further controvert the
Matter, but rest in their Decisions. For in all Governments there must be an
end of Suits, some where or other: and God required all his People to submit to
the Sentence of this Court. For so the words run in the Hebrew, And thou shall
do according to the Sentence which they shall show thee, from the place which
the LORD thy God shall choose: That is, from the Supreme Court of Judicature,
which resided where God himself did. For if Men had been permitted to disagree
to their Sentence, the very end and use of this Court had been taken away; as
Maimonides speaks in his More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLI.

Ver. 11. According to the Sentence of the Law which In the Hebrew, according
to the Mouth, or the Word of the Law, which they shall teach thee: That is,
according to the Interpretation which they gave of the Law.

And according to the judgment which they shall tell thee.] That is, according
the Order or Decree which they made thereupon.

Shall thou do.] Pay suppose the Money, which they judged to be due to another
Man. For he does not speak of their doing whatsoever they bad them, (as if they
could control the Commands of God) but of Obeying the Sentence of this Court,
about those Matters which were in question between one Man and another, ( v.
8.) who were not to be Judges in their own Case; but rest in the Judgment of
those whom God had made the Supreme Interpreters of his Law.

Thou shall not decline from the Sentence which they shall show he, etc.] They
were not to make the least alteration in their Sentence. For though they might
think it was wrong, and the Senate perhaps did really err, and be better
informed afterward, (which the Law supposes, and in that case orders an
Expiatory Sacrifice, IV Levit. 13.) yet it was not lawful for any Man to act
contrary to their present Decree; nor to teach the contrary, whatsoever his
private Opinion might be.

And the man that will do presumptuonsly, and will not hearken.] This they
understand not barely of a private Man, that would not stand to their Sentence;
but of an Elder, or inferior Judge, who presumed to contradict it; as Mr.
Seldom shows, L. III. de Synedr. Cap. III.

Unto the Priest.] It is commonly thought, as I observed v. 8. that the
Singular Number is here put for the Plural; and that the meaning is, If any Man
would not hearken to the highest Court of Judgment, which consisted commonly of
a great many Priests, he should die for his Contempt. But they have a great
deal of reason on their side, who insist upon the Letter of this word Priest,
and of that which follows, or the Judge (understanding both of single Persons)
and take the High Priest only to be here meant: who seems to be described in
the next words, that stands to minister there before the LORD thy God. For when
God did not raise up a Judge to govern his People, the High Priest was the
Supreme Governor under God until the days of David: and so they were after the
Captivity. Hence it is, as Grotius observes ( Lib. de Imperio Summarum
Potestatum circa Sacra, Cap. IX. Sect. 4.) that COHEN is a name common to
Priests, and Princes: For among a great many Nations anciently he shows, the
Priests had the highest power; particularly among the Cappadocians (Strabo, who
was of that Country, says) the Sacerdotal Dignity was next to the Regal. But
howsoever this word be interpreted, the Crime here mentioned was Contumacy, in
not submitting to the Sentence of the highest Authority, whether it were vested
in one Person, or more: whereby the Government was in danger to be broken; and
therefore God orders such a person to be put to death.

Or the Judge.] See before v. 9.

Even that man shall die.] The Jews, who interpret this, as I said, of a Judge
in Inferior Courts, who presumed to contradict the Judgment of the Supreme
Court, have tempered the Severity of this Law, by several Explications and
Exceptions. Which have regard either to the manner of passing this Decree by
the highest Court, which an inferior disobeyed; and that was when a Cause came
before them upon an Appeal, (for it was not so Criminal to disobey every
Sentence of the Supreme Court, but only such as these) or to the place where it
was made; which was to be no where else, but at God's dwelling place: or to the
things about which the Decree was made; which some will have to be only weighty
Matters: and the act of Contumacy also was considered; for he was not put to
death, they say, unless in open Court he declared a contrary Sentence. The
death he suffered was strangling: and he could suffer in no other place, but
where this High Court sat. See Seldom of all these, in the place
beforementioned, N. II, III, IV, V, VI. And it may be further observed, that
the Prophets themselves were subject to the Power and Jurisdiction of this High
Court: by whom they might be sentenced to Capital Punishment, if they taught
contrary to the Law of God. But our Mr. Thorndike makes a doubt, whether the
Constitution which the Jewish Writers mention, about a Rebellious Elder (as
they call him who taught any thing contrary to the determination of this
Supreme Court) was ever in force, or no? For it was made, because of the
differences between the Schools of Hillel and Sammai, who lived not long before
our Savior's time: when it appears by the Gospel, that Nation had lost the
Power of Life and Death. See Rights of the Church, Chap. V. p. 256.

And thou shall put away the evil from Israel.] This may refer either to the
evil Person; or to the great scandal and dangerous Example he gave, by
resisting the highest Authority, and thereby breaking the Bond of Unity and
Peace.

And all the People shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.] This
Punishment was intended to strike a terror into all the People, that they
should not adventure to oppose the Supreme Authority. And for this end, the
Offender was to be kept in custody, as R. Aquiba understood this, till the next
great Feast (either of the Passover, or Pentecost, or Tabernacles) and then
executed, when the whole Nation, i. e. all the Males were present. This Mr.
Seldom observes (in the forenamed place, N. VII.) is the most received Opinion:
though R. Jehuda says, they did not make the Sentence sharper by a long delay,
but executed it presently. And for the further publication of it, they sent
Letters to all the Tribes and Cities of Israel, to give notice that such a Man
was executed, at such a time, for this Crime. See Seldom there, N. VIII.

And when thou come into the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee, and
shall possess it, and shall dwell therein.] When they had conquered the Land of
Canaan, and were settled in it.

And shall say, I will set a King over me.] The Jews commonly from this and the
next Verse, fancy that God commanded them to make a King, when they came to the
Land of Canaan, and had a quiet possession of it: following herein the Gemara
of the Sanhedrim, Cap. II. Insomuch that they have presumed to make this an
affirmative Precept, That a King of the People should be chosen; and quote this
place for it. To which some Learned Men among Christians have seemed to
incline; particularly Petrus Cunaeus Lib. de Republ. Hebr. Cap. XIV. and Guil.
Schikardus in his Jus Regium Cap. I. Theor. I. But Abarbinel himself
contradicts this, and so does Josephus; who observes that God intended they
should keep their present Government; but if they would have a King, he should
be one of their Brethren. For thus he interprets this place, Lib. I. Antiq.
Cap. VIII. that they should not affect any other Government, but love the
present, having the Laws for their Master, and living according to them; (...),
for it is sufficient that God is your Ruler. And then he adds, but if you
desire to have a King, (...), let him be one of your own Nation, as it here
follows in the next Verse.

Like as all the Nations that are about me.] Such as the Edomites, who had been
governed by Kings before the days of Moses. See XXXVI Genesis 31.

Ver. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee.] Install, and receive
him into the Throne.

Whom the LORD thy God shall choose.] They could not elect whom they pleased,
but the first King, at least, was to be appointed oy God himself, who was their
Supreme Governor. So the People understood it, when they desired Samuel, who
was their chief Ruler under God, to make them a King, (1 Samuel VIII. 5.) but
durst not to presume to set one up of themselves. And to confirm them in this
Opinion Samuel says to Saul, 1 Samuel X. 1. The LORD has anointed thee to be
Captain over his Inheritance: and says to all the People, v. 24. See ye him
whom the LORD has chosen. And accordingly when the lot was to be cast, to show
who was to be their King, Samuel bids all the Tribes present themselves before
the LORD, v. 19. And when it fell upon Saul, and they could not find him, they
enquired of the LORD, and the LORD answered where he was, v. 22. In like manner
when Saul was rejected, the LORD himself appointed David to be anointed their
King: and settled that Authority in his Family. And to determine which of his
Sons should have it, God himself appointed his immediate Successor, viz.
Solomon. For so David declares to all the Princes and the great Men, whom he
assembled before his death; Of all my Sons, the LORD has chosen Solomon to sit
upon the Throne of the Kingdom of the LORD God of Israel, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 5.
And again XXIX. 1. David said unto all the Congregation, Solomon my son, whom
alone God has chosen, is yet young, etc. But though it was thus in the
beginning of this Kingdom; yet God intended at length to make it hereditary, as
appears from v. 20. of this Chapter.

One from amongst thy Brethren shall thou set over thee.] i. e. Says the
Tradition mentioned by the Jews out of Tosiphta, the most select and choice
Person that could be found, not one of mean Extraction or Employment. This they
fancy is meant by from among thy brethren.

Thou may not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.] This the
Jews extend to all Offices whatsoever, as Maimonides reports their sense. See
Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XX. p. 647. And by thy brother some
of them understand one that was an Israelite, both by Father and Mother: though
others think it sufficient, if a King was an Israelite by the Mother's side.
See there Cap. XXII. Which in his Book de Succession* ad Pontificat. Lib. II.
he shows was sufficient for any Dignity among the Israelites, but only the
Priesthood. See also Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. IX. N. VI. where he observes the
Talmudists say the great Sanhedrim was to see, that no King but one thus
qualified was set over the People. Which, when there was such a Court, may be
allowed to be true; though all the Power which they ascribe to their Sanhedrim
over their Kings, is by no means to be admitted; but is an apparent figment:
For it is manifest out of the Bible, that their Kings had that very Power which
they ascribe to the Sanhedrim. Particularly, it is notorious that Solomon, by
his own Power, put Abiather out of the Office of High Priest, 1. Kings II. 6,
26. which Judgment the Talmudists say belonged only to the great Sanhedrim. In
like manner other Kings judged Prophets; which they appropriate to the same
Court.

Ver. 16. But he shall not multiply Horses to himself.] to keep up a Body of
Horse for War. For among the Jews their Armies consisted altogether of Footmen:
there being no breed of Horses in that Country; and their People, who were all
Husbandmen and Shepherds, being accustomed to labor, and to run as swiftly as
a Horse, 2 Samuel II. 18. XVIII. 19, 22, etc. Certain it is, that in the days of
David they had no Horsemen in their Army; for when Absalom lost the Battle and
fled, it was upon a Mule, that he endeavored to make his Escape. And though
Solomon was so prodigiously rich, that he was able to maintain Forty thousand
Stalls of Horses for his Chariots, and Twelve thousand Horsemen, (1 Kings IV.
26.) yet succeeding Kings could not keep up such an Expense: but, when they had
occasion, sent for Succors from Egypt, which commonly consisted of Horsemen.
Now one of the Reasons the Jews give why their King was not to multiply Horses,
is, lest he should be puffed up with pride; for an Horse being a stately
Creature, his Rider is often swollen with an high conceit of himself, as more
than one of the Heathen have observed. See Bochart. in his Hierozoicon, Lib.
II. Cap. IX. Nachmanides gives another good Reason, Lest he should confide and
trust in the power of his Horsemen, more than in God. See Schikard in his
Mischpat Hammelech, Cap. III. Theorem X. But the chief Reason is given by Moses
himself, in the next words; Lest they should be tempted to go to Egypt; with
which Country it was dangerous to have familiarity.

Nor cause the People to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply
Horses.] Send his People thither to buy Horses for him: it being a Country
which abounded with them, as Judaea did with Asses. For when Sheshak King of
Egypt (whom the Greek Writers call Sesostris) came against Jerusalem, there
were Threescore thousand Horsemen in his Army, 2 Chronicles. XII. 3. Which shows
how they abounded with Horses in that Country in those days; though in after
times they did not care to breed them. They might indeed have had Horses out of
other Countries, as well as Egypt; but not so easily, nor so good. Which made
Solomon send thither, and Pharaoh set a great price upon them: because he knew
their value, and that they could not furnish themselves so easily with them
elsewhere, 1 Kings X. 28, 29.

Forasmuch as the LORD has said unto you, ye shall henceforth return no more
that way.] Or the first words may be rendered, Forasmuch as the LORD says unto
you, etc. as he did now by him; that they should not maintain Traffic with the
Egyptians; at lest while they continued Idolaters. We read indeed that many
Jews went thither, and Vrijah the Prophet fled thither, XXVI Jerem. 21. of
which the Jews give this account. First, Some say this was but a temporary
Constitution, which was not to last always. Secondly, They distinguish about
the way of returning thither: conceiving that they might not go thither out of
the Land of Israel; but they might out of another Country whither they were
driven. Maimonides thinks they might go thither as Merchants; but not fix their
dwelling there. But the true meaning is, that they might not voluntarily go
thither upon any account; at least while they remained, as I said, so corrupted
in their Religion and Manners, as they were at this present. For there is an
express Law, XVIII Levit. 3. According to the works of the Egyptians ye shall
not do. See Schickardus in the forenamed place, p. 78. Whence those words of
the Prophet Isaiah, where, when he says the Land of Israel was full of Horses,
he adds, their Land also is full of Idols, II Isaiah 7, 8. For by multiplying
the one they multiplied the other. And therefore though David did reserve some
Chariots and Horsemen, which he took in his Conquests, for his own use, yet no
great number, 2 Samuel VIII. 4. But still great Men rode upon Mules (2 Samuel
XVIII. 9. 1 Kings I. 33, 38, 41.) as they had done in the days of the Judges,
V. 10. X. 4. XII. 14.

Neither shall he multiply Wives to himself.] This is not a Prohibition to take
more Wives than one; but not to have an excessive number, after the manner of
the Eastern Kings, whom Solomon seems to have imitated. I see no ground for
what the Jews say, that he might have Eighteen. See Schickard in the Book
abovenamed, Cap. III. Theor. IX. Selden's Vxor. Hebr. Lib. I. Cap. VIII.
Buxtorf. de Sponsal. Pars I. Sect. 40. For the proof which R. Solomon and
Bechin give of it is very weak; which is, that David having already six Wives,
(2 Samuel V. 13.) the Prophet tells him, if he had not offended God, he would
moreover have given him such and such things; i. e. say they, twice as many
Wives. 2 Samuel XII. 8. Much less is there any ground for what they say, that if
he took more than this number, he was to be scourged by the Authority of the
Sanhedrim: as he was, they pretend, for the breach of any of these Precepts
here mentioned. See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. IX. N. V. Which Grotius
indeed endeavors to soften, by affirming that these Lashes were no disgrace to
him, because he received them voluntarily, in Token of his Repentance; and
therefore was not scourged by the common Executioner, but by such a Person as
he himself chose to give this Correction: and he received also such a number of
Stripes as he himself pleased, and no more, Lib. I. de Jure Belli and Pacis,
Cap. III. Sect. XX. But this is directly against Maimonides, who says in
downright words, that the Sanhedrim appointed this Chastisement, as Seldom
observes in another place, Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. IX. N. V. And there is no
Example in the whole Book of God, of any such Jurisdiction which the Sanhedrim
had over their Kings: but all this may well be looked upon as a mere invention
of the Jewish Doctors, to magnify the Power of their great Council.

That his heart turn not away.] From all serious Business and Employment,
whilst he was caressing and studying to please a multitude of Women. Some
understand it, lest they turned his heart away from God, and the Duties of
Piety: of which there was great danger, if he married Worshippers of strange
gods as Solomon did. Otherwise, I should think it might be interpreted, of
turning his Thoughts from minding his People, and their good and welfare, which
must needs suffer much, when they were burdened with a great company of Wives,
who were to be richly maintained and provided for.

Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.] No more, says
the Sanhedrim (Cap. II.) than would pay Stipends to his Servants, etc. Others
of them scan the words more nicely, and observe That first, he is forbidden to
multiply Gold and Silver greatly: That is, to content himself with moderate
Riches, and not set himself to heap up Treasure; which could not be done
commonly without great Oppression of his Subjects. And secondly, he is
forbidden to multiply them to himself: But for the Public Benefit he might lay
up Money in the Treasury at the Temple; though in his own Coffers, for his
private Interest, he might not. See Schickard in his Mischpat Hammelech, Cap.
III. Theorem XI. where he produces their Answer to this Question, How should
the King be able to manage a War, or do any other great thing, if he did not
furnish himself with good store of Gold and Silver? He might, say they, fill
the Public Exchequer, though not his own private Bags. And that for two
Reasons: First, Lest he should wax proud and haughty, when his Purse swelled.
And secondly, Lest he should be tempted to squeeze his Subjects, and exact more
from them than they were able to bear; as Solomon seems to have done, whose
Treasurer the People stoned, 1 Kings XII. 18.

And it shall be, when he sits on the Throne of the Kingdom, that he shall
write him a Copy of this Law in a Book.] Not only of this Book of Deuteronomy,
but of the whole Law; and that with his own hand, as a means to fix it more in
his mind. Insomuch that though a Copy was left him by his Father, he was
notwithstanding to transcribe one himself, as the Jews say in the Gemara
Sanhedrim, Cap. II. Sect. XIII. All this is very agreeable to these words: but
whether he was bound, if he had not written a Copy before he was King (as every
private Israelite they say was bound to do) to write two, when he sat on the
Throne, may be doubted: for it cannot without violence be drawn from these
words; and their authority is not sufficient to warrant it. They give indeed a
plausible reason for it; That the one he was to carry about with him
whithersoever he went, and to read in the other at home: but why one Copy might
not serve for both these purposes, I do not see.

Out of that which is before the Priests the Levites.] He was not to write one
word of it out of his memory merely, or any private Man's Copy; but out of the
Book which was in the Sanctuary; where the original and uncorrupted Copy was in
the Custody of God's Ministers. There are a great many Rules the Jews give,
about the right writing of this Copy. Which may be seen in Guil. Schickardi
Mischpat Hammelech Cap. II. Theorem V.

Ver. 19. And it shall be with him.] Wheresoever Theor. VI.

And he shall read therein all the days of his life.] Diligently study it; not
spending his time, as Maimonides glosses, in drinking and making merry; but in
learning the Law of God. See there p. 53. From the neglect of this Precept,
their Kings became so ignorant of the Laws of God, and of their Obligation to
observe them, that in the days of the good King Josiah, he was strangely
startled at what he heard read out of this Book of the Law; when it was found
in the Temple, where it had long lain without any knowledge of it.

That he may learn to fear the LORD his God.] Be preserved in the true Religion.

To keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them.] Be
acquainted with his whole Duty, and perform it constantly. See I Joshua 8.

Ver. 20. That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren.] but taking a due
care to promote their happiness. For as the Scriptures, says Maimonides,
provided the King should have great honor done him, obliging all to reverence
him, so it commands him to be lowly in heart, and not to carry himself
insolently. Let him be gracious, and full of clemency to little and great; so
shall he go out and come in with the love and good wishes of them all. Unto
which Nachmanides adds this pious Reflection, If the Scripture deters Kings
from pride and haughtiness of heart; how unbecoming is it in other Men, who are
far inferior to them? etc.

And that he turn not aside from the commandment to the right hand, or the
left.] Neither by changing the Laws, on pretense of making better; nor by
abrogating them, on pretense of their inconveniency. But where the Divine Law
was not clear, or where nothing was there defined, he might by his Authority
make new Constitutions, as David and Solomon did, as well in Sacred as in Civil
Matters.

To the end that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom; he, and his Children,
in the midst of Israel.] This shows that God intended to establish a successive
Right in that Family, to which he chose to give the Kingdom, if they continued
in a constant Observation of his Laws. And indeed, there is no way to establish
and perpetuate a Family in the Throne, like the due observation of Laws, though
they be but Humane, not Divine Laws. For as Aristotle truly said, He that
commands the Law should govern all, (i. e. all things be ordered according to
Law) (...), seems to command that God should rule, and the Laws. But he that
bids a Man to rule without Laws (according to his own will) (...) (...), sets
up a Beast to govern. Chapter XVIII.
And above all things, he ought to endeavor to win the love of his Subjects,
by Humility and Clemency; as the same Aristotle taught Alexander, if we may
believe R. Jedaja in his Book called Mib^har Happeninim: where he reports a
Letter of his to that great Prince, advising him to gain the Affection of his
People by a gentle Government; which is far better than to rule Tyrannically by
Force and Violence. For to what purpose is it to have possession of their
Bodies, when the true possession is to be Master of their Hearts? Get
possession of their Hearts by Clemency, and that will draw their Bodies along
with them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. THE Priests, the Levites, and all the Or, even the whole Tribe of
Levi. See XVII. 9.

They shall have no inheritance with Israel] As had been said XVIII Numb. 20.
and here in this Book, X. 7. Which made it the more necessary Moses should
remind the People of that maintenance God had appointed for them. Which unless
it was duly given them, Religion could not be supported; and consequently the
Government (of which he had been speaking) would be quite confounded.

They shall eat the Offerings of the LORD made by fire.] Not the
Burnt-offerings, which were wholly Gods: but all other Offerings, of which a
share was appointed for the Priests the Sons of Aaron, XVIII Numb. 9, 10, 11,
18, 19.

And his inheritance.] That is, the Inheritance of the LORD, of whom he spoke
before; who had reserved certain Oblations to himself, and bestowed them upon
the Priests. They are mentioned XVIII Numb. 8, 9. and v. 12, 13, 14, 15. where
he first speaks of the First Fruits, and the Firstborn, which were all brought
unto the LORD, and by him given to them. In like manner all the Tithes of the
Land are said to be an Heave Offering unto the LORD, v. 24. where he says, I
have given them to the Levites to inherit. So these two, The Offerings of the
LORD made by fire, and his Inheritance, comprehend all that belonged to his
Ministers, whether Priests or Levites.

Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren; the LORD is
their inheritance, as he has said unto them.] The LORD had given them that
part and portion of the Offerings, which were peculiarly his own: And therefore
is said to be their Inheritance, because they enjoyed his inheritance, as these
holy things are called in the foregoing words. See XVIII Numb. 20, 24. and XIII
Josh. 14, 33.

And this shall be the Priests due from the people.] Besides those things that
God gave them, which peculiarly belonged to him.

From them that offer a Sacrifice.] Of Peace Offerings; which are sometimes
called simply a Sacrifice, (XVII Levit. 5, 8. XV Numb. 3.) in which the People
had a considerable Interest.

Whether it be Ox, or Sheep.] Under Sheep are comprehended Goats also, as I
have observed. See III Levit.

And they shall give unto the Priest the shoulder.] Together with the Breast;
as we read VII Lev. 32, 33, 34.

And the two cheeks, and the maw.] These were not given to the Priests before;
but were now added to their Portion, being accounted the best part of the
Beasts. For as the Cheeks were the best part of the Head, and the Shoulder and
Breast the best of the other Members of the Body; so the Maw was the principal
part of the Entrails, as Maimonides observes, P. III. More Nevochim, Cap. XXXIX.

By the Maw is meant the Stomach: and, in Beasts that chew the Cud, who have
four Stomachs, that which is called by the Greeks (...), viz. the lowest of
them. Which had this name, because the digestion which is begun in the other,
is here perfected and completed. And it appears that this part of the
Entrails, was accounted by the Ancients, a great dainty; as Bochartus proves
out of Aristophanes, in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. Cap. 45. p. 505.

Ver. 4. The first fruits also of thy Corn, of thy Wine, See XVIII Numb. 12. To
which it may be useful to add this out of Maimonides, (who has distinctly
represented the order wherein all Oblations were made) that after the Fruits of
the Earth were gathered, every Man was bound to bring a fiftieth part of them,
as a First Fruits, to the Priests, which was called Trumah gedolah, the great
Oblation; of which Moses speaks in this place. And next of all he separated a
tenth part of the whole from the rest, which was Maaser Rishon, the first
Tithe; and given to the Levites, XVIII Numb. 24. Then out of what remained
another tenth part was taken, called Maaser Sheni, the second Tithe; which was
every third year given to the Poor, and in the two intermediate years, spent in
Feasting at the House of God, XIV Deuteronomy. 28. So that, for instance, if a Man had
pressed out an Hundred and two Logs of Oil, he sent two of them as First Fruits
to the Priest; and then ten more, as Tithe, to the Levites; and deducted nine
parts more out of the residue, for the Poor: by which it appears that One and
twenty parts of an Hundred and two, that is, a fifth part of the whole, was
separated for pious and charitable uses. See Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap.
IV. Theorem XV.

And the first of the fleece of thy Sheep shall thou give him.] This is
comprehended under First Fruits; but never particularly mentioned before now.
And though the quantity is not mentioned, yet the Jews have adventured to
determine, that less than one Fleece in sixty was not accepted. For so they say
of all other First Fruits, that a sixtieth part of the whole was the least that
any Man gave; and he was accounted a covetous Man if he gave no more: they that
were indifferently good, giving a fiftieth part; and liberal Persons the
fortieth. By this means the Priests were provided with Clothes, as by other
Offerings with Food. And the Wool also, as they call it, of Goats (which were
shorn in these Countries) is comprehended under the Fleece of Sheep.

For the LORD thy God has chosen him out of all thy Tribes, to stand to
minister in the name of the LORD.] This was the Office of a Priest, to offer
Sacrifices unto God, and to bless the People in his Name.

Him and his sons for ever.] The Family of Aaron, of which he is principally
speaking. Who, when they were few in number, all ministered unto God: but
afterward they took their Courses of Attendance. And, as the Jews say, there
were eight Courses before Moses died; four of the Family of Eleazar, and as
many of Ithamar's: which in David's time were enlarged into Four and twenty
Courses. See Seldom Lib. I. de Succession. in Pontificat. Cap. I.

Ver. 6. And if a Levite.] By a Levite he seems here to mean a Priest. See v.
1. For they only could minister Levites ministered unto them.

Come from any of thy Gates out of all Israel.] From any City, in any Tribe of
Israel.

Where he sojourned.] i. e. Leave the Country where he has been wont to live.

And come with all the desire of his mind, unto the place which the LORD shall
choose.] With a sincere Affection to devote himself to the perpetual Service of
God at the Sanctuary; so that instead of coming in his Course, he would always
wait there, and never stir from that place.

Ver. 7. Then he shall minister in the name of the LORD Attend continually at
the Altar, to do all the Service of the Sanctuary. The LXX. translate it, He
shall minister to the name of the LORD; i. e. to the Divine Majesty, who dwells
there.

As his brethren the Levites do.] As all those do who live at that place.

Which stand there before the LORD.] To minister unto him. This was the case of
Samuel.

Ver. 8. They shall have like portion to eat.] This Levites did not eat of the
holy things, offered at the Altar. And the meaning is, that the rest of the
Priests who waited there, should allow him the same Portion, which they
themselves had, in the Sacrifices.

Besides that which comes of the sale of his patrimony.] Which was to remain
proper to himself, and not be divided with other Priests at Jerusalem (suppose)
where he ministered. The Hebrew words are something obscure, being beside his
sales by, or unto the fathers: That is, such Possessions as their Fathers
purchased, and left to them. For though the Priests had no share in the Land of
Canaan given them at the division of it, yet they might purchase Houses, and
Goods, and Cattle; and sometimes they purchased Fields, as we read Abiathar had
Fields of his own at Anathoth, 1 Kings II. 26. and the Prophet Jeremiah, who
was a Priest also, purchased a Field of his Uncle's Son in his own Town, XXXII
Jer. 7, 8, etc.

But the Jews make a quite different construction of these three Verses, which
they understand in this manner, That if any Levite (i. e. Priest, for they only
ministered before God) came up out of the City where he commonly resided, out of
pure Devotion to attend at the three Solemn Feasts, which were held at the
place where the Sanctuary was (where they were bound to wait, only when their
Course came; but at these Feasts might all come and minister in the Sanctuary)
his Brethren, whose Week it was then to attend, should both admit him to
minister before God with them; and also give him an equal Portion with
themselves, in the extraordinary Sacrifices which were then offered at those
Festivals. Except only those which were peculiarly assigned to them, whose Week
of waiting at the Altar it then was: who by the Ordinance of God delivered to
Moses and Aaron (who they suppose are here called the Fathers) were to have the
right Shoulder of the Peace Offerings. See VII Levit. 33. where it is said, He
among the Sons of Aaron that offers the Peace Offerings and the fat, shall
have the right shoulder for his part: in which none other was to participate.
But why this should be called the Sales, I do not understand; unless we
interpret it as Fosterus does, Venditiones, i. e. res venditas a patribus,
things sold by the Fathers: That is, appropriated by them (to the particular
Priest that offered the Sacrifice) as things sold are to those that buy them.

Ver. 9. When thou art come into the Land which the The Land of Canaan, which
the LORD was about to bestow upon them, according to his promise.

Thou shall not learn to do after the abominations of those Nations.] Now he
returns to warn them again, not to fall into the Idolatry, and the
Superstitions of the Country, whither they were going. See XVIII Levit. 3.

Ver. 10. There shall not be found among you.] So

Any one that makes his son or his daughter to pass through the fire.] This
was the most abominable Idolatry practiced in that Country, whither they were
going; who consecrated their Children in this manner to Moloch, or the Sun: of
which I have said sufficient XVIII Levit. 21. Therefore I shall only add here,
that this wicked Custom seems to have flowed from this Country of the
Phaenicians and Tyrians unto the Carthaginians. Who were guilty of the Impiety
of Sacrificing their Children, as they did also here unto Moloch, XX Levit. 2,
3. Which spread it self, in a manner, over all the World, as many have shown;
particularly Joh. Geusius in his Treatise de Victimis Humanis, Pars I. Cap. XI.
and it was found among the Americans, when that new World was discovered: See
also P. II. Cap. V.

Or that uses divination.] Of which there were many sorts; and one was by
raking into the bowels of their Sacrifices, particularly of Humane Sacrifices:
by the observation of which they pretended to foretell things, as many Authors
testify. Yea, they offered little Children on purpose, that thereby they might
make their Auguries, as the same Geusius has observed in that Book, Cap. XXI.
Unto which perhaps there is a peculiar respect in this place: for I find most
of the things here mentioned, joined in other places with making their Children
pass through the fire; particularly 2 Kings XXI. 6. 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 6. and the
Prophet Ezekiel seems to intimate that hereby they divined, when he charges the
Israelites with this crime, XX. 26, 31. For he adds, Shall I be enquired by
you, O House of Israel? Who have enquired, that is, by making your Children
pass through the fire.

But it must be confessed that the Hebrew words Kosem kosemim (which we
translate uses divination) are by many thought to have a peculiar respect unto
such, as used to divine by casting or drawing of Lots. And the word, as our
Learned Dr. Castle observes, is so used in the Arabian Language, for
distribution of Lots. Which sort of Divination was much in use among the Greeks
and Romans; and had been so, it is very likely, in more ancient times among the
Eastern Nations. For nothing is more known than the Sorts Praenestinae, and
Pativinae among the Romans; and the Dodonaeae, and Dindymenae, and many others
among the Greeks: Particularly that at Bura in Achaia, where there was a Cave
in which was the Image of Hercules: before which, they who resorted thither to
enquire directions in any Case, or the success of any Affair, used to fall
down, and say their Prayers; and after that to throw four Dice upon the Table,
and by the Letters or Marks upon which they fell, the divination was made; as
Pausanias describes it in his Achaica. In other places they used them in a
different manner; and the ancient Arabians divined by Arrows, as our famous Dr.
Pocock has shown in his Notes upon Gregor. Abul-farajus his Book concerning
the Original and Manners of the Arabians, p. 327, 328, etc. Where he describes
the manner of it, and shows that it was performed before some Idol; and
therefore was strictly forbidden by Mahomet in his Alcoran, as a Diabolical
Invention. In which he seems to have imitated Moses, who may be thought here to
forbid such kind of Divination; which was in use among the Eastern People in
the days of the Prophet Ezekiel, XXI. 21. where we find the same word Kosem;
which that Learned Author thinks is illustrated by that Arabian Custom.

It is to be noted also, that they used to divine by a dead man's skull, as our
Dr. Windet has observed out of the Sanhedrim Cap. VII. and Maimonides. Which
Custom the Greeks likewise followed; for Palladius relates how Macarius
enquired (...), at a dry Skull, etc. See Windet in his Book de Vita functorum
statu, Sect. I.

Several sorts of such kind of Persons there were among the Edomites, Moabites,
and other Nations near Judaea, who in the days of Jeremiah deceived the People
with their Divinations, Prophecies, Dreams, Enchantments and Sorceries; as we
learn from XXVII Jerem. 3, 9.

Or an observer of times, or an enchanter.] Of these I have said enough upon XX
Levit. 26.

Or a witch.] This word signifies worse than any of the former, viz. one that
does Mischief unto Men or Beasts, by evil Arts. Concerning which see upon XXII
Exodus 18. Unto which I shall here add, That the Jewish Nation have been
extremely addicted to Witchcraft, and some of their famous Rabbis have been
suspected of it. See J. Wagenseil upon Sota, p. 529.

Or a charmer.] There are various Conjectures about the meaning of the Hebrew
words chober chaber; which importing something of society, or conjunction, some
translate fortune tellers, who by the Conjunction of the Planets pretends to
predict future things: others, one that has Society with Evil Spirits, which
is mentioned afterward in another word. Job Ludolphus seems to me to have
given the plainest account of the words, which he translates congregans
congregationem, gathering together a Company. For it was an ancient way of
Enchantment, to bring various kinds of Beasts into one place; which the Rabbis
distinguish into the great Congregation, and the little Congregation. The great
was when they assembled together a great Company of the larger sort of Beasts;
and the less, when they gathered together as great a Company of the smaller,
such as Serpents, Scorpions, and the like. But we cannot be certain of this;
though Telezius tells us, it is in use at this day in the Eastern Countries.
For so he describes the Election of the King of Gingir; that he stood compassed
about with Lions, Tigers, Leopards, and Dragons, which by Magical Arts were
gathered together as his Guard, and Courtiers. See Ludolphi Comment. in Histor.
Aethiop. Cap. XVI. Numb. CXVI.

But the common Interpretation which the Jews give of Chober chaber is, that he
is one who uses strange words, which have no signification; but he pretends are
powerful to charm a Serpent (for instance) that it shall not sting, or to
preserve from any other harm. So Maimonides in Avoda Zara, Cap. XI. And to this
sort of Superstition the World was so addicted, that this Precept of Moses
could not bring the Jews quite off from it; but when they threw away other
Charms, they used the words of Scripture instead of them: Pretending, for
instance, to cure Wounds by reading that Verse in the Law, XV Exodus 26. I will
put none of these Diseases upon thee, etc. So we find they themselves
acknowledge in Sanhedrim, Cap. II. Sect. I. and Maimonides says in the
forenamed Treatise, this is forbidden by Moses in this place, as much as any
other kind of Charm; for the words of the Law are turned hereby to another use
than God intended in them; which was not for healing the body, but curing the
soul. And I see no reason why it should not be thought as great a Crime to use
the Schem Hamphorash (as they call the Name Jehovah) to such purposes: and yet
the Jews are so stupid as to imagine Moses wrought all his Miracles by the
virtue of it. Maimonides indeed was so sober as to reject this common Conceit,
condemning those who think there was a power in the very Letters and
pronunciation of the word, Lib. I. More Nevochim, Cap. LXII.

Or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizzard.] Of these two see what I
have noted XIX Levit. 31. and XX Levit. 6.

A necromancer.] In the Hebrew, one that seeks to, or enquires of the dead. It
is not easy to tell wherein this differs from one that had a familiar Spirit,
as we translate it. For the Woman whom Saul consulted, who had a Spirit, called
Oboth, enquired also after this manner: their Spirit, it seems, teaching such
Persons to call for the Dead to appear to them. But some perhaps had not such a
Spirit, who notwithstanding consulted the Dead, by going to their Graves in the
Night, and there lying down, and muttering certain words with a low voice, that
they might have Communion with them by Dreams, or by their appearing to them:
Unto which the Prophet Isaiah is thought to allude, VIII. 19. XXIX. 4.
Maimonides in Avoda Zara, Cap. XI. Sect. XV. thus describes a Necromancer; He
is one, who having afflicted himself with Fasting, goes to the burying place,
and there lies down and falls asleep; and then the Dead appear to him, and tell
him what he desires. Such are they also, who put on a certain kind of Garment,
speak foam uncouth words, and make a Fume; and then lie down alone, that the
Dead, whom they desire, may come to them, and discourse with them in their
sleep. To the same purpose Aben-Ezra. To this the Gentiles were very prone; and
it was thought so high an Attainment to come to this Knowledge, that Julian the
Apostate, who was ambitious to be acquainted with all the Heathen Mysteries,
secretly practiced this (...), in the most retired part of his Palace; cutting
up the Bodies of Virgins and Boys, to bring up the dead to him; which was far
more impious than what the Talmudists say (in the Title Beracoth) that such
kind of People were wont to burn the Secundine of a black Cat, when she had
first Kitlens, and beating it very small, put some of the Powder upon their
Eye, whereupon Demons appeared to them. See Greg. Nazianz. in his Invectives
against Julian, p. 91. and St. Chrysostom in his Oration upon S. Babylas. I
shall only add, that this was not only privately practiced among the Gentiles,
but there were also public places to which Men resorted to consult the Dead:
Particularly at Thesprotis near to the River Acheron, where Herodotus, Lib. V.
mentions a (...). and Plutarch (to name no more) mentions another at Heraclea;
which Pausanias in his distress, went to consult; as he relates in the Life of
Cimon.

Ver. 12. For all that do these things are an abomination Because they were
invented by idolatrous People; if not by the Suggestions of evil Spirits.

And because of these abominations the LORD thy God does drive them out from
before thee.] Expelled the Amorites, and other wicked Inhabitants of the
Country, where they practiced these Abominations: which, no doubt, had some
relation to Idolatry, and therefore were forbidden to the Israelites.

Ver. 13. Thou shall be perfect with the LORD thy This shows there was
something of Idolatrous Worship in all the forenamed Practices: which, if they
followed, it was, in some degree, to forsake the LORD, on whom they were wholly
to depend, and seek to him alone in the ways which he had prescribed in his
Laws. For this was to be perfect with the LORD; to have nothing to do with any
other god, nor with the Rites and Ceremonies that were used in their Worship.
And therefore the LXX. translate this word sometimes by (...), (XXII Job 3.) as
well as by (...): for then they were perfect with God, when they kept his
Worship simple and pure, without the mixture of any Foreign Religion. Which
the whole Context shows to be the sense, both in the words foregoing, and
followng.

Ver. 14. For those Nations which thou shall possess, hearkened unto observers
of times, and to diviners.] The ancient Heathen, as Strabo tells us, Lib. VI.
had these hearkened to them, were odious to God. For that even the Art of
Divination depended upon some Idolatrous Opinions and Practices, appears
evidently even from the most refined Account we have of it, in ancient Authors.
For Instance, Ammianus Marcellinus, who to acquit his Master Julian from the
suspicion of Sorcery, which some said he used, to get the foreknowledge of
things future, makes it a principal point of Wisdom, not unworthy such a Prince
who was a professed Lover of all Sciences, to offer placatory Sacrifices to
draw in the Spirit of all the Elements, to endue him with a Spirit of
Divination. For so his words are in the beginning of his One and twentieth
Book: The spirit of all the Elements being always and every way invigorated with
the fore-perceiving motion of the everlasting (i. e. the heavenly) bodies, make
us partakers of the gifts of divining: and the substantial Powers, ritu diverso
placatae, being rendered favorable by respective Rites (i. e. such as were
proper and suitable to each of them) convey Praedictions to Mortality, as from
so many perpetual Springs, or Fountains. Over which (Substantial Powers) the
goddess Themis is said to praeside, etc. Which shows that Julian, who called
Jupiter the most high god, the king of all, yet courted other inferior powers,
by such rites, as he imagined would win their favor: which was rank Idolatry.

But as for thee, the LORD thy God has not suffered thee so to do.] But
absolutely forbad it, XIX Lev. 31. XX. 6. where he warns them to have nothing
to do with some of the Persons here mentioned: and not only instructed them in
the way to live happily, but established an Oracle among them to be consulted
on all weighty occasions; and governed them by Men, whom he had endued with his
Spirit, XI Numb. 16, 17, 25. Therefore if any Israelite practiced any of the
things here forbidden, though he did not worship any Idol, he was scourged by
the Sentence of the Court of Judgment. See Seldom Lib. de Jure Not. and Gent.
Cap. VII.

Ver. 15. The LORD thy God will raise up unto thee a Since the Jews, as all
other Nations, were extremely desirous to know things to come, Moses reveals
unto them from God a thing future of the highest importance, viz. the Coming of
CHRIST, and the greatness of his Authority: and in after times God revealed to
them by degrees, the time of his Birth, his Death, Resurrection, etc. The Jews
indeed commonly take these words to be a promise of a constant Succession of
Prophets, that should be among them, to preserve them from going to such
Diviners as were famous among their Heathen Neighbors: and thus many Christian
Interpreters make out the connection of these words with the foregoing. But
though this may be allowed to be intimated, and this Promise be acknowledged to
be partly verified in those Prophets which God raised up from Age to Age after
Moses, for further knowledge of his Will (as the promise of a Savior was in
part verified in those Judges and Kings by whom God delivered his People from
their Enemies) yet it is very evident that he speaks of a single Prophet more
eminent than all the rest: and that these words, in their most literal sense,
cannot belong to any other Person, but the MESSIAH. So that albeit the
continuance of Prophets among this People, was a means to prevent all occasions
of consulting Sorcerers, or Witches; yet the chief ground upon which Moses
disswades them from such practices, according to the literal connection of these
words with the foregoing, [the LORD thy God has not suffered thee to do so] i.
e. to hearken unto Observers of Times and Diviners, was the consideration of
their late mighty Deliverance by Moses; the excellency of their present Law,
which God had given them for their direction; and their expectation of a
greater Lawgiver in future times: when the first Covenant should wax old, and
Prophecy it self for a long time fail; as it did before the Coming of this
great Prophet, the LORD CHRIST. To this purpose Dr. Jackson, in his Third Book
upon the Creed, Chap. XXI. paragr. 19.

From the midst of thee, of thy brethren.] It was a great honor to them to
have such a Prophet, as is here spoken of, arise out of their Nation: but as he
was after a peculiar sort raised up by JEHOVAH, not merely by the External
Assistances or Impulsion of his Spirit, (to use the words of the same excellent
Person, paragr. 9.) but by intrinsic assumption into the Unity of his Person:
So likewise he was raised up in a strict and proper sense from the midst of
them; being, as it were, extracted out of a pure Virgin, as the first Woman was
out of the Man, by the Almighty's own immediate hand.

Like unto me.] This shows he speaks of a single Prophet, and not of a constant
Succession of Prophets; there being none of them like to Moses: whom God
himself distinguished from them all, XII Numb. 6, 7, 8. And accordingly that
Divine Writer, who added those Verses which are at the end of this Book,
(concerning the Death of Moses) testifies that there never rose in Israel a
Prophet like to Moses. See XXXIV Deuteronomy. 10. It is commonly thought to be done by
Ezra, who has effectually confuted all the Conceits of R. Bechai, Aben-Ezra,
Abarbinel, and other Jewish Doctors, who take either Joshua or Jeremiah to have
been this Prophet. If Joshua, as some fancy, added these words, then he
excluded himself from being the Person: nor did Joshua act as a Prophet, but as
a Judge, or Governor. And Jeremiah is acknowledged by Abarbinel himself to be
inferior to Isaiah. For though in his Preface to his Commentary upon Jeremiah,
he mentions Fourteen things wherein he was like unto Moses, and says he
prophesied just Forty years, as Moses did; yet in his Commentary upon the
lesser Prophets, he prefers Isaiah before them all: and Censures the rudeness
of Jeremiah's Language; in many things preferring Ezekiel to him. So little do
these Doctors agree in their Interpretation of this Prophecy; which can belong
to none of their Prophets which succeeded Moses (who were all much inferior to
him) until He came, who perfectly resembled him, but was much superior to him.
See v. 18. And thus the ancient Jews, understood this Prophecy: For though
Maimonides only says, the Messiah should be endued with Wisdom greater than
Solomon's, and should equal their Master Moses;, yet those before him proceeded
a great deal further. This being a common saying among them, which Abarbinel
himself remembers, in his Commentary upon the small Prophets, He shall be
exalted above Abraham; lifted up above Moses; and higher than the Angels of the
Ministry. Nor is the Cabbalistical observation, mentioned in Baal-Hatturim, to
be quite neglected; which is, that this Verse begins and ends with the Letter
Nun, which is the numeral Letter for Fifty: importing that to the Prophet here
promised should be opened the fifty Gates of Knowledge; forty nine of which
only were opened to Moses. And that this Verse also consists of ten words; to
signify that they were to obey this Prophet no less than the ten Commandments.
Which observation, it must be confessed, is weakly grounded, but contains a
most illustrious Truth; and shows that they believed Moses here speaks of the
Messiah.

Unto him shall ye hearken.] As they had engaged themselves to do; it will
appear from the following words.

According to all that thou desiredst of the LORD thy God in Horeb, in the day
of the Assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the LORD, etc.] So
we read XX Exodus 19. where they made this request unto Moses, saying, Speak,
thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die.] In
which words the whole Multitude bound themselves solemnly, to hear the words of
the LORD, being delivered not immediately from his own mouth, but by Moses: as
is more fully expressed in this Book, V Deuteronomy. 27, 28, 29. Where God highly
commends this good Resolution in them, as Moses here observes again in the next
Verse.

And the LORD said unto me, they have well spoken that which they have spoken.]
He approved their desire; and resolved not to speak to them any more, as he did
from mount Sinai, with a voice out of the Fire and Cloud: but by Moses himself
while he lived; and afterward by one like to Moses, as it here follows.

Ver. 18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren.] These
words seem to have been spoken to Moses by God, when they desired God would not
speak to them any more immediately by himself, but by a Mediator. Then God was
pleased to promise them a great deal more than they desired; which was to raise
up another Prophet, like to Moses; who should acquaint them more fully with his
Mind and Will, in as familiar a manner as Moses did: without striking any such
terror into them, as they were in at the giving of the Law; though the words of
this Prophet came from the mouth of God himself. In which two things the
Israelites excelled all other Nations ( i. e. in that they had such an
excellent Law delivered by Moses; which was to be bettered by an everlasting
Covenant, made by this Prince of the Prophets) In respect of both (as the same
Dr. Jackson expresses it) the name of Southsayer or Sorcerer was not to be
named in Israel; as they were in the Nations that knew not God, much less
expected such a Mediator. In whom the Spirit of Life should dwell as
plentifully, as Splendour does in the Body of the Sun: from whose fullness, e're
he visibly appeared in the World, all other Prophets were illuminated. So that
Moses himself, and all the Prophets that followed him, were but as Messengers
sent from God, to solicit his People to preserve their Allegiance free from all
commerce or compact with familiar Spirits: until the Prince of Glory came in
Person to visit them, and dwell among them.

Like unto thee.] This is well explained by Eusebius, (...), a second
Lawgiver, as Moses was. For in saying not simply he would raise them up a
Prophet, but like unto thee, it must signify, says he, that this Prophet
should be a Lawgiver, as well as Moses: which none of the Prophets were, till
our Savior came. Neither Isaiah, nor Jeremiah were the Makers of Laws, but
only called upon them to observe the Law of Moses. Whereas when the LORD Jesus
came, he gave Laws to all the World; and those far superior to the Laws of
Moses. Who only said, Thou shall not commit Adultery: but our LORD says, I say
unto you, ye shall not lust: And instead of Thou shall not kill; he says, Be
not angry with thy brother, etc. Whence it was, that they who heard him were
astonished at his Doctrine, and said, that he spoke not as the Scribes, who
were expounders of the Law; but as one that had authority: that is, power to
ordain and enact Laws, and not only to explain those that were already written,
Lib. I. Demonstr. Evang. Cap. VII. and Lib. III. Cap. II. Lib. IX. p. 443, etc.
See also what Joh. Wagenseil has said upon these words, in his Annot. in
Lipman. Carm. Memoriale. p. 548.

And will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
shall command him.] Reveal the whole Mind and Will of God, XII John 49, 50. For
he was herein like to Moses, (though far superior to him) that he was
intimately acquainted with God's Counsels, being in the bosom of the Father, I
John 18. And confirmed all that he said to be from God, by Miracles, and
Wonders, and Signs, far more mighty than those of Moses; and more in number
than had been wrought by all the Prophets, from the beginning of the World.
Particularly, he fed Multitudes with a little Food (which made the People cry
out, This is of a truth that Prophet which should come into the World, VI John
14.) but above all this, gave them that Bread from Heaven of which the Manna
which Moses gave them was but a shadow: as he took occasion to show the People,
upon their admiration of that miraculous Feast he had made for them, with five
Barley Loaves and two small Fishes. For he himself was that Bread of Life, who
nourished Men's Souls with the Word of Eternal Life, which he had in himself: as
he showed by his Resurrection from the Dead, which he himself predicted, and
thereby proved himself the greatest of all the Prophets. For though Moses
foretold his own death; yet neither he, nor any other Prophet whatsoever, but
our Savior, spoke of his being raised up again. In which he may be thought to
be like to Moses; who was raised up by God to be a Savior of his People out of
that Ark, which without the special Providence of God, had been his Tomb. And
unto this Resurrection of Christ, does the propriety of this phrase, from the
midst of thee agree: for this was done, as Dr. Jackson also well observes, in
the midst of Jerusalem, the Metropolis of Judaea; not without express notice
given of it to the Rulers of the People. And such a Confirmation it was, that
he was the Prophet they should all hear, that there could not be a greater; as
all Strangers, both to their Religion and ours, must agree; and they themselves
cannot deny. For Nachmanides (relating in a Letter of his to the Rabbis at
Marseilles, how there was a Man in those days, in the Southern Countries, who
pretended to be the forerunner of the Messiah, unto whom great numbers, both of
Jews and Arabs resorted) tells us, that he being apprehended by the King of the
Country, and asked what Miracle he showed to confirm his Commission, he answered
boldly, Cut of my Head, and I will come to life again. To which the King of the
Arabs replied, There is no sign greater than this; which if it come to pass,
both I and the whole World will believe thee. Whereupon his Head was cut off,
and there was an end of all his pretenses: though some of the Jews were so mad,
as Maimonides there says, that they still expected his return to life. Thus R.
Gedaliah reports in his Schalshelet Hakkabalah.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words,
which he shall speak in my name.] This is the proper Character of a Prophet, to
deliver in the Name of God, what he received from God. This did Moses: but
Christ most eminently, as I before observed from XII John 49, 50. where he
says, I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak, etc. whatsoever
therefore I speak, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. Which is a
perfect Commentary upon these words of Moses. Who here calls Christ a Prophet,
not a Priest, or a King, (though he was to be both) because he would not have
the Jews mistake, and expect to find in his Person the worldly Grandeur of a
mighty Prince, or the high honor and splendour of Aaron; but have the greatest
regard to the heavenly Doctrine which he taught them, as he himself (he told
them) was taught by the Father. For I proceeded forth, says he, and came from
God, neither came I of my self, but he sent me; and I do nothing of my self,
but as my Father has taught me, I speak these things, VIII John 28, 42. This
was the highest honor of all, to speak God's words (v. 47.) in the Name of
God, V. 42.

I conclude this, with the remarkable words of the Midrasch upon Ecclesiastes,
who thus expresses the sense of this Prophecy, As was the first Redeemer, such
shall be the last Redeemer. Which plainly determine the Prophet here spoken of
to be one single Person; and he no other but the LORD Christ. See Huetius in
his Demonstr. Evang. Propos. VII. N. IX.

I will require it of him.] Severely punish him, so as to destroy him from
among his People; as St. Peter interprets it, III Acts 23. And so this Phrase
is used IX Genesis 5. XLII. 22. And there was great reason for such severity,
seeing they had so solemnly bound themselves to hearken to this Prophet; when
they desired God not to speak any more to them by himself, but by a Mediator;
which God then promised, as I observed v. 18. A Mediator of a better Covenant,
who should secure them from such dreadful Flames, as they then saw, if they
would hearken to him, as they promised to do: otherwise, what could they
expect, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation,
to devour the Adversaries? For since he that despised Moses his Law, died
without mercy, under two or three Witnesses; of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye* shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, in the open face of all the World, X Hebr. 27, 28, 29. Which is a full
explication of these words, Whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he
shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him. Or, as Onkelos translates it,
My WORD shall require it of him. Where Memra, WORD, can signify nothing but a
Divine Person, distinct from him who speaks these words: even that very Person
to whom the Apostle applies them.

Ver. 20. But the Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, etc.]
These words plainly suggest to us, that Moses intended in the foregoing
Discourse Israelites to hearken diligently to all such Prophets as God should
at any time raise up to them: though it be most evident, if we examine the
propriety of every Word, or Clause in the whole Context, they cannot be exactly
fitted unto any Prophet but Christ. Unto whom the whole Discourse is as fully
accommodated, as a well made Garment to the Body that wears it. They are the
words of the same excellent Person, so often mentioned, Dr. Jackson, Lib. III.
on the Creed, Cap. XXI. Paragr. 1, 2.

Speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him, or that shall speak
in the name of other gods.] It was a manifest sign a Man was a false Prophet,
if he spoke in the name of Baal, or any other god, but the God of Israel. Or,
if he said, such a Star by its spiritual influence coming upon me, said,
Worship me after this manner, or thus call upon me, as Maimonides (who gives an
account of the several sorts of false Prophets) speaks in his Preface to Seder
Zeraim. But how should they know a Man to be a false Prophet, when he spoke to
them in the Name of the LORD? For Men might pretend, as some did, that God had
sent them, and given them a Command, when he had not. To which he answers in
the next Verses.

Even that Prophet shall die.] He was to be strangled, say the Jews, by the
Sentence of the great Sanhedrim. For it is a Tradition of their Rabbis, says
the Gemara Babylonica upon that Title, that in the business of Prophecy there
are three sorts of Persons, who are to be punished by the judgment of Men: and
three by the Sentence of Heaven. He that prophesied what he did not hear from
God (an example of which we have in Zedekiah, 1 Kings XXII. 11.) or spoke what
was not said to him, but to another (an example of which they make Hananiah,
XXVIII Jer. 11.) or Prophecies in the name of an Idol, (suppose Baal) all these
were to be put to Death by the Sentence of the Court of Judgment. But he that
suppressed his Prophecy (like Jonah) or despised the words of a Prophet; or did
not observe his own words, were to be punished by the Hand of Heaven. See
Seldom Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. VI. N. I.

Ver. 21. And if thou say in thine heart, how shall we Which was but a
reasonable question; there being as great care necessary, not to hearken to
falsehood, as to be attentive unto Truth. And this relates unto such Prophets,
as came to them in the Name of the LORD: For if a Man came in the name of any
other god, there needed no other Mark to discover him to be an Impostor.

Ver. 22. When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the Predicting some wonderful
thing to come to pass, as a Token he is sent of God to deliver what he speaks
to the People.

If the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the LORD
has not spoken.] For if the LORD had sent him, he would have accomplished what
he gave as a sign of his Mission: which not coming to pass, he was proved to be
a false Prophet, who spoke out of his own heart, and not the Word of the LORD.
But here the Jews distinguish between a Prophet who predicts evil things, as
Famine, or Pestilence, etc. and one that predicts good things, as Rain (when
there is great need of it) and fruitful years, etc. Though the Predictions of
the former sort did not come to pass, he was not to be reputed presently a
false Prophet, because God is very merciful, and often repented him of the
evil: as he did in the Case of Nineveh. But in the latter Case, if any one of
the good Things he foretold did not come to pass, he was to be taken for a
Deceiver: which they understand also of the very time and place, when and where
he said the things he predicted should be fulfilled: and here they bring in the
example of Hananiah, the Son of Azur, mentioned before XXVIII Jer. 11. And see
v. 8, 9. of that Chapter. But this does not give us the true difference: for
both God's Promises and Threatenings many times depend upon a Condition, as
appears from that famous place in the Prophet, XVIII Jerem. 7, 8, 9. So that
the good Things a Prophet foretold might not come to pass, and yet he might be
a true Prophet; because the People proved unworthy of them, and God did not
absolutely intend them. Therefore the true meaning seems to be, That if a
Prophet foretold such a Thing as the Power of Nature cannot produce, and gave
it as a sign God sent him, who would justify his Mission by doing that wonder;
and the Thing did not come to pass: he was to be looked upon as not a Man of
God. For example; when Moses threw his Rod on the ground, and said it should
become a Serpent; if it had not been turned into a Serpent, he had been
convicted of Falsity. Or a Prophet said Fire should come down from Heaven, and
consume the Sacrifice which lay before him, which was the case of Elijah, if it
had not come down, he would have been no more owned for a true Prophet, than
the Prophets of Baal. And, as Maimonides well observes, if a Prophet's words
were fulfilled in one, or more Things, he was not to be judged a true Prophet,
unless every Thing he spoke in the Name of God came to pass. Which he proves
from those words concerning Samuel, 1 Samuel III. 19, 20. The LORD let none of
his words fall to the ground: And all Israel knew that Samuel was established
to be a Prophet of the LORD.

The Jews also made this addition to the Rule forementioned of trying Prophets,
as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. V. N. III. That whatsoever
Prophet had the Testimony of another undoubted Prophet, was to be taken for a
true Prophet. By which Rule they might have known the great Prophet, whom God
promised to them in the foregoing Verses. For John the Baptist, whom the whole
Nation took for a Prophet, testified to them that JESUS was the Christ. And
besides all other undoubted Marks of his being sent of God, his rising from the
Dead, which he himself foretold, was enough to satisfy all Men of the Truth of
what he said. For though every Prediction of what afterward comes to pass,
will not necessarily prove a Man to be a true Prophet; yet the fulfilling of a
great number of Things, (not one of which fails, as was said before of Samuel)
especially of such a Thing as this, which was impossible to be brought to pass,
but by an Almighty Power, is an uncontrollable Evidence of a Divine Mission.

R. Solomon, upon this Verse, has a Note which is worth our Observation,
though it be not to the purpose of Moses his words: A Prophet, says he, that
bids thee not observe some of the Precepts, is not to be heard, unless he be
known to be a Man of eminent Virtue, and upright Life, as Elijah was, who bid
them build an Altar on Mount Carmel, even when Sacrifices upon High Places were
forbidden. But there was a necessity for it, that he might restore the true
Worship of God in Israel. Which should have made them hearken to our blessed
Savior, better than they did; he being so perfectly holy and pure, that he
challenged any of them to charge him with Sin; especially when he only laid
aside some of their vain Traditions; but conformed to all the Rites of Moses.
So that if, in conclusion, we should grant that Moses (in the 15th and 16th,
etc. Verses) speaks of all the Prophets that should succeed him (which it is
certain he does not principally intend) the Jews were impious in rejecting our
Savior, who came as a Prophet to them; and had all the Marks that a Prophet
could have, of his being sent from God.

But the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously.] For it was an act of high
Presumption, and arrogant Pride, for any Man to pretend a Commission from God,
when he had not sent him. Which was done two ways, as the Jews interpret this:
either when a Man spoke in the Name of God, that which was false; or when he
pretended that to have been spoken to him, which was revealed by God to
another. (See XXII Jerem. 30.) Both these were impudent Impostors, and
accordingly to be treated.

Thou shall not be afraid of him.] Have no reverence or regard to him, though
he be never so confident. Nor be afraid to lay hold of him, and endeavor to
bring him before the Sanhedrim, to have their Sentence pass upon him, (as the
Jews understand it) though he have never so powerful an Interest to support
him, and preserve him from punishment. Thus Maimonides in the forenamed Preface
to Sever Zeraim; Thou shall not be terrified, Chapter XIX.
or averted from endeavoring to have him put to death, by his Religion,
Goodness, or Knowledge: since in his proud brags, he has spoken false things
of God. For to be afraid of such a Person, and of his Partakers, was to
distrust God, who is the Defender of those that defend the Cause of Religion.

CHAP. XIX.
HAving sufficiently pressed upon the People the great Commandment, of Loving
God with all the Heart, and Soul and Strength; and Him alone: Moses now
proceeds to remember them of other Precepts belonging to the Second Table, (as
we now speak) but not in an exact method, nor without interspersing some
Ceremonial Matters. And he begins with what concerns that Commandment, Thou
shall not kill.

Verse 1. WHen the LORD thy God has cut off etc.] The very same words we had
before upon another occasion, XII. 29. Which are now used to signify, that
they were not bound to what follows, till God had subdued the Land of Canaan
for them, and they were settled in it; as the last words of the Verse import,
dwell in their Cities, and in their Houses. Accordingly after the division
of the Land, God puts Joshua in mind of this business, XX Josh. 1, 2, etc.

Ver. 2. Thou shall separate three Cities for thee.] According to an order God
had given to Moses, XXXV Numb. 14, 15. to set aside six Cities in all, for the
Jordan, where they now were; and three on the other side in the Land of Canaan.
The former part of which Command Moses himself had executed, IV Deuteronomy. 42, etc.
and now gives them a Charge to perform the other.

In the midst of thy Land, which the LORD thy God gives thee to possess it.]
In the midst of their Land, signifies no more but within their Land. For if
they had been all three, in the very heart of the Country, it would have
crossed the end and intention of them; which was, that they should be placed so
conveniently in several parts of the Country, that Men might easily and
speedily flee to them. And therefore the midst of the Land, may be opposed to
the skirts of the Country, where they would have been too far distant from some
parts of it: or, may denote that they should be set in an eminent place, upon
the top of Mountains, where they might be seen afar off. And so they all three
were, it is apparent from XX Josh. 7. where they are said to be in Mount
Naphtali, Mount Ephraim, and the Mountain of Judah.

And thou shall prepare thee a way.] Make a plain Rode to them, and keep it in
good repair; that both in Winter and Summer the Manslayer might, without
difficulty, flee thither. And for his more safe passage, the Hebrews say, where
there were any turnings, or two ways parted, they were bound to set up a Post,
or Stone, wherein was engraven, in great Letters the word MIKLAT, i. e. Refuge;
that he might not mistake his way to the place.

And divide the Coast of thy Land (which the LORD thy God gives thee to
inherit) into three parts.] The Jews understand it, that they were to be placed
at an equal distance, in three several parts of the Country: that all might
have the same benefit by them; and no Body have a longer Journey to go than his
Neighbor, for his safety.

That every Slayer may flee thither.] Have the convenience of preserving
himself, in one or other of them. It is observable, that there were as many of
these Cities in the two Tribes and a half, as there were in all the other nine
Tribes and a half: in which there seems to be a great inequality. I have given
some account of it upon XXXV Numb. 14. and the Hebrews fancy there was another
reason for it, because of the frequent Murders, which were likely to be
committed, by the fierce Nature of the Gileadites. See the Book of Judges,
Chap. X. and XI. and VI Hosea 8.

Ver. 4. And this is the case of the slayer, which shall Be preserved from the
Avenger of Blood, who otherwise might kill him.

Whosoever kills his Neighbor ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past.] These
Cities were not to be a protection to a wilful Murderer; but to an innocent
Person, who against his intention was so unhappy as to kill a Man belidaath (as
the words are in the Hebrew) without his knowledge; being free, that is, from
any design to do him the least harm. But as for such as out of hatred and
malice in their hearts killed another, they were so far from finding safety in
these Cities, that they were to be pulled from the Altar, if they fled thither
for Sanctuary, as we now speak, XXI Exodus 12, 14. Or if they would not stir
from thence, they might be killed there, as appears by the case of Joab, 1
Kings II. 28, 30, 31.

Ver. 5. As when a man goes into the wood with his neighbor to hew wood, and
his hand fetches a stroke with the Ax, to cut down the Tree, and the head
slippeth By this, all other like Cases were to be judged. That is, when a Man
was about a lawful business, if any thing happened which he intended not, he was
not accountable for it. See Seldom Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. II.

He shall flee unto one of those Cities, and live.] He might get to which of
them he could most conveniently; and there be preserved. The Jews from this
word live conclude, without any other ground for it, that a Master was bound to
go along with his Scholar, who fled hither; because without the Doctrine of the
Law, Men did not live, but were dead.

Lest the avenger of blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot.] With
Anger, which might boil up to such a degree, as to move him to kill the Slayer,
before he had examined, whether there was a just Cause.

It is evident that this Verse is to be connected with Verse the third, (the
two next, v. 4, 5. coming in as a Parenthesis, to show who should be preserved
in these Cities, and who not) being a reason, why the Cities of Refuge should
be placed at an equal distance, in several parts of the Country; that the
Journey might not be too long to any of them; but a Man might soon flee
thither, before the Avenger of Blood could lay hold of him.

Because the way is long, and slay him.] If he could not have gotten thither in
a short time, he might have been in danger to lose his Life, though not worthy
of death. For as the Law did not punish him that killed a Manslayer, when he
found him out of the Bounds of the City of Refuge, (XXXV Numb. 27.) so it seems
to have indemnified him, if he killed him before he got thither.

Whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he hated him not in time
past.] Which in his rage, the Avenger of Blood did not consider; and therefore
was guilty before God of shedding innocent Blood; though the Law did not punish
him for it.

Ver. 7. Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall To prevent which
Mischief, God commanded, not merely one, but three Cities, and those in several
places of the Country; where Men might find Safety, if they made haste to flee
to them.

Ver. 8. And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy Coast As far as unto the River
Euphrates, XV Genesis 18. XXIII Exodus 31. I Deuteronomy. 7.

Ver. 9. If thou shall keep all these Commandments to This seems to have been
the Condition, upon the performance of which depended the enlargement of their
Border. Which is more fully expressed XI. 22, 23, 24. And so the Covenant made
with Abraham (in XV Genesis 18.) is to be understood, as including in it this
Condition.

Thou shall then add three Cities more for thee, besides these three.] We do
not read of any more added to these, though their Border was enlarged in
David's and Solomon's time; and that as far as Euphrates. But those Nations
which they subdued were only made Tributaries to the Kings of Israel, who did
not people and possess those Countries: and consequently there was no occasion
for such Cities there; unless the Israelites had been the Inhabitants of those
Countries, as they were of the Land of Canaan, v. 1.

That innocent blood be not shed in thy Land, which the LORD thy God gives
thee.] As there would, if, upon supposition of such an enlargement of their
Borders, there had been no Cities nearer to flee unto than these six: which
were sufficient only for the Land of Canaan, and the Land they possessed on
this side Jordan, where they now were.

And so blood be upon thee.] The Guilt and Punishment of Blood, in not taking
care of the Safety of innocent Persons.

But if any man hate his brother, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against
him, and smite him mortally that he die, and flees unto one of these Cities.]
When there was a manifest design of killing another, and known hatred, he that
committed the Murder, was to receive no benefit by his fleeing to a City of
Refuge. And then a Man was judged to hate his Brother, when for three days
together he had never spoken to him, though they had kept one another company;
as I observed before out of Mr. Seldom Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. II.
p. 473.

Then the Elders of this City, shall send and fetch him thence.] Demand him of
the Elders of the City to which he fled; that he might be sent to them, and
tried by them; whether he was guilty of wilful Murder; or ought to have the
benefit of their protection, being innocent of that Crime, XXXV Numb. 12, 24.
It is likely there were probable Reasons given, why he was suspected to be
guilty of Murder; and therefore they desired the Matter might be examined:
otherwise, if the Case was known to be like that in v. 5. they did not make
this demand.

And deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.] That
is, if they found him guilty of wilful Murder: otherwise, they were to deliver
him out of the hand of the Avenger of Blood, and restore him to the City of
Refuge, that he might not die, XXXV Numb. 25.

Ver. 13. Thine eye shall not pity him.] Nor take any Numb. 31.

But thou shall put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel.] By putting
him to death.

That it may go well with thee.] By having no guilt upon them; as they had,
when they let this Crime go unpunished.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not remove thy neighbors landmark, etc.] The Jewish
Doctors think that this has respect to the Holy Land, (as they call it) and to
the terms or bounds which were set by Joshua in the division of the Country;
which no Man might take away. For that made him both guilty of Theft, and also
of the breach of this Precept: and consequently he incurred a double
Punishment, and was whipped twice as much as another Offender. See Seldom Lib.
VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. III. in the latter end. This was a Law among
the Greeks, as appears by Plato, Lib. VIII. de Legibus, (...), etc. (...), etc.
Let no Man presume to remove the bounds of Land: looking upon this, as being
truly to remove things immovable: i. e. To unsettle and overturn all things.
Numa-Pompilius therefore made this Crime capital. Which makes Josephus his
Explication of these words seem more reasonable than that of the Talmudists:
who extends this Precept to the Grounds of all their neighbor Nations, who
were at peace with them: (...), as being the occasion of Wars and
Insurrections, which arise from the Covetousness of Men, who would thus enlarge
their Territories, Lib. IV. Archaeol. Cap. 8. Which may be thought a reason,
why Moses joins this to the foregoing Precept, about punishing Murder: and made
this one of the Curses they were bound to pronounce, and consent to it, at
their entrance into the Land of Canaan, XXVII Deuteronomy. 17.

Which they of old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shall
inherit, in the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee to possess it.] This
may seem to determine this Precept peculiarly, to the preserving the Bounds in
the Land of Canaan: and by those of old time, they understand Joshua and the
Elders, who divided the Land, and fixed every ones Lot. But it was as necessary
to be observed in all other Countries, as that which was their proper
Inheritance. For as Josephus truly observes, They that remove the Bounds of
Lands, are not very far from subverting all Laws.

One witness shall not rise up.] They that gave their Testimony in any Cause,
always stood up.

Against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin.] A single Witness was not to
be admitted, as sufficient to convict a Man of any Offense whatsoever; whether
in Civil, or in Criminal Matters. For an inquisition into the Fact, one was
enough; but not for the Condemnation of him that was accused. Yet in Pecuniary
Matters, one Witness was sufficient to bring a Man to purge himself by an Oath.
See XVII. 6.

At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the
matter be established.] The Accusation shall stand, or fall to the ground.

Ver. 16. If a false witness rise up against any man, to In any Matter, whether
against God, or against Man. For though one Witness could not condemn another;
yet if it were proved he was a false Witness, it was sufficient to condemn
himself.

Ver. 17. Then both the men between whom the Controversy That is, the Accuser,
and the Person accused.

Shall stand before the LORD.] They were to come, in Cases obscure, to the
Supreme Court, where the Sanctuary was settled. Who sat, it is likely, at the
Door of the Tabernacle in Moses his time, (See XVII. 8, 12.) and so might
properly be said to try them before the LORD.

Before the Priests and the Judges which shall be in those days.] This they all
understand of the highest Court, which consisted partly of Priests, and partly
of other great Persons, whom he calls Judges: under which Name the whole Court
is comprehended in the next Verse. See XVII. 8. And Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr.
Cap. VIII. N. 2, 3.

Ver. 18. And the Judges.] The Court before-named: Judges.

Shall make diligent inquisition.] For it was not easy to prove a Man to be a
false Witness; and therefore the Matter was brought before this Supreme Court.

And behold, if the witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely
against his brother.] If upon strict Examination he was found to have given a
false Evidence against his Brother, in a matter which touched his Estate, or
his Body, or his Life.

Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother.]
That is, says Maimonides, if he designed to have taken away his Brother's
Life, he was to lose his own; if to have had him scourged, he was to be lashed
himself; if to lose a Sum of Money, he was to be fined the very same Sum. More
Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLI. But though in most Cases a false Witness was to
suffer the very same kind of Punishment, which he intended to have brought upon
another, if his Testimony had not been disproved; yet in some it was not
exactly observed. As if one falsely accused a Priest's Daughter of playing the
Whore, he was not to be burnt, as she should have been, but to be strangled, as
an Adulterer. So J. Coch observes upon the Title Maccoth. ad Cap. I. where the
whole business of false Testimonies is handled. But some foolish decisions were
made by the Rabbis in opposition to the Sadducees; as he observes in his
Annot. 20. in Sect. 6.

Among the Athenians there was an Action lay, not only against a false Witness,
but against the Person who produced him. Upon whom they set a Fine; and they
were made infamous. And if they were found thrice guilty of this Crime, not
only they but their Posterity were made infamous throughout all Generations; as
Sam. Petitus observes out of Andocides, and others, Lib. IV. in Leges Atticas,
Tit. VII. p. 359. It is something strange they were not more severe against
such Offenders, many of their Laws being plainly borrowed from Moses. And among
the ancient Romans, by the Law of the Twelve Tables, false Witnesses were
thrown down from the Tarpeian Rock, as A. Gellius tells us, Lib. XX. Cap. I.
which was altered indeed in latter times, for such Punishments as the Judges
thought they merited: But he there tells Phavorinus, That if the old Punishment
had continued to their days, they should not have had so many false Testimonies
given, as they then saw.

So shall thou put the evil away from among you.] This may be understood either
of the false Witness, or of his Crime: the guilt of which was taken away by the
just punishment of it.

Ver. 20. And those that remain.] The remainder Israel, who see him suffer in
his kind.

Shall hear and fear.] The end of punishment is to deter others from such
wickedness. See XIII. 11. XVII 13.

And shall henceforth commit no more any such avil among you.] Learn to beware
by other Men's sufferings.

Ver. 21. And thine eye shall not spare.] He speaks to

Life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot.] Concerning this lex talionis, see XXI Exodus 23, 24, 25. XXIV Levit. 19,
20. And see Grotius on V Matthew. 38, 40. where he well observes, that the Party
injured might forbear to require this Punishment; but the Judge, if it were
required, could not deny to inflict it.

Chapter XX.
CHAP. XX.
WHen thou go out to battle against thine Enemies.] Who either invaded them,
(as in XI Judges) or with whom they had a just quarrel, because of Injuries
done them, without Satisfaction: Such as that mentioned 2 Samuel X. 4, etc.

And see Horses.] Which the Israelites wanted, (as I observed upon XVII. 16.)
their Armies consisting of Footmen; who were taken from the Plough, or from the
Sheepfolds.

And Chariots.] Which carried a certain number of Men in them; and when they
were falcati (as they called them) were very formidable. For they made terrible
Slaughters among the Enemy; cutting down Men, as we do Grass with a Sith, or
Sickle. The Canaanites had great numbers of them, XI Josh. 4. and IV Judges 3.

Be not afraid of them.] The Israelites were trained up to confide in God, and
not in Horses, (which their Country, as I said, did not afford, and
consequently they had no Chariots) nor in multitude of Soldiers. And we find
remarkable Instances of this, particularly in Jehosaphat (2 Chronicles. XX. 6, etc.
17.) who followed the Example of David, whose words are most memorable, XX
Psalm 7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will remember the
Name of the LORD our God. See also XXI Prove. 21.

For the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt.] That was such an instance of his power, as made it unreasonable to
doubt of good Success when he was present with them: as he always was, while
they continued faithful Worshippers of him.

The Translation of Onkelos is here very remarkable; which is, The LORD thy God
his WORD is thy help: which plainly denotes another Divine Person, the same
with JEHOVAH.

Ver. 2. It shall be when ye come nigh unto the battle.]

That the Priest shall approach and speak unto the people.] The Jews say there
was a Priest appointed for this very purpose, whom they call MASCHUACH
MILCHAMAH, anointed of War: he being set apart, as they say, to this Office by
an Unction; and that with the same Oil which the King was anointed withal. His
Office was to blow with the Trumpets, to make the following Speech unto the
Army, when they were preparing to join battle; and when they first went out, to
exhort all new Builders, Planters, and married Men to return back; and when
they were drawn up in Battalia, to exhort all that were faint-hearted to leave
the Army, and go home. See XXXI Numb. 6. A great many of the Jewish Doctors
thus explain this, particularly Maimonides, who may serve instead of all. See
Schickard. Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theor. XVIII. and Hottinger in his Histor.
Eccles. Seculum XVI. pars 2. p. 689, 690, etc. Where he produces an excellent
Discourse out of R. Levi Barzelonita his Catechism, to show the Office of this
(...), anointed for the War; and the reason why he was appointed to it. For
Soldiers, says he, in the time of War, have great need to be heartned and
confirmed in their resolution. And because the more honorable any one is, the
more willingly Men hearken to him; therefore the Law required, that he who was
to encourage others, should be a select Person himself, and a Priest; to whom
they would be apt to pay a great Reverence.

Ver. 3. And shall say unto them, etc.] Going from one Battalion (as we now
speak) unto another: or else, ordering the Officers (mentioned v. 5.) to go
Mischna Sota, Cap. VIII. Sect. 1. And they have a conceit, that the Romans
learnt both the form of Encamping out of Moses his Law; and also to make
Orations to their Soldiers, before they went to fight, as J. Wagenseil
observes out of Shilte Hagibborim: Though it is more reasonable to think, that
common sense taught those that were Leaders of others, to encourage them to
follow them.

Ye approach this day unto battle against your Enemies.] Who often appeared
very formidable, by the vast number of their Horses and Chariots; which the
Israelites wanted.

Let not your hearts faint.] So we well translate the Hebrew word, be soft or
tender. Which though it be a quality highly commendable with respect to God (2
Kings XXII. 19.) yet the contrary became them toward their and his Enemies.

Fear not, and do not tremble.] Trembling, or, as the Hebrew word is, making
haste; i. e. running away, is the effect of fear.

Neither be ye terrified because of them.] Sometimes a great dread of danger
made Men run away; and sometimes so dismayed them, that they could not stir,
much less strike a stroke.

Some of the Jewish Doctors fancy, that the four several words here used, are
opposed to so many Actions of their Enemies, whereby they hoped to strike a
terror into them. Let not your hearts faint, when your Enemies brandish their
Swords, and clash them one against another. Fear not, when you hear the
pransing of their Horses, and the terrible rattling of their Chariots. And do
not tremble, when they shout, as if they were sure of Victory. Neither be ye
terrified, when ye hear the Trumpets sound an Alarm to the Battle. So Moses
Kotzensis. See Schickard, Cap. V. Theor. XVI. p. 115. And such a passage
Wagenseil observes out of Philostratus, Lib. II. Cap. V. upon the Gemara of
Sota, Cap. VIII. Sect. II. p. 876.

Ver. 4. For the LORD your God is he that goes Sometimes the Ark of God's
Presence went before them, when they entered into Canaan, III Josh. 3, 10, 11,
etc. and in the midst of them, when they compassed Jericho, VI Josh. 9. So that
God was properly then said to go with them, or in the midst of them, as the
Vulgar Latin here translates it. And at all other times, he was present by his
power to aid them; especially against the People of Canaan, with whom their
Battles were said to be the Wars of the LORD.

To save you.] To preserve them, by the defeat and overthrow of their Enemies.

Ver. 5. And the Officers shall speak unto the people, This the Jews,
particularly Abarbinel, think was spoken by the Priest beforementioned, and
then proclaimed by the Officers, called Schoterim, of whom I have observed
enough before, XVI. 18. and other places. They that would see more, may consult
J. Wagenseil upon that Title in the Mischna, called Sota, Cap. VIII. p. 854.
But by whomsoever this was spoken, it seems most likely to have been delivered
before they drew nigh to the Battle, (See v. 2.) at the first mustering of the
Army.

What man is there that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it.] i.
e. Has not yet dwelt in it. For at their first entrance to dwell in an House,
they made a Feast, which being the first Meal they made there, was called
Chanach, or Dedication: as the same Wagenseil observes out of Michlol Jophi.
See in Cap. VIII. Sota Sect. 2. Annot. 3. And because a Year is allowed to a
Man to enjoy his Wife, before he be obliged to go to the Wars, (XXIV. 5.) they
allow the same time in these other Cases, for the enjoyment of a new House, or
of a Vineyard; as many have observed: Particularly Seldom Lib. III. de Synedr.
Cap. XIII. N. I. and Schickard. in his Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theor. 16, 17. And
they understand this, not only of a new built House, but of an House newly come
into a Man's possession, either by Succession, Purchase, or Gift: yet not of
such Houses as were not fit for habitation, as Mr. Seldom reports their
Opinion, Lib. III. de Vxor. Hebr. Cap. III. In which he seems to have forgot
himself; for the Mischna in Sota, Cap. VIII. Sect. II. says expressly, this is
to be understood of him that built an House, wherein to lay Straw, to make a
Stable, a Barn, or a Granary: because as Wagenseil there notes, such places
might, in case of necessity, be turned into a Dwelling House.

Let him return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
dedicate it.] This was allowed in those Wars only which they made voluntarily;
but not of those which were ex praecepto, by the Divine Commandment, against
the Seven Nations of Canaan and Amalek, in which every Man was bound to engage.
And so are the other Cases, which here follow, to be understood; as all the
Jewish Writers agree.

Another man dedicate it.] First enjoy it: for this word here does not denote
any Consecration, (as in other places) but beginning to use a thing; which in
our English Language (as Mr. Seldom observes in the place forenamed) we call
taking handsel of it; and so the Spanish Jews express it in their Translation.

Ver. 6. And what man is he that has planted a Vineyard, Which he could not
lawfully do for the three first Years after it was planted. See XIX Levit. 29,
etc. And in the fourth Year the fruit of it was to be carried to Jerusalem, and
eaten there: after which the Fruit of the fifth Year was wholly his own, when
it was no longer Sacred (as the Hebrew word Chittel signifies) but common for
every bodies use. Aben-Ezra takes the word in the sense of rejoicing; as if he
had said, Who has planted a Vineyard, and has not yet danced in it: for that
was the Custom, he says, when they first enjoyed the Fruits of their
Vineyards. And to this the LXX. seem to have had respect, when they translate
it, (...), he has not been made merry by it. But the other Notion is more
proper: and the Jews understand it, not only of Vineyards, but of all other
Plantations wherein there were Fruit Trees fit for Food; if there were five of
them planted together in good order, such as R. Solomon and Wagenseil have
described. And see Seldom Vxor. Hebr. Lib. III. Cap. III. p. 334.

Let him also go, and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and
another man eat of it.] The ground both of this, and the foregoing Proclamation
(and of the next also) seems to have been, that the minds of such Men were
commonly very much disturbed to think of leaving what they had taken a great
deal of pains about, and enjoy nothing of it; which would naturally make them
fight with less Courage. So R. Solomon. And Josephus much to the same purpose,
(...), etc. least out of a longing desire after these things, they should be
sparing of hazzarding their lives; and, reserving themselves for their
Enjoyment, not sight manfully. But many think this was a bare Concession to
such Persons; who, if they could overcome their Affection to all things, but
the Safety of their Country, might remain in the Camp, and go to the Battle.
Yet Abarbinel disputes strongly against this, and will have all these to be
Precepts enjoining such Persons, as are here mentioned, not to stay in the
Army, but to return home.

And what man is there that has betrothed a wife, and has not taken her,
etc.] The Jews interpret this Law, either of one who had espoused a Wife, and
not yet brought her home; or of one that had but newly completed his Marriage.
And whether he had married a Widow or a Virgin, an old Woman or a young, it was
the same thing. Yea, they extend it to him, who had married his Brother's Wife.
But not to him, who had married a Person prohibited to him by the Law; or him
that took his own Wife again, whom he had formerly put away; because she was
not a new Wife, as the Phrase is XXIV Deuteronomy. 5. where the time being limited,
how long such a Man should be free from the War, viz. for one Year, they extend
it, as I said, to the other two Cases; that so long Men might enjoy a new
House, or a Vineyard after the first use of them, as the Law allowed them to
enjoy a Wife, before they went to War. See Seldom Lib. III. Vxor. Hebr. Cap.
III. and Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theor. XVII. And it must be
confessed that this is a Law of great Equity, founded in Nature, that Conjugal
Love should not be disturbed; but have some time to knit into a strong and
stable Affection, by an uninterrupted Conversation together, in its beginning.
The Jews were so favorable in this matter, that they say, if five Brethren
were in the War together, and one of them was slain, leaving a Widow without
Issue, all the remaining four returned home; because every one of them, in
their order, in case those before him refused, was to raise up Seed to his dead
Brother.

Ver. 8. And the Officers shall speak further unto the Make this new
Proclamation, throughout the Camp.

What man is there that is fearful and faint-hearted.] This some of the Jews
understand of a natural timorousness, which makes Men quake at every danger:
and others refer it to those that were old, in whom that heat and vigor which
makes Men valiant, was quite abated. Upon which account they would not admit
one who had no Children to go to War (if we may believe Maimonides) because he
was not thought masculine enough; or rather, because they would not cut off all
hope of his having Posterity. But there are those who understand this of the
Terrors of an Evil Conscience, (See Sota, Cap. VIII. Sect. V.) For they did not
do as we are wont in these days, (who send the wickedest Villains into the
Wars) but if they knew any Man to be guilty of a great Crime, thrust him out of
the Army, lest they should all fare the worse for having him among them. See
Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theorem. XVII. p. 124.

Let him go, and return unto his house, lest his brethrens heart faint as well
as his heart.] For the Cowardice of some, might enfeeble the rest. Yet all
these who were thus dismissed, were bound (if required) to furnish the Army
with Victuals and Water; to clear the ways; and to take up their quarters; as
it is in the foregoing place in Sota, Cap. VIII. where Jo. Wagenseil observes
that they who restrain these Offices only to the Fearful are mistaken.

And it shall be when the Officers have made an end of speaking to the People,
that they shall make Captains of the Armies to lead the people.] This shows
that what I noted v. 5. is true; that the foregoing Proclamation was made
before they marched forth to the War: For how should they march till there were
Captains chosen, to lead the several Armies, (as those Companies, into which
they were divided, are called) which was not done till he had spoken all the
forenamed things. And if we translate the words, as they may be out of the
Hebrew [ they shall place, or set Captains of the Hosts, in the head, or the
front, of the people] still it must be supposed, that this was done before they
stirred a foot: for no order could be observed without Leaders.

When thou come nigh unto a City to fight against it, then proclaim peace
unto it.] I have often noted, that there were two sorts of War which the Jews
undertook: one by the Divine Commandment against the Seven Nations of Canaan;
another voluntary, when they themselves found just cause to make War upon any
other neighboring Nation. Now this Precept many of the Jews will needs
understand only concerning the latter sort of War: for the Canaanites were to
be utterly destroyed without mercy. But Maimonides, and Moses Kotzensis, take
it to belong to both sorts of War. So the former of them in express words, It
was not lawful to make war upon any one whatsoever, before they offered them
Terms of Peace, etc. Only they think the Ammonites and Moabites were to be
excepted by that Law XXIII. 6. yet they temper it thus, that if those Nations
desired Peace of themselves, it was to be granted to them, though not offered.
And the most ancient Writers of the Jews say, that Joshua sent three Messages
to the Seven Nations of Canaan, before he invaded them; though he undertook the
War. with a Command from God to destroy them; viz. if they did not submit to
the Summons which was sent them, either to flee, or to make peace; which was
the subject of the two first Messages. The next was a Denunciation of War
against them, as they say in the Jerusalem Talmud, quoted by Mr. Seldom, Lib.
VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XIII. And see the Learned J. Wagenseil in
Annot. upon Sota, p. 845. Maimonides was of opinion that the Gibeonites had not
heard of these Proclamations, which made them use Craft to procure Mercy from
the Israelites: But P. Cunaeus thinks it more probable, that they had refused
at first to submit to Joshua's Summons; but seeing him victorious, they betook
themselves to that Artifice, mentioned in the Book of Joshua, when they could
not hope for Peace by any other means, Lib. II. de Republ. Hebr. Cap. 20.

Ver. 11. And it shall be, if it make thee an answer Accept of the Conditions
offered to them, which were three. First, That they should take upon them the
observation of the Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah, and consequently
renounce Idolatry. Secondly, Pay them a yearly Tribute: And thirdly, become
their Subjects. See Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. IV. and
Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theor. XVI.

Then it shall be that all the people that is found therein shall be
Tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.] Here are two of the
Conditions beforementioned; and the first was necessarily supposed, because
the Israelites were not to suffer any of their gods to remain among them. For
though by serving the Israelites is not meant, being made their Slaves, yet it
imports that they were to live in due subjection to them, as their Governors,
who might employ them in their Public Works; as repairing the King's Palace,
the Walls of Cities, etc.

And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then
thou shall besiege it.] Without any further Summons to yield upon Conditions of
Peace.

And when the LORD thy God shall deliver it into thy hand.] Of which they were
not to doubt, v. 4.

Thou shall smite every Male thereof with the edge of the Sword.] Which was a
just Punishment for their Obstinacy; of which the Men, who were here condemned
to Destruction, were the Authors; and suffered the more justly, because they
were told, no doubt, beforehand, that if they did not yield when Conditions
were offered to them, they must expect this Execution.

But the women and the little ones.] Who had not offended by rejecting
Conditions of Peace; nor could do any harm. And by little ones are to be
understood Male-children, as well as Female.

And the Cattle, and all that is in the City, even all the Spoil thereof.]
Money, Household Stuff, and all manner of Goods.

Shall thou take unto thy self, etc.] This was granted to them as a reward of
their Service in the War.

Ver. 15. Thus shall thou do unto all the Cities, which This Clemency to the
Women and little ones is limited to those that were not Inhabitants of the Land
of Canaan; who, in the following Verses, are ordered to be otherwise treated.
For by the Laws of War among all Nations, the Conqueror might use those whom
he subdued as he pleased. See Grotius Lib. III. de Jure Belli and Pacis, Cap.
IV. Sect. V. where, among other things, he quotes that saying of Marcellus in
Livy, Quicquid in hostibus feci, jus belli defendit. Whatsoever I have done
with Enemies, the right of War defends it.

Ver. 16. But of the Cities of these People, which the The Cities of the Land
of Canaan.

Thou shall save alive nothing that breaths.] i. e. Neither Man, Woman, nor
Child, as we speak. But their Cattle (except in few cases when they were
appointed to be a CHEREM, i. e. accursed) were not to be killed, as appears
from XI Josh. 14. And this slaughter of all the People, is to be understood
only in case they did not surrender when they were Summoned; but rejected the
Conditions of Peace that were offered to them. After this, no Mercy was to be
had upon them. See XXIII Exodus 32. In which their Condition was worse than any
other Peoples; whose Men were only to be slain, v. 14. but not Women and
Children. For which difference there was a great reason, as I shall show
presently: but if we could see none, we ought to consider, that it was done by
God's Command; who as he is most just and merciful, so has a greater right
over Men, than we have over Beasts, as Grotius well observes. Who alleges many
Examples of the like practice in the Heathen World, both among Greeks and
Romans. See L. III. de Jure Belli and Pacis, Cap. IV. Sect. IX.

But thou shall utterly destroy them.] After they had slighted all offers of
Peace. Some of the Jews indeed have been so merciful as to think this is not a
Command, but a Permission: which warranted them to kill all without any
distinction of Sex or Age; yet did not so enjoin it, but that they might, after
they had taken a City, spare such as repented, and offered to become Proselytes
of the Gate. This was the opinion, one would think, which anciently prevailed,
as Seldom observes ( Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XVI.) because we find
the Relics of these People, often mentioned in the Bible. And this is
agreeable also to the Law of Nations, that such as beg Mercy should be spared.
Which flowed from the ancient right which such Persons were thought to have to
it, as David Chytraeus observes out of Thucydides, Lib. III. and the known
Verse of the Oracle, (...). Not to hurt Supplicants who are sacred, and
acquitted of their Offenses. He does not mention the place where this Oracle
was uttered; but Ezekiel Spanhemius has lately observed out of Pausanias, that
it was at Dodone. See Observationes in Callimachi Hymnum in Dianam, verse. 123.
where he notes, that from hence Jupiter was called (...), because he was
accounted a severe and implacable avenger of all Violence done to Supplicants.
And they are Supplicants (says the same Chytraeus) who confess their Sin, and
acknowledging they deserve Punishment, give themselves up to the pleasure of
the Conqueror: but beg the Punishment may be mitigated by Mercy and Clemency.

Namely the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the
Hivites and the Jebusites; as the LORD thy God has commanded thee.] He
distinctly mentions the Nations which were to be utterly destroyed, that this
severity might be extended no further. And so he had done before, VII. 1. where
he mentions Seven Nations; though here are only Six, the Gergasites being
omitted. The reason of which Maimonides (in Hilcoth Melachim) thinks to be,
that they upon the first Summons of Joshua fled the Country into Africa, and
therefore are not named in IX Josh. 1, 2. among those that gathered themselves
together to fight against Israel. But I take the true reason of this to be,
that the Gergasites were a People mixed among the rest; and did not live in a
separate part of the Country by themselves: but that they opposed Joshua as
well as others, and were delivered into his hand, appears from XXIV Josh. 11.
Now this looks like a great Cruelty, to kill so many Nations, till we consider
who the People were, that God commanded to be utterly extirpated, viz. most
abominable Idolaters, who offered their Children to Moloch, as a piece of pious
Worship; Magicians, Witches, Necromancers; and guilty of all those filthy Lusts
mentioned in XVIII Lev. For which Crimes God thought them not fit to live any
longer upon the face of the Earth; and therefore commanded them to be utterly
destroyed in this War, which was undertaken by his order, and called therefore
the War of the LORD. And so was that against Sihon and Og, who were likewise
Amorites, and upon that score rooted out by God's order, XXI Numb. ult. II
Deuteronomy. 34. For it was Mercy to others, not to suffer such a wicked Generation to
live.

That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have
done unto their gods.] Here is the great reason given of the forenamed severe
Execution, that if they had been spared, they would have infected the
Israelites with their filthy Idolatry. Which some make an Argument, why Peace
was not to be proclaimed to these Nations, ( v. 10.) because they were so
wicked, that on no terms it was fit to suffer them to live. But they that
object this against what was before said, forget, or do not consider, that the
great Condition of Peace with them, was that they should renounce their
Idolatry: and then there was no such danger in sparing them. And this so
settled in the opinion of the ancient Jews, that after they had taken a City,
they thought, upon these terms, there was room for Mercy. So the Book Siphri,
upon these very words, lest they teach you to do after all their abominations.
From whence it is to be observed (says that Author) if they repented the
Israelites might let them live. And so R. Solomon himself; It is to be
understood that if they repented, and became Proselytes, it was lawful to
receive them.

So should you sin against the LORD your God.] Both by suffering them to live,
and imitating them in their wickedness.

When thou shall besiege a City a long time, in making war against it to take
it, thou shall not destroy the Trees thereof, by forcing an Ax against them,
for thou may eat of them, and thou shall not cut them down.] It is very
plain that he speaks of Fruit Trees, such as bare Apples, Olives, Dates, etc.
which were to be preserved both in War, and in Peace; except in a few Cases. In
War, if the Enemy made advantage of them, for their Archers to lurk and shelter
themselves behind them, by which the Israelites were much annoyed; then they
think they might be cut down, to shorten the Siege. And in Peace, if they did
not bring forth Fruit, or if the Fruit would not be so profitable as the Wood
would be for building, and other uses; or if they hindered the growth of better
Trees: in all these Cases they might be cut down, as the Jewish Doctors
resolve. Who, when they please, mind the reason of a Law, and not the bare
words: insomuch that they extend this Law, to a great many other things, which
they say might not be destroyed, if they were useful and profitable. No Houses
for Instance, nor Garments, nor Household Stuff; nor were they to stop up
Fountains, etc. See Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XV. and Guil.
Schickardus in Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theorem. XVIII.

For the Tree of the field is man's life.] The word Life is not in the Hebrew
Text; but we add it to make out the sense. In which we follow many good Authors
among the Jews, particularly Aben-Ezra: who observes many such elliptical, i.
e. concise Forms of Speech in Scripture. As in 1 Samuel XVI. 20. where an Ass of
Bread, is an Ass loaded with Bread. So here the Tree is a Man, i. e. the Life
or Support of Man. Just as XXIV. 6. it is said, a Man should not take the upper
or neither Millstone to pledge, ki nephesh hu, because it is his Life, i. e.
that whereby he gets his livelihood. But there are a great many who translate
the words by way of Interrogation (and the Hebrew will bear it) and joining
them with those that follow, make this the sense; Is the Tree of the Field a
Man, that it should come against thee in the Siege? So the Vulgar, the Greek,
and the Arabic Translation, and the Chaldee Paraphrast, and Josephus, as Mr.
Seldom observes, Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XII. As much as to say,
they need not fear any danger from the Trees, as if they were Soldiers that
could fight against them. And if this sense do not seem dilute (as some have
censured it) there is no need of rendering the words by way of Interrogation,
but only of repeating the word not, out of the foregoing words, in this manner,
Thou shall not cut them down, for the Tree of the Field is not a Man, etc. Of
this there are many Examples, as Glassius and our Gataker have shown. And thus
R. Bechai among the Jews expounds these words; and the famous Abarbinel, who
thus glosses upon them, It is not decent to make War against Trees, who have no
hands to fight with thee; but against Men only. And this sense Grotius follows,
Lib. III. de Jure Belli and Pacis, Cap. XII. Sect. II. where he produces Philo
for this opinion, and Josephus, who says, If Trees could speak, they would cry
out, that it was unjust, that they who were no cause of the War, should suffer
the mischiefs of it. And thus Onkelos translates these words, and those that
follow, For the Tree of the Field is not as a Man, that it should come against
thee in the Siege: that is, they had no cause to fear Trees, and therefore
should not hurt them. But this is a reason against cutting down any Trees
whatsoever; whereas Moses speaks only of Fruit Trees. From whence Grotius
thinks that saying of the Pythagoraeans took its original, (...), etc. Trees
that do not grow wild, and bear fruit, ought not to be hurt, much less cut
down. And yet it seems to be more agreeable to the Hebrew words, than our
Marginal Translation, which makes this sense, That there are Trees of the Field
sufficient to employ in the Siege: so that they need not cut down Fruit Trees
to carry it on.

Ver. 20. Only the Trees which thou know, that they If it were necessary for
the raising Bulwarks, (as it here follows) or otherways to distress the Enemy,
they had liberty to cut down Trees that did not bear Fruit; but not merely to
make Waste and Desolation.

And thou shall build Bulwarks against the City that makes war with thee.]
From whence they battered the City, and threw great Sons into it; as well as
begirt them round, that no Provisions might be brought in to them. Thus we find
they did in after times, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 15. 2 Samuel XX. 15. And they must have
some such Inventions in Moses his days; or else how could they take Cities
fortified with such high Walls as are mentioned I Deuteronomy. 28. Or to what purpose
should they build Bulwarks, and cast up Banks, but from thence to batter the
City with some Engine or other?

Until it be subdued.] From these words the Jewish Doctors conclude, that it
was lawful to make War even upon the Sabbath; because having set down before a
City, they were to proceed till it was subdued; which these words suppose might
not be in a short time. Only they say, that the Siege was to be begun at least
three days before the Sabbath. Thus these Superstitious People, not thinking
common reason sufficient to justify them in so plain a case, Chapter XXI.
make the Scripture speak what it intended not, for their warrant. See
Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theorem. XVIII. where he alleges
Maimonides in his Hilkoth Melachim to this purpose. And Joh. Benedictus
Carpzovius produces a plainer out of Hilkoth Schabbath, where he delivers their
sense in these words, A Siege is to be begun three days before the Sabbath; and
then it may be continued every day, even upon the Sabbath, until the City be
taken: and this may be done, in a War that is voluntarily undertaken. For thus
our wise Men understand these words, by ancient Tradition, until it be subdued.

CHAP. XXI.
IF one shall be found slain, in the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee to
possess.] This follows very properly after the Law he had delivered, about
making War; because then the Bodies of dead Men were most frequently found.
About which the wisest Lawgivers took the greatest care, that Inquisition
should be made, how and by whom they were slain. This appears by Plato, who in
his Ninth Book de Legibus, has a Law something like to this, though far short
of the Solemnity that is here required to be used; as I shall observe in the
Conclusion of this Statute.

Lying in the field, and it be not known who has slain him.] The Hebrew
Doctors here stick too much to the letter of these words; for they will not
have them reach to a dead Body hanging in the Air upon a Tree; or hid in the
Sand or Dust; or floating upon the Water; which is extreme absurd.

Ver. 2. Then thy Elders and thy Judges shall come forth.] The great Sanhedrim
were to send forth some Vzielides says, Two of the wise Men, or Elders, and
three of the Judges, were sent by the great Sanhedrim about this business. See
Seldom Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. VII. N. 2.

Yet he observes in another part of that most Learned Work, Lib. II. Cap. VII.
N. 3. that there were a sort of Elders, who were not ordained by laying on of
Hands, but only were venerable Persons for their Age and Prudence; who, some
think, might serve for this Employment. And they called such Elders, Zikne
Hashuk, Elders of the Street, or Vulgar Elders. But none, I think, has
discoursed more critically upon these words, thy Elders, and thy Judges, than
our Mr. Thorndike; who observes that there had been Judges constituted to
determine Causes by Jethro's advice, (XVIII Exodus.) the greater Causes being
reserved for Moses alone. For whose Assistance God afterward appointed Seventy
Elders, ( Numb. XI.) who made up the great Court of Judgment in that Nation.
Now they of this great Consistory, are called the Elders of Israel; but they of
other Consistories, or Inferior Courts, are called barely Elders, or Elders of
such a City. See Review of the Rights of the Church, p. 70. where he alleges
this very place for it; and by thy Elders understands the Elders of Israel; the
lower Elders being mentioned in the next Verse. And so those of the great
Consistory are commonly called in the Gospel: And in like manner, the Scribes
of the People, and thy Scribes, signify there those of this High Court.
Whereas the bare Name of Scribes is extended further, to the inferior Doctors
of the Law. As also the Name of Rulers, and that of Rulers of the People, are
to be understood with the like difference.

And they shall measure unto the Cities, that are round about him that is
slain.] That is, if it were dubious what City lay nearest to the dead Body, as
it sometimes happened. But commonly, it is probable, at the first view they
easily discerned this, and so did not trouble themselves to measure. It is a
frivolous dispute in the Mischnah, from whence they were to measure; whether
from the Navel, or the Nose, or the Forehead: which last seems most rational to
Maimonides, who calls it the Center of the Body. But they did not (if we
believe the Jewish Doctors) in their measuring, take notice of any City,
wherein there was not a Court of XXIII Elders; and Jerusalem was always
excepted. See Seldom in the place forenamed, N. III. and L'Empereur upon Bava
kama, p. 173. and Wagenseil upon Sota, p. 899. If the dead Body lay nearest to
the Country of the Gentiles, then they did not measure at all; but it was
presumed the Man was killed by them.

And it shall be that the City which is next to the slain Man.] From whence it
might be presumed the Murderer came, or was fled thither, as Abarbinel
discourses.

Even the Elders of that City.] Who were different from the Elders
beforementioned, (See the foregoing Verse) for they returned to Jerusalem,
when they had seen the Body buried, if there was no discovery of the Murderer:
and then the Senators of the City next to the dead Body, who were XXIII.
performed what is here ordered.

Shall take an Heifer.] That was not above two years old: for if it were a day
more, they might not use it for this purpose, as Maimonides and others affirm.
Yet the Scripture, in other Cases, mentions one of three years old, XV Genesis 9.
XV Isa. 5. XLVIII Jer. 5. as Wagenseil observes upon the Mischna of Sota, Cap.
IX. Sect. III. Annot. 2. If two Cities happened to be aequidistant from the
dead Body, then they joined together to provide this Heifer.

Which has not been wrought with.] Never used in ploughing the Ground.

And which has not drawn in the yoke.] This may seem to be included in the
foregoing Expression, as Maimonides observes; but it is added, he thinks, to
signify that if it had been employed in any other labor, it became improper
for this use. Such Heifers were accounted by the Heathen to be most acceptable
to their gods, as appears by Homer: in whom Diomedes and Nestor promise such an
Offering to Pallas. See Bochart. Lib. II. Hieroz. Cap. XXXIII. P. I. out of
Iliad K. and Odyss. T.

But there was a particular reason for such an one in this Case, (wherein the
Heifer was not to be offered) that it might the better represent, as many
think, the Person that had committed this Murder: who was a Son of Belial,
subject to no Law; and deserved to be beheaded as this Heifer was. It is not
required that it should be without blemish, as those Heifers were to be, that
were offered at the Tabernacle: but it sufficed, if it had never been
accustomed to the Yoke. Yet this is not to be taken without all Limitation; for
if it wanted any Member, or were diseased, it might not be employed in this
Service; as Wagenseil observes out of Maimonides, in the place forenamed, p.
907.

And the Elders of that City shall bring down the Heifer.] Their Cities it
seems were commonly seated on Hills, or high Ground.

Into a rough Valley.] The Hebrew word Nachal signifies both a Valley, and a
Torrent. The LXX. Josephus and the Vulgar understand it as we do; and the
following words favor this Interpretation. But the Talmudists, and the Rabbis
who generally follow them, take it to signify a Torrent: which is the sense of
Maimonides himself; and the next word Ethan (which we translate rough) they
interpret a rapid Torrent. Chaskuni thinks there is some reason for this, in
the sixth Verse, where they are required to wash their hands over the Heifer;
in the Water, that is of the Brook. I see nothing to hinder the putting both
senses together: Torrents being wont to run down violently from the Mountains,
through the Valleys which lie beneath them; which is the cause that the same
word signifies both.

Which is neither eared.] Or rather, ploughed.

Nor sown.] Being a stony, craggy Ground: representing the horridness of the
Murder, and the cruelty and hardness of the Man's heart who committed it. They
that follow the other Interpretation of Nachal, understood the foregoing words
[Ascher lo jeabeth bo] which we translate neither eared, as if they signified
the Torrent did not serve to water the neighboring Ground: and these words to
be meant of the Soil which lay next to the Torrent, in which nothing was sown.
And besides this variety, there are those who take Ethan not to signify either
that which is hard, or rapid, but the most fertile Ground: So R. Bechai, and
lately R. Jac. Abendana in his Marginal Notes upon Michlal Jophi. Where he
gives this reason for it; That the Inhabitants of each City might be the more
careful to prevent such Murders; being in danger otherwise to lose the best
Ground belonging to their Inheritance, For the Land where the Body was found
(if we may believe the Mischna) was never to be sown any more. See Sota, Cap.
IX. Sect. V.

And shall strike off the Heifers neck there in the valley.] Coming behind the
Heifer (says that Mischna) as the Murderer was supposed to have treacherously
surprised the slain Man: and should have been thus used, if he could have been
found.

Ver. 5. And the Priests the sons of Levi.] See

Shall come near.] To see all performed according to the Law; and to pray to
God for the Country, in the words prescribed v. 8.

For them the LORD thy God has chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in
the Name of the LORD.] See XXVIII Exodus 1, etc. VI Numb. 23, etc.

And by their word shall every controversy, and every stroke be tried.] They
did not determine all Matters whatsoever; but all of this nature: in which the
Law appointed them to take care things were done according to it. As in the
killing of the red Heifer; the Examination of the Woman suspected of Adultery
by the Water of Jealousy; the Leprosy, whether in Men, or Houses, or Garments.
Thus the Hebrews explain these words. See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. VIII.
And so Bonfrerius here acknowledges, that they did not come hither as Judges,
but as Directors; and that they might purge themselves, together with the
Elders, from all guilt of this Crime.

And all the Elders of that City that are next to the slain Man.] If there were
never so many Elders in the City, they were all to clear themselves, by doing
what follows.

Shall wash their hands over the Heifer, etc.] In the Water of the Brook, which
flowed through the Valley; protesting their Innocence, in the words prescribed
in the next Verse. So Chaskuni glosses, As our hands are clean, so are we from
the guilt of this blood. See Wagenseil upon Sota, p. 910. who thinks Pilate had
respect to this Rite, when he condemned our Savior (XXVII Matthew. 24.)
notwithstanding all that Learned Men have said to the contrary.

And they shall answer and say.] Being asked, perhaps, whether they knew any
thing of this Murder.

Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.] That is,
they professed solemnly they knew not who shed it, nor how the Man came to be
slain. And the Mischna beforementioned adds, that they said (for how can any
one think that Elders would be Murderers?) This Man did not come into our City
that we know of, and dismissed without necessary provisions; nor was seen by
us, and permitted to go away without company. Which Maimonides expresses more
largely in his More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XL. where he represents the Wisdom
of this Law, in these words: The Elders called God to witness, that they had
not neglected to secure the ways; nor to set Watches, to examine diligently
those that traveled; saying, as our Rabbis express it, This Man was not
killed through any negligence, or forgetfulness which we were guilty of, in not
observing our public Constitutions; nor do we know who killed him. Now by this
Inquisition into the Fact, by this going forth of the Elders, and the striking
of the Heifers Head, etc. a great deal of Discourse necessarily arose about
this business, which made the thing public; and was a probable means of
discovering the Murderer, by some or other who were there, or should hear of
all this. And if any one came and said he knew the Author, then they forbore to
behead the Heifer: but the Man being apprehended, if the House of Judgment did
not put him to death, the King had power to do it: if he neglected it, the
Avenger of Blood might kill him wheresoever he met him. By which it appears
that this solemn Process here mentioned tended very much to detect the
Murderer. Unto which this also contributed, that the place where the Heifer's
head was struck off, might never be ploughed or sowed hereafter, (as I noted
before) which made the Owners of that Ground employ their utmost diligence to
find out the Murderer, that their Land might not lie waste for ever. For they
might not so much as plant a Tree upon it.

Ver. 8. Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Israel, The Priests alone
pronounced these words as the Mischna there says: though Josephus (who often
differs from the Talmudists) says, both Priests and Elders prayed God to be
propitious unto them; and to prevent the like Evil from falling out again in
their Region. See Seldom Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. VII. N. V, VI.

And the blood shall be forgiven them.] These are not the words of the Priests,
says the same Mischna: but the Holy Ghost pronounces, that when they observed
these Rites, the guilt should be removed from them. Which in some sort, would
have lain upon them, if they had taken no notice of a Murder committed so near
to their City; nor made inquisition after it, and expressed their abhorrence of
it.

So shall thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among you, when thou
shall do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.] Sincerely protesting
their Innocence, and detestation of this Fact. Which was to be done in the day
time, and not in the night: and the Body of the Heifer was to be buried; but
none of it eaten, or any part of it employed to other use. If the Murderer was
found before it is Head was struck off, it was to be let go into the Pasture
among other Beasts: if after, he was to suffer Capital Punishment; that is, to
be cut off by the Sword, as the Mischna beforementioned explains it, Cap. IX.
Sect. VII.

By all this it appears, that no ancient Law made such provision for the
discovery and expiation of secret Murders, as this of Moses. For the very best
of them, which is that of Plato, enacts no more than this, That if a Man was
found dead, and he that killed him, after a diligent search, could not be heard
of, public Proclamation should be made, that he who was guilty of the Fact,
should not come into any holy place, nor any part of the whole Country: for if
he were discovered and apprehended, he should be put to death, (...), and be
thrown out of the Bounds of the Country, and have no burial, Lib. IX. de
Legibus, p. 874.

Ver. 10. When thou go to War against thine Enemies.] To a voluntary War
against any of their neighboring Nations; not against the People of Canaan:
none of which were to be spared, if they

And the LORD thy God has delivered them into thy hands, and thou have taken
them captive.] As the manner was, to make them Slaves to their Conquerors.

Ver. 11. And see among the captives a beautiful woman.]

And have a desire unto her, that thou would have her to thy wife.] The plain
meaning is, fell so passionately in love with her, as to desire to marry her;
though a Stranger of another Nation and Religion. It is a common Opinion indeed
among the Jewish Doctors, that a baser sort of Passion is here indulged; for it
was lawful, they imagine, for a Soldier to lie with such a Captive once to
satisfy his Lust, (which some make to be the meaning of this Expression, have
a desire to her; or, as it is in the Hebrew, have cleaved to her) but not
repeat it, unless he would take her for his Wife. Which they think was allowed
to Military Men, when they were absent from their Wives, to prevent greater
Outrages which were wont to be committed by the Heathen. But the best Nations
severely prohibited all such Abuses, as Grotius observes, L. III. de Jure Belli
and Pacis, Cap. IV. Sect. XIX. 1. And though Schickard in his Mischpat
Hammelech endeavors to make out the Wisdom of this Law, in permitting a Hebrew
Soldier to enjoy a Captive once, (See p. 130, 131. and Mr. Seldom Lib. V. de
Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XIII.) yet he cannot but acknowledge that some of the
Jews do not allow of this Interpretation; but are of opinion that he might not
touch a Captive till she became a Proselyte, and he took her for his Wife. Thus
R. Bechai, as Grotius observes in the place forenamed, Sect. XIX. 2. God would
have the Camp of Israel holy, and not defiled with fornication, and other
abominations, as the Camps of the Gentiles. Unto whom Alexander himself gave a
better Example; who being extremely taken with the Beauty of Roxana, did not
abuse her, as a Captive; but vouchsafed to marry her, and make her his Wife.
For which he is justly commended, both by Arrianus and by Plutarch. And
therefore I think it is most reasonable to expound this Law, only of taking
such a Captive in Marriage: which Abarbinel also shows is the most ancient
Interpretation of it, and has the best Authority on its side among the Jews.
For though he acknowledges it is the common Opinion of their wise Men, that a
Soldier might lie with a fair Captive once, whilst she was a mere Gentile; yet
herein they followed the Doctors in the Babylonian Talmud; which is not of so
great Antiquity as the Jerusalem Talmud: where R. Johannes (in Massecheth
Sanhedrim) delivers the quite contrary Doctrine, That it was not lawful for any
Israelite to lie with such a Woman at all, till the Conditions, mentioned in
the following words of this Law, were fulfilled, when he was to make her his
Wife. And according to the Judgment of this R. Johannes, Abarbinel explains
this Law, in a large Commentary on this place.

Then thou shall bring her home to thine house.] The forenamed Doctors, who are
so indulgent to the Soldiers Lust, will have this to signify that they were
to observe the Rules of Modesty in the Camp; and not openly lie with her like
Beasts, but privately in their Tents. Thus Maimonides himself, More Nevochim P.
III. Cap. XLI. But it is evident Moses does not speak of any thing done in the
Camp, but of what was to be done when he returned to his House: where he was to
dispose her, in the manner following to be his Wife.

And she shall shave her head.] These and the following words are variously
interpreted: some taking these things to be done to her, with a design to abate
his Affection to her, that he might not marry her at all: and others to prepare
her, and make her fit, for his Bed. For shaving her Head (which every one knows
was used in mourning) deprived her of one of her greatest Ornaments, and made
her less amiable, and consequently might extinguish his Affection, which was
kindled by her Beauty. So Clemens Alexandrinus understands it; See Lib. II.
Strom. p. 398, 399. and Lib. III. p. 456. and many of the Hebrews are of the
same mind, that these things were ordered to lessen his Affection to her, by
making her appear less lovely in his eyes. See Schickard's Mischpat Hammelech,
Cap. V. Theorem. XVII. p. 134, 135. But there are others who take this to have
been a kind of Purification and Cleansing her from her Gentilism; and a Token
of her becoming a new Woman, that she might be meet to be made his Wife.

And pair her Nails.] This likewise was a piece of Cleanliness and Neatness.
But they who are of the other Opinion translate the words, Let her Nails grow.
As our marginal Translation has it, and the Arabic and Chaldee, and the
Hebrew Doctors commonly understand it. Which was intended to make her look
ugly, and to slack his love to her. At least, it was suitable to the Condition
of a Mourner; as she plainly was, it appears by the next Verse. The Hebrew
words indeed (which are make her Nails) are dubious; from whence arose that
dispute we find in the Talmud between R. Eliezer, who expounds it pair her
Nails, to make them look handsome, and R. Akiba, who expounds it let them grow.
The former reasons thus; the Hair and the Nails are to be used alike: now her
Hair is plainly ordered to be cut, and therefore so were her Nails to be. But
the other Doctor turns it quite contrary; what was ordered about her Hair was
to make her abominable, therefore this also was intended to make her appear
ill-favored. And indeed the Hebrew word being indifferent to either sense, we
must judge of the meaning by the circumstances of the place: and here they seem
to lead us to R. Akiba's interpretation; which Onkelos, a most judicious
Paraphrast, follows: and many Learned Men in later times; particularly
Schickard in the Book beforementioned, p. 134. and Martinus Gierus de luctu
Hebraeorum, Cap. XIV. Sect. V.

And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her.] Her fine
Clothes, wherein they suppose her to have been taken captive: Instead of which
she was to put on sordid Apparel; which was the Habit of Mourners. This still
tended to cool his love; the drift of these things being (as the Jews commonly
think) to take away from her all that was inviting and tempting, that so such
Marriage might not be common among them.

And shall remain in thy house.] Not stir out of doors, but be retired; as
Persons in a mournful condition are wont to be.

And bewail her father and mother.] Who perhaps were killed in the War: or,
rather, whom she was likely to see no more. And this also the Jews suppose
might help to abate his Affection to her: Sorrow and Grief very much spoiling
ones Beauty.

A full month.] So long the Jews were allowed to bewail their dead Relations,
or at least those who were eminent: as they did Aaron and Moses. And here I
cannot but observe how Philo magnifies this Constitution, and plainly shows he
was of the opinion of R. Johannes beforementioned; that this Captive might not
be touched till all these things were performed. (...) (says he, in his Book
(...), p. 545, etc.) Moses ordered every thing most excellently in this Law:
First, In not letting the Reins loose to Men's desires; but restraining them for
thirty days. In which time, secondly, a trial was made of his love, whether it
was a furious, ungovernable Passion, or had something of reason in it. Which
advises us to do nothing suddenly, but after serious and long deliberation. And
thirdly, (...). This was a merciful Law to the Captive; that if she were a
Virgin, she might bewail her unhappiness, in not being disposed of in Marriage
by her Parents: If a Widow, that she had lost her first Love, and was now to be
married to one, who would be her Lord, as well as her Husband.

And after that.] Upon these words R. Johannes grounded his opinion, That till
a full Month was spent, in the forementioned Ceremonies, he might not lie with
her.

Thou shall go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.] If
he continued, that is, to love her at the end of the Month; and she was willing
to embrace the Jewish Religion, in which, while she remained retired in his
House, she was instructed. For, the Jewish Doctors agree, she was to be
baptized, and not merely made a Proselyte of the Gate ( i. e. renounce
Idolatry) otherwise he might not marry her. And if she refused to embrace their
Religion entirely, Maimonides says, they gave her a years time to consider of
it: at the end of which, if she remained still obstinate, they required her at
least to observe the Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah, and so to become a
Proselyte of the Gate: otherwise she was to be slain. But though she was so far
converted, no Jew might take her to Wife: for such a Marriage, Maimonides
says, was counted impious.

Those Hebrew Doctors who think a Soldier might enjoy her once, at the first
taking her Captive, have added another conceit to this; viz. That there was not
only this Months time allowed her to bewail her Parents, but that he was to
stay two Months more, before he might go in to her, and be her husband, that he
might see whether she were with Child or no, by his first enjoyment of her. For
if she were, a great difference was to be made between that Child, and those
she might have by him after marriage. Concerning which see Seldom Lib. V. de
Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XIII. where he observes, they make Tamar, the Daughter
of David, an instance of this. Whose Mother being a Captive, they suppose he
lay with her as soon as she was taken, and had this Issue by her: but afterward
she becoming a Proselyte, he made her his Wife, and she bare him Absalom.
Whereby it came to pass, that there was not such a Relation between her and the
other Sons of David by other Women; but that it had been lawful for Amnon to
have married her.

But all this is judged by the famous Abarbinel (upon 2 Samuel XIII.) to be very
absurd: and neither believes that David would have committed such a Fact, as to
lie with a Woman in her Gentilism; nor, if he had, that this Child would have
been looked upon as a Gentile, since he afterward married her Mother. And
therefore he takes those words of Tamar, v. 13. Speak to the King, and he will
not withhold me from thee, to be a mere put off, as we speak, to get rid of his
Company: which Amnon understood very well, who knowing he could not have her to
Wife, proceeded to force her.

Ver. 14. And it shall be, if thou have no delight in If at the Months end, or
before, his Mind was changed, and he did not like to take her for his Wife,
then he might neither meddle with her any more (as the Hebrew Doctors
understand it) nor keep her any longer as a Slave, nor sell her, or make
merchandise of her, (as the Text here expressly orders) but give her liberty to
go whither she her self thought good. This he lost, say the Jews, by his short
pleasure he took at first. For other Captives, whom a Man had made himself
Master of, by the Law of War, he might employ in his Work as Slaves, or make
Money of them; but one whom he had lain with, he was either to marry, or set
her a liberty. This they ground upon the last words of this Verse; which I
shall show may have another interpretation. And therefore I shall not insist
upon their sense (which depends upon the same words) who think Moses speaks of
his not likeing her after she was become his Wife, her Humor, Manners, and
Conversation being disagreeable to him: in which case he was to give her a Bill
of Divorce, as he might do another Wife, but not keep her as a Slave.

Because thou have humbled her.] It must be acknowledged that this is an usual
Phrase, for having had Carnal Knowledge of a Woman, as the Scripture modestly
elsewhere speaks, in the like case. It signifies so in the very next Chapter of
this Book, XXII Deuteronomy. 29. XIX Judge. 24. XX. 2. and many other places, where it
is used for Violence offered to a Woman, which was the greatest Affliction to
her; as the Hebrew word properly signifies. From which I see no reason why we
should depart in this place; for it was sufficient Affliction and Humiliation
to a Captive Woman (as Carpsovius observes in his Annotations upon Schickard's
Book, which I have so often named) that after she had been brought into a
Soldiers House, and kept there a Month, having her Head shaved, Garments
changed, etc. in hope of Marriage, she was rejected at last when it should have
been consummated: And thus Abarbinel here understands the word humbled, not of
his lying with her; but of all the forementioned Conditions which were imposed
upon her, as a preparation for his Bed; and of her disappointment after she had
submitted to be baptized. And indeed the Hebrew word denotes any sort of
Affliction. See I Exodus 11. LXXXVIII Psalm. 8. LXXXIX. 23. XC. 15. XCIV. 5, etc.

If a Man have two Wives, one beloved and another hated.] That is, less loved;
as the word hated sometimes signifies, XXIX Genesis 31. VI Matthew. 24. R. Solomon
thinks that this Case follows the other, because it might so happen, that if a
Man suffered himself to be carried with too violent a passion toward such a
Woman, as is beforementioned, it might turn into hatred, when he found her not
to be agreeable to him.

And they have born him Children, both the beloved and the hated.] Toward
which it was likely he would be affected very differently, as he was to his
Wives.

And if the firstborn Son be hers that was hated.] As it fell out in the Case
of Leah and Rachel.

Ver. 16. Then it shall be when he makes his Sons to etc.] He speaks of Sons;
for Daughters were not to have a double Portion. And he speaks of Sons (as the
Jews will have it) born before the death of their Father; to whom he divided
his Inheritance. For a posthumous Son had not a double Portion, as the Gemara
upon Bathra says. See Seldom de Successionibus, Cap. VII. p. 29.

Ver. 17. But he shall acknowledge the Son of the hated Which had his first
love; and was to enjoy the effects of it.

By giving him a double portion of all that he has.] Of all that he was in
possession of when he died: but not of that which was his in Reversion after
his death; as Mr. Seldom shows the Opinion of the Jewish Lawyers is, Lib. de
Success. Cap. VI. p. 24.

For he is the beginning of his strength.] See XLIX Genesis 1.

The right of the firstborn is his.] By a very ancient Custom, antecedent to
the Law: which made the firstborn the Head of the Family, and gave him as much
more, as any of his Brethren, of the Estate belonging to it, that he might be
able to maintain and support the Dignity of it, XXV Genesis 31. But if there was
no Son, and the Inheritance was to be divided among Daughters, the eldest
Daughter had not a double share of the Estate; as Mr. Seldom shows in the same
Book, Cap. VIII.

If a Man have a stubborn and rebellious Son.] By a stubborn Son the Jews
understand, one that will not do as he is bidden: and by a rebellious, one that
does what he is forbidden. And they imagine this Law is annexed to the
foregoing, about the marriage of a Soldier to a Captive Woman; because the
Issue of such Marriages commonly proved refractory, or at least gave their
Parents great trouble. So Schickard observes out of Tanchuma. And they confirm
it by an Example out of Scripture, viz. the two Children of David, Absalom and
Tamar, who were both born of a Captive Woman, made a Proselyte: the former of
which conspired the Death of his Father; and the other being ravished by Amnon,
was the occasion of the Death of some of her Brethren. Mischpat Hammelech, Cap.
V. Theorem. XVII.

Which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother.]
Behaved himself not only undutifully, but crosly to them: and with such
contempt of their Authority, as argued he had not only lost all filial
Affection and Reverence to them; but would, if he could, undo them.

And that when they have chastned him, will not hearken unto them.] Is never
the better for Admonitions, Reprehensions, and Corrections, which they were
bound to give him.

Then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold of him.] It is absurd to say, as
the Hebrew Doctors do (in their qualifications of this Law) that his Parents
were with their own hands to apprehend him, and bring him before the Court:
though it seems reasonable enough, that both Father and Mother should agree in
the Complaint against him, and desire Officers might be sent to lay hold of
him. In which one cannot well suppose that they would consent to have such a
Punishment, as follows, inflicted upon him, unless he were intolerable.

And bring him unto the Elders of his City.] Who were to examine the proofs,
and accordingly to pass Sentence upon him. Concerning these Elders, see v. 3, 4.

And unto the gate of his place.] Where the Court of Judgment was wont to sit.
See XVI. 18. The Paternal Power among the ancient Romans was so great, that
they might put their Children to death, as they did their Slaves, without any
Process before a Magistrate. And this some have taken to be a Natural Right;
and imagined God would not have commanded Abraham to kill his Son, but that it
was a part of his inherent Power. However this be, they were not thought fit to
be long entrusted with it; for God here orders by Moses, that it should be
committed to the public Judges, as the most disinterested Persons.

Ver. 20. And they shall say unto the Elders of his City.]

This our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice.] This is
to be understood, say they, of a Son that was no less then Thirteen years old
and a day: and so might be presumed to know his Duty, and to be capable of
being governed by Counsel and good Advice. And this is reasonable enough. But
what they say concerning the time when he became his own Man, is monstrously
absurd. See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. p. 559, 560. What they say of
a Daughter, not to be comprehended under this Law, may be admitted; because she
was not capable to do so much Mischief in a Family, as a rebellious Son.

He is a glutton and a drunkard.] These Sins are no where made capital by the
Law of Moses, but when they were accompanied with rebellious Disobedience to
Parents. Who were to bring Witnesses, as the Hebrew Doctors say, that this Son
had stolen some of their Goods, and sold them, that he might spend the Money in
these Vices: under which others are comprehended, which usually attend them.
And that he had done this, after he had been admonished and chastised: so that
he was not to be punished, as this Law at last prescribes, till he was grown
incorrigible. For, they say, the Court was first to order him to be whipped; and
not to proceed further till, upon a new Complaint, it was proved that he had
run into the same riotous Courses, since that punishment. Then, upon this
second Testimony (as they call it) the Court gave Sentence against him, that he
should be stoned to death; unless the Parents, before the Sentence was
pronounced, said they gave him their Pardon. There are a great many little
Niceties about the quantity of Meat and Wine that he eat and drank, and other
Matters; with which I do not think fit to trouble the Reader.

And all the Men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die.] This is
such a severe Sentence, that it inclines me to think, the Parents looked upon
such a Son as so debaucht, that he would not only spend all their Estate, if he
had it, but was inclined to kill them, that he might get it into his own hands.
For the Sentence of Death is denounced, elsewhere, against one that struck his
Father or Mother, XXI Exodus 15. or that cursed them, v. 17. It is not said
indeed he should be stoned, but put to death; which they interpret of
strangling; this punishment of stoning, being appointed for Idolaters and
Blasphemers of God. Next to whom Parents are to be reverenced; being in God's
place, with respect to their Children. See upon the fifth Commandment. And
therefore other Nations were very severe in their punishment of such Children
as are here described; and particularly the Romans, after the power was taken
from Parents to sell them* or put them to death, and the Censure of them
committed to the Magistrates. See Hen. Stephen in his Fontes and Rivi Juris
Civilis, p. 18. And among the Athenians, Lysias says (in his Oration against
Agoratus) he that beats his Parents, or did not maintain them, and provide an
habitation for them, when they were in want, (...), deserved to be put to
death. The Law indeed did not inflict that punishment, but only said (...), let
him be infamous. That is, as they expound it, he might not come into the
Public Assemblies, nor enter into their Temples, nor wear a Crown in their
Public Festivals: and if any such Persons presumed so to do, they were brought
before the Magistrates, who set a Fine upon their Heads, and committed them to
Prison, till they paid it. See Sam. Petitus in his Commentary upon the Attick
Laws, Lib. II. Tit. IV. p. 163. No wonder therefore Moses ordained this
punishment, when a Son was come to such a degree of profligate wickedness, that
he endeavored to undo his Parents. Which some States have thought fit to
follow, in these latter Ages. For David Chytraeus says, he himself saw an
Example of this Severity at Zurich, in the year One thousand five hundred and
fifty; where a disobedient Son was beheaded, who had cursed his Mother, and
beaten her.

So shall thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear, and
fear.] See concerning this before upon XIX. 20.

If a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be put to death.] There
were several sorts of Capital Punishments, viz. Strangling, Burning, Cutting
off by the Sword, and Stoning. Now the Hebrew Doctors limit this unto such
Offenders, as were stoned; of which Punishment he speaks in the foregoing
Verse. But there being Eighteen sorts of Offenders, who were to be Sentenced to
this Death, they put a further limitation upon these words; their Tradition
being, as they tell us, the Sin worthy of death (or Stoning) is only Idolatry,
or Blasphemy. So we read in the Sanhedrim, Cap. VI. Sect. IV. All that were
stoned were also hanged, according to the opinion of R. Eliezer: but the wise
Men say none were hanged but the Idolater and Blasphemer. And they add there,
that only Men, not Women, were thus used: for which I can see no reason, but
their sticking to the mere Letter of these words; as if the word Man did not
comprehend both senses.

But if we examine the Scripture, we shall find this not to be true (that no
Men were hanged, but they that were stoned) for the King of Ai was hanged, VIII
Josh. 29. and five Kings more, X. 26. and they were not hanged because they
were Blasphemers or Idolaters, (for then all the rest of the Canaanites should
have been so treated) but because they were such Enemies of God, as had
rebelliously withstood the gracious Summons of Surrender. And there are other
Examples also, which confute this; as the two Traitors that murdered Isbosheth,
2 Samuel IV. 12. and the five Sons of Saul, 2 Samuel XXI. 9. It is more probable
therefore, that all those whom the Judges thought to be such great Offenders,
that it was fit to make them very public Examples, were hanged up, after they
had suffered the punishment of Death, to which they were sentenced. This seems
to be denoted in the word Chatta; which signifies sometimes a very great Crime,
as appears from XII Hosea 8. where he speaks of iniquity, which is sin. Not as
if all iniquity were not sin; but some acts of iniquity were not so heinous, as
to be called by that name.

And thou hang him.] After he had been put to death, as appears by the
foregoing words, which speak of his being put to death before this Suspension.
Which shows that this Punishment was not the same with the Roman Crucifixion
(as Baronius, Sigonius, Lipsius and others have mistaken) for they hanged Men
alive upon the Gibbet; whereby they expired before they were taken down: But
this was only hanging up their Bodies after they were dead, and exposing them
to open shame for a time.

On a Tree.] On a piece of Timber (says the Sanhedrim) struck into the Ground;
out of which came a Beam, whereunto his Hands were tied, as they tell us in the
place beforementioned. And so Schickard in his Mischpat Hammelech, Cap. IV.
Theor* XIV. So that his Body hung in such a posture as crucified Men did.

Ver. 23. His body shall not remain all night upon the Tree, but thou shall in
any wise bury him that day.] This is excellently interpreted by Josephus, Lib.
IV. Archaeol. VIII. (...). Having remained the whole day a Spectacle unto all,
he was to be buried at night: for as soon as the Sun went down, the Body also
was taken down. Examples of which we have in the Book of Joshua, VIII. 29. X.
26, 27. In which he is far more sincere then their Rabbis, who say the Law was
satisfied if they hanged up the Body just before the setting of the Sun, and
presently after took it down again. Which Exposition seems to have been
contrived in favor of their Countrymen: for only Israelites, they confess,
were to be thus exposed, not Proselytes of the Gate, as Mr. Seldom observes,
Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. etc. Cap. XII*

For he that is hanged is accursed of God.] The Jews interpret this Clause, as
if the meaning were, he was hanged, because he blasphemed God. So Onkelos
himself, and the Samaritan Versions, with those of the Spanish and Mauritanian
Jews, as Seldom observes, L. II. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. N. IV. And Hottinger in
his Smegma Orientale, p. 96, 97. But though this be a common Opinion among the
Hebrew Doctors, yet the LXX. have taken the sense right, (...), Cursed of God
is every one that is hanged on a Tree. And so S. Paul III Galat. with very
little difference. For they observed, what those Doctors did not, that Moses
does not here give a reason, why the Man was hanged up, but why he was to be
taken down from the Gallows. Now what Consequence is there in this, Let him be
taken down and buried, because he cursed God? Every one sees, that (though the
word cursed should be taken in an active sense) this is not a right
interpretation of these words. For though it had been good sense to have said,
Let him be hanged, because he cursed God; yet not let him be taken down for
that reason. Now such Persons are said here to be accursed of God, not because
they were hanged up, but because of their Sin which deserved they should be
thus exposed. So S. Hierom upon III Galatians, Non ideo maledictus quia pendet,
sed ideo pendet quia maledictus. He was not accursed because he was hanged, but
he was therefore hanged, because he was accursed: Hanging up being a Token that
the Man had committed a horrid Crime, whereby he had incurred the high
displeasure of Almighty God. So that every one who saw him hang on that
fashion, were to think with themselves, This Man was under the Curse of God,
because of his Sin. And unless he had undergone this Curse, he could not have
been buried, and put into the Condition of other Men. But when he had undergone
it for his Sin, then it had been a sin in the People not to have taken him
down, or prolonged his Suspension longer than God imposed this Curse upon him.
And the Land had been defiled, if after this Suffering which God had appointed,
they had not buried him. To this purpose Abarbinel, who refutes several other
accounts of this matter, particularly that of Sol. Jarchi; who thinks he was
not to hang longer than till the Evening, because it would have been a
dishonor to the Sovereign of the World, after whose Image Man was made. This
is followed by many, and even by Grotius himself, who gives no other reason of
it in his Book de Jure Belli and Pacis, Lib. II. Cap. XIX. Sect. IV. But this
is a reason, as Abarbinel notes, why he should not have been hanged up at all.
It may be also usefully noted further, that they say in the Tract called
Sanhedrim, that not only the Malefactor, but all the Instruments of Punishment
were to be buried at the going down of the Sun. Even the Tree it self, upon
which he was hanged, was to be buried, that no memory of so foul a thing might
be left in the World; nor any might say, Behold, this was the Tree upon which
such a one was hanged.

That the Land be not defiled which the LORD thy God gives thee.] By the
stench of the Body, after it putrified, as the same Abarbinel expounds it: who
observes, that the dead Body of no Creature corrupts and stinks sooner than
that of a Man; which is exceeding offensive to the living. For which cause,
says he, the Book Siphre determines not only that all Malefactors should be
buried, as soon as the Law here orders (that they might not imitate the manners
of the Egyptians and Philistims, and such like People, who let Bodies rot in
the Air after they were hanged up) but that every Man should bury his dead, the
same day they died, or be deemed to have transgressed a Negative Precept. Which
may pass for a very good natural reason of it: but there is something more in
it, respecting a Legal Pollution, under which their whole Country lay, as long
as an accursed thing hung openly among them; just as all that entered into the
Tent where a dead Body lay, and all that was in it, were made unclean by it,
XIX Numb. 14, 15. Upon which score S. Paul might well apply this Passage to
Christ crucified for us; not only because he bare our sins, and was put to
death, and exposed to such shame as these Sinners were, who were accursed of
God; but was also taken down in the Evening, in token now the guilt was
removed; Chapter XXII.
as the Curse upon the Man that was hanged, ended at the going down of the Sun;
and as the Land of Israel was pure and clean, after the dead Body was taken
down and buried, with the Tree upon which it was hanged. Joh. Coch has well
explained this, in his Notes upon the Sanhedrim, Cap. VI. Sect. V. whose sense
in short is this: As our blessed Savior, while he hung upon the Cross, was
made a Curse, and an Execration; so when, according to the Law, he was taken
down, and buried, both he ceased to be a Curse, and all they that are his.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. THou shall not see thy brother's Ox, or his They were not to turn
away their Face, as if they did not see them, and so neglect them. And by
Brother is to be understood, not only an Israelite, but any Man that lived
among them: this being a matter of common right, and extended to their Enemies,
as well as their Friends, XXIII Exodus 4.

Thou shall in any case bring them again to thy brother.] Not merely give
notice to the Owner, where he saw them, but take care himself to bring them
back, that they might not go further astray, and perhaps be quite lost, before
the Owner could have notice of them. This, and many that follow, are Precepts
of Humanity, and Care of each others welfare; without which Society could not
be preserved.

Ver. 2. And if thy brother be not nigh thee, or thou know him not, then thou
shall bring it to thine own house.] And preserve it there, till he could send
to him, or find who the Owner was.

And it shall be with thee, until thy brother seek after it.] He was to give
notice, by the public Crier, that such a Beast was with him, and that, as the
Jews say, three or four times; that the Owner might seek after it. But here
they are pleased to make a distinction; that they were to do this, if there
were Marks upon the Beast; but if there were none, they were not bound to cry
it: which does not seem to be reasonable. See Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and
Gent. Cap. IV.

And thou shall restore it to him again.] He paying the Charges of keeping it,
from the time it was brought to his House, till its being restored. But if no
Body could prove a right in the Beasts that were lost, they became his who
found them, and he might lawfully keep them: for no other Owner appearing, they
were his that was in present possession of them. Who did very piously, if he
gave the value of them to the Poor, (and so the Law was in many places*) but he
was an honest Owner of them, if he kept them to himself: As Grotius observes,
Lib. II. de Jure Belli and Pacis, Cap. X. Sect. XI.

In like manner shall thou do with his Ass, and so shall thou do with his
raiment, and with all lost things, etc.] In all other Cases of like Nature, the
same Law was to be observed.

Thou may not hide thy self.] Pass them by with neglect, or pretend they did
not see them.

Thou shall not see thy brothers Ass, or his Ox fall down by the way, and hide
thy self from them.] Turn away, as if they did not see the danger they were in.

Thou shall surely help him to lift them up again.] This has been explained
upon XXIII Exodus 5. I shall only add here, a famous Example of this sort of
Piety, in Alphonsus King of Naples: who traveling upon the Road, attended by a
great number of Courtiers, and seeing a poor Ass with a burden fallen into a
deep Slough, (when all that went before him passed by, without any regard) when
he came to the place stopped, and went himself to the Driver, and lent him
Assistance to help the Ass out of the Dirt. So David Chytraeus upon this place.

Ver. 5. The woman shall not wear that which pertains The last words of this
place plainly indicate, that it was an idolatrous Custom, which is here
prohibited. For Moses and the Prophets are wont to speak in these terms of
utmost abhorrence, concerning such Matters. And nothing was more common among
the Heathen, than for Men, in the worship of several of their gods, to put on
the Garments usually worn by Women, and Women those worn by Men. Particularly
in the worship of Venus, Women appeared before her in Armor, and Men in Women's
Apparel. And thus the words literally run here in the Hebrew; Women shall not
put on the Armor of a Man, (so the word Celi frequently signifies Armor, as
well as other sorts of Instruments) nor a Man ((...) the LXX. translate it) the
stole of a Woman. See Seldom Syntag. II. de Diis Syris, Cap. IV. And thus
Maimonides says he found this Precept in an old Magical Book, that Men ought
to stand before the Star of Venus in the flowered Garment of Women, and Women
put on the Armor of Men, before the Star of Mars. More Nevochim P. III. Cap.
XXXVII. Servius also upon the Second Book of Aeneiads, mentions a Statue of
Venus in Cyprus (in which Island were anciently many Colonies of Phaenicians)
to whom the Women sacrificed in Men's Garments, and the Men in Women's. Many
other Nations did the same. See J. Ger. Vossius, Lib. II. de Orig. and Progr.
Idol. Cap. XXVII. and XXXI. but especially our Learned Dr. Spencer, Lib. II.
Cap. XVII. Sect. I. etc.

But setting aside all this, every one knows that if there were no distinction
of Sexes, made by their Habits, it would open a Door to all manner of Impurity:
for which reason, if there were no other, this Law was very wise and pious.

If a birds nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree, or on the
ground, etc.] By this place, among others, (particularly VIII Psalm. 8.) it
appears the word tsippor signifies all kind of Birds, and not only the smaller
sort, as some have imagined. But he seems particularly to speak of clean Birds,
such as it was lawful for them to eat. And this Precept seems to have been
given to breed in the Jews a sense of a Divine Providence, extending it self to
all Creatures; and to teach them to exercise their Dominion over them, without
any kind of Cruelty.

Thou shall not take the dam with the young.] R. Menachem, mentioned both by
Drusius and Bochartus, was of opinion that it is not pity toward Birds which
is intended in this Law, but kindness to Mankind; whom God intended by this
usage of other Creatures, to form unto gentleness and commiseration toward one
another. But others, I think, have more truly determined, that this is a
merciful Constitution, with respect to Birds as well as Men. It being a
sufficient Affliction, as Maimonides calls it, to the old one to lose her
young: and it being unreasonable also, that Men should consider only their own
present interest, without regard to Posterity; to whom the breed ought to be
continued by letting the old one go free. Unto which those Verses, commonly
ascribed to Phocylides, have respect.

(...),
(...).
i. e. Let no Man take all the Birds together out of a Nest; but let the Mother
go, that thou may have young ones again of her.

Ver. 7. Thou shall in any wise let the dam go, and take For there is a great
deal of ill nature in it, to take away the Liberty and the Life of any
Creature, from whom we have received a benefit; as Bonfrerius glosses upon
these words.

That it may be well with thee, and that thou may prolong thy days.] Some of
the Jews, from these words, have fancied, that the observation of this single
Precept was of such great value, as to procure for them even forgiveness of
sins and a long life. Which is such a foolish conceit, that it makes all other
Precepts unnecessary. The plain meaning is, that God would reward them for
their kind usage even of brute Creatures, if other Virtues were not wanting;
such as Charity toward their poor Neighbors. And so the Mischna, in the
Conclusion of the Tract called Cholin, discourses very well, If in a light
Precept concerning a thing which is scarce worth a farthing, the Law says, that
it may be well with thee, and thou may prolong thy days; how much more may
this be expected in the weightier things of the Law?

Ver. 8. When thou buildest a new house, then thou shall make a battlement for
thy roof.] The Jews, I think, are a little too curious, in setting a Mark upon
the thy; fancying he says not simply the Roof, but thy Roof, to except the
Temple, and the Synagogues, and Schools from this Rule; which were no private
Man's House, but belonged to the whole Congregation. They say indeed the Temple
had Battlements; but not for necessity, but for Ornament; because the Roof of
the Temple was not flat, as the Roof of another House was. For no Body walked
upon the Temple, as they did upon their own Houses, to take the Air, and
discourse together; or to meditate and pray (in little Closets they had there)
which made it necessary to have these Battlements, of three foot and a half
high (as the Jews say) to prevent any Man's falling down; when he did not
attend, but was thinking of some other thing. See Constant. L'Empereur in his
Annotations on Codex Middoth, p. 160.

That the Roofs of their Houses were flat, which was the ground of this
Precept, we have many proofs in the Scripture. For hither Rahab brought the
Spies, and covered them with the Stalks of Flax, which she laid upon them, II
Josh. 6. Here Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the House, 1 Samuel IX.
25. David also was walking upon the Roof of his Palace, when he saw Bathsheba
washing her self, 2 Samuel XI. 2. And in the same place Absalom caused a Tent to
be spread, that he might go in to his Fathers Concubins, in the sight of all
Israel, XVI. 22. See also XV Isa. 3. XXII. 1. and in the New Tastament X Acts
9. Nor was it the manner of the Hebrews only, but of the Greeks and Romans
also, to make the Roofs of their Houses so, that they might walk upon them; and
stand there to see any Public Show, or take the Air; as Is. Casaubon shows in
a multitude of Instances, Lib. IV. in Athenaeum, Cap. XII. where he observes
also out of Pliny and Seneca, that the Roman Houses wanted these Battlements,
which Moses here ordered in this Law. By all which we may easily understand
those places in the Gospel, that speak of proclaiming things on the House top,
etc. X Matthew. 27. V Luke 19.

That thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence.] And
be killed by the fall. For his neglect being the cause of his death, it made
him guilty before God of his Blood, and liable to be punished by the Judges for
slighting so profitable an Institution as this is. Which the Jews extend to a
studious care about every thing that might bring a Man's Life in danger. For
examples sake; they might not keep a mad Dog; nor set up a broken Ladder in
their House, etc. as L'Empereur observes upon Bava kama, Cap. V.

Ver. 9. Thou shall not sow thy Vineyard with diverse What he had said
concerning their Fields, XIX Levit. 19. he now says of their Vineyards; which
they were not to sow with Seeds of a diverse kind. For this was an idolatrous
Custom, as the reason given against it plainly shows. This Maimonides says he
found in a Book of the Zabij, and in one Rabbi Josiah; who taught, That these
three things, Wheat, Barley, and Grapes dried in the Sun, should be sown
together in the Grounds with one and the same Cast of the Hand. Which was so
senseless a thing, that he could not but think they learnt it from the ways of
the Amorites, as his words are; that is, from the wicked Idolaters of the
Country, to which the Israelites were going. For Wheat being sown properly at
one season of the year, and Barley at another, and a Vineyard being an improper
place for the growth of either of them, this Custom could not have its original
either from God, or from Man, but from the Devil, the Author of Confusion; who
taught them this uncouth Rite, in honor of Ceres, perhaps, and Bacchus, whom
they joined in the same Act of Worship.

Lest the fruit of thy seed, which thou have sown, and the fruit of thy
Vineyard be defiled.] If the Israelites had followed this Custom, it would have
made both the Corn, and the Grapes that sprung up from such Seed, impure,
because polluted by Idolatry; the very smell of which God would not have to
remain among the Israelites, as Maimonides speaks in his More Nevochim, P. III.
Cap. XXXVII. See Dr. Spencer in his very Learned Work de Leg. Ritual. Hebr.
Lib. II. Cap. XVIII. Every one also knows that it was unlawful for the
Israelites to eat any of the Fruits of the Earth, till the First Fruits of them
had been offered unto God; which would not have been accepted by him of such
things as these, that were expressly forbidden by his Law; and consequently the
whole Crop became unclean to them, and might not be used by them.

Thou shall not plough with an Ox and an Ass together.] Lest that Law should be
violated which we read XIX Levit. 19. Thou shall not let thy Cattle gender with
a diverse kind. So some give the reason of it; even Maimonides in the Book
forementioned, P. III. Cap. XLIX. But it seems also to have respect to those
Magical Rites of the Idolatrous Nations in those Countries; who thought their
Fields would be more fruitful, if, according to some Directions which had been
given by their gods, they were thus ploughed. For one cannot well think that
Men, of themselves, would join together two Creatures so different in their
Temper and Motions, to draw in the same Yoke, if they had not been led to it by
some Superstition or other. For their strength is unequal, as Aben-Ezra here
observes, The strength of an Ass is not as the strength of an Ox. Whence it was
that Ulysses, to make it be believed that he was mad, joined an Horse and an
Ass to plough: and Homer, Odyss. 5. would have Oxen (...) joined together; that
is, (...), equally bearing, and drawing, as Bochart observes the Scholiast
there glosses.

The Jews commonly think this Law extends to all other Creatures of different
Species, which might not be yoked together. But some understand it so, that
they might join several kinds together; provided one was not unclean, and the
other clean. Baal Hatturim finds this Mystery in this Prohibition, That the
Righteous ought to have no Society with the Wicked. And there are those who
think the Apostle alludes to this, when he says 2 Corinthians. VI. 14. (...), Be
not unequally yoked together with unbelievers. Which Bochart himself thinks not
improbable. See Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. Cap. XIII. and Cap. XL. p. 401.
where there are other reasons of this Precept.

Ver. 11. Thou shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts, The Ancients think God
intended hereby to teach his People simplicity in their Manners. See Bochart in
the same Book, P. I. Lib. II. Cap. XLV. p. 491. But there was something further
in it, as I have observed upon XIX Levit. 19. to which I refer the Reader. And
shall only add here, That the Jews carried this so far, as not to sew a Woollen
Garment, with Linen Thread; nor on the contrary.

Ver. 12. Thou shall make the fringes.] What these were is sufficiently
explained upon XV Numb. 38, 39. See there.

Upon the four quarters of thy vesture.] They wore long Garments in those
Countries, as most People do still at this day. And I suppose the Garments of
the Jews had usually four Skirts. But perchance they some times had more, or
fewer than four: and in this case, if they had but three, their Doctors have
resolved they were not bound to make any Fringes for them; but if they had five
or six, they were bound to annex them to the four most remote quarters, in
which the intermediate were included. But this is a very unreasonable Subtilty;
the intention of the Law being, that they might be put in remembrance of God's
Commandments, by these Fringes; which therefore were to be worn in the Skirts
of their Garments, though they had been divided into no wings, or quarters at
all.

Wherewith thou coverest thy self.] Which they commonly wore: And it seems to
signify the uppermost Garment which covered all the rest, and was most seen;
whereby they were distinguished from the People of other Nations: For that was
one end of these Fringes, to be a distinctive Mark that they were of the Jewish
Religion. And therefore I do not see any reason in the determination of their
Doctors, who say Women, Servants, and little Children were not bound to wear
Fringes: For though little Children could not think of the Commandments of God,
yet it was fit they should wear the Note of their Religion. There is no reason
neither in their Resolution, when they say, That if Women and Servants (who
were bound as much as others to observe the Laws of God) would wear Fringes,
though they were not obliged by their Constitutions, yet they might not put
them on with the common Form of Benediction which they used. But I think they
observe rightly enough, that these Fringes were so peculiar to the Jews, that
the Samaritans, though acquainted with the Law, did not wear them. Nor do the
Jews themselves at this day use them upon their upper Garment: for that being
no longer four-cornered (because it made them a laughing stock) they wear only
under their other Garments a kind of square Frock, with the aforesaid Tassels
or Pendants fastened to it; as Leo Modena relates in his History of the Jews,
Part I. Chap. V. Only in their Synagogues or Schools at Morning Prayer, every
Man puts over his Head a square Woollen Garment, with the said Tassels fastened
at each corner, which they call Talith. Concerning which Bartoloccius in his
late Rabbinical Lexicon. Tom. I. has a long Dissertation, p. 576, etc.

Ver. 13. If a man take a wife and go in unto her.] Have

And hate her.] Do not like her; but is desirous to be rid of her.

Ver. 14. And give occasion of speech against her.] words sometimes signify)
as are opprobrious.

And bring up an evil name upon her.] Or as the Hebrew words are, bring forth a
name of evil, or infamy. Which signifies, as Mr. Seldom observes ( Lib. III.
Vxor. Hebr. Cap. I. p. 321.) the Action it self, which he brought against her,
in the Court of Judgment. This appears from the words following.

And say, I took this Woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a Maid.]
This was the Form wherein the Action was laid against her (as the same Seldom
there observes) in these words, as the Jews say; Having lain with this young
Woman, not of full age, as her Husband, I found not in her the Tokens of
Virginity; and making inquisition into the matter, it appears to me that she
has been guilty of Adultery, after I had espoused her: and these are the
eyewitnesses of her guilt.

Then shall the father and the mother of the damsel, take and bring forth the
tokens of the damsels virginity.] If the Accusation, as they say, was to be
made good by Witnesses of her Adultery, then her Defense was to be made, no
doubt, by contrary Witnesses, who endeavored to disprove the Testimony which
was brought against her. For so they are constrained to interpret the words we
translate, Tokens of her Virginity; as I shall show upon v. 17. The Hebrews
have many nice Subtilties about the word Damsel, with which I shall not trouble
the Reader. See Seldom in the forenamed place, L. III. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. I.

Unto the Elders of the City.] The Court consisting of XXIII. Judges; who had
the Cognizance of Common, Capital, and Penal Causes, in every City.

In the Gate.] Where the Court sat, as I observed before upon XVI. 18. And this
may be added to what I noted there, that by this may be explained those words
in the Book of Job V. 4. concerning the Children of the wicked, that they are
crushed in the Gate; i. e. lose their Cause, and are Condemned in the Court of
Judgment: and those of the Wiseman, XXII Prove. 22. Oppress not the afflicted
in the Gate; i. e. do him justice, and not let him be overthrown, because he
wants Money to defend his Cause. This appears to be the sense from the very
next words, v. 23. For the LORD will plead their Cause, etc.

Ver. 16. And the damsels father shall say unto the Elders, I gave my daughter
unto this man to wife.] The Jews say the Mother had no power to espouse her
Daughter, but the Father only, before she was of Age. Mischna Sotae, Cap. III.
Sect. VIII. where Wagenseil notes that the Mother, and Brethren also, had some
power in this matter; but such that the Daughter, within a time limited, might
make the Contract void.

And he hates her.] Has not the Affection which an Husband ought to have to
his Wife. If she had no Parents alive, the Judges appointed her a Guardian: and
Josephus says the next of kin were to Patronise her, as if they had been her
Parents.

Ver. 17. And lo, he has given occasion of speech against See v. 14. He does
not add what there follows, and brought up an evil name upon her, (i. e.
accused her publicly before you of Adultery) because it is sufficiently
comprehended in this.

Saying, I found not thy daughter a maid.] As such and such give Evidence.

And yet these are the tokens of my daughters virginity.] I have good Witnesses
to the contrary; which are here ready to be produced before the Court, to
disprove the former Testimony.

And they.] That is, the Witnesses which the Father produces.

Shall spread the cloth before the Elders of the City.] Though such Tokens of
Virginity, as are commonly understood by these words, might always be found in
those Countries (being very consonant to the Opinion of the chiefest Arabian
Physicians, as Mr. Seldom observes out of Avicenna, and of the Africans and
other People at this day, as many Authors* testify: See Joh. Geusius de
Victimis Humanis, Pars I. Cap. IX. and P. II. Cap. II. and Wierus L. Medicarum
Observationum, Sect. de Hymene) especially in such Virgins as the Jews say were
here meant, who were under thirteen years of Age; and though all that some
Physicians and Lawyers in these parts of the World have said to the contrary,
is of no consideration: yet there are weighty Reasons to incline us to think,
that no Man of common sense would bring such an Action against his Wife,
wherein he was sure to be cast, whether his Cause was right or wrong, if these
were the Evidences whereby it was to be tried. For if he accused her falsely, he
knew her Friends were able to produce the Sheet wherein they lay when they were
married, with such Tokens upon it as would disprove him, and render him guilty
of Defamation. And if he had a just ground to accuse her, because he knew they
could produce no such Tokens; yet this was no proof she had been vitiated since
she was Espoused to him; for she might have been corrupted before: and then he
could not attain his end, which was to be rid of her, not by way of Divorce,
(for then he must have given her a Dowry, which he was desirous to save) but by
having her put to death, as an Adulteress, which v. 21. shows to be the present
Case. Such evident Reasons as these have constrained the Jews to understand
these words, not according to the very Letter of them, but figuratively; of
such Witnesses produced by her Parents, as convinced the other of falsity so
evidently, that they made it appear as plainly as a piece of Cloth that is
unfolded, and laid before Men's eyes to view it. And they think the Hebrew word
Simlah, which we translate the Cloth, favors this Exposition. For it never
signifies a Sheet, or a Linen Cloth (which is wont to be called Sadin, XIV
Judge. 12. XXXI Prove. 24.) but such Cloth as Men's Garments are made of, which
commonly is Woollen, not Linen. And so it is used in this Book, X Deuteronomy. 18.
and in this very Chapter, v. 5. So that the sense is, They shall produce
evident proofs, and lay them before the Court, like a piece of Cloth, which is
spread for all that please to look upon it. Whether this be the Truth or no, I
will not dispute, but refer the Reader to Mr. Seldom, Lib. III. Vxor. Hebr.
Cap. 1, 2.

Ver. 18. And the Elders of that City shall take that Man.]

And chastise him.] Condemn him to receive forty Stripes save one, as both
Josephus and the Talmudists agree; and it was to be done with a Scourge made of
Thongs of an Oxes Hide. The Woman was dismissed with a Solemn Benediction; the
Form of which is set down in the Jewish Rituals: and, as for the false
Witnesses against her, they were condemned to be stoned, according to the Law,
XIX. 18, 19.

Ver. 19. And they shall amerce him in an hundred Who was to receive this
Satisfaction for the Reproach which was thrown upon his Family. It is something
strange that Josephus should mention only (...), fifty Shekels to be paid to
her Father, when the Scripture expressly says an hundred, Lib. IV. Archeolog.
Cap. VIII. But it is supposed by some, that he means fifty besides her Dowry,
which he was to have given her, if he had put her away. Which that he might
save, he designed to take away her Life: and therefore was punished double to
what it would have cost him, if he had not been so wicked.

Because he has brought up an evil report upon a virgin of Israel.] Laid the
most infamous Crime to the Charge of an Innocent Virgin; and that out of hatred
to her, and love to his Money. For if he would have put her away, according to
the Law of Divorce, no Man could have hindered him, as Maimonides observes: But
then he must have paid her fifty Shekels, which they take to be the Dowry of
Virgins, mentioned XXII Exodus 16, 17. To keep which to himself, and be rid of
her, he brought this Scandalous Action against her; for which he was thus
justly punished.

And she shall be his wife, he may not put her away all his days.] Besides the
two former Punishments, in his Body and his Purse, he was deprived of the
common benefit which all Men had, who did not like their Wives; which was to
sue out a Divorce. Here Maimonides calls upon his Readers to admire the wise
Ordination of God, which appears in his Judgments, as well as in his Works. For
because this Man took away his Wives Reputation, therefore God ordered him to
be rendered vile, by being whipped: and because he basely contrived to save her
Dowry of fifty Shekels, he ordered him to be amerced as much more: and because
he indulged his Lust, and sought nothing but his Pleasure, therefore he was
bound to keep her as long as she lived, More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLIX.

But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the
damsel.] If the Witnesses which appeared for her, could not prove the falsity
of their Testimony who appeared against her.

Ver. 21. Then shall they bring out the damsel to the door of her father's
house.] Where she was to be punished, as a Disgrace to her Parents, who had
taken no better care to preserve her Chastity, while she lived

And the Men of her City shall stone her with stones that she die.] This was
the punishment of such Adulteresses, except only of a Priest's Daughter, who,
if she was guilty of this Crime, was burnt alive, XXI Lev. 19. And it plainly
shows he speaks here of a Woman corrupted between the time of her Espousals,
and her Husbands completing the Marriage. Otherwise he could not have had this
Capital Action against her, none being put to death for simple Fornication. And
this Maimonides says in Seder Zeraim, that from Moses to his time, it was
never doubted, the Woman he here speaks of, was one that proved false to her
Husband, after she was contracted to him.

Because she has wrought folly in Israel.] A great wickedness; as the word
folly signifies in Scripture, and as the Vulgar translates it.

To play the whore in her father's house.] Where she remained after her
Espousals, as in a safe place, till her Husband brought her home to his own
House.

So shall thou put evil away from among you.] See XIX. 19.

Ver. 22. If a man be found lying with a woman married etc.] It is not said
what death, either here or XX Lev. 10. But the Jews say they were to be
strangled. Which is an Opinion so settled among them, that Buxtorf says he
never saw any Hebrew Book, which assigned any other Punishment for Adultery but
this. Stoning indeed was the Punishment of her that after her Espousals played
the Whore (as was noted before) between that time and her Marriage: but after
the Marriage was completed, if she were guilty of this Crime, this was the
only Punishment, according to their Tradition. See upon XX Lev. 10. and
Buxtorf. de Sponsal. and Divortiis, p. 32, 33. and Grotius in VIII John V.

If a damsel that is a virgin, be betrothed to an husband.] But not yet known
by him: For there was generally some space between the Espousals, and the
bringing her home to her Husband's House. And the time allowed was more or
less, according to her Age. See Seldom Lib. II. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. VIII.

And a man find her in the City, and lie with her.] If he lay with her any
where else, the Crime was the same; but it was not so easy to corrupt her in
her Father's House, or among her Friends, where she remained till the
completion of the Marriage, as it was to do it abroad in the City, or in the
Field.

Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that City.] That is, to the
Court of Judgment, which sat there; as I noted upon XVI. 18.

And ye shall stone them with stones that they die.] After they had been
Sentenced to this Death by the Court.

The damsel, because she cried not out.] Which was a demonstration she was not
forced, but lay with him by Consent.

Being in the City.] Where the Neighbors might have heard her cry; and the
Force, if there had been any, prevented.

The man, because he has humbled his neighbor's wife.] For so she was by such
a Contract, as made her only his. This is supposed to be the Case of the Woman
taken in Adultery, mentioned VIII John 5. See my Notes upon XX Lev. 10.

So thou shall put away evil from among you.] See v. 21, 22.

Ver. 25. And if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field.] Where no Body was
near, as in the City.

And the man force her, and lie with her.] It was presumed, by the
Circumstances of the Place, that she did not Consent, but was under a Force; as
she also affirmed, and he could not prove the contrary.

Then the man only that lay with her shall die.] Because he only was guilty of
a Crime; as it follows in the next words.

Ver. 26. But unto the damsel thou shall do nothing, To make her liable to
suffer death: for it was her misfortune, as we speak, not her fault, that she
was ravished.

For as when a man rises against his neighbor, and slays him.] He not being
able to defend himself.

Even so is this matter.] It is here observed by many (particularly by Grotius
and de Dieu) that Chastity is equal unto Life.

Ver. 27. For he found her in the field.] Far distant

And the betrothed damsel cried.] For help, as she affirmed, and as it was
presumed; because if she had consented, some other place might have been found,
more convenient for their purpose than the Field.

And there was none to save her.] None appeared to rescue her, as she desired.

Ver. 28. If a man find a virgin.] In the Field, beforementioned.

Which is not betrothed.] To a Husband.

And lay hold of her, and lie with her, and they be found.] There be Witnesses
of it; or they themselves confess it. This Case is different from that in XXII
Exodus 16, 17. in many respects. For that Law speaks of one that was drawn in to
consent to the Man's lying with her, by enticing words (which is expressly there
mentioned) and fair Promises perhaps of Marriage; but here Moses speaks of one
that laid hold of her, i. e. deflowred her by force and violence. In this Case
the Man was bound to marry her, if she and her Father pleased (for both their
Consents were required, though the Man that deflowred her could not refuse) but
in the former Case the Man himself might choose whether he would marry or no;
which he could not refuse in this; and besides, was bound to pay fifty Shekels,
as a Mulct upon him for the Crime, as follows in the next Verse. See Seldom L.
I. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XVI.

Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsels father fifty
shekels of silver.] Here is another difference between this Case, and that in
Exodus; where the Man was bound to settle a Dowry upon her; but here to pay a
Fine unto her Father. The reason is plain; because there was no need of
settling a Dowry in this Case, as in the former; for the Dowry was settled upon
her in that Case, lest the Husband might lightly and wantonly put her away by
Divorce, and she have nothing to maintain her: of which there was no danger
here, because this Law says expressly in the conclusion of this Verse, that he
may not put her away all his days. Yet there are those who think it likely,
that in this Case also, he settled a Dowry of fifty Shekels upon her, besides
what he paid for her further; for otherwise the Condition of a Virgin deflowred
by Force, was worse than hers deflowred by her own Consent.

They have some Exceptions concerning this Payment to her Father, which are not
very material, nor certain. But this is considerable, That this Fine was the
same, whether the Woman was of Noble, or of Mean Parentage; neither more nor
less was paid by the Law. But, in after times, the Sanhedrim, they tell us,
added some other Mulcts besides this here mentioned; because it seemed so small
that the Honor of a Virgin was not thought sufficiently repaired by it.
Therefore he that enticed a Virgin paid other two; one for the Shame and
Dishonor he had done her; and the other for the loss of her Virginity, and
vitiating her Body. And he that forced a Virgin paid a third besides these two;
upon the account of the Pain unto which, he was supposed, to have put her. And
in these three they proportioned the Penalties to the quality of the Person,
and other Considerations, which made them vary. See Seldom in the forenamed
place, p. 123.

And she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her.] Though she were
blind, or lame, or leprous, he could not refuse her; if she and her Father
required him to marry her.

He may not put her away all his days.] This was a third part of his Punishment
for the force he had committed; that he should be forced, not only to take her
to Wife, but constrained also to keep her as long as she lived, and not have
the liberty of giving her a Bill of Divorce; as other Men might do, who were
desirous to part with their Wives.

If it be asked, How it could be known whether she was enticed, or forced? They
answer, as was observed before, that it was reasonably presumed that he forced
her, if the thing was done in the Field, or in a Place far from Inhabitants:
Chapter XXIII.
but if in the City or Town, that she consented; unless the contrary was
evidently proved.

A man shall not take his fathers wife.] That is, shall not marry her.

Nor discover his father's skirt.] Nor so much as lie with her. For this is a
modest Phrase, borrowed from the ancient Custom in those Countries; where the
Bridegroom when he brought his Bride into the CHVPPA, as they called it, or
Bridal Chamber, spread the Skirt of his Robe over her, to signify his right to
her, and power over her, and that he alone might lawfully enjoy her, III Ruth
9. XVI Ezekiel. 8.

And this Verse seems to me to be here inserted, as a short Memorandum, that
they should be careful to observe all the Laws which he had delivered against
Incestuous Marriages, in the Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus. See there v. 8.
and XX. 11.

CHAP. XXIII.
HE that is wounded in the stones.] Bruised or compressed in those parts; as
the manner was of making Eunuchs, who are here spoken of: and were sometimes
made that way when they were Infants; or by taking them quite away; which was
done in some when they were grown up. And there were those, who had none of
these Parts left remaining; as it follows in the next words.

Or has his privy members cut off.] In whole or in part: which was not used,
till they found the other did not effectually answer their purpose in this
unnatural practice. Wherein some thought they honored their gods, particularly
Cybele the Mother of the gods, unto whose Service her Priests devoted
themselves, by cutting off their Genitals. So not only Minutius Foelix,
Tertullian, and several other of the ancient Christian Writers testify, but
many also of the Pagan. See Joh. Geusius de Victimis Humanis, Pars II. Cap. I.

Shall not enter into the Congregation of the LORD.] These Persons were so much
abhorred by some among the Pagans, that Lucian says they were excluded not
only from the Schools of Philosophers; but, which was more, (...), from their
holy Offices, and their Sprinklings, and all common Meetings. So Diocles is
introduced speaking in his Eunuchus. But no Body thinks this to be the meaning
here, that they should not entertain such a Person as a Proselyte; or that he
should not come to worship God at the Temple: for that was free for all
Nations, if they renounced Idolatry. But the meaning of this Law is, either to
forbid the Israelites to marry with such Persons, or not to admit them to bear
any Office in the Jewish Commonwealth. The Hebrew Doctors generally take it in
the first sense: See Seldom de Jure Not. and Gent. Lib. V. Cap. XVI. and so do
a great many among Christian Writers. And there is an eminent Example of the
use of this Phrase in this sense, XIII Nehem. 1, 2, 3. But some think it was
superfluous to forbid this, because none would marry with such Persons, as were
incapable to perform the Marriage Duty. And therefore they follow the second
sense, it being certain that the Hebrew word KAHAL, Congregation, signifies in
many places, not the whole Body of the People of Israel, but the great Assembly
of Elders, into which no such Person was to be admitted: because they were
unfit for Government, Eunuchs being observed generally to want Courage. Thus
Simeon de Muis and others, who seem to have great reason on their side. Yet it
is so plain, that the Congregation of the LORD in the following part of this
Chapter, signifies the People of Israel, who might not marry with the Persons
mentioned, v. 2, 3, 8. that I cannot but think it ought to be so interpreted
here. For though such Marriages were useless and unprofitable, as Maimonides
speaks, yet they made a distinction between those who were made Eunuchs by God
(that is born so) and those made by Men: And this Law, they say, is not to be
understood of the former, but only of the latter. Some of which, it is certain,
were left in such a Condition, that they were desirous of Marriage; as appears
by the Constitution of the Emperor Leo, who did not think it superfluous to
forbid Marriage with them. For it appears by it, that some Women chose such
Husbands. See also XXX Ecclesiasticus 20. but especially the Book ascribed to
St. Basil (de vera Virginitate, Tom. I. p. 782, etc.) where there is too free a
description of the unextinguishable Lust of such Eunuchs as were only deprived
(...) whose Company he charges Virgins to avoid, not only because they hoped to
corrupt them without danger of discovery, but were insatiable in their desires.
And on the other side, though they were unfit for Marriage, yet it appears by
many Instances in History, that they were not unfit for Government, nor wanted
Courage for the greatest Undertakings. I need only refer the Reader for this to
Xenophon's Cyropaedia, Lib. VII.

They that follow Allegorical Senses, free themselves from all these
difficulties. See Filesacus Lib. I. Selectorum, p. 169. and 185. But one cannot
think that Moses intended any of those things; though such pious use may be
made of his words.

Ver. 2. A Bastard.] The Hebrews do not understand Mamzer one that was begotten
in simple Fornication, out of the state of Marriage; but one that was begotten
of such Persons as the Law forbad them to marry, or lie withal, under pain of
being cut off, viz. those mentioned in the Eighteenth of Leviticus. They only
except this single Case, If a Man lay with a menstruous Woman, and begat a
Child of her at that time, it was not a Mamzer. See Seldom Lib. de Succession.
in bona defunct. Cap. III. and L. V. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. XVI. and
Wagenseil lately in his very Learned Annotation upon Mischna Sotae, Cap. IV.
Sect. I. where he observes out of a MS. which he calls very precious (EZ
Hachajim in Hilcoth Nidda) that Mamzer, whether Male or Female, was excluded
from the Congregation of the LORD. And they were Mamzers, who were born of any
Woman whom the Law prohibited them to have knowledge of; whether it was by
violence, or by consent; by error, or advisedly; it made no difference.

Shall not enter into the Congregation of the LORD.] Nor marry with an
Israelite. So all the Doctors, none excepted, expound it, as Mr. Seldom
observes, Lib. II. de Successione in Pontific. Cap. II. p. 209. If any Man of
Israel married such a Woman, or any Woman of Israel married such a Man, and
they were found in Bed together after Espousals, they were both whipped, for
violating this Precept. But if they lay together without any Espousals, this
Punishment was not inflicted on them.

Even unto his tenth Generation shall he not enter into the Congregation of the
LORD.] That is, never, as the Hebrew Doctors expound it. And Maimonides (More
Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLIX.) gives this reason for it, That People might be
deterred from such Marriages or Conjunctions, which would leave an indelible
blot upon their Posterity. And indeed some Heathens anciently put such a Mark
of Infamy upon mere Bastards, as to prohibit both Males and Females to come to
their Sacred Offices. Such a Law there was at Athens, mentioned by Isaeus; as
Casaubon observes upon Athenaeus, Lib. VI. Cap. VI. p. 410.

There were some also of these Mamzers, who were not manifestly born of such
incestuous or other forbidden Mixtures; but were called dubious, because their
Fathers were not known: or being exposed, and found in the Fields or the
Streets, neither Father nor Mother were known. Yet it being uncertain whence
they were descended, the Israelites might not marry with them, for fear they
should be polluted by those, who perhaps were born of incestuous Parents. But
Proselytes of Justice they say might marry with Mamzers; and that they might
not for ever be excluded from the Congregation of the LORD, they contrived this
Remedy for the Restitution of their Blood. They might marry a Slave (who was
baptized and become a Jew) whose Children were not reputed Mamzers, but only
Slaves. Who being made Jews, and having their freedom given them, might
lawfully marry with a Jewish Woman; and then they were entirely incorporated
into the Congregation of the LORD, for proles sequitur matrem, the Issue
follows the Mother (as that MS. of Wagenseils has it, p. 565.) and there was
no regard had to the Father.

Ver. 3. An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the Congregation of the
LORD, even to the tenth Generation, shall they not enter for ever.] These last
words for ever in this Verse, the Jews think warrants them to the tenth
Generation, in the foregoing Verse, as if he said, never. It is certain indeed
that Moses intended to exclude the Moabites and Ammonites from marrying with
the Jews for ever; for so Nehemiah understood him when he quoted this Law,
XIII. 1. as a reason against the Israelites Marriages with them in his time,
when more then ten Generations were past. But then these words for ever, being
omitted in the foregoing Verse, where he speaks of Mamzers, it seems reasonable
that they should not be so interpreted: but that after ten Generations were
past, all distinction between them and others should be abolished. This one
would have expected should have been the sense of those, who examine every word
so nicely, as the Jews do. For here being mention made only of an Ammonite and
Moabite; that is, of the Males of these two Nations; they will not have their
Women concerned in this Law: but say that an Israelite might take one of them
to Wife, if she embraced their Religion. For thus they expound this whole
Matter of Marriages with Proselytes of Justice; that is, such of other Nations
as became entirely of the Jews Religion. With such Proselytes of some Nations,
whether Men or Women, the Israelites were never to make any Marriages. With
those of some other Nations, they were prohibited only to marry with their Men:
with others they were prohibited to marry only for some Generations: and there
were others with whom they might marry, as soon as they were made perfect
Proselytes. Of the first kind were the Seven Nations of Canaan, mentioned VII
Deuteronomy. 1. with the Males or Females of which they might never contract an
Affinity. To the second kind belong the Ammonites and Moabites; to whose Males
an Israelitish Woman was forbid, by this Precept, to marry: but a Man of Israel
might marry any of their Women, after they professed the Jewish Religion.
Otherwise David, who descended from Ruth, a Moabitess, had been illegitimate.
Of the third kind were the Edomites and Egyptians; with whom, and with their
Children, the Israelites might not marry; but their Grandchildren might. And
of the fourth kind were all other Nations besides these mentioned. This is an
Abridgment of what our great Seldom has more largely shown to be the sense of
the Jews, in his fifth Book de Jure Not. and Gent. etc. Cap. XIV. which another
excellent Person, J. Christoph. Wagenseil has confirmed out of his inestimable
MS. as he call Etz-Hachajim in Hilchot Nidda, Cap. X. See Excerp. Gem. in Sota,
Cap. I. p. 143.

Because they met you not with bread and water, when ye came forth out of
Egypt.] This seems to belong to the Ammonites, who had no Compassion toward
the Israelites when they were distressed in the Wilderness: but, though they
were near of kin to them, did not show them that Civility, which is commonly
expressed to mere strangers in their Travels, XIV Genesis 18. XVIII. 2, 31. XIX.
1, 2. We do not find any mention of this barbarity of theirs in the foregoing
History; but we read how kind God ordered the Israelites to be to them, in not
meddling with them, much less distressing them as they passed by their Country
(II Deuteronomy. 19.) Which aggravated their Inhumanity, in not vouchsafing this
common kindness to the Israelites, of giving them the Refreshment of Bread and
Water as they went by them.

And because they hired against thee Balaam the Son of Beor of Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee.] As the foregoing passage peculiarly refers to the
Ammonites, so this does to the Moabites: who, with the Assistance of the
Midianites, invited Balaam, by the Promises of a great Reward, to come from the
Eastern Country and curse the Israelites. See XXII Numb. 5, 6, 7. For these two
Reasons God laid this Prohibition upon his People: in which Maimonides observes
the Divine Justice, in proportioning Punishments to Offenses. For Amalek coming
out against the Israelites, when they were newly come forth from Egypt, to cut
them off with the Sword, God commanded their Memory to be blotted out, (XXV.
19.) but the Ammonites being only basely covetous, and the Moabites acting
against them only by Craft, and not by Force, God inflicted no other Punishment
upon them but this, That his People should avoid all Affinity with them, and
show no love to them, More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLI. And the MS. Author of
Etz-Hachajim, mentioned by Wagenseil, in the place forenamed, makes this the
ground of the distinction, mentioned before, between the Males and the Females
of those Countries. Their Males, says he, might never marry with an
Israelitish Woman; but by a Tradition delivered down to us from Moses in Mount
Sinai, we hold, that the Women of those Countries (if they embraced the Jewish
Religion) might be married to a Man of Israel. For the Women must be thought,
in all reason, not to have been guilty, as the Men were, of that which was the
reason of this Law; it not being the Custom for Women to bring out Bread and
Water to Travelers; nor did they send Ambassadors to hire Balaam to come and
curse the Israelites. Accordingly we find Ruth, who was a Moabitess, married to
Boaz, the Ancestor of David.

Nevertheless the LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, but the LORD thy
God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the LORD thy God loved
thee.] Balaam indeed did not Curse the Israelites as the Moabites desired, and
he intended; but no Thanks was owing to him for that: but it was to be ascribed
to the Love of God to his People, who constrained him, against his will, to
Bless them.

Thou shall not seek their peace, nor their prosperity, all thy days for ever.]
By entering into any League with them, much less by taking them into Conjugal
Society: but on the contrary, they were to look upon them as dangerous Enemies;
who being their near Neighbors, would watch all Opportunities to ensnare, or
disturb them.

Some of the Jews would have this to be an Exception to the General Rule XX.
10. that they might not offer them Terms of Peace, as they were bound to do to
all Men, but the Seven Nations of Canaan: though if they desired Peace, they
were bound, they say, to grant it. See Schickard in his Mischpat Hammelech, p.
118. But Grotius has well observed upon V Matthew. 43. that God did not give the
Jews any Right to their Country, (as appears from I Deuteronomy. 19.) and therefore
the meaning here is, that they should not make any League with them of mutual
Assistance, which they called foedera (...).

Thou shall not abhor an Edomite.] So as never to enter into the Society of
Marriage with them; they being a circumcised People.

For he is thy brother.] Nearer of kin to them than the Ammonites and Moabites;
Esau their Father being the Twin-brother of Jacob. And so Moses calls them,
when he delivers God's Command to the Israelites not to meddle with them, II
Deuteronomy. 8. We passed by from our Brethren the Children of Esau, etc. Here it may
be observed, that the word Brother comprehended more than the Israelites; as
our Savior shows the word Neighbor did, X Luke 29, etc.

Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his Land.]
That is, the Egyptians in a sore Famine sustained them, their Children, Flocks
and Herds very kindly; the memory of which benefit God would not have
forgotten, though in future Generations they were cruelly oppressed by them.

Ver. 8. The Children that are begotten of them shall When they had been
Proselytes for three Generations, it was lawful to marry with them. Nay, some
of the Jews are so liberal here of their kindness, as to understand by banim
not Children in general, but Sons, with whom only Marriage is forbidden till
the third Generation: Marriage with their Daughters being lawful, as they
think, as soon as they turned complete Proselytes. Upon which account Solomon
took Pharaoh's Daughter to Wife. See Seldom Lib. V. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap.
XIV, XV. where he observes that all this held good only till the Captivity of
Babylon, when all these Nations being confused, they might marry with any of
them if they became Jews. For Wars, and Colonies, and Deportations had made
such a mixture of People, that one could not be known from another. This
Wagenseil has lately confirmed out of several Hebrew Authors, whom Mr. Seldom
did not trouble himself to mention; and particularly out of the MS.
Etz-Hachajim, which he most highly commends. See p. 149. upon Sota. They all
agree likewise, that none of these Laws extended to Proselytes; who might marry
with any of these Nations. See Seldom ib. Cap. XVIII.

When the host goes forth against thine Enemy, then keep thee from every
wicked thing.] This was a Rule to be observed at all times; but then
especially, when they had the greatest need of the Divine help (for which
wicked People could not reasonably hope) and when there was the greatest danger
of being wicked, in a time of such license as Soldiers commonly take. There is
a Sentence very like this in Agathias, Lib. II. (mentioned by Grotius toward
the conclusion of his Prolegomena to the Book de Jure Belli and Pacis) (...)
Injustice and neglect of God's Service are ever to be avoided, as most
pernicious; but especially in a time of War, and when Men are upon the point of
giving battle. Which he proves elsewhere, by the illustrious Examples of
Darius, Xerxes, and the Athenians in Sicily.

If there be among you any man that is not clean, by reason of uncleanness that
chances to him by night.] This seems to be only one Instance of Uncleanness,
from which they were to keep themselves carefully; though it was no moral
Impurity, nor a voluntary Pollution. By which it was easy for them to
understand, how watchful they were to be over themselves, in all other Cases,
especially such as had an inward turpitude in them.

Then he shall go abroad out of the Camp.] There is no such thing required
before in XV Levit. 16. where the same Pollution is mentioned. The reason, I
suppose, was, that he speaks there of what happened to them in their own Houses;
where they had private Chambers into which they might retire, and keep
themselves from defiling others: But here, of those that were abroad in the
Army; where it was hard to keep their fellow Soldiers from touching them,
without removing out of the Camp.

He shall not come within the Camp.] This some understand, particularly
Drusius, of not coming within the Camp of God, and of the Levites; that is, to
the Tabernacle: but it seems to be an Exclusion of him from the whole Camp of
Israel, as I have expounded it.

Ver. 11. But it shall be, when evening comes on, he shall wash himself with
water; and when the Sun is down he shall come into the Camp again.] See XV
Levit. 16. The end of all this, as Maimonides observes ( More Nevochim, P. III.
Cap. LXL) was, that every Man might have this fixed in his mind, that their
Camp ought to be as the Sanctuary of God, (into which, every one knows, no Man
might enter in his Uncleanness) and not like the Camps of the Gentiles, in
which all manner of Corruption, Filthiness, Rapines, Thefts, and other
Wickednesses were freely committed.

Ver. 12. Thou shall have a place also without the Camp, A place distant from
all Company; where they might ease themselves, as it is explained in the next
Verse. For natural Honesty directed all Men on such occasions, to seek privacy;
and it tended, as all Cleanliness does, to the preservation of Health: which
was one reason of ordering them to find a place without the Camp, that there
might be no offensive smell among them. And hereby, as Maimonides observes,
they were distinguished from brute Beasts, which commonly ease themselves any
where, and before any body. But, besides all this, Moses himself gives us the
principal reason of this Command, peculiarly respecting the Israelites, v. 14.

Thou shall have a paddle.] An Instrument wherewith to digg up the Ground, and
cover it again; Epiphanius Haeres. LXXVII. calls it (...), an Iron Paddle.

Upon thy weapon.] Their Sword, I suppose.

And it shall be when thou will ease thy self abroad.] It was not in their
choice when they would do this; but when their needs required: yet the Jews
will have it, that they were to accustom themselves to do this business in the
Morning, as soon as they were up. Thus the Jews at this day (as Leo Modena
tells us in his History of them, Part I. Chap. VI.) afterward washing their
Hands, that they may go clean to their Prayers.

Thou shall dig therewith.] A hole in the ground.

And shall turn back, and cover that which comes from thee.] That there might
be no appearance, nor scent of it remaining. This is still practiced by the
Carribians; among whom there is never any such thing as Ordure seen. So the
Authors of the History of the Carriby Islands tell us, Book II. Chap. XIV.
Where they observe also out of Busbequius, that the Turks use the same
Cleanliness in their Camps; making an hole with a piece of Iron, wherein they
bury their Excrements. And in this matter the Essens were extremely
superstitious; for, as Josephus relates, they would not ease themselves at all
on the Sabbath day; because they looked upon it as a labor to dig in the earth,
and Excrements not fit to be seen on that day.

Ver. 14. For the LORD thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp.] At this time
the Ark, which was the Token of the Divine Presence, was settled in the midst
of their Camp; and whithersoever they moved, Tenth of Numbers. It is likely
also that it was carried in after times, in the midst of them, when they went
to War; as some think it was when they went against the Midianites, XXXI Numb.
6. and when they encompassed Jericho. Now this Presence of God among them, was
the reason why no Uncleanness, though in it self natural, might be found in
their Camp; but out of reverence to the Divine Majesty, which dwelt between the
Cherubims over the Ark, be removed afar off. And by such Actions as these,
Maimonides well observes, God intended to strengthen and confirm the Faith of
the Soldiers, that God dwelling among them, would go along with them, and fight
for them against their Enemies, as it here follows, More Nevochim P. III. Cap.
XLI. And thus Abarbinel discourses upon these words; The Camps of the
Israelites ought to be holy; having a special Providence of God among them. For
they do not make War by mere Humane Power and Courage; but by the Power of God
and of his Spirit, on which they depend for deliverance from all evil, and
victory over their Enemies, etc.

To deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee.] This is the
constant sense of this Phrase, Of God's being in the midst of them, to defend,
protect, and deliver them from all evil, as I observed before. See VII Deuteronomy.
21. III Josh. 10. XLVI Psalm. 6. III Zachar. 15. Now this Cleanliness being
commanded with respect to the Divine Presence, which dwelt among them, the Jews
are strangely mistaken in using such Superstitions as they do in every place,
when they have no such Presence of the Divine Majesty in the midst of them. See
Schickard in Mischpat Hammelech, Cap. V. Theorem. XVIII. p. 144, etc.

Therefore shall thy Camp be holy.] Free from all manner of Defilements; though
they be only of this sort.

That he see no unclean thing in thee.] In these words, says Maimonides (in
the place before-named) he deters them from Fornication; which is far worse
than the forementioned Uncleanness; but too common among the Soldiers, when
they are absent from their own homes. And therefore that he might keep them
from such Impurities, he commands them such Actions (he means covering their
Ordure) as might call to their minds the glorious Majesty of God, which dwelt
among them. But though the Hebrew word, which we here translate unclean thing,
properly signifies nakedness, and all those impure Mixtures mentioned in the
Eighteenth of Leviticus; and therefore by Maimonides particularly applied to
such Uncleanness; yet Mr. Seldom has well observed, that it signifies all
manner of Filthiness; and therefore is well so translated by us, both here and
in the next Chapter, where he speaks of the Matter of Divorce. And so it is
used by the Prophet Nahum III. 5. (to name no more) where the nakedness of
Niniveh, which God says he would show to all Nations, signifies all the
Murders, Robberies, Deceit, and other great Wickednesses, which abounded in
that City. See Vxor. Hebr. Lib. III. Cap. XXIII. And thus Abarbinel here
extends it, to all the horrid Sins which were usually committed in the Camps of
Idolaters.

And turn away from thee.] As Princes are wont to do, when they see any thing
offensive to them. And the meaning is, he would not deliver them from their
Enemies, (as he promised before) but give them up into their hands. I conclude
all this matter with the words of R. Zacharias in Pirke Eliezer, Cap. XLIV. The
Pillar of the Cloud (in which the Glory of the LORD dwelt) encompassed the
Camps of Israel round about; and made them like a City girt about with a wall,
that no Enemy might assault them. But this Cloud threw all Uncleanness out of
the Camps of Israel, for they were holy: and he quotes this place for it.

Ver. 15. Thou shall not deliver unto his master, the The Hebrew Doctors
understand this of a Servant of another Nation, who was become a Jew. Whom his
Master, if he went to dwell out of Judaea, might not carry along with him
against his will: and if he fled from him, when he had carried him, he might
not be delivered to him, but suffered to dwell in the Land of Israel. Which
they understand also of a Servant, that fled from his Master out of any of the
Countries of the Gentiles, into the Land of Israel: which was to be a safe
Refuge to him. See Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. juxta Discipl. Hebr.
Cap. VIII. p. 711.

Ver. 16. He shall dwell with thee, even among you.]

In the place which he shall choose, in one of thy Gates where it likes him
best.] He was not to be abridged of his Liberty; but permitted to settle
himself where he pleased, in any part of their Country.

Thou shall not oppress him.] For there was an express Law against all manner
of Injuries, or Hardships, put upon Strangers, XIX Levit. 33, 34.

Ver. 17. There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of
the Sons of Israel.] Or, a Whremonger of the Sons of Israel; as the last part
no Whore of the Daughters of Israel. So Bonsrerius truly observes, and so the
Vulgar Latin and the Seventy translate it; and several other Versions mentioned
by Mr. Seldom, Lib. III. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XXIII. p. 487. Which sort of Persons
Moses would not have to be tolerated among the Israelites, as they were among
the Egyptians: many of which, if we may believe Sextus Empiricus, were so far
from thinking it a Reproach for Women to prostitute themselves, that they looked
upon it as honorable and gloried in it, (...), etc. (...), etc. Lib. III. Pyr.
Hypot. Cap. XXIV. p. 152.

And great reason there was for this Prohibition, because by Whoredom Families
are confounded and destroyed, as Maimonides observes; and their Issue are looked
upon by all Men as Aliens: so that none will own them as their kindred, and
their Neighbors become Strangers to them; than which nothing can be worse, for
them and for their Parents. For which cause, says he, all public Stews were
disallowed among the Israelites; who had this benefit by it among others, that
many brawls and quarrels, fightings and bloodshed were prevented; which
frequently happened when several Men were assembled at the same time,
contending for the same Woman. For so the Scripture says, V Jeremiah 7. They
assemble by troops in the harlots houses. For the preventing of these, and such
like Mischiefs, and that the distinction of Families might be preserved, both
Whores and Whoremongers are here condemned: and no other Conjunction permitted,
but with a Man's own Wife, publicly married. For if a private Marriage had
been sufficient, many would have kept Women in their Houses as their Whores,
and pretended they were their Wives. Therefore after a Man had privately
espoused a Woman, he was bound publicly to keep his Wedding. Thus that great
Man More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLIX. and see Seldom, Lib. V. de Jure Not. and
Gent. juxta Disc. Hebr. Cap. IV. p. 554.

How much more abominable then were such Persons, as prostituted their Bodies,
in honor of Venus and of Priapus, and such like filthy Deities: Of which sort
there were both Males and Females, consecrated to such impure Services. And
this was practiced even in the days of Moses; as appears from the History of
those who committed Fornication with the Daughters of Moab, who exposed
themselves in honor of Baal-Peor: for their lying with them was accounted
Idolatry. And such there were at last among the Israelites, as appears from 1
Kings XIV. 24. 2 Kings XXIII. where we read that the Houses of the Sodomites
(as we translate it) were by the House of the LORD. Which shows they were not
vulgar, but consecrated Sodomites, or Whoremongers. I need not mention the
Heathen Writers, who tell us this was a piece of Religion among them. See our
Learned Dr. Spencer, Lib. II. de Leg. Hebr. Ritual. Cap. XXII. and Heideggerus
in his Histor. Patriarch. Exercit. I. Sect. XI. where he observes a great many
very learned Men, understand this very place, not merely of Vulgar Whores; but
of such as I have mentioned. Which were famous in ancient times among the
Phaenicians, Babylonians, and other Nations, whom Strabo calls (...), Lib.
VIII. Geograph. where he says ( page 378.) that at Corinth there was a Temple
so richly endowed, that it maintained (...), above a thousand of these
consecrated Whores: whom both Men and Women had dedicated to the goddess,
(...), for Seafaring Men (who arrived in great numbers at this Port) parted
with their Money easily. And Lib. XII. speaking of Comana, he says, There were
a multitude of Women there, (...), who maintained themselves by prostituting
their Bodies; and most of them were (...) Sacred Persons: this City being a
little Corinth, to which great numbers of People resorted at their Festivals,
(...) because of the multitude of Harlots which were here sacred to Venus, p.
559. And the like account we find in Athenaeus, Lib. XIII. Deipnos. Cap. VI.
where he says, They that went to pray there, were wont for the obtaining their
Petitions, to add that they would bring some Women to be devoted unto Venus; as
Xenophon, the Corinthian did, when he returned Conqueror from the Olympicks.

Thou shall not bring the price of a whore.] If such Persons, as are mentioned
in the foregoing Verse, offered unto God what they had got by prostituting
their Bodies, it was not to be accepted, but rejected as abominable. For this
was a Custom among the Idolatrous Nations, as appears by a great many of their
Writers; who tell us they were wont to dedicate some part of that which they
received for the use of their Bodies, at the Temples of their pretended
Deities. Particularly Herodotus mentions it, as done among the ancient
Babylonians, Lib. I. p. 199. Which explains what we read in VI Barnch 42, 43.
where see Grotius his Annotations.

Nor the price of a dog into the house of the LORD thy God.] There was a
peculiar reason for this besides the vileness of this Creature, (which
Maimonides only mentions, More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLVI.) which was, as
Bochartus, and some other great Men think, because a Dog was highly honored
among the Egyptians, from whom the Israelites were lately come. For Nile was
wont to overflow and enrich their Country, at the rising of the Dog Star: and a
Dog was the Symbol of one of their principal Deities, called Anubis, who was
represented with a Head like that of a Dog. See Hierozoicon. P. I. Lib. II.
Cap. LVI. p. 690, etc. If we can think this vile Idolatry was so ancient as the
days of Moses, which it is certain prevailed afterward, this may pass for a
very likely reason, why God would not accept so much as the price for which a
Dog was sold, or exchanged; for so the LXX. expounds it: As for example, If a
Man gave a Lamb for a fine Dog, God would not have that Lamb offered at his
Altar; as Maimonides explains it.

For any Vow.] There was the greatest Obligation lay upon Men to make good
their Vows, wherewith upon any occasion, they had bound themselves; but God
would have them discharged from such vile Oblations as these.

For even both these are abomination unto the LORD thy God.] It is hard to give
an account why these two (the price of a Whore and of a Dog) are associated in
the same Law; unless it be in opposition to some such Rites as those
beforementioned among the Egyptians. Who, in after times, it is certain, had
such Harlots Sacred to Isis, as many think are spoken of in the beginning of
this Verse; and a Dog was no where else Sacred as a Symbol of Anubis or
Mercury. Though this may be said, with some probability, that these two are
joined together, because a Whore and a Dog are both alike impudent. Josephus
thinks that the price of a Dog here mentioned, was Money given (...) for the
Lone of a good Dog to breed withal, as Mr. Seldom observes in his History of
Tithes, p. 57. where he notes also that the Jews would not admit the Tenths of
Usury, or of War to be offered. But the Talmudists expound it quite otherwise,
as I have done, for the Price of a Dog, either sold or exchanged for some other
thing; which the same great Man approves of as the truer Interpretation, Lib.
V. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. IV. p. 557.

Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother.] i. e. Unto an Israelite. See
XXII Exodus 25. XXV Levit. 36.

Usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon
usury.] Here the word Nesech is used for all sort of Usury; whether that which
was made by the Lone of Money, called here Nesech Ceseph, or that which was
made by the Lone of Food and such like things, called Nesech Okel. But commonly
there are two words used to express this matter, viz. Nesech, Usury, and
Tarbith, which we translate Increase. Which are not two kinds of Usury, one
more griping, the other more moderate, as some have conceived; for the same
Usury is called Nesech, with respect to the Debtor, to whom it is grievous, and
Tarbith with respect to the Creditor, to whom it is beneficial. See Salmasius
in his Book de Vsuris, Cap. VII. p. 188. Yet there is some difference between
Nesech and Tarbith: else one cannot tell why they are so often both mentioned
in the same place. And Nesech properly signifies the Interest, as we speak,
which was paid for Money; and Tarbith the Interest of Corn, and other Fruits of
the Earth; as the same Author shows in that Book, Cap. XX. p. 614, etc. And in
the next Book de Modo Vsurarum, he shows that as the LXX. and R. Levi ben
Gersom thus understood the difference, so do the ancient Fathers, particularly
Origin, and St. Hierom, Cap. VIII. p. 320, etc.

Ver. 20. Unto a stranger.] One that was not an Israelite, whether he dwelt out
of their Land, or in it; if he were not a Proselyte to the Law: of whom they
might not take any Usury, but use him as a Brother.

Thou may lend upon usury.] Some of the Jews would have this to be an
Affirmative Precept, obligeing them to take Usury of a Gentile, if they lent
him any Money. For this Maimonides quotes a passage out of Siphri; which others
say he mistook. See J. Wagenseil in his Annotations upon Lipmans Carmen
Memoriale, p. 598. where he shows that he was of this cruel Opinion. But this
is not the common sense of the Jews: and their Wisemen have been so modest
also, as to decree, That though the Law did here permit them to take Usury of a
Gentile, yet they were not to practice it, unless it were, that they might
provide for themselves, that they might live more safely among the Gentiles.
And they add this reason for this limitation; lest the Jews by this way of
Commerce and Traffic, should grow too familiar with the Gentiles, and learn
their manners. Only Men that studied the Law, and thereby were out of danger of
being enticed to their Religion, might freely lend them Money upon Usury; for
this very end, as they think, that they might make a gain of it, and enrich
themselves. See Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. X. where he
observes that the Mahometans forbid Usury only among themselves, not to
Strangers. Which Salmasius shows is thus limited in the Alcoran, by these words
in their own Territories. That is, if Mahometans live among Christians, they
may take Usury of them, but of Christians who live among them, they may not
take any, no more than of a Mussilman, as they call themselves.

But unto thy brother thou shall not lend upon usury.] He repeats this again,
that they might not fail to be kind one to another in this matter. And the
Author of Etz-Hachajim mentioned by Wagenseil, says, according to their
ancient Doctors, this is six times forbidden in the Law, not to take Usury of
their Brethren, p. 601. upon Sota. And indeed, as there was nothing more
rational than this, that their Neighbors making great gain by Merchandise
(such as the Sidonians, Tyrians, and those that lived upon the Red Sea, and the
Egyptians) they should not borrow Money of the Israelites for nothing; so it
was no less reasonable, the Israelites themselves, whose chiefest Profit was by
Husbandry and Breeding of Cattle, should have Money lent them freely by one
another, without any Interest; their Land not being a Country of Traffic,
whereby Money might be improved, as in other Countries. For by the Laws of
other Nations (as Grotius observes on VI Luke 35.) that Usury was odious which
was practiced upon Husbandmen. Abarbinel also is so tender in this point, as to
say, that Usury has something in it so unequal (at least as it is commonly
practiced) that God did not permit the Israelites to exercise it among all
their Neighbors, but only upon those of the Seven Nations of Canaan. And thus
far he is in the right, that every one who was not a Jew, was not to be deemed
a Stranger. An Edomite, for instance, is called their Brother in the seventh
verse of this Chapter; and therefore this Precept, Thou shall not lend upon
Usury to thy Brother, is to be extended to Edomites. In like manner, says he,
neither do the Ishmaelites come under the name of Strangers, nor other People,
but those of the Seven Nations. And this Opinion Leo Modena follows in his
History of the present Jews, Part. II. Cap. V. where he says by the word
Stranger in this place, none other can be meant, but only those Seven Nations,
from whom God commanded them to take away even their Lives. And that it is only
their present distress, in which they have no other way of livelihood left,
that makes them think it lawful to lend upon Usury to those among whom they
live. In which I think he is mistaken: though this Doctrine is better natured,
than that of some of the Jews, who are so full of hatred to us Christians, whom
they call Edomites, that they deprive us (as Wagenseil observes in the place
abovenamed) of the name of Brethren; and think it lawful to oppress us with
Usury. Of which number are R. Bechai, and the Author of the old Nitzacon, set
forth by Wagenseil (ancienter than that of Lipman's set forth by Theodorick
Hackspan) who was so full of Malignity, that he shut his Eyes against the Light
which he plainly saw. For he could not deny that the Edomites were their
Brethren; and consequently that Moses required the Jews not to take Usury of
them; and that it was anciently unlawful. But then he pretends, that they
forfeited this Privilege, by not coming to help to preserve Jerusalem and the
Temple from being destroyed; yea, by rejoicing at their ruin. And fearing this
would not satisfy, he has devised this justification of their Usury, that the
Edomites have made themselves Strangers by the neglect of Circumcision. See p.
139.

That the LORD thy God may bless thee in all that thou set thine hand unto,
in the Land whither thou go to possess it.] Charity to their poor Brethren,
had many Promises of a great Reward: and this Law was made peculiarly for the
Relief of such Persons; as appears by those places beforementioned, both in
Exodus and in Leviticus. It extended indeed to all; but chiefly was intended,
as a Provision for the Poor and Needy: whom they were not to neglect; for God
ordered them all to live together as Brethren, Children of the same Father: and
indeed they were all, Rich and Poor, descended from one and the same Original.
And therefore he designed there should be no indifferent Person unrelieved
among this People, upon whom he had heaped so many Blessings; and delivering
them from the Slavery of Egypt, had planted them in the good Land promised to
their Fathers. To which purpose all those Precepts were given, which require
them to lend gratuitously to their poor Brother; to restore the Pledge left
with them; to leave the Corners of their Fields unreaped; not to gather the
Gleanings of the Harvest, and Vintage; to observe the Year of Release and of
Jubilee; and such like peculiar Provisions for the Comfort of the Poorer sort,
that they might share in the happiness which God bestowed upon his Elect People.

Ver. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the LORD thy God.] In a thing lawful
and possible; and by a Person who had power to make it, and was not subject to
the Authority of another, who had power to Numb. 2.

Thou shall not slack to pay it.] Lest they should prove less able, and so be
unwilling to perform what they had vowed; or should perhaps forget it. If they
lost the thing they vowed, whilst they delayed, they were bound to give the
value of it. Which was one difference between a Vow, and a Free-will-offering;
that in the latter case, (as Maimonides says) if that which he designed was
stoll'n or died, he was not bound to make reparation. The same Author applies
this to a Vow a Man made of giving an Alms to a poor Body, suppose a Shekel;
which he was to bestow immediately, if any poor Body was at hand. If not, he
was to separate it, and lay it by till he met with one, etc. Cap. VIII. de
Donis Pauperum, Sect. 1.

For the LORD will surely require it of thee.] Demand that which thou have made
to be his own.

And it would be sin in thee.] Be punished, by God's just Judgment upon thee,
for the wrong thou have done him.

Ver. 22. But if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no God was so very
merciful, as Maimonides observes, that if a Man was not able to offer him an
Ox, or a Lamb, he accepted of Turtles and young Pigeons, of which there was
great plenty in that Country. And if this was beyond his Ability, but he had a
desire to testify his Affection to God by a Free-will-offering, he was pleased
to accept an Oblation of Bread baked in an Oven, or Pan, or any other usual
way. And if this was too heavy, he accepted of bare flour, without putting him
to the charge of baking it. For he would have Men to be easy in his Service,
and all their Offerings to be free and cheerful; and therefore tells them here,
that if they vowed nothing at all to him, he would not take it ill of them, nor
impute it to them as a sin, More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLVI.

That which is gone out of thy mouth thou shall keep and perform, even a
Free-will-offering, according as thou have vowed, etc.] This was to make them
consider well beforehand, what their Ability was; and not rashly resolve and
promise any thing: for though they were not bound to vow the smallest matter,
yet having once vowed, they were no longer free, but bound to make it good,
though it proved very chargeable to them. Yet there is a Traditional Doctrine
among them practiced at this day, That if any Man or Woman make a Vow, which
afterward they wish unmade, and it be not to the prejudice of any third Person
that it should be broken, in this case they may go to a Rabbine, or to any
other three Men, who hearing their Reasons why they repent of having made such
a Vow, and judging them good, they may free them from their Obligation; saying
to such a Person thrice, Be thou absolved from this Vow, etc. and so he is
discharged. Thus Leo Modena in his History of the present Jews, Part II. Chap.
IV.

When thou come into thy neighbors vineyard, then thou may eat grapes thy
fill, at thine own pleasure.] This the Hebrew Doctors take to be a Law made in
favor of poor Laborers, who were hired to work in their Vineyards, in the
time of Vintage. Whom the Owners might not hinder from eating as many Grapes as
they pleased (and the same held good in Olives, Figs, Dates, and all other
Fruit) as long as they were at work; but not after they had done working. And
if their Masters would not suffer them so to do, they were to be scourged with
forty stripes save one: for it was not reasonable to deny them this liberty,
when the very Oxen were not to be muzzled, whilst they trod out the Corn. See
Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. 2. p. 670. Which must be confessed
to be as good a natured Law, as that of Plato's was harsh and unnatural, which
enacted a Servant should receive as many Stripes, as he eat Grapes or Figs. See
Eusebius Lib. XIII. Praepar. Evangel. Cap. ult.

But I see no reason at all to restrain this Indulgence only to Hirelings, of
whom there is no mention at all in this Law: and therefore Josephus seems to me
to have justly enlarged this Benefit ( Lib. IV. Archaeol. Cap. VIII.) to all
Travelers on the Highway, though they were not Israelites (to whom, and to
Proselytes of Justice alone, the Jews consine this Privilege) but mere
Strangers of any other Nation, who had occasion to pass by a Vineyard, and
needed a Refreshment. Which Permission may seem to have great Inconvenience, if
not Mischief in it, because they might tread down the Vines, and make great
waste among the Grapes. Therefore by coming into their Neighbor's Vineyard, is
not meant, going into every part of it, with a liberty to pick out the best
Grapes; but only stepping aside out of their way, into the Skirts of the
Vineyard, which lay near the Rode, and satisfying their hunger, without
entering further into the Vineyard. This made it no Damage to the Owners,
considering the great plenty of Fruit in that Country.

Chapter XXIV.
But thou shall not put any in thy vessel.] They were only to eat for their
present necessity or delight, but not to carry any away with them, for the
benefit of others, or their own Refreshment at another time. And therefore
might not put any in their Pouches, or their Garments, or Bosoms; or so much as
carry away in their Hands what they could not eat.

When thou come into the standing Corn of thy neighbors, thou may pluck
the ears with thine hand.] As the Disciples of our Savior did, when they
walked through the Corn, XII Matthew. 1. which they might have justified by the
strictest Rules of the Pharisaical Doctors, who granted this Privilege unto
Jews, but not unto Gentiles.

But thou shall not move a sickle into thy neighbor's standing Corn.] They
might not cut down any Corn, but only pluck with their Hands as much as was
necessary to satisfy their hunger, or for their pleasure.

CHAP. XXIV.
WHen a man has taken a wife, and married her.] The Hebrew Doctors make a
difference between these two: understanding by taking a wife, his espousing her
to be his Wife; and by marrying her, his completing the Contract, by lying
with her.

And it come to pass.] Either after he has espoused her, or after he has
consummated the Marriage.

That she find no favor in his eyes.] i. e. He dislikes her; or as it is
expressed v. 3. hates her. Which signifies either an absolute dislike to her;
or comparatively with some other Person, whom he likes better.

Because he has found some uncleanness in her.] This is assigned as the reason
and ground of his dislike, which signifies something odious to him, though
perhaps it might not be so to another, whom Moses supposes she might marry
after this Husband had discharged her. Some of the Jews indeed extend this
liberty so far, as to fancy they might, without any reason at all, for their
mere pleasure, part with their Wives. See Buxtorf. de Sponsal. and Divortiis,
Sect. 89. But others are more modest, and acknowledge that these words [matter
of uncleanness] signify some weighty Cause. Yet they distinguish between the
first Wife a Man took, who might not be put away but for some Uncleanness; and
the second, who might be put away for a lesser reason. But there were great
differences between the School of Hillel, and the School of Samai (whom the
Talmudists so much talk of) about this matter of Uncleanness. Yet both agree it
has a far lower signification here, than in the Book of LEVITICUS, where it
signifies Adultery, Incest, or such like Turpitude. For if Adultery had been
here meant, she might have been put to death; or the mere suspicion of it tried
by the Water of Jealousy. See Buxtorf in the Book before-named, Sect. 90. and
our Seldom L. III. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XX, XXI. Abarbinel thinks the two plainest
Causes of dislike signified by these words, were either, such behavior as
might make her suspected of Impurity, (as going with her Face uncovered, or her
Breast naked; sporting with young Men; or washing in the same place with them;
or having her Arms bare) or secondly, when they were of such a different
Temper, Humor, and Disposition, that they disliked and nauseated each others
Company, and consequently lived in continual Brawls and Contentions. And
besides such moral Causes, they allowed also such natural, as made a Woman
offensive, viz. Leprosy, or some such Disease in her Body, as he did not
discover before Marriage. And sometimes they extended this as far, as to a
stinking Breath.

Then let him write her a Bill of Divorcement.] Whatsoever was the Cause of the
Husband's dislike, this Law provides the Wife should not be damaged by it,
being made rather for her Advantage, than her Husband's, viz. to free her (as
Dr. Hammond observes) from the pain and vexation of her Husband's unkindness,
and the danger of seeing another taken in, and preferred before her; and she
might be perfectly at liberty to leave one who did not love her, and take
another Husband who might possibly delight in her. See Answer to six Queries,
Q. III. Cap. II. Some think that this Custom of putting away Wives which they
did not like, prevailed before the Law of Moses. Which Opinion has something
to countenance it, from the mention of Divorces in several places (XXI Levit.
14. XXII. 13. XXX Numb. 9.) before the Book of Deuteronomy was written, wherein
he orders a Bill to be given in writing to discharge them. If this be true, it
gives a good reason why God was pleased to grant this permission, because they
were so settled in this practice, that it was safer still to indulge it to
them, than quite to abolish it. Which he did with this Caution, that Husbands
should not discharge their Wives with a Word, bidding them be gone out of Doors
( i. e. putting them away rashly, and in a sudden fit of Anger) but first write
them a Bill containing their pleasure herein. Which being a deliberate act,
might possibly hinder this Divorce; to which they might be prone in a passion,
but not after some consideration. The form of this Bill is in Mr. Seldom, and
exactly scanned Lib. III. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XXIV. who observes also in another
place of that Book ( Cap. XIX.) that, as for five hundred years or more, the
Roman State flourished, without the use of Divorces, so for seven hundred years
after the making of this Law, there is no mention of any Bill of Divorce among
the Jews, that is, till the days of Isaiah, (See Chap. L. 1.) and but rarely
afterward.

And give it into her hand.] Saying these, or some such like words, Behold,
this is thy Bill of Divorce; otherwise it was not good: And there were to be,
at least, two Witnesses unto it, as the Jews say. Who make ten things necessary
(which they think to be founded upon the Law it self) to make the Bill legal.
See Seldom in the same Book, Cap. XXV.

And send her out of his house.] This Dr. Hammond (in the place
abovementioned) looks upon as an Obligation upon her Husband to furnish her
for her Journey, to endow her, and make provision for her. For so the word
(...), to send out, signifies in the New Testament to provide a viaticum, 1 Corinthians. XVI. 6, 11. III Titus 13. where it is explained by letting nothing be
wanting. But the Jews are of opinion, that the Divorce was perfect and
legitimate, before he sent her out of his Doors. For it was sufficient to give
her a Bill in such a form, as plainly showed their Matrimony was dissolved, and
that she was no part of his Family; though he had not actually sent her away.
Yet if he kept her still in his House, after this Bill was delivered into her
hand, it was presumed they cohabited together; and he was to give her a new
Bill of Divorce.

In all which I can see nothing like a Command for putting away their Wives, if
they were disagreeable; which the Jews would fain extort out of these words.
And so they spoke unto our blessed Lord, XIX Matthew. 7. though in another place
they spoke of it only as a permission, X Mark 3. The plain intent of this Law
being this; That if a Man did put away his Wife (as they are here suffered to
do) she might marry another Man; but if that new Husband died, she might not
return to her first Husband again. See Buxtorf de Sponsal. and Divort. p. 107,
108, etc. and to show that Moses rather supposed than permitted Divorces, p.
113, etc.

And when she is departed out of his house.] So that it is publicly known, she
is no longer his Wife.

She may go and be another man's wife.] The Bond of Marriage being wholly
broken by the Bill of Divorce; whereby he renounced all interest in her, and
expressly said, in the very body of the Bill, (as we speak) It may be free to
thee to marry with whom thou will. Much more was the Bond broken by Adultery,
for which our Savior gives a Man leave to put away his Wife and take another.
See David Chytraeus concerning this matter, p. 117, etc. where he reports a
very wise Resolution of Luther's, Pomeranus and Melancthon in the Case of the
Criminal Person.

And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a Bill of Divorce, and give
it her in her hand, and send her out of his house.] This shows that no other
way of putting away a Wife was allowed, but only this. For, as Maimonides well
observes ( More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLIX.) if it had been lawful to do it, by
bare words, or simply sending her out of his House, any Woman might have left
her Husband, and said she was put away; both she, and he that committed
Adultery with her, pretending a Divorce, when her Husband had given her none.
Therefore the Law wisely provided none should be put away, but by such a Bill
as is beforementioned, whereby an Authentic Testimony was given of it.

Or if her latter husband die, which took her to wife.] Whereby she became free
again, as the Apostle has observed VII Romans 2.

Ver. 4. Her former husband, which sent her away, may One would have thought
there could have been no danger of any Man's desiring her again, whom he had
solemnly sent away with dislike. But such is the levity and fickleness of
Humane Nature (the Jews at least were so inconstant) that it seems Men
sometimes sought after that which they had rejected: and this was the
Punishment of their Injustice, in putting away a Wife without sufficient Cause,
(as by this they acknowledged) that they might not again enjoy her.

After that she is defiled.] This is the reason why the former Husband might
not marry her again (as the Jews take it) because by her second Marriage she
was defiled. Which, they say she was, (so that he could not have her again)
though she had been only espoused to a new Husband, who had never lain with
her. For they make no difference between her second Marriage and second
Espousals; but think a Woman contracted such a Pollution by her second
Espousals, that she would not have been so much polluted, if she had played the
Whore after her Divorce. For in that case, they say, he might notwithstanding
have married her again; but not after she had been married to another. Thus Mr.
Seldom reports their opinion, Lib. I. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XI. where he observes
that the Mahometans, who are wont in many things, to ape the Jews, here quite
differ from them; allowing a Man liberty to take his Wife again, though he had
divorced her three times.

Now the ground upon which a divorced Woman was accounted defiled, or unclean,
after another Man had married her, I suppose, was that this was looked upon as a
Solemn Renunciation of her former Husband, on her part; who had been renounced
by him, by the Bill of Divorce, but he was not absolutely renounced by her,
till she married another, whereby she was totally alienated from him. This made
her unclean, not in her self, nor with respect to her second Husband, whom she
married, nor with respect to any other Man, (who might marry her without any
pollution) but only with respect to her first Husband. Unto whom, by this Law,
she was made unclean: for so all things forbidden to the Jews were accounted,
as appears from X Acts 14, 15. where all Meats prohibited by the Law are called
unclean; and God is said to have cleansed them, by taking off that Prohibition.

For that is abomination before the LORD.] That is, to return to her first
Husband, and to be his Wife again: For this, says Abarbinel, was to imitate
the Egyptians, who changed their Wives, and took them again into their Houses,
which was the occasion of great filthiness. But this intimates, that if she had
not been married to any other Man, but kept her self free, she might have been
his Wife again, if he had a mind to be Reconciled to her. And this shows also,
that God intended to discourage them from putting away their Wives; by making
them incapable, after they had been married to another, for ever to enjoy them
again, though they grew very rich, or otherwise desirable: which inclined many,
no doubt, to consider well before they parted with them.

And thou shall not cause the Land to sin, which the LORD thy God gives thee,
etc.] The People of the Land might, by such a large Indulgence, have been
tempted to pollute it with many sins, and thereby bring God's Judgments upon
it. See III Jerem. 1. For, as Isaac Arama glosses, if this had not been
prohibited, a Gate had been opened unto vile Men, to make a trade of changing
their Wives, and thereby filled the Land with Whoredoms.

Ver. 5. When a man has taken a new wife.] The Hebrews think (as I observed
before XX. 7.) that whether he had married a Virgin, or a Widow, he was to have
the Privilege here mentioned; yea, they extend it to him, who had married his
Brother's Wife; but not to him who had married her whom he put away, and might
take again, if she had not been married, since that, to another Man. For she
could not be said to be a new wife.

He shall not go out to war.] See XX Deuteronomy. 7.

Nor be charged with any business.] No Public Employment was to be put upon
him, which might occasion his absence from his Wife. Not so much as watching,
or such like. For the better understanding of which, it must be remembered what
was said about the fearful and timorous, who were bid to return home from the
Army, lest they disheartened their Brethren, XX. 8. And yet these Men were bound
to furnish the Army with Victuals and Water, to clear the Ways, and take up
their Quarters. But a new Bridegroom was free from all these. Only they made a
difference between a War by the Divine Commandment, and one undertaken
voluntarily: unto the former of which they think this Immunity does not extend,
but only to the latter. In the Margin these words are translated, Nor any thing
pass upon him; that is, he shall not pay tribute.

But he shall be free at home for one year.] The same time of freedom, it was
thought reasonable, to grant unto Builders and Planters, because they are
joined with new married Men, in the Speech the Priest made before they went to
battle, XX. 5, 6, 7.

And shall cheer up his wife whom he has taken.] Make much of her, as we
speak, and so endear himself to her by his kindness, that there might be no
occasion of a Divorce. For the prevention of which, this Law seems to have been
intended; that by so long a Conversation together without any interruption,
they might have so perfect an understanding one of another, and such a mutual
confidence might be settled, that he might not easily entertain any jealousies
of her, when he should be absent in the Wars, or elsewhere.

No man shall take the nether, or the upper Millstone to pledge.] This is a Law
of the same nature with that XX Exodus 26, 27. for the preservation of Mercy,
Beneficence, and Clemency toward the Poor, as Maimonides speaks, More
Nevochim, P. III. Cap, XXXIX.

For he takes a man's life to pledge.] That is, his livelihood: by which he
maintains himself and his Family, and keeps them from starving. By this reason
it was unlawful to take any other thing for a Security, by the want of which a
Man might be in danger to be undone. For instance; they did not allow any Man
to seize upon the Oxen which were at Plough. He who broke this Law was scourged.

Ver. 7. If a man be found stealing any of his brethren If he were either taken
in the fact, or it was plainly proved against him. So the very words of the
Athenian Law were, (...), if a Man be an apparent Man-stealer.

And makes merchandise of him, or sells him.] This was the end of
Man-stealing, to make a gain of him; either by exchanging him for some
Commodity, or selling him for Money.

Then that Thief shall die.] This Crime was punished with death, though
stealing of Beasts, or other things was not, (See XXI Exodus 16.) because it was
very heinous on a double account: both by depriving the Community of one of its
Members, and making him a Slave in another Country. And indeed, the most
moderate Lawyers did not know how to secure Men in the possession of things
very valuable, but by inflicting such a Punishment on those that stole them.
Thus, after Solon had tempered the rigid Law of Draco, which punished all Theft
with death, by ordering in most Cases only the payment of double, he enacted
the stealing of a great Sum of Money to be Capital. Nay, he made it a great
Crime to steal Dung, because it was a thing of great value in that Country,
which was very barren, and needed it for their Ground. How much more valuable
was a Man in all Men's account, whom if any Man stole, the Law was (...), that
death should be his punishment, as Xenophon reports it. And he was accounted
(...), a Man-stealer, who not only by force, or by fraud, carried away a free
Man, and sold him for a Slave, or suppressed him; but he who inveigled away
another Man's Servant, and persuaded him to run away; or concealed such a
Fugitive; as Samuel Petitus observes out of Pollux and others, Lib. VII. in
Leges Atticas, Tit. V. p. 533. which makes me think, not only he that stole one
of his Brethren of the Children of Israel, but he that stole a Proselyte of any
sort, or the Servant of a Stranger, was liable to the punishment mentioned in
this Law of Moses.

And thou shall put away evil from among you.] By these words we may understand
the greatness of this Crime, for they are never used in this Book, but when
Moses speaks of the punishment of some enormous sin. See XIII. 5. XVII. 7. XIX.
19, etc.

Take heed in the plague of Leprosy, that thou observe diligently.] This was
the highest legal Uncleanness, and therefore the greatest Caution was to be
used to prevent its Contagion.

And do according to all that the Priests the Levites.] They were constituted
by the Law the sole Judges, whether a Man had the Leprosy, or no; and were to
order his Separation from others, if he had: and frequently make inspection
whether it spread, or was at a stand, etc. See the Thirteenth and Fourteenth
Chapters of LEVITICUS: where there are Laws about Houses and Garments, as well
as Persons, infected with this Disease by the Hand of God, as the Jews
understand it.

Shall teach you.] To teach in this place, signifies to declare the Obligation
of the Law by the Judges of it, the Priests, the Levites. Thus Jehosaphat is
said to have sent his Princes to teach in the Cities of Judah, and with them he
sent Levites and Priests, 2 Chronicles. XVIII. 18. where R. Solomon notes, that it
was the business of the Priests and Levites to teach and instruct, as is here
written in this place, (which he quotes) and the Princes went with them, that
none might disobey them, but be constrained by their Authority to do according
to their command. See Mr. Thorndike in his Religious Assemblies, Chap. II. p.
22. where he observes, that in LEVITICUS direction is given to the Priests how
to proceed in judging Leprosies; but no Provision made till now, that the
People should stand to their Judgment.

They who imagine that the Priest had the care of Lepers, as their Physicians,
forget that no other diseased Persons are ordered to repair to them: which is a
sign they did not pretend to cure them, but only to preserve others from being
defiled by them; and to do what was necessary for their cleansing, when they
were healed by God.

As I command them, so shall ye observe to do.] They were so to observe the
Priests, as to mark what God commanded; and accordingly obey them, not against,
but according to his command.

Ver. 9. Remember what the LORD thy God did unto This seems to be mentioned,
that they might not think much to be shut up seven days, when they were but
suspected to have the Leprosy; and seven days more to make farther trial: and
to be put out of the Camp, when it appeared plainly they had this Disease,
(XIII Levit. 4, 5, 45, 46.) Since so great a Person as Miriam was excluded so
long from the Society of God's People, XII Numb. 15. And this may be also looked
upon, as an Admonition to take care, lest they spoke Evil of Dignities, (which
brought this Punishment on Miriam) or disobeyed the Commands of the Priests,
which might bring the like, or some other Judgment, upon them.

When thou do lend thy brother any thing, thou shall not go into his house to
fetch his pledge.] This was a very merciful provision for the Poor; whose
Houses he would have so privileged, that no Man might enter into them without
their consent, and there choose what he pleased for the Security of his Debt.
But he was to take what the Borrower could best spare.

Thou shall stand abroad.] Keep without door.

And the Man to whom thou do lend, shall bring out the pledge abroad unto
thee.] So the Debtor, not the Creditor, was to choose what Pledge he would give:
For he best knew what he could, with most convenience to himself, part withal;
and if it was sufficient, the Lender had reason to be satisfied with it.

And if the Man be poor, thou shall not sleep with his pledge.] But restore it
before Night. Which is to be understood of such things as were necessary for
the preservation of his Life, or Health; as the following words demonstrate.

In any case thou shall deliver him the pledge again, when the Sun goes down,
that he may sleep in his own raiment.] And not to be forced to borrow of others
a necessary Covering to defend him from the Cold; and not be able, perhaps, to
procure it. See XXII Exodus 26, 27. which Laws seems to have been intended, to
keep them from taking any pledge of a very poor Man. For to what purpose should
they every Morning fetch a pledge, and every Evening carry it back again? which
would only create them a great deal of trouble.

And bless thee.] Pray God to bless thee.

And it shall be righteousness unto thee before the LORD thy God.] Procure thee
a Blessing from God; who will esteem it an Act of great Mercy: which is often
called by the name of Righteousness in the Holy Books, CXII Psalm 9. X Prove. 2,
etc. Nay, such like actions are properly called tzedekah, or righteousness,
according to the opinion of Maimonides, who observes ( More Nevochim P. III.
Cap. LIII.) that this word does not merely signify, giving to every Man his
own. For when a Man pays the Hireling his wages, or a Debtor pays his Creditor,
that is not called tzedekah; but what a Man does out of pure love to Virtue and
Goodness, (as when a Man cures a poor Wretch of his wounds) is properly called
by that name. From whence it is said, concerning the restoring of a poor Man's
pledge, it shall be to thee for righteousness. That is, says Dr. Hammond (in
his Practical Catechism) that degree of Mercy which the Law required of every
Jew, without which he could not be accounted righteous: but there was a degree
of Bounty beyond this, called chusidah, which was an excess of Righteousness,
or Goodness.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant.] Constable. L'Empereur observes
out of D. Kimchi, who in his Book of Roots, says, the difference between (...)
(which is the word here) and (...) does not lie in this, that the former
signifies to defraud, the latter to take away by violence; but the former
signifies to detain by force, and the other to take away by force, what belongs
to another. And for the proof of it alleges this place in Deuteronomy, which
he thus translates, Thou shall not detain by force the wages of the hireling.
Which is expressed more clearly III Malachi 5. Annot. in Bava kama, Cap. IX.
Sect. VII. p. 247.

That is poor and needy.] And therefore the more to be pitied, and not
oppressed; either by giving him less Wages than another Man, when he ought
rather to have greater; or by keeping back his hire beyond the time wherein it
ought to be paid: For as the ancient Lawyers say, Minus solvit, qui tempore
minus solvit; as it is observed by Grotius upon V James 4.

Whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy Land within
thy gates.] No difference was to be made between a Natural Jew, and a Proselyte
of the Gate, according to the general Law XIX Levit. 34. For such oppression
might tempt them to do very wicked things; for instance, expose, or kill their
Children, when they were not able to maintain them; after the manner of the
Heathen, who were frequently guilty of this, and thought it no Crime when their
Poverty constrained them to it. See Petrus Petitus, Lib. III. Miscell. Observe.
Cap. XVII. where he produces many proofs of it, both out of Greek and Roman
Authors.

At his day thou shall give him his hire.] Which was due to him, either by
Contract, or by natural Equity; and whether he had agreed to serve him for a
Day, or a Month, or a Year. At the time when his Wages was due, it was to be
punctually paid, unless he were willing to have it remain in his hands. For
this was not an Act of Mercy, but of Justice, to pay an Hireling his Wages.

Neither shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor.] This shows he speaks,
particularly, of one that served for a days Wages, and could not forbear the
payment of it, because he was so poor, as not to be able to provide himself and
family Necessaries without it.

And sets his heart upon it.] Eagerly expects it, as the Support of his
Life. So the Vulgar translates it, with it he supports his Soul; that is, his
Life.

Lest he cry unto the LORD.] Make grievous Complaints to him, who made both
Rich and Poor.

And it be sin unto thee.] God will hear his Cry, and severely punish thee. See
V James 4.

Ver. 16. The father shall not be put to death for the This is a Rule of Common
Reason, which was anciently expressed in this vulgar saying, Noxa Caput
sequitur: And is excellently expressed by Dion Chrysostom, (...) Let every Man
be the Author of his own Misfortune. Which Amaziah King of Judah thought
extended to the Children of Traitors, unto whom he allowed the benefit of this
Law, as we read in so many words, 2 Kings XIV. 6. 2 Chronicles. XXV. 4. And not only
Philo, but Dionys. Hallicarnassaeus condemns the Custom of those Nations, who
put to death the Children of Tyrants or Traitors. See Grotius Lib. II. de Jure
Belli and Pacis, Cap. XXI. Sect. XIII, XIV. where he observes, that God indeed
threatens to visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children: but in this Case,
Jure dominij non poenae utitur, he uses the Right of Dominion, not of
Punishment.

Thou shall not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless.]
Nor of the Widow, who is joined with them, v. 19. For such Persons commonly had
none to stand by them, and plead their Cause; and therefore the Judges were to
take the greater Care to see them have Justice done, XXII Exodus 21. XXIII. 9.

Nor take the widows raiment to pledge.] Which is to be understood of one that
is poor; as appears from v. 12. See XXII Exodus 21, 26, 27.

But thou shall remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD
redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.] The
remembrance of their own miserable Condition in Egypt, till God took pity upon
them, was to work Compassion in them toward others, in the like forlorn
Estate; otherwise they did not remember them, as they ought. This is often
urged as a Reason for showing Mercy to Strangers, and such like helpless
Persons; particularly in XIX Levit. 33, 34. and in this Book, X. 19, 20. XV. 15.

Ver. 19. When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and have forgot a
sheaf in the field, thou shall not go back again to fetch it.] There are many
merciful Laws about the Poor. See XIX Levit. 9, 10. XXIII. 22. They are all put
together by Mr. Seldom Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. Cap. VI. where the
Exposition the Talmudists give of this Law, seems to me to be so strict, that
it could do little good. For they say a Sheaf was not taken to be forgotten,
unless not only the Owner of the Field, but all the Laborers forgot it: and if
none of them remembered it, yet if any Man that passed by that way, came and
gave them notice of it, it was not looked upon as left by forgetfulness. Yet
they are so kind as to extend this Law, not only to Sheaves of Corn left in the
Field; but to Bunches of Grapes, and other Fruit which was left behind in their
Vineyards, or Orchards. And it seems no unreasonable Interpretation of this
Law, that if an Owner of a Field, or his Workmen, called to mind, before they
were gone quite out of the Field that a Sheaf was left in such a place, they
might go back and fetch it; but not if they did not remember it, till they came
into the City. They that would see more Cases about this matter, may look into
Maimonides de Donis Pauperum, translated by Dr. H. Prideaux, Cap. V. and his
very learned Annotations upon it. Josephus seems to me to have interpreted this
Law most charitably, Lib. IV. Archaeolog. Cap. VIII. where he says they were
not only not to go back to fetch what they had forgot, but to leave on purpose
Corn, and Grapes, and Olives, etc. for the benefit of the Poor.

It shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the Widow.] Who are
commonly put together, as proper Objects of Charity: and are (as Mr. Seldom
speaks) a kind of Paraphrase upon the word, Poor.

That the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hand.] Make their
Land still very fruitful: which was a reward of their Charity.

Ver. 20. When thou beatest thine Olive Tree.] As

Thou shall not go over the boughs again.] Not search the Boughs, after they
are beaten, whether any be left.

It shall be for the stranger, etc.] Who might go into the Olive-yards, after
the Owner had carried out his Fruit, and gather what they found still remaining
on the Trees.

When thou gatherest the grapes of thy Vineyard, thou shall not glean it
afterward.] By making a new gathering after the first. But if the poor
themselves left any behind, after the usual time allowed for the gathering such
Fruits or Corn as were left for them, it was lawful for the Owner to take it
himself; and he was not bound, either to pay the Poor the price of it, or to
leave it for the Beasts and the Birds. For the command is (say the Jewish
Doctors, who nicely scan these things) that it shall be for the Poor; and that
it be left for them: But not any thing given them in lieu of it. See Seldom in
the forenamed place, p. 699.

It shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.] The
Jewish Doctors, by the Stranger here mentioned, in this and the foregoing
Verses, would have only Proselytes of Justice understood, who had entirely
embraced the Jewish Religion: So that other Proselytes, and mere Gentiles, had
no right to these things. For by the Law, say they, concerning the Tithe for
the Poor, XIV. 29. the Levite and the Stranger are put together: and the Levite
being a Child of the Covenant, so must the Stranger be, who is joined with him.
But this Restriction confined this Charity within such narrow Bounds, that they
themselves are not satisfied with it: and therefore they add, that though such
only as were within the Covenant, had a right to these things by the Law, yet
if Proselytes of the Gate, or mere Gentiles, mixed themselves with the Jews, by
the decree of their Wisemen, Chapter XXV.
they were not to be hindered from gathering their share in these Fruits of the
Earth, which were left for the Poor. And they give this Reason for it, because
of the way of peace: that is, Offices of Humanity and Charity ought to be
extended to all. See Seldom p. 700.

Ver. 22. And thou shall remember that thou wast a If they had been only
Strangers there, and neglected by the Natives of the Country, the remembrance
of God's Mercy in providing for them, had been a powerful Motive to obey this
Command: and therefore the remembrance of the Slavery and grievous Oppressions
under which they there groaned, was a far greater. See v. 18.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 1. IF there be a controversy between men, and It is evident, by the
sequel, that he speaks of Criminal Causes.

That the Judges may judge them.] Who were appointed to be constituted and
settled in all their Gates. See XVI. 18.

Then they shall justify the righteous.] Acquit him who is falsely accused of
doing any wrong.

And condemn the wicked.] To suffer such punishment as his Crime deserves.

Ver. 2. And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten.] For what
Crimes Men were to be beaten, by the Sentence of the lower Courts, as well as
by that of the great Sanhedrim, See Seldom Lib. 2. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. N.
VII, VIII. They were in all, as they reckon, CCVII.

The Judge shall cause him to lie down.] By his Officers who attended the Court.

Before his face.] In open Court; but he was first to be admonished, and the
Witnesses were to be produced against him, as in Capital Causes. After which
the Judge commanded him to lie down before a low Pillar, to which his hands
were tied; and he being stripped down to his waste, the Executioner stood behind
him upon a stone, where he scourged him both on the back and breast, with
Thongs made of an Oxes hide, before the face of the Judges. For though one
Judge be only mentioned, the Execution was done before the whole Bench, after
the Sentence was pronounced by one of them.

According to his fault.] For the violation of a negative Precept he might be
scourged before the Court, consisting of three Judges; but not for the
violation of an affirmative, which was to be done before the Court of XXIII. as
Seldom observes in the place forenamed, Sect. VI.

By a certain number.] He was condemned to receive more or fewer Stripes,
proportionable to his Crime: and all the time the Executioner was scourging
him, the principal Judge proclaimed those words XXVIII Deuteronomy. 58. with a loud
voice, If thou observest not all the words of this Law, etc. then the LORD
shall make thy Plagues wonderful, etc. adding those XXIX. 9. Keep therefore the
words of this Covenant, and do them, etc. Concluding at last with those of the
Psalmist, LXXVIII. 38. But he being full of compassion forgave their
iniquities. Which he was to repeat, if he had finished these sayings, before
the full number of Stripes were given. See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap.
XIII. N. VI. which I find in the Title Maccoth, Cap. III. Sect. XIV. And see G.
Schickard, Mischpa^ Hamelek, Cap. II. p. 57, 58.

Ver. 3. Forty stripes he may give him.] Which Athenian law mentioned by
Aeschines, which inflicted upon some Criminals, (...), fifty stripes by the
public scourge. But none among the Jews, were to receive above XL. for any
Crime; fewer they might inflict, though not more.

And not exceed.] Of this they were so careful, that as one of the three Judges
commanded the Executioner to strike, another told the stripes, while the third
pronounced the Sentences out of Scripture beforementioned, to admonish him,
and every one else, of the Justice of the Punishment. So Schickard observes out
of Maimonides in the place abovenamed. For the prevention also of excess in
this Punishment, they were wont to give but XXXIX Stripes, and no more; though
the Offender was ever so strong or pertinacious. Thus the Jews generally
affirm, and it appears to be true by what S. Paul says of himself, 2 Corinthians.
XI. 24. Of the Jews five times I received forty stripes save one; which is
exactly the phrase of the Mischna in Maccoth, Cap. III. Sect. X. Where they
interpret forty stripes, by the next number to forty; i. e. thirty nine. For
which they give a foolish reason in the Gemara (as Joh. Coch there observes)
but Maimonides gives a sober account; that this was ordered, lest the
Executioner, by carelessness, might exceed the number of XL. beyond which the
Law required them not to go; but it was lawful to fall short of it, and
therefore they required him to stop at the Thirty ninth stroke. Yet if any Man
deserved this Punishment twice together, they did sometime exceed the number of
XL. and went so far as to Sentence such a Malefactor to receive LXXIX stripes;
as Mr. Seldom observes in the same place. Where he likewise notes, on the other
side, that if a Man was so weak, that he was ready to faint away, before he had
received XXXIX, the Judges ordered the Executioner to stay his hand.

Lest if he should exceed and beat him above these, with many stripes, then thy
brother should seem vile unto thee.] Being beaten like a Dog, as we speak; that
is, so cruelly, that the marks of it remained afterward, to make him
contemptible. Which the Law was so far from intending, that the Jews say, no
Man was to be reproached afterward with this whipping, or the Crime for which
he was whipped, because he was still a Brother, as the word here is. And
therefore he was to be restored to the same respect among them that he had
before; nay, to any Office which before he enjoyed; except he was the President
of the Sanhedrim, who was never to be restored to his power, if he had been
scourged; nor equally honored with his inferior Colleagues. So Schickard
observes out of Maimonides, in the forenamed Book, p. 62.

Thou shall not muzzle the Ox when he treads out the Corn.] It was the
Custom, not only in this Country, but among the Egyptians, Greeks and Romans,
to use Oxen in treading out their Corn; either with their feet barely, or by
drawing a Cart, or other Instrument over it. And while they were at work, some
muzzled them; others dawbed their Mouths with Dung; others hung a wooden
Instrument about their Necks, which hindered them from stooping down; or put
sharp pricks in their Mouths; or kept them without drink; or covered their Corn
with Skins that they might not be able to come at it. See Bochartus in his
Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. II. Cap. XL. p. 401. Which inhumanity God here forbids,
and instructs his People by showing Mercy to their Beasts, to be kind one to
another; particularly to their Servants and Laborers: but above all to those
who labored in the Work of the Ministry, for the Salvation of Souls; as S.
Paul argues 1 Corinthians. IX. 9. See Bonfrerius.

Ver. 5. If brethren dwell together.] They are said Genesis 5, 6.

And one of them die, and have no child.] If he left a Child, though he were a
Mamzer, or an Apostate, his next Brother was not bound to marry his Wife; but
if he left a Child by a Slave, or a Gentile, he was. If he left his Wife with
Child, and she miscarried, he was bound; but if she brought a live Child after
she had gone with it nine Months, he was free. And by a Child, is to be
understood either Son or Daughter. See Seldom Lib. de Successionibus ad bona
Defuncti, Cap. 14.

The wise of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger.] This shows the
end of this Law was to preserve Inheritances in the Family to which they
belonged.

Her husbands brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife.] The
Hebrew Doctors understand this Obligation to lie upon the Eldest Brother that
was surviving; and only of a Brother that was by the same Father. For though
they had the same Mother, if they had not the same Father, no Obligation lay
upon him: For Brethren (says Maimonides) by the Mother's side are not
accounted Brethren, either in the matter of Inheritances, or of marrying a
Brother's Wife: but they are as if they were not Brethren; for there is no
fraternity which is not from the Father. See Heideggerus Exercit. I. de
Oeconom. Patriarch. X. XVI. and Seldom Vxor. Hebr. p. 80. But the King, they
say, was excepted from this Law, as Schickard observes in his Jus Regium, p. 56.

And perform the duty of an husband's brothr to her.] This was a Law before the
time of Moses, among the Patriarchs, as we learn from XXXVIII Genesis 7, 8, etc.
And it was so well understood to be a bounden Duty, that the Hebrew Doctors
say, it was not necessary there should be any solemn Marriage celebrated with
such a Widow; because, unless her Husband's Brother renounced her, she was
esteemed his Wife, Min Hashamajim, by the Authority of God: and that whether
she had been only espoused by the deceased Brother, or his complete Wife. Yet
by the Constitution of their Elders, he was to contract with her before two
Witnesses, and give her a piece of Money; before which it was not lawful for
him to lie with her. There was to be also a Sacred Benediction of the Marriage;
and her Dowry assigned her by an Instrument. But if he did lie with her before
these Solemnities, there was no formal Contract exacted of him afterward; he
was only scourged for contemning the Constitutions of the Elders, and compelled
to settle a Dowry upon her. See Seldom L. I. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XII. where he
observes, That in case a Man left several Widows, if his Brother either
married, or renounced one of them, all the rest were free from this Law. And if
several Brethren died, and left every one of them a Wife, without Issue, the
surviving Brother might either take, or reject them all; or take one or two,
and let the rest alone, as he pleased. And if the eldest Brother, that married
his Brother's Relict, died also without Issue, then the next surviving Brother
was to marry her; and so forward, according to the Case supposed in the Gospel.
And yet that Brother only was admitted to this Marriage, who was born before
his Brother's death; which they gather from the first words of this Verse, if
Brethren dwell together; which cannot be meant of one born after his Brother's
death. They might likewise have concluded, from this Phrase, That such of the
Brethren as had Wives already, were not bound to take her to Wife, but only he
that was unmarried; who might be supposed to be meant by him that dwelt
together with his Brother, and was not yet gone to a House of his own. But I
fear I have said too much of a matter now quite antiquated; unless it be among
some of the Indians and Persians, and among the Tartars that inhabit Iberia and
Albania, who still retain this Custom, as Huetius observes in his Demonstratio
Evangel. Propos. IV. Cap. XI. N. I.

Ver. 6. And it shall be that the firstborn which she Shall be reputed the Son
and Heir of the deceased; but there was no necessity to give him his Name.

That his name be not put out in Israel.] That a Family in Israel might not be
lost; for this was a Provision for the preservation of Families. See XXVII
Numb. 4. And therefore, if there was no Brother, properly so called, to perform
this Duty, the next of kin (who is also called a Brother, in a large sense) was
bound to marry her. See of this word Name, XXVII Numb. 4.

Ver. 7. And if a man like not to take his brother's wife.] Here now was a
great mitigation of that ancient Law, which had been before the time of Moses;
Onan (XXXVIII. Gen.) who married Thamar against his mind (as his behavior
toward her demonstrates) which he needed not to have done, if this permission,
which here follows, had been then in use.

Then let his brother's wife go up to the gate.] Where the Court of Judgment
sat, as I have often observed. See XVI. 18.

Unto the Elders.] A Court consisting of three Elders, was sufficient to judge
in this matter. And it was no consequence whether these three were created
Elders, according to the Solemn Form among them, by laying on of hands; but it
was sufficient, if they were such as they called Elders of the Street, or
common Men. See Lib. I Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XV. and Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. VII.
N. III.

And say, my husband's brother refuses to raise up unto his brother a name in
Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.] She was to put
in a Bill of Complaint against him, in these words.

Then the Elders of his City shall call him, and speak to him, etc.] He being
summoned to appear before them, together with the Woman (who they say was to be
fasting) and two Witnesses at the least, she opened the whole matter. And then
the question being asked, Whether it were three Months since her Husband's
death? (which were to be allowed, to see whether she proved with Child, or no)
and whether this Man was next of kin? And a satisfactory answer being returned,
the Judges laid the Law before them, and admonished them seriously, to
consider, on each side, their Age, or any Disparity or Incommodity that might
be in their Marriage, and accordingly to resolve. And then they ask't the Man,
in express words, Whether he would marry her, and raise up Seed to his Brother.
If he stood to his first Resolution, as it here follows, and said, I like not
to take her; then the Woman read the words foregoing, v. 7. My husband's
brother refuses to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, etc. and then
proceeded to do, as follows, v. 9. See Seldom in the Book forenamed, Cap. XIV.

Ver. 9. Then shall his brother's wife come unto him, in the From his right
foot, as the Hebrew Doctors say; which was done, I suppose, as a Mark of
Infamy, for his want of Natural Affection; which made him unworthy to be
reckoned among Freemen, but rather deserve to be thrust down into the
Condition of Slaves, who were wont to go barefoot.

And spit in his face.] In contempt of him, who had despised her. The Hebrew
Doctors indeed expound this, only of her spitting upon the Earth, directly
before his face; so that the Spittle might be seen by the Judges. And they give
this a reason, why the King was not subject to this Law of marrying his
Brother's Wife (and they might add the High Priest, XXI Lev. 13, 14.) because
it would have been below his dignity to have had his Shoe pulled off, (if he
had not liked the Woman) or to have had her spit before him, as Bartenora's
words are. Which would have been a better reason, if they had said, It had been
very unbecoming for her to have spit in the King's Face. See Seldom Lib. I.
Vxor. Hebr. Cap. X. and Hackspan Lib. I. Miscellan. Cap. VII. N. VIII. where he
observes the King was bound to all the DCXIII Precepts, but only this of
marrying his Brother's Wife.

And shall answer.] To his peremptory refusal of her.

And say, so shall it be done unto that man, that will not build up his
brother's house.] She was immediately to read these words of the Law. And then
the Judges gave her a Writing signifying his renunciation of her, in the manner
now related, that so it might be free for any other Man to marry her. See the
form of it in Seldom, Lib. I. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XIV. where he has observed
certain Niceties, about the kind of the Shoe that was to be pulled off; but
gives no account why this Ceremony was used.

And his name shall be called in Israel, the house of him that has his shoe
loosed.] As soon as she had loosed his Shoe, both the Judges, and all the
Bystanders round about, cried aloud three times, The Shoe is pulled off, the
Shoe is pulled off, the Shoe is pulled off: and thereupon his Family had this
Name, as a disgrace for not doing the Duty of a Brother. Some will have this
pulling off the Shoe to have been only a mark, that he parted with his right to
her; but these words show that it was in the nature of a Brand upon him and his
Posterity. And so Josephus says, Lib. IV. Archaeolog. Cap. VIII. that he went
out of the Court with a Mark of Ignominy. Which does not relate merely to her
spitting in his face; for Maimonides says expressly (in his More Nevochim P.
III. Cap. XLIX.) that this Action ( viz. of pulling off the Shoe, as well as
the other) was a foul and ignominious thing in those days; intended to move Men
to perform the Duty of a Husband's Brother, that they might avoid such
Reproach. J. Wagenseil has given us the exact form of the Shoe, which was used
on such occasions, in his Annotations upon Sota, p. 664. and see 1212. where he
commends Leo Modena his account of this whole Business. Which differs not at
all from that which I have given; only I observe that he says, when the Woman
takes off the Shoe fom the Man's foot, she lifts it up on high, and throws
it against the ground; which I take to be a Note of Indignation and Contempt.
And he says also, it was anciently accounted a more laudable thing to take
her, than to release her; and imputes it to the Corruption of Men's Manners,
and the Hardness of their Hearts, that now they look only after worldly ends,
either of Riches, or Beauty: which makes very few in these days (especially
among the Dutch and Italian Jews) to marry their Brother's Widow. See his
History of the Rites and Customs of the Jews, Part IV. Chap. VII.

Ver. 11. When men strive together, one with another.]

And the wife of the one draws near for to deliver her husband out of the
hand of him that smites him.] Who had wounded him, and was likely, I suppose,
to be too hard for him.

And puts forth her hand, and takes him by the secrets.] As a sure means to
make him let go his hold of her Husband, that he might preserve himself.

Ver. 12. Then thou shall cut off her hand.] This in those Parts, whereby
Mankind is propagated.

Thine eye shall not pity her.] The word her, not being in the Hebrew Text,
several of the Jews (and Grotius seems to approve their Opinion) interpret this
Law quite otherwise: As if the Woman might both take hold of his Secrets for
the delivery of her Husband, and also cut off the other Man's hand; and they
should not pity him who suffered thus, nor punish the Woman, who might do any
thing of this nature, to preserve one so dear to her as her Husband: But this
is a very forced Interpretation. Maimonides is a little more reasonable, in his
Exposition of these words, which he will have to signify, that they should lay
a Fine or a Mulct upon her, for her Immodesty: which is suitable to their
interpretation of that Law XXI Exodus 24. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. See
L'Empereur on Bava kama, p. 198. But it is an intolerable presumption in
Maimonides to say, That if any one interpret this of a proper Abscission of the
Woman's hand, though he pretend to be a Prophet, and say, the LORD has said
unto me these words, Thou shall cut off her hand, are to be understood as the
words sound ( i. e. literally as we speak) and do a Miracle to confirm it, he
is to be looked upon as a lying Prophet, and may be put to death, because it is
contrary to the constant Tradition of their Elders. So he writes in Seder
Zeraim, translated by our famous Mr. Pocock, p. 15. and p. 38. Upon which
Principle they killed our Blessed Savior.

Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights.] In the Hebrew the words are, a
stone and a stone: for their weights then were made of Stone, as are ours now
commonly of Lead or Brass.

A great and a small.] To buy in Commodities with the great, and sell them out
again by the small: which was then, and is now an usual way of cheating.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not have in thine house diverse measures, an Ephah and an
Ephah: for this was the most known Measure among them, by which all the rest of
their Measures were made. See XVI Exodus 36. From hence it was that Lucius
Ampelius thought Moch^s, that is Moses (who by ancient Writers is called
Moschos) was the Inventor of Weights and Measures; because he took such pious
care there should be no deceit in them; as the most Learned Huetius observes in
his Demonstr. Evangel. Prop. IV. Cap. VIII. N. 16.

Ver. 15. But thou shall have a perfect and just weight, Neither too scanty,
nor too large. See XIX Levit. 35, 36. where all these three Verses are
sufficiently explained.

That thy days may be long in the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee.]
Justice, as well as Charity, was necessary to prolong their happiness in the
Land of Promise, XVI. 20.

Ver. 16. For all that do such things, and all that do All that any way wrong
their Neighbors.

Are an abomination to the LORD thy God.] This is an Expression commonly used,
to declare God's hatred of all idolatrous practices. See XVIII. 9, 12.

Ver. 17. Remember what Amalek did unto thee by The Jews have framed three
Precepts out of this and the two following Verses. One is, that they should
remember what Amalek did unto them. Which Maimonides, according to their Oral
Tradition, refers to the Mouth, that they should always be talking of what
Amalek did to them. The second, Not to forget it; which he refers to their
Heart: that they should never let slip out of their mind the hatred Amalek had
to them. And the third, that they should blot out their remembrance from under
Heaven; i. e. utterly destroy them, and leave none of them remaining. But none
of the Jews has explained this better than Abarbinel; who, inquiring why such
Severity was expressed against the Amalekites, when the Edomites, who were of
the same Race were dealt withal very favorably, (as we read before XXIII. 8.)
observes four Reasons given here by Moses himself, why they should remember,
when they were settled in the Land of Canaan, and able to effect it, to
exterminate this Nation: For that is the single Precept he gives them in
charge; only he bids them not forget what Amalek had done to deserve that heavy
Sentence long ago passed upon them, and remaining on Record (XVII Exodus 14, 15,
16.) confirmed with a Solemn Oath; though they were not able to execute it till
they were settled in the Land of Promise. The first of these Reasons is,
Because, whereas Men undertake War against others, either to defend their own
Country, or to subdue their Enemies Country, the Amalekites came forth against
the Israelites without any such Cause: for the Israelites did not pass by their
Country, and consequently gave them no apprehension of an Invasion; nor had the
Israelites then possession of any Land of their own, which might tempt the
Amalekites to covet it, and drive them out of it. But they undertook this War,
with a petulant Malice, only to bring them into slavery again. Which is the
thing here intimated in this Verse, Remember what Amalek did to thee, etc. Unto
which he should have added, that their barbarity was much aggravated, by their
assaulting them, when they were newly delivered from grievous Oppressions, and
were unaccustomed to War, and without any provocation.

Ver. 18. How he met thee by the way.] This the Abarbinel takes to be the
second Cause of God's high displeasure against Amalek; that, whereas it is the
Custom of all Countries, before they begin a War, to denounce it by Heralds,
showing the grounds of it; they rose up against the Israelites unexpectedly,
which was a piece of the basest Treachery. Which he thinks is intimated in
these words, He met thee by the way: that is, on a sudden, by surprise, without
any Notice by a Declaration of War. He might have added, that they did this
when the Israelites were in a Journey, and had traveled a great way, and in a
Wilderness, where they stood in need of Refreshment; but were very unfit for
fighting. Then, says one of their Rabbis in Pirke Elieser, Cap. XLIV. They
came like a Bear in their way, to devour the Mother with the Children.

And smote the hindermost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when
thou wast faint and weary.] This he makes the third Cause; that they did not
offer them a pitched Battle, but only fell upon their Rear (as we speak) and
there cut off such as lagg'd behind through feebleness and weariness; being
unable to march so fast as the rest of their Brethren. This is a very sober
sense, suitable to the use of the word in X Josh. 19. But what some of the Jews
say, that the Amalekites cut off the Privy Members of certain of the Tribe of
Dan in derision of Circumcision, is disowned by others of them, as having no
foundation. See Schickard in his Jus Regium, p. 112, 113. Where Carpzovius
observes, this was only a fancy of their Midraschim, or Preachers, wherewith
they entertained the People in their Sermons, on occasion of the ambiguity of
the word we translate cut off the hindermost. Which R. Zacharias much better
interprets in Pirke Elieser, Cap. XLIV. where he makes it to signify all that
were behind the Cloud (which protected those who were under it) as those were
who went out of the Camp by reason of some Uncleanness, to wash themselves. But
this is no more than an ingenious Conceit; for the Laws about Cleansing were
not then delivered,

And feared not God.] This he makes the fourth Cause; that though they feared
Israel, whom they durst not look in the Face, but cut them off behind; yet they
feared not God who had done such wonderful things for them in Egypt, and
brought them thence with a mighty hand, and overthrown Pharaoh in the Red Sea.
Which might have made them understand, that he sets up Kings, and pulls down
Kings, as Daniel speaks, 2.21. But instead of considering this, they would have
profaned the Glory of the LORD (as he speaks) by inslaving those whom he had
but newly delivered, and continued under the protection of a glorious Cloud.
Unto all which may be added, that they were originally derived from the same
Stock with the Israelites, viz. from Isaac.

Therefore it shall be, when the LORD thy God has given thee rest from all
thine Enemies round aabout, in the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee.]
God did not require them to put this Command in Execution, immediately after
they were possessed of the Land of Canaan: but after they were well settled
there. So that there were some Ages passed before they went about it, and then
God himself put them in mind of it; or rather strictly enjoined it to be
performed by Saul their first King: and we do not find them blamed for not
doing it in the time of the Judges, 1 Samuel XV. 1, 2, 3.

Thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.] So God
commands Saul in the place now mentioned, Utterly destroy all they have, and
spare them not; but slay both men and women, etc. For by the same Justice that
one Person is cut off, a whole Family, or a whole Nation may be utterly
destroyed: that other Families or Nations, seeing or hearing God's Judgments
upon them, may be moved to flee from that wickedness, for which they are
punished. They are the words of Maimonides P. III. More Nevochim, Cap. XLI.

If we could believe all that the Talmudists say, we might think there were
some among the Jews who endeavored to mollify the Severity of this Precept.
For they tell a story in Bava-bathra of Joab his Master, who taught him to read
it thus, Blot out Zachar the Male of Amalek, not Zecher the Remembrance. But at
the same time they tell us Joab thought to have killed him, for leading him
into an Error.

Thou shall not forget it.] This is not a distinct Precept, but only a
Repetition of the foregoing; to imprint it more on their minds and hearts. And
accordingly the Jews pretend to have had their hearts so set upon it, that when
the Officers were about to proclaim freedom from War to those Persons mentioned
XX. 5, 6, etc. they always excepted the War against the Seven Nations and
Amalek, in which every Body was bound to assist.

Chapter XXVI.
I shall end this matter with an Observation of Abarbinel, that in this
Paragraph about Amalek, the Injunction which God gave to Moses, XVII Exodus 14.
was fulfilled by him, Write this for a memorial in a book. No other Book, says
he, is hereby meant, but the Book of the Law; which when Moses wrote, he was
bound to mention this Precept about Amalek; which he does in this place. And if
we suppose that he immediately wrote a distinct History of this matter, yet he
inserted it afterward into the Pentateuch; both here, and in the Book of
EXODUS.

CHAP. XXVI.
AND it shall be when thou art come into the Land which the LORD thy God gives
thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwell therein.] When they
had a settled possession, of the several Inheritances, which fell to their
share in the Land of Canaan.

That thou shall take of the first of all the fruit of the earth.] This is not
meant merely of the first First Fruits they should have after they were settled
in Canaan; but of the First Fruits they should have every year. Which being the
most desirable (as Conradus Pellicanus here observes) of all other, and coveted
by every one, majori aviditate, with a greater Appetite than ordinary; Nature
it self directed Men to offer them to God, the giver of all good things. And
these were distinct from that mentioned XXIII Levit. 10. being of all the
Fruits of the Earth. The principal of which being Seven, the Jews commonly say,
these only were to be carried to God, viz. Wheat, Barley, Grapes, Figs,
Pomegranates, Olives and Dates. Some of the Doctors say, the First Fruits of
all kind of things whatsoever, were due: and a question being raised, Whether a
Stranger was bound to pay them, or not? some of them say no; because they could
not use the Protestation mentioned v. 3. But the more common Opinion is, that
they might both bring First Fruits, and use the Protestation; because Abraham
was also the Father of Strangers, XVII Genesis 5. and it may be, says R. Bechai,
that is pointed at v. 11. of this Chapter; where it is said, Thou and the
Levite, and the Stranger that is among you.

Which thou shall bring of thy Land, which the LORD thy God gives thee.] In
order to which, they say, every owner of Land, when he went into his ground,
and found any Figs, or Bunch of Grapes, or a Pomegranate more forward than the
rest, he was to tie a Rush about it, and write upon it, These are First Fruits.
So Wagenseil, and many others, have observed out of the Title Biccurim, Cap.
III.

And shall put it in a basket.] The quantity of each, they say, was to be at
least a sixtieth part. And they might be all put into the same Basket; provided
they were not mingled, but preserved distinct: Barley being laid at the bottom,
and then Wheat, and next Olives, and above them Dates, and then Pomegranates;
and last of all Figs, and Grapes being hung on the outside, and Leaves of
Palm, or other Trees, put between every kind of First Fruits.

R. Bechai says that the Rich brought these Fruits in Baskets of Gold and
Silver; that is, covered with Gold or Silver, (as Maimonides speaks) and we
read of the like golden Baskets carried by Virgins, in the Feast of Bacchus at
Athens. See Ezekiel. Spanhemius on Callimachus his Hymn to Ceres, p. 733. Now if
the Basket here mentioned was made of these, or any other Metal, the Jews say,
the Priest was to restore it to the owner, when he had emptied it. But if it
was a wicker Basket, or such like, the Priest had it together with the
First Fruits. See Wagenseil upon Mischna Sota, Cap. VII. Sect. III.

And shall go unto the place which the LORD thy God shall choose, to place his
Name there.] The Man himself was to go, as the Jews say, with the Basket upon
his shoulder: and a great Company were wont to go together; who met at the
chief City of their Province. The time of going was at the Feast of Pentecost
(XXIII Exodus 16.) not before, but at any time after till the Feast of
Dedication, which was in our November: after which they were not accepted. Of
the manner of going up, with a Bullock before them, whose Horns were gilt, and
Head crowned with an Olive Garland, with Music, and singing in the way the
first Verse of the CXXII Psalm, etc. See Wagenseil in the place
abovementioned: and Seldom Lib. III. de Synedriis, Cap. XIII. N. III. with Dr.
Light-foot in his Temple-Service.

And here I cannot but think fit to note, that the Heathen, in all probability,
from hence derived the Custom of carrying their First Fruits, as a Tithe, every
year, unto the Island Delos, where Apollo was supposed to have his special
Residence. And this not only from the Islands thereabouts, and the neighboring
Countries, but from all parts of the World: as the Jews we find every where
sent from the Countries where they dwelt, a Sum of Money every year instead of
First Fruits and Tithes, unto Jerusalem; which Privilege the Romans allowed
them, after they had conquered them, as Josephus tells us, Lib. VII. de Bello
Jud. Cap. XIII. That Heathen Custom now mentioned, is expressed by Callimachus
in his Hymn upon Delos, in those remarkable words, v. 278, 279, etc.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
The sense of which is this; That First Fruits were sent, for Tithes, every
year, from all Countries, not only from the East, and West, and South, but from
the North also. And they were sent with such Joy, as the Jews expressed on this
occasion: for all Cities, he says, did (...). And so we read in several
Authors, that there were (...), as they called them, Solemn Embassies sent from
several People, by chosen Persons, unto Delos, to celebrate there the Feast of
Apollo, with Music and Dancing, etc. Particularly the Athenians,
Peloponesians, and Messenians, etc. of whom see Ezekiel. Spanhemius in his
Observations on Callimachus, p. 487. And, which is most strange, the
Hyperboreans, a very northerly People, sent frugum primitias to this Island, as
Pliny, and I know not how many other Authors testify. Only what he calls the
First Fruits of their Corn, and such like things, they call the First Fruits of
their holy things: as the same excellent Person observes there, p. 490, 492,
etc. Which was done to testify their honor to this god, and for the
maintenance of his Priests and other Ministers, who attended upon him there.
For Delos, of it self, was but a barren Isle, the Soil being dry and stony, and
called therefore by Callimachus, v. 208. (...).

There are other footsteps of this among the Heathen; the Mystica vannus Jacchi
mentioned by Virgil in his Georgicks, being nothing else (according to Servius)
but vas vimineum, a wicker Basket, in which their First Fruits were carried.
See the same Spanheim, p. 495.

And thou shall go unto the Priest that shall be in those days.] Who was then
in attendance at the Sanctuary, and particularly appointed to wait for their
coming. When they entered the Gates of the City, they sung the second Verse of
Psalm CXXII. Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem: And then they went
to the Mountain of the Temple, and sung the whole Hundred and fiftieth Psalm:
And as soon as they entered the Court of Israel, the Levites began to sing, XXX
Psalm. 1. I will extol thee, O LORD my God, etc.

And say unto him.] The following Confession in this Verse, was made by them
with the Baskets on their shoulders, to stir them up to Humility, as Maimonides
interprets it. His words are these: While they were compelled to carry their
Baskets on their shoulders, and in that manner to proclaim the Divine Benefits,
it signified that it was a considerable part of God's Worship and Service, for
a Man to be mindful of his Afflictions and Tribulations; when God had given him
ease and rest from them. This the Law takes care of, in several places; as when
it says, Thou shall remember that thou wast a servant, etc. With this
intention; that he who lived in Riches and Pleasure, might be secured from the
Vices which spring from thence; such as Pride, Haughtiness, Apostasy, and the
like. According to what is said in this Book, VIII. 12. Lest thou eat, and art
full, and. and XXXII. 15. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, etc. To prevent which,
God commanded the First Fruits to be thus offered every year, to his Divine
Majesty, More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXXIX.

I profess this day unto the LORD thy God, that I am come into the Country,
which the LORD swear unto our fathers for to give us.] This is a thankful
acknowledgment of God's faithfulness to his promise, whereby they were put in
mind to be faithful unto him; of whom they held this good Land, by his gracious
and free Gift; and held it by this Tenure of paying to him this yearly Rent.

Ver. 4. And the Priest shall take the basket out of thy After the foregoing
words were said, the Basket was taken down from their shoulders; and every one
holding his Basket by the handle, or the rim of it, the Priest put his hands
under it, and waved it about, according to the Prescription in the Law, while
the Men recited the following words, v. 5, 6, etc. This waving was a manifest
token that it was offered to the LORD of the World, as an acknowledgment that
he was in a peculiar manner their LORD and Sovereign, of whom they held this
Land.

Ver. 5. And thou shall speak and say before the LORD Audibly pronounce in the
presence of God.

A Syrian ready to perish was my father.] Their Father Jacob was not a Syrian
by birth, for he was born in the Land of Canaan. But one and the same Person
may be said to be of diverse Countries, (as Bochartus has observed) with regard
either to the Place of his Nativity, or of his Education, or of his Life and
Conversation; which occasioned three Countries to be ascribed to our blessed
Savior, viz. Bethlehem, Nazareth, and Capernaum. See his Phaleg. Lib. II. Cap.
V, Thus Jacob, who was born and bred in Canaan, is notwithstanding called a
Syrian, because he lived Twenty years with his Uncle Laban who was a Syrian,
XXV Genesis 20. and consequently Jacob's Mother was so, as were both his Wives,
and all his Children, who were born there, except Benjamin. But he is more
particularly here called a Syrian, to put them in mind of his Poverty, when he
went first into that Country, and there lived as a Servant, under an hard
Master; which is expressed in these words, ready to perish: that is, very poor,
and reduced to great straits: being forced to flee from the fury of his Brother
Esau, and to travel on foot to Padan-Aram (which was comprehended anciently
under the name of Syria, XXXII Genesis 10.) where he was so cruelly used by his
Uncle Laban (XXXI. 7, 39, 40, 41.) that Onkelos takes these words, which we
translate ready to perish, in an active sense, for him that destroys another.
For by the Syrian here he understands Laban (who is so called as I noted
before, XXVIII Genesis 5.) as if the meaning were, the Syrian (that is, Laban)
sought to destroy my father. For as he used him barbarously when he was with
him, so he followed after him, when he went away, with a mind to ruin him. And
thus Manasseh ben Israel understands it, and many others mentioned by
Fesselius: which is the sense also of the Vulgar Latin, Syrus persequebatur
patrem meum.

And he went down into Egypt.] Though he brought him from Laban with great
Substance; yet as he was still but a Sojourner in the Land of Canaan, so he was
forced by Famine to go down into Egypt for Sustenance.

And sojourned there with a few.] They were but seventy Persons, and lived
there as Strangers. All which they now were bound to commemorate, for their
Humiliation before God (which I observed before out of Maimonides:) which might
move them the more to exalt and magnify the Mercy of God to them, who had made
them (as it follows) a mighty Nation. For this Confession consists of these two
parts; their own Unworthiness, and God's great Goodness.

And became there a Nation, great, mighty, and populous.] See I Exodus 7.

Ver. 6. And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted The goodness of God
unto them, in making them so numerous, was the occasion of sorer Affliction,
than either they or their Fathers had endured. See I Exodus v. 9, 10, etc. The
remembrance of this was exceeding useful, to stir up their gratitude to God;
not only for their deliverance from the Egyptian slavery, but bringing them
into a Country of their own, most plentifully stored with all manner of good
things.

Ver. 7. And when we cried unto the LORD God of etc.] Having acknowledged their
low, and poor, and distressed Condition; now they proceed to an acknowledgment
of God's wonderful goodness; which appeared the more in relieving them, when
they were utterly helpless. See II Exodus 23, 24, 25. III. 7, 8.

Ver. 8. And the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt, etc.] See IV. 34. and VII.
19. This is so vehemently inculcated upon them (as Maimonides speaks in the
place forenamed) that they should remember the day they came out of Egypt all
the days of their life, XVI. 3. X Exodus 2. Which it became them especially to
remember at this time, that they might demonstrate the truth of Prophecy, both
concerning Punishments and Rewards.

And has brought us into this place, and given us this Land, even a Land
flowing with milk and honey.] As they remember the terrible Plagues upon Egypt
in the foregoing Verse, so they commemorate the singular Blessings bestowed
upon them, in this.

And now, behold, I have brought the First Fruits of the Land, which thou, O
LORD, have given me.] Thus they concluded this Solemn Rite, as they began it (
v. 3.) with an acknowledgment that they held this Land of God, as the Supreme
LORD; and that by his free gift.

And thou shall set it before the LORD thy God.] Having said these words, they
left the Basket by the Altar, as the Jews say, where it had been placed ( v.
4.) and then the Priest set it before the Sanctuary; where God dwelt by his
special Presence there.

And worship before the LORD thy God.] They made a profound Reverence toward
the most Holy Place, by bowing their Bodies as low as they could, and so went
out of the Temple. So the Hebrew word imports: and this outward Act of Worship,
no doubt, was accompanied, in all good Men, with humble Thanks to God for his
Benefits, and Prayer for the continuance of them.

And thou shall rejoice in every thing which the LORD thy God has given unto
thee, and unto thy house; thou, and the Levite, and the Stranger that is among
you.] They were to make a Feast at the time of offering these First Fruits; and
there to entertain the Levites, and the Strangers, as well as their own Family.
These Feasts were made out of the Provision mentioned XII. 6, 7. XVI. 10, 11,
12. Besides which, the Bullock which went before them, when they carried up the
First Fruits from their several Cities, was offered for a Peace Offering, when
they came to the Sanctuary; as Mr. Seldom observes in the place
abovementioned, Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. p. 203.

Ver. 12. When thou have made an end of tithing all For there was a second
Tithe to be paid after the first to the Levites, as was observed above, XII. 6.
and is plainly spoken of XIV. 22, 23, etc. Which the Jews call the consummation
or finishing of tithing, as I observed there, v. 29. And so these words may be
translated, When thou have finished all the tithes of thine increase.

The third year, which is the year of tithing.] Every third year, the second
Tithe beforementioned, was to be employed to a peculiar use, (See XIX. 28,
29.) as it follows here in the next words. So the Jews expound it, whose sense
our Mr. Mede expresses in a few words. For two years together they paid the
Levites Tithe, and the Festival Tithe; but in the third year, they paid the
Levites Tithe, and the Poor-man's Tithe: That is, what was wont in other years
to be spent in Feasting, was wholly spent every third year upon the Poor. B. I.
Discourse XXXII. p. 228. But there are some that think, they were bound every
third year to pay this poor Man's Tithe, besides that to the Levites and the
Festival Tithe: about which I shall not here dispute.

And have given it to the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow,
that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled.] According to the
Commandment XIV. 29. See there.

Then thou shall say.] As they were every year to make the foregoing
Profession, when they brought their First Fruits; so they were to make another
Profession which here follows, every third year; when the course of all manner
of tithing (as Mr. Mede there expresses it) was come about.

Before the LORD.] This sounds as if they were to make this Profession before
the most Holy Place at the Sanctuary. Which seems to confute the common
Exposition of the Jewish Doctors, that this Tithe of the third year, was not to
be spent there, but at home, within their own Gates. But it may be supposed,
that every Man was privately to make this Solemn Profession, as in the Presence
of God, who knew the truth of what he said. Or rather, that the next time he
went up to worship at God's House, he was bound to make this declaration before
the Divine Majesty. Which is the most likely Interpretation, because these
words, before the LORD, are always so used in these Books. And unless they had
been obliged to this, their covetous and cruel disposition might have inclined
them to defraud the Poor; which by this means was prevented. For though Men
might have satisfied themselves in omitting this Profession, if it had been
left merely to their own private Consciences; yet, when they were bound to come
and make it publicly at God's own House, as they could not avoid it, so few
would be found so impudently profane, as solemnly to tell a lie to God himself.

I have brought away the hallowed things.] Things separated by the Divine
Commandment from their own private use, for the use of the Poor.

Out of my house.] From the rest of the Fruits of the Earth which they had
gathered.

And also I have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the
fatherless, and to the widow.] That is, unto the Refreshment of the Poor. So
the Jerusalem Targum paraphrases v. 2. which is worth the mentioning; In the
third year, which is the year of tithing for the Poor, ye shall give the first
Tithes to the Levites, and then the Tithes of the Poor, to the Strangers,
Fatherless and Widows, that they may eat in their Cities, and be filled.

According to all thy Commandments which thou have commanded me.] According to
the direction beforementioned, XIV. 29.

I have not transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I forgotten them.]
Neither done contrary to God's Precepts, nor forgotten to perform them; either
by keeping these Tithes to themselves, or by bestowing them otherwise than God
appointed.

Ver. 14. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning.] general Profession
mentioned in the Verse foregoing, that they had brought all hallowed things out
of their Houses, and employed them as God directed; they were to make three
particular Professions, which are mentioned in this Verse: and it is probable
they have respect to some idolatrous Customs, which were in those days. The
first of them is, that they had not eaten thereof in mourning, or in
lamentation. For so the Hebrew word Oni signifies, very bitter grief, and sore
mourning. Such the Egyptians made in Harvest time, when they offered the
First Fruits of the Earth, and kept the Feast of Isis with doleful
Lamentations. So Diodorus Siculus, and other Authors, tell us; particularly
Julius Firmicus: who severely reproves their folly, or madness rather, saying,
Cur plangitis fruges terrae, etc. Why do you bewail the Fruits of the Earth?
why weep you at the growth of your Seed, etc. you should rather give thanks for
these things to the most high God, whose Bounty is not to be lamented; but
bewail rather your own Error, etc. If there was such a Custom in the World,
when Moses lived, it may very well be thought that he taught the Israelites to
disclaim such senseless and impious practices. And as the Egyptians by this
mourning acknowledged Isis, that is the Earth, to be the giver of all these
good things; so he required God's People to bring in their Harvest with the
greatest Joy and Thanks unto the most High. For there was no Joy so great, as
that of Harvest and Vintage; directly opposite to the Heathen, who kept the
Feast of Bacchus also with Lamentations. See our Learned Dr. Spencer, Lib. II.
de Ritual. Hebr. Leg. Cap. XXIV. Sect. I.

Nor taken ought thereof for any unclean use.] As some of the old Idolaters
were wont to do; who separated some part of the First Fruits for Magical
purposes; and some times for carnal and filthy. So Julius Firmicus informs us,
who immediately after the mention of their Lamentations, when they gathered the
Fruits of the Earth, asks this question, Quid addis incestum and adulterium?
Which shows that there were unclean Rites which accompanied their Offerings;
and that they made them minister unto Venus. See the same Learned Author in the
same place, Sect. III.

Nor given ought thereof for the dead.] If this be the right Translation of the
last words, for the dead, St. Austin has given us a likely reason of this
Clause, which was to profess they had not imitated the Gentiles, who were wont
to set Meat and Drink upon the Graves of the Dead; as he tells us, Sermon. XV. de
Sanctis. But it does not appear that they set any part of their Tithe, or
First Fruits upon them, nor that they did it only in Harvest time; but rather
common Bread and Wine, which at all times they set upon their Graves, when they
were interred: and therefore it may be translated to the dead, (as the same
excellent Person observes, Sect. III.) And so it is a profession, they had not
offered any of the Fruits of the Earth to Heroes (after the manner of the
Gentiles) particularly to Osiris. For that they honored them with their
First Fruits, appears by a passage in Porphyry, Lib. IV. (...), Sect. XXII.
where he mentions three Laws made by Triptolemus, an ancient Lawgiver among the
Athenians: One of which is this; (...), to worship the gods with the Fruits of
the Earth. Which Draco thus expounds, as he shows in the Conclusion of that
Book; (...), etc. To honor the Gods and the Heroes of their Country publicly,
according to the Laws of the Nation; and privately, as much as they were able,
with speaking well of them, and with the First Fruits, and the Annual
Offerings. See Meursius in his Themis Attica, Lib. I. Cap. I. But however we
take this, the giving any part of the Tithe, either for the dead, or to the
dead, shows there was such a Superstitious Custom: unto which this Clause
having a manifest respect, we have reason to think the two former have so
likewise.

But I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD my God, and done according to all
that thou have commanded me.] Performed all that God required, and done nothing
contrary to it. All these words from v. 13. to this place, were to be spoken
with a low and humble voice, because they are a sort of Commendation of
themselves, and of their own Integrity; which is not to be proclaimed aloud.
But when they made the foregoing Profession, at the presenting of their
First Fruits, ( v. 5, 6, etc.) they being an acknowledgment of their own
meanness and poor beginnings, and of God's infinite goodness in their
advancement; they were to lift up their voice, and say aloud, My Father was a
Syrian ready to perish, etc. Thus the Doctors resolve in the Gemara of Mischna
Sota, Cap. VII. in the beginning of it.

Look down.] Have a gracious regard.

From thy holy habitation from heaven.] This is an humble acknowledgment of the
Infinite Majesty of God; who, though he was graciously pleased to dwell among
them by a glorious Symbol of his Presence in the Sanctuary, yet dwelt in far
more transcendent Glory in the Heavens; the highest of which could not contain
him, as holy Men acknowledged, 1 Kings VIII. 27. 2 Chronicles. II. 6.

And bless thy People Israel, and the Land which thou have given us.] Having
performed their Duty, they had the greater confidence to beg the continuance of
God's Mercies to them, and to their Country; which it had been presumption to
expect, if they had not acknowledged him to be the Donor of all the good things
they enjoyed, in the manner before appointed. For this was the end of all
Oblations, both of this Tithe, and of the First Fruits, and any other, to
acknowledge God to be the LORD, of whom all things come (as David speaks) and
of whose own we give unto him. See 1 Chronicles. XXIX. v. 11, 12, 13, etc.

As thou swarest unto our fathers.] He teaches them to conclude, as they began
( v. 3.) with a thankful acknowledgment of God's faithfulness to his Promise.

A Land that flows with milk and honey.] See XI. 9. The Jerusalem Targum
paraphraseth it thus, A Land producing fruits as pure as milk, and as sweet and
delicious as honey.

Ver. 16. This day.] This refers to the time, when Moses spoke all these words
unto them.

The LORD thy God has commanded thee.] By me.

To do these statutes and judgments.] These two words comprehend the Precepts
in the foregoing Chapters: some of which concern Matters of Religion, and
others of Civil Government.

Thou shall therefore keep and do them, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul.] Set your selves sincerely and heartily to the performance of them.

Ver. 17. Thou have avouched.] So the Hebrew Job Ludolphus observes, who
renders it, asseverare, serio affirmare: being the same with the French word
avouer; and may be here translated, thou have solemnly professed, or rather
protested.

The LORD this day.] The word this is not in the Hebrew (as it is in the
foregoing Verse) but he says simply Hajom (not hajom hazeh) the day, or that
day: which signifies the time when Moses delivered these Laws from God.

To be thy God.] Then they owned him to be their King and Governor. For so the
Name of ELOHIM properly signifies Dignity, Empire and Authority, as Grotius
observes upon XX Exodus and Fortunatus Scacchus before him expounds these very
words. Which, says he, have respect to God as their Emperor, who had the
Supreme Government of the Commonwealth of Israel, with a Right and Authority of
constituting Laws and giving Mandates, for the establishing of that Government.
Sacror. Elaeochrism. P. II. Cap. LII. p. 509. See XXIV Exodus 3, 4, etc. and
XXXIV. 27.

And to walk in his ways.] By his ways that Author understands the Moral
Precepts written on Tables of Stone.

To keep his statutes.] The Ritual Precepts.

And his Commandments.] Concerning the Duties of his Worship and Service.

And his judgments.] The Political Precepts belonging to their good Government.

And to hearken unto his voice.] In all things which he should declare from his
Oracle, when they consulted it.

And the LORD has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, etc.] At
the same time (for the word this is not in the Hebrew) the LORD assured the
Israelites that they should be his People, in a special manner; provided they
made good their promise of keeping his Commandment. For the Covenant was
mutual. See XXIV Exodus 3, 7. XIX. 5, 6. It is observable that the Jerusalem
Targum paraphrases these two Verses in this manner; Ye have taken the Word of
the LORD to reign over you to day, that he may be your God, etc. And the Word
of the LORD reigns over you, a People dedicated to his Name, as his peculiar,
etc. Where MEMRA, the WORD, cannot be understood other ways, than of the second
Person in the Deity.

Ver. 19. And to make thee high above all Nations, that he has made.] It is a
pious note of Conr. Pellicanus, That there is no greater Glory to the Faithful,
than that they are peculiarly, grateful, devoted, dedicated,

In praise, and in name, and in honor.] These words express his singular
Kindness to them, in that, though all Nations were his (being made by him, and
he the LORD and Governor of them all) yet he promised to have such a special
Favor to them, that all Nations round them should take notice of it, and speak
with admiration of their Happiness, and the Honor he had done them. All this
is included in those words beforementioned, XIX Exodus 5, 6. where the last
words of this Verse are explained, That thou may be an holy people unto the
LORD thy God, as he has spoken.

All this Moses called to their mind, that it might prepare and dispose them to
renew the same Covenant with God, before he left them. Which he presses upon
them in the Nine and twentieth Chapter of this Book; after he had given them
some other Admonitions, and laid before them the Blessings and Curses that
would come upon them, according to their Fidelity or Falsness in that Holy
Covenant. Which is the Subject of the two following Chapters.

Chapter XXVII.
CHAP. XXVII.
AND Moses with the Elders of Israel commanded the people, saying.] I observed
in the Preface to this Book, and upon Chapter IV. 41. and other places, that
Moses did not speak all that is contained in this Book at once, but at several
times; and that he commonly took the Elders to his assistance, as is here
expressly affirmed; though some things he spoke himself alone to all the People,
as I observed upon V. 1.

Keep all the Commandments which I command you.] This is a new Exhortation to
Obedience; which he could not press too often, considering the great proneness
of this People to break God's Laws.

This day.] At this time, and formerly: for it does not precisely signify one
day; and the word this is not in the original.

And it shall come to pass on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan.] Here it
is evident the word day, does not signify precisely the very same day they
passed over; but not long after, as soon as they were come to Mount Ebal, v. 4.
after the taking of Jericho and Ai, as appears from VIII Joshua 30. For they
were to pass over Jordan, unto the Land which the LORD their God gave them, (as
it here follows) before they were obliged to do what is here required.

That thou shall set thee up great stones.] It is not said how many; but some
fancy there were Twelve, according to the number of Pillars which Moses
employed (XXIV Exodus 4.) when he made the Covenant between God and his People.
But unless we could certainly determine how much of the Law was to be written
upon these Stones, we cannot give a good guess at their number. For if only the
Ten Commandments, fewer than Twelve would serve: if the whole Book of
Deuteronomy, so many were not sufficient. As for the Marginal Reference in our
Bibles, unto IV Josh. 1. it can have no respect to this place; for those Twelve
Stones were ordered to be taken our of Jordan, and left there where they lodged
that Night, which was at Gilgal. See there v. 3, 8, 20.

And plaster them with plaster.] That being plain and smooth, they might
write what is here commanded, upon them: which they could not do while they
were rough and uneven.

Ver. 3. And thou shall write upon them all the words Many think he means the
whole Book of Deuteronomy; which because it is long, great stones are ordered
to be provided for this purpose. Others think only the Ten Commandments are
here intended, which were the principal words of the Covenant, as Moses calls
this Law XXIX. 1. But Josephus, L. IV. Archaeol. Cap. ult. is of opinion, that
he means the Cursings which here follow from v. 15. to the end of the Chapter.
Which is no improbable Opinion, they containing several select Precepts, and
the last of them seems to respect the whole Law of Moses, v. 26.

But however we understand this, it is certain that before the use of Paper was
found out, the Ancients, particularly the Phoenicians and Egyptians, were wont
to write their minds upon Stones, as a great many Authors testify mentioned by
Huetius. Who observes that this Custom continued long after the Invention of
Paper; especially if they desired any thing should be vulgarly known and
conveyed down to Posterity. See Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. Cap. II. N. XV.
where he observes that Moses ordered the Book of Deuteronomy to be inscribed
upon Stones. I suppose he means all the Laws contained in this Book (not all
the Exhortations and Historical passages) which agrees very well with this
Injunction, that they should write on the stones, all the words of this Law.

When thou art passed over, that thou may go in unto the Land which the LORD
thy God gives thee, etc.] When they were gone over Jordan, to take possession
of the Land of Canaan; and were come to the place where he directed these
Stones to be set up, and this Inscription made upon them. Which place is
particularly named, in the next Verse. And from these words, Fortunatus
Scacchus thinks he has reason to assert, that none of the things forementioned
are meant by the words of this Law, here commanded to be written: But that upon
the very top of these Stones (or the Altar made of them, as he would have it
understood) were written only the words of this Covenant, whereby the People of
Israel confessed themselves to have received the Land of Canaan from God, and
to hold it on Condition of their Obedience unto him. For so he interprets the
words write upon them; in summa superficie. And to make us know what he means
by the words of this Law, he thinks the following words are added, That thou
may go in unto the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee, etc. That is,
thou shall declare who brought thee hither, and gave thee possession of this
Country, and upon what Condition, viz. that thou should keep the Commands
given to thee by God in Horeb. And therefore Moses does not bid them write on
the Stones the Law of the LORD, nor the Law absolutely, but the words of this
Law. Where the demonstrative Particle hazoth limits the sense to the present
Matter of which he is speaking. Thus he. Myrothec. 2. Sacror. Elaeochrism. Cap.
LVII. where he endeavors to strengthen this Interpretation, by observing, that
after this Command for writing this Law upon the Stones, Moses and the Priests
and Levites spoke unto all Israel, saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel,
this day thou art become the People of the LORD thy God, etc. v. 9, 10.

Ver. 4. Therefore it shall be, when ye be gone over This Phrase set up seems
to imply that they were a kind of Pillars erected for this purpose, that the
Inscription might appear more fairly upon them.

In Mount Ebal.] Here the Samaritan Pentateuch has, in Mount Gerizim; which is
a manifest corruption, to justify their building a Temple there, which they
pretend God commanded in these words,

Ver. 5. And there shall thou build an Altar unto the That they might offer
Sacrifice to God, and renew their Covenant with him.

An Altar of Stones.] Upon which Josephus himself fancies the forenamed
Inscription was to be made: and so the Talmudists also in Mischna Sota, Cap.
VII. But it is plain, the Stones designed for that use, were to be set up
before the Altar was built; the intention of it being (as I shall show
presently) that they might promise to observe the words which were there
written.

Thou shall not lift up any iron tool upon them.] See XX Exodus 25.

Thou shall build the Altar of the LORD thy God of whole stones.] Not hewn, nor
polished; whereby all manner of imagery was avoided. Such Rustic Altars of
rough Stone, piled one upon another, were in use among the Heathen, who seem to
have imitated this Pattern. The Form of one of them Fortunatus Scacchus has
given us out of some ancient Monuments at Brixia, related by Octavius Roscius.
See his forenamed Book, Cap. LIX. p. 585. Such Altars the Israelites were
permitted to build, upon some special occasion; as Gideon and Manoah did, VI
Judge. 24, 26. XIII. 19. and Samuel, 1 Samuel VII. 17. and Saul, 1 Samuel XIV. 35.
and David, 2 Samuel XXIV. 25. And such an one Moses himself built, XXIV Exodus 4.
And as Moses there set up Twelve Pillars according to the number of the Tribes
of Israel, when they entered into Covenant with God at Horeb; so the
forementioned Author thinks, at the Confirmation of it, when they came into
Canaan, they built not Twelve Altars, but heaped up Twelve Stones, which made
one Altar, without any Cost at all bestowed upon it. And thus Elijah took
Twelve Stones, and on a sudden built an Altar with them; when he endeavored to
bring the Israelites back again, into the Covenant of God, 1 Kings XVIII. 31,
32.

And thou shall offer Burnt-offerings thereon.] As they did at Horeb, XXIV
Exodus 5. and as Joshua did when they came into Canaan, and had built the Altar
here commanded, VIII Josh. 31. which Burnt-offerings were an acknowledgment of
God's Sovereign Dominion over them, and that they held this Land of him as
their Supreme LORD, from whom they had received it. They kept the Passover as
soon as they came into Canaan; but we read of no Altar erected, nor
Burnt-Sacrifices offered, till they came to Ebal.

Ver. 7. And thou shall offer Peace Offerings.] So Moses also did at Horeb, as
we read in the forenamed place, XXIV Exodus 5. and so Joshua did, when they came
into Canaan. And they were offered as Thanksgivings to God, for bringing them
into that good Land.

And shall eat there, and rejoice before the LORD thy God.] The Sacrificers had
a part of the Peace Offerings given them, that they might feast with God, in
Token that they were in Covenant with him. See VII Levit. 5. And therefore God
ordered these Sacrifices to be offered, as soon as they came to this place,
where his Law was to be inscribed upon the Stones beforementioned; that the
People of Israel, to whom God promised the possession of the Land of Canaan,
upon the Condition that they observed his Laws, might confirm their Covenant
with him, when they took possession of it: And be given to understand that God
having performed what he promised, expected that they should be mindful of
their Obligation, faithfully to observe his Divine Laws. So that this Altar may
be properly called (as the same Fort. Scacchus terms it) The Altar of
Confederation, or Confirmation of the Covenant, into which they had entered at
Horeb.

Ver. 8. And thou shall write upon the stones all the So that they might be
read easily. How the Talmudists came to fancy they were written in LXX
Languages, I cannot imagine. But such a Conceit there is among them, as Mr.
Seldom observes, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. IX. p. 396. For so many Languages
they think there were in the World; and Bartenora says, God would have every
Body* that came into their Country, learn these Truths, if he pleased; and no
Pagan be able to excuse his Ignorance, by saying, He had no means to know them.
See Joh. Wagenseil upon Sota, Cap. VII. Sect. V. Annot. V.

And Moses, and the Priests, and the Levites, spoke unto all Israel, saying.]
It seems, by this, that Moses and the Elders ( v. 1.) took the Priests and
Levites to their Assistance, to deliver what follows.

Take heed.] Attend to what we say. The Hebrew word is found no where else; and
seems to belong to their outward posture.

And hearken.] So, as to consider.

This day thou art become the people of the LORD thy God.] These words
following after the Precept concerning building an Altar of Confederation, must
be understood as relating unto that. And therefore the word this day does not
respect only that particular day on which Moses spoke this to the People, or
the day wherein God declared it; but the day upon which such an Altar, for the
renovation of the Covenant, was to be erected; when Joshua was to speak these
words: For then, and not before, the Blessings were pronounced to those that
observed the Laws of God; and the Curses against those that broke them: and God
had not fulfilled his Promises to them till they came over Jordan. Therefore he
did not order this Altar to be built, and these Sacrifices to be offered,
whereby they obliged themselves to him, and became his People by a new Bond,
till their entrance upon the possession of what he had promised.

Ver. 10. Thou shall therefore obey the voice of the LORD thy God, and do his
Commandments, etc.] These words, and the foregoing, are plainly words of a
mutual Covenant between God and them. Into which Covenant they entered three
times. First at Horeb, XXIV Exodus and then just before Moses died, XXIX. of
this Book, 1, 12, 13, etc. and when they were come into Canaan, VIII Josh. 30,
31, etc. And because the Divine Laws delivered to them, were confirmed and
ratified, at all these times, therefore it is that those Laws are so frequently
called by the Name of the Covenant; and when they transgressed them, they are
said to break this Covenant.

Ver. 11. And Moses charged the people the same day, Which Charge, I suppose,
the Elders, with the assistance of the Priests and Levites, delivered
throughout the whole Camp of Israel, v. 1, 9.

Ver. 12. These shall stand upon Mount Gerizim.] Samaria was afterward built.

To bless the people.] By saying Amen, when they heard the Blessings read by
the Priests. For it was not the People, who stood upon the Mountain, that
blessed ( i. e. pronounced the Blessings) but the Priests below, v. 14.

When ye are gone over Jordan.] See v. 2.

Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.] These
six Tribes who stood upon Mount Gerizim, (i. e. upon the top, and on the
descent of it down to the bottom) were all descended from the Sons of the
Free-women, Leah and Rachel: and therefore, many think, appointed to bless;
which was more honorable than to curse.

Ver. 13. And these shall stand upon Mount Ebal, to curse.] This was a Mountain
opposite to the other; and there lay a Valley between them. Abimelech Gideon,
but Jotham: for it was done in the Plain (or, by the Oak) of the Pillar, which
was in Schechem; that is, by this Pillar, on which the Curses of the Law were
written, IX Judges 6. whereupon Jotham got upon Mount Gerizim, and thence
cursed the Men of Schechem. Which shows that the tops of these Mountains were
not so far distant one from another, but what was said upon the one, might be
heard by those who were on the top, and the sides of the other. And yet there
was such a Valley between them, that they could not presently come at Jotham to
apprehend him; but he had time to flee and get away, after he had spoken his
Apologue.

Reuben, Gad, and Asher; and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.] Four of these were
Children of the Handmaids; and Reuben had lost his Dignity by going up to his
Father's Bed; and Zebulun was the youngest of Leah's Sons; who was therefore
chosen, rather than any of the other, for this less honorable Employment. For
otherwise there would not have been an equal number of Tribes upon each
Mountain.

And the Levites.] That is, the Priests, who are often called the Priests, the
Levites: particularly in that very place, where we read of the Execution of
this Command, VIII Josh. 33. And the Levites were among those that stood upon
Mount Gerizim, (v. 12.) who did not pronounce the Blessings; but answered Amen
to them. Yet the Gemara upon Sota, Cap. VII. Sect. XXIII. will have it, that as
many of the Levites as were fit to minister (that is, all from thirty to fifty
years of Age, who were fit to carry the Ark) stood round about the Ark, with
the Priests: the rest of the Levites being upon Mount Gerizim, with the other
Tribes appointed to have their station there.

Shall speak and say unto all the men of Israel.] The same Gemara rightly
gathers, that the Ark with the Priests, were below in the Valley between the
two Mountains; because it is said, in the place beforementioned, that all
Israel and the Elders stood about it, VIII Josh. 33. Which could not have been,
unless it were placed between the two Mountains, whereon they stood upon both
sides, from the top to the bottom.

With a loud voice.] That every one that stood on the side or top of the
Mountains might hear what they said; the Priests being placed so in several
parts of the Valley, that their voice might reach them all. For which end they
were advanced, perhaps upon a Pulpit, (as Ezra afterward was, VIII Nehem. 4.)
and a signal likewise given when they should say, Amen.

Ver. 15. Cursed be he that makes any graven or molten The People upon the
Mountains being to bless as well as curse, the Mischna in the Title Sota (Cap.
VII. Sect. V.) rightly explains this; that first the Priests, turning their
Faces toward Mount Gerizim, proclaimed with a loud voice, Blessed be the man
that makes not any graven, etc. Unto which all the People that stood there,
answered Amen. And then turning their Faces toward Mount Ebal, they said these
words, Cursed be the man that makes, etc. to which they that stood there made
the same answer. See also the Jerusalem Targum, which paraphrases these words
in the same manner.

An abomination unto the LORD.] Which is odious, and far to be removed from the
Presence of the LORD, as the same Targum interprets it.

The work of the hands of the Crafts-man*] A mere device of Men, and therefore
not to have Divine Worship given to it of any sort.

And puts it in a secret place.] Though he was not a public declared
Worshipper of Images; yet if he did it privately in some Closet of his own
House, or in any other secret place to conceal his wickedness; though he
escaped the punishment of the Law, which sentenced open Idolaters to death, yet
he could not escape the vengeance of God.

And all the people.] The forenamed Mischna and Targum say, That the People on
both Mountains answered Amen; both to the Blessings, and to the Cursings: which
does not agree with what goes before, v. 12, 13.

Shall answer and say, Amen.] Express their consent to it. For the word Amen,
as the Talmudists say in Schebuoth, has sometimes the force of an Oath;
sometimes only declares consent and approbation; and sometimes is used for the
confirmation of any thing. An Example of the first they think there is in V
Numb. 22. and they allege this place for an Example of the second: and for the
third XXVIII Jerem. 6.

Cursed be he that sets light by his father and mother.] It is observed by
Interpreters, that as the Precept of honoring Parents stands next to the
Commandment concerning the Honor that is due to God, (XX Exodus 12.) so the
Curse pronounced against those who dishonored them, is here placed next to the
Curse against Worshippers of Images. And as Idolaters were to be put to death,
so were those that cursed their Parents, XXI Exodus 17. XX Levit. 9. And I may
add, from the foregoing words, that though they did it ever so secretly, they
lay under this Curse.

And all the people shall say, Amen.] But before this Curse was pronounced,
they had said Amen to the Blessing opposite to it, (blessed is he that sets
not lightly by his Father and Mother) as was observed on the foregoing Verse.
And the same is to be noted concerning the following Curses, which were
preceded with a Blessing; till they were all ended.

Ver. 17. Cursed be he that removes his neighbor's etc.] Against which there
is an express Precept in the foregoing part of this Book, XIX. 14. And
Pellicanus well observes, that by this particular Instance of God's displeasure
against Injustice, they were deterred from all Encroachments upon their
Neighbors Possessions.

Ver. 18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander By giving him wrong
directions, or misleading him. See XIX Levit. 14. Some apply this to giving
pernicious Advice to simple People; which is certainly worse than misguiding of
the blind, because it leads Men into sin, as well as into danger.

Ver. 19. Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of These three I observed
before (XXIV. 19.) are commonly put together, as a paraphrase upon the word
poor: whose Cause God himself undertakes to plead, X. 18. and see XII Exodus 21,
22. And therefore all good Lawgivers have taken special care of them;
particularly of Orphans; concerning whom Plato ordains, that the Conservators
of the Laws should be (...), instead of their natural Parents, and look after
them so well, that they should not fare the worse for wanting their Fathers.
See Lib. VIII. de Legibus, fol. 926, etc. Edit. Serrani.

Cursed be he that lies with his father's wife, See XXII. 30. and XVIII Levit.
8.

Cursed be he who lies with any manner of beast, etc.] XXII Exodus 19. and
XVIII Levit. 23. This some of the Jewish Doctors, out of an unaccountable
pride, apply to the Vulgar sort of their own Nation, (whom they call the People
of the Earth) as if they were no better than Beasts, with whom they were not to
marry.

Cursed be he that lies with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the
daughter of his mother, etc.] This has been explained also XVIII Levit. 9.

Cursed be he that lies with his mother-in-law, etc.] See XVIII Levit. 17. and
XX. 14.

Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly, etc.] Though it be but with
his Tongue, whereby he wounds the same of an absent Person. But the word smite
is often used for killing, XXI Exodus 12. XXIV Levit. 17. Of which, if a Man was
guilty, though he committed the Murder so secretly, that he could not be put to
death by the Sentence of the Judges, yet he lay under this heavy Sentence of
God.

Cursed be he that takes a reward to slay an innocent person, etc.] This seems
to have respect to the Judges, who for Money not only gave wrong Judgment in
other Causes, but condemned those that were not guilty to death. See XXIII
Exodus 7, 8. and in this Book X. 17. XVI. 19.

Ver. 26. Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this law to do
them.] The word we here translate confirm, is more plainly translated perform,
in 1 Samuel XV. 11. And so it certainly signifies here: the performing Galat. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc. where the Apostle
adds the word all (as the LXX. and the Samaritan did, even in St. Hierom's
time) to expound the words of this Law, to signify not merely all that is
contained in these Blessings and Curses, but all things which are written in
the Book of the Law. So that whether this whole Book ( i. e. all the Laws
contained in it) written upon the Pillars, or only these Blessings and
Cursings, the matter comes to the same Issue; because all that is contained in
this Book, is comprehended in this last Curse; yea, all that is contained in
the whole Law of Moses. Therefore it is not very material neither, whether only
these Curses and Blessings were recited upon Mount Gerizim and Ebal; or the
whole Law of Moses from one end to the other; about which the Jews themselves
differ. But they that are of the latter Opinion, think it well grounded upon
VIII Josh. 33. where we read how Joshua carefully performed what Moses here
enjoined. And that his words might not be forgotten, Moses seems to have
ordered the continuance of this Solemnity, every seventh year; in the Twenty
ninth Chapter of this Book, v. 10, 11, etc.

The Mis^hna in Sota (which I have often mentioned) concludes this matter with
these words; When the Blessings and the Cursings were ended, they brought
Stones and built an Altar, which they plaistered over, and wrote upon them all
the words of this Law in Seventy Languages. But I have shown before, that the
Stones on which the Law was written, was different from the Altar: and were
erected before the building of the Altar. The Gemara there adds, Cap. VII.
Sect. XXIV. That every one of the Israelites there present stood bound one for
another (that is for the whole Company) that they would observe these Laws.
Which I know not how they extract out of Moses his words; but their Doctors
frequently mention it in their Books; and make this pious use of it. That, by
virtue of this Security which they gave for each other, every Man was bound to
reprove his Neighbor, if he saw him offend; unless he was content to undergo
the Punishment which was threatened unto the Breach of God's Laws, and come
under the Curse, XIX Levit. 17. And unto this they apply those words, They
shall fall one upon another, (as we truly translate XXVI Levit. 37.) as if they
signified, every one shall fall by his Brother; that is, by his Brothers
Crimes. For we all promised, say they, (in the Gemara Sanhedrim, Cap. III.
Sect. VI.) and engaged one for another: and so from that time were punished one
for another.

CHAP. XXVIII. Chapter XXVIII.

Verse 1. AND it shall come to pass.] In this Leviticus, unto the Observance or
Breach of the Covenant they had made with God. And here in this Verse he
promises in general the Blessings which are more particularly enumerated in the
following Verses.

If thou will hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe
and do all his Commandments, etc.] See VII. 12. Where the same thing is said;
only here he adds the word diligently, to make them attend with the greater
seriousness to what he delivered. See Chapt. XI. 13, 22.

That the LORD thy God will set thee on high above all Nations of the earth.]*
By bestowing on them the following Blessings. See VII. 14. They were already
endued with singular Privileges above other Nations, (XIX Exodus 5, 6.) which
by their Obedience would be confirmed, continued and augmented in greater
plenty of all things.

Ver. 2. And all these Blessings shall come upon thee, Blessings that come
unexpectedly, and when we are not in pursuit of them, are most welcome, and
highly delight us. And such God here promises to bestow on them by his gracious
Providence, without their laborious and anxious seeking after them. By which
very thing he set them above all Nations: for what they followed after eagerly,
and many times in vain, he undertakes should come to them, and prevent their
desires.

If thou shall hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God.] So as to observe
and do all his Commandments; as it is explained in the foregoing Verse.

Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou be in the field.]
That is, in all their Affairs within doors, or without. Or, whether they lived
by Employments in the City, or by Husbandry in Tilling the Ground. It is not a
natural Interpretation of these words, which one of the Hebrew Doctors gives of
them in Bava Metzia; where he expounds blessed shall thou be in the City; thy
House shall be so nigh unto the Synagogue, that thou need not be troubled by
going a long way to it. And blessed in the field; thy Ground shall lie so near
to the City, that thou may quickly bring the Fruit it produces, to be sold
in the Market. But if he could have gone on in this manner, it had been
something tolerable; but he expounds what follows in a most undecent manner.
See Wagenseil upon the Gemara of Sota, Cap. III. Sect. IX. Annot. 5.

Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body.] This seems to be a Promise of
preventing Miscarriages, when they were with Child: for a numerous Progeny is
promised afterward, v. 11.

And the fruit of thy ground.] This signifies they should have seasonable
Harvests and Vintages. For fruit of the ground comprehends not only all sorts
of Corn, but Grapes, Figs, Pomegranates, and such like Fruit which grow on
Trees.

And the fruit of thy Cattle.] By the word Behemah is sometimes meant all sorts
of brute Creatures, in opposition to Men; sometimes tame Creatures, in
opposition to wild Beasts: But here all sorts of Domestic Creatures (except
Kine, Sheep and Goats) viz. Asses and Camels. Which Jacob brought with him, as
well as Oxen and Sheep, when he came from Laban into Canaan, XXXII Genesis 5, 7.

And the increase of thy kine.] The breed of these was very profitable; being a
considerable part of the Riches, not only of that but of other Countries; as
appears by what Pausanias says of them. See Bochartus P. I. Hierozoicon. Lib.
II. Cap. XL. in the beginning.

And the flocks of thy sheep.] Under the name of Sheep, in the Hebrew, are
comprehended Goats also. All which God promises to increase; that is, to make
them very wealthy. And here it may be observed, that the Israelites were
generally Husbandmen or Shepherds; and did not commonly follow any other
Trades: and therefore no mention is made of them here, unless it be in v. 6.
where he seems to speak of all sort of Business.

Ver. 5. Blessed shall be thy basket.] The Jerusalem refers this to the Basket
wherein they carried up their First Fruits, XXVI. 2. But the Vulgar Latin
translates it, thy Barns: and so do the LXX. (...), the places where they laid
up their Corn, and other Fruits of the Earth. Which God promises both to fill,
and to preserve from Fire, or Thieves, or other Disasters.

And thy store. The LXX. and the Vulgar translate it, all that was remaining;
of which they had not present use; but kept till they had occasion for it. So
it is a promise, that they should never want; but still have something lying by
them in Store (as we translate it) above what they needed.

Ver. 6. Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be
when thou go out.] This the Jerusalem Targum interprets, of their entering
into their Schools, and going home again. But it rather go out against their
Enemies. Or, it may signify in general good success in all their Affairs;
which is expressed by the phrase, of coming in and going out, XXXI. 2. 2 Samuel
III. 25. But I see no ground to think, that it relates to Traffic or
Manufactures: for they were of little use among a People, whose plain way of
living made few things necessary, but what every Man could make himself. And
therefore we find by Ezekiel, who describes ( Chapt. XXVII.) the great variety
of Merchandise which was brought to the Mart of Tire; that the Israelites
carried nothing thither, but Wheat and Honey, and Oil and Balm, ( v. 17.) which
are the Commodities the Earth it self produces.

The LORD shall cause thine enemies, that rise up against thee, to be smitten
before thy face.] God had promised before, that when they went up to serve him
at their Solemn Festivals, their Enemies should not so much as desire their
Land, XXXIV Exodus 24. and now he assures them, that when they did invade their
Country, they should not prevail, but be overthrown by them.

They shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.] He
not only promises them Victory; but a complete Victory. For fleeing seven ways
(i. e. many ways) imports a total overthrow: which made every Man shift for
himself; as Soldiers do when they are entirely routed.

Ver. 8. And the LORD shall command the blessing upon thee.] Protect them in
their Enjoyments by his

In thy storehouses.] The LXX translate it (...), and the Vulgar Cellaria:
which signify places wherein other Goods were laid up within doors; as Corn
was in Barns without, v. 5.

And in all that thou set thine hand unto.] In all manner of Undertakings
and Employments.

And he shall bless thee in the Land which the LORD thy God gives thee.] Make
them live long therein.

Ver. 9. The LORD thy God shall establish thee an holy Confirm them in that
noble relation wherein they stood to him. See VII. 6. XIV. 2.

As he has sworn unto thee.] See VII. 12.

If thou will keep the Commandments of the LORD thy God.] He had separated them
from all People, by peculiar Laws and Privileges; for this purpose, that they
should be governed by him, and be obedient to him.

And walk in his ways.] No body can see any reason to make this a special
Precept (as the Jews do) that we should walk in the ways of the LORD. Which
contains all the Duty owing to him: whether by his ways we understand those
Divine qualities, of Mercy, Holiness, Goodness, and Truth, whereby we approach
to him; or (as the word ways is commonly used in Scripture) his Divine
Precepts, whereby he comes (as it were) unto us, and declares his mind and will
toward us; by conformity to which we become like him in those Divine
qualities; for that is the entire meaning of walking in his ways: ordering all
our Actions according to the Direction of his holy Will; whereby we resemble
him.

And all the people of the earth.] Who were round about them; or should have
any knowledge of them.

Shall see that thou art called by the name of the LORD.] Be convinced that you
are, after a peculiar manner, the LORD's People, XIV. 1. XXVI. 18. For
wheresoever we read that a Person, or Thing, has the Name of God called upon
it, or is called by his Name, the meaning is, that it is his. As the City
called by God's name, XXV Jerem. 29. is the City of God, where he dwelt, viz.
Jerusalem. And thus the Ark is said to have the Name of God called on it, 1 Chronicles. XIII. 6. i. e. was the LORD's Ark, or the Ark of the Covenant. And as
here the Children of Israel are said to be a People called by his Name; so it
is said of the Christian Church, XV Acts 17. For the very same phrase (as Mr.
Mede observes) is used of the like relation that Men have unto that which is
theirs. Thus Jacob says, XLVIII Genesis 16. that his Name should be called on the
two Sons of Joseph: that is, they should be his, as Reuben and Simeon were.
Which shows, these are words of Adoption. See Discourse I. p. 7.

And shall be afraid of thee.] Not dare to do thee any hurt; or, fear to have
thee their Enemy.

The LORD thy God shall make thee plenteous in goods.] Bestow on them abundance
of all good things, that their hearts could desire.

In the fruit of thy body.] By giving them a numerous and healthy Issue;
whereby they should be multiplied like the Stars of Heaven, or the Sand on the
Seashore. According to the Promise made to Abraham, XV Genesis 5. XXII. 17.

And in the fruit of thy Cattle.] Which he promised likewise to increase
exceedingly.

And in the fruit of thy ground.] Which should afford large Crops of Corn, and
great store of all other Fruits every year.

In the Land which the LORD swear unto thy fathers to give thee.] So that they
should not need to send unto other Countries, to procure Food (as they did in
the days of their Father Jacob) but have enough in their own Land to support
them all, though never so numerous.

Ver. 12. The LORD shall open his good Treasure unto The Heaven, or the Air is
called the good Treasure of God; because there he gathers together great Heaps
of Clouds; from whence he inriches the Earth with fatning showers of Rain.
Which when he withholds, he is said to shut up this Treasure, XI. 17. and when
he bestows it, to open it: that his People might be sensible of their
dependence upon his Bounty for that Blessing, as well as others; which he
dispenses as he pleases.

In its season.] The former and the latter Rain, as the Scripture calls it. The
former fell in Autumn after the Seed was sown, to make it take root and spring
up. The latter fell in the Spring time; to bring the Seed which was come up, to
maturity. See XI. 14. See the Learned Dr. Prideaux upon Maimonides his Treatise
de donis Pauperum, Cap. I. Not. 25.

And to bless all the work of thine hand.] By these seasonable showers he
blessed their ploughing, and sowing, and produced a plentiful Harvest: which
seems to be meant here by the work of their hand; viz. their Husbandry; which
included all sorts of Plantations, as well as Tillage, IX Genesis 20.

And thou shall lend unto many Nations, and thou shall not borrow.] A token of
great Riches, (See XV. 6.) which all Nations looked upon as a Blessing: as
indeed they are, with piety. And therefore Callimachus in his Hymn to Jove,
prays him to bestow both Virtue and Riches upon them; v. 97.

-- (...). Which puts me in mind of a pertinent Observation of Maimonides in
his Preface to Perck Chelek, in which he treats of the Foundations of the
Jewish Religion. This is the meaning, says he, of the Promises and Threatenings
in the Law; that if they were obedient to his Precepts, he would further them
with all good things that should furnish them therein; and remove from them all
that hinder them. For no Man can serve God as he ought, when he is sick, or
oppressed with Famine, or vexed with Wars. Therefore God Promises to remove all
these things, and to give them Health and Tranquillity, that they might perfect
their Obedience, and be worthy of the Life of the World to come. For this is
not the end of the Law, to make the Earth bring forth plentifully, and to
prolong Men's Life upon the Earth, and give them healthful Bodies: but that by
all those things they may be helped and encouraged to perform Obedience to it,
etc.

Ver. 13. And the LORD shall make thee the head, and not the tail.] This is a
proverbial Speech, which is explained in the words following, and thou shall be
above only, and thou shall not be beneath. For the Head Head who command over
others, and those the Tail who are subject. And therefore this is a Promise
that they should rule over other Nations, as their Lords, (as they did in the
days of David and Solomon) but other Nations should not Lord it over them.

If that thou hearken unto the Commandments of the LORD thy God, which I
command thee this day, to observe and to do them.] This was the Condition upon
which all their Happiness depended; as he had told them in the beginning of
this Discourse, v. 1.

Ver. 14. And thou shall not go astray from any of the Sea Chapt. V. 32.

To go after other gods to serve them.] This was the principal Commandment of
the Law, to serve no other gods but the LORD alone. Which while they observed,
he was pleased to bless them, and to bear with many other sins which they
committed. Upon which account, this Commandment is so often repeated, as we
find it, in this very Book, VI. 14. VII. 4, 16. VIII. 19. IX. 16, 28. XI. 3, 4,
30, etc.

Ver. 15. But it shall come to pass, if thou will not Especially that great
Commandment, Not to go after other gods to serve them.

That all these Curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.] Pursue them
so, that they should not possibly escape them. The same phrase is used of the
Blessings, v. 2.

Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall thou be in the field.] As
miserable, that is, every where, as he intended to have made them happy, v. 3.

Cursed shall be thy basket, and thy store.] The blessing of the Barn, was to
have it full, ( v. 5.) and therefore the Curse upon it, was to make it empty.

Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, etc.] He
threatens to consume their Children, their Corn, and other Fruits; with their
Herds and Flocks.

Cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed shall thou be when thou
go out.] Have no Comfort in any Undertaking, either at home or abroad; in
Peace or in War.

The LORD shall send upon thee cursing, vexation and rebuke.] It is very hard
to know what these three words particularly import; the two first of them being
very variously translated. The first of them, Meera, seems to signify in
general, that God would blast them, in all they designed and went about: for
although the LXX. and Vulgar here render it famine and want, yet elsewhere the
LXX. renders it as we do, (...), cursing: And the next word, Mehuma, they
translate hunger: but in other places the LXX. render it by six or seven words,
which import the same with our English vexation; viz. (...), trouble or
disturbance; (...), tumult; (...), confusion; (...), horror or affrightment,
etc. Which relate to great disorder, disquiet, and perplexity in their Mind.
And the last word, Mighereth, the Vulgar translate as we do, rebuke; but the
LXX. (...), Consumption: which are the same in effect. For when God rebukes a
Man for his iniquity, he makes his beauty to consume away like a moth, XXXIX
Psalm. 11. For God's Rebukes consist not in Words, but in sore Afflictions, (2
Kings XIX. 3. XVIII Psalm. 15, etc.) particularly in Disappointments and
Ill-success in their Undertakings; and continual fear of worse for the future.

In all that thou set thine hand unto for to do.] In all their Affairs ( v.
8.) they should meet with trouble, perplexity, and defeats.

Until that thou be destroyed.] He threatens that this Curse, Trouble, and
Rebuke from God should pursue them, till they had completed their Ruin.

And until thou perish quickly.] When God began to punish them, after long
patience with them, he was quick in his Executions; and many times brought upon
them sudden destruction. So he threatens in Zephaniah I. 18. That he would make
a speedy riddance of all that dwell in the Land. And though the whole Nation
was not rooted out speedily, but by degrees; yet they enjoyed it but a short
time, in comparison of what God designed if they had been obedient: and in that
time, they were seldom without some trouble or other, till they were expelled
out of their Country.

Because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou have forsaken me.] And
followed after other gods: which was the great Crime that brought them to
desolation.

Ver. 21. The LORD shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee.] The Pestilence
is threatened in XXVI Levit, 25. where he says he will send it among them: and
here adds, that it shall cleave unto them; that is, Schebet Judah confesses,
that after they had been wasted and broken in pieces by Wars, they that fled
into Spain in the time of Alphonsus, were swept away in great numbers by a
Plague; and introduces one applying these very words, as a Prophecy of it.
Which I thought fit to note, though this part of the Prophecy does not belong
to what has befaln them since the last destruction of Jerusalem (as I shall
show hereafter) but to the times before the first destruction. When he often
sent a Pestilence to destroy them, 2 Samuel XXIV. 15. XIV Jerem. 12. XXI. 6, 7,
9. and many other places of that Book, V Ezekiel. 12. VI. 11, 12. IV Amos 10. But
it must be acknowledged also, that the Greeks call such unseasonable weather,
as destroys the Fruits of the Earth, by the name of (...), Pestilence. So Plato
Lib. X. de Legibus says, that which is called (...), a Disease in Bodies,
(...), etc. is called Pestilence in the Seasons of the Year. The Murrain also
in Cattle is called by the same name; which even the Pagans thought was sent by
the anger of their gods, for the sins of Men; as we learn from Callimachus in
his Hymn to Diana, where he says, verse 125. That when she was angry,
Pestilence eat up their Cattle, and Hail destroyed the Fruits of the Earth.

(...). As on the contrary, when she was well pleased, she sent fruitful
Seasons, and all manner of Happiness, as it follows in that Hymn.

Until it have consumed thee from off the Land whither thou go to possess
it.] Made a great destruction by sweeping away many People; the rest being
reserved for other Judgments, which follow in the next words.

Ver. 22. And the LORD shall smite thee with a consumption, These three words
signify sore Diseases in Men's Bodies: the two first of which, Sachepheth and
Kaddachath, we translate in XXVI Levit. 16. as we do here; only the second of
them we render the burning Ague, which here we translate Fever. Unto which is
here added Dalleketh, which signifies such an inflammation, as is accompanied
with itching (according to the LXX. who translate it (...)) which is extremely
grievous, because the scratching of it increases the inflammation.

And with an extreme burning, and with the sword.] These two seem to relate
unto the indisposition of the Air, by extreme heat and drought; as we translate
the Word Chereb in the Margin of our Bibles. For it signifies both the Sword
and Dryness; as the first word Charchur signifies scorching heat, which
frequently causes Diseases. For it being the doubling of the word Charar, it
denotes the extremity, or highest degree of it, as all such words do; of which
Bochartus has given many Examples in his Hierozoicon. P. II. Lib. I. Cap. XIX.

And with blasting, and with mildew.] These two relate to the destruction of
their Corn, and the fruits of the Earth; which follows upon the Corruption of
the Air, as Famine follows upon the Corruption of the Fruits of the Earth. The
first word Schiddaphon, the LXX. and the other Greek Interpreters translate
(...), blasting by biting Winds: though elsewhere the LXX. translate it by
(...) and (...), which signifies such bliting as comes by heat. And the second
word, Jerakon (which comes from jerek, Herb, or Grass, or any green things)
seems properly to be expressed by the LXX. who translate it (...): for Corn,
and Grass, and Herbs turn pale and wan for want of moisture.

And they shall pursue thee until thou perish.] These Plagues upon their
Bodies, and upon the Air, and the Corn and Herbs, he threatens shall come upon
them one year after another, till they were consumed.

And thy heaven that is over thy head shall he brass.] That is, as brass:
having no more moisture in it than brass has. It is remarkable that he does
not say the Heaven; that is, the Air, or Clouds; but thy heaven; that is, the
Clouds which hung over their Country should be dry; though they dropped upon
other Lands. See XIV Jeremiah.

And the earth that is under thee shall be iron.] Hard as Iron, for want of
Rain to soften it. See XXVI Levit. 19. The Observation of Maimonides is worth
noting upon this part of the Law: That the Zabij, an ancient sort of Idolaters
in the Eastern Countries, thought the fruitfulness of the Earth depended upon
the Worship of the Planets, and the rest of the heavenly Bodies. And therefore
their Wisemen and their Prophets (as he says he found in their Books,
particularly in one concerning the husbandry of the Egyptians) taught the
People to keep Festivals in their honor; because the fruitfulness of the
Earth, by which Men subsist, depends upon their Will and Pleasure. In
opposition to which God ordered Moses to tell the Israelites in his Name, that
if they worshipped the Stars, they should have no Rain; the Earth should be
barren, the Trees yield no Fruit; the Season prove unhealthful, and their Lives
be shortened. On the contrary, if they worshipped him, the LORD of Heaven and
Earth, and him alone, they should have showers from above; the Earth should
bring forth abundantly; and they should be blessed with healthful Seasons,
sound Bodies, and long Life. For it is the very Foundation of the Law (as his
phrase is) to root the forenamed false Opinion out of Men's minds, More
Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXX.

Ver. 24. And the LORD shall make the rain of thy That is, there shall be such
a long drought, that instead of Rain, showers of Dust, blown up into the Air by
the Wind, shall fall down from Heaven upon them.

From heaven shall it come down upon thee, till thou be destroyed.] This seems
to denote something more than the falling of Clouds of Dust, wherewith the Air
was filled by high Winds, viz. showers of Ashes, which have sometimes fallen in
great quantities, as good Historians testify. Nothing is more known than the
vast Clouds of Ashes which Mount Aetna has often vomited, whereby all the
Country thereabout has been laid desolate. And the like has been thrown out
by Mount Vesuvius, which has reached as far as Rome, and Constantinople. See
Bonfrerius. But if there was any such thing in Judaea, it must be a miraculous
judgment; there being no such Mountains in those parts of the World, to make
such Evomitions.

Ver. 25. And the LORD shall cause thee to be smitten before thine Enemies.] He
says the same in effect XXVI Levit. 17. For to smite in Scripture (as I slay
or kill.

Thou shall go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them.]
Though they marched out in a great Body against their Enemies, he threatens that
they should soon be dispersed; the hand of the LORD, as well as of their
Enemies, being against them. For that Expression is remarkable, the LORD shall
cause thee to be smitten. See v. 7.

And shall be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth.] This is something
more than is threatened XXVI Levit. 33. signifying not only their dispersion
into the remotest parts of the World; but their being tossed up and down, like
Vagabonds, from one Country to another, without any certain Settlement. Which
has been notoriously verified since their last dispersion by the Romans: of
which they themselves have given us large accounts in several Books, viz.
Juchasin, Schalscheleth Hakkabala, Schebet Jehuda, and Zemuch David; wherein
they have abundantly confirmed what Tertullian says of them in his time,
Dispersi, palabundi, and coeli, and soli sui extorres vagantur per orbem; that
being scattered, straggling up and down uncertainly, banished from their own
Country, they wander about the World, without any King, etc. But this belongs
to the time of the first Captivity, when Nehemiah (I. 8.) confesses these words
were fulfilled. See IX Jerem. 16. VI Ezekiel. 8. XII. 14, 15.

And thy carcass shall be meat unto all the fowls of the air, and unto the
beasts of the earth.] Nothing was accounted a greater Calamity among the Jews,
than to have their dead Bodies lie exposed, to be buried only in the bowels of
Birds and Beasts. And therefore Jeremiah threatens this as the utmost
punishment of the King of Judah, XXII. 19. XXXVI. 30. and the Psalmist bewails
it as one of the forest Judgments that was befaln them, LXXIX Psalm. 2, 3.

And no man shall fray them away.] That is, no Man took so much compassion upon
them, as to chase them away, and to interr the remainders which the Birds and
Beasts had not devoured.

Ver. 27. And the LORD shall smite thee.] Why the Jerusalem Targum should
here, in a particular manner, say the WORD of the LORD shall smite thee, I
cannot imagine; unless it was to suggest, that he being their Conductor out of
Egypt, was the Person more especially concerned to punish them for their
shameful ingratitude to their Deliverer. See v. 68.

With the botch of Egypt.] Some take this to signify the Leprosy, unto which
they in that Country were subject. Others, that boil breaking out with blains,
wherewith God smote the Egyptians, IX Exodus 9, etc. For that is called
Schechin, as this is.

And with the Emerods.] The Hebrew word Apholim is no where to be met with, but
here, and I Sam. V. 6, 9, 11. and in the rest of that History. Which most
Interpreters (and not without reason) think signifies those painful tumors in
the Fundament, which sometimes turn into Ulcers. See Bochartus in his
Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. II. Cap. XXXVI.

And with the Scab.] The LXX. here translate the Hebrew garab (as they do also
XXI Levit. 20.) (...), a fierce, or malignant Scab. And the Vulgar adds the
word jugis, to signify that this was no small punishment.

And the itch.] The Hebrew word cheres, signifies, as is generally thought, a
dry Itch; which is the most troublesome of all other.

Whereof thou can not be healed.] This may refer both to the Scab, and to the
Itch beforementioned; which proceeded from such a Corruption of the Blood,
that they were as incurable as the Leprosy.

And the LORD shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of
heart.] All these three relate to the Mind: The first of them importing such a
distraction in their Thoughts, that they should not know what course to take,
when they consulted for their safety: The second such a stupidity, that they
should not discern the true way, but always take the wrong: The third that
amazement and horror which followed thereupon, when they saw themselves ruined
by their own foolish Counsels and mad Contrivances. A famous instance of which
was in the time of Trajan, when they committed such outrageous Massacres, both
upon the Greeks and Romans (as Dion a very sober Author relates) in Cyrene and
Cyprus, (where great numbers of Jews dwelt after they were driven out of their
own Country) that the Lord, no doubt, (to use the words of Dr. Jackson on the
Creed, B. I. Chap. XXVII.) had smote them with the madness and blindness of
heart here threatened, that they might hereby provoke that puissant Emperor's
indignation, which otherwise would have slept: but now pursued them throughout
his Dominions, not only as Enemies, or Rebels, but as noxious Creatures to
Humane Society; with a Revenge suitable to their former Outrages. And indeed
this Prediction was verified in their blind Credulity, which made them follow
every one that pretended to be their Messiah; which always brought great
Calamities upon them, as R. Gedaliah himself confesses in Schalschetheth
Hakkala. Where he mentions no small number of these Deceivers; and shows how
many Jews perished who followed them. Yet they are but a few in comparison of a
long Catalogue that might be made of those pretended Messiahs. See the Learned
Wagenseil's Confutation of R. Lipman's Carmen Memoriale, page 233, etc. Unto
which I shall add only one Observation more out of Solomon ben Virgae, who
says in some places of Germany they were possessed with such a rabies, that
they cut one another Throats, to avoid the Oppression of their Enemies; and
burnt themselves and their Neighbors in their Houses, setting whole Cities on
fire, and perishing in the Flames. Such was their extreme Rage and furious
Revenge, on those Christians who pressed them to change their Religion. Many
Stories of the like nature that Author tells in his Book entitled, Schelet
Jehuda; where he has LXIV. Relations of the Calamities which befell them in
that, and in other Countries. But these words, I doubt not, were fulfilled
before in the first Desolation of Jerusalem, to which they belong. For though
we have not such particular Relations as those now mentioned to illustrate
them, yet the Prophets speak of their being mad by drinking of the Cup of the
LORD's Fury, XXV Jerem. 16, 18. and blind, Zephan. I. 17. Lament. IV. 14. and
astonished, Jerem. IV. 9. Ezekiel. IV. 17.

Ver. 29. And thou shall grope at noon day, as the blind This shows the
blindness spoken of in the foregoing Verse relates to their Mind; which was so
darkened, that in the plainest and clearest things, they mistook the way and
means of their Preservation, Zephan. I. 17.

And thou shall not prosper in thy ways.] But, quite contrary, whatsoever
Course they took it turned to their undoing.

And thou shall be only oppressed and spoiled evermore.] One Oppression
followed upon another (as the same Dr. Jackson observes) and such Rapines were
committed in several places, upon them, as only made way for new ones; even
when the Supreme Powers endeavored to hinder them.

And no man shall save thee.] This was so remarkably fulfilled in these parts
of the World, that the Magistrates who had a mind in many places to preserve
them from such Outrages, as none but Jews can justify, durst not venture to
appear for their Rescue. And those that did take them into their Protection,
were the Instruments of their further Wrongs, by grievous exactions for the
maintenance of the War undertaken in their defense. So strangely (as that
excellent Person forenamed speaks, Chap. XXIX.) did the Wisdom of God bring
that to pass which his Servant Moses had foretold in this Verse, No man shall
save thee. For even succor it self turned into their sorrow; and it is hard to
say, whether men's purposes for their good, or for their evil, brought greater
plagues upon them. Thus it was before their first Captivity; Pharaoh King of
Egypt came to help them, but was not able, XXXVII Jerem. 7. XLVI. 17.

Thou shall betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her.] Take her away
from thee, before thou can consummate the Marriage. This was a sore
Affliction, for all Nations accounted it a singular blessing to complete a
Marriage; and on the contrary, a Curse to be defeated of such delightful hopes.
Whence Callimachus in his Hymn to Apollo, promising many Blessings to the
Youths, who sung and danced before his Altar, mentions this in the first place,
verse 14.

(...) -- That he would be with them and prosper them, if they were to be
married.

Thou shall build an house, and thou shall not dwell therein.] But another take
possession of it, Zephan. I. 13.

Thou shall plant a vineyard, and shall not gather the grapes thereof.] So we
rightly translate the Hebrew word, which (as the Margin notes) is thou shall
not profane, or make common the Grapes thereof: which was not to be done till
the fifth year after the Plantation. Before which time God threatens another
should enter into it, and enjoy the Fruits thereof.

Ver. 31. Thine Ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and etc.] All these are
but particular Instances of their grievous Oppressions in all Countries; where
their Goods have been confiscated, the Bills of Debts owing to them all
cancelled. Of which the same pious and learned Person, Dr. Jackson, gives
several Instances in the forenamed Chapter.

Ver. 32. Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given This was literally
fulfilled, when the Jews were banished out of Portugal in the time of King
Emanuel; who ordered their Children under Nineteen years of Age to be taken
from them, and brought up in the Christian Religion. When In ants also were
torn from their Mothers Breasts, with far more grief and sorrow, than they had
at their coming out of their Womb: and many hundred years before that, when the
Goths were Lords of Spain, and suffered no Parents to have any Commerce with
their Children, after the seventh year of their Age; but by public Decree they
were committed to Christians to be educated by them, who married them to their
own Sons and Daughters. See the same Dr. Jackson, Chapt. XXVIII. Paragr. 1, 2.

And thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day long.]
Their Women filling the Heavens with more hideous shrieks than the Egyptians
did, when all their Firstborn were slain in the night. For these were bereft
at once of all their dear Children, in the open Sun; in vain begging to have
them restored to them. And to increase their Calamity (as that excellent Person
observes, Chap. XXIX. Paragraph. 15.) many Moors professing Mahometism, were
transported out of Portugal the same time, without such violence offered to
them. What was the reason? (says he) God would have a manifest distinction
made between the Jews and other People, that this Prophecy might be fulfilled.

And there shall be no might in thy hand.] Either to protect, or to rescue them
from violence. Where I cannot but take notice, with the same Doctor, that the
Moors then had some power in their hand, which moved the Portugals perhaps to
abstain from such usage of them; lest the report of it coming to the African
Mahometans, they might attempt to avenge their wrongs. But these wretched Jews
had no power any where; none to avenge their Injuries: which God had ordained
they should suffer at all times, and in all places wheresoever they came,
without redress.

Ver. 33. The fruit of thy Land, and all thy labors, shall a Nation which thou
know not eat up.] This was remarkably fulfilled, when Salmaneser came and
dispossessed the Ten Tribes; and when Nebuchadnezzar

There were many strange People also among the Romans who devoured their
Labors, before their last destruction by Titus. And ever since they have been
subject to depredations of various sorts; having scraped up Riches, with great
Care, which have often fallen into the hands of Strangers. Particularly in the
time of the famous Crusado's, when diverse Nations marched in great numbers to
recover the Holy Land from Infidels, their business was in their way to rob and
spoil the Jews, and to make great slaughter of them; as both Jewish and
Christian Writers witness. Particularly the Author of Schalscheleth Hakkabala,
and our Matthew Paris.

And thou shall be only oppressed and crushed always.] That they should not only
sometimes, or in some Ages, or in some one or few Kingdoms; but always, in
every Kingdom whither they removed (as he speaks, v. 25.) suffer such violence
and wrong, as no other People has done; must needs be thought to proceed
rather from Divine Justice, than Men's inclination to Injustice. Which could not
but have varied with the diversity of Times and Places, and the several
Dispositions of Parties, among whom they have been dispersed. And yet the brief
enumeration of their particular Spoils and hard Usage, which Dr. Jackson makes
in the forenamed Chapter (whose words these are, in the beginning of it)
throughout the most Civil and best governed States of Europe, will abundantly
confirm the truth of Moses his words in this place, Thou shall never but suffer
wrong and violence always; as our old Translation has it. The same is lately
observed by an eminently learned Person, J. Wagenseil in his Confutation of R.
Lipman's Carm. Memoriale, p. 241. where he takes notice, that the Jews no
sooner have grown rich, and by degrees become considerable in any Country, but
some great Calamity has befaln them. This the attentive consideration of their
History will justify; particularly, as he observes, in France, Spain, and
England: God not suffering them to be quite destroyed, like the Amalekites,
Jebusites, and Philistims, of whom no Footsteps remain; but be scattered and
tossed about through all Christian Countries, (for a testimony to the truth of
our Religion) and there only oppressed, crushed, and squeezed, as Moses here
foretold. One instance of which sore oppression I cannot forbear to add out of
Schebet Jehuda, where R. Solomon Virgae confesses what great Miseries they have
been exposed unto by Persons pretending to be their Messiah, who have drawn the
hatred of all Nations upon them. Particularly in Persia, he says, they were
most lamentably handled upon this score; being not only stripped of all, but
forced to go about, like Dogs, with a great Clog of Wood bound to their Necks;
which exposed them to the scorn and laughter of all Men. For while some threw
it behind their backs, others would come and throw it down before their feet.
Some dragging them backwards, and others cruelly beating them with it. This one
told him who saw it.

So that thou shall be mad for the sight of thine eyes, which thou shall see.]
So they were (as the forenamed Doctor observes, Chapt. XXIX. Paragraph. 6.15.)
when their Children were taken from them in Portugal. For some, being not able
to rescue or dispatch them, killed themselves; others, who had better
opportunity, drowned their Children in Wells or Ditches. And here in England,
one of their learned Rabbis, persuaded four hundred of his Company besieged
with him in a strong Tower, by the furious Multitude, to cut their own Throats,
rather than fall into their Enemies hands; himself confirming his Doctrine by
cutting his Wives Throat first, then his Children, and lastly killing himself.
And thus in the time of the forementioned Crusado's, the Soldiers made such
dreadful havoc of the Jews, as they went along to the Holy Land, that many of
them made themselves away, out of despair; as their own Authors, R. Gedaliah
and David Ganz tell us ad An. 1096.

Ver. 35. And the LORD shall smite thee in the knees etc.] This is the same
word in the Hebrew (Schechin) which is used v. 27. called the botch of Egypt,
and here an evil botch: that is, a very grievous breaking out; which began in
those lower parts, and so spread (being incurable, and by no means to be stopped)
from the sole of the feet, unto the crown of the head.

Ver. 36. And the LORD shall bring thee, and the This may seem to have been
fulfilled literally, only when Jehojachin was carried away Captive to Babylon,
2 Kings XXIV. 15. and afterward Zedekiah, XXV. 7. Jerem. XXXIX. 7. LII. 11. For
when they returned they had no more any Kings. But the latter part of these
words [a Nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known] may incline us
to extend this Threatening as far as to their last Dispersion by the Romans.
Since which they have been driven into several Countries, far less known to
them than Babylon was (with which they had correspondence before their
Captivity thither, 2 Kings XX. 12, etc.) And though they have had no King, yet
they have set over themselves Rulers and Governors, who may be comprehended
under that Name.

And there thou shall serve other gods, wood and stone.] Either sottishly
following the Example of the Country to which they were carried, XLIV Jerem.
17, 18. or being compelled thereunto by their cruel Tyranny, III Daniel 6. The
Author of Schebet Jehuda observes, that this was the just punishment of their
folly in running after Idols, that they were sent into other Countries to
worship those gods which they were so fond of in their own. And he refers it
particularly to the time of the Captivity of Babylon; in which they continued
Seventy years, according to the number of years wherein those Planets, whom
they had worshipped, finished their Course. For Saturn, as he computes,
finishes his in One and twenty, Jupiter in as many; and so he proceeds with the
rest, which make up that number. But this is too curious an Observation, and
the Jews have little skill in Astronomy; therefore I pass it by, and only
observe that Manasseh ben Israel also understands this of the Babylonian
Captivity; for all the Punishments mentioned from v. 15. to v. 49. were
fulfilled under the first Temple, and after the ruin of it, till the building
of the second. Which, though it be not exactly true, (some of these Predictions
having been more completely fulfilled, as I have shown in after Times) yet it
is reasonable to think, that this Threatening particularly belongs to what they
suffered in Babylon; the very same Calamity being again threatened in the 64th
verse; where I shall show it belongs to their present Condition.

Ver. 37. And thou shall become an astonishment.] Kings IX. 8. XVIII Jerem. 16.
XIX. 8.

A proverb, and a byword among all Nations whither the LORD shall lead thee.]
So that when Men would express one extremely vile, they should say he was a
Jew. The same is threatened by God when he appeared to Solomon, 1 Kings IX. 7.
and by Jeremiah, XXIV. 9. which it is likely was fulfilled at their first
Captivity into Babylon, (See II Lament. 15, 16.) but has been notoriously
fulfilled in their last Captivity (as they call it) since the Destruction of
Jerusalem and their Temple by the Romans. For here in England (from whence they
have been banished above three hundred years) their name serves as a perfect
measure (to use the words of Dr. Jackson, B. I. on the Creed, Chap. XXX.) to
express the height of Impiety in any Agent; or the depth of an abject,
worthless, forlorn condition in any Patient. Better we cannot express the most
cutthroat dealing, than thus, You use me like a Jew; or, none but a Jew would
have done this. And when in common Speech we exaggerate wrongs done to the most
odious, or despised People among us, we say, I would not have done so to a Jew.

Ver. 38. Thou shall carry much seed out into the field, and shall gather but
little in.] This was fulfilled before they were carried Captive to Babylon;
when Isaiah LII. 1.9. and Jeremiah XIV. 1, 2, 3, etc. and is often threatened by
Ezekiel among other terrible Judgments, and by Jeremiah himself, XXIX. 17, 18.

For the locust shall consume it.] They were a great Plague in those Countries;
falling sometimes in such vast numbers (from whence they had the name of Arbe)
that they covered the whole face of the Earth, and devoured every green thing.
For so another of their names imports, which is Chasil; coming from Chasal,
which signifies to consume and eat up; which they did so entirely, that they
were looked upon by all People, as a Plague sent by God, and are therefore
called by Joel his Army, II. 25. So not only the Hebrews, but the Arabians,
esteemed them; who say that some of them, on a time, fell before their Prophet,
as he sat at Meat, with this Inscription on their Backs; I am God, and there is
none other besides me; the LORD of Locusts, who nourish them; and when I
please, send them forth that they may be food for the people; and, when I
please, that they may be their plague, by eating up their food. See Bochartus
in his Hierozoicon, Pars II. Lib. IV. Cap. VI.

Thou shall plant vineyards and dress them.] Take a great deal of care and
pains about them, after they are planted, to make them fruitful.

But shall neither drink of the wine, nor eat the grapes.] Not enjoy the least
benefit, by their cost and labor.

For worms shall eat them. The Hebrew word Tholaath, is a general name for all
Worms whatsoever. But there is a peculiar sort that infest Vines, which the
Greeks call (...) and (...), as Bochartus observes in his Hierozoicon, P. II.
Lib. IV. Cap. XXVII. where he takes notice that the Latins call this Worm
Volvox and Convolvulus; because it wraps and rolls it self up in the Buds, and
eats the Grapes up when they grow toward ripeness; as the Roman Authors
explain it.

Ver. 40. Thou shall have Olive Trees through all thy Though the Country
abounded with these Trees, in all parts of it, they produced nothing but
Leaves, and a show of Fruit, which came to no perfection.

For thy Olive shall cast her fruit.] Being blasted, as the Jerusalem Targum
explains it, in the very Blossom; or the Buds dropping off for want of Rain; or
the Fruit being eaten with Worms. Maimonides observes, that the Idolaters in
those Countries, pretended by certain Magical Arts, to preserve all manner of
Fruit, so that Worms should not gnaw the Vines; nor either Buds or Fruit fall
from the Trees (as he reports their words, out of one of their own Books which
he names) therefore to deterr the Israelites from all idolatrous practices,
Moses here pronounces that they should draw upon themselves, those very
Punishments, which they studied by such means to avoid, More Nevochim, P. III.
Cap. XXXVII.

Ver. 41. Thou shall beget sons and daughters, but thou Which is threatened in
many places of the Prophets, and fulfilled in several Invasions of their
Neighbors; for the Syrians, no doubt, carried captive more than that one
little Maid, who waited on Naaman's Wife, 2 Kings V. 2. And in other inroads
upon them, till the Captivity of the whole Land; this we may be confident was a
frequent Calamity, 2 Kings XIV. 26. XV. 37, etc. But it was never more
remarkably fulfilled, than since they crucified our Savior; their Children
having been taken from them (as I have observed before v. 32, 34.) and
transported sometimes, into other places. And who knows whether many of their
Stock, detained by King Emanuel of Portugal beforementioned, have not been
transported into America; and whether many of the Spanish Colonies have not a
mixture of the Jewish Progeny in them? as Dr. Jackson observes. Manasseh ben
Israel, I am sure, endeavors to prove (in his Book called Spes Israelis) that
some of the Ten Tribes are in America; though how they came there, he can give
no account.

All thy trees and the fruit of thy Land shall the Locust consume.] So Onkelos
and the Hebrew Writers generally translate the word tzelatzal; which signifies
a peculiar sort of Locusts, which falls upon Trees, as others upon the Fields.
And it seems to have this name, because these Locusts come in such thick
Clouds, that they darken the Sun: the Hebrew word tzalal signifying to
over-shadow. The Jerusalem Targum translates it, All your Trees, and the
fruits of your Land, shall spoilers possess.

I suppose these several Judgments fell in the order wherein they are here
mentioned in v. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. There being first a great Dearth, of which
we read 2 Kings VIII. 1, etc. and I Joel 10, 11, 12, etc. then many Invasions
of their Country, wherein several were carried Captive; by the Bands of Moab
upon the Israelites, 2 Kings XIII. 20. and of the Chaldaeans, Syrians and
Ammonites, who came upon Judah, XXIV. 2. And we read expressly, that before
this, in the days of Ahaz, a great Multitude were carried Captive by the
Syrians, 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 5. After which more Spoilers came upon them in the
days of Jeremiah, XII. 12. and a new Famine, XIV. 1, etc. in which this 41st
verse may be thought to be fulfilled.

Ver. 43. The stranger that is within thee, shall get up There is no sorer
Punishment, to a proud People, than to see those who are not only their
Inferiors, but much beholden to them (as all Strangers were to the Jews, among
whom they lived merely by permission) get up above them, and become their
Superiors. But so it was that the Jews by their foolish endeavors to advance
themselves, raised a mere Stranger to the highest Dignity, who humbled them
into the lowest Condition. For this (as that excellent Person I have often
mentioned observes) may be applied to Vespasian, who was appointed to command
in the Wars against the Jews, and being a Person of mean Birth and obscure
Family, had no thoughts of aspiring to the Imperial Seat: but by the
unseasonable desire of the Jews to exalt themselves above all Nations, they
hoised him up to the most sublime pitch of Greatness, who was ordained by God
to pluck them down from their Seat, and bring them beneath all People. See Dr.
Jackson, Book I. on the Creed, Cap. XXIII. Paragraph. 3, 4, etc. For he quite
extinguished their Glory, which was their Temple at Jerusalem: and likewise
shut up and profaned the Temple which the Egyptian Jews had built in the
Country of Heliopolis; after it had stood above Three hundred years.

Ver. 44. He shall lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to him; he shall be
the head, and thou shall be the tail.] Thus the Covenant of God, to exalt this
People, v. 12, 13.) all the Plagues threatened to those who bare ill will to
Sion, lighting on them and their Friends; and all the Blessings promised to
such as prayed for her Peace, being heaped on those that wrought her ruin.

Moreover, all these Curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and
overtake thee, till thou be destroyed.] These Punishments, he means, should not
cease, but follow one upon another, till they had brought them to utter ruin.
Which is so evidently fulfilled, that would but the Atheists consider it, and
lay it to heart, it would wring from them a Confession, of the truth of what
these Divine Oracles have uttered, That this was a People, who had been
appointed to destruction. For though there be a great many of them remaining,
in several parts of the World, yet they have never been suffered to grow into a
Nation; but in that sense are utterly destroyed, as Moses here prophesied.

Because thou hearknedst not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his
Commandments, and his Statutes which I commanded thee this day.] It has
manifestly appeared the hand of God is very heavy upon them, for their
Disobedience to him; there being no other reason, why they, who were once so
favored by him, should be so long as they have been, more miserable than any
other People.

And they shall be upon thee.] That is, the Curses beforementioned, should
remain fixed upon them; and continue unremoved from Age to Age.

For a sign, and for a wonder.] That all Men may take notice of them, and look
upon them as extraordinary Tokens of God's high displeasure; and take warning
thereby to beware of their Infidelity and Disobedience. For, as that great Man
often says, No sign can be given equivalent to the desolatiqn of the Jewish
Nation; and their continuing still banished from their own Land, and miserably
treated in all other Countries.

And upon thy seed for ever.] All the World may clearly see (to use his words
again) that the God of their Fathers has cast them off; they having no signs
or badges of his ancient wonted favors; whilst innumerable Marks and Scars of
his fearful Indignation against their Fathers, remain unhealed in their
Children, after more Generations, than their Ancestors had of Prosperity in the
promised Land.

Ver. 47. Because thou servedst not the LORD thy Or, In the abundance of all
things: for this is opposed to the hunger and thirst, in which (he says in the
next Verse) they should serve their Enemies, as a punishment for their wanton
abuse of God's Mercies. Which being so exceeding great, justly required not
only their obedience, but cheerfulness and delight therein.

Ver. 48. Therefore shall thou serve thine Enemies, He does not call the LORD
their God, as he did before; now they were abandoned by him for their sins.

In hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and in want of all things.] This shows
what he meant before by abundance of all things: plentiful provision of Food
and Raiment, and all other things belonging to the Comfort of Life.

And he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck.] The loss of Liberty was as
great a Misery as any other; which ended also in hard Servitude. And it was but
just, that they should be Slaves in the Land of their Enemies to cruel Masters,
who would not in their own Country serve so gracious and loving a Father as the
LORD their God.

A yoke of iron.] Signifies an unsupportable Yoke, which could not be broken.
See XXVIII Jerem. 13, 14.

And the LORD shall bring a Nation against thee from far.] This evidently
belongs to the Romans, as Manasseh ben Israel acknowledges; who thinks that at
this Verse begins his Prophecy of their Calamities under the second Temple, as
in the foregoing he describes their Calamities under the first. And in this, I
think, he says right, That there is scarce any thing mentioned in the
following part of this Chapter, but what relates to what they suffered under
the second Temple (as he speaks) and since its destruction: though I cannot
say, as he does, of the foregoing part of it, that it was fulfilled in the
Calamities which befell them under the first Temple; for many things were never
so completely fulfilled, as since they crucified our Savior.

From the end of the earth.] This shows he speaks of the Romans, rather then of
the Chaldaeans; who did not come from far, much less from the end of the earth;
but out of the North Country, which was not very far distant from Judaea.
Whereas the Romans, by whom they were last destroyed, came literally from far,
and from the end of the earth. Particularly Julius Severus was called by the
Emperor Adrian, to their destruction, out of this Island of Britain. Wherein
Vespasian also had given great proof of his Conduct. And Adrian himself, and
Trajan by whom they were still more crushed, after Vespasian had destroyed
their City and Temple, were both Spaniards by birth. And therefore Manasseh ben
Israel says peremptorily in his Book de Termino Vitae, (Lib. III. Sect. III.)
this is to be understood of the Soldiers in Vespasian's Army, which he brought
out of England, France and Spain, and other remote parts of the World.

As swift as the Eagles.] Which every one knows the Romans carried in their
Ensigns. And these Birds are observed to fly upon their Prey with great force
and violence; to whom therefore fierce Soldiers (such as the Romans were) are
compared, when they set upon their Enemies. So Homer describes Achilles falling
upon the Trojans, (...) -- in Iliad PH. where (...) signifies (...), furious
assaults, as the Scholiast interprets it. And so he speaks concerning Hector,
Iliad. X. As David also speaks of Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.23. and the
Chaldaeans are so described coming against Jerusalem, IV Jerem. 13. XLVIII. 40.
XLIX. 22. I Lament. 19 XVII Ezekiel. 3. and see VII Daniel 4. and Bochartus in his
Hierozoicon, Pars I. Lib. II. Cap. IX. P. II. Lib. II. Cap. II.

A Nation whose tongue thou shall not understand.] The Roman Tongue was more
strange to them than the Chaldaean; especially the Language of many Nations of
which the Roman Army was composed. And being a People whom their Ancestors
perhaps never heard of, Dr. Jackson justly looks upon the Destruction and
general Desolation of their Country, made by the Romans and their Tributaries
in these Western Parts of the World, as an Everlasting Monument of the truth of
Moses his Prophecy, in this and in the following Verses.

A Nation.] This word Nation being used thrice in this and the foregoing Verse,
Manasseh ben Israel (in the place forenamed) is so critical, as to observe that
this Repetition shows, Jerusalem was to suffer thrice by the Roman power.
First, In the time of Pompey; and secondly, when Sosius came to the assistance
of Herod against Antigonus; and thirdly, when it was besieged and overturned by
Vespasian and his Son Titus.

Of a fierce countenance.] So we translate this Phrase, VIII Daniel 23. which
in the Hebrew is, a strong, or hard face. Accordingly we translate it impudent
(or in our language brazen-faced) VII Prove. 13. and hard, XXI Prove. 29. and
bold of face, VIII Eccles. 1. All which set forth a People stern, fierce,
undaunted, cruel and hard-hearted; that had neither mercy nor modesty, but
inflexibly pursued their designs; which is the true Character of the old Romans.

Which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young.]
These are wont to be pitied, being unable to hurt others; but in their Wars
with the Jews the Romans spared no body: their Rage and fury extinguishing all
reverence to gray hairs, and all tenderness to young babes.

And he shall eat the fruit of thy Cattle, and the fruit of thy Land, until
thou be destroyed.] For they brought such vast Armies, as devoured all the
Provisions in the Country.

Which also shall not leave thee corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy
kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.] He repeats it
again, in more particular words; to set forth the Desolation to be so great,
that nothing should remain for their support.

Ver. 52. And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates.] Jews fled into their
fenced Cities, where they had laid up some Provisions, to enable them to hold
out a siege.

Until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustest, throughout
thy Land.] This was literally fulfilled by the Romans, to whom the best
fortified places were forced to yield; as may be seen in Josephus his History
of the Jewish War; which is the best Commentary on this part of the Prophecy.
The Walls of Jerusalem particularly were razed by Pompey; and Sosius took it
again by force in the time of Augustus. But Tacitus tells us, That the Jews
took such advantage of the Covetousness of Claudius, that they purchased of him
the liberty to fortify their City again. Which they did so well, that they
trusted, as Moses here speaks, to its strength; which was so great, that Titus
could not take it, but by a long siege, which concluded in its utter ruin.

He shall besiege thee in all thy gates, throughout all the Land which the LORD
thy God has given thee.] He repeats it again, that they might not think to
find security in any place whatsoever, though never so strongly fortified, and
well provided with all things necessary for its defense.

Ver. 53. And thou shall eat the fruit of thine own body, the straitness
wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee.] This was fulfilled to a tittle by
Vespasian and his Son Titus; who after they had vanquished them in the Field,
begirt them so close in Jerusalem, that they could not stir out; and rather
than Surrender, perished by a lamentable Famine. For there were vast Multitudes
of People shut up in the City, which run thither from all parts for safety. Who
brought the Famine sooner upon them, and made it more severe when it came. If
we may believe R. David Ganz, it was furthered also by a Fire, which the
seditious People kindled; whereby Fourteen hundred Magazines were consumed,
stored with Provisions to serve two hundred thousand People for twenty years.
For this he quotes Josephus, though no such thing is to be found in him.

So that the man that is tender, and very delicate among you.] The two Hebrew
words for tender and delicate, signify a Man that had lived in pleasure, and
fared daintily, like the rich Man in the Gospel.

His eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom,
etc.] Grutch every bit which he sees his nearest Relations eat; being ready to
snatch it out of the Mouth of his dear Consort and Children, and put it into
his own. For this is the effect of a ravenous hunger.

And toward the remnant of his Children, which he shall have.] This imports
that they should see many of them die in the siege. For Famine forced them to
feed on bad Food, and that bred Pestilential Diseases, which swept away many;
and increased still more by the Carcases of those that were famished. If any
credit may be given to one of their own Authors David Ganz, there were above an
hundred and sixteen thousand dead Bodies of the rich and honorable Men of
Jerusalem, carried out at one Gate of the City, which was that of the Brook
Kedron, besides those which were carried out at other Gates, and thrown over
the Walls. And this he pretends to have out of Minchas the Son of Seruk, who
was a faithful Register in that City. Josephus mentions almost the same number,
Lib. VII. de Bello Judaico, cap. ult.

Ver. 55. So that he shall not give to any of them of This is a description of
the sorest Famine, which forced them, after they had eaten up their Horses,
Dogs, Cats, and such like Creatures, and their very Belts and Shoes; to eat
even their own Children. Which Fathers, who used to live deliciously, Moses
prophecies should eat up themselves privately, and let none share with them.

Because he has nothing left in the siege, and in the straitness wherewith
thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates.] They were so sorely pincht
with Famine, in a long siege, that they had nothing else remaining but their
own Offspring, and one another, wherewith to satisfy their hunger. Josephus
observes ( Lib. VII. de Bello Judaico, Cap. 18.) that Jerusalem had been taken
five times before this; but never suffered so dreadfully as by Titus; whom the
Talmudists therefore call by the name of impious. Which Epithet belonged rather
to themselves, who having with wicked hands (as St. Peter speaks) crucified and
slain their Redeemer, were, by the just Judgment of God upon them for their
Infidelity, hardened in an obstinate belief and expectation of a Deliverer from
the Romans, till they were reduced to those Extremities.

The tender and delicate Women among you, that would not adventure to set the
sole of her foot upon the ground, for delicateness and tenderness.] A
description of the greatest softness and delicacy; which both the Chaldees
express by a word that signifies the nicest motion, and going so slow a pace,
as if they were loath to touch the ground. See Bochartus in his Phaleg. Lib. IV.
Cap. XIX.

Her eye shall be evil toward the Husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and
toward her daughter.] This is only an higher instance of the cruel Effects of
their Distress by Famine. For Women, especially of the better sort, are
naturally more tender and pitiful than Men; and have the most passionate Love
to their Children; which Moses here prophecies should be quite extinguished by
hunger. And it was literally fulfilled, both in the siege of Samaria, wherein a
Woman boiled her Son, 2 Kings V. 28, 29. as a Man did in the first siege of
Jerusalem by the Babylonians, II Baruch 3. and see II Lament. 20. IV. 10. But
never so exactly fulfilled as in the last siege by the Romans, when a noble
Woman (which fully answers to this Prophecy, such Persons being very delicate)
did the very same; as Josephus relates in his Book of the Jewish War, Lib. VII.
Cap. VIII. A most unnatural fact, as he observes, which was never committed,
either by Greek or Barbarian; and which he would not have related, because it
might seem incredible, if there had not been many Witnesses of it besides
himself.

And toward her young one that comes out from between her feet.] Toward her
newborn Babe; which is wont to be welcomed into the World with great joy; but
in this siege dispatched out of it, to assuage the rage of their hunger. In the
Hebrew (as we take notice in the Margin) the word we translate young one,
properly signifies the afterbirth: And so the LXX. translate it, (...). Which
makes this passage most plain; that their hunger should make them so unnatural,
as first to eat the Afterbirth which came from them, and then the Child which
was wrapped in it.

And toward her children which she shall bear.] The rest of their Children;
whose cries for Food they had no way to stop, but by killing them, and making
them their own Food. So it follows in the next words.

For she shall eat them for want of all things.] Having nothing else left to
eat. For they had devoured, not only the leather of their Girdles, and their
Shoes, and which covered their Shields; but the very stale Dung of Oxen, and
such things as the most sordid of all living Creatures would not eat. See
Josephus Lib. III. (...), Cap. XVI. Lib. VII. Cap. VII.

Secretly.] It was not done secretly for any other reason, but least any body
should have a share with them; and so make their hunger return the sooner. And
yet it was a hard matter to conceal what they had done of this kind: for the
seditious People presently smelling there had been something boild, got into
the House, when she had eaten one half of her Child, and found the other half,
which she had left till another time; of which she invited them to eat.

In the siege and straitness.] These two words which are used here, and v. 53.
and 55. may both relate to the grievous Miseries they should endure, when they
were besieged ( v. 52.) and may be translated, in the pressure, and straits,
wherewith thine Enemies, etc.

Wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in thy gates.] We have not such an
account of their distress in other Cities, as we have of what they suffered in
Jerusalem; where, (...), an innumerable multitude perished by Famine, (as
Josephus tells us, L. VII. (...), Cap. VII.) and ineffable Calamities thereupon
happened. For in every House, where the least shadow of Food appeared, a War
immediately began; and the dearest Relations fell to blows, snatching away from
each other the miserable Supports of Life. Nor would they let those that were
dying expire quietly, not believing what they affirmed, when they told them
they had no Food in their Houses; but the Cutthroats came and searched their
very Bosoms, as they lay drawing their last breath, whether they had not there
hid some Food.

If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law, which are written in
this Book.] Among which, those words are most remarkable XVIII. 15, 18, 19. A
Prophet shall the LORD thy God raise up unto thee, like unto me, unto him shall
ye hearken, etc. Whosoever will not hearken unto the words which he shall speak
in my Name, I will require it of him.

That thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, the LORD THY GOD.] That
is, fear the great LORD of Heaven and Earth, and their special Benefactor: who
is most glorious in himself, and to be most humbly reverenced by us. For the
Name of God, is God himself: from whence it is that he is sometimes called
HASCHEM, the Name, XXIV Lev. 11. This shows the reason why Moses repeats this
Name, the LORD THY GOD, so often as he does in the Preface to this Book, Chapt.
VI, VII, VIII, IX, etc. In some of which there is scarce a Verse wherein we do
not meet with these words: and it is sometimes repeated no less than three
times in one and the same Verse, XII. 18. XVI. 15. that God might be in all
their Thoughts; and the fear of him might possess their Hearts.

Ver. 59. Then the LORD.] If they still persisted Jerusalem and the Temple were
destroyed, and such unheard of Calamities as they had suffered during the siege
of that place, he threatens to bring upon them more astonishing Judgments.

Will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great
plagues, and of long continuance.] Though their great Plagues, under Vespasian,
by Famine, Sword and Pestilence, had lessened their numbers exceedingly; yet by
the time of Trajan and Adrian, they had, like Traitors taken for a while from
the Rack, (to use Dr. Jackson's words) recovered strength enough to be put to
greater torture. For then they were made a Spectacle to the World of the Divine
Vengeance again; which they brought upon themselves by their Rebellion; and
showed therein their natural strength, by their grievous lingering pains in
dying. For not only in Mesopotamia and in Cyprus, but especially in Cyrene, and
throughout all Egypt, they broke out into such outrages, (...), as if they had
been possessed with some fierce and seditious Spirit (as Eusebius speaks, Lib.
IV. Eccles. Hist. Cap. II.) whereupon Marcius Turbo was sent against them, and
setting upon them both by Sea and Land, with Horse and Foot, made a vast
destruction of them. See Dion Lib. LXVIII. and Xiphilinus; who describe their
slaughter to have been so great, that now was fulfilled (as the forenamed Dr.
Jackson thinks) what Moses foretold in this place, The LORD will make thy
plagues wonderful, great plagues, and of long continuance. And indeed Eusebius
says in the forenamed place, that Turbo destroyed many thousands of them,
(...), etc. in many battles, and in no small time; the War being protracted a
great while, to complete their destruction. And the application of this
Prophecy to this Time, may be confirmed by a strange Relation which we meet
withal in their own Books. For in the Jerusalem Talmud, one of their Doctors
tells us, That when Trajan came upon them with his Army, they were reading
these very words of the Law, v. 49. the LORD shall bring a Nation against thee
from far, from the ends of the earth, etc. which he understanding (having asked
them what they were doing) he cried out, Here is the man (pointing to himself)
who am come five days sooner than I intended. And immediately compassing them
about with his Legions, slew them all. Then he went to their Wives and offered
them Mercy, if they would submit themselves: But they replied, What thou have
done to the ground, do to the stubble. So he dispatched them also; and shed so
much Blood that it ran into the Sea, as far as Cyprus. At this time (so he
concludes his Story) the Horn of Israel was cut off from Israel, never to be
restored into its place, till the Son of David come. This passage I find
alleged by Joh. Benedictus Carpzovius out of Massec. Sanhedr. in explication
of another matter in Schickard's Mischpat Hammelek, Cap. III. Theor. X. p. 199.

And sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.] Such as Gonorhaea's, Leprosies,
and burning Fevers; as the Author of the old Nitzacon, set forth by J.
Wagenseil explains it, p. 131.

Ver. 60. Moreover, he shall bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which
thou wast afraid of, and they The same Diseases he foretells should infest them
in, and after, their destruction by the Romans, which had done formerly under
the Chaldaeans, and other Oppressors, v. 27. What these Diseases were, Pet.
Cunaeus Lib. II. de Republ. Jud. Cap. ult. has expressed in these words,
Vitiligines, psorasque and tetra ulcera, etc. Leprosies, Itches, Botches, and
foul stinking Ulcers, the greatest Physicians have anciently ascribed to the
Egyptians and Syrians, as Plagues proper to those Nations; unto which Diseases,
he observes, the Jews were strangely obnoxious.

Ver. 61. Also every sickness, and every plague which It had been too long to
have set down all the Diseases and Calamities that Mankind are subject to: but
he tells them, they should not escape any one of them, though very numerous;
and be afflicted with them till their destruction was completed. For they were
of such long continuance, as was said before, and pursued them so closely
whithersoever they went, that they are no longer a Nation, but a scattered,
forlorn People, abandoned and forsaken by him that formerly protected them. Of
this they themselves are so sensible, that they have confessed the truth of
this part of the Prophecy, in these latter Ages. For Solomon ben Virgoe having
related (in the fiftieth Section of his Book called Schebet Jehuda) how they
were transported out of Palestine into Spain, and so miserably handled, that
not one of a thousand remained; and then how they were destroyed in Germany and
France, where, of innumerable Multitudes, (equal to the number which came out
of Egypt) scarce Five thousand survived that Calamity; and what he himself saw
in Castile and Portugal (where they suffered such things as cannot be
expressed, nor conceived, by Famine, by Depredations, by Transportations, and
by being sold for Slaves, or drowned in the Sea) he thus at last concludes his
sad Story, that they who fled to avoid that dreadful Tempest in Castile, found
the truth of this Oracle, Every sickness and plague which is not written in the
Book of this Law, shall the LORD bring upon thee, till thou be destroyed.

And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for
multitude.] The multitude of the Jews killed in the Wars, was equal to the
number of living Men in Israel. in the time of King David. For Josephus says,
That in the siege of Jerusalem there were destroyed, by Pestilence, Famine and
other ways, Eleven hundred thousand; besides above Ninety thousand carried
Captive. For they being come from all Countries to keep the Passover, the whole
Nation (as his words are, Lib. VII. (...), Cap. XVII.) were shut up here by a
fate (...), as in a close Prison: or rather driven thither (as Dr. Jackson
speaks) into a Slaughterhouse; after they had been foild by the Romans in the
Field. And yet after this they recovered strength (as I observed before) merely
to be more tormented, and miserably destroyed. For in the reign of Adrian (who
succeeded the Emperor Trajan) they shook the Roman Empire by their rebellious
Commotions; as Dion, who lived not long after, relates in his History, Lib.
LXIX. which moved Adrian to exercise the greater Severity upon them, in their
punishment; there being slain of them in Battles and Skirmishes, Five hundred
and eighty thousand, besides a vast number consumed by Famine, and Sicknesses,
and Fire, during the time of this lingering War; which Julius Severus, a famous
Commander, sent for on purpose out of Britain, designedly protracted to a great
length, not being willing to try it out in the Field in one Battle, with a
desperate Multitude. And now, as Moses foretold, they were left few in number:
For Dion, as if he had intended to expound these words, says that Severus so
beset and attacked them separately, in several Parties, that very few of them
escaped; fifty of their strongest Fortresses being utterly razed; and nine
hundred eighty and five of their most noble and populous Towns sacked and
consumed by fire; with the slaughter of the forementioned number. Insomuch,
that, as his words are, all Judaea was in a manner laid waste, and left as a
Desert. This we may truly call the last Conflict of this Nation with Death and
Destruction in their own Land; out of which they were now almost totally
expelled.

Because thou would not obey the voice of the LORD thy God.] Who had spoken
to them by that great Prophet, his Eternal WORD, promised in the eighteenth
Chapter of this Book, v. 15, etc. but they would not hearken to him. For which
Cause he gave them up to listen unto false Christ's, whom they followed to their
destruction. Particularly Barchocheba, who in the time of Adrian took upon him
the Title of their King, and set up his Throne at Bitter, in the Tribe of
Benjamin; which the Jews had made their cheaf Seat after the Destruction of
Jerusalem; and had in it, as they pretend, four hundred Synagogues. Here the
Romans made such a slaughter of them, when they took it, that the Jews
themselves cannot find Expressions tragical enough to represent it. Twice as
many, they tell us, perished now, as came out of Egypt; great Rivers ran with
the Blood of the slain, which (say some of them) carried great Rocks along with
it in the stream. With these, and many other such like hyperbolical Speeches,
they themselves exaggerate their Calamities, as many have observed out of
Juchasin and Gittin; particularly Constable. L'Empereur in his Annotations on
Jacchiades, XI Dan. 34.

But though now they were left few in number in Judaea, yet in other Countries
where they were dispersed, they multiplied again; that God's Plagues might
continue to be multiplied upon them, and this Prophecy more perfectly
fulfilled. For some Ages after this ( An. 1009.) they had so incensed Christian
People against them, by bringing the Persians upon them, who destroyed the
Churches dedicated to our Savior at Jerusalem, that it was resolved by the
common consent of all Christians, that no Jew should live in their Territories;
but be driven out of them throughout all the World. By which means the greatest
part of them died of several kinds of death, or made away themselves, so that
vix pauci residui fierent in orb Romano, there remained but a very few of them
in the Roman World. They are the words of Glauber, who relates this Lib. III.
Cap. VII.

And it shall come to pass, as the LORD rejoiced over you to do you good, and
to multiply you; so the LORD will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring
you to naught.] The state of the Jews from the time of Adrian, till the
expiration of the Roman Empire, cannot be gathered from the Roman Writers; but
the Fathers of the Church often mention their Miseries, and so do their own
Authors. Particularly the Author of Schebet Jehuda; who says, It is not in the
power of Man to tell all the Kingdoms and Cities where they were scattered; in
which they suffered things so horrid, that it is fitter to pass them over in
silence, than to relate them. But therein was verified the Divine Prediction,
XXVI Lev. 38. Ye shall perish among the heathen, and the Land of your Enemies
shall eat you up. Sect. XLIX. And Dr. Jackson to explain this has more
particularly observed, That as God raised up Cyrus, in testimony of his
rejoicing to do them good, who released them from their Captivity in Babylon;
so to give the World a proof of his rejoicing to destroy them, and bring them
to naught, he advanced Philip Augustus to the Crown of France (about An. 1179.)
to defeat all the hopes, which some kindness shown unto them had put into their
hearts. For he spoiled their Synagogues of all their Donatives and Ornaments;
confiscated all their Lands and immovable Goods; and granted a Release of all
Debts due unto them from Christians. See Book I. upon the Creed, Cap. XXVIII.
Paragr. 13.

And ye shall be plucked from off the Land whither thou go to possess it.]
This was wonderfully fulfilled by Adrian; who, after the strange Desolation
beforementioned, prohibited by a Public Decree, ratified with the Senates
consent, any Jew to come within sight of Judaea. This he did out of a politic
respect, lest the sight of their Native Soil might inspire them with some fresh
desperate Resolutions to endeavor their Settlement there again: but herein he
was unwittingly the Angel of God (as the same excellent Person speaks) to keep
this wicked Race, out of that Paradise; the good Land, out of which he had
driven them.

And the LORD shall scatter thee among all people.] That was the effect of
Adrian's severe Decree, of not coming within view of their own Country; which
made them disperse all the World over, where they could find any admittance.

From the one end of the earth even unto the other.] Such as were carried
Captive in Adrian's War, were transported by his order into Spain, his own
native Country; which was then accounted the End of the World westward. And
many of them, it is evident by their own Books, fled to Babylon, and the
Countries thereabout, which was as far as they knew Eastward. In Spain they
continued many years in great abundance; as it were, expecting a Wind for their
Passage to some place more distant from their ancient Seat. And who knows
whether many of them have not, since the discovery of America, been transported
thither, as I before observed? Certain it is, that the Jews themselves are
sensible this Prophecy was not fulfilled, till this their last dispersion after
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. For thus R. Isaac, who had occasion
to mention these words (in his Munimen Fidei lately brought to light by
Wagenseil, Perek VI.) glosses upon them: In the Roman Captivity, the Jews were
dispersed and dissipated, through all the Regions of the East and of the West:
For every Nation of which the Roman Army consisted, when they returned to their
own Countries, carried some of them along with them, into Greece, Germany,
Italy, Spain, France, and all other Countries which either Christians or
Mahometans now possess.

And there thou shall serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known, even wood and stone.] Here that excellent Person I have so often
mentioned, (Dr. Jackson) commends it to the Readers consideration, whether this
part of Moses his Prophecy may not be understood of the Convert Jews throughout
the Pope's Dominions, who are often urged to commit Idolatry with Stocks and
Stones, upon more tyrannical terms (if they gainsay) than their forefathers
were, either by the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, Egyptians, Romans, or any whatsoever
that led them Captive out of their Land.

If it be said, There is a great difference between the Heathen Idolatry, and
the present Image Worship in the Roman Church; it is granted the Idolatry is of
a diverse kind, and so it seems Moses meant, when he threatens the Jews, after
their final Transportation into these Western Countries, should serve such gods
as their fathers had not known: for their Forefathers, before Moses his time
and after, had known the Heathen gods too well; but were perfect Strangers to
this Image Worship now in use. And to strengthen this interpretation, it ought
to be observed, that these words, which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known, are omitted in the thirty sixth Verse of this Chapter; where he speaks
of their serving of other gods of wood and stone, as he does here. But that
part of the Prophecy belongs to what they did in the first Captivity into
Babylon, as Manasseh ben Israel observes. Who understands these words to be a
Prophecy of what they have suffered in this last Dispersion. For reciting these
words ( Lib. III. de Termino Vitae, Sect. 3. p. 131.) as containing the
greatest Calamity that has befaln them, he says, This we see fulfilled, after
a singular manner, in this present Captivity; because of all those Evils
wherewith the Hebrews have been afflicted in France, and England, and Spain.
For they had been often pressed, either to renounce their Religion, or to be
undone: and many times chose rather to comply with the Idolatrous Worship in
the Roman Church, then be banished, and have their Goods confiscated.

And among these Nations shall thou find no rest.] This was wonderfully
fulfilled in the Ages which followed that in which Adrian lived; when they both
disturbed others, and could find no rest themselves. For in the third Century
they raised Sedition in the Reign of Severus; by whom they suffered very much,
about the Year 202. after our Savior's Birth: And in the next Century we are
informed by St. Chrysostom, in his second Oration against the Jews, (Tom. VI.
Edit. Savil. p. 333.) That they rebelled again in the Time of Constantine; who
causing their Ears to be cropped off, dispersed them, (...), as vile Fugitives
and Vagabonds, into various Countries; where they carried this Mark of Infamy
along with them, that all might be instructed to make no more such Attempts.
But in the fifth Century they made new Commotions, and were driven out of
Alexandria for their Seditious Practices, where they had been settled ever
since the time of Alexander the Great, and dispersed into several Countries; as
Socrates observes in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. VII. Cap. XVI. And in the
next Chapter relates how miserably they were deluded in Crete by one that
pretended to be Moses, come down from Heaven to lead them to their own Land,
through the Sea, into which many threw themselves, and perished. That Expulsion
out of Alexandria is mentioned by David Ganz also, one of their own Authors. In
the sixth Century, as Elmacinus tells us, they again rebelled in Palestine
against the Romans, who slew a great number of them. And in the seventh they
were expelled from Antioch by Phocas, and out of Jerusalem by Heraclius: and
out of Spain (An. 604.) by Sisebutus, or, as some call him, Sisebodus King of
the Goths: And they flying in great numbers into France, were shortly after put
to this hard choice, either to renounce their Religion, or lose all they had.
Which Persecution Dr. Jackson observes in the Book often mentioned ( Cap.
XXVIII. Paragr. 1.) is recorded by those who wrote the Life of Dagobert, as one
of the chief Memorables of his Reign. What their state was in the next three
Centuries, he says, he had observed nothing remarkable. Nor can I find any
thing notable in the eighth, but the appearance of a false Messiah, by whom
they were deluded, and brought into trouble. As for the ninth there were no
learned Men among them in that Age, nor in the Christian World. And in the
tenth they were in the same condition; insomuch that they were fain to make a
Weaver the Head of one of their Universities.

Neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest.] They being not able to obtain a
long Settlement any where; but were tossed up and down, and forced from one
Country to another. For so it was, that in the beginning of the eleventh
Century, about the Year of our Lord One thousand, they were so vexed throughout
the most part of Europe, that quid agerent, aut quo se verterent nesciebant,
they knew not what they should do, or which way they should turn themselves, as
the forenamed Doctor observes ( Paragr. 4.) out of Papirius Massonus, who has
it out of Glauber. To which I will add this Testimony out of David Ganz, in his
Book called Tzemach David, that in the latter end of this Century ( An. MXCVI.)
when there was a famous Expedition for the recovery of the Holy Land, the Jews
felt it a most calamitous time, (as he speaks) being robbed, and pillaged, and
killed by the Soldiers as they went along. And indeed, so much Cruelty was
exercised upon them, that it moved St. Bernard's Compassion, to write to the
Bishop, Clergy, and People of Spire, not to persecute them, much less kill
them, or drive them out of their Country: For they are dispersed, said he, into
all Lands, that while they suffer the just punishment of their horrid
wickedness, they may be witnesses of our redemption. Epist. CCCXXII. And the
Author of Schebet Juda mentioning their Banishment out of Savoy, Piedmont,
Lombardy, Sicily, and other Countries, quotes these very words of Moses (among
those Nations thou shall find no rest, etc.) as a Prophecy of that Exile; which
was accompanied with many other Mischiefs. For as they fled to other Countries,
an immense multitude of People fell upon them, and pillaged them of all the
Gold and Silver they were carrying away with them; as he relates there Sect. XI.

And the LORD shall give thee a trembling heart.] They being always in dread of
some new Misery; their Condition still growing more dismal in the twelfth
Century. For as there is a progress in Moses his Prophecy of the increase of
their Calamities; so it proved in the event, that their Sufferings grew greater
and greater. They themselves (in Tzemach David and other Books) relate that in
the Year 1142. an Hundred and twenty of their Congregations, were utterly
subverted and dispersed. And in the Year 1170. they were expelled again out of
France, and spoiled of their Treasure: which was renewed in the Year 1198. How
they were used here in England, our own Chronicles tell us: and the like ill
usage they met withal in Germany and Spain. So that R. Zacut complains of no
less than ten grievous Persecutions in this one Age, to abolish the name of
Jews out of the World. This could not but give them a very trembling heart.

And failing of thine eyes.] Which looked for some relief; instead whereof they
were still more hardly used in the thirteenth Century: being in the Year 1253.
again expelled out of France, whither they had returned; and again in 1295.
when they expected some rest, there was a fresh Expulsion, mentioned by R. Levi
ben Gersom: who says they were spoiled of all their Goods, and sent away only
with their Clothes upon their backs. Which he affirms with the more confidence,
because it was done in his time; when he says there was such a number of them,
that they exceeded those that came out of Egypt. So he writes in his Exposition
of those words XXIII Numb. 10. Who can count the dust of Jacob? I will forbear
to mention how they were treated here in England (1290.) and in Germany: into
which they flying out of France, were most cruelly used.

And sorrow of mind.] Which must needs seize upon them heavily, to find their
Miseries so far from abating. that they still increased in the fourteenth
Century. When they were banished again out of France, and spoiled of their
Goods 1306. and once more 1395. which the Jews call their fourth and last
Banishment. About the same time they were banished out of Germany, An. 1392. In
Castile indeed they redeemed their Lives with Money, (which they could not part
withal, without much sorrow of mind) but in Catalonia, Arragon, and in other
parts of Spain, such a terrible Storm fell upon them, that they themselves, in
Juchasin, say, there were no less than Two hundred thousand turned Christians,
with heavy hearts. It would be too tedious to mention all that they suffered in
the fifteenth Century in Germany, Hungary, Polonia; and in Italy, Spain, and
Portugal. I will only observe what befell them in the Country last named, in the
next Century, An. 1506. when all that is said in this Verse is fulfilled, by
that dreadful Massacre which was made of them at Lisbon, for three days
together. Where Men were not suffered to die of their deadly wounds, but were
dragged by their mangled Limbs into the Market Place, where the Bodies of the
living and the slain, with others half alive, half dead, were burnt together in
heaps. The Spectacle was so horrible, that it quite astonished the rest of this
wretched People; two thousand of which perished in this barbarous manner.
Parents durst not mourn for their Children, nor Children sigh for their
Parents, when they saw them haled to the place of Torment: so that their
hearts, no doubt, were ready to break with Grief and Sorrow. In short, Sic eos
metus exanimaverat, ut vivi non multum a mortuorum similitudine distarent. Fear
had so dispirited them, that the living, in their Aspect, did not much differ
from the dead. Which words of Osorius (in his fourth Book de Rebus Emanuelis)
our Dr. Jackson, who relates this sad Story out of him, looks upon as a
Paraphrase upon these words of Moses (though Osorius did not think of them) I
will give thee a trembling heart, and failing of the eyes, and sorrow of mind.

There are those, who by a trembling heart, understand the Terrors of an Evil
Conscience. So D. Chytraeus p. 131. And by failing of the eyes may be
understood, the constant disappointment of their Hopes, wherewith they were
sometimes fed by false Messiahs in several Ages. Which disappointment bred
great sorrow of Mind, when after earnest expectation of some Good, the quite
contrary came upon them.

Ver. 66. And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee.]

And thou shall fear day and night, and shall have no assurance of life.] So it
was then: none of them knowing who would be next seized, in those three days
Butchery. And so it was in some of their Banishments, which they were told
should be the best remedy for the evils impending over them, as the Author of
Schebet Juda speaks: who tells us ( Sect. XXIII.) that the reason which some
Princes gave for their Expulsion out of their Territories, was to prevent their
being torn in pieces by the People, who were most furiously set against them.

Ver. 67. And in the morning thou shall say, would That they might not see
those miserable Spectacles, which they hoped would end in the night, when Men
went to rest.

And at even thou shall say, would God it were morning.] Being afraid of unseen
Dangers, to which the Night might give an opportunity: or, that they might not
see their way, when they fled by Sea and Land, from one Country to another; as
they were forced to do very often. For Abarbinel in his Commentary upon XL
Isaiah 11. reckons up four universal Banishments, out of the Countries where
they lived. The first out of England; the next out of France; the third out of
Asia, Germany, Tuscany, Lumbardy, and Savoy; and the last out of Spain; when he
himself was one of those who were constrained to leave that Country, and knew
not whither to go. He has given us a lively description of that Calamity (like
to which, he says, none had ever befaln them since they were banished their
own Country) in his Preface to his Commentary upon the Book of the Kings; which
he wrote the very next Year after their Expulsion (1493.) and the Author of
Schebet Juda has transcribed in his own words. A Decree was made and
proclaimed publicly, that all the Jews should either change their Religion, or
quit the Country in three Months time. Abarbinel had then a place in the Court;
where he petitioned the King, and besought his Ministers and Counselors to
revoke the Edict, and be content with their Estates, which they offered to him:
but all in vain. For Three hundred thousand, old and young, Men and Women, and
he among the rest, went away on foot, upon one day; not knowing whither to go.
Some went into Portugal; others into Navar: where they conflicted with many
Calamities. For some became a Prey, or perished by Famine and Pestilence. And
therefore others committed themselves to the Sea, hoping to find a quiet Seat
in some other Countries. But on the Sea they met with new Disasters; for many
were sold as Slaves, when they came on any Coast; many were drowned; many burnt
in the Ships which were set on fire: in short, all suffered the just Punishment
of God the Avenger, as he speaks. For after all this, a Plague came and swept
away the rest of these miserable Wretches, who were hated by all Mankind: so
that all that vast number perished by one Calamity or other, except a very few.
He that would see more of the woeful Miseries of this People, may look into
Schebet Juda, Sect. LIII. where he shows what befell those who went to seek new
Habitations in the Kingdom of Fess; where they lived a long time upon Grass,
and eat its very Roots, and then died; and their Bodies lay exposed, none being
so charitable as to bury them.

For the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall fear, and for the sight of
thine eyes which thou shall see.] The one of these seems to refer to their
dreadful apprehensions in the Night; and the other to the lamentable Spectacles
they beheld in the day. And the simple meaning of the former part of the Verse
may be, that they should be weary of Life; having no Comfort either Day or
Night.

Ver. 68. And the LORD shall bring thee into Egypt The Jerusalem Targum
translates it, The WORD of the LORD shall bring thee back again. He, that is,
who conducted them out of Egypt in a glorious Cloud, would punish them for
their foul Offenses against him, by bringing them again into Bondage there.
This was first fulfilled after the Desolation made by Titus; when there was, as
I observed before ( v. 62.) above Ninety thousand carried Captive; and many of
them transported into Egypt, as Josephus relates in the conclusion of the
sixteenth Chapter of his Seventh Book concerning the War of the Jews. And here
Manasseh ben Israel has a very pertinent observation, that Vespasian
transported them into many and various Regions; but Egypt is only here named,
the more to reproach the Jews: as if he had said, Ye shall be carried into that
Land as Captives, out of which you came in a triumphant manner, Lib. III. de
Termino vitae, Sect. 3. Which may incline one to think, that he was of the same
mind with our Dr. Jackson, who observing how cruelly they were used here in
England, and many other Countries, concludes that this Island, and every place
of Europe, wherein their Condition of Life has been more hard and burdensome
than their Forefathers was in Egypt, may be said to be that Egypt into which
God threatens here to bring them in Ships.

And indeed, we do not read of their being carried into Egypt after Vespasian's
time; though it is set down here as a Punishment to come upon them after a long
train of other Miseries; and must relate to their rigorous usage, which I have
observed in many Countries in several Ages down to these latter times. The
Jerusalem Talmud, it must be observed, mentions another bringing into Egypt
(literally understood) in the Massechta before-named upon v. 59. where they
say, That as God forbad them three times to return into Egypt (which they there
set down) so they were forced thither three times for their Transgressions
against God: first in the days of Senacherib King of Assyria, XXXI Isa. 1, 3.
secondly in the time of Johanan the Son of Kareah, XLII Jerem. 16. and lastly,
in the time of the Emperor Trajan. But this I look upon as a mistake; for
Trajan rather killed all those whom he found there, than carried them thither;
as I noted before.

With Ships.] Which seems to put them in mind, how different their Condition
was now become, from what it was when they came out of Egypt without any Ships;
for the Sea gave them a passage through it, by being made dry Land. Their being
carried also thither by Ships, made their Condition the more deplorable,
because there was no means of escaping out of them, as there might have been,
if they had gone by Land.

By the way whereof I spoke unto thee.] Or, To the way, (so the Particle beth
often signifies, XI Genesis 4. XVI. 22.) that is, to the place, whereof I said, Ye
shall see it no more again. For it seems to be a manifest allusion to what we
read in the Seventeenth Chapter of this Book, v. 16.

And there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen.]
Exposed to sale like Beasts in the open Market; and that at so vile a price,
that thirty of them (as both Profane and Ecclesiastical Historians relate)
were sold for one small piece of Money: Josephus giving a particular account
how the Captives were disposed of by Titus, says that the most goodly young
Men he reserved to attend his Triumph; of the rest he ordered those above
seventeen years old to be sent bound into Egypt, to labor in the Works there;
many he distributed in the Provinces to perish in the Theater by the Sword and
wild Beasts: and all under Seventeen years old he commanded to be sold. But
while they were making this distribution, Twelve thousand of them died of
Famine; partly by the hatred of their Guards, who gave them no Food; and partly
by the weakness of others, whose Stomachs could not receive it, L. VII. Cap.
XVI. By which a Judgment may be made, how little worth these vile Wretches
were, as it here follows. In after times, I have observed in the course of this
Commentary, how they were sold for Slaves in some places, and in all used as no
better. Benjamin Tudelensis, who went a Pilgrimage to visit his Countrymen,
represents their Condition as most miserable throughout the Eastern Empire. And
particularly complains of their hard usage among the Greeks at Constantinople.
Within the Walls of which City they were not suffered to live, nor to come
thither, but on occasion of Traffic and Business; and that only by Boat, (for
they had their Habitation in a kind of an Island) not a Man being permitted on
Horsback, except only one Solomon the Emperor's Physician. Whose advancement
was their sole Comfort in that miserable Servitude under which the rest
groaned, without any difference of good or bad, (as he acknowledges) who were
daily beaten and abused in the open Streets. Thus he confesses, though his
principal design was to set forth the power they retained in the world.
Itinerarium, p. 27, 28. Edit. L'Empereur.

And no man shall buy you.] Though some, as I said before, were sold at a very
vile rate, next to nothing; yet others hung upon the Sellers hands, (as we
speak) the Market being either so overstockt with their numbers, that none
would cheapen the greatest part of them; or they were so contemptible that no
body would give what was asked for such useless Slaves. For as no Money could
purchase their Peace and Security from Calamities, so neither could their
Calamities, though continually most grievous, (they are the words of Dr.
Jackson) redeem their estimation in the world; nor all the Blood of their Slain
(though their Massacres were numberless) extinguish that hateful and loathsome
Conceit, which most Men had entertained of them. For in the fifteenth Century
they were become so abominable, that several Doctors began to hold it unlawful
for Christians to let them live among them. Particularly the famous Thomas
Turrecremata, Inquisitor General, forbad all Men to have any dealings with
them, or to afford them Meat, or Drink, or any thing else. Whence proceeded the
direful Proscriptions which we read of in that Age, whereby they were forced
out of Spain, Poland, Hungary, and diverse other Countries; where they were not
suffered to live, though with a Note and Character upon them, to distinguish
them from all other Men.

I conclude my Observations on this Chapter, with the Remark which the same
great Man (Dr. Jackson) makes, Chapt. XXII. Paragr. 6. That the extraordinary
Blessings and Plagues which were to overtake this People, being here set down
by Moses; although their Blessings might have been more, and more admirable
than the Curses that have befaln them; yet he either foreseeing, or fearing
what would be, rather than hoping the best that might be, is almost four times
as long in enumerating their Plagues, as he is in their Blessings. And so have
the Miseries of the latter Jews been four times as long, as the Prosperity of
their worthy Ancestors. And since our Savior's Death, all the Plagues which
were in part fulfilled before, have been more than seven times multiplied upon
them. For in their former Overthrows or Captivities, though they suffered the
Violence of War, yet after that Storm was past, so they did but submit to their
Conquerers, they lived well enough, nay usually found more than ordinary favor
at their hands: But since our Savior's Death, they have through all Ages been
more and more miserable; Chapter XXIX.
the memory of their foregoing Plagues having been but an invitation to the
like, or worse; and their continual bad usage prescribing the lawfulness of
their abuse.

CHAP. XXIX.
THese are the words of the Covenant.] The Talmudists in the Gemara of Sota,
Cap. VII. Sect. XXIV. refer these words to the Benedictions and Cursings
mentioned in the foregoing Chapter; which plainly belong to what God delivered
unto Moses in Mount Sinai at the first; which he had now repeated in this Book,
with the addition of several Blessings and Curses to make what he said the more
effectual.

Which the LORD commanded Moses to make.] That is, to renew. For which end
Moses repeated the principal Laws of God, and explained them in this Book;
which is from thence called Deuteronomy: being a Compendium of the Pentateuch,
a Breviary of the Covenant, composed for the familiar and daily use of the
Children of Israel.

With the Children of Israel in the Land of Moab.] Where he declared to them
the Law which he had formerly delivered to their Fathers, I Deuteronomy. 5.

Beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb.] This does not signify
that he made a Covenant with them, different from the former made at Horeb,
(Exodus XXIV.) but only now renewed the same Covenant, after they had shamefully
violated it more more than once. Which was the more necessary, because they
were ready to enter into the Land of Canaan, and he was just upon his departure
from them into another World; and therefore did all he could, to engage them in
a more firm obedience to God. And for that end, both more fully explained
several Laws, and added others, and at large laid before them the Happiness or
the Misery that would ensue, upon their fidelity or falsness in this Covenant.

Ver. 2. And Moses called unto all Israel.] This

And said unto them.] He argued with them from the Knowledge and Experience
which they had of the Power of God, in his wonderful Works; particularly three,
which were very memorable. Those in Egypt, which he mentions here and in the
two next Verses; and those in the Wilderness, v. 5, 6. and lately in the great
Victory he had given them over two potent Kings, v. 7, 8.

Ye have seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the Land of Egypt, unto
Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his Land.] Some of them had
seen (when they were young) and others had understood from them (which is here
called seeing) all the Plagues which God brought upon Pharaoh, and upon his
Court, and upon his whole Country. This he had often called to their mind, in
his Preface to the Repetition of his Laws, (VI. 12. VII. 18, 19. XI. 3, 4.) and
makes it a great aggravation of their guilt, if they should forsake him, who
had done such wonderful things for them, XIII. 5, 10. And now he concludes with
the same Argument, as most powerful to move them, if they had any sense of
their Obligations to the greatest Benefactor.

The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great
miracles.] Of these he had put them in mind before. See IV. 34. VII. 19.

Yet the LORD has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear, unto this day.] They had not so considered and laid to heart
God's wonderful Works, as to have a lasting sense of them bestowed upon them by
God. He gives us an understanding heart, but we must first consider what he
has done for us, as the Apostle instructs us, 2 Timothy II. 7. And he gives us,
what we do not receive; and so in effect it is not given. Thus he says
himself, that he purged Israel, but they would not be purged, XXIV Ezekiel. 13.

What the difference is between an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears
to hear, need not be curiously enquired. They are perhaps but three various
expressions of their gross stupidity; or three degrees of it: which was so
great, that they had no continued sense of the wonderful Works God had done for
them; nor did so much as regard and observe them; no, nor hearken to those who
put them in mind of them. Which must not be imputed to any want of power in
these things to move them; much less of the Divine Grace to work upon their
hearts by them; but was wholly to be ascribed to their own negligence and
perverseness. Of which God here complains, and with which he severely upbraids
them, that he had not given them this Grace. Which is a clear demonstration the
fault was in themselves: and therefore Maimonides rightly and judiciously
explains these words, when he says the meaning is, they had not disposed
themselves to receive this Grace from God.

Ver. 5. And I have led you forty years in the wilderness.] forty years, see
Chapt. II. 7.

Your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon
thy foot.] See VIII. 4. The Jews used no shoes in Egypt, as Bochartus probably
conjectures; but being to take a long Journey, through a rough way in the
Wilderness, he commanded them to eat the Passover with shoes on their feet, XII
Exodus 11. And these very shoes which they put on at that Festival, when they
were ready to march, God suffered not to decay in all their Travels, for forty
years following. See Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. Cap. L.

Ver. 6. Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk Not commonly; though
when they passed by some neighboring Country, they might possibly sometimes
purchase both Bread and Wine, or other strong Liquors: But their ordinary Food
was the heavenly Manna, and their Drink was the Water that followed them out of
the Rock. So that the meaning is, they were constantly supported by a
miraculous supply from God; who took care of them, and thereby laid a greater
Obligation upon them to serve him, who graciously fed them without any labor
of their own. For they neither ploughed nor sowed, nor reaped, nor took any
other pains for this Provision; as they must have done for Bread and Wine, or
other Liquors pressed out of Dates, or Figs, etc.

That ye may know that I am the LORD your God.] This he did for them, that he
might breed and maintain in them a sense of his Omnipotent Power, and of his
All-sufficient Goodness, and Faithfulness to his Promises. Which he intended to
demonstrate at his first giving of Manna to them, XVI Exodus 12.

And when ye came into this place.] For they were now in a part of the Country
which they conquered, IV. 45, 46, etc.

Sihon King of Heshbon, and Og King of Bashan, came out against us to battle,
and we smote them.] XXI Numb. 24, 34, 35. II Deuteronomy. 30, etc* III. 2, 3, etc.

And we took their Land from them, and gave it for an inheritance unto the
Reubenites, etc. See XXXII Numb. 33. and IV Deuteronomy. 12, etc.

Keep therefore the words of this Covenant and do them.] Preserve them in
memory, so as to make good your Engagements which you passed to God in Horeb;
which Moses was now about to renew, and lay a fresh obligation on them. For
most of them being a new Generation, and now going to enter upon the possession
of the Land of Promise, it was necessary to make them sensible of the Condition
of their Tenure, by engaging them in a Solemn Covenant to observe the Laws of
God faithfully; which was but a renewal of what was made before at Horeb.

That ye may prosper in all that you do.] See IV. 6. The Hebrew word which we
translate prosper, the LXX translate act prudently: for they tanslate it (...).
And the Vulgar to the same purpose, ut intelligatis; that ye may understand to
manage your selves wisely in all your Concerns, by observing the Rules God has
given you: Which was the way to prosper.

Ver. 10. Ye stand this day all of you before the LORD your God.] The Summons
which he sent out ( v. 2.) it seems by this, was to appear at the Tabernacle;

Your Captains of your Tribes.] In the Hebrew, your heads of your Tribes; who
were the greatest Persons in the Nation; called sometimes Princes.

Your Elders.] These were not only the LXX. Elders mentioned XI Numb. 16. but
all the other Judges in their several Courts; who are often called by the Name
of Elders in this Book: Particularly XIX. 12, 18. XXI. 2, 4, 6. XXV. 8.

And the Officers.] Who attended upon the Judges, to execute their Sentence.
See XVI. 18.

With all the men of Israel.] All the Men of their several Tribes.

Ver. 11. Your little ones, your wives.] Who were Israel.

And thy stranger that is in thy camp.] Whether Egyptians that followed them
when they came out of Egypt, XII Exodus 38. or other People who had embraced
their Religion; so far, at least, as to renounce all Idolatry.

From the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water.] The meanest
Servant, whom they had bought perhaps with their Money; either in Egypt, or
since they came from thence.

Ver. 12. That thou should enter into Covenant with In the Hebrew the words
are, pass into Covenant. For so Covenants were anciently made in the Eastern
Countries, by dividing the Sacrifice, and passing between the parts of it; as
appears from the manner of God's making a Covenant with Abraham in XV Genesis 10,
17. whence some derive the Hebrew word Berith (which signifies a Covenant) from
Bara, which signifies cutting off: because something was always sacrificed at
the making Covenants, and anciently cut in pieces. For the same reason the
Romans called a Covenant foedus, which they derive a feriendo, from striking,
that is, killing some Beast, (particularly a Swine) which was done with many
Ceremonies.

And into his oath.] The Hebrew word which we translate Oath, rather imports a
Curse, which was annexed to an Oath. And so the LXX. (...): For they entered
into this Covenant with such Imprecations upon themselves as are mentioned
XXVII. 15, 16, etc. Wishing perhaps, that they might be cut in pieces, as the
Sacrifice was, (between whose parts they passed) if they did not faithfully
perform their Engagement.

Which the LORD thy God makes with thee this day.] For the Covenant was
mutual, as appears by the burning Lamp, representing the Divine Majesty,
passing through the pieces of the Sacrifice, when God entered into a Covenant
with Abraham, XV Genesis 17.

That he may establish thee to day a people unto himself.] Confirm them in all
the Privileges which they had often forfeited by breaking his Covenant; of
being his peculiarly above all People, XIX Exodus 5. XIX Deuteronomy. 2.

And that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee.] Bless them,
and do them good, as he had solemnly promised.

And sworn unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.] XII Genesis 2,
3. XVII. 7, 8. XXII. 16, 17. XXVI. 3, 4. XXVIII. 13, 14.

Ver. 14. Neither with you only do I make this covenant, He means those
mentioned v. 10, 11.

Ver. 15. But with him that stands here with us this etc.] I think the
Particle ki (which begins this Verse) should not be translated but: for this is
the same with what was said before, not distinct from it. And therefore should
be translated thus, As with him that stands here with us before the LORD our
God; so also with him that is not here with us this day: i. e. with all that
were absent from the present Assembly; and with all future Posterity, who were
as yet unborn. So the Jerusalem Targum understands the latter part of this
Verse; with all Generations, which shall be after us, as if they stood here
with us to day. And so Vzielides, as they call him, with all Generations to
come, unto the end of the World, as if they stood here with us at this present.
For perpetual Leagues are sometimes made between whole Nations; for whom some
contract in the name and place of all the rest; and bind not only themselves
but their Successors. And thus Kings give Feifs to their Subjects, upon
Conditions which their Families are bound to perform in after Ages, or else
lose the benefit of them.

Ver. 16. For ye know how we have dwelt in the Land of These words, and those
that follow in this and the next Verse, come in as an Argument to move them to
enter into this Covenant; and to show them the necessity of renewing it. For as
God had wonderfully multiplied them in the Land of Egypt; so he delivered them
from thence no less wonderfully, when they were miserably enslaved. Which was
such a Mercy, as ought never to be forgotten, (and therefore frequently
mentioned in this Book) and laid an obligation upon them to be wholly devoted
to him, as his redeemed People, IV. 20.

And how we came through the Nations whom we passed by.] The Edomites,
Midianites, Ammonites, and Moabites; through the Skirts of whose Countries they
passed, and were preserved from receiving any hurt by them.

And ye have seen their abominations, and their idols.] They had opportunity in
Egypt of seeing too much of their vile Idolatries. And so they had as they
passed by the Country of Moab and Midian, when some of them were seduced to the
Worship of Baal-Peor; though, if they had not been blinded by their Lust, they
could not but have seen how contemptible an Idol that was, and have abominated
it. All the Idols of the Heathen are frequently called Abominations; and in
XXVI Levit. 30. they are called, as they are here, gillulim; which we translate
in the Margin, dunghill gods; to express the utmost contempt of them. And some
think they are so called, not only in regard of their matter, sed ob formam
scarabaei habitantis in stercore, but for the form of the Beetle which lives in
Dung. For so Isis the great Goddess of the Egyptians was represented, as
Plutarch tells us, in his Book de Iside and Osiride. But whether in such
ancient times, as this of Moses, it may be justly doubted.

Wood and Stone, Silver and Gold.] Generally they were made of Wood, or Stone;
which sometimes were silvered or gilded over. And if any of them were made of
massy Silver, or Gold, yet being liveless things, they were no more able to
afford them any help, than the Dung on the Earth. And it was an abominable
thing to look upon dead matter, as a god; or to think he made his habitation
there, (which was the opinion of the better sort of Heathen) or would be
represented by them, they having no likeness at all unto him.

Ver. 18. Lest there should be among you man, or woman, These words are to be
connected with v. 15. as the principal end why he engaged every Soul of them,
to renew their Covenant with God; that none of them might revolt from him to
serve any other god. And the order wherein he places these words show, that
Idolatry is of a very infectious nature, spreading it self strangely; from
single Men and Women, unto Families, and at last into whole Tribes.

Whose heart turns away this day from the LORD our God.] Who had a hankering,
as we now speak, after other gods; which might afterward break out into
Idolatry.

To go and serve the gods of these Nations.] When the heart, i. e. the Mind,
Will, and Affections are depraved, Men easily find occasions to follow, whither
they lead them. And by this it appears, that the principal part of the Covenant
was to keep them close to the Worship of one God, and no other; as I have often
observed, VI. 4. VII. 2, 25. IX. 1, etc.

Lest there should be among you a root that bears gall and wormwood.] Many
take a root here to signify an evil principle; which the Apostle calls an evil
heart of unbelief, III Hebr. 12. But the words going before in this Verse, and
those that follow in the next, plainly lead us to take it for any Person
lurking secretly among them (like a root under ground) that was tainted with
Idolatry; who might poison others therewith, and in time bring forth the fruits
of their Impiety, which he calls gall and wormwood. Where it must be observed
that the Hebrew word Rosch, which we translate Gall, properly signifies an Herb
growing among Corn, as bitter as Gall. Which in X Hosea 4. we translate
Hemlock: and commonly in Scripture is joined with Wormwood, as it is here, IX
Jerem. 15. III Lament. 19. VI Amos 12. Unto which Idolatry is compared, because
it is most ungrateful and distastful (if I may so speak) unto God, and produces
bitter effects (that is, most grievous Punishments) unto Men.

And it come to pass when he.] The Man spoken of before, under the name of a
root of bitterness.

Hears the words of this Curse.] Against Idolatry; which Moses engaged every
one of them to renounce, by making a Solemn Covenant with God to Worship him
alone, and dreadful Imprecations upon themselves, if they did not make good
this Covenant, v. 12, 14, 15, 16. XXVII. 15.

That he bless himself in his heart.] Secretly fancy none of these Curses shall
fall upon him; but quite contrary, promise himself all manner of happiness.

Saying, I shall have peace.] Prosper and be happy.

Though I walk in the imagination of mine heart.] Or, in the stubborness of
mine heart, as it is in the Margin. That is, resolve to worship what God I best
fancy.

To add drunkenness to thirst.] In the Hebrew the words are (as the Margin of
our Bibles observes) the drunken to the thirsty: for both words are Adjectives,
as Grammarians speak; and supposing a Substantive to support them, many think
none so proper to be understood, as the word Earth. Which makes this a
Proverbial Speech, to add the wet ground to the dry and thirsty; or rather, the
thirsty to the wet. For the Particle beth, which in the Hebrew is the Note of
the Accusative Case, is put before the word dry or thirsty; and therefore
that is the thing which is to be added to the wet or drunken; not the drunken to
the dry. And the sense is, draw others into the same wickedness; just as if a
drunken Man should draw sober Persons to play the fool with him, and do as bad
as himself; or after one piece of Land is overflowed, the Water should be let
into that which is dry, and spoil that also. For this seems to be the meaning
of the whole Verse, If a Man shall be so presumptuous, as not only to cry peace
to himself, when he runs after his own Devices, in serving other gods; but
endeavors to draw others into the same wicked practices.

There are a great many other Interpretations of these words ( seven or eight)
given by the Hebrew Doctors, besides others in Christian Writers; which may be
seen in Coccejus in his Vltima Mosis, Sect. 134. But this seems to me the most
easy, at which the Chaldee aims, and the LXX. if the Particle (...) be
omitted; which is not in the Hebrew, or the Chaldee, nor the Vulgar Latin. And
if we take the words as we translate them (only inverting them) add thirst unto
drunkenness, the sense is as easy, viz. add more sins to the foregoing, XXX
Isa. 1. and to be still inflamed (as the Scripture speaks) with love to more
Idols, after the Service of many of them; increasing their Altars, as Hosea
speaks, like heaps in the furrows of the field, X Hos. 1. XII. 11.

Dr. Jackson in his first Book upon the Creed (Chapt. XXX. Paragr. 4.) thinks
the meaning is, that Posterity added to the wickedness of their Ancestors. For
they being cast out of their good Land for their Infidelity and Disobedience,
their Posterity, says he, continue Exiles and Vagabonds, for their stubborness
in like Practices: not being willing to this day, to offer up the Sacrifice of
a contrite heart for their disobedience past, but rather (adding thirst to
drunkenness) bless themselves when they hear the words of that Curse, promising
peace to themselves, though they walk on according to the stubborness of their
forefathers hearts.

The LORD will not spare him.] That is, not pardon, or pass by his wickedness
without punishment.

But then the anger of the LORD and his jealousy shall smoke against that
man.] These words import the highest degree of Anger. That is, the severest
Plagues, which are the effects of the Anger of an incensed Majesty.

And all the Curses that are written in this Book.] Particularly in the
foregoing Chapter.

Shall lie upon him.] Not only fall, but remain upon him, to his utter ruin; as
it follows in the next words.

And the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.] By his name is meant
himself: so that this is a threatening of Destruction to him and his Posterity;
till there be no memory of him left.

Ver. 21. And the LORD shall separate him unto evil, out of all the Tribes of
Israel.] Though he offended blessed himself in his heart, etc. v. 19.) God
threatens to make him a public and notorious Example of his Vengeance, to all
the People of Israel.

According to all the Curses of the Covenant that are written in the Book of
the Law.] It was a singular condescension in the Divine Majesty to enter into
Covenant with them; but it contained not only Blessings to the obedient, but
Curses upon the disobedient; the latter of which were as certain as the former.

Ver. 22. So that the Generations to come of your Children, That which follows
v. 24.

When they see the Plagues of that Land.] This shows that these Threatenings are
denounced not merely against a simple Idolater; but such an one as made it his
endeavor to draw others from the Worship of God: not being content to be drunk
himself with Heathenish Superstition; but zealous to intoxicate as many as he
could with it, and to root true Religion out of the Nation.

And the sicknesses which the LORD has laid upon it.] In the Hebrew it is, The
sicknesses wherewith he has made it sick: i. e. the heavy Punishments which he
has inflicted upon it, and thereby made it a miserable Nation.

Ver. 23. And that the whole Land is brimstone and salt, and burning.] Or, as
it may be translated, Is burnt up with brimstone and salt. For these make Land
Pliny particularly observes of Salt, Lib. XXX. Cap. VII. Omnis locus in quo
reperitur Sal, sterilis est, nihilque gignit. All ground in which Salt is
found, is barren, and produces nothing. See IX Judges 45. CVII Psalm. 34. XVII
Jerem. 6. XLVII Ezekiel. 11. II Zephan. 9.

That it is not sown, nor bears, nor any grass grows therein.] That neither
Nature nor Art will make it fruitful.

Like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim.] And the Country
about them, which was the most beautiful of all other, in that part of the
World (XIII Genesis 10.) but on a sudden turned into a filthy stinking Lake, where
no Creature, neither Fish, nor Fowl, can live.

Which the LORD overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath.] Being highly
incensed by their wickedness. See Genesis XVIII. 20. XIX. 24, 25. as he was by the
wickedness of the Jews, which was the more provoking, because they had such an
example of his Vengeance continually before their eyes, and yet went on in
their evil ways, till they brought the like Judgment upon all Judoea. This was
more exactly fulfilled in the last destruction of the Jews by the Romans, than
in their first by the Babylonians. For the whole Land was laid waste, and
deserted by its Inhabitants, and made a Den of Thieves; being brought to
desolation by repeated returns of Wars. More especially in the time of Adrian,
when Julius Severus, as I observed upon the foregoing Chapter, made such a
devastation, that the whole Country was turned, in a manner, into a Wilderness.

Ver. 24. Even all Nations shall say.] All that were near them, or came that
way from far Countries; as it goes before v. 22.

Wherefore has the LORD done thus unto this Land?]

And what means the heat of this great anger?] These exceeding dreadful
Calamities; which evidently proceeded from a Divine Vengeance. For the Jews
fought so valiantly, and defended Jerusalem so resolutely (as appears by
Josephus) that the Author of Schebet Juda had reason to say, that it was not
want of Arms, nor the unusual terror of new Machines, but the Anger of God,
provoked by their Wickedness, which was the true and only Cause of their
destruction. And indeed Titus himself said as much, that God fought for the
Romans, and drove the Jews from their Fortifications, (...), for what could the
hands of Men or Machines have done against such strong Towers? See Chap. XXXII.
v. 22.

Ver. 25. Then shall men say, because they have forsaken This account must be
supposed to be given by the pious Jews, or by those who were made sensible,
when it was too late, how steadfast God was in his Covenant; which contained
Curses as well as Blessings; as was before observed, v. 21. And see VII. 9, 10.
XI. 26, 27, 28.

Ver. 26. For they went and served other gods, and This aggravated their sin,
that they sought for acquaintance with strange gods; directly contrary to the
Covenant of God, XII. 30, 31.

And whom he had not given unto them.] Or, as it is in the Margin, had not
given (or divided) to them any portion: that is, never bestowed any benefit
upon them, as the LORD their God had done, who brought them out of Egypt. Or
more simply (as Bootius thinks the words will bear) to whom no worship belonged.

And the anger of the LORD was kindled against this Land, to bring upon it all
the Curses that are written in this Book.] So Moses foretold them, VII. 4. XI.
16, 17.

And the LORD rooted them out of their Land in anger, and wrath, and in great
indignation.] Here is one word more to express his displeasure against them,
than was used before, when he speaks of the destruction of Sodom, etc. v. 23.
And they all denote the great Plagues threatened in XXVI Levit. and in the
foregoing Chapter of this Book.

And cast them into another Land, as it is this day.] This may seem to relate
only to their Captivity in Babylon: for after they were rooted out by the
Romans, they were scattered into all Lands, XXVIII. 63, 64. But considering
what goes before ( v. 23, 24.) and that they were not quite rooted out (many of
them remaining in the Land, when Nebuchadnezzar conquered them) till the
desolation made by the Romans, I think these words relate to them also, and
another Land is only the singular number, as is usual, for the plural. And so
the Author of Schebet Juda understood it, who quoting these words [cast them
out into another land] adds, which experience now proves to be true.

The secret things belong unto the LORD our God, but those that are revealed
belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, etc.] The Jews generally take
these words to be meant of the punishment of secret sins (particularly of
Idolatry spoken of before v. 19.) which belongs unto God, as the punishment
of open sins belonged unto them, in obedience to his Law; who commanded them to
put to death him that seduced any Person to Idolatry, and to raze the City that
apostatized unto it, XIII. 5, 6, etc. 12, 13, etc. And their negligence in
doing their duty in this particular, made Idolatry spread among them to their
utter ruin. But these words may be understood as a further answer to such
Enquiries, as that v. 24. In which if Men persisted, and still asked, But why
does God thus punish his own People, with such unusual Severity, when there are
many Idolatrous Nations far worse than they, who continue still in their own
Land, and are not thus rooted out? Moses bids them silence such Demands, and
rest satisfied in this; that we cannot give an account of such things, as God
has not revealed; particularly, why he punishes some People, when he spares
others who are as bad; but must mind our own duty, which he has plainly
revealed unto us. That is, (as Moses concludes this Chapter) to do after all
his Commandments which he has given us in his Law; believing he will greatly
reward the obedient, and terribly punish, one time or other, all those that
transgress it.

There may be also a more obvious sense of these words, if we translate them as
some great Men have done, The secrets of the LORD our God, are revealed to us
and to our Children. Thus Onkelos, whose Judgment is very valuable; which
Grotius follows, and before him Forsterus; and Paulus Fagius represents it as a
commodious sense; and makes it the same with the words of the Psalmist, CXLVII.
20. He has not dealt so with any Nation, Chapter XXX.
etc. For this was a peculiar favor to the Jews, that those things which God
before kept secret in his own breast, he now manifested to them; that they
might know how to order their lives so, as to please him. But this made them
liable to be punished more grievously than all other People, if they did not
observe his Will which he most graciously discovered to them. And if we could
give any credit to the Jews, who say that all words in the Bible that have
extraordinary Points upon them (of which there are but ten in the Pentateuch,
and these words lanu ulebenu, to us and our Children are the last of them)
denote something peculiar and extraordinary: I should think that they relate to
the Revelation to be made by Jesus Christ, the great Prophet promised to them (
Chapt. XVIII.) unto which if they did not give heed, the most dreadful
Punishments would be inflicted on them; as we see they have been for many Ages,
and are not yet ended.

CHAP. XXX.
AND it shall come to pass when all these things are come upon thee, the
Blessing and the Curse which I have set before thee.] God at the first bestowed
great and singular Blessings upon them; but when they grew so insensible of his
Mercy, as to violate the Covenant he had made with them, then he sent his
Curses which he had threatened upon them. Which were completed in their
Expulsion out of the good Land, which he had given them; especially in their
last Expulsion by the Romans, which was rather an Extirpation.

And thou shall call to mind.] In the Hebrew, Bring back to thy heart, as we
observe in the Margin of 1 Kings VIII. 47. where there is the very same phrase,
and there translated, shall bethink thy self: that is, reflect seriously both
upon the Blessings and Curses, and consequently consider the truth of God in
fulfilling both. In which consideration, Repentance and Conversion to God
begins. See XVIII Ezekiel. 28.

Among all the Nations whither the LORD thy God has driven thee.] Where they
could not choose but often think of all the Blessings they had enjoyed in their
own Land, and might have still enjoyed if they had not been disobedient; and
all the Curses which had befaln them till they were driven from thence, and had
pursued them ever since. See XXVI Levit. 40, etc. IV Deuteronomy. 29, 30, etc.

Ver. 2. And shall return unto the LORD thy God, Repentance was completed by
forsaking their Idols, and returning to the Worship of the LORD their God
alone; and by obeying all the rest of his Commands; and teaching their Children
to do the same: and all this with sincerity of heart. This they did, in some
measure, after they were carried Captive to Babylon: since which time we read
nothing of their Idolatry. But they fell into other sins, which stopped their
Ears to that great Prophet the LORD Christ, when he came to them; for which
they are punished to this day, and will be till they repent and obey him.

Ver. 3. Then the LORD thy God will turn thy Captivity.] That is, bring those
that were carried Captive, back again to their own Land. Thus the word
Captivity is used XIV Psalm. 7. IV Ephesians. 8.

And have compassion upon thee.] These words express the Spring of all their
Happiness; viz. the Divine Compassion, in pardoning their sins, which had been
very provoking.

And will return and gather thee.] This is the effect of his Compassion, in
their Restitution, and Recollection again into one Body after their Dispersion.

From all the Nations whither the LORD thy God has scattered thee.] This was
fulfilled in part when they returned from Babylon; for then they who were
scattered in other Countries, flockt again to them: And will be more completely
fulfilled, when they shall believe on our blessed Savior.

And if any of thine be driven out unto the uttermost parts of Heaven, from
thence will the LORD thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee.]
Unto this Promise Nehemiah plainly alludes, in his Prayer to God, to prosper
his endeavors for the Restoration of Jerusalem, I Nehem. 8, 9. And finding the
truth of it confirmed by the King's gracious Concession to him, he went about
the work, though one who was accounted a Prophet (yea, several of the like
quality) dissuaded him from the Enterprise, as likely to prove dangerous to his
Person, VI. 10, 11, 12, etc. Ezra also tells us, how Cyrus made a Proclamation
throughout all his Kingdom, which was very large, That all the Jews might
return, if they pleased, into their own Country, I Ezra 1, 4. And see VIII
Zachariah 7, 8. And though in their last dispersion by the Romans, they be far
more scattered, and into more distant Regions than they were in the Babylonian
Captivity, (according to Moses his threatening XXVIII of this Book, 64.) yet if
they did now consider the Cause of it, and lay to heart their Sin in crucifying
the LORD Christ, no doubt God would have Compassion on them, and wonderfully
restore them. For the Jews themselves apply this place (and have long done so)
to their present Condition; being of Opinion that God has appointed a prefixed
time in his own mind, though he has not declared it, when he will deliver
them; but if they did repent, he would shorten the days of their Banishment,
and immediately bring them to their own Land. Thus the ancient Nitzacon set
forth not long ago by Wagenseil, p. 254. And R. Isaac since him, and more
lately often insists upon this, in his Chissuk Emuna, published by the same
very learned Person. Particularly Perck. VII. where he says, There can be no
time prefixed for their Deliverance, because it depends upon their Repentance;
whereby they may cut off the length of this Banishment, provided they turn to
God with their whole heart, and a full repentance. For which he alleges this
place. And he repeats it again ( Perck. XXVII.) as the great comfort they have
in this long Banishment, that upon their perfect Repentance, God will be
merciful to them, and overcome their Sins, and perform this Promise. Which I
find still more lately mentioned in Manasseh ben Israel his Book de Termino
Vitae, L. III. Sect. III. where he says, Herein all the Prophets imitate
Moses; being wont after terrible Threatenings, to conclude with some singular
Consolation. Which made R. Aquiba (as the Talmudists report) fall a laughing,
when all the wise Men who were with him wept and lamented, at the sight of the
ruins of Jerusalem and the Temple. Which they wondering at, he said, After the
Clouds the Sun will break out, and after the end of the Evils which Moses
threatened, we may hope for good things: for God is not more faithful in
fulfilling the one, than in performing the other.

But alas! in all Ages hitherto there are no signs of Repentance, much less of
a perfect one; but they have been strangely hardened in their unbelief, and have
bitterly reproached the LORD Jesus and his Religion. Abarbinel himself, though
a Gentleman of a noble Family, a well bred Person, and of an excellent
Understanding, is extremely guilty of this. And since his time Solomon Virgae,
in the Age before us, considering the astonishing Plagues that have befaln
them, and that never any People, as he acknowledges, conflicted with so many
Miseries, and for so many Ages, as they have done, enquires the Causes why the
Divine Majesty should be so angry with them. He reckons Seven; among which he
accounts the putting of Jesus of Nazareth to death, as one; yet not as a Crime,
but that which has enraged Christians against them. For he wickedly
illustrates this by that Speech of Moses, VIII Exodus 24. which he thus
translates, If we slay and sacrifice the abominable gods of the Egyptians in
their sight, will they not stone us? Which is the highest Reproach he could
vomit against our Savior; mingled with the most stupid folly, in giving that
as a Reason of the Divine Anger, which at the most is only a Reason, in their
account, of Men's indignation, Schebet Jehuda, Sect. LXIII.

The most cruel Usage which they have met with in all Christian Countries,
might thus exasperate and embitter their Spirits; and I cannot excuse the
violent hatred of Christians to them, and their barbarous treatment of them,
though they therein fulfilled the Divine Threatenings, as I have shown upon the
Twenty eighth Chapter: which being ceased since the Reformation of Religion,
the Jews have not been so virulent against our blessed Savior; and it is to be
hoped will be won to the Obedience of Faith, by our Christian usage of them;
when those other stumbling Blocks, which hinder their Conversion, are removed
out of the way.

Ver. 5. And the LORD thy God will bring thee into Be again planted in it, as
they were at their return from the Captivity of Babylon; especially after they
had laid the foundation of the House of the LORD, he blessed them exceedingly,
II Haggai 18, 19. VIII Zachar. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

And he will do thee good.] The Prophet Zachary has given a full Explication
of these words, VIII. 13, 14, 15. And the Prophet Jeremy before him, XXXII. 42,
43, etc. which was fulfilled in the building of the House of the LORD, though
great opposition was made to it; and in the compassing Jerusalem with Walls,
and settling them in a state of liberty, according to the Prophecy of Isaiah,
LII. 1, 2.

And multiply thee above thy fathers.] The Hebrew words import that he would
make them greater then their fathers. Which he did, by their vast increase
after they returned from Babylon: See VIII Zachar. 4, 5. and before him I Hosea
10. Which is manifest from their (...), i. e. spreading themselves in so many
Colonies, through all Asia, both the great, and the less; with Egypt, Greece,
Italy, and Spain. See Strabo, Lib. XVI. concerning Joppa. By this means they
were very much exalted, as Zachariah prophesied, after the Captivity, XII. 6.
for as they had their liberty in their own Country, (God being a Wall of Fire
to them, while Jerusalem had no Walls) so they spread themselves as I said, and
had their Synagogues in Babylon, Arabia, Syria, and diverse other Countries
beforementioned; and a great many Proselytes also joined themselves to them.

Yet one cannot well think that so magnificent a Prophecy as this is, was
entirely fulfilled after their return from Babylon, when they were Tributaries
to the Persians, and afterward fell under the power of the Graecians; under
whom they suffered very much, especially in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes;
whose death did not conclude their Troubles, as Hermannus Witsius has shown at
large, in his Decaphylon, Cap. X. N. 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. where he endeavors to
prove that there was no moment of time, after their return from Babylon,
wherein they could be said, to be made greater than their fathers, especially
in the days of David and Solomon. And therefore he concludes, that this Promise
is still to be completely fulfilled. And thus R. Isaac (in his Book
before-named, Chissuk Emuna) argues, Perck. VI. that God did not bestow
Benefits upon them equal to those which their Fathers enjoyed, much less
superior, while the second Temple stood; but all that time was full of Straits
and Calamities; for which he alleges the Prophecy of Daniel, IX. 25. And
therefore says, these words of Moses can by no means be thought to be
fulfilled, when the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin returned from Babylon, and
left a vast number behind them, who would not come back with them, but stay
there to this day.

Ver. 6. And the LORD thy God will circumcise thine heart.] By such singular
Benefits bestowed upon them, in a miraculous manner, God designed to take away
the stubborn refractoriness of their Spirits, (called hardness of heart, XXIX.
19.) and to cut off all their wicked Inclinations and Dispositions to Idolatry
and Superstition, which had been their ruin; which is called humbling their
uncircumcised heart, XXVI Levit. 41. But though God circumcised them, yet their
hearts might remain uncircumcised, as appears from XXIX. 3, 4. And therefore he
calls upon them to Circumcise their hearts themselves (XVI. 10.) by laying to
heart his Benefits, and following the Motions of his Grace and Holy Spirit,
which thereby he put into their hearts: And their neglect of this, and resting
merely in the Circumcision of the Flesh, was that which ruined them again.

And the heart of thy seed.] Accordingly we find they were freed from Idolatry,
after their return from Babylon; though still they continued in other sins.
Which brought this present Captivity (as they call it) upon them; another
Banishment being necessary (says R. Isaac in the Book before mentioned, Perek.
VII.) to purge them from their sins, by the severe Afflictions which they now
endure, and have long suffered; because their manifold sins, as he expresses
it, needs much scouring, by contusions and pressures. After which, he says,
they shall sin no more, but that shall be fulfilled which is written in the
Law, the LORD thy God shall circumcise thine heart, etc. quoting these very
words of Moses. But alas! they are not sensible for what sin they suffer. See
p. 96, 97. of Wagenseils Edition.

To love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that
thou may live.] See VI. 5. This Prophecy, the Jews say, shall be fulfilled
in the days of the Messiah, according to what Ezekiel says, XXXVI 26. A new
heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put into you, etc. So R. Isaac
in the place abovenamed; and in p. 83.

And the LORD thy God will put all these Curses upon thine enemies, and on them
that hate thee, which persecute thee.] Their very Restoration created them many
Enemies; whose hatred increased with their prosperity in their own Land; and
made them, when they had power, to persecute them. Whom God remarkably plagued,
particularly Antiochus Epiphanes, who died in miserable Torments.

And thou shall return.] This may relate as well to their return unto their own
Land, as to their turning unto God: of both which he had spoken before. And now
having mentioned their Persecution, whereby many of them might be driven out of
their Country, I suppose he here promises their Restoration to it again, when
he had cursed their Enemies.

And obey the voice of the LORD thy God, and do all his Commandments which I
command thee this day.] Continue steadfast in their love to him, by a strict
observance of all his Commandments.

And the LORD thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand, and
in the fruit of thy body, etc.] The effect of their constant and sincere
obedience he promises should be still greater prosperity, in all their
undertakings, and in all their enjoyments. See XXVIII. 4, 5, etc.

For good.] To encourage them to continue faithful in the Service of God.

For the LORD will again rejoice over thee for good.] Delight only in blessing
them; and not send any Curses upon them. See XXVIII. 63. and XXXII Jerem. 41.

As he rejoiced over thy fathers.] In whose obedience he delighted, X Deuteronomy. 15.

Ver. 10. If thou shall hearken unto the voice of the etc.] Persist in
obedience to him.

And if thou turn unto the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul.] With a sincere love to all his Commands, ( v. 2.) who had planted them
assuredly in their Land, with his whole heart, and his whole soul, as Jeremiah
speaks, XXXII. 41. But herein they were defective, after they came out of the
Captivity of Babylon. For though they never returned again to Idolatry, but
kept close to the Worship of God alone, yet they rested merely in the outward
Rites of Religion, and had not an hearty love to God, and to all Goodness:
which made them reject the Son of God when he came among them, and fall under
those long Calamities, which will not end, till they turn to him with all their
hearts and souls.

Ver. 11. For this Commandment which I command Of hearty love to God, and
sincere obedience to all his Commands, v. 2, 6.8, 16.

It is not hidden from thee.] Or, it may be translated out of the Hebrew, It is
not too wonderful above thee. That is, abstruse and hard to be understood,
because above their reach; but easy to be known and acquainted withal, because
plainly revealed. Which is as true of the Gospel (unto which St. Paul applies
these words, X Romans 6, etc.) as it was of the Law of Moses: for therein our
Savior has declared the Mind and Will of God to us, in such familiar words,
that the most simple People may understand their Duty.

Nor is it far off.] So that they should go to seek it, and learn it in some
distant Nation. R. Isaac in his Chissuk Emuna, Cap. XLV. had his thoughts so
fixed upon what is said v. 4. that he fancies these words belong to that
matter; and that Moses still speaks to them of Repentance, which is of greater
value than any other thing, and yet most easily acquired. Which cannot but make
one wonder at their blindness; for if Repentance be so very easy, how comes it
to pass that they remain impenitent for so many Ages, and thereby, as they
confess, prolong their Miseries? And yet he repeats the same words in the
Second Part of his Work, Perek. LXXX. where he has the confidence to say St.
Paul misapplies this place.

It is not in heaven that thou should say, Who will go up for us to heaven,
and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?] R. Jacob Hacsaei in his
Preface to that part of the Misna called Seder Nesim (as Guil. Vorstius
observes upon Abarbinel about the Articles of their Faith) has very fairly
expounded this: which he takes to be a Proverbial Speech, to show that there is
no need of hard, or rather impossible labor, to come at the knowledge of God's
Will; as there is in many Humane Sciences, where the Mind of Man is tired by
several Propositions and Deductions, etc. before he arrive at what he seeks:
But all things are plain and easy to be understood, and not hard to be
performed. For God had revealed his Mind clearly by Moses from Heaven, and
therefore none had need to go thither to desire God to acquaint them with it,
which he had done of his own accord, out of his good will toward them. And
thus Grotius observes upon X Romans 6. out of several Greek Authors, that they
expressed things very difficult, by going up to heaven. Maimonides indeed in
Jesodehatorah, Cap. IX. and Abarbinel in Rosh Amana, Cap. XIII. make these
words an Argument for the eternity and unchangeableness of their Law, and that
there should be no new Revelation from Heaven. But there is no color for this
from these words; the Particle hu being of the Feminine Gender, and therefore
does not refer to God, but to the Command beforementioned. Plainly importing,
That Men could not pretend ignorance of their Duty, nor had any reason to
desire that some Body would go to Heaven again, for those things, which Moses
had already brought from thence. And thus the Apostle most justly accommodates
these words, to the new Revelation from Heaven, by the Son of God; which was
not abstruse and difficult; but as plain and perspicuous as this now made by
Moses.

Ver. 13. Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should etc.] (...), (to use
the words of Philo in his Book concerning Rewards and Punishments) so as to
need long and tedious Voyages, laborious and wearisom Travels, to fetch it from
foreign Countries. Such as the Greek Philosophers took, who traveled into
Egypt and the Eastern part of the World, to learn Wisdom, which God now taught
his People in the Wilderness, without any pains to attain it.

Ver. 14. But the word is very nigh unto thee.] Being Moses, the Servant of
God; who now delivered to them the Mind of God, as the Son of God himself did
afterward, when he came and dwelt among them.

In thy mouth and in thy heart.] Made so familiar to them, that they might
always have it in their common Discourse, to teach it their Children; and had
now been so often repeated, that it might well be laid up in their Memory,
never to be forgotten by them, VI. 6, 7, 8, 9. XI. 18, 19, 20. It was also in
the mouth of their Priests, who were to teach them Knowledge (II Malachi 7.)
and press it upon their hearts. Here the forenamed R. Isaac in both the places
forenamed, observes, That Repentance depends on the confession of the mouth,
and grief of the heart: but the largest Confession and the sorest Grief will
not avail them, till they repent of their Crucifying the LORD Jesus, and shall
confess him with their mouth, and believe in their heart that God has raised
him from the dead, etc. as St. Paul speaks, X Romans 9, 10.

That thou may do it.] That they might have nothing to do but to put it in
practice; and in order thereunto continually read it, and keep it in mind. In
which the Jews were so diligent, that, as Josephus tells the Gentiles ( Lib.
II. contra Apionem) they could as easily recite all the Laws of God, as tell
their Names. But here was their Error, that they were not careful to do what
they knew to be the Will of God: and so, when he sent his Son among them, who
plainly declared to them more fully the meaning of their holy Books, they could
not understand and receive that which they read every day. And indeed this is
the common Error (as Dr. Jackson well observes) of all corrupt Minds, to seek
that afar off, as if they were Strangers to it, which is really in their Mouth
and in their Heart, so that they would but be doers, and not only hearers of
the Word, as St. James speaks, alluding perhaps to these words of Moses. As St.
Paul applies this whole passage to the Gospel, which is that Word of Faith, so
preached and published by the Apostles, that it may be in all our Mouths and
Hearts, without going to seek for any other infallible Teacher.

Ver. 15. See, I have set before thee this day, life and Life and Good, Death
and Evil, may be but two words for the same thing, viz. all manner of
Happiness, and all manner of Misery; both which he had at large set before
them, in the Twenty eighth Chapter. Or by Life may be meant, long Life in the
Land God had promised them; and Good, all the Prosperity they could wish for
there: as on the other side, Death may signify their being cut off from the
Land of the Living before their time; and Evil, all the Calamities he had
threatened while they lived: And so the next Verse seems to interpret it.
Maimonides from these words observes, that the wills of Men are under no force
nor coaction, but are free Agents; and therefore have Precepts imposed upon
them, with a Punishment threatened to the Disobedient, and a Reward promised to
those who keep God's Commandments. Of which he treats at large in his Preface
to his Commentary* upon Pirke. Avoth, Cap. VIII.

Ver. 16. In that I command thee this day to love the This includes their
entire Obedience to all God's Laws; which are comprehended under these three
Names. See VI. 1, 5. VII. 11. X. 12, 13.

That thou may live and multiply, and the LORD thy God shall bless thee in
the Land whither thou go to possess it.] This is the Explication of the Life
and Good, which he set before them, if they observed God's Laws with sincere
affection to them, v. 15.

Ver. 17. But if thine heart turn away, so that thou Want of Love to God, and
of a due Esteem of his wonderful Love to them, made their Heart turn away to
other things, and not regard what he had revealed to them from Heaven.

And worship other gods and serve them.] This was the principal Breach of the
Covenant of God.

I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall
not prolong your days upon the Land whither ye go, etc.] This is the
Explication of the Death and Evil he set before them, v. 15.

I call Heaven and Earth to record this day aginst you, that I have set before
you life and death.] God, Angels, and Men were Witnesses that he had done his
duty. See IV. 26. VIII. 19. and therefore is owned by God himself to be
faithful in all his house, XII Numb. 7.

Blessing and cursing.] They are the same with Life and Death: but he uses
several words, to make them sensible that both proceeded from God; the one
being the Effect of his Love and Favor; and the other of his Anger and high
Displeasure.

Therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live.] That is, choose to be
Obedient, without which they could not be happy. Or he wishes them to set their
hearts on the happiness God had promised them, that it might incline them to do
as follows.

That thou may love the LORD thy God, and obey his voice.] Love is the
noblest, and the strongest Spring of Obedience.

And that thou may cleave unto him.] Obedience to God is the surest
Preservative from Apostasy.

For he is thy life and the length of thy days.] Chapter XXXI.
The Author and Giver of Life: which he preserves and prolongs unto those who
are obedient.

That thou may dwell in the Land which the LORD swear unto thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob to give them.] Which Promise confirmed by an
Oath, being faithfully fulfilled, he justly claimed their Fidelity to him upon
that account. Which is the reason it is so often mentioned VI. 10. VIII. 1. IX.
5. X. 11. XI. 9, 21. XIX. 8.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 1. AND Moses went and spoke these words By this it seems plain to me,
that after Moses had renewed the Covenant with the People (mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter) he dismissed them, and retired to his own Tent. But not long
after gave them a new Summons (as he had done XXIX. 2.) and went again to take
his leave of them. The LXX. indeed seem to take the first words, as if the
meaning was, that he went on with his Discourse. For thus they render them,
(...), He finished speaking all these words. For which I see no warrant, nor is
it likely he could speak all that here follows, at the same time.

Ver. 2. And he said unto them, I am an hundred and This shows these words were
spoken not long before his death; which was this year, XXXIV. 7. Manasseh ben
Israel would have us from hence observe, The singular care God has of those
who serve him with a perfect heart, as Moses did; the days of whose years,
says he, are exactly proportioned. For so these words are expounded in Sota,
Cap. I. To day my years are completed; to day I was born; and to day I shall
die. For he was born on the seventh day of the Month Adar, and on the same day
of the same Month he died. Thus Enoch (he adds) lived just Three hundred sixty
five years, which are proportioned to the days of the Suns annual Course, Lib.
III. de Termino Vitae, Sect. V. But as there is no great weight in this
Observation, if it were true, so that which he says of Moses is evidently
false. For he did not die this very day, as appears from v. 14. where he says,
The days approach that I must die; therefore the time was not yet come.

And I can no more go out and in.] Discharge the Office I have long sustained
of your Governor and Leader, (See XXVII Numb. 17.) not because he wanted vigor,
either of Body or Mind, (for that is contrary to XXXIV. 7. of this Book) but
because God did not think fit to permit him to conduct them any further; as the
following words explain it.

Also the LORD has said unto me, thou shall not go over this Jordan.] The
Particle we translate also, often signifies for; and is so translated by us in
diverse places; particularly in III Isa. 7. XVII Jerem. 8. And being so taken
here, the sense of these words is plain and easy; giving a reason why he could
no longer take the charge of them, as he had done, because God had otherwise
ordered; having told him, he should not bring them into Canaan, which they were
now ready to enter.

Ver. 3. The LORD thy God, he shall go over before thee.] Conduct them by the
Ark of his Presence, III Josh. 5, 11. and see XXIII Exodus 23. and IX Deuteronomy. 3.

And he shall destroy these Nations from before thee, and thou shall possess
them.] XXXIV Exodus 11.

And Joshua, he shall go over before thee.] As their Captain and Leader, when
Moses had left them, III. 28. Josh. I. 2.

As the LORD has said] When he was appointed the Successor of Moses, XXVII
Numb. 18, 21.

Ver. 4. And the LORD shall do unto them as he did etc.] See XXIV Numb. 24, 34,
35.

Ver. 5. And the LORD shall give them up before thy As he had promised before,
VII. 23. where he says, The LORD thy God shall deliver them unto thee. In the
Hebrew the words are, before thy face. See IX. 3.

That ye may do unto them according to all the Commandments which I have
commanded you.] i. e. Utterly destroy them, and their Altars, and Images, and
Groves, etc. See VII. 2, 3, 5, 27. XII. 1, 2, etc.

Ver. 6. Be strong and of a good courage.] By Faith in

Fear not, nor be afraid of them.] Be not affrighted, much less dismayed at
their Multitude, their Stature and Strength, when you go to fight with them.
The second word (afraid) only expresses an higher degree of the same Passion of
Fear; signifying, being overcome with it. For that is the import of the Hebrew
word aratz, which originally signifies to prevail over another. This he had
said to their Forefathers, I. 21, 29. and after repeated to them, III. 2, 22.
VII. 17, 18, 21.

For the LORD thy God, he it is that does go with thee.] According to the
assurance before given them, XX. 4.

He will not fail thee nor forsake thee.] This Promise, which here is general,
in the next Verse but one is particularly made to Joshua; and renewed to him by
God himself, after the death of Moses, when they were about to enter into the
Land of Canaan, I Josh. 5. And it is applied by the Apostle unto all faithful
Christians, to encourage their hope of being conducted through all Difficulties
and Dangers, unto their heavenly Inheritance, XIII Hebr. 5.

And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of all Israel.]
That they might have the greater reverence to his Person and Authority; and
follow his Conduct, as a Leader appointed by God.

Be strong and of a good courage.] He exhorts him to give a good Example to all
the People; these being the same words he had spoken to them, v. 6.

For thou must go with this people.] Be their Leader and Commander in chief, by
God's special order, XXVII Numb. 21.

Unto the Land which the LORD has sworn unto their fathers to give them, VIII.
1. X. 13. XXX. 20.

And thou shall cause them to inherit it.] Put them into the possession of it,
III. 28.

And the LORD, he it is that does go before thee, and will be with thee.] I
Josh. 9.

He will not fail thee nor forsake thee.] See v. 6.

Fear not, neither be dismayed.] The same which he said to the People, v. 6.
but was most necessary to be pressed upon him, who by his undaunted Resolution,
was to put Courage into them. The word we translate dismayed, is different in
the Hebrew from that ( v. 6.) which is, be not afraid: but the LXX. and the
Vulgar use the same word to express both; which denote such a Consternation as
disables a Man to do his duty; which is the proper import of this word.

Ver. 9. And Moses wrote this Law.] Some understand this Law, only the Book of
Deuteronomy, for which I can see no reason: the Scripture calling all that is
contained in the Five Books of Moses, by the name of the Law. St. Paul, for
instance, in III Galat. 21. asks this question, Do you not hear the Law? and
then quotes what we read in XVI Genesis 21. And so Nehemiah says, X. 34, 35. that
they brought First Fruits unto God, as it is written in the Law; viz. XIII
Exodus 12. XXIII. 19. And Josiah put away the workers with familiar Spirits,
etc. that he might perform the words of the Law, (2 Kings XXIII. 24.) which we
find XIX Levit. 30. XX. 6, 27. And Ezekiah also, 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 3. appointed
the daily Oblations, and those required at stated times to be offered, as it is
written in the Law of the LORD: which plainly refers to the XXVIIIth and XXIXth
of Numbers. And Joshua built an Altar on Mount Ebal, VIII. 30, 31. as it is
written in the Book of the Law of Moses; which we find no where but in this
Book of Deuteronomy, XXVII. 4.

And delivered it unto the Priests the sons of Levi.] Concerning this form of
Speech the Priests the sons of Levi, see XVII. 9. It is probable Moses had
wrote most of these Five Books some time ago, (and so the foregoing words may
be translated, Moses had wrote this Law) but did not finish them till a little
before his death, and then delivered them to the Priests. But there is no
necessity thus to understand it; for he might have had time enough between this
and his death, to write the whole Pentateuch: It being only said ( v. 14.) Thy
days approach that thou must die, which does not imply he was to die in a day
or two, but there might be some weeks before his departure.

Which bare the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD.] It was most proper to deliver
it unto them, who alone might touch the Ark, in which this Law was to be laid,
v 26. The Kohathites, who were mere Levites and not Priests, did carry the Ark
in their Travels through the Wilderness, after the Priests had covered it, and
put in the Staves thereof, (as I have shown IV Numb. 5, 6, etc.) but it is
evident they served only as Ministers to the Priests, who, upon great
occasions, bare the Ark themselves. As when they passed over Jordan (III Josh.
3, 6.) when they compassed Jericho, (VI Josh. 6.) and when the Temple of
Solomon was dedicated, and the Ark brought into it, 1 Kings VIII. 3, 4, 6. When
David indeed brought the Ark to Jerusalem, it is said the Levites bare it; but
at the same time the Priests also were summoned to take care of it; which
shows, the Levites bare it as their Servants, 1 Chronicles. XV. 2, 11, 13, 14, 15.

And unto all the Elders of Israel.] As he delivered this Book of the Law, that
is, the whole Pentateuch (as Abarbinel and others of the Jews understand it)
unto the Priests, commanding them to preserve it safe, near the Ark, v. 24. so
he delivered another Copy of this Book to the Elders of every Tribe, as the
Jews affirm in Debarim Rabba. Where they say (and it is highly probable) that
Moses before his death, wrote Thirteen Copies of the Law (with his own hand, as
they add) and having delivered one unto the Priests, to be preserved in the
holy Place, gave one to each Tribe, which he committed to the care of the
Elders of it. Thus Maimonides also in his Preface to Jad Chazakah, as Buxtorf
observes in his Histor. Arcae Foederis, Cap. 5. The intent of which was, I
suppose, that all the People of each Tribe, might resort to it (as the whole
Nation were to resort to that in the Sanctuary) if they doubted of any thing,
which might be thought to be amiss, by the errors of Transcribers.

Ver. 10. And Moses commanded them.] Both the

At the end of every seventh year, in the solemnity of the year of release.]
Mentioned XV. 1, etc.

In the Feast of Tabernacles.] When they had gathered in all the Fruits of the
Earth, and thereby had greater leisure to attend to the hearing of the Law read
to them. Which, when Men's minds were also freed from Cares by the Release of
their Debts, was likely to make a greater impression upon them.

Ver. 11. When all Israel is come to appear before the As they were bound to do
at this Feast, and at Pentecost and the Passover, XVI. 16.

Thou shall read this Law before all Israel, in their hearing.] This Order
being directed, not to all Israel, but to a particular Person, plainly imports,
that the Supreme Governor, whosoever he was, had this charge laid upon him, to
take care these Laws should be read at this Solemn Time, that all the People
might hear them. And therefore, I think, the Jews rightly say, that their
Kings, when they had them, were bound not only to look after this matter, but
to read the Law themselves, to as many (that is) as could hear them; appointing
the Priests and the Levites to read it in as many other Assemblies of the
People, as were necessary for the fulfilling of this Precept. In order to
which, a Pulpit was set up in the Court of the Men of Israel, on the very first
day of the Feast, (for they did not think fit to defer it till the last,
because it is here said, when Israel is come to appear before the LORD, not
when they were ready to depart, as the Jews observe) the King going up into it,
the Minister took the Book of the Law, and delivered it to the Ruler of the
Synagogue, who gave it to the Sagan (or Vicar of the High Priest) who delivered
it to the High Priest, and he to the King; who stood up to receive it, and then
s^t down to read. All this expresses the reverence with which this holy Book
was delivered; and likewise the reverence with which they approached to the
King. Who, they say, began to read at this Book of Deuteronomy (which is a
Compendium of the Law) and proceeded, before he stopped, to those words, VI. 4.
Hear, O Israel, etc. which having also read, he omitted the rest till he came
to Chap. XI. 13. And it shall come to pass, if thou will hearken diligently,
etc. reading on to the 22d Verse. And then skipt to XIV. 22. And thou shall
truly tithe, etc. reading on to the Section concerning the King, XVII. 14. and
then the Cursings and Blessings out of the XXVIIth and XXVIIIth Chapter, till
he had ended all that Section of the Law. Thus the Mischna in the Title Sota,
Cap. VII. Sect. VIII. which Wagenseil has lately illustrated with most Learned
Annotations: and our Dr. Lightfoot also has given an account of it long ago,
in his Temple Service, Chap. XVII. Sect. I. where he says the King might sit
down if he pleased, when he read, but it was esteemed more honorable if he
stood; as King Agrippa did when he performed this Office. And before he began
to read, he made a Prayer to God: and all this (he adds) was done in the Court
of the Women; which well agrees with what is said in the next Verse, Gather the
people, men and women, etc. But it does not contradict what I said before, of
his reading it in the Court of the Men of Israel. For if the King were of the
Family of David, it was always done there; if he were not, then in the Court of
the Women, as Wagenseil observes out of Maimonides.

Ver. 12. Gather the people together.] All that came Israel would hold meeting
there, it is reasonable to think that the rest assembled in some other holy
Place. Such were their Synagogues, which ( Philo in his Book of the Embassy to
Caius) calls Places of Secondary Holiness. And Maimonides discourses at large
of the Holiness of Synagogues, and Schools, in his Book of Prayer, and the
Priests Blessing, Cap. XI. See upon XIX Levit. 30.

Men, Women, and Children.] Though the Males only were bound to go up to the
great Feasts, yet many devout Women went also voluntarily; as appears by
Hannah, 1 Samuel I. 3, 4. And all the Women in Jerusalem were likewise bound to
attend at these Solemnities; with the Children, who were capable of
Instruction. See VIII Nehem. 2, 3. To whom some Person of Authority read the
Law in their Court, while the King of the House of David was reading it in the
Court of the Men of Israel.

And the stranger that is within thy gates.] Such as were Proselytes to the
Jewish Religion; not excluding those who were only Proselytes of the Gate, if
they would come to their Assemblies.

That they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and
observe to do all the words of this Law.] That by this means, they might be
instructed in the true way of worshipping God (which is here called his fear)
and to his Worship and Service, add a careful Obedience to all that he
commanded in this Book: which they might read (and were bound to do so) in
their own private Houses; and which they heard read every Sabbath Day in their
public Synagogues. For which indeed there is no particular Command in the Law;
but they being commanded to teach their Children every day at home, the things
contained in the Law, and consequently to read it, (VI. 7, 8. XI. 16.) they
thought it most reasonable to have it read on the Sabbath in their Public
Assemblies; where some portion of the Law was read. But now the whole Volume,
as an Authentic Testimony of the whole Nation, to the truth of what is
contained in these Books.

That their Children which have not known any thing.] For the early Instruction
of Posterity in the Sacred Authority of this Law.

May hear and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as ye live in the land,
etc.] Be preserved in the true Religion, by so solemn an Acknowledgment made by
the King himself, that God delivered all these Laws to Moses. Accordingly we
find that Joshua, their Supreme Governor after the death of Moses, did read
all the Words of the Law, not omitting a word that Moses commanded, before all
the Congregation, with Women, and the little ones, and the Strangers that were
conversant among them, VIII Josh. 34, 35. But from that time to the Reign of
Jehosaphat (2 Chronicles. XVII. 7, 8, etc.) which is commonly computed to be Five
hundred and thirty years, we find no mention of a Public Reading of it. Nor
from that time to the eighteenth year of King Josiah, (2 Chronicles. XXXIV. 30, 31.)
which was the space of two hundred eighty and two years; nor from that time
till after the Captivity of Babylon, VIII Nehem. 2, 3, etc. By which neglect
they more easily fell into Idolatry; and continued in it, more or less, till
that Captivity; for a forgetfulness of the Law ensued upon this neglect.

Ver. 14. And the LORD said unto Moses, behold, He admonishes him, that the end
of his days upon Earth was near; when he must resign up his Office into the
hands of Joshua, who had been before appointed his Successor, XXVII Numb.

Call Joshua, and present your selves in the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
that I may give you a charge.] This was done, I suppose, in the Face of all the
People, to whom Moses had been speaking ( v. 1, 2.) to give Joshua the greater
Authority, and to make him reverenced by them; when they saw he was appointed
by God himself to be their Governor; as he had been before ordained publicly
by God's Order, XXVII Numb. 18, 19, etc.

And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] In the Court of the Sanctuary, with their Faces toward it: for
it was not lawful for any but the Priests, to go into the Sanctuary it self.
Some indeed have thought, that by a special Order from God, Joshua was now
admitted into it: but this seems to me to be contradicted by the next Verse,
which says God appeared in a Cloud, over the door of the Tabernacle.

And the LORD appeared in the Tabernacle in a pillar of a Cloud.] This
signifies that the Glory of the LORD (as other places speak) appeared unto
them, and unto the People; as it had done upon many occasions, XXXIII Exodus 9,
10. IX Numb. 15. XVI Numb. 42, 43.

And the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the Tabernacle.] Being a
Symbol of the Divine Presence, whose Glory appeared out of the Cloud, as it did
XVI Numb. 42. For the Cloud was always upon the Tabernacle, (XL Exodus 35, 38.
IX Numb. 18.) but when the LORD would strike an awe into the People, and move
them to regard what he said or did, then the Cloud stood at the door of the
Tabernacle, and the Glory of the LORD came out of the most Holy Place, and
appeared in it.

And the LORD said unto Moses.] Out of the Cloud, I suppose, as he did XVI
Numb. 44.

Behold, thou shall sleep with thy Fathers.] He first admonished Moses again of
his departure, in the audience, I suppose, of Joshua: who heard all the
following Admonition, to make him more carefully observe the end and design of
it.

Sleep is a common word for Death, either of good Men or bad; which was not
used merely as a soft expression of that, which the Heathen dreaded as the most
terrible of all things; but ^o put them in mind, perhaps, that death should not
last always, but they should as certainly rise again, as they lay down (so the
word is in the Hebrew) to sleep with their Fathers.

And this people will rise.] In Rebellion.

And go a whoring.] God, who searches all Men's hearts, discerned such bad
inclinations in this People, that he knew they would fall into Idolatry, (which
is called going a whoring from him, as has been often noted) notwithstanding
all the Means he had prescribed to prevent it. And therefore he adds one more,
which was the learning them the following Song; notwithstanding which, he
foresaw, that after the death of Joshua, and the Elders who survived him, they
would forsake him, and worship other gods. See CVI Psalm. 36, 38.

After the gods of the strangers of the land.] This is an unusual Phrase;
signifying no more than what he calls in other places strange gods. Though some
think it imports peculiarly the gods of the Canaanites; who were the former
Inhabitants; but being expelled, became Strangers of the Land. And thus Onkelos
seems to have understood it, who translates it, After the Idols of the People
of the Land. Which was an high aggravation of their sin; that they should
worship such gods, as had not been able to protect their Servants.

Whither they go to be among them.] This seems to countenance the foregoing
Exposition. And God charges them in future Ages with this, as a very great
guilt, that they worshipped the gods of the Amorites in whose Land they dwelt,
VI Judges 10.

And will forsake me.] For he looked upon himself as forsaken (that is, not
worshipped) if they worshipped any other god with him, XX Exodus 3.

And break my Covenant which I have made with them.] This being the principal
thing in the Covenant (as I have often observed) that they should worship him
alone, XX Exodus 22, 23. XXIII. 32, 33. V Deuteronomy. 3, 4, etc. VI. 3, 4, etc.

Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day.] So we read it was
upon their very first Apostasy to Idolatry, II Judges 14. and continued so in
all Ages, as we read frequently in that and the following Books. See there v.
20. and III. 8, etc.

And I will forsake them.] Go no longer before them against their Enemies; but
deliver them up into their hands, v. 8.

And will hide my face from them.] Withdraw my favor and protection. So that
they were devoured, as it follows, by their Enemies, and wild Beasts: and many
evils and troubles beset them; or, as the Hebrew phrase signifies, came upon
them on a sudden. The Prophet Ezekiel expresses this in these words, My face
will I turn from them, VII. 22. The effect of which was, the Divine Presence
departed out of the Sanctury, and he left it (as he there speaks) to be
polluted and defiled by Robbers. And so it here follows;

So that they will say on that day, are not these evils come upon us, because
our God is not among us?] For whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD
was against them for evil; as we read II Judges 15. Which was so remarkable a
change, that it could not but at last make them reflect upon the Cause of it;
as we find it did, and moved them to cry unto the LORD for help, III. 9, 15.
IV. 3, etc.

Ver. 18. And I will surely hide my face from them, etc.] He repeats it again,
because they were a People dull of hearing. Or the former words may relate to
their first Captivity, and these to the last (as they Jerusalem by the Romans.
This appears from Schebet Jehuda, where Solomon Virgoe quotes this very Verse
to prove that their present Sufferings proceed not from Nature, but from an
angry God, more powerful than Nature, as he speaks, Sect. XIII.

Ver. 19. Now therefore write ye.] This shows these Moses and to Joshua; who
was to take care, after Moses his death, to see this Command observed.

This song for you.] Which follows in the XXXIIth Chapter.

And teach it the Children of Israel.] Make them get it by heart, as we now
speak.

Put it in their mouths.] That they might sing it, and thereby preserve it in
their memory. For it has been always thought the most profitable way of
instructing People, and communicating things to Posterity, by putting them into
Verse; and especially Children, and young People, are best taught in this way.
And the greater moment any thing is of, the more carefully it ought to be
preserved; which Plato himself thought, could be done by no better means than
this. And therefore having spoken of the Songs which he would have composed for
the use of the People, he would have it enacted, (...), etc. That all Men and
Children, whether bond or free, male or female, should be bound through the
whole City to sing such Songs, and never cease so to do, etc. See Eusebius,
Lib. XII. Praepar. Evang. Cap. XXXII. And Plato himself, Lib. II. de Legibus,
where he gives a great many Cautions about this Matter, and concludes that
(...), p. 657. this must be the work of a God, or some God-like Man. As if he
had been acquainted with what Moses, the Man of God, or rather God himself here
ordained, that every one should have this Song in their mouths, as a means to
preserve them in the Worship of God alone. However, this justifies the
admirable discipline of the Hebrews, in those ancient times, who were taught by
such Hymns, as the wisest Men among the Heathen in future times, thought the
best way of Instruction. For which reason, as Aristotle reports in his
Problems, (Sect. XIX. Probl. 28.) People anciently sung their Laws; as the
Agathyrsi (he says) continued to do in his days, (...), that they might not be
forgotten. Particularly the Laws of Charondas (as Athenaeus informs us out of
Hermippus) were wont to be sung at Athens (...), over a Glass of Wine. And were
therefore written in some sort of Verse, or tunable Measure, as our
incomparable Dr. Bentley has made it probable, in his late Dissertation on the
Epistles of Phalaris, p. 373. Tully also (to add no more) tells us that Cato,
in his Book de Originibus, reports, That it was the Custom among the old
Romans, to have the Virtues and Praises of famous Men sung to a Pipe at their
Feasts. Which he thinks they learnt from the ancient Pythagoroeans in Italy;
who were wont carminibus praecepta quaedam occultius tradere, to deliver in
Verses certain Precepts, which were the greatest Secrets in their Philosophy;
and composed the Minds of the Scholars to Tranquillity, by Songs and
Instruments of Music. See upon XXI Numb. 30. concerning this way of
Instruction.

That this song may be a witness for me against the Children of Israel.]
Testifying that they were sufficiently warned, and could not complain that they
were not taught their duty, and told their danger: and reproving also their
ingratitude, and putting them in mind how ill they requited their God, v. 21.

Ver. 20. For when I have brought them unto the Land VI. 10, etc. XV. 8, 9.

And they shall have eaten, and filled themselves, and waxen fat.] VIII. 10,
11, 12, etc. XXVII. 15.

Then they will turn unto other gods, and serve them, etc.] Against which he
had most solemnly foremarned them, in the places beforementioned, and XI. 16.
XII. 29, 30.

Ver. 21. And it shall come to pass, when many evils That they are most justly
punished for their foul ingratitude and unbelief, with which this Song
upbraided them; having told them plainly (XXXII. 18, 19.) what would be the
effect of their forsaking him; and at the delivery of it, God having solemnly
said here ( v. 17.) that when they went a whoring from him, he would forsake
them, and hide his face from them.

For it shall not be forgotten out of the mouth of their seed.] The Calamities
which fell upon them, according to what is predicted in this Song, brought it
to their remembrance when they had forgotten it, or did not regard it. For
these words do not seem to be a Precept requiring them to remember this Song;
but a Prediction, foretelling that their Miseries should not suffer them quite
to forget it.

For I know their imagination, which they go about, even now before I have
brought them into the Land which I swear.] He saw the secret Inclinations and
Designs which were in their hearts; and perceived that, at that very present
they hankered, as we speak, after Idols.

Moses therefore wrote this Song, the same day.] And so did Joshua (as he was
commanded, v. 19.) who spoke the words of this Song unto the People, as well as
Moses, XXXII. 44.

And taught it the Children of Israel.] Commanded them to learn it, v. 19. In
order to which the Jews say every Man was bound to write for himself a Copy of
it: and more than that, they make it one of the affirmative Precepts (as
Maimonides tells us) which obliged every Israelite to write out the whole Book
of the Law with his own hand. For so they interpret those words, v. 19. Write
ye this Song for you, as if they were spoken to all the People, and their
meaning had been, Write ye this Law for you, wherein is this Song; for they
were not to write the Law by small parts and sections (as his words are) but
all of it entirely. And if a Man's Parents had left him a Copy, yet he was
bound to write one himself: or if he could not write, to procure one to be
written for him by some other Person, etc. See Schickard's Mischpat Hameleck,
Cap. II. Theor. V.

And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge.] That is, the LORD, who had
hitherto spoken to him by Moses, now spoke to him himself, and gave him this
charge, to gain him the greater Authority. For which end he had ordered Joshua
to present himself before him, together with Moses, verse 14.

Be strong and of a good courage.] Which he repeats to him after the death of
Moses, I Josh. 6, 7.

For thou shall bring the Children of Israel into the land which I swear unto
them.] I have appointed thee to be the Captain of my People, to lead them into
the Land of Canaan.

And I will be with thee.] To give him success in all his Enterprises. Which
words being spoken in the audience of all the People (as may be supposed from
v. 14.) made them readily submit to the Authority of Joshua, and confide in his
Conduct.

Ver. 24. And it came to pass, when Moses had made The whole Book of his Laws,
which he put together before his death; as I said on v. 9.

Ver. 25. That Moses commanded the Levites, etc.] Levi. See v. 9.

Ver. 26. Take this Book of the Law, and put it in the Not in the inside of it;
for he does not say, put it into the Ark, but in the side of the Ark: that is,
on the outside, in a little Box, as Jonathan and others expound it. For it is
the very same Phrase with that, 1 Samuel VI. 8. where the Philistims are said to
have put the Jewels of Gold, which they returned for a Sin-offering, in a
Coffer by the side of the Ark. Where none could put it but the High Priest,
because no Body else might go into the Holy Place, where the Ark was. And
therefore those Priests who received the Book of the Law from Moses, delivered
it to Eleazer, to be there placed. See Buxtorf. Histor. Arcae Cap. V. and
Huetius more lately in his Demonstratio Evangelica, Propos. IV. Cap. de Can.
Libr. Sacrorum, Sect. VIII. where he observes that R. Meir in both the Talmuds,
Abarbinel himself, and many others, have been of opinion, from this very place,
that the Book of the Law was put into the Ark it self, being no less precious
than the Tables of Stone, which were there. But the Scripture tells us, There
was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables of Stone, 1 Kings VIII. 9. 2 Chronicles.
V. 10. and their reason is good for nothing, the two Tables far excelling this
Book, because written by the Finger of God. And therefore other great Doctors
among the Jews, rightly place it without the Ark, as the very words of Moses
import.

That it may be there for a witness against thee.] It was deposited in that
place, as a public Record, that if any one should falsify or deprave any
thing in the Law (as Abarbinel interprets it) he might be convicted out of this
Book; which was sacredly preserved to be produced as a Witness against him. Or
(as the Author of Tzeror Hammor expresses it) that if they should be so wicked,
as to lose the Books of the Law, this Copy, kept under the care of the Priests,
might remain to testify what was the Will of God. As we see it did in the days
of Josiah, when it was casually found in the House of God, as they were about
the reparations of it. Though I cannot say they found it, in the side of the
Ark, but rather upon the Roof of the House, or in the Rafters; where the
Priests had hid it, as some of the Jews think, when Manasseh endeavored to
destroy this Authentic Copy of the Law, as he had done all other that he could
find; and when they came to uncover the House, there it appeared.

Ver. 27. For I know thy rebellion and thy stiff-neck.] I have been
sufficiently acquainted with your perverse disposition.

Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye For it was not likely they
would have a greater regard to Joshua, than they had to him; who had such near
familiarity with God, as never any Man had.

Ver. 28. Gather unto me all the Elders of your Tribes.] Moses had spoke to the
People, what God ordered v. 1, 2, etc. (See there) he dismissed them again;
that he might write the Book of the Law, ( v. 9.) and deliver it to the
Priests, etc. and then write this Song (which follows in the next Chapter), v.
19, 22, etc. Which being done, he is ordered here to summon all the Elders of
the several Tribes, (and with them all the People came, v. 30.) that he might
deliver to them by word of Mouth, the Song which he had wrote.

And your Officers.] I have frequently observed that these Schoterim (which we
translate Officers) were but Ministers to their Elders, or Judges. See V Exodus
14. I Deuteronomy. 15. XVI. 18. Unto which I shall add here only the words of
Abarbinel; The Office of the Schoterim was to see that the Sentence which the
Judges had given was observed, and to compel Men to it. They who would have
more, may find a long Roll of Authors, who are of this mind, both Jews and
Christians, in Jo. Benedic. Carpzovius upon Schickard's Jus Regium; who has
also said a great deal to the same purpose, Cap. IV. Theorem XIV.

That I may speak these words in their ears.] The Song which God had suggested
to him, and commanded him to write, v. 19, 22.

And call heaven and earth to record against them.] Call the whole World to
witness how wicked they are, if they fall from God, after such care to preserve
them in his Obedience.

For I know that after my death, you will utterly corrupt your selves.] Fall to
the foulest Idolatry, II Judges 19.

And turn aside from the way which I have commanded you.] Departing from that
way of God, which I have delivered to you by his command. It was a very
melancholy thing for Moses to leave the World in this belief, that all his
pains would be lost upon them: but he comforted himself in doing his Duty to
the very last, and omitting no means to secure them from Apostasy.

And evil will befall you in the latter days.] This seems to express a foresight
that they would not immediately revolt; but after the death of Joshua, and of
the Elders who survived him, II Judges 7, 11, 12, etc.

Because ye will do evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger
through the work of your hands.] By making Images, after the manner of other
Nations, and bowing down to them, and worshipping them, II Judges 12, 13. III.
7. where the Groves signify the Images in the Groves.

And Moses spoke.] With the assistance of Joshua, XXXII. 44.

In the ears of all the Congregation of Israel.] Whom the Elders and Officers (
v. 28.) had assembled, according to their Tribes and Families: unto whom they
went severally, and spoke these words in their hearing.

The words of this song.] Which follows in the next Chapter; and much differs,
in the raised Expressions and loftiness of the Style, from the rest of this
Book hitherto.

Until they were ended.] Omitted nothing, but completely delivered this Song to
them. Or, they spoke all these words to them, at the same time, with one
continued Speech. I observed before that the most ancient way of Instruction
was by Poetical Compositions; which was more ancient than Rhetorical
Discourses. And as their chief Learning did consist of Poetry, so the
excellency of their Poetry was seen in the proper and native Subject of this
Faculty; that is, in Matters of sacred use or observation. From whence the
Title of Vates descended unto Secular and Profane Poets, who detained the
manner of Speech used by the former. But, as Conradus Pellicanus here truly
observes, (and see my Notes on XV Exodus 1.) the Scripture Poetry does not
consist in the cadency and number of Syllables contrived to please the ear; but
in brief and weighty Sentences, simply and sincerely composed, in a lively
manner, to enlighten the Understandings, move the Affections, and stick in the
Memory. And the Ancients (as a great Man of our own observes) had this
advantage of later Poets, That the Fashion of the World (as he speaks) in their
times, was more apt to ravish their thoughts with admiration; wonderful Events
being then more frequent, and their frequency not abating, but rather
increasing their wonderment, because their variety was very great, and the
apprehension of invisible, or supernatural Powers in those Events was usual and
undoubted. So that admiration was then enforced upon Men, and the Breasts of
those who diligently observed those Events, or were any way disposed by Nature
to it, were inspired with lively and sublime Affections, apt to vent themselves
in such Poetical Phrase and Resemblances as we cannot reach; unless we raise
our Invention by Imitation, and stir up Admiration by Meditation and Study. But
now, our Senses being neither moved with such extraordinary Effects of God's
Power, nor our Minds bent to observe the ways of his Wisdom, so as to be
stricken with true observation of them: we have fewer good Sacred Poems, than
of any other kind.

Thus Dr. Jackson, Book I. on the Creed, Chap. XIV. David Chytraeus also has
an excellent Discourse on this Subject, to show that the ancient Poetry among
the Heathen, contained the Doctrine of God and of Celestial Things; all the
Offices and Rewards of Virtue, with the Punishment of Vice; the History of
their Kings, and the noble Acts of famous Men, Tome I. of his Works, p. 154,
etc. Where he confirms this out of the Verses of Orpheus, who lived (as he
computes) about an Hundred and fifty years before David; and those of Pindar,
Simonides, and the rest, who lived in the time of the War with Xerxes. But
Moses led the way to them all; whose Mind was raised to that Sublimity of
Thoughts and Speech, which we find in his Songs, by admiration of those strange
Events which he saw, XV Exodus XXI Numb. and here in the next Chapter: wherein
he was followed by Deborah, Barak, and Hannah, etc. in after times, V Judges, 1 Samuel II.

CHAP. XXXII. Chapter XXXII.

Verse 1. GIve ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; He calls Angels and Men to
bear witness (XXX. 19.) that the Israelites had been admonished of their Duty,
and warned of their Danger: and this, not by words of his own invention, but
which were put into his mouth by the Spirit of God. Or (after an elegant form
of Speech) he calls upon all insensible Creatures every where, to listen to
him; that he might awaken the Israelites out of their stupidity; or upbraid
them as a People, that had ears to hear, and would not hear him. And, as some
of themselves have observed, he may be thought to intimate hereby, that if they
would not hearken and keep his Precepts, the Heavens were forbidden to give
them Rain, and the Earth to bring forth Fruit. The Gloss also of the Jerusalem
Targum is not amiss, that Moses being shortly to die, calls the Heavens and the
Earth, which endure through all Ages, to be Witnesses against them when he was
gone. But the following observation is too curious; That Isaiah when he
prophesied, i. e. being far remote from the Heavens, and near to the Earth,
calls upon the Heavens to hear, and the Earth to give ear, or attend: whereas
Moses, quite contrary, approaching now very near to the Heavens, calls upon
them to attend or give ear; and being in Spirit remote from the Earth, bids it
hear.

Ver. 2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain; my speech shall distill as the
dew.] Or, Let my doctrine drop, etc. For this seems to be a Prayer, that his
words which were sent from Heaven to them, might sink into their hearts, and
soften them, as the drops of Rain and the dew do the Earth; and produce such
Fruits of Obedience as might make them happy.

As the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.]
The aforesaid Targum thus paraphrases this whole Verse; Let the Doctrine of my
Law be as sweet upon the Children of Israel as the Rain; and the word of my
mouth be received by them, as the delectable Dew. Let it be as gentle showers
refreshing the Grass, and as the drops of the latter Rain, descending and
watering the blades of Corn, in the Month of March.

Because I will publish the Name of the LORD.] For my Song shall be concerning
the LORD of Heaven and Earth, whose glorious Perfections I will proclaim; which
make him the sole Object of your Worship.

Ascribe ye greatness unto our God.] Acknowledge therefore the Infinite Power
of our God, and his Sovereign Dominion over all; and give Honor and Service to
none besides him.

These three first Verses seem to be the Preface to the Song; and now follows
the Song it self. Which Josephus calls (...), a Poem in Hexameter Verse, Lib.
IV. Antiq. Cap. VIII.

He is the Rock.] Always indures, and never changes; so that in him we may find
at all times a sure Refuge.

His work is perfect.] Whatsoever he undertakes, he perfects and compleats it.

For all his ways are judgment.] He does nothing without the greatest reason;
and according to the Rules of the exactest Justice.

A God of truth.] Who is faithful to his Promises.

And without iniquity.] And never deceives or wrongs any Man.

Just and right is he.] Nor will he punish any Man without a cause; or more
than he deserves.

Maimonides takes the first words of this Verse, He is the Rock, to signify
the first Principle, and the efficient Cause of all things without himself. For
so the word Rock is used when God bids the Children of Israel, Look to the Rock
out of which they were hewn, LI Isa. 1. that is, to Abraham their Father, from
whom they were descended. And so he thinks it signifies v. 18. of this Chapter,
Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, i. e. of God, the Author of
their being. And again, v. 30. their Rock (i. e. the LORD) sold them. See More
Nevochim, P.I. Chap. XVI. And then by the next words, His way is perfect, he
thinks is meant, that, as he is the Creator of all things, so there is no
defect or superfluity in his Works. For he takes these words to be the same
with those, I Genesis 31. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. See there P. II. Cap. XXVIII. and P. III. Cap. XXV. And as his Works
of Creation are most perfect, so are his Works of Providence; for he governs
the World with the greatest Judgment and Justice. So he seems to understand the
next words, ( P. III. Cap. XVII.) all his ways are judgment. We are ignorant of
the Methods and Reasons of his Judgments, yet no injustice or iniquity is to be
ascribed to him. But all the Evil and all the Good that befalls any Man, or the
whole Church, proceeds from the just and equal Judgment of God. And more
largely, Cap. XLIX. Our narrow minds cannot apprehend either the Perfection of
his Works, or the Equity of his Judgments: for we apprehend his admirable Works
only by parts, whether we look upon the Bodies of Animals, or the Celestial
Spheres; and in like manner we apprehend but a little of his Judgments. For
that of which we are ignorant in both, is far more than that which we know of
either. I conclude this with the words of the Author of Sepher Cosri (Part III.
Sect. XI.) He that believes this, that all God's Works are perfect, and his
Ways Judgment, will always lead a sweet and pleasant Life. All Afflictions will
be made light to him: nay, he will rejoice that his Iniquities are hereby
alleviated, and that he shall one day be rewarded for his Patience, which he
teaches Men by his example, and thereby justifies the Judgments of God. With
respect to which, I suppose, the Jews now begin the Prayer which they make at
the burial of their dead, with this Verse of Moses his Song. Which Prayer they
call Tzidduck haddin, i. e. just judgment, as Leo Modena observes in his
History of the present Jews, Part V. Chap. VIII.

They have corrupted themselves, etc.] I know not how to justify this
Translation, nor that in the Margin, [He has corrupted himself.] Maimonides
translates them better; making these words a Question, and the next words an
Answer to them, in this manner; Did he (i. e. God, the Rock before spoken of)
do him any hurt? For the Hebrew word Shecheth with lamed after it, signifies to
hurt or destroy, XXXII Numb. 15. 1 Samuel XXIII. 10. (as Joh. Cocceius observes
in his Vltima Mosis, Sect. 701.) And so the meaning is, Is God to blame for the
Evils that befall him? i. e. Israel. Unto which the Answer follows in the next
words, which we thus translate.

Their spot is not the spot of his Children.] In the Hebrew, the first word of
this Sentence is lo, i. e. not, or no. Which the accent Tipcha (as they call
it) under it, shows is not to be joined with the words that follow [banau
Mumam] but taken by it self; being a denial of the foregoing Question. And
these words are thus to be translated; No. His Children are their blot: i. e.
all the Evil that befalls them, is the fruit of their Childrens wickedness. And
so these words are in effect the same with those of Solomon, XIX Prove. The
foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the LORD.
He complains of God, when the fault is in himself. See More Nevochim, P. III.
Cap. XII.

Onkelos translates it thus, They corrupted to themselves, not to him; Children
that served Idols: i. e. as Paulus Fagius observes, they hurt themselves* not
God, when leaving him the true God, they turned to Idols. For the word corrupt
is commonly used in Scripture, where it speaks of the sin of Idolatry. The
Jerusalem Paraphrast aims at the same sense.

They are a perverse and crooked Generation.] The whole Body of them are
untoward and untractable, walking contrary to God in all their ways. For, there
being a gemination (as they speak) of a syllable in the latter of these words
[Pethalthol] it increases the sense, and makes it the same with the Superlative
Degree among us; importing the highest obliquity imaginable. And these words
were never more exactly fulfilled, than in the days of our blessed Savior; who
calls them a wicked and adulterous, a faithless and perverse Generation, XVI
Matthew. 4. XVII. 17. And in the days of the Apostles, who call them (...), an
absurd kind of People, 2 Thessalonians. III. 2. Who pleased not God, and were contrary
to all men, 1 Thessalonians. II. 15.

Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people and unwise?] He upbraids them
with their senseless folly, and foul ingratitude; which in the following words
he demonstrates, by representing the Obligations he had laid upon them.

Is not he thy father?] Having adopted them in a peculiar manner to be his
Children, above all other People.

Who has taught thee?] When he rescued them from the slavery of Egypt.

Has not he made thee?] Advanced them (for so the word Asa is translated, 1 Samuel XII. 6.) to be a great and mighty People. See C Psalm. 3.

And established thee?] By settling them in excellent order, under the
Government of most wise and righteous Laws. See Chapter the fourth of this
Book, v. 7, 8.

Remember the days of old.] Look back as far as you are able.

Consider the years of many generations.] Consult the most ancient Records;
which would inform them how God chose their Father Abraham long ago; and
promised to bless his Posterity, as he did Isaac and Jacob in a most eminent
manner; and sent Joseph by a wonderful Providence into Egypt to preserve them
from starving, etc.

Ask thy Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they will tell thee.]
All this is to express the same thing; that they should advise with those that
knew more than themselves; and particularly with old Men (as the word may be
understood which we translate Elders) who by the benefit of their great Age,
had heard and seen more than others; and could tell them how God had dealt with
them, ever since he brought them by a wonderful Power out of the Land of Egypt.

Ver. 8. When the most High divided to the Nations He directs them still to
look further back, and they would find, that long before Abraham's time, God
had them in his thoughts; even when he divided the Earth among the Sons of Noah
and their Posterity, after the Flood, X Genesis 5, 25, 32.

When he separated the sons of Adam.] Or, the sons of Men; who were one People,
till he scattered them into several Parts of the Earth, and separated them into
diverse Nations, by confounding their Language, XI Genesis 8, 9.

He set the bounds of the people, according to the number of the Children of
Israel.] He had then the Children of Israel in his mind, before they were a
Nation; and made such a distribution to other People (particularly to the Seven
Nations of Canaan) within such bounds and limits, as that there might be
sufficient room for so numerous a People as the Israelites, when they came to
take possession of that Country.

How the Seventy came to translate these words thus, He appointed the bounds of
the Nations, according to the number of the Angels, it is hard to say.
Bochartus has made the best Conjecture about it (which was hinted by de Muis
before him) Lib. I. Phaleg. Cap. XV. that they had a bad Copy before them,
which left out the three first Letters of Israel; and so they read baneel, the
Children of God, meaning the Israelites. Instead of which some Transcribers put
the Angels of God, because they are sometimes called his Sons. Which led the
ancient Greek Fathers, who followed this Translation, into great difficulties:
and it grew a common Opinion, that every Nation was under the Government of an
Angel: which seems to be the meaning also of the Son of Sirach, XVII Ecclus.
17. And many others fancying that God divided the Nations according to the
number of the Children of Israel, when they came into Egypt, which was just
Seventy, they thence gather there were just so many distinct. Nations, and so
many several Languages: Which is a Conceit of some of the Jews, as Mr. Seldom
observes, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. IX. But Bochart. in the place abovenamed,
has given the plain and simple meaning of this place, in these words; God so
distributed the Earth among the several People that were therein, that he
reserved, or in his counsel designed, such a part of the Earth for the
Israelites, who were then unborn, as he knew would afford a commodious
habitation to a most numerous Nation.

For the LORD's portion is his people.] And not satisfied with this kindness,
he chose them alone out of all other Nations, to be under his special Care, and
to enjoy singular Privileges, which none other had; and therefore they are
called his peculiar Treasure, XIX Exodus 5. This Origin maintains to be true,
against all the Cavils of Celsus, Lib. V. p. 250. Edit. Cantabr. where he shows
how beneficial their Laws were; and that they were taught so early to know God,
to believe the Immortality of the Soul, and Rewards and Punishments in the Life
to come, as demonstrated they were distinguished from all other People
whatsoever. See p. 260.

Jacob is the Lot of his Inheritance.] This is the same thing repeated in other
words; alluding to the manner of measuring and dividing Lands, by Cords; as the
word in the Hebrew is, which we translate lot. See XVI Psalm. 6 and Chapt. IV.
of this Book, v. 20.

Ver. 10. He found him in a desert Land.] There Israelites to be his peculiar
People; for so the word we translate found, frequently signifies. As in Psalm.
CXVI. 3. The pains of Hell gat hold upon me: where in the Hebrew the words are
found me. And in the New Testament, IV Romans 1. What shall we say then, that
Abraham our Father has found? that is, attained.

In the waste-howling wilderness.] Desolate and void of all Sustenance: where
nothing was to be heard but the howlings and yellings of wild Beasts, VIII
Deuteronomy. 15.

He led him about.] Conducted the Israelites from place to place, XXXIII Numb.
1, 2, etc.

He instructed him.] Gave them his Laws, XX Exodus 1, 2, etc. XXXIV. 1, 10, etc.

He kept him as the apple of his eye.] Protected and defended them from all
dangers with extraordinary care; for there is nothing of which we are more
tender than the sight of our Eyes. Which God has guarded by several coats and
humors, and Eyelids fenced with hairs, to preserve it from hurt: unto which
R. Levi ben Gersom thinks these words allude.

Ver. 11. As an Eagle stirs up her nest, etc.] Eagles her nest, as Bochartus
observes; (it being a common Figure used by other Authors, to put continens pro
contento) whom she provokes to fly (which is meant by stirring up her Nest) by
fluttering over them, with her wings stretched out. Upon which she takes them,
while they are so weak and feeble that they fail in their attempt to fly; and
supporteth them till they recover strength to commit themselves unto the Air.
See Hierozoicon P. II. Lib. II. Cap. III. and J. G. Vossius de Orig. and Progr.
Idolol. Lib. III. Cap. LXXVII. where he observes that this kindness to her
young ones is chiefly found in the black Eagle; though something of it be seen
in others: which may be the reason they lay but a few Eggs, because they are
not able to educate many young ones with such tender care.

So the LORD alone did lead him.] XIV Numb. 14. This is an exact Resemblance of
God's tender care of his People Israel. Whom he solicited by Moses and Aaron,
to aspire after their Liberty, when they were oppressed in Egypt; just as an
Eagle excites her young ones, when they lie drowsy in the filth of their Nest,
to fly away. And as the Eagle flutters over them, with her wings spread abroad,
so God by his Spirit moved the Israelites to be obedient to their Deliverers
out of Egypt. For Moses uses the very same word, when he speaks of the Spirit
of God moving upon the waters, I Genesis 2. And as the Eagle carries her fainting
young ones on her Wings, so God supported them when they were weary, and upheld
them in dangerous ways. Insomuch that he is said to carry them in his Arms, as
a Father does his Child, I Deuteronomy. 31. I Hosea 1, 3. See Bochartus in the place
abovenamed, Cap. IV.

And there was no strange god with him.] To help or assist him: but by his
Almighty Power alone they were protected and preserved. Which made their sin
the more heinous, in sacrificing to other gods, ( v. 17.) as if they had been
their Benefactors.

Ver. 13. He made him ride on the high places of the earth.] Brought the
Israelites in a triumphant manner, to possess a noble Country, full of lofty
and very Canaan, where they lived deliciously. So to ride signifies, as
Bochartus thinks, laute and opipare vivere. Which he justifies by that place in
Hosea, X. 11. I will make Ephraim to ride; Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall
break his clods. That is, says he, the People of Israel lived in pleasure,
when Judah lived laboriously, P. I. Hierozoic. Lib. II. Cap. XLI. But to ride
signifies also, to subdue and conquer: which may be the meaning here, XLV Psalm.
4. LXVI. 12. and to have dominion and rule, as Maimonides interprets it in his
More Nevochim P. I. Cap. LXX. In which sense it is said of God himself, in the
next Chapter of this Book, He rides upon the heavens, for thy help, v. 26. And
he rides upon Araboth the highest Heavens, LXVIII Psalm. 4.

That he might eat the increase of the field.] Abundance of Corn, and Fruit.

And he made him to suck honey out of the Rock.] Wild Honey; which was esteemed
an excellent Food in that Country: and was sometimes found upon the ground;
sometimes in the hollow part of Trees; and sometimes in the Clefts of Rocks; as
Bochartus observes out of good Authors, Hierozoicon P. II. L. IV. Cap. XV. This
Rock-honey seems to be spoken of as the best of this kind, being joined with
the finest Wheat, LXXXI Psalm. ult.

And Oil out of the flinty Rock.] No part of this Country being barren; but
affording something or other for their Sustenance: Though some say that the
Olive Trees thrive best in rocky places. Columella himself observes, that it
does not delight either in low places, or in high, but magis modicos clivos
amat, but rather loves the sides of moderately rising Hills, Lib. VI. Cap. VI.
And D. Chytraeus notes, that as the most generous Wine is produced upon the
Rhine, below Mentz, out of the hardest Flints; sic oleae locis petrosis
sterilibus non infeliciter proveniunt; so Olive Trees grow prosperously in
stony and barren places, Tom. I. p. 173.

Butter of kine.] The use of Butter was very ancient among the Hebrews; though
lately known to the Greeks (as I observed upon XVIII Genesis 8.) and it was
accounted an excellent Food.

And milk of sheep.] Which the Scripture often mentions, VII Isa. 21, 22. 1 Corinthians. IX. 1, 7. And under the word tzon, as has been often observed, Goats
also are comprehended: whose Milk likewise is mentioned, XXVII Prove. 27.
Aristotle mentions both, and so does Columella, and a great many others, in
Bochart's Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. II. Cap. XLV. where he proves that they made
Butter of these Milks, as well as of Cows.

With the fat of Lambs.] Well fed. For Carim properly signifies Pasture Sheep,
as the same Bochart there observes, Cap. XLIII.

And Rams of the breed of Bashan.] A Country famous for excellent Pasture;
being (...), etc. as St. Cyril calls it. See XXXII Numb. 1, 4.

And Goats.] Of the Breed of that Country.

With the fat of kidneys of wheat.] The Hebrews call the best of every kind of
thing, by the name of the Fat. And the Kidneys of Wheat, signifies large and
plump Corn, affording great plenty of Flour. Cajetan thinks it signifies Wheat
as Big as a Kidney; or rather, having that shape, as our Kidney Beans have.

And thou shall drink the pure blood of the Grapes.] Most generous red Wine;
very clear and bright. So Achil. Tatius Lib. II. calls Wine (...).

Maimonides in his More Nevochim, P. II. Cap. XLVII. takes all the Expressions
in this Verse to be metaphorical; signifying (as Onkelos allegorizes them) the
possession of all their Enemies Cities and Goods, after they had poured out
their Blood like Water on the Ground.

Ver. 15. Jeshurun waxed fat.] Grew rich, says Onkelos, and the Jerusalem
Targum.

And kicked.] Against him who fed him so plentifully and deliciously. It seems
to be a Metaphor taken from Oxen, who being stirred up with a Goad to labor,
lift up their Heels and kick against him who pricks them forward. So did the
Israelites, when they were urged and pressed to their Duty by the Prophets; not
only despised, but evil entreated them.

Why Israel is called Jeshurun, is not easy to resolve. Jo. Cocceius (in his
Vltima Mosis, Sect. 973.) derives it from Shur, which signifies to see, behold,
or descry. From whence in the Future Tense, and the Plural Number, comes
Jeshuru: which, by the addition of Nun paragogicum, as they speak, makes
Jeshurun. That is, The People who had the Vision of God. I know nothing more
simple, nor more probable than this; which highly aggravated their sin, who
having God so nigh unto them, (IV. 7.) and their Elders having had a sight of
him, (XXIV Exodus 10.) were so ungrateful, as to rebel against him, and worship
other gods. Some refer this kicking, to their revolt from the House of David;
when Jeroboam, to preserve his new Kingdom, set up the golden Calves, to
prevent the return of the People to their old Master, by going up to Jerusalem
to worship.

Thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness.] This
variety of Expressions is used to signify how exceeding bountifully God had
provided for them; and withal, how very wanton and insolent they were grown, as
Cattle fed in a fat Pasture are wont to be. The words with fatness (after
covered) are not in the Hebrew; but are well supplied out of other places;
particularly XVII Psalm. 10.

Then he forsook God.] The Jerusalem Targum here has it, they forsook the
WORD of God.

Which made him.] Advanced them from a desert where he found them, ( v. 6, 10.)
into a very rich and plentiful Country. This was the lamentable effect of their
Plethora, or Fullness: unto which we are all too prone, as an excellent Person
of our own has long ago observed. Even such as seem most upright, says he,
when they wax fat, spurn with the heel, and cast away the memory of their
Misery, and of God's former Mercy behind their backs. And what was the reason
that the Israelites waxed thus full and fat? Only because they did not use that
Exercise which God had appointed to keep them under, and preserve their Hearts
from being lifted up; VIII Deuteronomy. 11, etc. Take heed to thy self, lest when thou
have eaten, and filled thy self, etc. then thy heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc. The
daily and lively Representation, or Recognition of their Condition there,
should have been as usual to them as their Meat and Drink; yea, as it were,
their Thanksgiving before and after Meats, as our Dr. Jackson speaks, Book XI.
on the Creed, Chap. XXXIV. And Maimonides himself, mentioning those very words,
Lest when thou have eaten, and filled thy self, etc. very well observes; That
to prevent Pride and Apostasy, which grow out of great Plenty, God commanded
them to offer their First Fruits before him every year, with a solemn
Confession, how poor they were in the beginning, and then raised by God to be a
mighty People, XXVI Deuteronomy. 5, 6, etc. For which end the Passover was instituted,
That they might remember the day when they came forth out of Egypt all the days
of their Life, XVI Deuteronomy. 3. See More Nevochim, P. II. Cap. XXXIX..

And lightly esteemed the Rock of their Salvation.] As there was a progress in
their insolent forgetfulness of God, expressed in three Phrases, which may
signify three degrees of their stupidity, ( waxen fat, grown thick, and
covered with fatness) so some observe as many degrees of their Rebellion.
First, They kicked against God; i. e. threw off the Yoke of his Laws, and
refused to observe them. Secondly, They forsook God, and fell into Idolatry.
And lastly, They lightly esteemed the Rock of their Salvation. Where the Hebrew
word nibbel signifies more than a light esteem; for, if it come from Nebelah, a
dead Carcass, (as some think it does) it denotes the greatest abhorrence;
nothing being so much abominated among the Jews as a dead Carcass; the touching
of which was the highest pollution. And thus J. Cocceius and Campeg. Vitringa
understand it; who observe that this was never so fulfilled as in their
behavior toward our Lord Christ, who was indeed the Rock of their Salvation;
and so vilely used by them, as if he had been the most loathsome Man upon
Earth. So Vitringa expounds these words (in his Observe. Sacr. Lib. II. Cap. IX.
p. 173.) instar flagitij tractavit rupem salutis suae. For this is a word used
by God himself, when he would express his utter detestation of Nineveh, and his
dealing with her according to her abominable Wickedness, III Nahum 6. I will
cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, etc. and when he speaks of
the disgrace he would put upon his own Temple, XIV Jerem. 21. The LXX. indeed
simply expound the word (...), he departed; but the last words they expound
(...), from God his Savior; as Onkelos also, his most mighty Redeemer. Which
in the most eminent sense, is the LORD Jesus; for none brought such Salvation
to them, and wrought such a Redemption for them, as he did: who is the Stone
which God laid in Sion, etc. XXVIII Isa. 16. But instead of flying to him, as
Men in danger, do to a Rock or strong Fortress; they not only rejected him, but
abused and put the highest Indignities upon him.

They provoked him to jealousy.] Made him extremely angry with them. For so
Jealousy is described as the Rage of a Man, VI Prove. 34.

With strange gods.] Whom they fell in love withal and worshipped. This was the
ground of his Jealousy; their falsness to God, who had espoused them to
himself. And the Hebrew word zar (strange) we sometimes translate another, XIX
Job 27. So that a strange god and another god are the very same, LXXXI Psalm. 9.
XX Exodus 3. Therefore God says he will not give his glory to another, XLII
Isa. 8. and that their Sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another
god, XVI Psalm. 4.

With abominations provoked they him to anger.] I take this to be a Repetition
of the same thing; their Idols being called Abominations, because God
exceedingly hates them, VII. 25. 1 Kings XI. 5. Though R. Solomon and Abarbinel
by Abominations here understand those filthy Mixtures forbidden in Levit.
XVIII. with Witchcrafts and such like Wickedness. And Abarbinel refers the
first part of this Verse, to the times under the first Temple, when they
worshipped the Sun, Moon and Stars; and the latter part of it to the times
under the second Temple; when, though they were free from Idolatry, they were
corrupted with other abominable filthiness.

Ver. 17. They sacrificed to Devils, and not to God.] Schedim, which we
translate Devils, imports as much as Destroyers, (as the Devil is called in the
Book of Revelation, IX. 11.) Evil Spirits delighting in Mischief; and leading
those that worship them into Perdition. Though some think they are called
Schedim ironically, by way of Scorn; the true God being Schaddai, the
Omnipotent, and All-sufficient;and these called by way of mockery, counterfeit
gods, who had no power to help their Worshippers; nor were sufficient to
preserve themselves. Either of these accounts of the word are better than that
of Manasseh ben Israel, who derives it from (...) a field, because they
frequent desert places. But then they should have been called Sedim, not
Schedim, as he must needs know, who was a great Master in the Hebrew Learning.
The LXX. call them here (...), and so does the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. X. 19.
because the Demons led Men into the impiety of worshipping other gods; either
themselves, or other beings; which they persuaded simple People, had some
Divinity in them. And that, not only the Stars, but even Beasts here upon the
Earth; nay, Onions and Garlic. Which they did not take to be gods; but things,
by which, as intermediate Causes, their gods were pleased or offended with
them; and therefore worshipped them.

To gods whom they knew not.] Or, as the words may be translated, gods that
knew not them: that is, had never bestowed any benefits upon them. For, as it
follows, they were new gods; never before heard of by their Ancestors.

New gods, that newly came up.] Such as Jeroboam's Calves; invented out of his
own Brain: and the gods of other Nations, Moloch and Baal; which were new to
the Israelites, and had not been known among them. For the doemon gods were of
no great antiquity: Bell, or Baal (as he is called in the Chaldee Dialect) the
first King of Babel after Nimrod, being the first that was ever deified (as Mr.
Mede observes) or reputed a god after his death; whence all other Demons were
called Baalim: as all the Roman Emperors were called Caesar's, from the first
Emperor of that Name. See p. 776. Besides which, the Heathens had another
higher sort of Demons, which had never been linked to a Mortal Body, viz.
those we call Angels: who the Israelites were taught to be but Ministers unto
their God, and therefore not to be worshipped.

Whom your Fathers feared not.] That is, did not worship. This was a great
aggravation of their guilt, that when they would have other Objects of Worship,
they did not return unto those, whom their Ancestors had reverenced, (the
Teraphim for instance, which were the gods of Laban and Rachel) for whose
worship they might have pretended Tradition: but chose gods, whom their
Forefathers were not acquainted withal; which was a token of a strange
proneness to Idolatry. And Maimonides, mentioning this Verse, observes that
they worshipped not only things that had a being, but mere imaginations. For
which he quotes these words of the Book Siphri: It was not enough that they
worshipped the Sun, Moon and Stars, and Caelestial Signs; but they worshipped
their Shadow; More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XLVI.

Ver. 18. Of the Rock that begat thee.] God the v. 4.

Thou art unmindful.] Being wholly intent to Idols, which they themselves had
made.

And have forgotten God that formed thee.] Into a Kingdom of Priests; making
them his peculiar People, XIX Exodus 5, 6.

Ver. 19. And when the LORD saw it, he abhorred Cast them off; as they had done
him.

Because of the provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters.] For so they were,
till they corrupted themselves; and thereby highly incensed him against them.
For nothing can be so provoking as the Rebellion of Children against a most
indulgent Parent. Maimonides translates it, By reason of his Anger against his
Sons and his Daughters: P. I. More Nevochim, Cap. XXXVI. where he observes, we
never find the word Caas (which is here used signifying indignation) in
Scripture applied to God, but only when it speaks of Idolatry.

Ver. 20. And he said.] Resolved.

I will hide my face from them.] See XXXI. 17, 18.

I will see what their end shall be.] Not cease my Judgments till I have
brought the sorest Calamities upon them, and made an end of them: that is, of
their Polity and Government.

For they are a very froward Generation.] Incorrigibly wicked.

Children in whom there is no faith.] Who had broken their Covenant with him
(XXXI. 16.) so often, that they were not to be trusted, when they made
profession of Repentance. The Book of Judges, and indeed their whole History,
testifies to the truth of this.

They have moved me to jealousy.] See v. 16.

With that which is not God.] By worshipping God's Creatures, or the Work of
their own Hands.

They have provoked me to anger with their vanities.] The same thing, in other
words: all the gods of the Nations, whom the Israelites imitated, being mere
Vanities (or things of naught, as the Jerusalem Targum has it) as has been
often observed.

And I will move them to jealousy.] He threatens to be even with them, and
serve them in their kind.

With those that are not a People.] Who either were not a Nation in being, at
this time; or so obscure, base and ignoble, that they were not worthy the name
of a Nation. The Jews interpret it of the Chaldaeans; whom God raised up on a
sudden, when no Body would believe it, (I Habak. 5, 6, etc.) to be a terrible
Scourge to them. See XXIII Isa. 13.

And I will provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation.] The Jews thought all
Nations so, except themselves. And in one sense all the Gentiles were really
so: for nothing was more foolish than to Worship Creatures meaner than
themselves, X Jerem. 8.

The Apostle applies this unto the bestowing the Blessing of the Messiah, whom
the Jews refused, upon the Gentile World (X Romans 19.) which strangely enraged
the Jews; as we see, when our Savior first mentioned it, XXI Matthew. 43, 44,
etc. and when St. Paul did but speak of going to preach unto them, XXII Acts
21, 22. And see 1 Thessalonians. II. 15, 16. And through all Ages since it has made
them gnash their Teeth, to see so many Nations subject unto our Savior, and
honor him as God; whom they rejected as the vilest of Men.

Ver. 22. For a fire is kindled in mine anger.] Great fire in Scripture, (XXX
Ezekiel. 8.) which God here threatens to send upon them, as the woeful Effects of
his heavy displeasure.

And shall burn unto the lowest hell.] Never cease till they have destroyed
them. For Hell and Destruction seem to be the same, XV Prove. 11. And therefore
the lowest Hell signifies the depth of Misery.

And shall consume the Earth with her increase.] Make an utter desolation in
the Country, I Isa. 7.

And set on fire the foundations of the Mountains.] Subvert the strongest
Fortresses, which were accounted impregnable. Such as Jerusalem (which Rasi
thinks is here meant) in whose last destruction this was perfectly fulfilled,
as it was in part at the first, 2 Kings XXV. 9. For Titus himself, as Josephus
relates, ( Lib. VII. de Bello Judaico, Cap. 43.) observing the vast height of
the Walls, the bigness of every Stone, the exact order wherein they were laid,
and compacted, etc. cried out, God was with us in this War, he drove the Jews
from these munitions, (...) (...); for what could Men's Hands or Machines do
against such Towers? Which calls to mind, what is related, not only by S.
Chrysostom, Sozomen, Socrates, but by Ammianus Marcellinus himself, an Heathen
Historian, ( Lib. XXIII. beginning) how that when Julian the Apostate ordered
the Temple at Jerusalem to be rebuilt, terrible Globes of Fire burst out prope
fundamenta from the very Foundations, which overturned all, burnt the Workmen,
and made the place so inaccessible, that they desisted from the Attempt. The
certainty of this has extorted the same Confession from the Jews themselves, (
David Ganz in his Tzemach David, and R. Gedaliah in Schal. Hakkabala) though
they pretend the Building went on and was finished; but after many years
overthrown by an Earthquake.

I will heap mischiefs upon them.] Which shall miserably oppress and crush them.

And spend all my Arrows upon them.] His Judgments and Plagues are often compared
to Arrows shot at them (VII Psalm. 12, 13. XXXVIII. 2. XCI. 5.) And he speaks in
the Language of an Archer, who shoots till he has emptied his Quiver, and has
not one Arrow left.

They shall be burnt with hunger.] This Verse and the next explains what he
means by Arrows, which are here enumerated. And first he threatens a Famine,
with which he says they should be burnt: either because these Judgments are
compared to fire, v. 22. or because extreme Hunger parches the inward parts,
and makes the Visage as black as a Coal, as Jeremiah speaks, IV Lament. 8.

And devoured with burning heat.] With Fevers, and Calentures; as they are
called in hot Countries.

And with bitter destruction.] With the Pestilence: which he calls bitter,
because it was incurable.

And I will send the teeth of wild beasts upon thee.] This was another of the
sore Judgments, which God threatened to their Disobedience. See XXVI Levit. 22.
Upon which Maimonides observed, that Magicians were wont to promise them by
their Arts, to free their Cities, Fields, and Plantations from Lions and
Serpents, and such like hurtful Creatures; unto whose power God delivered them,
because they forsook him, and followed Idolaters and Magicians, More Nevoch. P.
III. Cap. XXXVII.

With the poison of Serpents of the dust.] Whose bitings were deadly. And they
were exposed to them, as well as to wild Beasts; when they were forced to fly
into Wildernesses, and hide themselves in Dens and Caves; where some of them
could not avoid being devoured by wild Beasts, and bitten by Serpents, which
lay lurking in those holes. So Cooceius in his Vltima Mosis, Sect. 1271. where
he notes also, that this was fulfilled in part, when they were thrown by the
Romans to wild Beasts in the Theaters, as Josephus relates, Lib. VI. de Bello
Judaico, Cap. XVI, XX.

Ver. 25. The sword without, and terror within shall They could no where be
safe: for in the Field the Sword of their Enemies cut them off, and at home,
they did not think themselves secure, in their closest Chamber, but died with
fear, or made away themselves, lest they should fall into the hands of those
that sought to destroy them. See I Lament. 20. Or perhaps by the terror within
may be meant Famine and Pestilence, VII Ezekiel. 15.

Both the young man and the virgin, the suckling with the man of gray hairs.]
He threatens to deliver them into such merciless Hands, as would spare none;
nor make any difference of Sex or of Age. This Huetius refers to the last
destruction of Jerusalem, in his Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IX. Cap. CLXXIII. And
Abarbinel also confesses it was then fulfilled.

I said] i. e. Resolved.

I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to
cease from among men.] Utterly destroy them, so that not one of them should be
found: and if any remained they should sculk, and not dare to appear among Men.

Were it not that I feared the wrath of the Enemy.] He that is Omnipotent is
not capable of fearing any thing: but he speaks in our Language, and gives this
reason why he did not make them cease to be a Nation, because he would not have
their Enemies insult, and grow outrageous in their insolent Language, even
against himself. Of which we find an instance XXXVII Isa. 28, 29.

Lest their Adversaries should behave themselves strangely.] Ascribe all this
to their false gods (as Cocceius understands it) which are called strange gods,
v. 16.

And lest they should say our hand is high.] Imagine their own Power and Valor
had destroyed the Jews; as both the Assyrians and Chaldaeans boasted, X Isa. 7,
8, etc. I Habak. 15, 16.

And the LORD has not done all this.] And attribute nothing to the most High,
in all the business. Certain it is, the Wickedness of the Jews was so exceeding
great, that their final Extirpation had been accomplished many Generations
before it came to pass, had the LORD been only just, and respected nothing but
their deserts; whom he very often preserved when they might have been justly
destroyed, for such reasons as he himself here gives. That his Glory might not
be impeached among the Nations, but they might see by the strange Deliverances
and Restaurations of the Jews, that their God was a God of gods, most worthy to
be honored by all the World, as he himself speaks below, v. 36. So Dr. Jackson
well observes, B. I. on the Creed, Chap. XXII. Sect. IV.

The Marginal Translation of this last Clause, is also agreeable to the Hebrew,
Our high hand, and not the LORD, has done all this. To prevent which wrong
Construction of God's Judgments upon them, he took such a time for the
Execution of them, (as Conradus Pellicanus well observes) when the World began
to be better instructed by the Coming of Christ. So that Titus himself said, as
I noted before, that it was God, and not the Hands of the Romans, that
destroyed them. See XXIX. 24. and this Chapter v. 22.

Ver. 28. For they are a Nation void of counsel.] The abad (which is commonly
translated perish, and here we translate void) signifies in the Ethiopick
Language is foolish, or mad, as Job Ludolphus observes in his excellent History
of that Country. Which makes it probable, this was the ancient sense of the
word among the Hebrews, and gives the best account of this place, which may be
thus translated, They are a Nation foolish in their counsel.] Whose Counsels
led them to such Courses, as utterly undid them; and when they seemed most
wise, they madly ruined themselves. And thus those words of Jeremiah may be
best translated, The heart of the King is foolish, IV. 9.

Neither is there any understanding in them.] They did not understand what was
good for themselves; but imprudently chose that which did them mischief. Some
refer this to the Enemies of the Jews, before spoken of: but that seems not so
agreeable to what follows, which relates to the same Persons; and most likely
expresses God's Compassion toward the senseless Jews. Huetius applies this to
their stupid blindness at their last destruction; which they were so far from
preventing, that they drew it upon themselves, as Josephus shows. See XXVIII.
28, 29.

O that they were wise.] So as seriously to consider God's dealing with them
exactly, according to what he foretold them.

That they understood this, etc.] Or, as it may be translated, Then would they
understand this; they would consider their latter end. They would soon perceive
the Hand of God in all that is befaln them; and that if they do not change
their Course, they will in Conclusion be utterly undone.

How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight?] Whence
should such an amazing Change proceed? that the Israelites, who formerly with
an handful of Men put vast Armies to flight, (XXVI Levit. 8.) should now,
though never so numerous, be beaten by one or two of their Enemies: fleeing
when none pursues them, XXVI Lev. 17, 36, 37. XXVIII Deuteronomy. 25.

Except their Rock had sold them.] A little consideration was sufficient to
make them understand, that this had been impossible, if they had not forsaken
their God; who thereupon delivered them up to the Will of their Enemies. For by
their Rock is meant God; and his selling them, is his quitting his Interest in
them, and giving them up to be Slaves to those that hated them.

And the LORD had shut them up.] So that they could not escape the Hands of
their Enemies.

Ver. 31. For their Rock is not as our Rock.] None their Rock, because they
relied on them for safety) have such power as He that gave us our being. So
Maimonides interprets the word tzur, the Spring and Fountain of all things.

Our Enemies themselves being Judges.] Who were often forced to acknowledge his
overruling Power and Providence, controlling all their Designs. As the
Egyptians confessed, XIV Exodus 2, 5. and Balaam, XXIII Numb. 19, 22. and the
Philistims, 1 Samuel IV. 7, 8. and the King of Babylon, III Dan. 29.

Ver. 32. For their Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and of I suppose he speaks here
of the Israelites (giving an account why their Enemies so shamefully chased
them, v. 30.) who are compared to a Vine, which God brought out of Egypt, and
planted in Canaan, LXXX Psalm. 8. and the Prophet afterward calls them, the
Plant of his Pleasure, V Isa. 7. Which was an ancient resemblance, it appears
by this place; where he represents them as such a degenerate People, that they
were as bad (nay worse, as the Marginal Translation is) as the Sodomites, or
the People of Gomorrah: and therefore deserved ( v. 26.) to be utterly
destroyed as they were. See I Isa. 10. II Jerem. 21.

Their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter.] These words
represent their actions (called fruit in Scripture) to be so wicked, that they
were not to be endured. And so Josephus describes them before their last
destruction, Lib. VI. de Bello Judaico, Cap. ult. where he says, If the Romans
had delayed to fall upon such a wicked People, he thinks either the Earth would
have opened its Mouth, and swallowed them up, or a Flood drowned their City, or
Thunder and Lightning from Heaven destroyed it, as it did Sodom. (...), For
they were a more Atheistical Generation, than they who suffered such things.
And again, Lib. VII. Cap. XXX. he says that the time when they were destroyed
was so fruitful in all manner of wickedness among the Jews, (...), That there
was no one work of wickedness, that was not committed; nor can one imagine any
thing so bad, that they did not do: endeavoring publicly, as well as
privately, to excel one another, both in impiety toward God, and injustice to
their Neighbors.

Their wine is the poison of Dragons.] This still represents their Fruit, that
is, their Works, to be most pernicious; being compared to the Poison of
Dragons. Many Authors indeed say that Dragons have no Poison in them, (as B.
Chytraeus and others observe) but as the Hebrew word Thaanim signifies any kind
of Serpent, so it is certain that the Dragons of Africa and Arabia had a deadly
Poison in them; though those of Greece had not: as the famous Bochartus shows at
large, in his Hierozoicon, P. II. Lib. III. Cap. XIV. Who also observes in
another place, that the Hebrew word Rosch, signifying both the Head and also
Poison; the Poison of Serpents lies partly in their Gall, partly in their
Teeth, and partly in a little Bladder under their Tongue, P. I. Lib. I. Cap. IV.

And the cruel venom of Asps.] The Poison of Asps is called cruel, because it
is accounted the acutest of all other: instan^ly penetrating into the Vital
Parts. Whence the Proverb (...), the biting of Asps, for an incurable Wound.
For they who are bitten with an Asp, seldom escape with their life; as
Aristotle, Pliny, and a great many other Authors observe, in Bochart. P. II.
Lib. III. Cap. V.

Ver. 34. Is not this.] That is, the Vengeance he hu, often refers to what
comes after, not to what goes before; as Cocceius observes.

Laid up in store with me.] To be produced in due time.

Sealed up among my Treasures?] He speaks of it as a matter determined, or
decreed, as Deeds are which are signed and sealed, though not presently
executed, but kept safely in a Cabinet. And the meaning of this Verse is, that
though he do not speedily punish Evildoers, it is not because he does not
observe them, or forgets what they do; for he has prefixed a time to reckon
with them; as will appear in the issue.

Ver. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense.] Romans 19. (...), vengeance
is mine, (or to me belongs vengeance) exactly follows the Hebrew Text, and
not the present LXX. which renders these words, (...), in the day of vengeance
I will recompense.

Their Feet shall slide.] Though they think themselves unmoveably fixed in
their Dominion, they shall certainly fall.

In due time.] Not so soon perhaps as Men may expect; but when the great Judge
of the World sees it most seasonable.

For the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon
them make haste.] When they little thought of it, and prided themselves in
their Prosperity, God suddenly brought down the Chaldoeans, who had been the
great Instruments of plaguing the Jews, XLVII Isaiah 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. L Jerem.
15, 27, 31. LI. 6, 8. And so shall the Plagues of Babylon the great come in one
day. In one hour her great riches shall come to naught, XVIII Revel. 8, 10, 17.

For the LORD shall judge his people.] Plead their cause, as the Scripture
elsewhere speaks, (L Jerem. 34.) and deliver them from the Oppression of their
Enemies; as this Phrase is often used in the Book of Psalms VII. 8. X. 18.

And repent himself for his servants.] Have mercy upon them, (as the Vulgar
truly expresses the sense) and turn his Hand, which punishes them, upon their
Enemies. See L Jerem. 20. LI. 24.

When he sees that their power is gone.] That they are not able to help
themselves. That Is the due time, or season beforementioned, for God to
interpose; when the Enemies of his People think themselves irresistible; there
being none able to oppose them.

And there is none shut up, or left.] Some refer this to Persons, and others to
Things: and either way it signifies their Condition to be so forlorn, that they
could do nothing, either by Men or by Money, for their deliverance. J.
Forsterus translates these words, Custoditum, aut neglectum, i. e. precious, or
vile. By which wonderful deliverance, and restoration, when they were so
totally destitute of all help, all the World was given to understand, that
there is no God like unto the LORD.

Ver. 37. And he shall say.] Or, It shall be said.

Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted?] Jews, or to the
Gentiles who had oppressed them. It seems most agreeable to take them as a
Reproach to the Enemies of the Jews; who had long bragged of the Power of their
gods, and ascribed all their Success to them, ( v. 27.) who now could not
deliver them in their distress.

Ver. 38. Which did eat the fat of their Sacrifices, and For the same Rites
were used among the Gentiles, as among the Jews: who offered all the Fat upon
the Altar, and there poured out the Wine which accompanied the Meat Offering,
etc. See XV Numb. The LXX. refer this to the Worshippers themselves, and
translate it thus, (agreeably enough to the Hebrew) The fat of whose Sacrifices
ye eat, and drank the wine of their Drink Offerings. And Onkelos to the same
purpose.

Let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.] From the Calamity
which was unavoidably coming upon them, XLVI Isa. 1, 2, 7. LI Jerem. 17, 18.

Ver. 39. See now.] Open your Eyes now at last,

That I, even I am he.] That it is I, and none but I who have made these
Changes in the World: first making you Instruments in punishing my People; and
now inflicting the like Punishments upon you, LI Jerem. 24, 25, 49.

The words in the Hebrew being, I, I am he, the Author of the Old Nitzacon was
sensible that we Christians might hence observe, that there are two who are
here called God, the Father, and the Son. And therefore takes care to inform
his Reader, that there are not two first principles of things. Which, as no
Christian is so foolish as to affirm, so their own Authors have acknowledged
more Persons than one, here called God. Thus Jonathan in his Paraphrase,
plainly supposes another Person in the Divinity, whom he calls the WORD, when
he thus explains this Verse; When the WORD of the LORD shall reveal himself to
redeem his People, he shall say to all People, I am he that have been, and am,
and shall be, (See I Revel. 8.) and by my WORD kill and make alive. I smote the
People of Israel, and I will heal them in the end of the days. Which makes
these words a plain Prophecy of the Messiah, and him to be God. And so the
Jerusalem Targum: See, that I now am he in my WORD, and there is no God
besides me; I am he who kill the living in this World, and raise the dead in
the World to come, etc.

And there is no god with me.] As I have no Superior, so neither have I any
Equal.

I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal.] If I please to destroy any
People for their sins, none can hinder me; and if any repent and implore my
Mercy, I restore them to perfect safety. R. Isaac in his Chissuk Emuna, P. I.
Cap. VI. Sect. XX. alleges these words as a Prophecy of the Resurrection of
the dead, in the days of the Messiah. And in another place, Cap. X. he alleges
them as an effectual Confutation of those ancient Heretics, who imagined two
Supreme Powers: one of them, the Author of all Good; and the other, the Author
of all Evil; (which I observed upon XVI Levit. to have been a very ancient
Opinion) For there could not be, they fancied, the same Care, which had an
influence upon both. To remove which false conceit, God declares, I kill, as
well as make alive, etc. And for the same reason he says, in XLV Isa. 7. I
form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD
do all these things.

Neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.] Nor can any reverse the
Judgment, that I pass upon Men.

Ver. 40. For I lift up my hand to Heaven.] Swear viz. be revenged on his
Enemies, as well as deliver his People. Thus Abraham anciently swear XIV Genesis
22. And when God promised to bring the Israelites into Canaan, he is said to
lift up his hand, VI Exodus 8. IX Nehem. 15. From whence some think the word
promittere is derived, signifying to engage by stretching out the hand: and
that from thence sprang the Custom of stretching out, and lifting up their
Hand, when they swear. Which the Gentiles practiced, as those known words of
Virgil inform us, Aeneid. XII.

Suspiciens Coelum tenditque ad sydera dextram. When God therefore is said to
lift up his Hand to Heaven, the meaning is, he swears by himself; as it here
follows.

And say, I live for ever.] As sure as I live.

Ver. 41. If I whet my glittering Sword.] Make all

And my hand take hold of judgment.] I begin to punish.

I will render vengeance to mine Enemies.] None shall stop my proceedings, to
be fully avenged of them.

And will reward them that hate me.] For as Jeremiah speaks, LI. 56. The LORD
God of Recompenses will surely requite. For it is the vengeance of the LORD (as
he speaks in the foregoing Chapter concerning Babylon, L. 15.) take vengeance
upon her: as she has done, do unto her.

I will make mine Arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh.]
Make an exceeding great slaughter, XXXIV Isaiah 5, 6.

With the blood of the slain, and of the Captives.] This signifies none should
be spared: for they should be killed who were taken Captive, as well as those
that fell in the battle.

From the beginning of revenges upon the Enemy.] How the Hebrew word Paroth
comes to signify revenges, I am not able to give an account: but in that sense
we take it both here, and in V Judges 2. The word Para, from whence it seems to
be derived, signifies to make bare, or naked. And so the Vulgar Latin here
understands it: and thence Joh. Forsterus has given a probable sense of these
words, (taking rosch which we translate beginning, for the head, as it properly
signifies, or the King) in this manner; because of the baring, (i. e. making
bare) of the head by the Enemy. That is, the taking away of the Kingdom and
Priesthood from Israel. The LXX. translate it (...), from the Head of the
Princes of the Enemies. Which is a sense very agreeable, if we could find any
word in the Hebrew like to Paroth that signifies Princes or Rulers. But I think
there is a more simple sense may be given of these words, than any of the
forementioned, only by supposing the Particle Lamed to be omitted, (as in many
other places) before paroth. Which is this, from the King, to the Slave of the
Enemies. For they were wont to shave their Captives, as every one knows, by way
of Contempt and Scorn. Which is the reason God threatens baldness so often to
the Israelites by his Prophets, when he was so angry with them, that he gave
them up to be Slaves. Next to this is the Translation of Onkelos, I will take
away (those words he adds) the Crowns from the head of the Enemy. Which was the
making the King's head bare.

This universal slaughter is most notably expressed by Jeremiah L. 35, 36, 37,
43. And some think this Prophecy will be then most amply fulfilled, when the
Jews shall be called, and made Members of the Church of Christ. See Dr.
Jackson, Book XI. on the Creed, Chap. XII.

Ver. 43. Rejoice, O ye Nations, with his People.] eth is omitted before ammo,
as I supposed, in the foregoing words, lamed to be before paroth. Which made
the Vulgar translate these words, O ye Nations, praise his People. But the LXX.
discerned the true sense, and translate it as we do: The Apostle having
justified their Translation in XV Romans 10. where he expresses this word for
word, as they do, (...), Rejoice ye Gentiles, with his People. But it must here
be noted, that before these words, the LXX. have some other which are very
remarkable, (...), Rejoice ye Heavens together with him, and let all the Angels
of God worship him; (and then follows, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his People)
which are not in the Hebrew, nor in the Chaldee: and yet the latter Clause of
them, (...), Let all the Angels of God worship him, are the very words of the
Apostle, I Hebr. 6. which seem to have been taken from hence out of the LXX.
for they are no where else to be found in the Scripture. The Margin indeed of
our Bibles refers us to XCVII Psalm 7. But there the words of the LXX. are
otherwise, (...), Worship him all ye his Angels. Which are in the second
Person: whereas here, and in the Apostle, the words are in the third. We may
therefore suppose rather, that the LXX. from ancient Tradition among the Jews,
added these words (before they translated this Verse) to declare unto what time
the fulfilling of them should principally belong. For the XCVII Psalm seems to
be but a descant (as Dr. Jackson's words are) upon this part of Moses his Song;
from whence the Jews might learn the Scope of it. And accordingly the Apostle
uses the words of the LXX. here in this place, rather than those of the
Psalmist; because he would have the Hebrews understand and consider, that Moses
himself had predicted the Exaltation of the Son of God, as the Psalmist
afterward expounded him.

There is another Translation of these words of Moses, which is very agreeable
to the Apostle in XV Romans 10. Rejoice ye Nations, who are his People. See v.
21. of this Chapter. Either way, this is a plain Prophecy of the Gentiles
becoming one Body with the People of Israel. And thus Kimchi himself translates
it, Sing ye Gentiles, who are his People: which began to be fulfilled after our
Savior's Ascension to the Throne of his Glory in the Heavens, when all the
Angels of God worshipped him. Hitherto Moses had supposed, in this Song, great
Enmity between them: and that sometimes they had plagued Israel sorely; as at
others God rendered to them according to what they had done unto his People. But
now he breaks out into a rapture of Joy, to think that they should one day be
reconciled, and made one People of God. And the LXX. thus understanding it,
might well preface to their Translation of this Verse, with the words now
mentioned, Rejoice ye Heavens together with him. For if there be joy in Heaven,
as Procopius Gazaeus well glosses, at the Repentance of one Sinner, how much
more for the Salvation of the whole World, by destroying the Devil's Tyranny.
Which being to be performed by the Advancement of the Son of God into the
Heavens, the next words might well be added, Let all the Angels of God worship
him. Which they had always done (the same Procopius observes) as their God who
created them: but now they Praise and Extol his Humanity, exalted at the right
Hand of God.

For he will avenge the blood of his Servants.] These words seem to express
some of the Motives that should persuade the Gentiles to become one Body with
the Jews, (for such the Apostles, and all the first Converts were) God's
punishing all those who shed the Blood of his Servants; as the Christian
Martyrs are called in the Book of the Revelation. In which confidence the LXX.
add another Sentence before these words, (...), and let all the Sons of God be
strong in him.

And will render vengeance to his Adversaries.] To all such as oppose this
blessed Union: and first to the Jews, who set themselves against it, more than
any others, (being mad at the Apostles for preaching to the Gentiles) and then
to the Romans, who persecuted all those who embraced Christianity.

And will be merciful unto his Land.] This cannot be meant of the Land of
Israel, which was no longer God's Land than any other, but of the whole Earth,
(as Conrad. Pellicanus well explains it) in which that one People of God
dwells; reduced (as he speaks) in the whole Multitude of the Faithful into one
Catholic Church. For they all acknowledge, from the greatest to the least,
that One only Omnipotent God, with no less Devotion and Affection, than
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Moses did.

And unto his People.] The whole World that believe in Christ, and are his
faithful Servants; whose Blood he will avenge, XIX Revel. 2. and then set up
his Tabernacle with Men, and dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and
he will be their God, XX Revel. 3. which I mention, because this part of the
Prophecy reaches unto the last times, and is not yet all fulfilled.

Thus this famous Song concludes, which as the Jews reckon, consists of Seventy
Verses, each of which contains two distinct and entire Sentences: and, as they
fancy, are a Compendium of the whole Law of Moses. Nay, some of them (such are
the idle Conceits of this Nation) think this Hymn is so perfect a Prophecy,
that it contains in it the Names of all the Men in the World; which they
undertake to find, and by that Versicle where it is, to tell what Fortune he,
whose Name they seek, shall have in the World. Thus, instead of observing
seriously what Moses foretold would certainly befall themselves; their
Superstition and hardness of heart have led them to vain Conjectures concerning
other Men. See Jo. Wagenseil upon Sota, p. 164, etc. where he says a Jew
undertook to show him his Name in this Song; which fell out in a Verse that
signified Prosperity to him. And since him Martinus Mauritius in his Book de
Sortitione Hebraeorum, Cap. XVI. Sect. 3, 4, 5.

Ver. 44. And Moses came, and spoke all the words of The very same that is said
before he spoke this Song, (XXXI. 30.) and is now repeated at the Conclusion of
it, to express his Fidelity in his Office, to the very last.

He and Hoshea the Son of Nun.] Who was now his Assistant in this Work, as he
was designed to be his Successor after his death. He is commonly called Joshua,
but Oshea was his Name at the first, XIII Numb. 8.

Ver. 45. And Moses made an end of speaking all When he had made an end of
speaking them, then he added what follows.

Ver. 46. And he said unto them, set your hearts unto Apply your Minds to press
upon your selves the observation of all these things. For this Expression is a
little more than letting them be in their heart, VI. 6. or, laying them up in
their heart, XI. 18. For they were so to retain the remembrance of them, as to
attend unto them, and consider them.

Which ye shall command your Children to observe to do.] This necessary duty of
instructing their Children is often pressed, (IV. 10. VI. 7. XI. 19.) because
without this care their Religion would soon be lost; but by this means might be
preserved and propagated to all Generations.

All the words of this Law.] Which they might be certain was delivered by God
to Moses; there being as many Witnesses of God's Presence with him, as there
were Men in their Nation. But he had seen so many instances of their unbelief,
that he uses all the ways, manners, and forms (as Pellicanus observes) that he
could think of to urge them to obedience. By delivering them Tables of their
Laws written by God himself, by Books, by Pillars, by Blessings, Cursings,
Obtestations, Threatenings, long Exhortations, Songs, Phylacteries, and other
Ceremonies, etc. which he continued to do as long as he had breath, and was
able to speak; that they and their Posterity might be happy.

For it is not a vain thing for you.] You shall not employ your diligence in
this matter unprofitably. The Jews upon these words have founded a Maxim, which
Maimonides often mentions, That every Precept has its end and use: which,
though they do not appear to us, are grounded upon strong Causes and Reasons.
More Nevochim P. III. Cap. XXVI. and L. The design, for instance, of many
Ceremonial Laws, cannot now be fully discerned, because they were instituted
directly contrary to the idolatrous Rites of the Zabij; which are long since
utterly abolished, and but imperfectly recorded in those ancient Authors that
speak of them.

Because it is your life.] The means to make you an happy People. Here are two
benefits, says R. Isaac, which are promised by the observation of this Law; a
Spiritual and a Corporal. The Spiritual in these words; and the Corporal in the
next, ye shall prolong your days, etc. And he puts the Spiritual first; though
among all Corporal Blessings, this of long Life be the chief; Chissuk Emuna, P.
I. Cap. XVIII.

And through this thing.] By teaching your Children to observe to do all that
is commanded in this Law.

You shall prolong your days in the Land whither you go over Jordan to possess
it.] Have the great Blessing of a long Life in all manner of Happiness, which
your Posterity shall enjoy for many Generations in the Land of Canaan* By which
it appears, that nothing else but Contempt of this Law, could have ejected them
out of this Country.

Ver. 48. And the LORD spoke unto Moses that self Immediately after he had
ended the foregoing Song, and given them this Admonition at the Conclusion of
it.

Ure. 49. Get thee up into this Mountains Abarim.] Numb. 12.

Unto Mount Nebo.] Abarim was a ridge of Hills, whereof Nebo was one. See there
upon XXVII Numb. 2.

Which is in the Land of Moab, that is over against Jericho.] This is a more
particular Description of the Site of this Mountain, than he gave before in the
Book of Numbers.

Behold the Land of Canaan, which I give unto the Children of Israel for a
possession.] Which he might easily do from the highest part of the Mountain,
called Pisgah, III Deuteronomy. 27.

Ver. 50. And die in the Mount whither thou go up.]

And be gathered unto thy People.] To Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This
signifies, says R. Isaac, that he should be associated and joined to the Souls
of the just, who are called his People. For the People of Moses were not buried
in Mount Abarim: and therefore he does not speak, of gathering his Body to
their Bodies; but of his Soul to their Souls. Chissuk Emuna, P. I. Cap. XI.

Chapter XXXIII.
As Aaron thy brother died in Mount Hor, and was gathered unto his People.] See
Numb. 24, 28. XXXIII. 38.

Ver. 51. Because ye trespassed against me among the Rebelled against his
Commandment, as he speaks XXVII Numb. 14.

Because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the Children of Israel, XX Numb.
12. XXVII. 14.

Ver. 52. Yet thou shall see the Land before thee.] He had earnestly begged of
God that he might go over Jordan; but he denied him that favor, I Deuteronomy. 37.
III. 25, 27. yet he was pleased to mitigate his punishment, by letting him
enjoy a sight of that good Country, into which he might not enter.

But thou shall not go thither unto the Land which I give the Children of
Israel.] By which the Israelites should have learnt, that as Moses left them
short of the promised Land, and could not bring them into the possession of it;
so his Law did not contain a perfect Revelation of God's Will; but they were to
expect something beyond it.

CHAP. XXXIII.
AND this is the blessing.] As Jacob blessed his Children, at his departure out
of the World, when God had begun to fulfill the promise to Abraham, of giving
him a numerous Offspring; so Moses, having seen them vastly increased, and
ready to enter upon the Land promised to them, (XV Genesis 18, etc.) takes his
farewell of them, with a Blessing pronounced upon the People in general, and
upon each Tribe in particular. Which is in part prophetical, as the Blessing of
Jacob was; and delivered in the prophetic style: which has some difficulty
and obscurity in it; on purpose perhaps to excite their diligent study to
enquire into the meaning. See XLIX Genesis 1, 3.

Wherewith Moses the Man of God.] Or, the Prophet of the LORD, as Onkelos
translates it. For Prophets are called Men of God in the holy Books, 1 Samuel IX.
6, 7, 8. 1 Kings XIII. 1. 1 Timothy VI. 11. 2 Timothy III. 17. 2 Pet. I. 21. because
in the exercise of their Sacred Function, they did not deliver their own sense,
nor the sense of other Men; but the Mind and Will of God who spoke by them.

Blessed the Children of Israel before his death.] Before he went up into Mount
Abarim to die, (XXXII. 49.) he prayed God to bless them: and also foretold
their future State and Condition. Such had been the ancient Custom among the
holy Patriarchs (as we learn from the example of Jacob) to admonish their
Posterity upon their dying Beds of such things, as they thought most imported
them. For then they could not but be thought to speak most sincerely; and their
words were apt to be entertained with greater respect, and preserved in Mind
with greater Care. Moses therefore their Deliverer, Leader, and Lawgiver,
concludes his Life in the same manner: and it is very likely deposited these
dying words with them, in writing.

Ver. 2. And he said, the LORD came from Sinai.] And in the first place, he
endeavors to make them sensible of what God had done already for them: and the
LORD came from Sinai: where he appeared in a most glorious manner, and from
thence promulgated his Law with the greatest Solemnity, Exodus XX. And thus the
Gentiles took an unwonted brightness in any place to be a token of the (...),
Appearance or Advent of some of their gods in that place. As also a great
commotion in any place, they took for another token of it. See the illustrious
Spanhemius in his Annotations upon Callimachus his Hymn to Apollo, v. 7. which
they seem to have learnt from this appearance of God on Mount Sinai, and the
quaking of that Mountain, when God appeared on it.

And rose up from Seir unto them, and shone forth from Mount Paran.] There is
no difficulty in the foregoing words, it being evident that God came down on
Mount Sinai, and thence delivered his Commands to the Israelites, and espoused
them for his People. But how he rose up from Seir unto them, the Country of
Edom; and shone from Paran the Country of Ishmael, is not so easy to
understand. The Jews indeed, who are wont to solve all Difficulties, by
inventing what they please, are not troubled to give an account of these words.
Which signify, they fancy, that the Divine Glory first resided upon Mount
Seir, where God propounded his Law to the Children of Esau; but they would not
have it, because they found these words in it, Thou shall not kill. He went
therefore to Paran, and offered it to the Children of Ishmael, but they refused
it also, because they found these words in it, Thou shall not Steal. So he came
to Sinai, and gave it to the Israelites, who said, All the words which the LORD
has said, will we do, XXIV Exodus 3. Thus the Jerusalem Targum, and Pirke
Elieser, and some other more ancient Authors, with this addition, That he
offered the Law to all the Nations of the World, but they rejected it, because
it is written, Thou shall have none other gods but me. But this looks so like a
Fable, that some of themselves are ashamed of it, and have given a better sense
of the words, though I cannot say the true one. For thus Abraham Peritsol
expounds them, The true Law came out of Sinai to the Israelites, by which the
Edomites were so enlightened, that God might be said to rise up to them also:
and afterward the Celestial Influence shone out of this Law to the Ishmaelites,
who were the better for it. Thus Constable. L'Empereur reports his sense in his
Annotations upon Bava kama, Cap. IV. Sect. III. where he endeavors to make out
a plainer sense of these words, in this manner: Though the Mountain of Paran
was nigher to Sinai than Seir was, and first occurred to those that went out of
Egypt; yet there was great reason to mention Seir before it, because Moses had
respect to the order of their Journeys, and not to the Site of the Places. And
their Journeys were so directed by Divine Providence, that fetching a long
Circuit, forward and backward, they should come to Canaan. In all which
turnings and windings they were marvellously preserved and provided for, by the
same good Providence which conducted them. Of this Moses here makes a thankful
Commemoration, how he led them from Mount Sinai to the Borders of the Land of
Canaan, toward Mount Seir, as is expressly noted by Moses, (compare I Deuteronomy. 19.
with II. 1. and XX Numb. 14.) From whence, by reason of their Infidelity, they
were led back again toward the Red Sea; and encamped in the extremity of the
Wilderness, XXXIII Numb. 35. where Ptolemy places Paran, (though there was
another part of it called Paran near Kadesh, XIII Numb. 3, 27.) And from thence
they were led back again in a long Circuit, to the East part of the Land of
Canaan. This may be one reason why these two places are mentioned together with
Sinai, that God, who there appeared to them, was with them all the time they
wandered about in the Wilderness, till he brought them to the Borders of Canaan,
where they now were. And another may be, because in Mount Seir the brazen
Serpent was erected by God's order, for the Cure of such as were bitten by
Serpents, when they looked on it: which was an illustrious Type of our blessed
Savior, and the Salvation wrought by him, XX Numb. 4, 9. And in the Desert to
which Paran gave the name, (because it overlookt the whole, though very large)
they received the joyful news, that they should march into Canaan: or, as D.
Chytraeus understands it, in the Wilderness of Paran the LXX Elders received
the Spirit, to make them Assistants unto Moses in the Government, (X Numb. 12.
XI. 24, etc.) and here, I may add, Moses repeated his Law to them, I Deuteronomy. 1,
5. who seems in this Verse to follow a Metaphor borrowed from the Sun; which
first illuminates the Air; and then rises, and then spreads abroad his Beams;
as God by degrees declared his Presence with his People whithersoever they
went; first at Mount Sinai, then at Seir, and last of all here in the
Wilderness of Paran.

But it must be acknowledged that these words may be interpreted in a more
simple manner; they being but a further amplification of what was said in the
first words, the LORD came from Sinai. When at the same time he rose up from
Seir, and shone forth from Mount Paran: for these Mountains were very near one
to another; or rather parts of one and the same ridge of Mountains, as Conr.
Pellicanus here observes; and is more clearly made out by a very Learned Man
among our selves (Dr. Hyde, in his excellent Notes on Abrah. Peritsol, Itinera
Mundi, p. 73.) for Teman (which is the same with Paran, III Habak. 3.) was near
to Edom, whose chief City was Bosra, I Amos 12. as that was near to Sinai.

The ignorance of the Mahometans is much to be pitied, who out of this place
imagine they have found as good an Authority for the Alcoran, as there is for
the Law of Moses, and for the Gospel of Christ. For thus they interpret these
words, God gave the Law from Sinai, and the Gospel from Seir, (which they would
have to be the same with Galilee, which our Savior much frequented) and the
Alcoran from Mount Paran. Which they fancy is a Mountain not far from Mecca.
See Dr. Pocock upon Greg. Abul Pharaji p. 183. and Guadagnolus Resp. pro Relig.
Christiana. But the last words of this Verse, for them, are sufficient to
confute these Conceits; for they plainly show that the whole Verse speaks of
the People of Israel.

And he came with ten thousand of Saints.] Or, as our Mr. Mede thinks it should
be translated, with his holy ten thousands, or myriads: that is, attended with
an innumerable company of Angels, who waited on him at the giving of the Law.
See LXVIII Psalm. 7. VII Dan. 10. of which Enoch perhaps prophesied in part,
Jude 14, 15. And from hence it may be thought, that Notion of the Jewish
Doctors, followed by St. Stephen and St. Paul, that the Law was given by
Angels, had its beginning, Mede, Book II. p. 437. That is, they attended upon
God, as his Ministers, when he himself gave the Law.

From his right hand.] With which we are wont to deliver things to other
Persons.

Went a fiery Law for them.] For the Law of Moses was given out of the midst of
Fire, and therefore called a fire of Law, as the words are in the Hebrew, XIX
Exodus 16, 18. IV Deuteronomy. 11, 12. V. 22, 23, 24. The Cabbalists (as Reuchlin
observes) fancy that God wrote the Law in a Globe of Fire, and sent it to them.
But the Jerusalem Targum is more sober, which thus expounds it, He stretched
his right hand out of the midst of flames of fire, and gave the Law unto his
People. And Onkelos still better, The Law written with his right hand he gave
us out of the midst of fire. Or, as Campeg. Vitringa would have this latter
part of the Verse translated, On his right hand a fire, and out of the fire a
Law for them. The meaning being, that God came to Mount Sinai with that fire:
for in Scripture, to be on the right hand of any one, is to accompany him, Lib.
II. Observe. Sacr. Cap. IV.

By the conclusion of this Verse, it is apparent that the former part of it
belongs entirely to God's Mercy unto the Children of Israel, upon whom he
bestowed his Law, in most illustrious Tokens of his Presence. Which makes it
highly probable that his rising up from Seir upon them, and shining from Mount
Paran, belongs to the same matter. That is, the Cloud wherein he descended on
Sinai, with a vast Host of Angels, extended it self so far, as to cover the
neighboring Mountains of Seir and Paran. Though the meaning may be, as I have
shown, that he continued his Presence with them after they went from Sinai,
through all their Journeys in the Wilderness of Seir and Paran, till they came
to the place where they now were.

Ver. 3. Yea, he loved the People.] All this was the Israel; whom he owned for
his Son, and his Firstborn, (IV Exodus 22.) and therefore in a tender manner
brought them out of Egypt (XIX Exodus 4.) that he might instruct them in his
Laws.

All his Saints are in thy hand.] Whereby he made them an holy Nation, (as it
there follows in XIX Exodus 5.) whom he took into his special Care and most
gracious Protection, as this phrase signifies in many places, IV Numb. 28, 33.
And Onkelos refers it to the mighty Power, whereby he brought them out of
Egypt. But it may have respect to God's preservation and support of them, when
he gave the Law in such a terrible manner, that Moses himself quaked; and yet
none of them received any harm. As for the change of the Person from his to
thy, it is very frequent in this Language; particularly in IX Dan. 4.

And they sat down at thy feet.] The first word (which we translate sat down)
being no where else found but here, and I Isa. 5. where it plainly has another
sense, has occasioned various Interpretations of this Sentence. But most agree
in this, of Sol. Jarchi, that, as Scholars sat at the feet of their Master
round about him, while he taught them their Lesson, so the People encompassed
the Mount where God was, and heard his Law, which he thence delivered. But it
is a question, whether there was such a Custom of Scholars in those days; and
the People did not sit, but stood at the foot of the Mount, XX Exodus 18.
Therefore Onkelos understands this of their sitting down, or pitching their
Tents, where the glorious Cloud that led them rested, X Numb. 12, 33.

Every one shall receive of thy word.] This still is commonly referred to the
Peoples receiving the Law. But Onkelos thinks it has respect to their Journeys
at the commandment of the LORD, X Number. 13. For so he interprets it; They went
forward according to thy word. And so the Jerusalem Targum expounds these and
the foregoing words: Behold, they were led and came to the foot of his Cloud,
and went forward and rested, according to the command of his word. It takes in
also the other sense of the word tucchu (as it signifies smiting in I Isa. 5.)
in this manner, Though he inflicted many Chastisements upon them, yet they did
not cease, nor desist from the Doctrine of the Law.

Moses commanded us a Law.] He commanded them to observe that Law which God had
given them, when he was about to depart from them. This he did in this very
Book, I. 3. V. 1. VI. 1. VIII. 1, etc. He spoke of himself in the third Person;
which is very usual throughout all this Book.

Even the Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob.] As a peculiar Blessing
which God had bestowed on them, and on their Posterity, above all other Nations
in the World, IV Deuteronomy. 8. Who, as they had not this Law given to them, so they
were not bound to observe it; as the Jews themselves conclude from this very
place. Nor did they force any Body to embrace this Law, when they made a
Conquest of a neighboring Country, but left them to their liberty; provided
they would become Proselytes of the Gate; that is, forsake Idolatry, and keep
the common Precepts enjoined to all Mankind. Thus Maimonides interprets the
word Inheritance. See Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theorem. XVII. and
Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis, Lib. I. Cap. I. Sect. XVI.

The Author of Ez Hachajim (a MS. highly valued by the famous Wagenseil) says,
that when a Child began to speak, the Father was bound to teach him this Verse.
In which instead of (...) hereditary, some of the Jews read (...) espoused: as
if the Law were espoused to the Jewish Nation. See Wagenseil on Sota, p. 519,
520.

Ver. 5. And he was King in Jeshurun.] Or, For he that is, under God, the
Supreme Ruler and Governor of Israel; and therefore in his Name, and by his
Authority, required them to observe these Laws. Which plainly shows him to have
had the Supreme Power in all things, both Civil and Sacred. Which is
excellently expressed by our Mr. Thorndike in his Review of the Rights of the
Church, etc. p. 68. where he observes, That the Israelites being made a free
People by the Act of God, bringing them out of Egypt, and intitling them to the
Land of Canaan, upon the Covenant of the Law, had Moses not only for their
Prophet and their Priest (for by him Aaron and his Successors were put into the
Priesthood, the Tabernacle and all belonging to it consecrated) but also for
their King, their Lawgiver, their Judge, and Commander in chief of their
Forces, under God, if not rather God by Moses. For we find that, after Moses
his decease, either God by some extraordinary signification of his Will and
Pleasure, stirred up some Man in his stead for the time; or if there was none
such, ruled their proceedings himself; by Vrim and Thummim answering their
Demands, and directing what to do, and what course to follow, in all the
Public Affairs that concerned the State of that People. Whereupon, when they
required Samuel to make them a King, he declared it was not Samuel, but
himself, whom they had rejected: Because they had rejected him whom God had
immediately set over them in his own stead; by whose death the power returned
to God, as at the beginning.

Concerning the word Jeshurun, see XXXII. 15. and Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr.
Cap. II. N. 2.

When the Heads of the People, and the Tribes of Israel were gathered
together.] To renew their Covenant with God, and to receive his last Commands.
See XXIX. 1, 2, 9, 10. XXXI. 28, 29.

Let Reuben live, and not die, and let not his Men be few.] In the last Clause
of this Verse, we repeat the word not (which is wanting in the Hebrew) without
any necessity. For the words may be thus translated exactly, Let Reuben live
and not die, though his Men be few. Which seems to be a confirmation of the
Prophecy of Jacob, XLIX Genesis 4. That he should not excel; and yet should live
and not perish. That is, be in some measure a flourishing Tribe, though not so
numerous as some others. See there. And possibly it may be here suggested, that
though they passed armed over Jordan before their Brethren, to settle them
there, (according to their engagement XXXII Numb 27. IV Josh. 12, 13.) yet none
of them should perish; but both they, and their Wives and Children, that stand
behind them, should be all preserved.

Ver. 7. And this is the blessing of Judah.] As much as to say, Judah shall be
remarkably blessed. For these words [this is the blessing] are used of none of
the rest of the Tribes; either of Reuben which went before, Simeon, (who was
next to Reuben) because that Tribe was included in Judah, with whom their
Possessions were mixed, XIX Josh. 1. and therefore they went together to make
Expeditions, I Judge. 3. Judah also is here put before Levi, because it was to
be the Royal Tribe, according to the Prophecy of Jacob; which Moses was assured
God would fulfill, and therefore prays as follows; And he said, hear LORD the
voice of Judah. Grant his Petition, when he calls for help against his Enemies.
So Onkelos paraphrases it, Hear his Prayer, when he goes forth to war.

And bring him unto his People.] Return him home in peace unto his People; as
the same Onkelos expounds it.

Let his hands be sufficient for him.] To avenge him of his Enemies; as he also
explains it.

And be thou an help to him from his Enemies.] Suffer them not to prevail over
him; but give him the victory, when he fights with them. So the Jerusalem
Targum paraphrases these two last passages; Let his hands exercise Revenge upon
his Enemies in battles; and do thou support and sustain him against those that
hate him. This was notoriously fulfilled in this Tribe; which was the most
valiant and successful of all other. For in all their Wars this Tribe was the
principal; and the safety of all the rest seems to have depended upon this. See
I Judge. 1, 2, etc. XX. 18. And as these places show that this was the most
considerable Tribe, before they had Kings; so after that, it was able, together
with Benjamin, to maintain its ground against the other ten Tribes, and all
other Opposers.

Ver. 8. And of Levi he said, let thy Thummim and Continue in this Tribe the
high dignity of Consulting with thee, and receiving Directions from thee, by
the High Priest, concerning the Public Safety. Or, as some take it, (because
Thummim is here set before Vrim, which is not in any other place) make them
upright and faithful, as well as understanding and knowing in the discharge of
their Duty. For though by holy One be principally meant the High Priest, who
was in a peculiar manner anointed to be separated to the Service of God;
especially in this part of it, to approach him with Vrim and Thummim, (which
gave Aaron the name of the Saint of the LORD, CVI Psalm. 16.) yet it comprehends
all the rest of the Priests and Levites, in conjunction with him; for they were
all separated unto the LORD; having signalized themselves (as we speak) by
their early Zeal for the LORD, when their Brethren apostatized to Idolatry. Of
which Moses takes notice in the next Verse, Who said unto his Father, etc. I
have not seen him, etc. regarded, that is, no Relation, when they executed the
Commands of God against the Worshippers of the Golden Calf. See our Learned Dr.
Spencer de Leg. Hebr. Lib. III. Cap. VII. Dissert. VII. where he treats also of
these words, as they may be applied to our LORD Christ, the true holy one of
God; who is indeed a Priest for ever, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, etc. VII Hebr. 26.

Whom thou did prove at Massah.] Or, whom thou have thoroughly proved. For the
words in the Hebrew are, Whom in proving thou did prove: the ancient
Interpreters not taking Massah for the name of a place (as we do) but for
trying or proving. And so indeed the words in the Hebrew seem to import: the
Particle (beth) before Massah, being different from that before Meribah (which
is al) though we translate them both alike by the word at. And thus the
Jerusalem Targum paraphrases, Whom thou did prove, or try; and he stood in
the trial; that is, approved himself perfect or upright, as Onkelos expresses
it. This procured that Tribe a Blessing from the LORD, XXXII Exodus 26, 29. and
brought them into special grace and favor with him, as the word we translate
holy one signifies. For it is not kadoth, but chasid.

And with whom thou did strive at the waters of Meribah.] Though God did
severely chide and reprove Moses and Aaron (who were the Heads of this Tribe)
when they were tried at the Waters of Strife, XX Numb. 12, 13. yet they did not
forfeit their Office by the Offense they then committed; and therefore Moses
prays it might still continue in Aaron's Posterity.

Ver. 9. Who said unto his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen him,
neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor know his own Children.] This
relates unto the impartial Execution of Judgment by the Levites, upon the
Worshippers of the Golden Calf, without respect of Persons, XXXII Exodus 26,
etc. And as some will have it, to Phinehas his Zeal mentioned in Numb. XXV. But
that it has any respect to a more ancient Judgment, given in the Case of Judah
and Thamar, (as the Jerusalem Targum fancies) there is no ground to believe.
See Seldom Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. VIII. N. 2.

For they have observed thy Word, and kept thy Covenant.] XXXII Exodus 28, 29.
Abarbinel and others make this to be the reason of what follows.

They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Law.] Because they were
so upright, as to take no notice of their dearest Relations, in Judgment;
therefore they were entrusted with this Office of Teaching the People the
Statutes of God. That is, deciding all Controversies which arose about any
thing in the Law. So the Jews expound it; and it is agreeable to what we read
in the Seventeenth Chapter of this Book, v. 9, 10. and many other places; as
Mr. Seldom shows in the place forenamed, p. 372, etc. and our Mr. Thorndike in
his Religious Assemblies, Chap. II. where he observes, the TEACHING here
mentioned consisted in declaring the meaning and obligation of the Law, in
matters doubtful; as is apparent from X Levit. 8, 9, 10, 11. For though others
might be Members of their Courts of Judgment, yet they consisted chiefly of
Priests and Levites. As for teaching the People in their Religious Assemblies,
that was not so much the Office of the Priests and Levites, as of the Prophets.
For though the Prophets and the Disciples of the Prophets, were commonly
Priests and Levites (who being most free from the Care of Estates and
Inheritances, and by their Office, in his Ceremonial Service, came nearest to
God of all other Men, were most likely to be endued with an extraordinary
degree of Knowledge and of the Fear of God) yet it is certain that the charge
of teaching the People in their Assemblies, belonged as well to those Prophets
who were not Priests and Levites, as to those that were. See him p. 25. And
this was one reason, as Maimonides observes, why the Tribe of Levi might have
no Inheritance in the Land, that being free from the trouble of ploughing and
sowing, etc. they might wholly attend to the Study of the Law, and be able to
teach Israel God's Judgments. More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XXXIX.

They shall put incense before thee, and whole Burnt-offerings upon thine
Altar.] This was the peculiar Office and Honor of the Priests alone; to offer
Incense on the Golden Altar, and Burnt-offerings upon the Brazen. The
Jerusalem Targum thus paraphrases it, They shall put Incense of precious Spice
before thee, to pacify thine Anger, and offer a most acceptable Sacrifice upon
thine Altar.

Ver. 11. Bless, LORD, his Substance.] The word Substance, is translated
Wealth, VIII. 17, 18. which consisted most in Cattle, (they having no Land to
till) which he prays God to increase, that they might have sufficient
Sustenance for themselves and their Family. It is a strange fancy of some of
the Jews, that whosoever offered Incense grew rich; and therefore no Priest was
suffered to offer Incense more than once, that so Riches might be derived to
them all. Thus they trifle, while their hearts are set on getting Money, and
not on growing good. See Sheringham on Joma, p. 35, 36. and Mauritius de
Sortitione Hebraeorum, Cap. XXIV. Sect. IV.

And accept the work of his hands.] All their Ministry at the Altar, where the
Priests officiated; or about the Tabernacle, of which the Levites had the care.

Smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate
him, that they rise not again.] For they who were Enemies to the Priests and
Levites, were Enemies to Religion, and to all Civil Government; which was
chiefly administered by them, as was before observed. See XVII. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Ver. 12. And of Benjamin he said.] He mentions Levi; because the Temple, in
which the Priests officiated, was partly situated in his Lot.

The beloved of the LORD.] Or, being beloved of the LORD, as the LXX. interpret
it, (...).

Shall dwell in safety by him.] i. e. By the LORD. Which signifies the
stability of his Portion, which had Jerusalem the Holy City in it, as we read
XVIII Josh. 28. For though Mount Sion was in the Tribe of Judah. and so the
Sanctuary was there, (LXXVIII Psalm. 68.) yet the City wherein it stood was not.
Nay, the Ancients think the Altar of Burnt-offering was in the Tribe of
Benjamin, as Kimchi observes upon that place beforementioned in Joshua. See
upon XLIX Genesis 27. And there are reasons to make one think, that Sion, in the
place forenamed and in others, is to be taken in a large sense, comprehending
Mount Moriah also (on which the Temple was built, 2 Chronicles. III. 1.) which was
in the Tribe of Benjamin; and consequently the Temple was situated in this
Tribe.

And the LORD shall cover him all the day long.] The Glory of the Majestical
Presence of the LORD shall be a Shield over him (to defend him) continually; as
the Jerusalem Targum expounds it.

And he shall dwell upon his shoulders.] For the Divine Majesty (says Onkelos)
shall dwell in his Country. It being in the Temple, and the Temple in the Tribe
of Benjamin: where it stood upon Mount Moriah, as the Head of a Man does upon
his Shoulders; as Dr. Lightfoot glosses in his Temple Service, p. 145. Edit. 1.
Or the word we translate here shoulders may signify, as it is translated in
other places sides (XXXIV Numb. 11.) or borders. And nothing is more certain,
than that the Divine Habitation was in the Borders of Benjamin; whose Lot
touched Judah's at Jerusalem: and was so united to it, that when the rest fell
off from Judah, the Tribe of Benjamin always adhered to it.

This being the sense which the ancient Interpreters give of this Verse, and
very agreeable to the words, I shall not trouble the Reader with any other. But
only mention a Conceit of Conradus Pellicanus, who, by the beloved of the LORD
here understands David, who dwelt in safety by Benjamin, though the King of
that Tribe persecuted him; for God covered and protected him continually from
violence, etc. It is strange that a Man otherwise judicious, and well
acquainted with the Jewish Learning, should propound this as the best
interpretation he could think of; when there is nothing of a Blessing upon
Benjamin in it.

Ver. 13. And of Joseph he said.] This Tribe follows Benjamin; who lay between
Judah and Joseph.

Blessed of the LORD be his Land.] He foretells that this Tribe should be
situated in a most plentiful Country, and enriched by the Divine Blessing upon
it.

For the precious things of Heaven.] Sending fruitful showers from Heaven.

For the dew.] Together with the Evening and Morning Dews; which are no less
refreshing to the Earth than Rain.

And for the deep that coucheth beneath.] He means Springs of Water which burst
out of the Bowels of the Earth, for the use of Man and Beast.

Ver. 14. For the precious fruits of the Sun.] Whose kindly heat brings them
forth, and makes them grow to maturity.

And the precious things put forth by the Moon.] For all Fruits are plumped by
the Moons cool and fatning Moisture in the Night, which is digested by the Sun
in the Day. Or, this passage may relate to the several sorts of Fruit, which
are produced every Month. So Onkelos interprets it, It produces also sweet
fruits at the beginning of every Month. For the word jerachim in the Hebrew,
being in the Plural Number, signifies Moons; i. e. Months. And so the
Jerusalem Targum translates it in every New Moon, which comprehends the whole
Month.

And for the chief things of the ancient Mountains, and for the precious things
of the lasting hills.] Such as Mount Ephraim and Samaria, and Bashan: which
were exceeding fruitful in Grapes, and Olives, and such like excellent Fruit.
And called ancient and lasting, because they were made together with the Earth,
in the beginning; and not Mounts cast up by the Art of Men. See XLIX Genesis 20.

For the precious things of the Earth.] This seems to relate to their Arable
Land; which he foretells should bring forth great store of all sorts of Corn.

The word Meged, which we translate precious, is repeated five times in these
three last Verses: signifying that which in its kind is most excellent and
eximious; as that great Man Ezekiel Spanhemius observes upon Callimachus his
Hymn to Diana, V. 245. where mentioning several Instruments of Music among the
Greeks, whose names came from the Hebrew, he thinks one called (...) (which was
(...), as Athenaeus says, but he could not tell whether a wind or stringed
Instrument) came from this Hebrew word Meged, for it was not of a Greek
Original. And in IV Cant. 13. this word is translated pleasant, as all Music
is; but that especially which was made by this Instrument (...). For Plato, who
took it for a stringed Instrument, calls it (...), Anacreon saying he had one
of twenty Strings; as Spanhemius notes upon the Hymn in Delum, p. 472.

And fullness thereof.] By the fullness of the Earth, may be meant either the
Plenty and Abundance of its Fruits, or the Ripeness thereof; as Bochartus
observes in his Canaan.

And for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush.] That is, of God: whose
Majesty (as Onkelos paraphrases) dwells in the Heavens, and was revealed to
Moses in the Bush, III Exodus 2, 4. That is, the SCHECHIMAH there appeared in a
most glorious manner, and the LORD told Moses he was there present. Whose good
will, which is the Fountain of all Blessings, (for to it they owed their
Deliverance out of Egypt, which God then promised to Moses out of the Bush) he
wishes may be the peculiar Portion of Joseph.

Let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph.] The word blessing is not in
the Hebrew: but this being connected with the foregoing words, may be thought a
Prayer, that the good will of God, the Fountain (as I said) of all Blessings,
may rest upon Joseph. Or, as Onkelos translates it, Let all those things
(beforenamed) come upon the head of Joseph. And so the Jerusalem Targum
expounds it, Let all these Blessings come, and be made perfect upon the head of
Joseph.

Upon the top of him that was separated from his Brethren.] That is, says the
same Targum, Upon him that was made Ruler over all the Land of Egypt; and
splendid in the honor given him by his Brethren. See this explained upon XLIX
Genesis 26.

Ver. 17. His glory is like the firstling of his Bullock.] Bochartus has shown
out of several good Authors, in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. Cap. XXIX. And
accordingly here it signifies, that the Tribe of Ephraim should have Royal
Authority established in it. For he does not compare the Person of Joseph to a
young Bullock (though he was a goodly Man, eminent for his Beauty and comely
Proportions, XXXIX Genesis 6.) but the Tribes which sprang from him; as appears
from the last words of this Verse. Whose glory he here comparing to that of a
young Bullock, and its glory consisting in its strength, the power of the
Tribes of Joseph is hereby denoted; which was so great, that they were the
chief Support of the Kingdom of Israel. Which began in Jeroboam, who was King
of ten Tribes: after whom there followed a long Race of Kings till the
Captivity. There may be also some respect in these words unto Joshua, the first
Governor of all the People, who was of the Tribe of Ephraim; as of Manasseh,
were Jair, Jephthah, and Gideon, who were famous Men among the Judges.

It is remarkable also here, that Joseph is compared to the Firstling of a
Bullock; because Reuben being set aside for his Incest, Joseph had the Right of
Primogeniture, in part, translated unto him, 1 Chronicles. V. 1, 2. and in
consequence of it, had a double Portion in the Land of Canaan.

It is to be noted likewise, that he is said to be like unto the Firstling of
his Bullock; because there were not more goodly Bullocks any where, than in
Bashan (IV Amos 1.) which fell to the share of some of the Children of
Manasseh, XVII Josh. 5.

There have been some great Men, who from this place and other Conjectures,
have fancied that Joseph was worshipped in Egypt after his Death, under the
form of an Ox, by the name of Serapis. Which Bochartus has confuted in the
Book forenamed, Cap. XXXIV.

And his horns are like the horns of an Unicorn.] This is a further description
of the power and strength of the House of Joseph: for an Horn is every where an
Emblem of mighty Power and Force; and an Unicorn (as we translate the word
Reem) is a very strong, as well as stately Creature. But Bochartus has
alleged a great many things to prove that Reem is a sort of wild Goat in
Arabia, as big as a Deer, and of the same color; which they now call Gazellus,
P. I. Hierozoicon Lib. III. Cap. XXVII. There were some of them sent lately to
the French King, by the Divan of Tripoli; which had black Horns, in shape like
those of a Goat; only they were round and pointed. But the tallness, strength,
and swiftness of this Creature, together with its fierce, untameable Nature,
has made Ludolphus (who at first was of Bochart's opinion) to conclude, upon
second thoughts, that Reem in Scripture signifies the Rhinoceros, as the Vulgar
Latin here translates the word. See Lib. I. Commentar. in Histor. Aethiop. Cap.
X. N. 74. Which seems not so well to agree with these words of Moses; which
suppose the Creature here spoken of to have two Horns, (he using the Plural
Number) with which the two Tribes descended from Joseph are very fitly
compared. And so David mentions the Horns of the Reem, XXII Psalm. 22. But
whatsoever Creature it was, Princes and great Men were wont to be compared to
it; as appears from XXXIV Isa. 7. where the Grandees, (as we now speak) of
Edom, are called Unicorns; as in the following words they are compared to
Bullocks and Bulls.

With them he shall push the people together.] Throw down all that oppose him:
particularly the Canaanites. For these (says the Jerusalem Targum) are the
great Men of the Amorites, whom Joshua the Son of Nun slew, who was of the
Tribe of Ephraim; and the Captains which Gideon the Son of Joash slew, who was
of the Tribe of Manasseh.

To the ends of the Earth.] Of the Land of Canaan.

And they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of
Manasseh.] These things shall be performed by the numerous Armies of Ephraim
and Manasseh. Or these are the Benedictions of these two Tribes: the younger of
which, he signifies, should be more powerful than the elder, according to the
Prophecy of Jacob, XLVIII Genesis 19.

And of Zebulun he said, rejoice Zebulun in thy going out.] About their
business, as the Jerusalem Targum expounds it; that is, their Merchandise;
which they exercised upon the Sea of Genesaret, where they were situated, and
not far from the Mediterranean. In which, he prays, they might have such good
Success, as to fill their hearts with joy. There are those who understand this
of their going out to War against their Enemies; which is the Exposition of
Onkelos. And so this Phrase is often used; particularly in XIV Genesis 8. and the
Valor of this Tribe is, upon one occasion, celebrated in V Judges 18. But
Jacob's Prophecy determines us rather to the other sense, XLIX Genesis 13. where
he represents this Tribe as Mariners, rather than Soldiers. Though it must be
acknowledged that there were greater numbers among them, in David's time, who
were expert Warriors, 1 Chronicles. XII. 33. and that the Israelites generally were
not addicted to Traffic: the Seacoast being possessed by the Philistims and
the Canaanites; save only what belonged to this Tribe.

And Issachar in thy Tents.] The same Jerusalem Targum expounds it, Rejoice ye
House of Issachar when ye come into your Schools: for this was a Learned Tribe,
at least in some Ages; as appears from 1 Chronicles. XII. 32. But Jacob's Prophecy
rather determines us to another sense; which is, that they should grow rich by
feeding Cattle, and by Husbandry: for which their Country being very proper,
they chose rather that quiet kind of Life, then Merchandise. Though they were
near Neighbors to Zebulun, and for that reason, as well as because they were
Brethren by the same Mother, are here put both together in one Benediction.
This seems also best to agree with the Phrase of rejoicing in their Tents: in
which they are said anciently to dwell, who fed Cattle, IV Genesis 10. And perhaps
the Learning that the Children of Issachar are said to have had, (in 1 Chronicles.
XII. 32.) which consisted in the understanding of the times, was nothing else,
but their skill in the proper Seasons for Sowing, and Planting, and Pruning,
etc. to know what Israel ought to do, in the management and improvement of
their Land; which was of great use, especially in that Country.

Ver. 19. They shall call the People unto the Mountain.] Here Moses predicts
the House of God should be set upon a Mountain; unto which he says Zebulun
(for Jerusalem Targum paraphrases, Behold, the People of the House of Zebulun
shall be ready to go to the mount of the holy House of the LORD. Or by the
People, perhaps he means the Gentiles their Neighbors, whom they should
endeavor to bring to the Service of the true God. Which was especially
fulfilled when Christ came, IV Matthew. 15, 16.

There they shall offer Sacrifices of Righteousness.] Liberal Sacrifices, out
of their honest gains by Merchandise.

For they shall suck of the abundance of the Seas.] Import abundance of various
Commodities, and grow rich by their Traffic.

And of Treasure hid in the Sand.] This is a further amplification of the same
thing; relating particularly to their importation of Gold, and Silver, and
precious Stones, which are dug out of the Earth. Some think it has respect
to the rich Mines which were in this Country; but of that I can find no proof.

And of Gad he said, blessed be he that inlargeth Gad.] That is, blessed be
God, who has allotted to him such a large Inheritance; which he afterward also
further enlarged, as we read 1 Chronicles. V. 18, 19, 20.

He dwells as a Lion.] Lives secure and fearless, though encompassed with
Enemies; whom the Gadites tore in pieces (as it here follows) if they offered
to molest them. For this was a very warlike Tribe, as we learn from 1 Chronicles.
XII. 8. and therefore here compared to a Lioness (so Labi signifies) which
equals a Lion, if not exceeds him in strength and fierceness; as Bochartus has
observed out of good Authors, in his Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. III. Cap. L. And so
Onkelos here translates it, He dwells as a Lioness: And the Jerusalem Targum
puts in both, after this manner; He remains quiet, as a Lion and a Lioness;
neither is there People or Kingdom, that shall stand before them.

And teareth the arm with the Crown of the Head.] Kills the Princes with their
Kings, as Onkelos truly expounds it. For by Arms are meant Men of Strength and
Power; and by the Crown of the Head is properly to be understood, the chief
Commander, Ruler, or King. And therefore the LXX. also translate Crown of the
Head by (...), Prince or Supreme Governor.

Ver. 21. And he provided the first part for himself.] Onkelos expounds it.
Which he is said here to provide for himself; because this Tribe (with Reuben
and part of Manasseh) desired to be possessed of the Country of Sihon; which
was accordingly given to them, XXXII Numb. 1, 2, 33.

Because there, in a portion of the Lawgiver.] Which Moses (who was their
Lawgiver) gave them by God's order; whereas the other Nine Tribes and a half,
had theirs given them by Joshua.

Was he seated.] The word in the Hebrew signifies hid, i. e. protected, when,
going to the War in Canaan, they left their Wives and Children and Cattle,
without any defense, but God's Providence: according to the Promise they made
to Moses, XXXII Numb. 16, 17, etc. What the Jerusalem Targum, and Onkelos, and
several of the Rabbis, even Abarbinel himself, here say, of Moses being buried
in this Tribe (which they make the sense of these words) I think is no more to
the purpose, than what the Cabbalists observe upon this place; that in the
Blessing of Gad the whole Alphabet is found; because Moses our Master (says
Baal. Hatturim) was buried in his Territory, who observed the whole Law from
Aleph to Tau; i. e. from the beginning to the end. See Theodorick Hackspan.
Cab. Judaica, N. 10.

And he came.] He speaks of this as a thing already done; because he certainly
foresaw they would perform their Engagement.

With the Heads of the People.] With the chief Commanders of the rest of the
Tribes of Israel. Or, as the words may be translated more literally, He came
with the Heads of the People, i. e. the Gadites marched in the Front before the
Children of Israel. For so was the Agreement between Moses and them, as we read
in XXXII Numb. 17. that they should go ready armed before the Children of
Israel. Of which engagement Joshua put them in mind, when they were entering
into Canaan, I Josh. 14. and they stood to it, v. 16, 17.

He executed the Justice of the LORD.] Upon the Seven Nations of Canaan, whom
God commanded them to extirpate.

And his Judgments with Israel.] Going in the foremost of the Israelites to
Battle, till the whole Country was subdued to them, XXXII Numb. 21, 22, 29.
XXII Josh. 1, 2, 3, etc.

Ver. 22. And of Dan he said, Dan is a Lions whelp.] Courageous as a young
Lion: So Onkelos. Which was most eminently verified in Sampson, who was of this
Tribe; and whom the Spirit of the LORD began XIII Judges 25.

He shall leap from Bashan.] The Tribe of Dan had no Inheritance near Bashan:
but he compares them to the young Lions of that place. For Lions haunted
Mountains, (IV Canticles 8.) and this Mountain in particular was famous for
them, and bred very fierce ones. Which, every one knows, leap upon their Prey,
when they assault it, and fasten their Nails and their Teeth in it. So Bochart
observes many ancient Authors describe them, P. I. Hierozoicon L. III. Cap. II.
p. 739. And thus did the Danites on a sudden leap from one end of Judaea to
another, and seized on the City of Laish, near to the Fountain of Jordan,
calling it by the Name of Dan, as we read XVIII Judge. 29.

Ver. 23. And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied That is, with the
Favor of God: which is explained in the next words.

And full with the blessing of the LORD.] The word full, as Maimonides
observes, signifies that which is most perfect and absolute in its kind, More
Nevoch. P. I. Cap. XIX. Such was the Country of Galilee wherein this Tribe had
their possession; which was (...), etc. (as Josephus speaks, L. III. de Bello
Judaico, Cap. IV.) fat throughout in all its parts, and very fertile; planted
with all manner of Trees: insomuch that it invited him to Husbandry, who was
averse to Labor: and by that means was entirely inhabited, and had no void
space in all the Country, etc.

Possess thou the West and the South.] The same Josephus makes this Tribe to
have possessed the East and the North in the upper Galilee, (Lib. V. Antiq.
Cap. I. p. 142.) which is directly contrary to what Moses here says. Therefore
Bochartus (in his Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. III. Cap. XVIII.) judiciously expounds
these words of Moses, not with respect to the whole Land of Canaan, but to the
Danites before mentioned. For the portion of Naphtali extended from the South
of the City called Dan, or Laish, to the Sea of Tiberias. And so the three
Chaldee Paraphrasts expound the Hebrew word jam (which we translate West) by
the Sea of Tiberias, or Genesaret; which is the same. For the Hebrews call
great Lakes by the name of Seas: and by this Sea, is not meant the
Mediterranean, but the Sea of Galilee, or Tiberias or Genesaret: for by all
these Names it is called, as Mr. Seldom observes in his Mare Clausum, p. 21.

And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with Children.] With a numerous and
beautiful Issue.

Let him be acceptable to his Brethren.] All the rest of the Israelites shall
court them, for their goodly aspect. Or (as some rather think) he prophecies
this Tribe should win the favor and affection of others, by their affability
and obliging behavior. For which Jacob predicts they should be famous, XLIV
Genesis 21.

And let him dip his foot in Oil.] Be planted in a rich Soil, full of Olive
Trees; which should make Oil so plentiful, that they might not only wash their
Faces, but their Feet in it. Onkelos translates, He shall be nourished with the
delights of Kings.

Ver. 25. Thy shoes shall be iron and brass.] Or, as in the Margin, Under thy
feet shall be iron. Which has made some think these Minerals were dug out
of Libanus; near to which lay the Tribe of Asher. Bochartus says, mentions any
such thing as the Brass of Libanus; and therefore some understand by these
Expressions, the barbarous People that dwelt in Galilee of the Gentiles, who
pressed the Asserites, as an Iron Shoe or Fetters do the Feet. But the Arabic
here by Minal, which we translate Shoe, understands a Bolt or Bar; and renders
this passage, Thy Bolts shall be Iron and Brass. That is, as Onkelos expresses
it, They should be as strong as Iron and Brass. And so Kimchi expounding the
words of Jonathan (who interpret it, Thy habitation shall be as strong, etc.)
says the meaning is, Their Country should be as well fenced, as if it had been
shut up in brazen, or iron walls. And R. Solomon to the same purpose. See
Hierozoicon P. II. Lib. VI. Cap. XVI. But I have observed, that the same
Bochartus acknowledges in his Phaleg, that Sarepta (which the Hebrews call
Zarephath, 1 Kings XVII. 9.) a City of Sidon, had its Name from the Brass and
Iron which was here melted; being in great plenty in that Country, as the
Hebrews gather from this Blessing of the Tribe of Asher (who were the
Inhabitants of those places) Iron and Brass are under thy Shoe; as he there
interprets it, Lib. IV. Cap. XXXIV. And so a very Learned Man, long before him,
David Chytraeus, expounds these words, and adds this observation; Nam Sidon and
Sarepta, quae a Metallis excoquendis nomen habet, in Tribu Asser fuerunt. For
Sidon and Sarepta, which had its Name from the Melting of Metals there, were in
the Tribe of Asher.

And as thy days, so shall thy strength be.] The same Chytraeus expounds it,
All the time of their life, they should retain the same vigor of Body and
Mind. Which seems to be the sense of Onkelos, As the days of thy youth, so
shall thy strength be: And the Jerusalem Targum more expressly, Such as they
were in the days of their youth, such they should be in their old age. Or
simply, these words signify, That this Tribe should grow stronger and
stronger. Which Hottinger seems to have aimed at, when he propounded this
Exposition in his Smegma Orientale, Cap. VII. As are thy days, so are thy
riches and wealth. Masius quite contrary upon XIX Josh. 31. interprets these
words to signify, that they should have perpetual Conflicts with the old
Inhabitants of the Country. All which various Interpretations proceed from the
uncertain signification of the Hebrew word Daba, which we render strength.

There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun.] And now, having blessed every
particular Tribe, he concludes with this general demonstration of their
happiness, That their God was not like the gods of other Nations, but
supereminent in all Perfections. And therefore they must needs be blessed (as
the same Chytraeus explains it) who had him propitious to them, as their
Father, their Keeper, their Defender, Avenger, and Savior from all their
Enemies.

Who rides upon the Heavens in thy help.] Who commands in the Heavens, as
well as in the Earth: and sends help and succor to thee, from thence, by
Thunder, Lightning and Hailstones; as we read he did in many places, XVIII
Psalm 8, 9, etc. LXVIII 33, 34, 35. And as he that rides upon an Horse, turns
him this way, and that way, as he pleases, (they are the words of Maimonides
in his More Nevochim, P. I. Cap. LXX.) so God by his Power and Pleasure
Commands the Heavens: and is not fixed to them, as the Soul of them, (which was
the foolish Opinion of the Zabij) but as the Rider is far more honorable and
excellent than the Beast on which he sits, and of a quite different Species
from it; So God is represented by this Metaphor (though but in a weak manner)
as separate from the Heavens, and of a more Excellent Nature, far transcending
them; which are but the Instruments he uses, to fulfill his Will and Pleasure.

And in his Excellency on the Sky.] Or, as it may be translated word for word,
And in his magnificence, the Clouds. From whence he sends such Storms and
Tempests, as demonstrate his Power.

Ver. 27. The eternal God is thy refuge.] Or, dwelling to whom they might always
betake themselves for safety, and never fail of it, XC Psalm 1. In the Hebrew
the words are, The eternal God is the habitation, or dwelling place. From
whence the Jews have framed this Maxim, to preserve all Men from having low
thoughts of God, as if he was contained in any thing, God is the place wherein
the world dwells, and not the World the place where God dwells. So Maimonides
observes in the place abovenamed, out of Bereschit Rabba.

And underneath are the everlasting arms.] To support all those, with an
unwearied Power and Care, who commit themselves unto him.

And he shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee.] As he had carried them
through the Wilderness with an unwearied Care; so he promises God would expel
the Canaanites, and make room for them in their Country.

And shall say, Destroy them.] Give the Israelites Power, as well as Authority,
to root them out. For to say here, is as much as to do, and therefore signifies
executing their destruction.

Israel, thou shall dwell in safety alone.] Live in quiet and peace, separate
from all other People. Or, the Divine Protection shall be sufficient for their
Security. This Rasi thinks was fulfilled in the days of Solomon, 1 Kings IV.
25. But others of them think it is still to be fulfilled.

The fountain of Jacob.] That is, his Posterity; who flowed from him as a River
from a Fountain, XLVIII Isaiah 1. LI. 1. Cocceius thinks these words should be
joined to the foregoing, in this manner, Israel shall dwell in safety alone, by
the Fountain of Jacob: that is, by God. But though this may have some
countenance from the ancient Interpreters, (as I shall observe presently) yet
most go the other way: there being the like Expression in LXVIII Psalm. 26.
Bless the LORD in the Congregation, from the Fountain of Israel: or, as it is
in the Margin, Ye that be of the Fountain of Israel; i. e. are derived from him
as your Father.

Shall be upon a Land of Corn and Wine, also his Heavens shall drop down dew.]
In a fruitful Country, upon which the Heavens shall drop down refreshing Dews.
Onkelos paraphrases the whole thus, Israel shall dwell securely alone,
according to the Blessing wherewith Jacob his Father blessed them, in a Land of
Corn, etc. And so the Jerusalem Targum (making more express mention of the
word Fountain) Israel shall dwell by himself securely, from the Fountain of
Benediction, wherewith Jacob blessed them, in a Land producing Wine and Oil:
and the Heavens above are commanded to send Dews and Rain upon them.

Ver. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel.] He was not

Who is like unto thee.] Who had the LORD for their God, as he said before v.
26, etc. and IV. 7, 8.

A People saved by the LORD.] Who have been redeemed by his mighty Power. So
the Jerusalem Targum, Whose Redemption (I suppose he meant out of Egypt) is
from the presence of the LORD. Who had preserved them ever since, and would
still protect them, as it here follows.

This R. Isaac (in Chissuk Emuna, P. I. Cap. XVIII.) says, signifies the
Spiritual Blessings God bestowed on them. For true Felicity, says he, does not
consist in Victory over Enemies, and Plenty of Corn, or such like things, of
which he had spoken before in the foregoing Verse; but in the Salvation of the
Soul, of which no Nation in the World was secure, but the Jews. Which made
Moses, says he, break out into these words, O happy People, saved by the LORD.
As much as to say, among all People, is there any saved like to thee? This he
says, because Christians were wont to tell them, that they fixed their Minds
wholly on the Corporal Felicity, which their Law promised them: which made him
look about to find out all that he could draw to an higher sense. And he fixes
so much upon these words, that he repeats it again, a little after, that the
Salvation here promised is everlasting. And yet his Eyes could not be opened to
see, that this Salvation was to be brought to them by the MESSIAH: and that our
LORD Jesus is he, whose Gospel is as full of such Promises, as their Law is of
the Promises of Corn, and Wine, and Oil.

The shield of thy help.] To defend them from all the Assaults of their
Enemies. He adds this, says the same R. Isaac, to show that they to whom he
promises Spiritual Blessings, are not thereby put out of hope of Temporal: For
the People that are saved by the LORD, have him also for their Shield and their
Sword, as it here follows.

And who is the sword of thy excellency.] To cut their Enemies in pieces; so
that they should glory and boast in magnificent Victories over them. Or, as
Onkelos translates it, From his presence are all the Victories of thy valiant
Men.

And thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee.] Find themselves deceived in
all their vain hopes of saving themselves, or hurting the Israelites. Or,
should be so afraid of them, that with feigned Stories they should court their
Friendship, as the Gibeonites did. Or, more simply, should submit to them,
though not heartily, yet out of fear; as this Phrase is used, XVIII Psalm. 44.
LXVI. 3. and other places.

And thou shall tread upon their high places.] Upon the Necks of their Kings,
as both Onkelos and the Jerusalem Targum understand it: taking bamoth here for
great Men, in high stations. And thus Joshua did, as we read X Josh. 21.
Chapter XXXIV.
But this word commonly signifies, either strong holds, or places of idolatrous
worship: which neither their great men, nor their gods themselves, should be
able to preserve from ruin.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 1. AND Moses went up.] Having thus declared

From the plains of Moab.] In which was their last station before they entered
into Canaan, XXXIII Numb. 48, 49, 50. Where God delivered several Commands to
them, XXXV Numb. 1. XXXVI. 13. and where Moses spoke to them what we read in
this Book, I Deuteronomy. 5.

Unto the Mountain of Nebo.] Which was the highest part of the Mountain of
Abarim, as appears from XXVII Numb. 12. compared with XXXII Deuteronomy. 49. Near to
which there was a City of the same Name, XXXII Numb. 38. XV Isa. 2.

To the top of Pisgah.] Which was the very top of the Mountain Nebo. See III
Deuteronomy. 27. XXI Numb. 20.

That is over against Jericho.] A famous City on the other side of Jordan. I
see no ground to believe that the People of Israel accompanied him hither (as
Josephus tells the story) with so many tears, that Moses wept also: and having
beseeched them not to take his Departure so heavily, he dismissed them together
with the Elders, and remained there alone.

And the LORD.] Or, as Jonathan has it, the WORD of the LORD, who had
accompanied him with his blessed Presence through the Wilderness.

Showed him all the Land of Gilead unto Dan.] God had often promised him that
he should see the good Land promised to their Fathers, though not be permitted
to enter into it, XXVI Numb. 12. III Deuteronomy. 27. And now fulfils his word, and
gives him a full prospect of it; bidding him first look Northwards through the
whole Land of Gilead (which comprehends all that was given to the two Tribes
and half on this side Jordan, where they now were) to the Land of Naphtali,
which was in the upper Galilee beyond the Sea of Genesaret; as far as to the
utmost Northern Border, which was then called Laisch, and afterward Dan, XIX
Josh. 47. XVIII Judge. 28. and in latter times Cesaraea Philippi.

The mention of Dan, which was not the name of this place, till after that
Tribe had conquered Laish, in the time of the Judges, shows that this was not
written at the same time with the rest of this Book; no more than what we read
v. 5, 6, 10. of his Death and Burial, etc. (unless we suppose Moses to have
given an account of his own Death and Burial by the Spirit of Prophecy, which
is not probable) but it is most likely by Samuel, who was a Prophet, and wrote
by Divine Authority, what he found in the Records which were left by Joshua,
and others who succeeded him; who gave an account of Moses his leaving the
World, and of all that was done after, till the end of the time of the Judges.

Ver. 2. And all Naphtali, and the Land of Ephraim Having seen the Northern
Parts, he bad him turn his Eyes toward the Midland Country, where Ephraim and
Manasseh were situated.

And all the Land of Judah.] Which lay Southerly.

Unto the utmost Sea.] By which some understand the Salt Sea, which lay on the
South-Border of the Land of Judah, XXXIV Numb. 3. But then there will be no
mention of the Western Part of Canaan, which lay upon the Mediterranean, or
Midland Sea, which is hereby meant.

Ver. 3. And the South.] And after he had seen South, which the Tribes of Judah
and Simeon inhabited, he bad him take a view of the Eastern Parts of the
Country; as it here follows.

And the plain of the Valley of Jericho.] All the Region about Jordan;
especially the lovely Plain of Jericho: which is very much celebrated by other
Authors; and lay in the Tribe of Benjamin.

The City of Palm Trees.] Which is often mentioned in Scripture; sometime
without, and sometime with the name of Jericho, I Judges 16. III. 13. 2 Chronicles.
XXVIII. 15. which was so called, because a multitude of Palm Trees grew about
it, as Strabo (as well as Josephus) testifies in his Geograph. Lib. XVI. p.
763. where he describes this plain, as (...), etc. as encompassed about with
Mountains, after the manner of a Theater; abounding with Palm Trees, and other
Garden-trees mixed with them, for the space of an hundred Stadia. And there was
also, he observes, (...), the Paradise of Balsam. Which is a rare Aromatic
Plant, like to the Turpentine-tree; whose Juice is of great virtue and value,
etc. From which odoriferous Plant, growing here, some think this City had the
Name of Jericho, signifying sweet smelling. So R. Judas in the Gemara of
Beracoth; where he mentions this Tree, as growing about Jericho, and thence
derives its name from the Hebrew word reach, which signifies a sweet smell.
This is more probable than the Conjecture of D. Chytraeus, who imagines Jericho
to come from jerec, which signifies the Moon: and in their German Language, he
thinks, might be called Luneburgh.

Unto Zoar.] Which lay in the entrance of the Salt Sea.

And the LORD said unto him.] After he had showed him the Land, the WORD of the
LORD (as the Jerusalem Targum has it) spoke these words to him, which follow.
And God having been wont to speak to Moses out of the Cloud of Glory, Josephus
conceives, that now he was encompassed with it, and from thence heard this
voice. Which the Jews fancy was so loud, that the People heard it into the
Camp. Thus at our Savior's Transfiguration upon the holy Mount, a glorious
Cloud over-shadowed him, and his three Apostles, who heard the voice say to
them, This is my beloved Son, etc. The Samaritans, as Hottinger relates in his
Smegma Orientale, Cap. VIII. p. 456. tell the story thus: That Joshua, Eleazar
the Priest, and all the Elders accompanying him to the Mount, fell into such a
Passion, when they were to take their leave, that they could not be parted from
him. Whereupon the Pillar of Fire came down, which separated them from Moses,
so that they saw him no more.

This is the Land which I swear unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob,
saying, I will give it unto thy seed.] XII Genesis 7. XIII. 15. XV. 18, etc.

I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes.] Which the LORD strengthened, it
is likely, with a greater vigor than usual, that he might take a larger
prospect than other wise he could have done, of this Country. Or, as some of
the Jews understand it, he laid a Map of it before his eyes, wherein every part
of it was exactly described. But that might have been done, in the Plains of
Moab, without going up into a Mountain; therefore the other is more reasonable,
that he strengthened his visive Faculty, with a greater Power, to see the whole
Country in its length and breadth, etc. And therefore some of the Rabbis have
been so wise as to put both together, as J. Bened. Carpzovius observes out of
several of them, (upon Schickard's Jus Regium, Cap. V. Theorem. XVI. p. 285.)
who thus speak: God showed him the whole Land, as in a Garden Plot, forty Miles
in breadth, and as many in length; and gave his Eyes such a power of
Contemplating the whole Land, from the beginning to the end, that, he saw Hills
and Dales, what was open and what was enclosed, remote, or nigh, at one view.

But thou shall not go over thither.] This he had often said to him: and now
mentions it, that he might die in a comfortable sense, that he had been as good
as his word to him; and consequently carry this Belief along with him, into the
other World, that he would make good the Oath which he swear, to their Fathers
of bringing them into Canaan; and there fulfill all that he had foretold.

So Moses the servant of the LORD.] So God himself calls him after his death,
in the next Book, I Josh. 2, 7. as the most eminent Minister of his, that he
had hitherto employed in Israel. But the observation of R. Bechai is not well
founded; that he is not called the Servant of the LORD till after he was dead,
and then admitted unto the nearest familiarity with the Divine Majesty. For
though these very words are not used, yet the LORD calls him, My Servant Moses:
which is the same thing, XII Numb. 7.

Died in the Land of Moab.] For this Country was so still called, because it
anciently belonged to the Moabites (See XXI Numb. 26.) from whom Sihon had
taken it, as Israel now had taken it from him. So that he really died in the
Land of Israel.

According to the Word of the LORD.] The Jerusalem Targum expounds this very
soberly, According to the Sentence of the Decree of the LORD. That is, as the
LORD had determined and declared he should, XXXII. 49, 50. And so this Phrase
is commonly used in this very Book, XVII. 6, 10, 11. as well as in other places
of the Pentateuch, IX Numb. 20. XIII. 3, etc. which will warrant this
Interpretation, that Moses did not die of any Disease, nor was worn out with
Age; but merely because God, the Supreme Governor of all things, so ordered
it. But some of the Jews, not satisfied with this, have far-fetched Conceits,
concerning the Death of Moses, from these words. For because it is said, he
died, al pi, at the mouth (as the words are literally in the Hebrew) of the
LORD, Maimonides himself says, that their wise Men think (and he seems of
their Opinion) that it signifies the LORD drew his Soul out of his Body with a
kiss. And thus died Aaron and Miriam, but none besides them. Of Aaron indeed it
is expressly said he died al pi of the LORD; but it is not said of Miriam, and
yet they will have her to have had the same favor. That is, they died (says
he) of too much love, from the pleasure they had in the thoughts of God; which
apprehension of God, conjunct with the highest love to him, he thinks is called
kissing, I Cant. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, More Nevochim
P. III. Cap. LI. But this is not the meaning of the Phrase: though no doubt
Moses departed this Life in a most delectable sense and taste of the Divine
Love; having no unwillingness to die, nor being surprised with death; for he
knew the time, and the place, and the manner of it. And as he did not die of
any Disease, (as was said before) or of old Age, or by external force; but only
by the will and pleasure of God, who took his Soul out of his Body: so he did
not part with it against his will, nor with any fear; but with a placid Mind,
and composed Spirit, committed himself to God. In whose embraces (as we may
speak) he expired; and this it is likely the ancient Jews meant, when they
said, His Soul departed with a kiss.

As to the time of his death, the Scripture does not mention the Year, the
Month, and the Day: but the Jews commonly place it in the last Month of the
fortieth year after their coming out of Egypt, called ADAR, and the seventh day
of that Month. Thus they say in Seder Olam Rabba, Cap. X. and in their Calendar
which they now follow: and so Patricides in Hottinger's Smegma Orientale, p.
457. But our great Primate of Ireland in his Annals observes, that it agrees
better with the following History, to place his death in the first Day of that
Month: and Torniellus makes the same Computation, that it must be either in the
latter end of the Eleventh Month, or in the beginning of the Twelfth.

And he buried him.] This refers to the words foregoing, viz. the LORD; who
commanded his Angels to bury him. So Epiphanius, (...), etc. Haeres. IX. p. 28.
and see p. 600. Though in the Scripture, active words are very often used
passively: and the meaning may be only, that he was buried. Yet there is this
to be said for the other sense, that thereupon it is thought, that the Contest
arose between Michael the Archangel and the Devil, (as St. Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Procopius Gazaeus, and others take it) who would not have had him
buried, but opposed it; that he might administer an occasion to the Jews to
commit Idolatry. Though we never find, that the Jews were given to the Worship
of Relics, as our most Learned Vsser observes in his Annals. See there.

In a Valley in the Land of Moab, over against Beth-Peor.] This Valley was in
the Land of Sihon King of the Amorites, (IV. 46.) who had taken it from the
Moabites, as I noted before, and was now possessed by the Israelites. And
Beth-Peor was a part of the Possession of Reuben, (XIII Josh. 20.) which was a
place, where the Temple of Peor anciently stood, from whence it had its name.
For this Idol is not only called Baal-Peor, but simply Peor, XXII Josh. 17. and
as Beth-Baal is the Temple of Baal; so Beth-Peor is the Temple of Peor, as J.
Ger. Vossius abserves de Orig. and Progr. Idol. Lib. II. Cap. VII.

Now by all these Circumstances of his burial, it appears how frivolous that
Opinion of the Jews is, mentioned in Jalkut, out of Siphri, that Moses did not
really die, but was translated into Heaven, where he stands and Ministers
before God. Which conceit Josephus himself follows, Lib. IV. Aniq. Cap. VIII.
where he says, that the having dismissed the Elders, who went with him to
Mount Abarim, and then conversing a while with Eleazar and Joshua, while he
embraced them, (...), a Cloud on a sudden coming upon him, he was snacht out of
their sight into a certain Valley. Which is not only beside, but contrary to
the Scripture, which says he died, and was buried in the Valley. And yet some
of the ancient Fathers, particularly St. Ambrose and St. Hilary, have followed
this Opinion, that when Moses is said to die, it does not signify the
separation of his Soul from his Body, but his Translation to a better Life. See
Sixtus Senensis in his Bibliotheca, Lib. V. Annot. LXI. where he observes, this
is not only against Scripture, but against the sense of almost all
Ecclesiastical Writers.

But no man knows of his Sepulcher unto this day.] These words unto this day,
show that this passage was not written by Moses, as Josephus and Philo imagine,
who say he wrote this by the Spirit of Prophecy. See v. 1. The reason why his
Body was concealed, most think to have been, lest in future times it should
become an Object of their Worship. So R. Levi ben Gersom: Future Generations
perhaps might have made a god of him, because of the fame of his Miracles. For
do we not see how some of the Israelites erred, in the brazen Serpent which
Moses made? And the Heresy of the Melchisedekians shows this was no vain fear
(as Hermannus Witzius observes, Lib. I. Miscell. Cap. XVII.) if Epiphanius may
be believed; who says that in Arabia Petraea, (...), etc. They thought him to
be God, because of his Wonders he wrought, and worshipped his Image. What would
they have done, if they had had his very Body? Which he did not desire to be
carried into Canaan, and buried among his Ancestors, as Joseph ordered
concerning his Bones. For he understood, it is likely, the mind of God to be,
that, as he should not go over Jordan while he was alive, so his Body should
not be carried over when he was dead. Which R. Chama thinks might have proved
dangerous, because in the time of their Distress (especially at the Captivity
of the Land) the Children of Israel might have been prone to run to his
Sepulcher, and beg him with tears to pray for them, whose Prayers had been so
prevalent for them in his life time. For such a piece of Superstition, it
seems, crept in among them, in latter Ages: of which see Wagenseil upon the
Gemara of Sota, Cap. I. Sect. LII. Annot. II.

But though no Man knew where Moses was buried, when this was written, yet some
Maronite Shepherds, we are told, have pretended lately (MDCLV.) to find out his
Tomb, with this Inscription in Hebrew, Moses the Servant of the LORD. A great
stir was made about it, as the same Witzius observes out of Hornius his
Historia Ecclesiastica. But a learned Jew, he says, so confuted the Story,
showing it was another Moses whose Tomb they found, that the Report presently
vanished. And the Learned Wagenseil makes some probable guesses, that it was
the Tomb of Moses Maimonides. See Annot. VI. in Gemara Sotae, Cap. I. Sect. LI.
But Bartoloccius in his late Bibliotheca Rabbinica, Tom. III. p. 928, etc. has
made it rather probable, that Hornius was imposed upon by some body, in this
narration; there being no such Author known among the Jews, as R. Jakum, or
Jacomus ben Gad, who, he says, confuted this Tale.

Ver. 7. And was an hundred and twenty years old A third part of which time,
wanting one Month, he had been employed in the Government of Israel; as
Josephus observes in the Conclusion of his Fourth Book of Antiquities.

His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.] That is, he had all the
vigor of Youth remaining; there being not so much as a wrinkle in his Cheeks.
So some of the Ancients interpret the last Clause. Others, He had not lost so
much as a Tooth out of his Mouth. See Bocharius in his Hierozoicon P. I. Lib.
II. Cap. XLV. p. 506. Both Onkelos and the Jerusalem Targum refer it to the
Splendour of his Countenance, which continued to the last. From hence it was
that the Heathen, who were not wholly unacquainted with this Story, but had not
a perfect knowledge of it, imagined that Moses was troubled to die, when he was
so vigorous. For Trebellius Pollio, in the Life of Claudius, says, that the
most learned Mathematicians were wont to say, that no Man lived beyond an
Hundred and twenty years. For though Moses lived an Hundred and five and twenty
years (so he mistakes) being Dei, ut Judaeorum libri loquantur, familiaris, a
Man familiar with God, as the Books of the Jews tell us; yet he complaining
that juvenis interiret, he died when he was young, they say he was told by an
uncertain God, that no Man should ever live longer. This Mistake arose from
their misinterpretation of those words VI Genesis 3. Yet his days shall be an
hundred and twenty years. For Huetius well observes, that this incertus Deus
was the true God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth; whom St. Paul says they
called also the unknown God, Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. Cap. I. N. LVII. And
I cannot but add, that this passage out of Trebellius was taken notice of above
an hundred years ago, by a learned Man I have often mentioned, David Chytraeus;
to show that these Sacred Books were not unknown to the Heathen, and that they
had a Reverence for them.

And the Children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days.]
The time of Mourning for the Dead was longer or shorter, according to the
Dignity of the Person. And the Jews have a Tradition which distinguishes
between the days of Weeping and Mourning. The former of which never exceeded a
Month, which was the time they wept for Moses; the latter never lasted more
than a year; as they gather from the Example of the greatest Doctor they ever
had, R. Judah, who composed the Mischna; for whom they mourned Twelve Months.
See Schickard in his Jus Regium, Cap. VI. Theor. XIX. and upon L Genesis 3, 10. XX
Numb. 29.

So the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.] They lamented him
completely thirty days, and no longer. By which it seems that weeping and
mourning (whatsoever difference was between them) were anciently of the same
length; though the Jews, in the forenamed Tradition, are pleased to make the
one last much longer than the other.

Now by this, and what follows in the Book of Joshua, we may certainly know the
truth of what I said (on v. 5.) concerning the day on which Moses died. For if
we add unto these thirty days, which followed immediately upon it, the three
days wherein the Spies lay hid in the Mountain, II Josh. 22. and allow three or
four days more for their going and coming back, and then add the three days
they lay by Jordan before they passed over, III Josh. 2. they make just a Month
and ten days, from the first day of the last Month, when I supposed Moses died,
unto the day they got safe over Jordan, which was the tenth day of the first
Month. Whereas if we reckon as the Jews do, that Moses died on the seventh day
of the last Month, it would have been the seventeenth day of the first Month
before they got over Jordan. I observe also, that though the Talmudists
generally make him to have died on the seventh day of Adar, yet there have been
some who placed it on the first. For the Medrasch Rabbah, telling the story of
Haman's casting Lots to find the best time to do Execution on the Jews, says
he pitched upon the Month ADAR, because it had been unlucky to the Jews, by the
death of their Master Moses therein. But he did not consider, says that
Medrasch, that as Moses died on the first day of this Month, so he was born on
the same first day.

Ver. 9. And Joshua the Son of Nun was full of the Spirit of Wisdom.] To take
the Government upon Moses left them. Which was necessary to be mentioned, that
it might not be thought they wanted a Head to conduct them; as their Neighbors
possibly might imagine, when the News came of Moses his death. For as the
Samaritans tell the story, (in Hottinger's Smegma Orientale, p. 462.) when they
heard the Lamentations which the whole Congregation made for Moses, they began
to rejoice, and gather their Forces together to set upon the Israelites, as
wanting a Leader. But they soon found themselves mistaken; Joshua having taken
the Charge of them, and being endued with his Spirit.

For Moses had laid his hands upon him.] Whereby he committed to him the
Supreme Authority after his departure, and implored the Spirit of God to
qualify him for it. For power to execute any Office among the Jews, was given
by laying on of hands, whereby they were ordained and appointed to it. And this
was a Rite of Prayer also, as many have observed, for the obtaining the Gifts
of the Spirit, which were necessary for the discharge of that Office. And
though no words of Prayer be mentioned, yet the very laying on of hands denotes
it, as our learned Dr. Outram observes from this very place, and from I Tim. V.
22. Lib. I. de Sacrif. Cap. XV. N. VIII. Of Moses his laying on Hands upon
Joshua, we read XXVII Numbers 18, etc. And he was solemnly also, a little
before Moses his death, presented unto God, by his own Command, XXXI of this
Book, 14, etc.

And the Children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the LORD commanded
Moses.] Obeyed him as their Supreme Governor, according to God's Command
delivered to Moses, XXVII Numb. 20. XXXI Deuteronomy. 23. See 1 Josh. 16, 17, etc.

Ver. 10. And there rose not a Prophet since in This is a plain demonstration,
that the promise God makes by Moses, that he would raise up a Prophet like to
him, XVIII Deuteronomy. 15, 19, etc. was not fulfilled either in Joshua, or in Samuel,
(who it is likely wrote this Chapter, as I said before) and the best of the
Jews confess, shall not be fulfilled till MESSIAH come. Thus the Author of
Sepher Ikkarim, Lib. III. Cap. XX. It cannot be, but that a Prophet shall at
last arise like to Moses, or greater than he; for the King Messiah shall be as
great or greater. Therefore these words are not to be expounded, as if there
should never be such a Prophet, but that in all the time of the following
Prophets, till the Cessation of Prophecy, none should arise like to Moses. But
after that, there shall be one like him, or rather greater than he.

Whom the LORD knew face to face.] Or, as de Dieu thinks it should be
translated, who knew the LORD face to face.] This was one Pre-eminence of Moses
above all the Prophets, that he conversed more familiarly with God than any of
them did. See XII Numb. 8. which place explains this: for to know him face to
face, was to speak familiarly to God, and to hear God speaking in like manner
unto him. And so the Jerusalem Targum expounds these words; only instead of
the LORD, he says, Who knew the WORD of the LORD talking with him; and
delivering to him most excellent Laws, for the good government of his People.
In which Laws he still lives. they all remaining upon Record to this day; when
the Laws of all the famous Lawgivers, whom the Gentiles honored as gods, are
obliterated: But it must be observed, that in this wherein Moses excelled all
the Prophets, our blessed Savior far transcended him: For he was in the bosom
of the Father, I Joh. 18. and spoke what he saw and heard, etc. III Joh. 11, 32.

In all the signs, and the wonders which the LORD sent him to do.] The
Jerusalem Targum has it, Which the WORD of the LORD sent him to do in the
Land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his Servants, and to all his Land. See
IV. 34. VI. 22. VII. 19. In these signs and wonders Moses excelled all the
Prophets, doing more Miracles than all that succeeded him; as Maimonides
observes More Nevochim, P. II. Cap. XXXV. But our blessed Savior excelled him
in this, as well as them; doing more wonders than all the Prophets put together
had done, from the beginning of the World; and far greater also than theirs,
XXI Joh. ult.

Ver. 12. And in all that mighty hand, and in all that great terror which Moses
showed.] As the former Verse relates to what he did in Egypt; so this has
respect unto their passing through the Red Sea, and to all that befell them in
the Wilderness; both at the giving of the Law, and afterward till this time. So
the Jerusalem Targum expounds these words, In all that strong hand, and in all
those great Visions, which Moses managed. And Onkelos to the same purpose.

In the sight of all Israel.] In the place forenamed Maimonides insists much
upon this, that Moses wrought all his Miracles publicly, the whole
Congregation being Witnesses of them. And so our Savior commonly wrought his
(till they sought to kill him) in their Synagogues, at their Public Feasts,
when there was the greatest Concourse of the People of Israel. So that in this
he was a Prophet like unto Moses, though infinitely superior; which some of
the old Jews could not but discern (as I observed upon Chap. XVIII.) when upon
these words of Isaiah, LII. 13. He shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very
high, they thus gloss in Tanchuma, which is an ancient Book among them, This is
the King MESSIAH who shall be exalted above Abraham, extolled above Moses, and
be very high above the Angels of the Ministry. Upon which Conradus Pellicanus
thus glosses, and concludes his Commentary, as I shall do mine with these
words: What is it to be above the Angels, let the Jews explain; we can
understand nothing by it, but the very WORD of God, which was in the beginning
with God, and was God, by whom all things were made, and without him nothing
was made, viz. the LORD God of Hosts, to whom, in perfect Unity, God the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

Thus ends the Pentateuch; which, as our great Primate of Ireland computes,
contains the History of Two thousand, five hundred and fifty two years and an
half, from the beginning of the World to the death of Moses.

FINIS.
By reason of the Distance of the Author this Omission happened, which the Reader
is desired to insert in its proper place.
At the end of Page 511. Line. ult. after three hundred years, add these words,
But if any one think good thus to apply the words of this Verse unto Vespasian,
they must not take this for the literal meaning of them: because it is evident
that by the Stranger is to be understood those of other Nations, who lived
among them. Particularly, those Gentiles who were brought into their Country by
the Assyrians, instead of the Ten Tribes, as some of the best of the Jewish
Writers expound it: What the Doctor also says, concerning their advancing
Vespasian to the Imperial Dignity, cannot be maintained.

ERRATA.
Page. 21. Line. 24. read their Cities. Page. 30. Line. 14. r. Elate. Page. 39.
Line. 18. r. faith. Page. 43. Line. 17. r. Ammonites. Page. 67. Line. 15. r.
Atargatis. Page. 85. antepen. r. (...) Page. 86. Line. 11. r. (...). Page. 90.
Line. 24. r. even before. Page. 116. Line. 2. r. Melech. Page. 145. Line. 13.
r. until the other. Page. 174. Line. 5. for notion r. reason. Page. 183. Line.
10. for Geder r. Seder. Page. 194. Line. 18. r. Author of Sepher Ikkarim. Page.
220. Line. 20. r. Acra-batta. Page. 242. Line. 20. r. Arcadica. * Page. 264.
Line. 24. blot out, but as the persons concerned in the Controversy brought
it; and read, But whoever brought the Controversy before this Court (when the
Inferior could not determine it) they gave the sentence. Page. 269. Line. 10.
r. Cunaeus Lib. II. Page. 290. Line. 29. r. had her first. Page. 323. Line. 15.
r. Chillel. Page. 332. Line. 20. r. was so settled. Page. 348. Line. 2. r.
slake. Page. 358. Line. 24. r. both Sexes. Page. 365. Line. 6. r. whom all
that. Page. 372. Line. 1. r. make thee. Page. 382. Line. 31, 32. r. paid to her
father. Page. 408. Line. 20. for inherent r. indigent. Page. 420. Line. 28. r.
Chasidah. Page. 428. Line. 2. r. remember it. Page. 438. Line. 16. r. of no
consequence. Page. 439. Line. 26. r. as a reason. Page. 442. Line. 28. r. Dr.
Pocock. Page. 488. Line. 19. r. would furnish. Page. Line. 20. r. that should
further. Page. 507. Line. 9. r. strangeness. Page. 599. Line. 16. r. retained
the manner. Page. 612. Line. 1. r. Olive Tree thrives. Page. 617. Line. 27. r.
(...) a field. Page. 641. Line. 12. r. Mountain. Page. 650. Line. 22. r. he
speaks of himself. Page. 652. Line. penult. r. staid behind them. Page. 663.
Line. 20. r. Gazellas. Page. 665. Line. 5. r. great numbers. Page. Line. 25. r.
IV Genesis 10. Page. 668. Line. 17, 18. r. He came the Heads of the People. Page.
685. Line. 12. r. he having.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Chiswell.
BIshop Patrick's Commentary on the First Book of Moses called Genesis. The
Second Edition, 4 to. School. -- His Commentary on the Second Book of Moses
called Exodus, 4 to. 1697. -- His Commentary on the Third Book of Moses called
Leviticus, 4 to. School. -- His Commentary on the Fourth Book of Moses called
Numbers, 4 to, 1699. -- His Commentary on the Fifth Book of Moses called
Deuteronomy, 4 to, 1700. -- His Hearts Ease, or a Remedy against all Troubles.
A Consolatory Discourse directed to those who have lost their Friends and dear
Relations. To which is added Two Papers, printed in the time of the late
Plague. The Seventh Edition, 120. 1699. The Life of Henry Chichele, Archbishop
of Canterbury. In which there is a particular Relation of many remarkable
Passages in the Reigns of Henry the Fifth and Sixth Kings of England. Written
in Latin by Arthur Duck, LLD. Chancellor of the Dioscess of London, and
Advocate of the Court of Honor. Now made English. And a Table of Contents
annexed. Archbishop Tollotson of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith and
Profession of the True Religion. Being the First Volume. Published from the
Originals by Dr. Barker, Chaplain to his Grace. -- His Second Volume; Containg
Sixteen Sermons on several Occasions. -- His Third Volume; Containing Sixteen
Sermons on several Subjects. -- His Fourth Volume; Containing several
Discourses on Natural and Instituted Religion. The Nature and Necessity of
Regeneration, the Danger of all known Sin, etc. -- His Fifth Volume; Proving
Jesus to be the Messiah, the Son of God. The Danger of Apostasy from
Christianity, etc. -- His Sixth Volume; Being the First part of his Discourses
on the Divine Attributes, 1699. -- His Seventh Volume; Being the Second or
Remaining Part of his Discourses on the Divine Attributes. 1700. A Discourse of
the Government of the Thoughts. By George Tullie Sub-Dean of York. The Third
Edition Corrected, 120. 1699. Preparation for Death. Being a Letter sent to a
young Gentlewoman in France, in a dangerous Distemper, of which she died. By
William Wake, D.D. The Sixth Edition, 120. Private Devotions digested into Six
Litanies, with Directions and Prayers. By Hen. Valentine. The Bishop of Sarum's
Exposition of the 39 Articles of the Church of England in Folio. 1700. The Life
of John Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury in the Times of Queen Elizabeth and
King James the First. Written by Sir George Paul, Comptroller of his Graces
Household. To which is added a Treatise entitled, Conspiracy for Pretended
Reformation. Written in the Year 1591. By Richard Cousin, LLD. Dean of the
Arches, and Official Principal to Archbishop Whitgift, 80. 1699.

