A COMMENTARY UPON THE Third Book of MOSES, CALLED LEVITICUS.

BY The Right Reverend Father in GOD SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCVIII.

A COMMENTARY UPON LEVITICUS.

THE Third Book of MOSES, CALLED LEVITICUS.
CHAP. I.
THE Greeks and Latins give it this Name of LEVITICUS, not because it Treats of
the Ministry of the Levites, properly so called, (of which the Book of NUMBERS
gives a fuller account than this Book does) but because it contains the Laws
about the Religion of the Jews, consisting principally in various Sacrifices;
the charge of which was committed to Aaron the LEVITE, (as he is called IV
Exodus 14.) and to his Sons; who alone had the Office of Priesthood in the Tribe
of Levi: Which the Apostle therefore calls a Levitical Priesthood, VII Hebr. 11.

Verse 1. And the LORD called unto Moses.] That is, bad him draw near, and not
be afraid, because of the Glory of that Light which was in the Tabernacle, (XL
Exodus 35.) For this is a word of love, as the Hebrew Doctors speak: who
observe, that God is not said to call the Prophets of the Gentiles; but we only
read that God jikar met Balaam; not jikra called to him, as he did here to
Moses. Who, as Procopius Gazaeus has well observed, upon this word, appointed
no Service of God, in his House which he had lately erected, without his order:
whereas the Worship performed in the honor of Demons, was without any
Authority from him. Nay, there were Magical Operations in it, and Invocation of
Demons; and certain tacit Obligations which their Priests contracted with
them. For which he produces Porphyry as a Witness.

And spoke unto him but of the Tabernacle.] Hitherto he had spoken to him out
of Heaven, or out of the Cloud; but now out of his own House. Into which, it is
not here said he bad him come, (as he did afterward when the Glory of the LORD
dwelt only in the inner part of the House, over the Ark) but he stood, it is
likely, without the Door of the Tabernacle, till the Sacrifices were appointed
(as it here follows) and the High Priest entered into it with the Blood of
Expiation. I can find no time, in which this can so probably be supposed to
have been done, as immediately after the Consecration of the Tabernacle, as
soon as the Glory of the LORD entered into it. And so I find Hesychius
understood it, who observing this Book to begin with the word And, which is a
Conjunction used to join what follows with that which goes before, thence
concludes that the beginning of this Book is knit to the conclusion of the
last; and consequently what is here related was spoken to Moses on the same day
he had set up the Tabernacle, and the Glory of the LORD filled it. When Moses
might well think (as the Jerusalem Targum explains it) that if Mount Sinai was
so exalted, by the Divine Presence there for a short space, that it was not
safe for him to approach it, much less come up into it, till God commanded him;
he had much more reason not to go into the Tabernacle, which was sanctified to
be God's dwelling place for ever, till God called to him by a Voice from his
Presence: nay, he durst not so much as come near the Door, where I suppose he
now stood, without a particular Direction from the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them.] The Tabernacle
being erected, it was fit, in the next place, to appoint the Service that
should be performed in it: which consisted in such Sacrifices as are here
mentioned in the beginning of this Book. There could not be a more Natural
order, in setting down the Laws delivered by Moses, than this which is here
observed.

If any man of you bring.] It is the Observation of Kimchi, that in the very
beginning of the Laws about Sacrifices, God does not require them to offer any,
but only supposes they would; having been long accustomed to it, as all the
World then was. To this he applys the words of Jeremiah, VII. 21. and takes it
for an Indication, that otherwise God would not have given so many Laws
concerning Sacrifices, but only in compliance with the usage of the World;
which could not then have been quite broken, without the hazard of a Revolt
from him. And therefore they are directed to the right Object, the Eternal God;
and limited to such things, as were most agreeable to Humane Nature.

An offering unto the LORD.] The Hebrew word Korban, which we translate an
Offering, and the Greeks translate a Gift, is larger than Zebach, which we
translate a Sacrifice. For as Abarbinel observes in his Preface to this Book;
though every Sacrifice was an Offering, yet every Offering was not a Sacrifice.
A Sacrifice being an Offering that was slain; but there were several Offerings
of inanimate things (as those mentioned in the beginning of the second Chapter
of this Book) which therefore were not properly Sacrifices; but were accepted
of God as much as the Offering of Beasts, when they had nothing better to give.
And therefore the same Abarbinel will have the Name of Korban to be given to
these Offerings, because thereby Men approached to God. For it is derived from
a word which signifies to draw near: from whence he thinks those words in
Deuteronomy IV. 7. What Nation is there that has God so nigh unto them, etc.

Ye shall bring.] He speaks in the Plural Number, say some of the Hebrew
Doctors, (who have accurately considered these things) to show that two Men
might join together to offer one thing.

Your offering of the Cattle.] I do not know what ground Maimonides had to
assert in his More Nevochim. Pars III. cap. 46. that the Heathen in those days
had brute Beasts in great veneration, and would not kill them (for it is no
Argument there was such a Superstition in Moses his time, because there were
People in the days of Maimonides, as there are now, who were possessed with
such Opinions). But he thinks God intended to destroy this false Persuasion, by
requiring the Jews to offer such Beasts as are here mentioned; that what the
Heathen thought it a great sin to kill, might be offered to God, and thereby
Men's sins be expiated. By this means, says he, Men's evil Opinions, which are
the Diseases and Ulcers of the Mind, were cured; as Bodily Diseases are by
their contraries. Yet in the XXXII Chapter of that Book, he says God ordered
Sacrifices to be offered, that he might not wholly alter the Customs of
Mankind, who built Temples and offered Sacrifices every where: taking care (it
may be added) at the same time, that they should be offered only to himself, at
one certain place, and after such a manner, as to preserve his People from all
Idolatrous Rites. Which if they had considered, who contemned this Book of
LEVITICUS (as Procopius Gazaeus tells us some did) because ittreated too much
of Sacrifices, they would not have thought it unworthy of the Creator of the
World, especially if they had looked further to the Wisdom hidden under these
things; which were Examples, Shadows, and Patterns of heavenly things, as the
Apostle speaks VIII Hebr. 4. IX. 13. And so was the Tabernacle it self, a
Figure, (as we there read v. 9.) for the time present, of a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands.

Even of the herd and of the flock.] That is, Bullocks, Sheep, and Goats. For
under the word tzon (which we translate Flock) both Sheep and Goats are
comprehended. And so Moses expounds himself, v. 10. These were the principal
Sacrifices, and most acceptable to God, as Abarbinel observes in the forenamed
place. For though Doves and Turtles were accepted when Men were not able to
bring the other; yet in Public Sacrifices these Birds were never allowed: but
only the three sorts of four-footed Beasts beforementioned. Which were
therefore chosen (as he proceeds) because these were the most-excellent of
all-brute Greatures, on several accounts; and because they were not hard to be
found, but easily procured: and therefore no wild Beasts were required to be
offered, because God would not impose upon his People (as his words are) so
great a Burden, as to bring him that which could not be got without some
difficulty. For which cause also young Pigeons and Turtles were only offered
among Birds. He gives other Reasons for this, which seem to me very far fetched,
and therefore I shall not mention them. But this I may further add, That as
they were the most ready at hand, and in common use among Men at their Tables,
(which he should have noted as the plainest Reason of all) so they had been in
most ancient use among Religious People in their Sacrifices. See XV Genesis 9. And
it is very likely they were restrained peculiarly to these, that they might not
follow the Customs of the Gentiles; as they would have done, had they not been
abridged in their liberty. Now though we find in Homer mention made of
Hecatombs (which were a Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen) and of perfect Lambs and
Goats, whereby Achilles hoped Apollo might be appeased, and moved to cease the
Plague he had sent upon the Greeks; yet there was no more ancient Sacrifice
among the Heathen, if we may believe themselves, then that of Swine. Which made
that Learned Roman Varro derive the word (...) (which is the Greek word for
that Creature) from (...), i. e. from a Sacrifice, because it was most
anciently offered to their Gods; there being no more delicious Food at their
own Tables then Swines Flesh. See Petrus Castellanus de Esu Carnium, Lib. II.
cap. 1. And afterward they also sacrificed not only Hearts to Diana, but Horses
to the Sun, Wolves to Mars, nay, Dogs to Hecate; whereby they destroyed the
very Nature of Sacrifices, or at least of Sacrifical Feasts; in which People
had communion with the Gods whom they worshipped, by partaking at their Table.
For who could endure to eat of such Meat as Horseflesh, and the Flesh of
Wolves, nay Asses, which were offered to Priapus?

Ver. 3. If his offering be a Burnt-sacrifice.] Having prescribed what sort of
Creatures should be offered, he first directs them about their Holocausts, as
the Greeks call them, which were wholly burnt upon the Altar; and were the most
ancient Sacrifices that had been in the World. They are often mentioned by the
Greeks, particularly by Xenophon in his Cyropaedia, Lib. VIII. where he says
(...), etc. they sacrificed whole Burnt-offerings of Oxen to Jupiter, and
afterward of Horses to the Sun. See Bochart. L. II. Hierozoic. cap. 33. P. I.
Sometimes indeed the Heathen burnt only a part, and reserved the rest to feast
upon, as he there observes: But among the Jews no Man ever partaked of these
Offerings. For there being four sorts of Sacrifices prescribed by the Law (as
Abarbinel observes in his Preface to this Book, cap. 2.) the whole
Burnt-offerings, the Sin Offerings, the Trespass-offerings, and the
Peace Offerings. There was this difference made between them; that of the first
of these, whether it was a public, or a private whole Burnt-offering, no Body
partaked, no not the Priests themselves; but it was entirely consumed, except
the Skin. Of the second some part was burnt; the rest the Priests had, and were
to eat it in the Court of the Tabernacle (though there was one sort of
Sin-offering which was wholly consumed, as the Burnt-offerings were). The third
sort, which were Trespass-offerings, were only offered for private Persons;
some part of which, as in the former, were burnt upon the Altar, and the rest
eaten by the Priests. As for the last (the Peace Offering) some part of such
Sacrifices were burnt on the the Altar, the Priest had the Breast and the right
Shoulder; and the remainder he that brought the Sacrifice eat with his Friends.
I shall add no more, but that these whole Burnt-offerings seem to have been
simple Acknowledgments of God the Creator of the World, and Testifications that
they owned him to be their LORD, and continued in Covenant with him, and
implored his Blessing upon them. And therefore with respect to the first and
last of these Considerations, the Gentiles were permitted to bring these
Sacrifices (as the Jews tell us) but no other whatsoever, to be offered unto
God.

Of the herd.] As Burnt-offerings were the principal Sacrifices, and therefore
mentioned in the first place, so those of Beeves, were the chief of all
Burnt-offerings, both among the Jews and among the Gentiles. Whence (...), to
sacrifice Oxen, became a Proverb for a magnificent Entertainment.

Let him offer a male.] These were accounted the best, and therefore
principally appointed. And so they were among the Heathen; insomuch that the
Egyptians offered only (...) (as Herodotus tells us Lib. II. cap. 41.) and
thought it unlawful to offer Females. Which shows that Moses did not conform
his Laws to their Customs. for he admitted the Sacrifice of Females, III. 1.
Nay, it was particularly prescribed in some Cases, XIX Numb. 2.

Without blemish.] Or perfect, as the Hebrew word Tamim signifies. Which word
Homer expressly uses, when Achilles speaks about the Sacrifices to Apollo.

-- (...). For to the Gods (as Eustathius there observes) who are most perfect,
(...), the most perfect things ought to be offered. The like passage a very
learned Friend of mine, now with God (Dr. Owtram) observes out of the Scholiast
upon Aristophanes his Acharnenses, Lib. I. de Sacrificiis, cap. 9. sect. 3.
where more may be seen to the same purpose. Now that is perfect, in which there
is no defect in any part; and is not decayed by Age. For which reason Abarbanel
observes, great care is taken in the Law, that this sort of Creatures were to
be offered before they were three years old; and the other sorts, before they
were two.

He shall offer it of his own voluntary will.] In this Translation we follow
the Opinion of the Jews, who refer this to the Persons that brought this
Offering; which they might do when they pleased. The like expressions we read
XIX. 5. XXII. 19. But the LXX. thought it has respect to God; and so the
Phrase may be interpreted, he shall bring it for his acceptance, i. e. that he
may find a favorable acceptance with God.

At the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Where the Altar of
Burnt-offering was placed, XL Exodus 6, 29. And this was so necessary, that it
is required upon pain of death to be brought hither, and offered in no other
place, XVII. 3, 4, etc. For which cause, it is likely, the Door of the
Tabernacle is here mentioned rather than the Altar; that it might be understood
to be unlawful to offer at any other Altar, but that which stood at the door of
the Tabernacle.

Before the LORD.] With their Faces toward that holy place, where the Divine
Majesty dwelt: unto whom the Sacrifice was brought; and at the door of the
Tabernacle received by the Priest, from the hand of the Offerer.

Ver. 4. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the Burnt-offering.] Both
his hands; as some gather from XVI. 21. and (as Maimonides says) he was to do
it with all his might. This was a Rite belonging to Peace Offerings, as well as
to Burnt-offerings, III. 2. and to Sin Offerings also, IV. 4. The meaning of
which in this sort of Offerings, seems to have been that he who brought the
Sacrifice renounced all his Interest in it, and transferred it wholly to God,
unto whose Service he entirely devoted it. It being like to the old Ceremony
among the Romans, who laid their hands upon their Servants, when they gave them
their Liberty, and abdicated their own Right in them, saying, Hunc hominem
liberum esse volo, I will that this Man be free: which was called Manumission.
In other Offerings it had another meaning, as I shall observe in due place: and
it was imitated by the Gentiles, though not without the addition of impious
Superstitions. For they wreathed back the Head of the Beast upward, when they
sacrificed to the Gods above; and thrust down its Head toward the Ground, when
they sacrificed to their Infernal Deities; as J. Brentius has observed in his
Preface to this Book.

And it shall be accepted for him, to make an atonement for him.] It shall be
so acceptable, as to recommend him to the favor of the Divine Majesty. For so
the Hebrew word Capher seems here to signify, not properly to make an
Atonement (which was the business of a Sin-offering) but to own him to be in a
state of Reconciliation with God; unto whom, he was supposed to give up himself
wholly, as he did this Beast. The Jews indeed, who stick to the literal
signification of the word, fancy that these Burnt-offerings expiated evil
Thoughts and Desires: but there is no ground for this in Scripture; and the
most that can be made of it is, that God accepted his Prayers which he made in
general, for the forgiveness of all his sins, when he laid his Hand upon the
Head of this Sacrifice. For it must be here observed, that Laying on of Hands
was always accompanied with Prayer, as appears by Jacob's laying them on the
Head of Manasseh and Ephraim, XLVIII Genesis 14, 16, 20. and the High Priest
laying them on the Scapegoat, XVIth of this Book, 21. Insomuch that laying on
of hands signifies sometimes in the New Testament to pray, XIX Matthew. 15. V
Mark 23. and other places. But if a Man had committed any sin, there are other
Sacrifices peculiarly appointed by the Law for their Expiation; which he was
bound to offer with confession of sin, and prayer to God for pardon.

Ver. 5. And he shall kill the Bullock.] That is, the Man himself who brought
it, as Rasi interprets it; or one of the Levites, as others understand it: For
they killed the Paschal Lamb at that great Passover mentioned 2 Chronicles. XXX. 17.
as Bochart observes. But he should have added the reason of it, which Rasi
there gives; that a great many of the Congregation having not sanctified
themselves, (as we read in that place) therefore the Levites had the charge of
the killing of the Passover, for every one that was not clean, to sanctify
them unto the LORD. Otherwise every Man might kill his own Passover, XII Exodus
6. as they might do all their other Sacrifices. For certain it is, this was
none of the works of Priests, as Maimonides shows in a passage mentioned by Dr.
Cudworth (in his Book concerning the Lord's Supper, p. 27.) out of Biath
Hammik-dath. Where he quotes this very place to prove, That the killing of the
holy things might lawfully be done by a Stranger; yea, of the most holy things:
whether they were the holy things of private Persons, or of the whole
Congregation. The common Objection to this is, That none might come into the
Court where the Altar was, but the Priests. To which the Answer is plain, That
upon this occasion other Persons might come so far within the Court, be cause
it was indispensably necessary, that the Man who brought the Sacrifice should
lay his hand upon the Head of it; which was to be done at the Altar, when it
was to be slain.

Before the LORD.] See v. 3.

And the Priests Aarons sons shall bring the blood.] Now begins the work of the
Priests: the receiving of the Blood and that which immediately followed,
belonging to their Office. They received it in a Basin (XXIV Exodus 6.) as the
manner also was among the Heathen; which our learned Sheringham observes upon
Codex Joma (p. 85.) out of Homer's Odyss. L. III. where Thrasymedes is
represented as cutting the Ox asunder with a Cleaver; and Perseus as receiving
the Blood in a Basin, which he calls (...) A word used in Crete, as Eustathius
notes, for such kind of Vessels; which some think was originally (...), from
the receiving of the Blood.

And sprinkle the blood round about upon the Altar, etc.] That this might be
done readily, one Priest received the Blood; and another took it from him, and
sprinkled it about the Altar; or, as the Jews understand it, on every side of
the Altar; which they performed by two sprinklings, at the opposite Corners of
it. Which was a Rite also used in Peace Offerings and Trespass-offerings: but
in Sin Offerings the Blood was poured out at the foot of the Altar: See VII. 2.
Thus the Heathen also themselves took care the Blood of their Sacrifices should
not run upon the ground, but be received, as I said, in Vessels prepared for
that purpose; and then poured upon their Altars, and so offered and consecrated
to their Gods. So Lucian in his Book of Sacrifices, represents the Priest,
(...), as pouring the Blood upon the Altar. See Dilheirus Disput. Philolog.
Tom. 2. p. 253.

Ver. 6. And he shall flay the Burnt-offering.] Next followed the taking off
the Skin; which God ordered to be given to the Priests, VII. 8. Though the
Heathen burnt Skin and all, in some places, as Bochart observes out of Plutarch
and Lucian in the forenamed place, ( Hieroz. P. I. L. II. p. 324.) But whose
work it was to flay the Beast, is not here expressed. The Jews say it belonged
not to the Priests to do this; but to the Man himself, who brought the Beast to
be offered. For (to show in brief what belonged to the owners of the Sacrifice,
and what to the Priests) it may be fit to note out of Abarbanel, that each of
them had five things to do. The Owner of the Sacrifice laid his hand upon it,
killed, flayed, cut it up, and washed the inwards: And then the Priest received
the Blood in a Vessel; sprinkled the Blood; put fire on the Altar; ordered the
Wood on the fire; and ordered the pieces of the Sacrifice upon the Wood. And
that the Beast might more easily be flayed, there were eight Stone Pillars (as
the Jews tells us in Middoth, cap. 3.) and Beams laid over them: in each of
which there were three Iron hooks fixed; That the greater Beasts might hang
upon the highest, the lesser upon the middlemost, and the least of all on the
lowest: and so be more commodiously stripped of their Skins. Concerning this
Excoriation both Homer and Virgil speak, as the aforementioned Dilheirus has
observed in the same Book, p. 255.

And cut it into pieces.] This followed the Excoriation among the Gentiles
also, as the same Author shows. And it was done with such accuracy, that Homer
says they dissected the Sacrifice (...) and (...): from whence some great Men
have thought St. Paul borrowed the word (...), to express the Care the
Ministers of the Gospel should have, in dividing rightly the Word of Truth, 2 Timothy II. 15. These pieces were not the very same in Bullocks and Goats, that
they were in Sheep, as will appear afterward; and therefore the greater care
was to be used in the cutting of them; especially, when besides those parts
which were offered to God, the Priests and the People were to have their share
also.

Ver. 7. And the sons of Aaron the Priest shall put fire upon the Altar.] This,
as I said before, was one of the works of the Priests: who did not put fire
daily upon the Altar (for being once kindled, they were to keep it always
burning, VI. 13.) but stirred it up, and blowed the Coals. Which is meant by
giving fire, as the Phrase is in the Hebrew; that is, disposing it so, that it
might burn quick. Yet, if the fire was taken off from the Altar, as when they
removed the Camp, IV Numb. 14. none might lay it on again but the Priest. Or,
if it were extinct, as it was in the days of Ahaz, who shut up the door of the
House of God, which was not opened till Hezekiah reigned, (2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 24.
XXIX. 34.) none but they might kindle it again.

And lay the wood in order upon the fire.] This the Priests did every Morning
and every Night, that the fire might be preserved from going out. And when the
time of the Morning and Evening Sacrifice came, they brought new Wood, and laid
it in such order upon the fire, that it might the better consume the parts of
the Sacrifice, that were laid thereon.

Ver. 8. And the Priests Aarons sons shall lay the parts, the head and the
fat.] The Hebrew word Peder does not simply signify the Fat, (for which they
have another word cheleb) but that Fat which is separated from the rest of the
Flesh. So it is to be understood here, and in III. 9. IV. 35. Which being
gathered together, and thrown into the fire, fed the flame, and made it burn
more fiercely: by which means the other parts, into which the Sacrifice was
divided, were the more easily and the sooner consumed. Particularly, St. Hierom
takes it for that Fat which adhered to the Liver: and both Solomon Jarchi and
David Kimchi observe that this Peder was thrown upon the Head of the Sacrifice
(when it was cast into the fire) just in the place where the Head was cut off
from the Body; because otherwise the Gore which issued from it, might have
extinguished the flame. See XXIX Exodus 17.

In order upon the wood, etc.] That they might lie upon the Wood, so as to have
the same situation in the Altar that they had in the Beast, when it was alive.
So Maimonides in Maase Korban, cap. 6.

Verse 9. But his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water.] These Parts
were not to be burnt upon the Altar, till they were well cleansed by washing
them in Water. For which end there was a private Room afterward, in the Court
of the Temple, (as now it is likely there was in the Tabernacle) called the
Washing Room, (as we find in Codex Middoth, cap. 5. sect. 2.) There they having
washed them privately, and freed the Inwards from their filth, they brought
them into the Court, where there were new Marble Tables between the Pillars
beforementioned ( v. 6.) and there they were washed more exactly, as we read
in the same Book, cap. 3. sect. 5. Where Constable. l'Empereur observes, out of R.
Hobadia, the reason why they used to lay the Flesh upon such Tables, was,
Because Marble made it cold and stiff, and preserved it from stinking in very
hot weather.

And the Priest shall burn all on the Altar.] From whence this Sacrifice is
called ischeh, an Offering made by fire, (from isch, which signifies fire)
because it was altogether consumed in the fire; and no part of it left, so much
as for the Priest to eat of it.

Of a sweet savor unto the LORD.] i. e. Most acceptable. For it is a form of
Speech taken from Men, who are delighted with the good Scent and Taste of Meat
and Drink. But none can reasonably imagine it was the mere Sacrifice that was
pleasing unto God, but, as Conrad. Pellicanus well notes, the Devotion, Faith,
Obedience, and Sincerity of their Minds who made the Oblation.

Ver. 10. And if his offering be of the flocks, namely of the sheep or of the
goats, etc.] If a Man were not able to bring a Bullock for a Burnt-sacrifice,
(which could not be so well spared, being of great use in Agriculture) he might
bring one of these Creatures which were of less value; only perfect in their
kind, as it here follows.

He shall bring it a male without blemish.] See XII Exodus 5. What the Blemishes
were, that made any Animal unfit to be offered on the Altar, Moses tells us in
this Book, XXII. 22, 23, 24. where he mentions twelve, which shall be there
considered.

Ver. 11. And he shall kill it on the side of the Altar northward.] The greater
Sacrifices, which the Jews call the most holy things, had this peculiar place
assigned them, where they were to be killed, viz. all the Burnt-offerings,
(whether of Bullocks, Sheep, or Goats) and all Offerings for sin, VI. 25. and
all Trespass-offerings, VII. 2. But all the other Sacrifices, which they call
the lesser holy things, (such as the Peace Offerings of particular Men, the
Paschal Lamb, the Firstborn, and that which was tithed) might be killed in any
part of the Court, where the Altar stood; there being no peculiar place
appointed by the Law for that purpose, but only at the Entrance of the
Tabernacle. Yet a Peace Offering for the whole Congregation, was looked upon as
belonging to the things most holy; and so was slain (as Maimonides tells us) at
the North-side of the Altar: where there were certain Rings fixed, to which the
Head, or, as some say, the Feet of the Beast, was tied, in order to its being
killed. But they were not perfect Rings, as L'Empereur observes, being rather
half-segments of Rings, one part of which was fastened to the Pavement, and by
the other the Neck of the Beast was tied to it. See Codex Middoth, cap. 3.
sect. 5. The reason of this difference seems to be, only to make a distinction
between these and other Sacrifices. And all this is to be understood of the
four-footed Beasts beforementioned, not of Birds; which were sacrificed after
another manner, as appears from v. 15.

And the Priests shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the Altar.] See v.
5. and VII. 2.

Ver. 12. And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat, etc.]
This Verse has been sufficiently explained v. 5, 6, 8.

Ver. 13. And he shall wash the inwards and the legs, etc.] See v. 9. where
this also is explained.

It is a burnt-sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the
LORD.] As much as to say, this is as acceptable to the LORD, as the Sacrifice
of a Bullock, when offered with a pious Mind.

Ver. 14. And if the burnt-sacrifice for his offering to the LORD be of fowls.]
It is well observed by Maimonides in his More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 46. that
when a Man was not able to go to the charge of a Sheep or a Goat, (much less of
a Bullock) God was so merciful, as to accept of a Bird; only he prescribes of
what sort they should be. Nay, he that was not able to be at this expense, was
accepted if he offered Bread, however prepared, whether in an Oven or a Pan,
according to the custom of those Times. And he to whom this was too great a
Burden, might worship God, by bringing only fine Flour, as will appear in the
next Chapter.

Then he shall bring his offering of Turtle-doves, or of young Pigeons.] The
same Author observes, that there was a vast plenty of these Birds in the Land
of Canaan; and consequently they were so cheap, that it would put the poorer
sort to no great charge to bring this Oblation. They were also very anciently
sacrificed, XV Genesis 9. and of a gentle nature, (as Procopius and others
observe). And Pigeons being best when they are young, and Turtles when full
grown, accordingly they are appointed to bring them, when they were most
esteemed. These are but seldom mentioned in the Sacrifices among the Gentiles,
who offered Cocks to Aesculapius, and Geese to Isis, as we read in several of
their Authors.

Ver. 15. And the Priest shall bring it unto the Altar, and wring off his
head.] Pinch it off with his Nail (as the Jews say) at one of the Corners or
Horns of the Altar: viz. the whole Burnt-offering at the Southeast Corner, and
the Sin-offering at the North-west, as Maimonides says in his Treatise called
Korbanoth, cap. 5. But their Heads were so to be wrung or pinched, as not to be
separated quite from the Body, but to be left still hanging to it. For so it is
ordered in that Sacrifice mentioned V. 8. and therefore they suppose it was so
in all.

And the blood thereof shall be wrung out, at the sides of the Altar.] This is
the reason that the Priest alone might kill the Bird, (though others might kill
the Beasts, See v. 5.) because the sprinkling of the Blood, which none might do
but the Priest, was immediately conjunct with the wringing off its Head.

Ver. 16. And he shall pluck away his Crop.] Or the Stomach; that the Sacrifice
might be clean, and free from all filth.

With his feathers.] Which were no more to be offered, than the Skin of the
Beasts, v. 6.

And cast it besides the Altar on the east part.] As far as might be from the
most Holy Place, which was in the West.

By the place of the ashes.] See IV. 12.

Ver. 17. And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide
it asunder.] The Wings were to be so cloven, as not to be quite separated from
the Body, but still to remain hanging to it; and so Salt being sprinkled upon
the whole Body, it was thrown into the fire. So Maimonides observes in the
forenamed Treatise: where he takes notice also, that it was otherwise in Fowls
offered for sin; of which nothing but the Blood belonged to the Altar; the
Flesh of them being eaten by the Priests and their Sons. Whence it was, that no
Sin-offering of Birds was accepted, unless it were accompanied with an whole
Burnt-offering; that the Altar might not be without a Feast, when they that
ministered there were entertained. Thus it is required in several Cases,
mentioned V. 7. XII. 6, 8. XIV. 22. XV. 15, 30. and VI Numb. 11. The same
Maimonides likewise observes, that this Sacrifice of Birds, was one of the most
difficult Works in the Sanctuary; whereby the Mind of the Priest was kept as
intent upon the poorest Sacrifice, as upon the most splendid.

And the Priest shall burn it upon the Altar, upon the wood that is upon the
fire.] This was in part said before, but here repeated more distinctly, to show
there was no difference to be made between the Sacrifices of the meanest and of
the greatest.

It is a burnt-sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the
LORD.] The same is said of this, as of all other Holocausts, ( v. 9, 15.) to
show that whether the Oblation was of the greater Animals or the less, or only
of Birds, it made no difference in its acceptance with God: Who graciously
ordered these various sorts of Offerings, that the Poor as well as the Rich,
might be capable to express their Devotion to him, and be confident to find
favor with him.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. AND when any will offer a Meat Offering unto the LORD.] Here is a
merciful provision for those, who were neither able to offer Beasts of any
sort, nor Birds, whom God ordered to bring Meal, (as was observed before on the
first Chapter, v. 14.) which was called in the Hebrew Language Minchah, and by
us translated a Meat Offering: For it was a Korban, or Gift, as well as the
foregoing, though of a lower sort. And R. Levi Barcelonita thinks this sort of
mean Present (as we may call it) had the name of Mincah, because such Offerings
were very often merely voluntary; from whence whatsoever is not due among Men
from another, is called Mincah, a Gift. Some of which were constant and stated,
and also of a determinate quantity; being an Appendix to the daily
Burnt-sacrifice, Morning and Evening, as we read XXIX Exodus 38, 39, etc. But
these here spoken of were voluntary, when any Man's Devotion inclined him to
acknowledge God, and implore his Divine Blessing. And no certain quantity was
prescribed; only the Jews say, not less than an Ephah was accepted, but as much
more as they pleased. See Dr. Outram in his excellent Book De Sacrificiis, p.
90.

His offering shall be of fine flour.] Viz. Of Wheatflour. For all the
Offerings of this kind, whether for the whole Congregation, or particular Men,
were of pure Wheat-flour, sifted from the Bran; except only the Omer of
First Fruits of their Harvest, XXIII. 13, 14. and that which was called the
Mincha of Jealousy, V Numb. 15. which were of Barley. Of these voluntary
Offerings there were five sorts, as appears by this Chapter: for they were
either of raw Meal, (mentioned in this Verse) or Meal made into Cakes, baked in
an Oven, (which was of two sorts, v. 4.) or baked in a Pan, v. 5. or in a
Drying Pan, v. 7. The first of which was the most ancient, as appears from IV
Genesis 3. and from what the Heathen say of it; particularly Plato, L. VI. de
Legibus, and Pliny, L. XXX. Not. Hist. cap. 5. where he says Numa ordered the
Romans Deos fruge colere, etc. And Pausanias in his Attica tells us, in the
Porch of the most high Jupiter there was an Altar, where they did not offer the
Sacrifice of Beasts, but only of fine Flour. The same he repeats in his
Arcadia, and says this was ordained by Cecrops, that they should Sacrifice only
(...), which the Athenians in his time called (...). And accordingly
Triptolemus, another of their most ancient Lawgivers, enacted this as one of
his principal Laws, that they should worship their Gods with the Fruits of the
Earth. For these three Laws of his, Porphyry says, were preserved to his days,
(...) ( Lib. IV. (...).) to honor their Parents, Worship their gods with the
Fruits of the Earth, and hurt no living Creature. Which last St. Hierom ( L.
II. contra Jovin.) translates, not to eat flesh.

And he shall pour oil upon it.] Which was done to give this sort of Offering a
grateful relish, as Maimonides observes, P. III. More Nevochim, cap. 46. The
Heathen used Oil in their Sacrifices, but not mixed with Flour; but poured upon
the Flesh of the Beast that was sacrificed, to make it burn the better upon the
Altar. So that of Virgil shows, Aeneid. VI.

Pingue superque Oleum fundens ardentibus extis. And put frankincense thereon.]
To make a sweet Odor in the Court of the Tabernacle, which otherwise would
have been offensive, by reason of the Flesh that was burnt there daily, as the
same Maimonides speaks in the place before-named. When they came into the Land
of Canaan, where they were required (XV Numb. 2, 3, etc.) to take care that
this Mincha, or Meat Offering, should attend all the Freewil-offerings of
Beasts, as well as the daily Morning and Evening Sacrifice, there is no
Frankincense appointed; but a certain quantity of Wine, which perhaps was
instead of it, (having a fragrant smell) and was not required in the Offering
here mentioned. Both these were common in the Sacrifices of the Gentiles, as
appears by this single passage in Ovid, L. V. de Tristibus, Eleg. 5.

Da mihi thura, puer, pingues facientia flammas,
Quodque pio fusum stridat in igne merum.
Ver. 2. And he shall bring it.] In a silver Dish, or of some other Metal, (as
R. Levi of Barcelona expounds it, Praecept. CXVI.) wherein he delivered it to
the Priest, who carried it to the Altar, and presented it to God by lifting it
up over his Head; and, as the Jews generally say, turning it about to all the
four quarters of the World, in token that it was offered to the Possessor of
Heaven and of Earth.

To Aarons sons the Priests.] To one of them that ministered at the Altar that
day, this Offering was brought, as appears by the next words.

And he shall take thereout his handful of the flour thereof.] As much as he
could take up between his fingers, says the forementioned R. Levi.

And of the oil thereof.] Which was mingled, as I said before, with the Flour.

With all the frankincense thereof.] None of which was to be reserved for the
Priests own use; but entirely burnt upon the Altar. Which was contrary to the
way of the Gentiles, who called Frankincense (...), (as Diodorus Siculus
speaks, L. II.) a thing most beloved of the Gods, but yet offered only so much
as they could take up with two fingers, or, as others say, three. See Cuperus
his Apotheosis Homeri, p. 74, etc.

And the Priest shall burn the memorial thereof upon the Altar.] As a grateful
Acknowledgment unto God, that they held all they possessed of him their
Sovereign LORD; whom they supplicated also hereby, that he would still be
mindful of them; that is, be gracious to them. For this Offering seems to have
something of the nature of an Holocaust, or whole Burnt-offering; though others
will have it to be an Expiatory Sacrifice, because part of it was eaten by the
Priests. But it being said in the next words, to be an Offering made by fire
(which is the phrase for a whole Burnt-offering, in the foregoing Chapter, v.
9, 13, 17.) I take the other to be the truer.

Of a sweet savor unto the LORD.] The very same being said of this sort of
Offering, which is of the foregoing, that were more chargeable, (I. 9, 13, 17.)
Procopius Gazaeus had great reason here to observe (which cannot be too often
repeated) that true Piety is not demonstrated by the greatness of its presents.
The way of Piety is open and easy unto all: For God's Commandment is exceeding
broad. And he that makes the smallest signification of it, if it be sincere,
differs nothing from him, who shows it by the largest Gifts, etc. So vain were
the reasonings of the Heathen, who disputed, which were the most acceptable
Sacrifices to their Gods, those of living Creatures, or of Things inanimate.
Julian contended that (...), etc. the Sacrifices of living Creatures were more
esteemed, than of those without life; because they were nearer of kin to the
living God, and the Author of Life. But his great Doctors, Pythagoras and
Porphyrius (as St. Cyril observes, L. X. contra Julianum) condemned these
Sacrifices of Beasts, as hateful to their Gods; who they fancied were pleased
only with those that were made (...) of Fruits of the Earth, and of
Frankincense. But they might have learnt from Moses, if they had pleased, (
Julian and Porphyry being acquainted with his Books) that these things were
alike acceptable, God having respect to the Mind of him that offered, not to
his Gifts.

Ver. 3. And the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aarons and his sons.] To
be eaten by them. But that Meat Offering which was offered for the Priests
themselves, was to be wholly burnt, and no part eaten, VI. 22, 23.

It is a thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.] Nothing is
more known then the distinction which the Jews make between things most holy,
and the lighter holy things, (as their phrase is) which I took notice of
before. The most holy were such, as none whatsoever might eat of; or none but
the Priests, and the Sons of Priests; and that only in the Sanctuary, and no
where else, (See VI. 16, 26.) Such were all whole Burnt-offerings, all the
Sin Offerings, and all the Peace Offerings for the whole Congregation. The
lighter holy things were such, as might be eaten by those who were not Priests,
in any place within the City of Jerusalem, (to which their Camp now answered)
and such were all the Peace Offerings of particular Persons, the Paschal Lamb,
the Tenth, and the Firstlings of Cattle.

Ver. 4. And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven.]
This is the first sort of baked Mincha's for the preparing of which there was
an Oven in the Court of the Tabernacle, as afterward there was in the Court of
the Temple, 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 28, 29. XLVI Ezekiel. 20.

It shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened
wafers anointed with oil.] If the Cakes were thick, then the Oil was kneaded
together with them: But if they were thin (like a Wafer) then it was only
spread upon it, before it was baked, (See XXIX Exodus 2.) or, as some will have
it, after it came out of the Oven. Concerning its being unleavened see below v.
11.

Ver. 5. And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan.] Or in a flat
Plate, as we translate it in the Margin. For Maimonides says, this was the
difference between Macabath (which is the Hebrew word in this place) and
Marchesheth, that the former was a Pan or Plate without any Rim about it; and
the other had one, as our Frying-pans have. And so Abarbinel, in his Preface to
this Book, observes out of Jarchi, that there was a Vessel in the Temple, which
was only flat and broad, but had no rising on the sides of it: So that the Oil
being poured upon it, when it was set on the fire, ran down and increased the
Flame, and made the Cake hard.

It shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.] This sort of Cake
seems to have been both kneaded with Oil; and to have had Oil also poured upon
it, after it was laid upon the Plate.

Ver. 6. Thou shall part it in pieces, etc.] This, according to Abarbinel, was
done as it lay baking upon the Plate. Or, if this Division was made after it
was taken off, the reason was the same; because part of it was to be given to
God, and the rest to the Priests.

And pour oil thereon.] Upon the pieces; that they might by this new Addition
of fresh Oil, be made more savoury.

It is a meat offering.] And therefore to be eaten with Oil, v. 1.

Ver. 7. And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the drying pan.] This
Vessel was not flat, but deep, (as Abarbinel observes, See v. 5.) because that
which was baked in it was moist and fluid.

It shall be made of fine flour with oil.] The Oil was not kneaded with this
sort of Mincha, but put into the Pan, so that it mixed with the Flour; which
might be shaken and moved up and down, as things are which are baken in
Liquors. So Abarbinels words are in his Preface to this Book.

Ver. 8. And thou shall bring the meat offering, that is made of these things
unto the LORD, etc.] This relates to all the bake Meat Offerings
beforementioned, which were to be brought to the LORD at his House, and there
presented to the Priest; who was to bring them to the Altar, when they were
prepared as before directed. See v. 1, 2. And this variety of Mincha's was
allowed, that the Table of the LORD ( i. e. the Altar) might be furnished, and
his Ministers that waited on him entertained with all sorts of Provisions.

Ver. 9. And the Priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof.]
A part of the Cake (of whatsoever sort it was) was separated from the rest for
the LORD's portion; to whom it was offered as an acknowledgment of his Supreme
Dominion over them, and in commemoration of his goodness to them.

And shall burn it upon the Altar.] Before the other parts were eaten by the
Priests; as was directed before about the fine Flour, v. 2.

It is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the LORD.] See v. 2.

Ver. 10. And that which is left of the meat offering shall be Aarons and his
sons, etc.] All this Verse has been explained v. 3.

Ver. 11. No meat offering which ye shall bring unto the LORD, shall be made
with leaven.] These words [which ye shall bring unto the LORD] seem to have a
peculiar emphasis in this place; importing that no Meat Offering, part of which
was offered upon God's Altar, should be leavened. For no part of that leavened
Bread which was offered in Eucharistical Sacrifices, (VII. 13.) nor the two
Loaves offered in the Feast of Pentecost, (which some mistake for an Exception
to this Precept) were offered upon the Altar, but given entirely to the
Priests, as their portion.

Made with leaven.] There are many Moral Reasons given, both by Jewish and
Christian Writers, why none of the Cakes beforementioned should have any
Leaven in them, which I shall not here set down. There is some probability in
their Opinion, who think this was ordered to refresh their Memory, by putting
them in mind of their Deliverance out of Egypt. But Maimonides seems to me to
have given the best account of this, in his More Nevochim ( P. III. cap. 46.)
where he says, God prohibited this to root out the Idolatrous Customs in those
days, as he found in the Books of the Zabij, who offered to their Gods no Bread
but leavened. Next to this, the Account which Abarbanel gives of it is not to
be disregarded, who thinks it was forbidden, because it would have made delay,
if they had waited at the Tabernacle till the fermentation was perfected.

For ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey in any offering of the LORD made by
fire.] Neither mixed with Bread, nor alone by themselves. For Honey was a kind
of Leaven, and it is certain was used by the Heathen in their Religious Rites:
As appears not only from Maimonides (who tells us in the place forenamed, that
they chose sweet things for their offerings, and anointed their Sacrifices with
Honey) but from a great number of other Authors, who make mention of it:
Particularly Plato, who says (in his VI de Legibus) that anciently Men did not
Sacrifice living Creatures, but only fine Flour, (...), and Fruits moistened
with Honey. And so Phylarchus tells us (in Athenaeus his Deipnos. L. XV.) that
the Greeks sacrificed Honey to the Sun (which was the great God among the
Gentiles) but poured no Wine upon his Altars. Which Polemon (in Suidas) calls
(...), a sober Sacrifice; because there was no Wine in it, but Honey and Water
mixed together. Nay, there was scarce any God among the Heathen, to whom Honey
was not offered, as Bochartus has shown at large in his Hierozoicon P. II. L.
IV. c. 12. But one Testimony may serve for all, which is from Pausanias (in his
Eliaca) where having reckoned up at least fifty Altars in the Temple of Jupiter
Olympius unto several Deities, and some of them common to them all, he says,
They sacrificed upon every one of them once a Month, after an ancient manner,
((...)) Frankincense and Wheat mingled with Honey. Which being so common and
ancient a thing among the Gentiles in their Idolatrous Worship, was the reason,
it is likely, that God forbad it to be used in his Sacrifices. And under the
name of Honey the Jews think Figs and Dates, and all other sweet Fruits are
comprehended. For the famous Composition among the Egyptians called (...),
which was burnt every day, Morning and Evening on their Altars, consisted of
such things, as well as of Myrrh, Calamus, and Cardamum. So Plutarch tells us
(in his Book de Iside and Osir.) and mentions Honey in the first place, with
Wine and Raisins: (...), etc. (...), etc.

Ver. 12. As for the oblation of the first fruits, ye shall offer them unto the
LORD, but they shall not be burnt on the Altar for a sweet savor.] There were
several sorts of First Fruits (as I observed XXIII Exodus 19.) That which is
here spoken of, was of the Corn unground, only a little parcht at the fire,
which was to be presented unto God; but not burnt on the Altar, because they
belonged to the Priests.

Ver. 13. And every oblation of thy meat offering shall thou season with salt.]
All the forenamed Mincha's, which were Korbans, (as they are often here
called) were to be thus seasoned, because Salt was a thing never wanting at any
Table; and all Meat is unsavory without it.

Neither shall thou suffer the salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking
from thy meat offerings.] It is called the Salt of the Covenant of God, as some
think, because required by this Law, which they covenanted with God to observe,
as much as to offer Sacrifices; which were not acceptable without Salt, as
appears from the Repetition of it three times in this one Verse. But there is a
plainer reason than this, which is, That the Sacrifices being God's Feasts, and
they that did partake of them being his Guests, who did in a manner eat and
drink with him at his Table; the Salt that was cast upon all Sacrifices (as
appears by the words following) is called the Salt of the Covenant, to signify
that, as Men were wont to make Covenants by eating and drinking together,
(where Salt is never wanting at their Tables, but a necessary Appendix at every
Feast) so God by these Sacrifices and the Feasts upon them, did ratify and
confirm his Covenant with those that did partake of them. For Salt, as is
commonly observed, being a constant concomitant of all Feasts, and Covenants
being made by eating and drinking at the same Table, where Salt was ever used;
thence Salt it self was counted by the Ancients to be the Symbol of Friendship,
and proverbially used among the Greeks to express it. By which other places may
be explained, about which some have bestowed vain labor, (XVIII Numb. 19. 2 Chronicles. XIII. 5.) where the same words are used, but inverted; it being called a
Covenant of Salt (instead of the Salt of the Covenant) because Covenants, as I
said, were established by eating together, where Salt is never wanting.

With all thine Offerings thou shall offer salt.] Not only with the Minchas, or
Meat Offerings, mentioned in this Chapter, but with all other Sacrifices
whatsoever. Which is so solemnly enjoined, (as Maimonides says in the place
before-named) because the Heathen did not use any Salt in their Sacrifices.
Which is not unreasonable to think, since Honey (with which Salt does not well
agree) was in such constant use among them. And therefore says he, God
prohibited us to offer Leaven or Honey, and commanded us with great
seriousness, to use Salt in all our Sacrifices. That is, as R. Levi of
Barcelona explains it, ( Praecept. CXVI.) the Flesh of all Sacrifices was to be
salted; and the Meal of all Minchas. For which he gives these two Reasons;
because nothing is grateful to the Palate without Salt; which also preserves
things from Corruption, as the Sacrifices did their Souls from perishing.
Abarbanel says the same. And therefore whatsoever the Custom might be in
ancient time among the Heathen; in after Ages they learnt from Moses to use it
in all their Sacrifices: As appears from Pliny and Ovid (and many other
Authors) the first of which says, That Salt was so necessary, that no
Sacrifices were offered sine mola Salsa: which every one knows the Greeks
called (...) and (...). And among the Jews this Salt was not brought by him
that offered the Sacrifice, but was provided at the Public Charge; there being
a Chamber in the Court of the Temple (as we read in Middoth, cap. 5. sect. 2.)
called The Chamber of Salt. Which was one of the three Rooms on the Northside
of the Court (as there were three other on the South Side, for other uses)
where the Flesh of the Sacrifices were powdered, as the Mincha's were seasoned
at the very Altar. And this was so necessary, that though a Sacrifice was not
looked upon as null, if the Priest neglected to salt it; yet the want of it in
the Mincha's (as the Hebrew Doctors say) made them void; because it is here so
expressly required in this Verse, Thou shall not suffer the Salt of the Covenant
of thy God to be lacking in thy Meat Offering. And whosoever offered any
Sacrifice without Salt, or with Honey or Leaven, was beaten, as Mr. Seldom
observes, L. II. de Synedr. cap. 13.

Ver. 14. And if thou offer a Meat Offering of thy first fruits unto the LORD,
thou shall offer for thy Meat Offering, etc.] This is very different from the
Oblation of First Fruits mentioned v. 12. For there they are called Resith,
which signifies the First Fruits at Harvest time: but here Bichurim, which
properly imports the first ripe fruits before the rest were ready. And
therefore the manner of their Oblation was different from the former, which
follows in the Conclusion of this Verse. And first he describes what he means
by the First Fruits, which he calls Abib, i. e. full Ears of Corn, but as yet
green and moist: which he says therefore in the next place must be dried by
the fire; and then bruised and beaten in a Mortar, or with a Mill: and they
were to be brought out of the richest or fattest of their Fields: for so the
last words seem to signify Geresh Carmel, (which we translate Corn beaten out
of full Ears) for Carmel sometimes signifies a fruitful Field, XXXII Isa. 15.
and therefore may very well be thought in this place to import, the largest
Ears of tender Corn. And the intention of its Contusion seems to have been,
that it might be reduced into Flour; as it might easily be after it had been
dried by the fire. And therefore differed from that Meat Offering mentioned v.
1. only in this; that the former was Flour of old Corn, this of new: and that
was fine Flour sifted from the Bran; this had nothing taken out of it, but
remained as it came from the Mortar or the Mill. And so the LXX. seem to have
understood it. There are those indeed, who think it was only thrashed out of
the Husk, and so offered; and fancy also that from this word Geresh, the
Goddess, called Ceres, had her Name among the Gentiles. Which last Conceit is
the stranger, since they endeavor to have it thought, that the Jews derived
this Custom of offering First Fruits from the Gentiles; and not the Gentiles
from the Jews. Whereas the Gentiles had no such Custom, that I can find, as
this, to offer the First Fruits of Green Corn; but only the First Fruits of
their Harvest, which they called Novas fruges: of which the Romans thought it
unlawful to taste, antequam Sacerdotes primitias libassent, before the Priests
had offered the First Fruits, as Pliny tells us, Lib. XVIII. cap. 2. and
Censorinus says the same, cap. 1. de Die Natali. Or if they did offer any
First Fruits before Corn was ripe, they boiled them in a Pot; but did not roast
them in the fire, as is here directed. For so Hesychius seems to say, that in
the Feast called (...) (which was in the Month that Answers to our April) they
offered (...), the First Fruits that appeared out of the Ground, which they
carried about, i. e. in Pots, as other Authors tell us. And Hesychius himself
says that (...) signified a Pot, full of Sacred Decoction.

Ver. 15. And thou shall put oil upon it, etc.] See v. 1.

And the Priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof,
and part of the oil, and all the frankincense. All the rest that was not burnt,
was the Priests portion, except the Frankincense; which is here ordered to be
entirely offered to God, (See v. 2.) and made this, and such like Offerings, be
called an Offering of a sweet savor unto the LORD, v. 2.9, 12.

It is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.] See upon v. 9.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. AND if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering.] Having given
orders about whole Burnt-offerings, in the first Chapter, and Meat Offerings
(which had something of that Nature in them) in the second; he proceeds to
Peace Offerings, which in the Hebrew are called Schelamim, from the word
Schalam, either as it signifies Retribution, or Peace and Concord. They that
take it in the first sense, think the reason of the name to be from this; That
God, the Offerer, and the Priest, had each of them their portion assigned to
them of this Sacrifice. And they that follow the second sense do not much
differ, when they say, That these Sacrifices were Symbols of Friendship between
God, and the Priests, and those that brought them; for all these feasted at a
Common Table, as R. Levi ben Gersom expresses it. For part being offered on the
Altar, and the Priest having taken his share, the rest was given to him that
offered the Sacrifice. So that it was called a Peace Offering, says Abarbanel
(in his Preface to this Book) because it made Peace (or rather declared Peace)
between the Altar, the Priest, and the Owner. But they seem to me to have given
the best account of this, who, because Peace in their Language signifies
Prosperity and Happiness, think these were called Peace Offerings, because they
were principally thankful Acknowledgments of Mercies received from God's
Bounty. For there being three sorts of them mentioned VII. 15, 16. that of
Thanksgiving is the first, called Totheh, Acknowledgment of some Benefit
received.

The Gentiles called such Sacrifices (...), as appears from many places of
Dionys. Halicarn. L. VI. and L. VIII. where there are these words, (...).
Plutarch calls them (...), particularly in the Life of Agesilaus, where he
says, (...) which is a perfect Description of such Sacrifices as are here
appointed; with part of which they entertained their Friends. They are also
called by those Writers (...), especially when they had respect to any great
Danger they had escaped; for which they offered these thankful Acknowledgments.
The LXX. calls such Sacrifices (...).

If he offer it of the herd, whether it be a male or female.] A whole
Burnt-offering was to be only of a Male: for being wholly Gods, and offered
purely for his Honor, it was to be of the very best, I. 3. But Peace Offerings
being also for the profit of him that offered them, who had the greatest share
of them; it was at his liberty whether he would offer a Male or a Female.
Directly contrary to the Egyptian Customs, if they were the same now, that they
were in the time of Herodotus, who says expressly, (...), it was not lawful
among them to sacrifice Females, L. II. cap. 41.

He shall offer it without blemish, etc.] See I. 3.

Ver. 2. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering.] The Man who
brought the Offering was to lay his hand upon the Head of it; as was ordered in
the whole Burnt-offering and Sin-offering, (See Chapter I. v. 4.) It might not be
done by a Deputy, unless he was Heir to one that had vowed this Sacrifice, and
died before he had performed it; in which case the Heir was to do what the Man
himself should have done, if he had been alive, as Maimonides observes. In this
Sacrifice, laying on of hands, seems to have been done, not only with Prayer to
God, that he would accept the Oblation (which the Jews say always accompanied
this Action) but with acknowledgment of those Mercies which were the occasion
of it. So Conradus Pellicanus well glosses upon I. 4. (which may be best
applied to the use of this Rite in Peace Offerings) Laying on of Hands
signifies Devotion and Faith, with acknowledgment of the Divine Benefits; for
which we cannot offer any thing of our own, but rather return and restore to
him what we have received; that we may understand giving of Thanks to be the
greatest of our Sacrifices.

And kill it.] See chapter I. v. 5.

At the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] These being the lesser
holy things, as the Jews call them, were not offered as the whole
Burnt-offerings and Sinofferings were, on the North-side of the Altar, (See chapter
I. v. 11.) but any where else, near to the Entrance of the Tabernacle; which
was in the East, where the others were thrown out, and therefore a less holy
place. Only in laying on of hands, every Man was bound, wheresoever the
Sacrifice was killed, to turn his Face Westward, toward the Sanctuary; because
then, as I said, he made certain Prayers and Acknowledgments to the Divine
Majesty, which was always to be done in that posture.

And Aarons sons the Priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the Altar round
about.] See chapter I. v. 5.

Ver. 3. And he shall offer.] One of the Priests then in waiting at the Altar.

Of the sacrifice of the peace offerings, etc.] After the Sacrifice was flayed
and cut up, as is directed I. 6.

The fat that covers the inwards.] That is, the Omentum, as the Latins call
it, and has much fat in it. See XXIX Exodus 13.

And all the fat that is upon the inwards]. All the Fat which adheres to the
Mesentery, and other Entrails.

Ver. 4. And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them.] The Kidneys are
noted by Aristotle to have more Fat about them, than any of the other Bowels:
(...). L. III. de Animal. cap. 9. Being so covered with it, that in dissecting
of a Body, the Kidneys at first sight, are not to be perceived, as Anatomists
observe; particularly our own Countryman Dr. Highmore.

Which is by the flanks.] The Hebrew word Cesilim signifies the Loins (as
Bochart has demonstrated in his Hierozoicon, P. I. L. II. c. 45.) which have
collops of fat upon them, as Eliphaz speaks, XV Job 27.) and thence are easily
inflamed, XXXVIII Psalm. 7.

And the caul above the liver.] The Hebrew word jothereth signifies the
greatest Lobe of the Liver. See XXIX Exodus 13.

It shall he take away.] Separate from the rest of the Flesh, to be offered on
the Altar. For all the Fat, here mentioned, was God's portion of the Sacrifice:
the Priest had the Breast and the right Shoulder; and he that brought the
Offering had the rest; as will appear more fully VII. 15, etc. 31. 32, etc.

Ver. 5. And Aarons sons.] Some of those that Minister that day.

Shall burn it on the Altar upon the burnt-sacrifice.] By the Burnt-sacrifice
seems here to be meant the daily Sacrifice, which was burnt every Morning:
after which this was to be offered, but not before it.

Which is upon the wood that is on the fire.] The same wood, upon which the
Burnt-sacrifice had been offered, would serve to burn this Fat. Which being
entirely consumed, as the Holocausts were, it is called in the following words,
an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the LORD. See chapter 1. v. 9.
That is, God was pleased graciously to accept of their pious Acknowledgments:
the Offerings of these Inwards being, as if he that brought them had said, I
will pour out my Soul unto the LORD in Thanks and Praise for the Benefits he
had received. So Abarbanel explains it in his Preface to this Book.

Ver. 6. And if his offering, etc. be of the flock.] i.e. Of Sheep or Goats,
which are both comprehended under the word Flock, (as was noted before chapter 1.
v. 2.)

Male or Female.] See v. 1. Where I observed a difference between these
Sacrifices and whole Burnt-offerings, in this respect; that either Male or
Female were accepted for Peace Offerings, but Male alone for the other. To
which may be added, that Birds were allowed for whole Burnt-offerings (I. 14,
15, etc.) but not for Peace Offerings: which were only of the Herd, or Flock;
i. e. of Bullocks, Sheep, or Goats. The reason seems to be plain; because
Peace Offerings being to be divided between God, the Priest, and him that
brought them, the portion of each would have been so small, that it would have
made the Feast upon it so very meagre and jejune, that it would have been
contemptible.

He shall offer it without blemish.] It was at his choice whether he would
bring it from the Herd or the Flock: but in its kind it was to be perfect. See
chap. I. 3, 9.

Ver. 7. If he offer a lamb for his offering.] Though a Bird was not accepted
for a Peace Offering, yet a Lamb was; though not of such value as a fat Sheep,
or a Goat.

Then shall he offer it before the LORD.] This seems to be meant of the Man's
presenting it to be offered at the Altar.

Ver. 8. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, etc.] This
whole Verse is only a direction to do with a Peace Offering of a Lamb or Sheep,
as they were to do with that of a Bullock, v. 2.

Ver. 9. And he shall offer of the Sacrifice of the Peace Offering, an offering
made by fire unto the LORD.] As was directed in the Offering of a Bullock, v. 3.

The fat thereof, and the whole rump.] The whole Fat being to be offered (as
was ordered also before) he enumerates the particulars; because in this was
more Fat, than in other Sacrifices of this kind. For the whole Rump of a Sheep
was to be offered to God, though not of a Bullock, nor a Goat. And the reason
was, because in those Countries the Tails of their Sheep are so vastly big,
that (as Golius and others assure us) the least of them weigh ten or twelve
pound; and some exceed forty pound weight: and they are so very fat, that they
melt the Fat and keep it to butter their Rice, and for other uses, as Bochartus
observes in his Hierozoicon, P. I. L. II. cap. 45.

It shall he take off hard by the backbone.] The Hebrew word Atzah, which we
translate the Backbone, denotes that part which is next to the Tail or Rump;
and therefore must signify that which Galen calls (...). Which is a Bone at
the extremity of the broad Bone, called Os Sacrum; confisting of three
Cartalaginous parts, as he describes it.

And the fat that covers the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the
inwards.] See v. 3.

Ver. 10. And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, etc.] This Verse
is explained above, v. 4.

Ver. 11. And the Priest shall burn it upon the Altar.] As he did the Fat of
the Bullock, v. 5.

It is the food of the offering made by fire unto the LORD.] That which was
offered upon the Altar, was accounted God's Mess, as appears from I Malachai
12. where the Altar is called his Table, and the Sacrifice upon it his Meat: as
here it is called his Bread or Food. To represent in a lively manner to them,
that God dwelt, and (as we say) kept House among them; and that they who
partaked of these Sacrifices, feasted with him upon his Provision. See upon XXV
Exodus 8, 30.

Ver. 12. And if his offering be a Goat, etc.] The Law concerning this
Sacrifice, is the very same with the former (except what is ordered about the
Rump of a Sheep) and this and the following Verses (13, 14, 15.) need no
farther Explication.

Ver. 16. And the Priest shall burn it upon the Altar, it is the food of the
offering, etc.]. See before v. 11.

All the fat is the LORDS.] That is, all the Fat beforementioned; which may
more properly be translated the Suet. For that Fat which was a part of the
Flesh might be eaten (as appears from many places, particularly XXXII Deuteronomy.
14.) but not that which only lay upon it, and might be separated from it; which
was burnt upon the Altar, when they sacrificed either Bullock, Sheep, or Goat.
And when they killed any of these, or other clean Creatures, for their Food at
home, still they were to forbear to eat the Suet; partly out of reverence to
God, whose portion it was at the Altar; and partly, because it was heavy and
too strong a Food, as Maimonides takes it, More Nevochim P. III. cap. 48. And
it seems therefore to have been offered upon the Altar, because it was so
unctuous, that it would easily burn, and make the Flesh also consume the
sooner. But from its being God's part, it came thence to signify, the very
best and most excellent of any kind of thing. As the best of the Tithe is
called the Fat of the Tithe, XVIII Numb. 17. and the best Corn, is called the
Fat of the Wheat, LXXXI Psalm. 16. and rich and powerful Men, are called the Fat
upon Earth; as the chief and principal part of the People, XXII Psalm. 29.

Ver. 17. It shall be a perpetual statute.] In force as long as this Law about
Sacrifices shall last.

For your generations.] For their Posterity, as well as them who received this
Law, in all succeeding Ages.

Throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.] This
confirms what was said before, that they might not eat such Fat, as is
beforementioned, at home, as their ordinary Food; because it is said,
throughout all your dwellings ye shall eat no fat. And Fat being joined with
Blood is another argument, that they might no more eat the Suet of Beasts that
were killed at home, for common use, than the Blood of such Beasts. From which
they entirely abstained, for the foregoing reasons, as Maimonides observes in
the Book forenamed; and for another also which he mentions in the XLVIth
Chapter of it. Where he says, The ancient Idolaters, called Zabij, were wont
to eat the blood of their Sacrifices, because they imagined this to be the Food
of their Gods; with whom they thought they had such Communion, by eating of
their Meat, that they revealed to them things to come. And in this R. Moses bar
Nachman concurs with him, as Dr. Cudworth observes in the conclusion of his
Treatise of the Right Notion of the Lord's Supper. For though he says, that
Blood was forbidden, because it served for Expiation, (in which he differs from
Maimonides) yet he adds also, that it was used superstitiously by the Heathen
in their Idolatrous Worship; where they partaked of the Blood with their
Demons, as being their Guests, and invited to eat with them at their Table.
And so were joined in faederal Society with them; and by this kind of Communion
enabled to prophecy, and foretell things to come.

CHAP. IV.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Having directed him about
whole Burnt-offerings, and Meat Offerings (which constantly attended some of
them) and Peace Offerings, which supposed Men to be in a state of favor with
God; he now proceeds to give order about the Expiation of their Sins, when they
had offended him, by doing contrary to his Commands; which he continues to the
14th Verse of the Vth Chapter. And this Law about Sin Offerings, seems to have
been delivered to Moses at a different time from the former; being about a
different matter; but by a Voice speaking to him out of the Tabernacle, as
before, chapter I. 1.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through
ignorance, etc.] There are three Conditions expressed in this Verse, of the Sin
for which the following Sacrifice was admitted. First, It was to be committed
ignorantly; not wittingly and presumptuously. Secondly, It was for Sin against
a negative Precept (as the Jews call them) i.e. such a Commandment as forbad
something to be done. So it is said here expressly [ Concerning things which
ought not to be done]. As for the omission of such things as were commanded to
be done, they might be performed some other time when Men had better bethought
themselves; which was much more acceptable to God, than offering Sacrifice for
the omission. And thirdly, It was for Facts committed, not for Words or
Thoughts; so the last words are, and shall do against any of them. As for the
sins which Men might imprudently commit in word and in thought, they were so
many, that the whole Flocks and Herds would not have sufficed for their
Expiation, nor the Altar contained all such Sacrifices. The Jews add a fourth
Condition, That the Sacrifice here appointed was for such Facts, as if they had
been committed wittingly, a Cereth, i. e. cutting off, was threatened to them by
the Law: which they gather from XV Numb. 30. But that phrase with an high hand
seems not to signify any sort of sin, but a certain manner of sinning: as when
a Man despised God's Commandments, and brought Contempt upon the Law by his
sins, as a very learned Friend of mine, now with God, has observed. And
therefore it is probable all sins committed ignorantly were expiated by the
following Sacrifices, save only those which are appointed to be expiated by
other Sacrifices, or after another manner. See Dr. Owtram de Sacrificiis, L. I.
cap. 12. n. 2, 3, 4.

Ver. 3. If the Priest that is anointed do sin.] And first he prescribes the
Sacrifice, which he who was to make the great Expiation for all the People,
should offer for himself, viz. the High Priest: who only, of all the Priests,
was constantly anointed at the entrance of his Office. And if after he was put
out of his Office, he committed any such sin as is here mentioned, he was to
make this Offering for his Expiation, as much as if he had continued in it. So
Mr. Seldom observes out of the Misna, L. II. de Synedr. cap. 15. n. 14.

According to the sin of the people.] In the manner beforementioned. Or, as R.
Solomon interprets it, if he hide any thing from the People, whereby they err.
For so the words run in the Hebrew, if he sin to the guilt of the people, (or,
to the making them guilty) either by misinforming them, or drawing them into
Error by his Example; so that they take a thing to be clean, which is indeed
unclean, or the like.

Then let him bring for his sin which he has sinned, a young bullock without
blemish.] It is observed by some, that in great Offenses the Sacrifices were
small; lest they should imagine their Pardon was procured by their great
expense. For here the word is Par ben bachur, a young Bullock, that was but a
little bigger than a Calf. And so this Sacrifice is called (Par) in the
following Verses. Whereas that of the Peace Offering is called v. 10. Shor, an
Ox, (though we translate it also, Bullock) one that was grown to its full
bigness, and consequently of greater value.

For a sin-offering.] How Chattah, which we translate Sin-offering, differs
from ascham, which we translate Trepass Offering, I shall examine afterward,
when Moses comes to speak of the latter. And now only observe, that Chattah is
the name both for Sin, and for the Sin-offering; as the word piaculum was among
the Heathen; which signified both a great Crime, and the Expiatory Sacrifice
for it. By which those words in the New Testament may be explained, Christ was
made sin for us; that is, a Sacrifice to expiate our sins. And so the word
(...), sin, certainly signifies, VIII Romans 3.

Ver. 4. And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation before the LORD.] This, as I take it, was to be done by himself;
who was to present the Sacrifice to the Divine Majesty, and desire it might be
accepted for the purpose to which it was to be offered.

And shall lay his hand upon the bullocks head.] As every one that brought
other Offerings were bound to do, (See chapter I. 4. III. 2, etc.) but here for
another purpose; viz. to confess their sins unto the LORD, and beseech him to
forgive them. See V. 5. There is a good Gloss upon this, in a very bad Book
called Nitzachon, not long ago published by the Learned Wagenseil: where that
Author says, ( p. 11.) When a Man sacrificed a Beast he was to think in his
mind, I am more a Beast than this here present. For I have sinned, and for the
sins I have committed, I offer this: but it were more just that he who has
sinned should suffer death, than this Beast (which has not offended) Therefore
thus a Man, by the help of this Sacrifice, began to repent.

And kill the bullock before the LORD.] This seems to have been done by him
that laid his hand on the head of the Bullock, that is, by the High Priest
himself. For the greatest Men, in old time, did not think such work below them;
but rather esteemed every thing that served to the Worship of God, to be noble
and honorable. So Homer represents King Agamemnon as killing the Lambs
himself; by the Blood of which he was to Seal the Treaty he made with the
Trojans, Iliad. 3. yet in this case it is likely the High Priest himself did
not kill the Sacrifice, but some of the other Priests that then ministered. For
he that did this, seems to be distinguished, by the next words ( v. 5.) from
the Priest that is anointed; i. e. the High Priest. Nor was this Sacrifice
killed in the ordinary place where Sin Offerings were killed, (See 24.) being
an extraordinary sort of Offering, as that which follows also was.

Ver. 5. And the Priest that is anointed.] Whosoever killed the Sacrifice, the
High Priest himself, for whom it was offered, did what follows.

Shall take of the bullocks blood.] In a Basin.

And bring it to the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Into the very Sanctuary;
where, as it follows, he was to dip his finger in the Blood, and sprinkle it
seven times before the LORD.

Ver. 6. And the Priest shall dip his finger in the blood.] Or rather, dip it
into the blood.

And sprinkle of the blood seven times before the LORD.] This was peculiar to
his Sacrifice for Sin, and done in no other but that for the whole
Congregation. To signify perhaps, that their Offenses were more heinous, and
could not be so easily expiated, as those of other Men. The number seven, every
one knows, was of great account, and thought most powerful in Religious
Actions, even among the Heathen. For as Elisha bad Naaman go and wash seven
times in Jordan, to cure him of his Leprosy; so Apuleius in the beginning of
the XIth Book of his Metamorphosis, speaks of dipping the head seven times in
the Sea for Purification, and gives the reason for it; Quod eum numerum
praecipue religioni aptissimum divinus ille Pythagoras prodidit; because the
Divine Pythagoras (as he calls him) taught this number to be above all other
most proper in Religion. Which in all probability, Pythagoras learnt from the
truly Divine Moses: to whom God revealed the Creation of the World in six days,
and his Consecrating the seventh day, on which he rested; which made the number
seven so much used in Sacred Matters. For not only in this Sacrifice, but in
making the Water of Separation by burning a red Heifer, this Rite was used,
(XIX Numb. 4.) and in purging a Leper, (XIV Lev. 7.) in dedicating the Altar
(XXIX Exodus 37.) when the Oil was sprinkled on it seven times, (VIII Lev. 11.)
and at the Consecration of the Priests, (XXIX Exodus 35.) and, to say no more,
as every seventh day of the Week was holy, so every seventh year the Land
rested; and after Seven times seven there was a Jubilee, XXV Levit. They that
would see more of this number, and of its Sacramenta, as St. Hierom speaks, may
read him upon V Amos 3. and Drusius on this place, and on VI Josh. 4. And
Wolfius upon Nehemiah VIII.

Before the vail of the Sanctuary.] Which parted the holy place from the most
holy. For that is peculiarly called by the name of Parocheth, which is the word
here used (XXVI Exodus 31, 33, 35. XVI Lev. 2, etc.) as the other Vail, which
was before the Door of the Tabernacle, is constantly called Masach, XXVI Exodus
36, 37.

Ver. 7. And the Priest shall put some of the Blood upon the horns of the Altar
of sweet incense, etc.] This also was peculiar to his Sacrifice; and to that
for the whole Congregation, v. 17.

And shall pour out all the blood of the bullock.] That is, all the rest of the
Blood which remained after the sprinkling before the Mercy-seat; and the
tipping of the Horns of the Altar with it.

At the bottom of the Altar of the burnt-offering.] Where, after the building
of the Temple, there were two holes; one on the West Side of the Altar, the
other on the South, (as the Jews tell us in Middoth, cap. 3. sect. 2.) by which
it was conveyed into a Canal under Ground, through which it ran into the Brook
Kidron. And there was only this difference (they say) about these two holes,
that the Blood of the Sin-offering (any part of which was carried into the most
holy place) was poured out only into that on the West Side of the Foundation of
the Altar. And, if we may believe the Jews, the Gardiners bought this Blood of
those that were the Treasurers of the Temple, to enrich their Ground with it,
as Constantine l'Empereur there observes. And while they were in the
Wilderness, and all the time they had only a moveable Tabernacle, it is most
likely there were Receptacles made under Ground, with Conveyances to some
distant place, where it sank into the Earth, or was covered with Dust, as other
Blood is commanded to be, XVII. 13. For Maimonides thinks the pouring out the
Blood (so that it might not remain in one place) which is constantly and
strictly required by the Law, was in opposition to an idolatrous Custom of the
old Zabij; who made a collection of the Blood in a Vessel, or in a little Pit,
about which they sat, and ate the Flesh, imagining their Gods feasted upon the
Blood; as I noted before out of Maimonides, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46.

Which is at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] For there was the
place of it, as has been often observed XL Exodus 6.

Ver. 8. And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the
sin-offering, etc.] All that follows in this and the two next Verses, ( v. 9,
10.) is the same that was ordered to be done about Peace Offerings, as appears
from v. 10. See therefore the foregoing Chapter, v. 3, 4, 5.

Ver. 11. And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and
with his legs, and his inwards, etc.] This Sacrifice was so laborious, to work
in them a greater detestation of sin; which was aggravated by the quality of
the Person that committed it. And Nachmanides has an observation which (in
some parts of it, at least) is very remarkable; That all a Man does, being
performed in Words, in Works, or Thoughts, God commanded them when they brought
an Offering for Sin, that they should lay their hand on it, which had respect
to the Works they had done; and make Confession over it, which had respect to
their Words; and burn the Inwards and Kidneys, which are the Organs of Thoughts
and Desires; the Legs also, had a respect to a Man's hands and feet, by which
he does all his work; and the Blood that was sprinkled on the Altar signified
his own Blood. So that while a Man did all these things, he was put in mind how
he had sinned against God, both in Soul and Body, and deserved to have his
Blood shed and his Body burnt; unless the Mercy of the Creator had accepted a
Price of Redemption for him, viz. a Sacrifice; whose Blood was for his Blood,
and its Life for his Life; and the principal Members of the Sacrifice, for the
Members of his Body. By which it appears that the best sort of Jews had a
sense, that the Sacrifices for Sin were offered to God in their stead, as a
Ransom for them. And so we Christians are to understand the Sacrifice which
Christ made of himself, who gave himself a Ransom for us all, as the Apostle
speaks I Tim. 2. 6. and our LORD says the same XX Matthew. 28. X Mark 45. Such
Sacrifices the Heathens themselves had, which they called Lustralia, from the
word lustrare, which signifies to expiate among the Romans; and that by paying
a price. For the ancient Poet Ennius (as our excellent Mr. Thorndike has
observed) translating into Latin a Greek Tragedy called (...) (being taken out
of Homer, where he speaks of Priamus ransoming of Hector's Corpse from Achilles)
entitled it Hectoris lustra; which shows this is the Latin of (...), ransom,
or redemption: and that (...) signifies in the New Testament to deliver by
paying a ransom. See his Epilogue, Book II. Chapt. 27.

Ver. 12. Even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the Camp.] It was
not dissected, as the Peace Offerings were, because no Body was to partake of
any part of it; being a Sacrifice for the Priests own sin. And therefore it was
to be carried (though not by himself, but some other Person) to be burnt
without the Camp, to express the abominabless of the Sin. This Rite, and the
carrying the Blood within the Tabernacle, to be sprinkled before the LORD, were
used only in these two Cases; of the Sin of the High Priest, and of all the
People. For of other Sin Offerings the Priests might eat, (VI. 26.) but of
this, being for himself, he was not to taste at all, because he was in a state
of Guilt.

Into a clean place, where the ashes are poured out.] On the East-part of the
Tabernacle there was a place for the Ashes to be thrown into, when they were
taken from the Altar; which afterward were carried into a clean place, without
the Camp. And so they were carried out, after the Temple was built at
Jerusalem, at the Eastgate of the City, into a Valley which lay between
Jerusalem and Mount Olivet.

And burn him on the wood with fire.] Not upon an Altar, but in a fire made
with Wood upon the Ground, to show the odiousness of the sin, as Maimonides
thinks. For as the whole Burnt-sacrifices were burnt on the Altar, because they
were an Offering of sweet smelling savor unto God; so this was burnt without
the Camp upon the Ground, to show that the odor of it was ungrateful and
abominable; More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 46. where he also observes, that the
burning of the Beast entirely, being the destruction of it, so that nothing of
it remained, it signified in like manner the utter deletion of Sin, so that it
should be remembered no more. And the Bullock being burnt without the Camp, I
take it to denote, that the People should not suffer for the sin of the Priest,
which was abolished together with his Sacrifice.

The same Maimonides has another observation upon the Title Zebachim, that
there were three places constituted for the burning of holy things. The first
was in the Sanctuary, as every one knows; the second was in the Mount of the
House, (as they called the place round about the Court of the Sanctuary) where
if any blemish happened to a Bullock or a Goat, they were brought out of the
Sanctuary, and burnt in a place called Bira: and the third was in this place of
the Ashes, without the City.

Where the ashes are poured out, there shall he be burnt.] This is repeated,
that none might presume to take the liberty to burn the Bullock in any other
place.

Ver. 13. And if the whole Congregation of Israel sin through ignorance.] The
Jews generally understood by the whole Congregation, the great Sanhedrim, who
represented the whole People of Israel. So Maimonides in his More Nevochim, P.
III. cap. 41. and in his Treatise of Sacrifices; and R. Levi of Barcelona,
Praecept. CXVIII. For they sometimes erred in Judgment; and thereby misleading
the People, they were bound when they found their Error to offer this
Sacrifice. Yet the Talmudists have raised many Disputes upon this Point, and
made various Cases: in some of which the House of Judgment was bound to offer
the Sacrifice here appointed, and not they who followed their Sentence: and
others there were, in which they who followed their Sentence were bound, and
not the Judges themselves. But if Moses his words be well considered, it will
appear, that he speaks of a Sin committed by all the People, in doing something
which God had forbidden; by making wrong Constructions of the Law, or by common
false Opinions, or popular Customs. For the whole Congregation is here plainly
distinguished from the Elders of the People, ( v. 15.) which is certainly the
name for their Judges and Governors. It was Mr. Selden's intention to have
treated largely of the Sense and Notion of this Law, as appears by what he
says of it, L. II. de Synedriis, cap. 14. n. 4. where he refers his Reader to
the third Book on that Subject, for an account of this place. In the beginning
of which ( cap. 1. n. 1.) he signifies his intention to explain what the Office
of the Sanhedrim was, in offering Expiatory Sacrifices for the whole
Congregation. Which he repeats again cap. 10. n. 1. with this addition, that
they made this Sacrifice in the name of all the People, when they offended as a
Community. But he did not live to pursue his intentions, being diverted by long
Digressions about other Matters: yet he shows sufficiently his Opinion was,
that this Sacrifice was not offered for the Sanhedrim, but by them for the
People.

And the thing be hid from the eyes of the Assembly.] They are not sensible of
their mistake for the present; but afterward discover it, either by themselves
or by their Rulers.

And they have done somewhat against any of the Commandments of the LORD,
concerning things which ought not be done.] Have offended against some of the
negative Precepts (as the Jews speak) which forbid such things to be done. See
v. 2.

And are guilty] Are sensible of their guilt.

Ver. 14. When the sin which they have sinned against it, is known.] When they
have discovered what Precept they have violated.

Then shall the Congregation offer a young bullock for the sin.] Without
blemish, as was required for the Sin of the High Priest, v. 3.

And bring him before the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] i. e. Cause the
Bullock to be brought thither, by some of his People, in the name of all the
rest.

Ver. 15. And the Elders of the Congregation shall lay their hands upon the
head of the bullock, etc.] They were to do this, as Representatives of the
People. See v. 13. and the end of laying on their hands, v. 4.

And the bullock shall be killed before the LORD.] Either by some of them, or
some of the People whom they appointed. See v. 4.

Ver. 16. And the Priest that is anointed.] That is, the High Priest: See v. 5.
All the rest that follows to v. 22. is exactly the same that is prescribed in
the foregoing Offering, for the High Priest himself. Only R. Solomon Jarchi
has a nice observation on the next Verse, that it is not said in this case (as
it is in the former) he shall sprinkle of the Blood seven times before the vail
of the Sanctuary, but only before the vail; without the addition of hakkodesh,
of the Sanctuary, as it is v. 6. Because, says he, if the High Priest only
sin, the Holiness does not depart: but if all the Congregation sin, then it
does depart. As if a Province rebel against a Prince, his Family stands; but if
there be a general defection, he must fall. He has the like observation upon
v. 22, 23. but it seems too subtle: For in the 18th Verse Moses only says, he
shall put some of the Blood upon the horns of the Altar, without adding, of
sweet incense, (as before v. 7.) and yet it is manifest he means the same
Altar; and what was done in this Sacrifice was as acceptable as what was done
in the other.

Ver. 22. When a Ruler has sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance
against, etc.] The word Nasi, which we translate Ruler, signifies the Head of a
Tribe, in I Numb. 4.16. VII. 2. But the Jews commonly understand it peculiarly
of the Head or Prince of the great Sanhedrim; who, when they were under the
Government of Kings, was the King himself. Thus the Misna gathers from these
words in the Text [when he sins against any of the Commandments of the LORD
his God] which signify him, say the Doctors, that has no Superior but the
LORD. And so the Gemarists understand it also, as Mr. Seldom shows L. II. de
Synedriis, cap. 16. p. 666. But I think it is most reasonable to extend this to
all great Officers and Judges, who had a peculiar relation to God; and
therefore were called by his Name.

Concerning things which should not be done.] See v. 2.

And is guilty.] Acknowledges that he has offended God by the Sin which he
has committed.

Ver. 23. Or if his sin wherein he has sinned, come to his knowledge.] If we
retain this Translation, (and do not render the first word and, but or) then
the foregoing words in the latter end of v. 22. veashem, must be translated
(not is guilty, but) and acknowledges his guilt. Which seems to be the true
sense; for when Men sin they are guilty, though the sin was committed
ignorantly; but they do not acknowledge their guilt till they see it; as Moses
here supposes they might, when they considered better, or some Body informed
them aright. So these words signify, or his sin is made known unto him. Thus
L'Empereur very judiciously translates this whole passage, And he acknowledges
himself guilty, or his sin be shown to him. Otherwise there is no room for this
disjunctive Particle. See his Annot. upon Bava kama, cap. 7. sect. 1. and cap.
9. sect. 4, 5. And thus we our selves translate the first part of this
disjunction (in the latter end of the foregoing Verse) V Hosea 15. acknowledge
their offenses.

He shall bring his offering, a Kid of the Goats.] His Sacrifice was of less
value than the two former. From which Mr. Seldom concludes, that the
High Priest was not always the Head of the Sanhedrim, L. II. de Synedr. cap.
16. p. 653. For their Sacrifices were very different, which argues a difference
in their Persons. And the Misna says, if the High Priest were put out of his
Office, his Sacrifice was still the same, viz. a Bullock without blemish: but
it was not so with the Nasi or Ruler, who offered only the Sacrifice of a
private Man, if he lost his Office.

A male without blemish.] It was to be the best of this kind; though not equal
to the Sacrifice for the High Priest, and the whole Congregation. See v. 28.

Ver. 24. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the Goat.] Of this see v.
4.

And kill it in the place where they kill the burnt-offering before the LORD.]
Where that was see Chap. I. ver. 11. Neither of the two forementioned
Offerings (for the High Priest, or the whole Congregation) are ordered to be
killed here; but only before the LORD, v. 14, 15. that is, in any part of the
Court but that which was proper to the Burnt-offering, and the common
Sin-offering, as it here follows.

It is a sin-offering.] And therefore was to be killed where the Burnt-offering
was: for so it is ordained VI. 25. that all Sin Offerings should be there
slain. Which does not imply that the two former were not Sin Offerings; but
that they were not of the common sort; as appears by the carrying of their
Blood into the Sanctuary, and burning their Flesh without the Camp; which are
not ordered either in this, or in the following Sacrifices.

Ver. 25. And the Priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering with his
finger.] By dipping his finger into it, v. 6, 17.

And put it upon the horns of the Altar of burnt-offering.] Whereas the Blood
of the two former, was put upon the Horns of the golden Altar in the Sanctuary,
v. 7, 18.

And shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the Altar of burnt-offering.]
See v. 18.

Ver. 26. And he shall burn all his fat upon the Altar, etc.] See chap. III. 9.
It is not here said what should be done with the Flesh; which in the two
foregoing Offerings is ordered to be burnt without the Camp, ( v. 12, 21.) But
in chap. VI. 26, 29. and XVIII Numb. 9, 10. the Law of the Sin Offerings is set
down to be this, that the Priest and his Sons should eat it, in the Sanctuary,
and no where else; provided also that they were free from uncleanness, XXII. 4.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, as concerning his sin.] By
this Sacrifice his Guilt was expiated; which must be understood to be the
effect of the Sacrifice for the High Priest; though it be not expressed, as it
is in that for the whole Congregation, v. 20.

And it shall be forgiven him.] So that he should not be liable to the
Punishment of cutting off, as the Jews understand it; who fancy such sins to
which that is threatened are here spoken of, See v. 1. Rather, he was restored
to Communion with the People of God, from which he was separated while he
remained in a known Guilt.

Ver. 27. And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance.] Commit
the same Offense that a Ruler or public Officer does.

And be guilty; or if his sin which he has committed come to his knowledge.]
See how this ought to be translated, v. 22, 23.

Ver. 28. That he shall bring his offering, a Kid of the Goats, a female
without blemish.] Being a common Person, less was required of him than of a
Prince; who was to offer a Male, ( v. 23.) which in all Creatures was of
greater value than a Female, as Maimenides observes: who reckons up three and
forty offenses of this sort, that might be committed imprudently (in his
Treatise called Schegagoth) in one of which, viz. worshipping an Idol
ignorantly, the Sacrifice was the same for a private Man, as for the King, or
the High Priest, or the Priest anointed for War: But in all the other XLII. a
female Goat or Lamb sufficed for a private Man, cap. 1. sect. 4. And this
Sacrifice they call stated or fixed, because no Man offered more or less,
whether Rich or Poor, Man or Woman; except only those who eat holy things, or
entered into the Sanctuary; whose Sacrifices were higher or lower, as they
speak. And there were three things, if we may believe them, which though
committed by Error, were expiated by no Sacrifice, viz. Blasphemy, neglect of
Circumcision, and not keeping the Passover. So R. Levi of Barcelona, Praecept.
119. Which seems to be an unreasonable Opinion, since Idolatry committed
ignorantly, they say, was comprehended within this Law.

Ver. 29. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin-offering, etc.]
This Verse and the following, with the beginning of v. 31. contain nothing but
what was ordered about the foregoing Sacrifice, v. 24, 25, 26.

Ver. 31. And the Priest shall burn it upon the Altar, for a sweet savor unto
the LORD.] This is a phrase used concerning Burnt-offerings, I. 9, 13. and
Peaceofferings, III. 5, 16. but it is not said of any of the foregoing
Sin Offerings, that the burning of them, or their Fat, was for a sweet savor
unto the LORD. The reason of which I am not able to give, unless it were to
comfort the lowest sort of People with hope of God's Mercy, though their
Offering was mean, in comparison of those offered by others. Abarbanel gives
this reason for it, because a Sin of Ignorance being a less Fault in a common
Man, it was a sign of great probity in him to bring a Sacrifice for the
Expiation of it: But for the High Priest, or Senate, or Ruler of the People to
be ignorant of the Law, was such a high Crime, that it was no commendation to
them, to bring a Sacrifice for their Purgation.

Ver. 32. And if he bring a Lamb for a sin-offering, etc.] For which reason God
was pleased to accept a Lamb, and that a Female, of those who were not able to
bring a young Kid.

Ver. 33. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin-offering, and slay
it, etc.] This and the next Verse differ not from the foregoing, and therefore
need no Explication.

Ver. 35. And the Priest shall burn them upon the Altar, according to the
offerings made by fire unto the LORD.] Or rather upon the Offerings, or after
the Burnt-offering. See III. 5.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for his sin, etc.] And if by the same
Error he had committed several sins, there was a distinct Atonement to be made
for every one of them: So that if he had committed ignorantly the XLIII.
Offenses beforementioned, though it were by one and the same Error, he was
bound to offer as many expiatory Sacrifices, as Maimonides resolves in the
forenamed Treatise Schegagoth, cap. 4. This, and such like things, made this
Law a Yoke which they were not able to bear, as St. Peter speaks XV Acts 10.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. IF a soul sin.] In the manner following.

And hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness.] Being adjured in the Name
of God, when he is called to be a Witness in a Cause, to speak the Truth. For
Judges had this power, to use such Adjurations, that they might either draw a
Confession from an accused Person, or a faithful Testimony from a Witness. Of
the former of which there is a solemn Form remaining in Scripture, 1 Kings
XXII. 16. 2 Chronicles. XVIII. 15. as Grotius has observed upon XXVI Matthew. 63. And
Dr. Hammond, upon the same place, has observed instances of the latter, 1
Kings VII. 31. XXIX Prove. 24. And Micah's Mother seems by her own Authority to
have adjured her Family, as they dreaded the Vengeance of the Divine Majesty,
to discover if they knew any thing of the Eleven hundred Shekels of Silver,
which had been stolen from her, XVII Judge. 2. In all which Cases, Men were bound
to answer, as much as if they had taken a solemn Oath so to do. Insomuch that
our blessed LORD himself, being thus adjured, made an Answer to the Court of
Judgment, though before he had stood silent.

Whether he has seen or known of it.] Whether he can say any thing of the
Matter in question; either from his own Knowledge, or from the Information of
credible Persons.

If he do not utter it.] Declare what he knows, being thus adjured.

Then he shall bear his iniquity.] Let him not think it is no offense to
suppress the Truth, when he is so solemnly admonished to declare it; but offer
such a Sacrifice for his sin, as is prescribed v. 1. which belongs to all the
following Cases. The Jews make four sorts of Oaths, in their Courts, or
commerce one with another; as Mr. Seldom has observed out of their Writers, (
L. II. de Synedr. cap. 11. n. 8.) which are, rash Oaths, vain Oaths, (of which
they also make four sorts) Oaths about Trusts (mentioned VI. 2, 3.) and this,
which they call the Oath of Testimony; which they say every Man was bound to
give before the Sanhedrim, when he was required. With this distinction between
Capital and Pecuniary Causes, that in the latter a Man was not bound to come
and testify, unless he was cited by the Plaintiff, or by the Court; but in
Capital Causes, and in such things as the Law prohibited, (as if a Man saw
another smite his Neighbor) he was bound to come of his own accord, without
any Summons, and give his Testimony in Court. Yet in this they make some
difference, as may be seen in R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept. CXX. They who
would see more of these several sorts of Oaths among the Jews, may find them
considered in Sam. Petitus his Var. Lectiones, cap. 16. And such a Law as this
there was anciently in other Countries, that he who saw a Crime committed, if
he could not hinder it, should be bound, at least, to prosecute the Malefactor.
So the Egyptian Lawgiver says concerning Theft, which a Man saw committed,
(...), to prosecute the Law against that Crime. So Plato uses the same word
(...), L. IV. de Legibus, saying, that he who knew of such a Fact, or had
certain Information of it, (...), and does not prosecute the Person that did
it, (...), let him be liable to the same punishment. See Henr. Stephanus his
Praefat. ad Fontes Juris Civilis.

Ver. 2. Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcass of an
unclean beast, etc.] The Hebrew Doctors expound this of such Persons, as having
touched any of the unclean things, which are mentioned in this Verse, and in
the next, came into the Sanctuary, or did eat of the holy things. Which they
gather out of VII. 20, 21. and XIX Numb. 20. where cutting off is threatened to
those, who knowingly were so guilty. For otherwise, it was sufficient for a
Man's Expiation, who touched any unclean thing, to wash himself; and his
uncleanness lasted only till the Evening. See Chap. XI. and Numb. XIX. But why
may it not be meant of those, who neglected to wash themselves? Who were to
expiate that neglect by a Sacrifice.

He also shall be unclean and guilty.] Obliged to offer the Sacrifice
prescribed ( v. 6.) for eating that which is holy (says Rasi) or coming into
the Sanctuary.

Ver. 3. Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, etc.] Such uncleanness as are
mentioned in the XIIth, XIIIth, and XVth Chapters of this Book.

And if it be hid from him, when he knows of it, then he shall be guilty.]
The words may be translated, Whether he did it ignorantly, or had some
knowledge of it, and yet offended, he shall be obliged to offer the Sacrifice
mentioned v. 6.

Ver. 4. Or if a soul swear.] This the Hebrew Doctors expound of that sort of
Oath, which they call futil or rash: when a Man says he has done, or will do
or not do, a thing that is in his power to do.

Pronouncing with his mouth.] It was to be uttered in words, and not merely
thought in his mind.

To do evil or good.] That he has done a thing, or not done it, of whatsoever
kind it be; or that he will, or will not do it. For these four kinds of Oaths,
of this sort, the Hebrew Doctors make, two about things past; and two about
things to come, (See Seldom. de Synedr. L. II. cap. 11. n. 8.) As if he swear
that he did eat, or he did not eat of such a meat; did talk, or not talk with
Reuben or Simeon, etc. Rasi thinks by doing good, is meant something for his
own advantage; and consequently by doing evil, we are to understand afflicting
himself, or punishing his Servant, etc. But it may as well be understood
generally of all things whatsoever, which are comprehended under the name of
good and evil.

And it be hid from him.] He did not rightly understand, or consider the thing
about which he swear; whether it was in his power, for instance, to do what he
swore he would do; or whether he could lawfully do it; or if through
forgetfulness he omitted to do what he might have done. Some interpret these
and the following words, as those of the foregoing Verse.

He shall be guilty in one of these.] Obliged to offer a Sacrifice (as it
follows v. 6.) if he have sworn rashly in any of the foregoing instances.

Ver. 5. And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that
he shall confess that he has sinned in that thing.] When he laid his hand upon
the Head of his Sacrifice, this Confession of his Offense, it is likely, was
made; without which his Sacrifice would have been of no avail: So all the
Hebrew Doctors understand it: Particularly Abarbanel, upon the XVIth Chapter of
this Book, says, That Confession was necessary to be added to every Sacrifice
for sin. For what is here commanded in this Case, they resolve belongs to all
Sin Offerings, and Trespass-offerings also. And indeed it was a Notion among
the Heathen themselves, that an Offering without Prayer, was to no purpose:
Quippe victimas caedi sine precatione, non videtur refer, nec Deos rite
consuli, as Pliny speaks, L. XXVIII. Not. Hist. cap. 2. and every one knows
that Confession was a part of Prayer. See Dr. Owtram de Sacrificiis, L. I. cap.
15. n. 9.

Ver. 6. And he shall bring his trepass offering unto the LORD.] There is a
difference between a Sinoffering (called Chattah) and a Trepass Offering
(called Ascham) as is plain in the latter part of this Chapter, compared with
this. But here in this place, they are not distinguished, for the name of
Trepass Offering is given to that, which was really a Sin-offering; as appears
from the latter end of this Verse, and from the two next, where this Offering
is expressly called a Sin-offering.

For his sin which he has sinned.] In any of the four forementioned Cases;
either by polluting the Sanctuary, or eating holy things, or a rash Oath, or by
refusing to give his Testimony, being adjured by the Court of Judgment to do
it. Thus R. Levi of Barcelona explains this, Praecept. CXXI.

A female from the flock, a Lamb or a Kid of the Goats for a sin-offering.] As
the Hebrews call the Sin-offering mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, v. 27. a
fixed Sacrifice; so they call this higher or lower, being brought according to
every Man's Faculty or Ability; some more, some less, as the forenamed Author,
and many other of their Doctors observe; and is plain of it self from the
following Verses.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, concerning his sin.] By
sprinkling the Blood, and burning the Fat of the Sacrifice, as is directed IV.
34, 35.

Ver. 7. And if he be not able to bring a Lamb.] See the mercy of God, says
the same R. Levi, who was pleased to exact such small Punishments for these
Sins, because it was very easy for Men to fall into them. For we are more
prone to offend in word, then in deed: and without great Caution it was scarce
possible not to fall into such Legal Pollutions, as required this Expiation.

Then he shall bring for his trespass which he has committed, two Turtle
Doves, or two young Pigeons, unto the LORD.] Who, though he would not exact an
heavy Punishment of them for these Offenses, yet would not suffer them to
escape altogether unpunished; that they might not be presumptuous, but use due
care and caution in their words and actions. So the same R. Levi represents the
sense of this Law, as if the LORD had said, I would not have such things done;
but if any Man by frailty commit them, let him repent with all his might, and
set a guard upon himself; and let him offer a Sacrifice, which may imprint the
remembrance of his Guilt upon his heart; and preserve him that he may not
hereafter offend.

The one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burntoffering.] First he was
to have his Peace made with God, by a Sin-offering; and then his
Burnt-offering, or his Gift, might be accepted, as Rasi observes; and is
expressly ordered in the next Verse, The Priest shall offer that which is for
the Sin-offering first.

Ver. 8. And wring off his head from his neck, etc.] Or rather, nip it off with
his Nail (as the Jews explain it, See I. 15.) so as not quite to separate it
from the Body. For that had been to make the Sacrifice contemptible, (as R.
Levi of Barcelona gives the reason of it, Praecept. CXXVIII.) the Bird looking
more handsome with its Neck still joined to the Body, than without it. And it
was fit the Sacrifice of a poor Man should be as decent, as possible; it being
sufficient he thus suffered, without increasing his Affliction by the mean and
abject form of his Sacrifice.

Ver. 9. And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the Sinoffering, etc.] Some of
the Blood, which ran out of it self, as the Priest held it by the Neck, where
he nipt it, he was to sprinkle upon the side of the Altar. And then he was to
press out the rest of the Blood (when as much was ran out, as would of it self,
by that nip) at the bottom of the Altar; where they were wont to pour out the
Blood of the Sin-offering, IV. 7, 18, 25, 34.

It is a Sin-offering.] Therefore the Blood was there pressed out: whereas in
Burnt-offerings of a Bird, we read only of pressing or squeezing out the Blood
at the side of the Altar, I. 15. It is not said what was to be done with the
Flesh; but it is plain from VI. 26. that the Priest was to have it; the Blood
only being offered to God.

Ver. 10. And he shall offer the second for a burntoffering, according to the
manner.] Prescribed in the first Chapter, v. 15.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, etc.] Some gather from hence
that the Burnt-offering was also an Expiatory Sacrifice. But it is so plainly
distinguished from it, that these words seem to me, to relate only to the
foregoing Offering, v. 8, 9. Though this may be concluded from hence, that the
Sin-offering was not accepted for his Expiation, unless this Burnt-offering
followed, as a Thankful Acknowledgment made to God for his Goodness.

Ver. 11. But if he be not able to bring two turtle Doves, or two young
Pigeons.] This was still a more merciful Provision for the Poor; who were not
to be so ambitious of offering a Beast or a Bird, as not to content themselves
with offering the smallest thing that God would accept. So R. Levi of Barcelona
observes, that God having such Compassion on Men's Poverty, it did not become
them to strain themselves to offer more than they were able; for so they might
have been tempted to stealth. Yet if after a Man had set aside a little Money
to buy this quantity of fine Flour, his Estate was bettered, he was then bound
(as Maimonides says in the Treatise called Schegagoth) to add so much to it,
as would buy the Birds before prescribed. And in like manner if he had designed
to buy Birds, and on a sudden grew richer, he was to procure a Lamb or a Kid.
On the contrary, if a Man had set apart Money to buy a Bullock for his
Sin-offering, and unexpectedly grew poor, he might buy two Turtles or young
Pigeons, and by them redeem his Money so consecrated, etc. cap. 10.

Then he that has sinned, shall bring for his offering a tenth part of an
ephah of fine flour, etc.] Neither more nor less; which was but a small
quantity, (See XVI Exodus 36.) because God would not have his Creature
oppressed, as the same Author observes, Praecept. CXXIX.

He shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon.]
In commiseration of his Poverty, God required only a little Flour, which every
one might easily get to offer, without any Oil to it, which was more costly;
and also had something of Magnificence in it, (Kings and Priests being
anointed) and therefore not becoming the meanness, or the grief and humility of
the Person that brought this Offering. For which reason Frankincense was also
omitted, being a pleasant thing; and not fit to be added to an Offering for
sin: which was offensive to God. To this purpose the same R. Levi, in the same
place. And we find this imitated also by the Heathen; for Pliny says, in his
Preface to Vespasian before his Natural History, Mola tantum salsa litant, qui
non habent thura.

Ver. 12. Then shall he bring it to the Priest.] Confessing his Sin to him (as
is ordered v. 5.) for which he desired this Offering might be accepted.

And the Priest shall take his handful of it, even a memorial thereof.] For an
Acknowledgment of his Fault, and as a Caution to him hereafter.

Ver. 13. And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, as touching the sin
that he has sinned, in one of these.] With one of these three forementioned
Sacrifices: either with a Lamb; or with two Turtles or young Pigeons; or with
fine Flour. For as Rasi has observed, there are three sorts of Men; Rich,
Poor, and very Poor: and so three sort of Offerings are prescribed in this
Chapter, suitable to each of their Abilities.

And the remnant shall be the Priests, as a meat offering.] See Chapter the
second, v. 2, 3. where the whole Meat Offering (except one handful) is given to
the Priest: who had nothing at all of some of the Sin Offerings, mentioned in
the foregoing Chapter ( v. 12, 21.) which were entirely consumed.

Ver. 14. And the LORD spoke unto Moses saying.] Here begin the Orders which
were given to Moses, about another sort of Sacrifice, near of kin to the
former: but delivered, it is likely, at some other time; after he had written
down the foregoing Laws about Sin Offerings. See IV. 1.

Ver. 15. If a soul commit a trespass.] In the Hebrew this is a different
phrase, from what has been hitherto used, signifying another sort of Guilt.

And sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD.] By applying to his
own private use any thing that was dedicated to God, (as Maimonides expounds it
in his More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 46.) which might be committed in the payment
of Tithes, and in First Fruits, and the Firstborn of Cattle, or meddling with
that part of the Sacrifice which belonged to the Priest alone. Which things he
that committed presumptuously, was to be cut off, XV Numb. 30. but if
ignorantly, he was to do as here is directed in this Verse. But these words
seem to be particularly restrained to the last of those things now mentioned
(eating any part of the Sacrifice which belonged to the Priest alone, XXII.
14.) and the end of this Law (as R. Levi Barcelonita speaks, Praecept. CXXII.)
was to excite fear and reverence in all those who approached unto holy things.

Then he shall bring for his trespass unto the LORD, a Ram without blemish out
of the flocks.] As a Sheep was a more noble Species among Creatures than a
Goat; so a Ram was of a greater value among Sheep, than a Female: and therefore
this Sacrifice was more costly than the Sin-offering mentioned v. 6.

With thy estimation.] Besides his Sacrifice, he was to make Satisfaction in
Money, according as the Priest should esteem the damage. For that is the meaning
of with thy estimation; according to the value thou shall set upon the thing,
which he applied to his own use.

By shekels of silver.] At least two Shekels, as the Jewish Doctors resolve.

After the shekel of the Sanctuary.] See XXX Exodus 13. The Jews were thus
confined to these Rites, and such as are mentioned v. 8, 9. in the rest of
these Prescriptions, that there might be no room for Idolatrous Ceremonies; nor
might Men among themselves be left at liberty to invent impious or frivolous
ways of Worship: and that the Obedience of good Men might be also exercised in
these minute matters; and the contempt of wicked People be the more apparent,
in refusing to comply with these known Laws of God.

For a trepass offering.] The Hebrew word Ascham, which we translate
Trepass Offering, is so near of kin to Chattah, which we translate
Sin-offering, that one of them is sometimes used for the other, as I observed
upon v. 6. yet there is a real difference between them; though it be not easy
to determine wherein it consists. For the greatest Men differ in their opinion,
about the quality of the Offenses, for which these two kinds of Sacrifices were
to be offered: Some saying that the Offenses for which Ascham was offered, were
inferior to those for which Chattah was offered; which is the Opinion of
Maimonides in his More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 46. Others, on the contrary,
think that the Offenses which were expiated by Ascham, were more grievous than
those expiated by Chattah; which is the Opinion of no less Man than the
deservedly admired Bochartus, in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. cap. 33. Where
he adds, that the former sort of sins were committed knowingly; the other only
ignorantly. For so the LXX. translate Chattah by (...), which seems to denote a
Fault committed by Error and Mistake: but Ascham by (...), which carries in it
the Notion of something premeditated and designed. But this is directly
contrary to the very words of Moses here in this Verse; which expressly speak of
a Trespass committed through ignorance. Aben-Ezra therefore distinguishes these
two much better, making Chattah to significe a Sacrifice which was made for the
purging Offenses, committed through ignorance of the Law: and Ascham, for such
as were committed through forgetfulness of the Law. But as he gives no proof of
this, so he was sensible, it was liable to exception; there being one of this
sort of Sacrifices, mentioned v. 17. which he saw could not be comprehended
under this Rule. Others therefore think the former has respect to Offenses
against God; and the latter to those against Men; not observing that the very
same sort of sin, which when it was known is called Chattah, when it was
doubtful, is called Ascham. From whence a very learned Person of our own, (now
with God) who had much and long considered this matter, concludes, That an
Offense was peculiarly called Ascham, (which is a name for the Sin as well as
for the Sacrifice, as Chattah also is) about which either a Man was dubious (as
in the following Verse) or did a manifest damage to other Men. There being no
Ascham (or Trepass Offering) commanded to be offered by the Law, but for such
Offenses as were so committed against God, that their Neighbors also were
injured by them. As in the Case of those who did eat holy things, here
mentioned, whereby the Priests were damaged: and of those mentioned VI. 2, 3,
4. and such as lay with a Bondwoman betrothed to another, XIX. 20, 21. Which
are all the Cases belonging to this matter; excepting that of the Nazarite
defiled by the dead, VI Numb. 12. and of the Leper, XIV. 12. who were to be
purged with a Sin-offering, as well as with a Trepass Offering: and therefore
not to be considered in this matter. See Dr. Owtram, L. I. de Sacrificiis, cap.
13. n. 8. and Samuel Petitus his Variae Lectiones, cap. 22. who has said the
same, but not so fully and distinctly. If this do not satisfy, yet it is plain
the Sacrifices which go by this Name of Trespass-offerings, and the Rites also
about them, were so different, that they are sufficient to distinguish them
from the other. For none but Rams and Male-Lambs were admitted for
Trespass-offerings; which were not used at all, in any Sin Offerings. And the
Blood of the Sin Offerings was put upon the Horns of the Altar (as was noted in
the foregoing Chapter, v. 7, 18, 25.) but that of the Trespass-offerings was
sprinkled round about upon the Altar, VII. 2. Sin Offerings also were offered
for the whole Congregation of Israel, IV. 13. but Trespass-offerings only for
private Persons, which made Bonsrerius (I suppose) after a long discussion of
this matter, to conclude, That the difference between Sin and Trespass,
consisted only in the Sacrifices which were offered for them. See him upon the
IVth Chapter of this Book, v. 1.

Ver. 16. And he shall make amends for the harm he has done in holy things,
and shall add a fifth part thereunto, etc.] Besides the Compensation mentioned
in the foregoing Verse, for the damage that was done, according to the
valuation made by the Priest, there was a fifth part more to be added
thereunto, and given to the Priest who had suffered the damage.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him with the Ram of the
trepass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.] The Atonement was not made,
nor Forgiveness obtained, till full Satisfaction for the wrong had been made.

Ver. 17. And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things, etc.] i. e. did
eat any of the holy things beforementioned; which God forbad any but the
Priests to eat.

Though he wist it not.] i. e. Be not certain whether they were holy or no. For
the Hebrews generally call this Ascham Talui, a dubious Trepass Offering:
being in a matter about which a Man was in Suspense, whether he had offended or
not.

Yet he is guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.] He shall be obliged to offer
this sort of Sacrifice. Which was ordained (says R. Levi Barcelon. Praecept.
CXXIII.) to make Men cautious, and fear to sin; and to attend diligently in all
their Actions, that they transgressed not the Laws of God.

Ver. 18. And he shall bring a Ram without blemish, out of the flock, with thy
estimation, etc.] The Offering before appointed, v. 15, etc. with this
difference only, that no fifth part was in this Case to be added; because it
was not certain whether he had transgressed or no.

The Priest shall make an atonement for him, concerning his ignorance wherein
he erred, and wist it not.] Did not know whether he had offended or not: which
distinguishes this from the Sin of Ignorance mentioned v. 15.

And it shall be forgiven him.] But if he afterward came to have a certain
knowledge of his Offense, he was not excused by this dubious Offering (as Rasi
observes) but was bound also to offer a Sin-offering.

Ver. 19. It is a trepass offering.] In this case a Sacrifice must be offered,
as well as in a certain Trespass.

He has certainly trespassed against the LORD.] The words in the Hebrew are,
Ascham ascham lajhova; which, I think, should be translated, A
Trepass Offering certainly unto the LORD. That is, in this doubtful case, let
him take a sure course, by offering the Sacrifice here prescribed. For though
neither this sort of Sacrifices, nor Sin Offerings, were to be voluntarily
(which was proper only to whole Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings) yet the
very suspicion of a Guilt required a Sacrifice. As for all those Offenses which
might be committed by Men, who had no sense nor suspicion of them, they were
expiated by the Sacrifices which were offered for the whole Congregation, at
certain stated times: but no particular Person was to offer either
Sin-offering, or Trepass Offering of his own accord; unless he knew or feared
he had contracted some Guilt.

I cannot think fit to conclude this Chapter, without taking notice how
Jonathan paraphrases these last words of it; who instead of saying, he has
trespassed (as it is commonly translated) against the LORD, says against the
Name of the Word of the LORD. Which is an observation that might have been made
in my Notes upon the two foregoing Books of Moses; where many such passages
occur, which I did not mention. And I should not have done it now (being
unwilling to swell this Commentary with any thing that does not tend to the
explaining the sense of the Text) did not the impious Pamphlets that have
lately been spread abroad, against the Doctrine of the ever Blessed Trinity,
made it necessary for me to take this occasion to assert, That this Doctrine
was not unknown to the ancient Jews; as appears even from the frequent mention
of the Word of the LORD in the Chaldee Paraphrasts, where the Hebrew has only
JEHOVAH (or the LORD): For which I can see no reason at all, if there had not
been a Notion among them, of more Persons than One, who were JEHOVAH. It does
not always indeed carry this signification in it; but there are very many
places where, by the WORD of the LORD, cannot be meant a word spoken by the
LORD, or any thing else, but a person speaking or acting, etc. who is the LORD.
There is a famous instance of it in XXVIII Genesis 20, 21. where Jacob's Vow is
thus translated by Onkelos: Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if the WORD of the LORD
will be with me, and keep me, etc. then shall the WORD of the LORD be my God.
Where the WORD of the LORD is so plainly made the Object of his Adoration, that
it evidently shows, they had a Notion in those days when Onkelos lived (which
was about our Savior's time) of more Persons than One, who was the LORD. The
Jerusalem Targum also speaks this so clearly, that one cannot but be something
amazed to meet with such Expressions in it, as those upon III Genesis 22. The WORD
of the LORD said, Behold, Adam, whom I have created, is my only begotten in
this World; as I am the only begotten in the Heavens above. Which may fairly
induce a belief, that St. John used the known Language of those times, when he
declared our blessed Savior's Godhead, under the Name of the WORD; who was in
the beginning with God, and was God, I Joh. 1.

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] What here follows belonging
unto the same matter, with that which went before, it is likely was spoken at
the same time. And these words signify, that the LORD further spoke unto
Moses, what concerned Trespass-offerings.

Ver. 2. If a soul sin, and commit a trespass.] The same sort of expression is
used in the beginning of this Law, concerning the Offerings, V. 15. Which some
translate prevaricate, or act insincerely.

Against the LORD.] The Sovereign of the World; who was peculiarly affronted by
the following Sins; especially by swearing falsely, which was calling him to
bear witness to a lie.

And lie unto his neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep.] Deny the
Trust which was committed to him; and that when he was brought upon his Oath to
deliver the Truth, as appears by the next Verse. For this is the instance of
that sort of Oath, which the Jews call, The Oath about a thing deposited, (See
V. 1.) For there being no witness of what was done between two Friends or
Neighbors, who trusted one another in such matters, but God alone; they
appealed unto him, from whom Nothing could be hid. And this Oath, the Jews say,
was governed by another, which they call The Oath of Testimony: which a Man was
not bound to give, unless he were adjured to it by the Court of Judgment: and
so it was in the Oath about the things deposited; he was not guilty who was
adjured by private Persons, and denied it; but he that denied it before the
Court. So they resolve in Halicah Olam, Pars IV. cap. 2.

Or in fellowship.] To carry on a common Trade, in joynt-stock; or (as others
understand it) in any thing for which he gave his hand unto another: for so the
Hebrew words are, putting of the hand, as Contracts were oft-times made: Which
if a Man afterward denied, he fell under the guilt here mentioned. And there
is some reason to think, that this is much of the same nature with the former;
because, when he speaks of Restitution, v. 4. this is not repeated. And
therefore it seems to be included in that which was deposited with another:
whether it were Money, called here Pikkadon; or any other Goods, called Tesumah
jad. They that would see more Opinions about these words putting of the hand,
may consult Constable. l'Empereur in his Annotations on Bava kama, cap. 9. sect. 7.

Or, in a thing taken away by violence.] That is, by Robbery, or Stealth; as
the word gazel signifies. For Theft not being punished among the Jews with
death, they tendered an Oath to those who were accused, or suspected of it, to
clear themselves from the imputation, XXII Exodus 11.

Or has deceived his neighbor.] Wronged him by false Accusation, as the
Hebrew word Hoschok seems to import. Which St. Hierom always translates
Calumny; as the word Haschak he translates to calumniate. It signifies also
extortion; and Rasi takes it for defrauding an Hireling of his Wages.

Ver. 3. Or have found that which was lost, and lies concerning it.] Deny that
he found a thing lost; which in truth came to his hand.

And swears falsely.] They put Men to their Oath in this case also, when there
was a just cause of suspicion; as they did in matters of Theft.

In any of all these.] In any of these sorts of things; as the Hebrew may be
translated.

That a man does.] Wherein one Man deals with another: or which frequently
happen, as Grotius thinks this phrase signifies, in his Annotations upon 1 Corinthians. X. 13.

Sinning therein.] By these means contracting a guilt.

Ver. 4. Then it shall be, because he has sinned and is guilty.] The last
words should rather be translated, and acknowledges his guilt. For so this word
Ascham, guilty, ought to be expounded, as I showed IV. 22, 23. to make a clear
sense of the Law there mentioned. And it would otherwise be superfluous here:
for when a Man had sinned so grievously as the foregoing Verses suppose, who
could doubt of his guilt? The true meaning therefore is, when he has sinned
(so the first words may be translated) by committing any of those things
forementioned, and acknowledges his guilt, he shall restore that which he took
away violently, etc. And this most plainly reconciles the contradiction, that
otherwise would be between this Law and that in XXII Exodus 1, 7, 9. Where a Man
that stole an Ox, is condemned to restore five Oxen; and four Sheep for one;
and if he delivered Money to another to keep, and it was stolen, the Thief was
to pay double: whereas, here one simple Restitution is exacted, with the
addition of a fifth part. The reason is, because in Exodus he speaks of those
Thieves who were convicted by Witnesses in a Course of Law; and then condemned
to make such great Restitution: but here, of such as touched with a sense of
their sin, came voluntarily and acknowledged their Theft, or other Crime, of
which no Body convicted them, or at least confessed it freely when they were
adjured; and therefore were condemned to suffer a lesser Punishment, and to
expiate their Guilt by a Sacrifice. See L'Empereur upon Bava kama, cap. 7.
sect. 1. and cap. 9. sect. 1, 5, 7. Where he observes very judiciously, that
this Interpretation is confirmed by V Numb. 7. where the first words may be
translated, If they shall confess their sin that they have done, etc. And this
seems to me more reasonable than the account which Maimonides gives of this
matter, in his More Nevochim, P. III. c. 41. where expounding these words,
which he took violently, of an open Robber; he gives these Reasons why he was
not punished so much as a Thief, but restored only the Principal with a fifth
part: because Rapine happens seldom, but Theft often; for it cannot be
committed so easily as Theft; and is done openly and manifestly, whereas Theft
is committed more secretly: so that a Man may be aware (he imagines) of a
Robber, and defend his Goods against him, better than against a secret Thief.
Yet this is better than the account of R. Johannes f. Zachei (mentioned by J.
Coch upon the Gemara of the Sanhedrim, cap. 7. p. 271.) that a mere Thief fears
Man more than God; but a Robber fears both alike.

Ver. 5. Of all that about which he has sworn falsely, he shall even restore it
in the principal.] The same numerical thing which he took away, if it still
remain in his possession unaltered; or else the just price of it: as R. Levi
Barzelonita expounds it, Praecept. CXXV. And the Jews pretend to such
scrupulosity in this matter, that they say, a Man who was to have a share in
his Father's Estate, from whom he had taken something by robbery, was to
restore it before the Division was made, and not by detaining it to make his
share greater than it ought to be. See Bava kama, cap. 9. sect. 9.

And shall add the fifth part more thereto.] The Jews have many subtilties
about this, as may be seen there sect. 6, 7. The plain sense is, that he should
compensate the loss which the right Owner might have sustained (by wanting the
use of his Goods so long as the other had detained them in his hand) by adding
a full fifth part of the Principal, as an amends for the wrong. Yet if he had
really forgotten that he had found such a thing as he was charged withal, at
the time he denied it upon Oath, he was not bound to pay the fifth part more,
nor to offer the Expiatory Sacrifice, though he really was possessed of the
thing; as Mr. Seldom observes L. II. de Synedr. cap. 11. p. 506.

And give it unto him to whom it appertains.] If he had stolen from a Man the
smallest piece of Money, which the Jews call Peruta, and had forsworn it, they
fancy he was bound to restore it to the Owner himself; though he lived as far
off as Media: and it would not suffice to give it to his Son or his Attorney,
whom he had left to act for him. Yet they are something humorsom in these
Absurdities, for they do not tie a Man to go so far to pay the fifth part;
though in a case where it was more than a Peruta. See Bava kama, cap. 9. sect.
5, 6.

In the day of his trepass offering.] Or, in the day of his trespass; that is,
as soon as he acknowledges his guilt, as this word I showed, v. 4. is to be
interpreted. And this agrees with what our blessed Savior requires V Matthew. 23.

Ver. 6. And he shall bring his trepass offering unto the LORD, a Ram without
a blemish.] This the Hebrews call an Offering for a certain guilt; as that V.
15. was for a dubious.

With thy estimation, etc.] R. Levi Barzelon. interprets it a Ram worth two
Shekels, Praecept. CXXIV.

Ver. 7. And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, etc.] The Offender was
not to think he was cleared, by making Restitution, and adding the fifth part,
whereby his Neighbor might well be satisfied: but withal, this Sacrifice was
necessary for his Expiation, without which no Satisfaction was made to the
Divine Majesty. The Jews themselves also think that this was prescribed, to
make them more sensible of their Sin, and to render it more odious unto them;
as the same Author observes.

Ver. 8. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Here the Hebrews begin a new
Section of the Law, as well as a new Chapter (as we call it) for the first
seven Verses plainly belong to the Matter of the foregoing Chapter. And it is
reasonable to think that the following Precepts were given at a distinct time
from the former, (See IV. 1.) being about a different Matter. For having
declared what Offerings the People should bring to the LORD, he now gives
instructions to the Priests, how they should manage the several Offerings that
were brought.

Ver. 9. Command Aaron and his sons, saying.] As before he bad Moses speak unto
the Children of Israel, I Lev. 2. IV. 2. because the Laws he then gave
concerned them: So now he bids him command Aaron and his sons what to do; and
acquaints them with the Laws, that is, the Rites they should observe in
offering the several Sacrifices before directed to be made.

This is the Law of the burnt-offering.] He mentions that first, which was
first delivered, and was the principal Offering, being purely in honor of God;
whereas the other was occasioned by Men's sins, or the Benefits he had bestowed
on them.

It is the burnt-offering.] He explains what Burnt-offering he chiefly means,
viz. the daily Sacrifice: which was the principal Burnt-offering, according to
which all other Offerings of that kind were to be regulated.

Because of the burning upon the Altar all night unto the morning.] Or, for the
burning upon the Altar, etc. This was the reason of its name, because it was
burning on the Altar from the Evening (at which the Jews began their day) till
the Morning. For which purpose the Priests watched all Night, and put the
Sacrifice upon the Altar piece by piece; that it might be consumed by a slow
and gentle fire. As for the Morning Sacrifice, it is not here mentioned,
because it was consumed with a quicker fire; that there might be room for other
Sacrifices that were commonly offered after it (as appears from v. 12.) and
were only offered in the Morning, not at Night. But if there were no other
Sacrifices to succeed it in the Morning, then, it is very likely, that it was
also kept burning till the Evening Sacrifice; that God's Altar might always
have Meat upon it.

And the fire of the Altar shall be burning in it.] Or, For the fire of the
Altar, etc. So it should be translated: unless we translate the last word not
in it, but by it. And the fire of the Altar shall be burning (i.e. be fed or
maintained) by it.

Ver. 10. And the Priest shall put on his linen garment.] Mentioned XXVIII
Exodus 40.

And his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh.] To cover his Secret
Parts, as appears from XXVIII Exodus 42.

And take up the ashes which the fire has consumed with the burnt-offering,
etc.] Or rather, When the fire has consumed the burnt-offering on the Altar.
For the word ascher, which we here translate which, signifies also when; and is
so translated by us, IV. 22. Or else the sense must be, The ashes into which
the fire has consumed the Burnt-offering. Or, to make good our present
translation, a few words must be added, in this manner, The ashes (of the Wood)
which the fire has consumed with the Burnt-offering.

And he shall put them besides the Altar.] On the Eastpart of it, as far, as
might be, from the most holy place. See I. 16. For this was most suitable to the
Glory of the House of God (says R. Levi of Barcelona) and the fire would burn
better, when the Altar was cleared from the Ashes.

Ver. 11. And he shall put off his garments.] Those before-named, and put on
other garments. It is a question among the Jews, whether he mean his common
Raiment; or some other Garments, not holy, and yet not quite common, but of a
middle nature. It is most likely that the carrying the Ashes out of the
Tabernacle, being not an holy action, as they were not to perform it in their
Priestly, i. e. Sacred Garments, wherein they took them from the Altar; so they
did it in the common Habit, which they wore when they did not minister. Yet
Rasi thinks this was not absolutely necessary, but only fitting and seemly: it
being indecent to do this Work in the same Garments, wherein they served at the
Altar. And the Ashes having been upon the Altar, there are those (as I said)
who fancy this was not a Work fit to be performed in their common Garments; and
therefore have devised an Habit of less dignity than those Garments wherein
they Ministered, which they used when they carried out the Ashes. Thus
Maimonides himself, and others, mentioned by Mr. Seldom, L. III. de Synedr.
cap. 11. n. 6. where he likewise observes that Chiskuni is of opinion, that
such of the Family of the Priests, as were both excluded from their Ministry in
the Sanctuary, and from wearing the holy Garments, by reason of some defect in
their Bodies, were permitted to perform this Office of carrying away the Ashes.

And carry forth the Ashes without the Camp, into a clean place.] See IV. 12.
The forementioned Rasi will have it, that they needed not to take away all the
Ashes every day; but only a shovel full, which they laid beside the Altar: And
when the hollow place of the Altar was so full, that there was no room to lay
on the Wood, they were bound to empty it, and carry all the Ashes away.

Ver. 12. And the fire upon the Altar shall be burning in it, it shall not be
put out.] This Precept is repeated again in the next Verse; as it was mentioned
once before, v. 9. For which there is a just reason, as Abarbanel makes
account. For in the ninth Verse he requires that the Wood for the Evening
Sacrifice should be so ordered and attended, that the fire might be kept in
till the Morning. And then, here in this Verse, he requires there should such
care be used in taking away the Ashes, that the fire might still remain, and
not be extinguished. After which, speaking of the Morning Sacrifice, in the
latter part of this Verse, he requires in the next ( v. 13.) that such a
quantity of Wood should be laid on the Altar, when they offered it, that the
fire might be kept in till the Evening Sacrifice: or, that if there were any
extraordinary Sacrifices brought besides the daily Burnt-offering, the Priests
should still add more Wood, that the fire might not be put out by that means,
but be able to devour them.

And the Priest shall burn wood on it every morning, etc.] The Hebrew word for
Wood being in the Plural Number, R. Levi of Barcelona concludes there were more
bundles than one brought in every day. And from this place (and I. 7.) he
gathers there were three. The first of which he calls the great heap; with
which the daily Sacrifice, and the rest, for which there was occasion, were
offered: of which he thinks Moses speaks in the ninth Verse of this Chapter.
The second was lesser, which was laid at the side of the other, that they might
have Coals for the burning Incense: and this, he thinks, intended here. And the
third was merely to keep in the fire perpetually, of which, he thinks, Moses
speaks in the next Verse. The Misna also tells us, that there being seven Gates
to the great Court of the Sanctuary, three on the North, and as many on the
South, and one at the East; the first on the South Side was called the Gate of
burning: because, at that Gate they brought in the Wood, which was to preserve
the fire perpetually on the Altar: See Codex Middoth, cap. 1. sect. 4.

And he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings.] This fat of the
Peace Offerings, was to be burnt together with the Burnt-offering, and not
separate from it: by which means the Burnt-offering was the sooner consumed,
and more room was made for other occasional Sacrifices.

Ver. 13. And the fire shall be ever burning upon the Altar.] This fire was not
kindled by the Priests, but by God himself; who sent it from Heaven to consume
the first Sacrifice that was offered by Aaron, IX. ult. From which time they
were bound to take care, that it never went out; that so their Sacrifices might
be constantly offered by Celestial fire: because it was the continuation of
that fire which came from Heaven, by a continual addition of Fuel, whereby it
was preserved. And so it continued, as the Jews affirm, till the Captivity of
Babylon; and after it, as some of them would have us believe, (who fancy it was
preserved in a Pit, by the care of some religious Priests, till their return)
though against the common Tradition among them, which is, That there was no
sacred fire in the second Temple; for they reckon this among the five things
which were wanting there, and had been in the first. And as for the constant
continuance of this fire, there was care taken that wood should be laid up in
the Temple for the maintenance of it: so in order thereunto, there was a
certain set time, when the People were obliged to carry wood thither; which
made a kind of Festival, called by Josephus (...), L. II. de Bello Judaico,
cap. 31. (...), etc. it being the Feast of the Wood-carrying; when it was the
custom for all to bring up Wood for the Altar: that there might be no want of
Fuel for the fire, which was never to go out.

It shall never go out.] This was a thing so famous, that it was imitated among
the Gentiles; who thought it ominous to have their Sacred fire go out: and
therefore appointed Persons on purpose to watch it, and keep it perpetually
burning, as appears by the Vestal Virgins at Rome, whose great business it was
to look after the Eternal fire, as they called it; imagining the extinction of
it purported (...), the destruction of the City, as Dionysius Halicarn. speaks.
This Institution is ascribed both by him and by Plutarch unto Romulus; into
whose History many things were translated by the ancient Pagans, out of these
Sacred Records of Moses: as the Learned Huetius has made probable in his
Demonstratio Evangel. Propos. IV. cap. 9. n. 8. The Greeks also preserved such
a (...), inextinguishable fire at Delph; and the Persians in like manner, and
many other People, as Bochartus has shown in his Hierozoicon, P. I. L. II.
cap. 35. and Dilheirus before him in a special Dissertation (as he calls it) de
Catozelia Gentilium, cap. 11. where he has heaped up a great deal to this
purpose: and among other things, has this conjecture, that the Grecian (...),
and the Roman Vesta, had their Names from the Hebrew word Esch, or the Chaldean
Escha, which signify fire. The conjecture of David Chytraeus also is no less
ingenious, who derives those Names from Eschgal, the fire of the LORD.

Ver. 14. And this is the law of the meat offering.] He does not speak of the
Offerings which accompanied the daily Burnt-offerings, but of those which were
offered alone, mentioned in the second Chapter. Where directions are given of
what they should consist; and also how much the Priest should have for his
portion: but here are some things added concerning the place where they should
be eaten by the Priests; and concerning those Meat Offerings, which were
peculiarly to be offered for themselves.

The sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, before the Altar.] Or
rather, upon the Altar: for so the Hebrew phrase [ on the face of the Altar]
signifies. Or else, the meaning is, he shall present it to the LORD before the
Altar; and then afterward (as is directed in the next Verse) burn an handful of
it upon the Altar. And so the Rule is, Chapter second, v. 8, 9. When it is
presented to the Priest, he shall bring it to the Altar, etc.

Ver. 15. And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the
meat offering, etc.] According to the prescription in the second Chapter, v. 2.
where all this Verse is explained.

Ver. 16. And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat.] If they had
no pollution upon them, XXII. 6. See Chapt. II. 3. The reason of the Precept
was (as R. Levi Barcel. observes, Praecept. CXXXIII.) that it preserved the
dignity of the Sacrifice, to have it eaten only by the Priests: and by them (I
may add) only in the holy place, and not carried out from thence, as it here
follows.

With unleavened bread shall it be eaten.] There is nothing in the Hebrew Text
to answer unto the word with; which makes the sense unaccountable, that
otherwise is easy and natural. If we translate it, as the Hebrew words plainly
signify, unleavened it shall be eaten. See X. 12.

In the holy place.] There was a room in the Court of the Priests, where they
ate these holy things, as Kimchi observes upon XLII Ezekiel. Which may be
confirmed out of XVIII Numb. 10. where the most holy place can signify
nothing, but the Court of the Priests, as L'Empereur rightly understands it, in
his Annot. upon Middoth, cap. 2. sect. 6.

In the Court of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, they shall eat it.] As the
Priests did eat it in their own Court, so their Male-children had a place in
the Court of the Israelites, wherein to eat it, X. 12, 13. And they are all
said to eat before the LORD, because this was a part of the Tabernacle: as was
also the Court of the Women; where there was a place for the Priest's Daughters
to eat, as well as their Sons, of the Firstlings that were offered to the LORD,
XVIII Numb. 19.

Ver. 17. It shall not be baken with leaven.] There were two little rooms, at
the Eastgate of the Court of the Temple, called The Gate of Nicanor; one of
which was a Vestry, for the Priests to put on their Garments, when they went to
Minister; and the other was for baking this flour, and that mentioned v. 21. So
they tell us in Middoth, cap. 1. sect. 4. And therefore it is ordered to be
baken without leaven, because it was a part of the LORD's Sacrifice: which
being offered unleavened (Chapt. second, v. 11.) the remainder must needs be
unleavened also, because the whole was God's; and the Priests could have it no
other ways, than it was offered unto him.

I have given it to them for their portion of my offerings made by fire.] That
is, of the Meat Offerings beforementioned.

It is most holy, etc.] This is the reason why it was not to be carried, to be
eaten out of the holy place. See Chapt. second, v. 10.

As is the sin-offering, and as the trepass offering.] See v. 26. and VII. 6.

Ver. 18. All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it.] And none
but they, because it was a thing most holy.

It shall be a statute for ever in your generations.] That is, as long as the
Law about Sacrifices shall last.

Every one that touches them shall be holy.] According to this translation of
these words, the meaning is, That it was not sufficient, to be descended of
Priests, and to be Males, but they were also to be free from any legal
defilement, who were admitted to eat of this Offering, XXII. 6. But these very
words, which we here translate every one, in the 27th Verse we translate
whatsoever: and then the meaning is, Every thing that touches them shall be
made holy by them. That is, the very Dishes into which such holy things were
put, or the Spoons, or Knives, wherewith they were eaten, were never to be
employed to any other use. See XXIX Exodus 37.

Ver. 19. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] At the same time the LORD
gave direction about another Offering, near of kin to the former; but not yet
mentioned.

Ver. 20. This is the offering of Aaron and his sons, which they shall offer
unto the LORD.] The Jews call this a Mincah of imitation; which every
High Priest, and every other Priest (as they understand it) were bound to
offer, when they were Consecrated; and the High Priest to continue every day,
as long as he lived. So Abarbanel in his Preface to this Book, ( Section 2.)
reckoning the various sorts of Meat Offerings, makes this the fourth kind;
which the High Priest offered every day, and every other Priest once in his
Life, viz. when he first was admitted to Minister at the Altar, at the Age of
twenty years. For both these Meat Offerings, says he, are comprehended in this
Verse. But it may as well be understood only of Aaron and his Successors in the
Priesthood, of whom the following words seem to speak, and not of the common
Priests.

In the day when he is anointed.] The Hebrew word bejom may be translated from
the day: and so the Jews understand it, that he was to make this Oblation, not
only upon the day of his Consecration, but ever after, (as I said) every day as
long as he continued in the Priesthood. And so the next words seem to explain
it.

The tenth part of an Ephah of fine flour, for a meat offering perpetual; half
thereof in the morning, and half at night.] The High Priest, says Josephus, L.
III. Antiq. cap. 10. sacrificed twice every day, at his own charges: and then
he describes this very Offering, which was distinct from that which attended
the daily Burnt-offering; as appears by the quantity of this Meat Offering, and
by the manner of ordering it. For that seems to have been raw Flower, mixed
with Oil; but this baken, as it follows in the next Verse. See XXIX Exodus 40,
41. The reason why it is here mentioned is, because it was a Mincah (or
Meat Offering) of whose Rites Moses is treating; and this is an Exception from
the rest.

Ver. 21. In a pan shall it be made with Oil.] With three logs of Oil; as the
Jews determine.

And when it is baken.] See v. 17.

Thou shall bring it in.] Unto the Altar.

And the baken pieces shall thou offer, etc.] If it was a Meat Offering of the
High Priest, it was divided into XII pieces, (as Maimonides says) if of a
common Priest (for they will have both to be included in this Law) then into X
pieces; which were so exactly divided, that half of them were offered in the
Morning, and the other half in the Evening. And the handful of Frankincense
(which they say was offered with them) was in like manner divided, and burnt on
the Altar, Maase Korban, cap. 13.

Ver. 22. And the Priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead, shall offer
it.] What he had said of Aaron and his Sons in general, ( v. 20.) he now
particularly requires of every Son of his, that should succeed him in his
office. For which there was the greater necessity, because (as R. Levi of
Barcelona understands it, Praecept. CXXXIV.) the High Priest was an Ambassador
between the Israelites and their Heavenly Father, (by whom their Prayers were
offered to God, and who made Reconciliation for them) and therefore should be
bound, in all reason, to offer a perpetual Sacrifice twice every day, for the
constant needs of the Congregation; and to apply his Mind to this, (as he
speaks) that he and they might be the better for it.

It is a Statute for ever unto the LORD.] As long as that Priesthood continued.

It shall be wholly burnt.] In which it differed from other Meat Offerings, as
will appear in the next Verse.

Ver. 23. For every meat offering for the Priest.] Or of the Priest. This may
seem to relate to every common Priest; who were not all bound to offer this
Sacrifice every day, but only he who did it in the name of all the rest, viz.
the Priest who offered the daily Burnt-Sacrifice. He may be well thought to
have been obliged to this; by which means this Meat Offering was offered to God
every day, by one or other of them, and never omitted. But Abarbanel, (as I
noted before v. 20.) thinks that only the High Priest was bound to offer this
Meat Offering every day; and every other Priest once in his Life, viz. when he
began his Ministry.

Shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.] The Priests had all the
Meat Offerings which were brought by the People, except one handful which was
offered to the LORD. See Chapt. second, v. 2, 3. But of their own
Meat Offerings they were not to taste, but wholly burnt them on the Altar. For
it had not been seemly for him both to offer unto God, and to eat of it as if
it were his own; as Maimonides speaks, P. III. More Nevoch. cap. 46. or, as R.
Levi Barcelonita gives the reason ( Praecept. CXLI.) the scope of the Sacrifice
being to raise the Mind of him that offered it unto God, it was not fit he
should think of eating any part of his own Offering; which would have taken his
Mind off from God.

Ver. 24. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] He added further several
things, concerning other Offerings; which perhaps were delivered at the same
time with the foregoing; being still concerning the Priests, (See v. 8, 9.) And
therefore the next Verse begins thus, Speak unto Aaron and his sons, saying.

Ver. 25. This is the Law of the sin-offering.] That is, for particular
Persons: that for the Priests themselves being governed by another Law. For it
is plain that in the IVth Chapter he distinguishes the Sin Offerings into two
kinds: one, whose Blood was carried into the Sanctuary, and the Flesh of it
burnt entirely without the Camp, ( v. 7, 8, etc. and here v. 30.) and another,
whose Blood was not carried into the Sanctuary; the Flesh of which the Priests
were to eat, as is here directed.

In the place where the burnt-offering is killed, shall the sin-offering be
killed before the LORD.] See IV. 24, 29, 31.

It is most holy.] This is the reason of what follows, that none might eat of
it, but those who were holy to the LORD.

Ver. 26. The Priest that offers it for sin shall eat it.] The Flesh of this
Sin-offering fell to the share of him, who offered the Sacrifice that day; and
to his Male-children: though he might invite any other Priests, and their Sons
to partake with him, if he pleased; as appears from v. 29. I need not add that
the Immurim, as the Hebrews call them, were excepted: that is, the Fat, etc.
mentioned III. 9, 10. IV. 26. which were to be wholly burnt upon the Altar.

In the holy place shall it be eaten, etc.] See v. 16. For it being mostly holy
(as the words are in the conclusion of the foregoing Verse) it was to be eaten
in the holy place: and that, the same day and night when it it was offered; and
none of it to be kept till the morning. Whereas some of their Peace Offerings
(which they called the lighter holy things) might be eaten the next day, VII.
16. See Maimonides More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 46. This seems to have been
imitated by the Heathen, who required that their most holy Sacrifices should
not be carried out of the Temple; as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes his
Equites observes concerning the Sacrifices offered to Ceres and Proserpina,
(...).

Ver. 27. Whosoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy.] See v. 18.

And when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment.] This is
commonly understood of the Priest's Garment, who alone sprinkled the Blood. But
his Garments being holy, the Blood that might chance to fall upon them, was not
thereby at all dishonored: and therefore (if this be the meaning) we are to
understand that the Garments would appear less venerable, when they were
spotted with Blood; and upon that account were to be washed. If we take it for
the Garment of him that brought the Sacrifice, which when it was killed, the
Blood might chance to spurt upon his Clothes; then the washing of them, was out
of reverence to the Blood; which being holy, was not to remain upon a common
Garment. Which way soever it be interpreted, the intention, it is manifest, was
to preserve in their Minds an awful regard to God, and to whatsoever belonged
unto his Service.

Thou shall wash that wherein it was sprinkled, in the holy place.] Where there
was a Room (after the Temple was built) which was called Lischath hagullah, the
Chamber of the Spring, or Well, out of which Water was drawn for the use of the
Court of the Sanctuary. And there it is probable these Garments were washed.
See Codex Middoth, cap. 5. sect. 3.

Ver. 28. But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden, shall be broken.] For it
being very porous, might so deeply imbibe a tincture from the Flesh, that it
could not be washed out; but the smell of it might remain a long time. And
being of a small value, it was no great loss to have it broken; rather than any
thing that was holy, remaining in it, be profaned. What became of the broken
shreds of these earthen Vessels, is a doubt among the Hebrew Doctors; because
it was neither fit to throw them out into a profane place, nor yet seemly to
heap them up in the Sanctuary: and therefore they fancy the Earth opened and
swallowed them up, as a great Man in this kind of Learning ( J. Wagenseil) has
observed upon the Mischna of Sota, cap. 3. But they might have rather said,
that they were thrown abroad into a clean place, after they were broken into
small bits, or crumbled to powder; just as the Ashes were that came from the
Altar, which was an holy place.

If it be sodden in a brazen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in
water.] Nothing could so easily sink into this, being a solid metal: but
whatsoever stuck to it might be rubbed out and cleansed by washing. From this
Verse, compared with other places, it seems apparent that nothing was roasted
in the Sanctuary, but only boiled. So we find the Peace Offerings (mentioned 1 Samuel II. 13, 14, 15.) were constantly sodden; and all other holy Offerings,
except the Paschal Lamb (which they roasted at home) 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 13. And,
after their return from the Captivity of Babylon, the same is intimated in the
last Verse of the Prophecy of Zechariah.

Ver. 29. All the males among the Priests shall eat thereof: it is most holy.]
See v. 16. and 26.

Ver. 30. And no sin-offering.] Or rather, but no Sin-offering.

Whereof any of the blood is brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
to reconcile withal in the holy place, shall be eaten, etc.] Such were those
Sin Offerings for the High Priest, IV. 3. and for the whole Congregation, upon
particular occasions, IV. 13, etc. Or, upon the day of general Atonement, XVI.
27. No part of these were to be eaten, but entirely burnt in the fire; as it
here follows in the end of this Verse. There is no necessity of Maimonides his
observation upon these words; That no Man whatsoever might eat of these
Sacrifices: for if the Priests might not, they were certainly prohibited to all
other Persons.

CHAP. VII.
Ver. 1. LIkewise this is the Law of the trepass offering.] The People were
directed before, in what cases they should bring this sort of Offering; and I
have noted the difference between them and Sin Offerings, (V. 15.) but now the
Priests are directed in their Office about Trespass-offerings.

It is most holy.] In general they were to observe that these Offerings, as
well as Sin Offerings, were to be numbered among the most-holy things; and
therefore to be accordingly used, v. 6.

Ver. 2. In the place where they kill the burnt-offering, shall they kill the
trepass offering.] The same order that was given about Sin Offerings, IV. 24.
VI. 25.

And the blood thereof shall be sprinkled round about upon the Altar.] This is
a different Rite, from that which was observed in the Sin-offering; whose Blood
was put upon the Horns of the Altar, IV. 25, 34. and the Blood of such
Sin Offerings as were made for the High Priest, or the whole Congregation, were
also to be sprinkled seven times before the Vail of the Sanctuary, IV. 6, 17.
But this to be sprinkled round about the Altar of Burnt-offering; according to
the manner used in the whole Burnt-offerings, I. 11. and in the
Peace Offerings, III. 2, 8. only with this difference, that there being a
scarlet Thread, or Line, which went round about the Altar exactly in the
middle; the Blood of the whole Burnt-offerings was sprinkled round about above
the Line, and the Blood of the Trespass-offerings and the Peace Offerings round
about below the Line. See Codex Middoth, cap. 3. sect. 1. and L'Empereur Annot.
12.

Ver. 3. And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof.] This was the work of
the Priest, first to offer unto God his part of the Sacrifice.

The rump.] All the Fat belonging unto God, this is particularly mentioned in
the first place, as the principal Fat. For the Tails of their Sheep in those
Countries (and no other Creature but a Ram was allowed for a Trepass Offering,
as was before noted) were of a prodigious bigness, as has been noted by many:
particularly by the famous Bochartus in his Hierozoicon P. I. L. II. cap. 45.)
and lately by another excellent Person Jobus Ludolphus in his Ethiopick
History, L. I. cap. 10. n. 16. and in his Commentaries on it, number. 76. And
therefore it is called both here, and in other places, by the peculiar name of
Alja; whereas the Tail or Rump of other Creatures is called Zanab. See what I
have noted upon III. 9.

And the fat that covers the inwards.] This, and all that follows in the next
Verse, has been explained before, III. 3, 4, 8, 9.

Ver. 5. And the Priest shall burn them on the Altar, etc.] As he did the Fat
of the Sin Offerings and Peace Offerings, IV. 26, 31.

Ver. 6. Every male among the Priests shall eat thereof, etc.] All the Fat
being offered to God, the Flesh became the portion of the Priest; who, with his
Malechildren, but not Females, were to eat it: but not in any place out of the
Sanctuary; as it here follows. See VI. 18, 26, 29.

Ver. 7. As is the sin-offering, so is the trepass offering: there is one law
for them.] In this matter (though in other things they differed) for the same
Rule is given here about the Trepass Offering, that is given in the Chapter
foregoing, v. 26. about the Sin-offering.

The Priest that makes atonement therewith shall have it.] Who might invite
other Priests, if he pleased, to eat with him, and with his Sons: but he was
not bound to it; for the Flesh of this Sacrifice was entirely his own.

Ver. 8. And the Priest that offers any man's burnt-offering, even the
Priest.] Or, that Priest who offers it.

Shall have to himself the skin of the burnt-offering, which he has offered.]
All the Flesh of the Burnt-offerings being wholly consumed, as well as the Fat,
upon the Altar (Chapt. I. v. 8, 9.) there was nothing that could fall to the
share of the Priest, but only the skin; which is here given him for his pains.
I observed upon III Genesis 21. that it is probable that Adam himself offered the
first Sacrifice; and had the Skin given him by God, to make Garments for him
and for his Wife. In conformity to which the Priests ever after had the Skin of
the whole Burnt-offerings, for their portion. Which was a Custom among the
Gentiles (as well as the Jews) who gave the Skins of their Sacrifices to the
Priests, (when they were not burnt with the Sacrifices, as in some
Sin Offerings they were among the Jews, (IV. 11.) Who employed them to a
superstitious use, by lying upon them in their Temples, in hope to have future
things revealed to them in their Dreams. This Dilhe^^rus has observed out of
those words of Virgil, -- huc dona Sacerdos
Quum tulit, and Caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti
Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit,
Multa modis simulacra vidit variantia miris,
Et varias audit voces, fruiturque Deorum
Colloquia. --
And in the Eleusinia, he observes out of Suidas, the Daduchus put on the Skin
of the Beasts which had been sacrificed to Jupiter; which were called (...),
the Fleece of Jupiter, Dissert. Special. de Cacozelia Gentil. cap. 9.

Ver. 9. And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is
dressed in the drying pan, and in the pan.] See concerning these various sorts
of Meat Offerings in the second Chapter, v. 4, 5, 7.

Shall be the Priest's.] All but the Memorial of it, which was burnt upon the
Altar. See II. v. 9, 10.

That offers it.] That particular Priest who offered it, was to have the
remainder for his Portion.

Ver. 10. And every meat offering.] Or, but every Meat Offering: for here is an
Exception to the foregoing Rule.

Mingled with oil, and dry.] The foregoing Verse speaks of such Meat Offerings
as were any ways baken; but this of those that were raw: which were of two
sorts; either of Flour mingled with Oil, as all voluntary Offerings of this
sort were, (II. 1.) or dry without any Oil, as some Sin Offerings were, V. 11.
and the Offering of Jealousy, V Numb. 15.

Shall all the sons of Aaron have, one as much as another.] All the Priests who
attended on that day, were to have an equal share in this kind of
Meat Offering: though he alone who Ministered at the Altar had the baked
Meat Offerings. There are some indeed who can see no reason for this
difference, (though this last sort, others think, was more easily divided, and
therefore shared among them all) and consequently take these words to signify
the same with those in the foregoing Verse: Every one in the course of his
Ministry, shall have this benefit, in his turn of waiting at the Altar.

Ver. 11. And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, etc.] These
are the only sort of Offerings remaining to be spoken of: which, when he
required them of the People, are mentioned in the third place, after the
Burnt-offerings and Meat Offerings; before the Sin Offerings and
Trespass-offerings. But here are reserved for the last place, in his directions
he gives to the Priests about them; because, as there were several sorts of
them, so there were various Rites to be observed about them. Which Rites, as I
observed before, are called here the Law of such Sacrifices.

Ver. 12. If he offer it for a thanksgiving.] In this, and in the sixteenth
Verse, we have an account of three sorts of Peace Offerings. This, which was
the principal, for Benefits received from God's bounty: the other two, for the
obtaining such Blessings, as they desired to receive. And this of Thanksgiving,
was either general for the whole Congregation, (of which there was but one
only, at one time of the year, in the Feast of Pentecost, XXIII. 19. which was
accounted most holy) or particular for private Persons, as occasion offered;
which were accounted less holy. And they are these here mentioned; which might
be either of the Flock, or of the Herd, (but no Birds) and either greater or
smaller of those kinds; that is, of the Herd from the first year to the third,
and of the Flock from the first to the second year complete. If they were
older, they were not fit for Sacrifice. All this R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept.
CXXXVII. explains at large.

Then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving, unleavened cakes
mingled with oil, etc.] The same R. Levi observes, that some Peace Offerings
were offered without any Bread; viz. such as they called Hagigah and Schimcah,
Sacrifices of Festivity and Rejoicing, i.e. at their great Solemn Festivals.
But these here mentioned, were all offered with Bread; and that offered with
this, which was the first of them, was called the Bread of Thanksgiving. R.
Solomon Jarchi restrains this sort of Peace Offerings (of Thanksgiving) to such
wonderful Deliverances, as those mentioned in the CVIIth Psalm; from Tempests
at Sea, or dangerous Travels through the Wilderness, and the like. Aben-Ezra
also seems to have been of the same Opinion, when he says, That Men being
delivered out of Straits and Distresses, gave Thanks to God by this Oblation.
But I can find no ground for this limitation; it being far more likely that
this Sacrifice was offered by all devout Persons, for any Mercy whatsoever,
that God bestowed upon them.

Unleavened cakes, and unleavened wafers.] For none of God's Bread was to be
leavened. See Chapter the second, v. 11.

Ver. 13. Besides the cakes.] Beforementioned; which were to be unleavened.

He shall offer for his offering leavened bread, with the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, etc.] Not upon the Altar (for that was absolutely forbidden in
the forenamed Chapther of this Book) but he was to give it to the Priest, who
waited at the Altar, and was to partake of this Sacrifice, and to rejoice
together with him that offered it. Which is the reason that such different
sorts of Cakes are ordered in the foregoing Verse, all unleavened (of which the
Priest was to have his share) and also others leavened, which are prescribed in
this Verse; that God's Family (his Servants the Priests) might want no variety
of Bread at their Feasts upon these Sacrifices: and that God might show his
Friendship with those who offered the Sacrifice, by accepting the same Bread at
his own Table, which they were wont to use at theirs.

Ver. 14. And of it he shall offer out of the whole oblation, etc.] One of the
Cakes beforementioned ( v. 12.) was to be presented to God for an
Heave Offering: Concerning which, See XXIX Exodus 24, 28.

And it shall be the Priests that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.]
Having offered one Cake out of the whole, all that remained was the portion of
the Priest, who sprinkled the Blood of the Peace Offerings on the Altar.

Ver. 15. And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for
thanksgiving, shall be eaten the same day that it is offered, etc.] The reason
of this, which was observed in most of their Sacred Feasts, (particularly in
the Paschal Lamb, XII Exodus 10. and in the Manna it self, XVI. 19, etc.) was to
maintain the honor and dignity of the Sacrifices; that they might not be in
danger to be corrupted, or turned to any profane use, or gratify Men's
Covetousness. For, as Philo observes (in his Book of Sacrifices) It was not sit
that these holy things should be put into their Cupboards, but immediately set
before those who were in need; for they were no longer his that offered them,
but his to whom they were offered: who being himself most liberal and
bountiful, would have Guests invited to his Table to partake with those that
offered the Sacrifice. Whom he would not have to look upon themselves as
Masters of the Feast, (...), for they are but Ministers of the Feast, not the
Masters or Entertainers. That belongs to God himself, whose bounty ought not to
be concealed, by preferring sordid Parsimony before generous Humanity. His
meaning is, that all the Sacrifice was God's, who graciously granted to him
that offered it, a part of it, to entertain his Friends, and the Poor; whom he
would have invited forthwith, that no part of it might be converted to any
other use, but that which God appointed, who made the Feast.

Ver. 16. But if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary
offering.] These two other sorts of Peace Offerings, were in the nature of
Prayers, for the obtaining such Blessings, as they desired and hoped for. And
they were either the performance of a Vow, which they made to God of offering
him such a Sacrifice, when they received the benefit; which was called Neder:
or, they were freely made before hand, in hope God would bestow the benefit;
which Sacrifice was called Nedebah, a voluntary offering. Now these were not so
holy as the former; and therefore might be eaten on the morrow, as well as on
the same day they were offered. So it here follows.

It shall be eaten the same day that he offers his Sacrifice.] Then they were
immediately to begin to feast upon the Sacrifice.

And on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten.] But if they could
not conveniently eat it all the same day, or had a mind to lay up some of it
till the next, they had that liberty allowed them. For which Philo gives this
reason (in the same Book) that these being for Mercies not yet received (or
offered by virtue of an obligation) they might take more time to feast upon
them with their Friends, and be more sparing: but the former being a thankful
Acknowledgment of Blessings already bestowed, their hearts were to be enlarged
in greater bounty. (...) that they upon whom God readily bestowed his benefits,
might make a quick and speedy return, by doing good to others without delay.
And what is here said of the Flesh of the Sacrifice, the Jews also understand
of the Meat Offerings mentioned v. 12, 13. None of which were to be kept longer
than two days at the most.

There is no place here assigned, where these Sacrifices should be eaten, at
the Sanctuary; as there is for the other, VI. 16. 26. and here in this Chapter,
v. 6. The reason is, because there was such a multitude of them, that it might
have made too great a crowd in the Court of the Israelites, if they had been
confined to it. Where they might eat them if they pleased (as I showed before,
VI. 16.) but were not determined to that place; but left at liberty to eat them
in any part of the City where the Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple, stood.
See XII Deuteronomy. 6, 7. And consequently while they dwelt in the Wilderness, they
might eat them any where in the Camp; which was pitched round about the
Tabernacle: only it was to be in a clean place, where the Priests might eat
them as well as the People, X. 14.

Ver. 17. But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day,
shall be burnt with fire.] If there were such plenty, or they and their Friends
were too sew, or they were so niggardly as not to call Poor enough, to eat all in
two days time; they were to have no further benefit of the Flesh of this
Sacrifice, but what remained of it on the third day, was to be burnt. Which was
to preserve the dignity of the Sacrifice, as the Jews speak, in preventing its
stinking. And there was no nobler way of consuming it than by sire, which
consumed the Sacrifice on the Altar. So R. Levi Barcel. observes, Praecept.
CXXXVIII. where he also adds, that God taught them hereby, not to be solicitous
for the future, nor careful to hoard up more than needed; when they saw him
command the holy Flesh to be destroyed, after the time allotted for its use was
past. The Heathens themselves thought this a decent Rite; for there was a
Sacrifice at Rome which they called Protervia, (as Bochart observes out of
Macrobius, L. II. Saturnal. cap. 2.) in which the Custom was, ut si quid ex
epulis superfuisset, igne consumeretur, that if any thing of the Feast
remained, it was consumed in the fire. See his Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. cap. 50.

Ver. 18. And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of the peace offering be
eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, etc.] He lost the
fruit of his Sacrifice which he had offered to God, by this profanation: which
destroyed the Grace and Favor, which it had procured him with God.

Neither shall it be imputed to him that offered it.] He shall not be thought
to have made any offering at all.

It shall be an abomination, etc.] And more than that, it rendered him
abominable; being abominable it self: and made him liable to be scourged, as
the Jews here understand the last words of this Verse, he shall bear his
iniquity. Which, I think, also signifies, that he should die under a great
guilt, till it was purged by a Trepass Offering.

Ver. 19. And the flesh that touches any unclean thing, shall not be eaten.]
That is, the Flesh of the Peace Offerings beforementioned, which might happen,
as they carried it from the Altar to the place where they intended to make a
Feast upon it, to touch any unclean thing, might not be eaten by any body.

But burnt with fire.] As that which remained to the third day was, v. 17. This
made them very careful to preserve it pure.

And as for the flesh.] That is, all the Flesh which was not defiled, by
touching any unclean thing.

All that be clean shall eat thereof.] Whether the Priest, or other Persons.
For the Priest had the right Shoulder and the Breast, (as we read expressly, v.
33, 34.) and he that brought the Sacrifice had the rest. Of the former, the
whole Family of the Priest might eat; not only his Sons, but his Wife and
Daughters, who were not married; or being Widows, were come back to their
Father again, if they had no Children; or if those they had, were begotten by
Priests: Yea, his Servants born in his House, or bought with his Money. See
XXII. 11, 12, 13. XVIII Numb. 11. And of the rest of the Sacrifice, he that
offered it might eat it, with all his Family and his Friends; excepting those
who had any uncleanness upon them. There are frequent mention of these Feasts
in the following Books of the Bible. As that made by Elkanah, 1 Samuel I. 4. and
by Samuel, when he entertained Saul, 1 Samuel IX. 13, 24. And when the Kingdom
was renewed to Saul at Gilgal, there was a Public Feast made on these
Offerings with great rejoicing, 1 Samuel XI. 15. And the like was made for Jesse
and his Sons, XVI. 3, 5. And by David when he entertained the People, 1 Chronicles.
XVI. 3. and by Solomon at the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings VIII. 65. And
all the Children of Israel made such a Feast at their return from Babylon, VIII
Nehem. 19. There are many Examples also of the like Feasts among the Heathens;
particularly in Homer, where Agamemnon ( Iliad. I.) offered an Hecatomb, and
made a Feast upon it. And Nestor ( Odyss. III.) offered a Sacrifice of LXXXII.
Oxen, and made the like Entertainment.

Ver. 20. But the soul that eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of the
peace offerings, that pertain unto the LORD.] By these last words it appears,
that the whole Offering was the LORD's, whose Bounty entertained him and his
Friends, to whom he gave the greatest part of it.

Having his uncleanness upon him, etc.] In this Verse and in the next, every
one that had any legal defilement upon him, is prohibited, under a severe
Penalty, to eat of the Peace Offerings.

And they might be made unclean either by impurity in their own Body, or by the
contact of unclean things: of the former of which he speaks in this Verse; and
of the other, in the next. Both were to be punished with cutting off; which
has been explained elsewhere, (XVII Genesis 14.) From whence it was that the Jews
were so very careful, not to go into the Judgment-Hall when our Savior was
condemned, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover,
XVIII John 28. at which Feast, Peace Offerings were offered together with the
Paschal Lamb. See more of this XXII. 2, 3, 4.

Ver. 21. Moreover, the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the
uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean thing.] All
these several sorts of Uncleanness, contracted by touching things unclean, we
shall find in the following Chapters, XI. etc.

And shall eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which pertain
unto the LORD, even that soul shall be cut off, etc.] The intention of such
Precepts was, that the greater Reverence (as Maimonides speaks, P. III. More
Nevoch. cap. 41.) might be maintained toward the Sacrifices which were offered
unto God. Upon which account Julian highly commends Moses, who he says (as St.
Cyril quotes his words, Lib. IX. contra Julian.) was (...), truly religious
about the eating of holy things; which he proves from these very words of
Moses. But his conclusion from thence was very frigid, as St. Cyril calls it,
That Christians were therefore to blame, because they would not partake of such
Sacrifices: for we abstain not from them, says that Father, as unclean things,
but (...), we rather make a progress, as from Types, unto the Truth.

Ver. 22. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] At the same time, that all
these Precepts were ordered to be delivered to the Priests, he takes occasion
to repeat several Precepts he had before given, which concern all the People;
because it was of great moment, to have them observed.

Ver. 23. Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, ye shall eat no manner of
fat.] Because this was God's part; and therefore not to be eaten by any one,
but burnt on his Altar. See III. 16, 17. And the reason Maimonides gives, why
it was reserved for him alone, was because it was very delicious to the Taste,
More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 41.

Of Ox, or of Sheep, or of Goat.] The Jews restrain this Precept to these three
sorts of Creatures (which were the only Beasts that were offered at the Altar)
taking the Fat of all other Beasts to be lawful. So R. Levi beforementioned,
Praecept. CXLIX.

Ver. 24. And the fat of the beast.] Of any of the forenamed Beasts, which
alone were allowed in Sacrifices.

That dies of it self, and the fat of that which is torn with Beasts, may be
used in any other use, etc.] Though the Flesh of such Beasts was unclean, yet
they might apply the Fat, when separated from the Body, to any use: only they
might not eat it.

Ver. 25. For whosoever eats the fat of the beast, of which men offer an
offering made by fire unto the LORD.] This seems to justify the Opinion of
those Jews, who restrain the eating of Fat, only to the three sorts of
Creatures mentioned v. 23. as was there observed.

Even the soul that eats it, shall be cut off from his people.] If he did it
presumptuously; but if through inanimadvertence, he was to be scourged, as the
Jewish Doctors affirm. Yet if he did it a third time, scourging did not
suffice, but they shut him up in a little Cave, where he could not stand
upright, nor had room to sit down; and there fed him with the Bread and Water
of Affliction, till his Bowels were sorely pinched, etc. as Maimonides
describes this punishment. See Schickard's Mischpat Hammeleck, and Carpzovius
his Annot. on him, cap. 2. Theorer. VII.

Ver. 26. Moreover, ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl, or
of beast.] See III. 17. Men were very prone to this, in those times, (as
Maimonides thinks) whereby they ran into Idolatrous Worship. Which was the
reason God restrained them from it, by threatening cutting off ( v. 27.) to
those who were guilty of it, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 41.

In any of your dwellings.] This is added to signify, that they might no more
eat of the Blood of those Beasts, which they killed at home, than of those
slain at the Altar.

Ver. 27. Whatsoever soul it be that eats any manner of blood, even that soul
shall be cut off, etc.] The reason of it is given XVII. 10, 11. But the Jews
here distinguish (particularly R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept. CXLVIII.) between
the Blood of the Soul, or the Life, (as they speak) and the Blood of a Member.
The former, which run out freely when the Beast was killed, in which was the
Life of the Beast, is that which is here meant, as Moses more fully explains
it, in the place beforementioned. The other, which remained in the several
parts of the Beast, they looked upon as belonging to the Flesh, and therefore
might be eaten with it.

Ver. 28. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] He delivered at the same time
some other Rules to be observed by the People, in these Matters. See v. 22.

Ver. 29. Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that offers the
sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the LORD, shall bring his oblation unto
the LORD of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.] The meaning may be no more
than this, that before he and his Friends feasted together, as is directed v.
15, etc. he was to take care to bring his Oblation unto the LORD, that is, to
see that God had his part of the Peace Offering; for till that was offered,
none could meddle with the rest. But if the import of the Hebrew words be well
observed, they seem to have a further meaning; which is, that whenever any
Man brought the Sacrifice (which in the Hebrew is here called Zebach) of his
Peace Offerings, he should also bring his Oblation (which in distinction from
the other is called Korban) that is a Mincha, or Meat Offering together with
it; that the Feast which was to be made might be completely furnished with
Bread and Wine, as well as the Flesh of the Sacrifice.

Ver. 30. His own hands shall bring the offerings of the LORD made by fire, the
fat with the breast, it shall he bring.] The Sacrifice being slain and divided,
the Priest was to put what belonged unto the LORD into the Man's own hands, (
viz. the Fat, with the Breast and the Shoulder) that he might present it
himself unto the Divine Majesty.

That the breast may be waved, for a wave-offering before the LORD.] This is
the manner wherein it was to be presented; the Man was to lift it up over his
head, and wave it to and fro; his hands being supported and guided by the
Priest. See XXIX Exodus 24. and VI Numb. 19, 20. Maimonides describes the order
of it in this manner; first the Priest put into the Man's hands the Fat; and
then laid upon it the Breast and the Shoulder; and after that, one of the
pieces of the Cakes for the Meat Offering upon them: all which he waved about.

Ver. 31. And the Priest shall burn the fat upon the Altar: but the breast
shall be Aarons and his sons.] When that part which belonged to God's Altar (
viz. the Fat) had been burnt there, the Priests had the Breast and the Shoulder
to their own use; as Servants have what comes from their Master's Table. For it
was all offered unto God, ( v. 29, 30.) who taking only the Fat for himself,
bad them take the rest, viz. the Breast and the Shoulder: which had been
presented unto God by waving them to and fro, as a Sacrifice to the LORD of the
World; but by him bestowed upon his Ministers for their maintenance in his
Service. This is more fully expressed in the three next Verses; in which there
is no difficulty, and therefore I shall but lightly touch them.

Ver. 32. And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the Priests, etc.] This is
only a more particular declaration what belonged to the Priest; who was to have
not only the Breast beforementioned, but also the right Shoulder.

Ver. 33. He among the sons of Aaron that offers the blood of the
peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.] This
is still a more special direction, providing for the encouragement of that
Priest, who on that day ministered at the Altar; unto whom the right Shoulder
was appropriated as a reward of his pains, in offering the Sacrifice.

Ver. 34. For the wave-breast, and the heave-shoulder have I taken of the
children of Israel, from off the sacrifice of their peace offerings, and have
given them to Aaron and his sons, etc.] This does not contradict what I
observed just before; for when he says, he has given these to Aaron the
Priest and his Sons; the meaning must be, to those of his Sons, who at the time
when these were offered, sprinkled the Blood and burnt the fat.

Ver. 35. This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing
of his sons, etc.] In the Hebrew the words are, This is the anointing of Aaron,
etc. That is, this they have in right of their Unction to the Priest's Office;
which intitles them to all beforementioned.

In the day.] The Hebrew word Bejom may, both here and in the next Verse, be
translated (as I observed before VI. 20.) from the day, and ever after.

When he presented them to minister unto the LORD in the Priests office.] Made
them draw near to attend upon him at his Altar.

Ver. 36. Which the LORD commanded to be given them, in the day that he
anointed them, etc.] By virtue of a Grant from God, when they were made
Priests; to enjoy this benefit in all future Ages.

By a statute for ever, etc.] As long as this Law of Sacrifices, and this
Priesthood shall last. See VI. 22.

Ver. 37. This is the law of the burnt-offering, of the meat offering, and of
the sin-offering, and of the trepass offering, etc.] This Verse contains a
Summary of what he had commanded Aaron and his Sons, from the ninth Verse of
the sixth Chapter, unto this place.

And of the Consecrations.] The whole order of their Consecration is not here
directed (but in XXIX Exodus.) only something belonging to that matter, VI. 20,
etc.

Ver. 38. Which the LORD commanded Moses in mount Sinai.] In that mountainous
Country, which lay near to Mount Sinai, as Maimonides truly expounds it. For he
was come down from Mount Sinai, and had delivered to them all that he received
there (XXXIV Exodus 29, 32.) before these Commands were given: but they still
continued near unto it; and so the word behar may be translated, by mount
Sinai. For as the last words of this Verse tells us, they were still in the
Wilderness of Sinai: that is, in that part of the Wilderness which took its
name from its nearness to Mount Sinai.

In the day that he commanded the children of Israel to offer their oblations
unto the LORD, etc.] This does not precisely signify, that he commanded Aaron
and his Sons (VI. 9, etc.) all these things, on the very same day, that he
commanded the Children of Israel what Oblations to bring, (Chapt. I. 2, etc.)
but they were delivered all at the same time; immediately after the other,
without any other Commandments intervening.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] See IV. 1.

Ver. 2. Take Aaron and his sons with him.] Having delivered the Laws and Rules
about Sacrifices, and the Rites belonging to them, he now prepares the Priests
to offer them, as had been commanded. And there is not much said in this
Chapter, but what has been explained in XXI^ Exodus and other neighboring
Chapters; where he relates the Orders he received in Mount Sinai, about those
things which were now performed.

And the garments.] XXVIII Exodus 2, 4.

And the anointing oil.] XXX Exodus 24, etc.

And a bullock for the sin-offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened
bread.] See XXIX Exodus 1, 2, 3, etc. These were in their kind the very best of
the legal Sacrifices, as appears, in part, from that Expression of the
Psalmist, LXIX Psalm 30, 31. where he prefers Thanksgiving and Praise, before a
Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs (a young Bullock, which began to spread its
Horns and Hoofs) that is, before the very best of all their bloody Sacrifices.

Ver. 3. And gather thou all the Congregation together, etc.] All the Elders of
the People, with the great Officers who were set over Thousands and Hundreds,
etc. For these are frequently called by the Name of Col ha Edah, which we
translate all the Congregation; particularly in XXV Numb. 7. XXXV. 12. XX Josh.
6. XXI Judge. 10, 13, 16. where the Elders of the Congregation, and the
Congregation, and all the Congregation, are plainly the same thing. Which is
further confirmed from the next Chapter of this Book, ( v. 1.) where it is said
expressly, Moses called Aaron and his Sons, and the Elders of Israel.

Ver. 4. And Moses did as the LORD commanded.] Summoned them to appear before
the LORD.

And the assembly was gathered together.] The word we translate Assembly is the
same with that in the foregoing Verse which we translate Congregation: that is,
as I said, the Assembly of the Elders.

Unto the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] That they might be
Witnesses of what was done, and satisfy all the People, that Aaron and his
Sons did not intrude themselves into this Office; but were solemnly called and
consecrated to it by Moses the Servant of the LORD. It is likely also, that as
many of the People, as the place would conveniently hold, met together to be
Spectators of this Solemnity.

Ver. 5. And Moses said unto the Congregation, this is the thing which the LORD
commanded to be done.] I am now about to execute what God has formerly
commanded, when I was with him in the holy Mount, XXIX Exodus 4. At what time
this was executed is a question among learned Men. And our great Primate of
Ireland places this Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, together with the
Tabernacle and all things belonging to it, in the second Month of the second
Year, after they came out of Egypt: moved thereunto, I suppose, by what is said
in VII Numb. 1, 2. So that, according to his Opinion, the numbering of the
People, and the separation of the Levites to God's Service, preceded this
Action. But I do not see any reason, why we should not think all things were
done in the order wherein they are here related. And then this Consecration was
performed in the first month of that year; after the Tabernacle had been
erected and set apart for the Habitation of the Divine Majesty. See XL Exodus
17, 18.

Ver. 6. And Moses brought Aaron and his sons.] To the door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation; as he had been directed XXIX Exodus 4.

And washed them with water.] As is there also directed; having first likewise
washed himself, XL. 31.

Ver. 7. And he put upon him the Coat, and girded him with the girdle, etc.]
Moses, by an extraordinary Commission from God, performed the Office of an
High Priest, on this day, and the six days following. And put Aaron in
possession of this Office by clothing him with the Garments here mentioned,
(according to the orders which had been given XXIX Exodus 5, etc.) which was
thought sufficient for the Consecration of an High Priest, after the Captivity
of Babylon; when they wanted the holy Oil, as has been before observed. Whence
Philo often calls Moses by the name of (...), i.e. High Priest. And in Schemoth
Rabba the Tradition is, that he continued High Priest all the time they
continued in the Wilderness: though others, they confess, are of opinion (which
is the truth) that he officiated only the seven days of the Consecration; after
which this Office was settled in Aaron. See Seldom L. I. de Succession. in
Pontificatum, cap. 1.

Ver. 8. And he put the breast plate upon him: also he put in the breast plate
the Vrim and the Thummim.] See XXVIII Exodus 30. It is observable, that he says
nothing here in this place, of the precious Stones, but only mentions Vrim and
Thummim; as in XXXIX Exodus 10. (where he describes the same thing) he makes
mention only of the four rows of Stones, but says not one word of Vrim and
Thummim: which I look upon as a proof that they were all one.

Ver. 9. And he put the Mitre upon his head; and upon the Mitre, the golden
Plate, the holy Crown, etc.] According as God commanded him in XXVIII Exodus 36,
37, etc. XXIX. 6.

Ver. 10. And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the Tabernacle, and
all that was therein.] See XXIX Exodus 26, etc. and XL Exodus 9, 10, 11. There
being several ways of anointing a Thing or Person, either by pouring Oil upon
them, or by putting it upon them with the finger, or by sprinkling; it is not
an improbable Conjecture of Fortunatus Scacchus, that Moses anointed the
Tabernacle and its Utensils, by dipping his finger in the Oil, and putting it
upon them. For though the word Maschah, which he uses for anointing, be
general, yet the Vulgar expressing it by linivit, and the LXX. by (...) (which
import this particular sort of anointing) and there being different words used
to express the anointing of the Altar and of Aaron, it may well incline one to
his Opinion; Myrothec. 2. Sacr. Elaeochrism. cap. 70.

And sanctified them.] Set them apart by this unction, for the holy use; for
which they were designed.

Ver. 11. And he sprinkled thereof upon the Altar seven times; and anointed the
Altar, and all its vessels, etc.] We do not find this expressly before directed:
but the intention of anointing the Altar being to make it most holy (because it
was to sanctify all that was laid upon it, XXX Exodus 29. XL. 10.) it was very
fit it should be both sprinkled seven times with Oil, and also anointed: in
token of its extraordinary Sanctity, which was put upon it by this very solemn
Rite. For here are two distinct words about this anointing; the first is jaz,
he sprinkled of the Oil upon it; and then jimshach, he anointed it, by putting
some of the Oil on it: whereas it is said of the Tabernacle, and of the things
there, only jimshach, he anointed them, without any sprinkling.

Some think that the Altar being mentioned twice in this Verse, he speaks of
the Altar of Incense, as well as of the Altar of Burnt-offerings. But it is
plain by those places in Exodus, it was the Altar of Burnt-offerings, which was
thus sanctified: and here the Laver and its foot (which stood in the same
Court) is said to be sanctified with it. As for the Altar of Incense, it is
included in what is said, in the foregoing Verse, that he anointed the
Tabernacle and all therein.

Both the laver and his foot, to sanctify them.] It may be thought that he
sprinkled with Oil the Laver and its Foot, as well as anointed them; which is
the opinion of the forenamed Fort. Scacchus. But the Hebrew words will not
warrant it; for they only signify that they were anointed as the Altar was
after its aspersion.

Ver. 12. And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aarons head.] Here now is a
third word distinct from the two former, viz. jitzok; which signifies there was
more done to Aaron, than to any of the holy things, to sanctify him to his
office: For the holy Oil was poured on his Head.

And anointed him.] Perhaps he drew the Oil with his finger upon his Forehead,
after it was poured on his Head; as the Jews think he did. See XXIX Exodus 7, 8.
XXX. 30. XL. 13.

To sanctify him.] i. e. Set him apart to this Sacred Office. Now this
Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, being mentioned here together with the
Consecration of the Tabernacle and all belonging to it; it has made some
conclude, that both were done at the very same time. But I have given some
Arguments to prove the contrary, upon XL Exodus 17, 18. And the meaning of these
three Verses (10th, 11th, 12th of this Chapter) may be, not that they were
Consecrated at the same time, but with the same Oil. For first he says, Moses
took the anointing Oil; and shows how it was employed after a different manner,
upon the Tabernacle and its Utensils, upon the Altar, and upon Aaron; on whose
Head it was poured; whereas the former had it only put upon them with the
finger, or were sprinkled with it. But though they were not Consecrated
together, yet their Consecration immediately followed one another. For seven
days being spent in sanctifying the Tabernacle and the Altar, then immediately
began the sanctification of Aaron and his Sons: during which time Moses may be
supposed to have received the foregoing Laws about Sacrifices; in which they
were to be employed, as soon as they were Consecrated. And the seven days for
the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, immediately succeeding the other seven
days which were spent in the Consecration of the Tabernacle and the Altar; it
may be the reason why they here are succinctly mentioned both together; and
neither of them mentioned before. For if the account we have in the XLth of
Exodus concerning these things, be well attended to, it will appear that
nothing is there said of the anointing of the Tabernacle, or any thing else;
but only that he set it up the first day of the Month, as he was commanded ( v.
2, etc. and 17, etc.) And he is commanded in like manner to take the anointing
Oil, and anoint the Tabernacle and all therein, ( v. 9, etc.) and then to
anoint Aaron and his Sons, ( v. 13, 15.) but he relates nothing of his doing
either of them, till now; when he executed those commands.

Ver. 13. And Moses brought Aarons sons, and put coats upon them, and girded
them with girdles, etc.] See XXVIII Exodus 40, 41. XXIX. 30. XL. 14.

As the LORD commanded Moses.] He commanded him also to anoint them at the same
time, XXVIII Exodus 41. XL. 15. but it is not here mentioned; because they were
not anointed as he was, by pouring Oil upon their Heads; but sprinkling it on
their Garments, with the Blood of the Sacrifice offered for them. And that he
did afterward as he had been ordered, v. 30. See XXVIII Exodus 41. XXIX. 7.

Ver. 14. And he brought the bullock.] See XXIX Exodus 1, 10, etc.

For a sin-offering.] So it was designed to be, XXIX Exodus 14.

And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the
sin-offering.] See XXIX Exodus 10. I Levit. 4.

Ver. 15. And he slew it.] XXIX Exodus 11.

And Moses took the blood, and put it upon the horns of the Altar round about
with his finger.] As he had been directed, XXIX Exodus 12.

And purified the Altar.] It was purified before; but this was a further
purification of it; that it might be the more fitted to be a place to make
reconciliation upon it, as it follows in the conclusion of the Verse.

And poured out the blood at the bottom of the Altar, and sanctified it, etc.]
The vulgar Latin, I think, gives the true interpretation of these words, rather
than translates them; in this manner: It being expiated and sanctified, he
poured out the blood at the bottom of the Altar, etc. Fort. Scacchus has taken
a great deal of pains to prove that this Expiation (as the Vulg. Lat. calls it)
went before the Anointing or Consecration of the Altar; in his Myrothec. P. II.
cap. 34. But his Arguments seem to me of no force to overthrow the Opinion of
Abulensis and Philo, That these words do not speak of a proper Expiation of the
Altar; but that it was only hereby more particularly set apart (as the word
sanctify signifies) to be the place where Sin Offerings might be made; that
Men who had committed Offenses, might be expiated by these Sacrifices.

Ver. 16. And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul,
etc.] See XXIX Exodus 13.

Ver. 17. But the bullock and his skin, his flesh and his dung, he burnt with
fire without the camp, as the LORD commanded Moses.] See XXIX Exodus 14. Yet we
do not find that the Blood of this Sacrifice was carried into the holy place;
and therefore it did not fall under the Rule in the VIth Chapter of this Book,
v. 30. but might have been eaten by the Priests, as is there allowed, v. 26.
Some think it sufficient, for the solution of this, to say that Aaron and his
Sons were not yet completely Consecrated, and therefore had not a right to eat
of the Flesh of this Sin-offering. But such Persons do not consider that Moses,
who now acted as a Priest, could not be debarred of that benefit, by this
reason. And therefore it is better to say, that no High Priest, whether
ordinary or extraordinary (such as Moses now was) might eat of any
Sin-offering, offered for the Priests themselves; although the Blood of it was
not brought into the Sanctuary. From whence we may draw this Consequence, that
although the Sins of the People, were taken away by the Priests, who by eating
of their Sin-offering, plainly showed that they bare their sin, (as the phrase
is X. 17.) yet the Sins of the Priests themselves could not be taken away, by
any Sacrifice they could offer for sin, of which they might not eat: But they
were to expect, as an excellent Person of our own speaks (Dr. Jackson. Book IX.
upon the Creed, cap. 26.) a better Sacrifice made by a better High Priest, the
Son of God. But these Legal Sacrifices in the mean time were offered in such a
place, as prefigured the place where this better Sacrifice should be offered,
viz. without the Camp: as when they came to their rest, without the City of
Jerusalem, where our Savior's Body was offered for our Redemption.

Ver. 18. And he brought the Ram for the burnt-offering: and Aaron and his sons
laid their hands upon the head of the Ram.] According to the direction given to
Moses, when he was with God in Mount Sinai, XXIX Exodus 15, 16. where all that
follows here, to the end of the 21st Verse, is explained: this being nothing
else but the execution of what was before ordered.

Ver. 22. And he brought the other Ram.] For he was commanded to bring two, v.
2. and XXIX Exodus 1.

The Ram of Consecration. So it is called XXIX Exodus 22, 31. for the reason
there given.

Ver. 23, 24. And he slew it, and Moses took of the blood of it, etc.] These
two Verses are explained XXIX Exodus 20. where order was given for what was now
done. I shall only add a Remark of R. Levi ben Gersom upon the order wherein
these Sacrifices were offered; which was most rational. For first there was a
Sacrifice for Sin offered ( v. 14.) before they could be worthy to have any
Gift or Present which they made to God, received by him. But upon their
Expiation, an whole Burnt-offering was accepted, ( v. 18.) and after that
followed this Sacrifice, which was a Peace Offering (as appears from v. 31.)
part of which was burnt upon the Altar, part given to the Priest, and the rest
they themselves ate for whom it was offered; that it might appear, they were so
far in the favor of God, as to eat with him of his Meat from his Table.
Abarbanel has the same observation.

Ver. 25. And he took the fat, and the rump, etc.] All this Verse likewise is
there explained XXIX Exodus 22.

Ver. 26, 27, 28. And out of the basket of unleavened bread, etc.] These three
Verses show that Moses exactly followed the Orders he had received XXIX Exodus,
23, 24, 25. where they have been explained.

Ver. 28. Burnt them upon the burnt-offering.] This shows, that they were not a
burnt-offering properly, as I there observed; but an Appendix to it.

They were consecrations for a sweet savor.] Because they were offered to
consecrate and sanctify them, as this is explained XXIX Exodus 33. See there.

Ver. 29. And Moses took the breast and waved it, etc.] According to the
direction given XXIX Exodus 26. where it is also ordered that this should be
Moses his part.

Ver. 30. And he took of the anointing oil, and of the blood that was upon the
Altar, and sprinkled it on Aaron, etc.] See XXIX Exodus 21. where it appears
plainly this blood that was mixed with the Oil, was the Blood of the Ram of
Consecration.

Ver. 31. And Moses said unto Aaron and his sons, Boil the flesh at the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and there eat it, etc.] God having had his
part, v. 28. and Moses, who performed the Office of a Priest at this time,
having had that which belonged to him, on that account, v. 29. the rest was
given (as the manner was in Peace Offerings) to those for whom the Sacrifice
was offered: that is, all but the right shoulder, which was burnt upon the
Altar, and the Wave-breast, which was given to Moses, as Priest. See XXIX Exodus
31, 32.

Ver. 32. That which remains of the flesh and the blood shall ye burn with
fire.] See XXIX Exodus 34. This shows it was of the nature of a Peace Offering,
VII. 15, 17.

Ver. 33. And ye shall not go out of the door of the Tabernacle in seven days,
etc.] For till then their Consecration was not perfected (as the following
words signify) no more than the Consecration of the Altar was, till a Bullock
had been offered, to cleanse it, and make an atonement for it seven days
together. See XXIX Exodus 35, 36, 37. This was to make them more sensible of the
great weight, as well as dignity of their Office.

Ver. 34. As he has done this day, so the LORD has commanded to do, to make
an atonement for you.] Every day of these seven, those Sacrifices were to be
repeated, the Sin-offering, the Burnt-offering, and the Peace Offering; and
their Garments were to be sprinkled with the Blood and the Anointing Oil, as
the LORD required when Moses was with him in the Mount, XXIX Exodus 35. This
shows the imperfection of all the Legal Sacrifices; which would not have been
so often repeated, if they had been of greater efficacy: Yet the continuance of
them seven days does signify, the complete Consecration of these Priests;
according to the Rites of those times. In conformity to which, our great
High Priest, the LORD Christ, who was perfected by one Sacrifice of himself,
spent seven days in his Consecration to his Office. For as Aaron is commanded
to attend at the Tabernacle so many days together, in like manner our LORD
Christ (as Dr. Jackson observes in the forenamed Book, Chapt. XXV.) did attend
the Temple five days one after another, before his death; (See XII John 1, 12,
etc. XXI Matthew. 8, 9, etc.) and having purged it on the first or second of
those days, from the profaneness that was exercised in it by Merchandising;
and afterward hallowed it by his Doctrine, and by his Divine Presence, which
appeared in several miraculous Cures, he went the sixth day into his heavenly
Sanctuary, into Paradise it self; to puririsie and sanctify it with his own
Blood, as Moses at Aaron's Consecration did the material Sanctuary, and Altar,
with the Blood of Beasts. And having rested the seventh day, finished all by
his Resurrection early the next day in the morning.

Ver. 35. Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] Where all things mentioned in this Chapter, had been done, and
were still to be repeated ( v. 3, 4.) for they could not go into the Sanctuary
till they were completed.

Day and night.] This was to make their Consecration more solemn, and taken
notice of by all the People.

Seven days.] By which means, a Sabbath, as the Jews observe, passed over their
heads: without which, they conceive, Aaron and his Sons could not have been
completed. But the Sabbath of the LORD did never so exactly pass over any
High Priest in his Consecration, as it did over the High Priest of the New
Testament. For however it were of Aaron's, it was to our blessed Savior (as
the forenamed Dr. Jackson notes) a Day of Rest indeed after six days of
Labor, Watching, Praying and Fasting, which concluded in his bloody Death and
Passion.

And keep the charge of the LORD.] That which he had now enjoined. Or rather,
watch the Tabernacle and his Vessels, etc. as they were to do in time to come.
The Hebrew Doctors have here raised a difficulty about the necessary Easements
of Nature; for which they had no convenience, if they might not stir for seven
days, from the door of the Tabernacle: and therefore they fancy, there was a
hole dug in the Ground for such occasions. But it is more likely, they were
not so confined, as not to be allowed this liberty: and one cannot well doubt
of it, who considers the word Mismoroth here used, (which we translate keep the
charge of the LORD) which is a military phrase, signifying the Stations and
Watches kept, in their turns, for certain hours: after which they were at
liberty to attend their own Affairs. Such was the charge here, one may
reasonably think, of not departing from the door of the Tabernacle, while they
were upon the guard (as we speak) which some or other of them kept night and
day; in such order, that while some watched, others might sleep, or step out
about the necessary occasions of Nature.

That ye die not.] It may seem hard that they should be in peril of their Life,
if they omitted any of these Rites. But this was necessary, to make those
serious and intent upon their business, who were to save the Lives of others,
by making Expiation for them, when they deserved to perish.

For so I am commanded.] These Orders, as has been already observed, he
received in the holy Mount.

So Aaron and his sons did all things which the LORD commanded by the hand of
Moses.] This was necessary to be added, that all Generations might be assured,
whatsoever was performed by their Ministry, would be effectual, to the end for
which it was appointed; they being exactly Consecrated to God's Service,
without the least omission of any thing that he had required. In like manner
our great High Priest, was Consecrated to his Eternal Priesthood, by fulfilling
all the Will of God; and that in a far more Solemn and Public way than Aaron's
was; it being performed by Suffering such things, as nothing but a perfect
Filial Obedience to his heavenly Father could have moved him to admit, because
it was accomplished by shedding his own Blood, in a lingering Death.

CHAP. IX.
Ver. 1. AND it came to pass on the eighth day.] He does not mean on the eighth
day of the Month; but on the next day after their Consecration, which was seven
days in doing, VIII. 33, 35. Then it was that the Fire fell down from Heaven,
and consumed the Sacrifice which Aaron offered: and this seems also to have
been the first day of unleavened Bread, which fell upon the fifteenth day of
this Month; for on the fourteenth in the Even, which was the last day of the
Consecration of the Priests, the Passover was kept, IX Numb. 2, 5.

That Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the Elders of Israel.] Just as he
had done before, VIII. 2, 3. that the Rulers, and as many of the People as
could meet together, to behold what was done, might see the Glory of the LORD,
which appeared at this time, v. 6.

Ver. 2. And he said unto Aaron, take thee a young Calf.] This is the first
Sacrifice, that was offered to God, by the Priests of the Order of Aaron. It
differed from that which was offered by Moses for Aaron and his Sons, as Egel,
a young Calf, does from Par, a young Bullock: by which his Sin was expiated at
his Consecration. And Maimonides says that the former signifies a Calf of one
year old; the latter one of two. Others say a Calf was called Egel till his
Horns budded; and then it was called Par.

For a sin-offering.] For his sins in general; not for any determinate Offense,
like that IV. 3. which therefore was something different from this. The Jews
fancy that a young Calf was appointed for the first Sin-offering, to put Aaron
and the People in mind of the Golden Calf, which they worshipped. So Maimonides
reports the Opinion of their Wise men, in his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46.
Where he also has this conceit, that it was to expiate that Sin.

And a Ram for a burnt-offering.] For none but Males were accepted for
Burnt-offerings, I. 10. There is no Peace Offering ordered for him (as there is
afterward for the People, v. 4.) because it was not fit he should have all the
Sacrifice, as he must have had, according to the Law of such Sacrifices, being
both the Priest and the Offerer; between whom and the Priest (after the Fat was
burnt) all was to be shared.

Ver. 3. And unto the Children of Israel thou shall speak, saying.] Unto all
the Elders ( v. 1.) who were to bring the following Offerings, in the Name of
all the People of Israel; and that by Aaron's direction, who was now to act as
God's High Priest, and gave out this Order.

Take ye a Kid of the Goats for a sin-offering.] The Hebrew word Seir signifies
a He-goat. Concerning which Maimonides (in his Book concerning Sacrifices)
delivers this opinion, That all Sacrifices for sin, whether of private Persons,
or the whole Congregation, at their three principal Feasts, New Moons, and the
Day of Expiation, were He-goats. For this reason, because the greatest Sin and
Rebellion of those times was, that they sacrificed to Demons, who were wont to
appear in that form. For which he quotes XVII. 7. They shall no more offer
their Sacrifices, lasseirim; which we translate unto Devils: but the word
Seirim is but the Plural Number of the word Seir, which signifies a Goat. And
further he adds, That their Wise men think, the Sin of the whole Congregation
was therefore expiated by this Kid of a Goat, because all the Family of Israel
sinned about a Goat, when they fold Joseph into Egypt, XXXVII Genesis 31. And such
reasons, says he, as these should not seem trifles; for the end and scope of
all these Actions was, to imprint and ingrave on the Mind of Sinners the
Offenses they had committed, that they might never forget them. According to
that of David, LI Psalm. 5. My sin is ever before me.

This Sin-offering was different from that IV. 14. being not for any particular
Sin, as that was; but in general, for all the Offenses that the High Priest
might have committed.

A Calf and a Lamb, both of the first year, etc.] When they were in their prime.

Ver. 4. Also a Bullock and a Ram.] These also were, no doubt, to be without
blemish, as is prescribed in the two foregoing Offerings. And the Hebrew word
Sor (which we translate a Bullock) often signifies a well grown Ox; as in XXI
Exodus 28. XXV Deuteronomy. 8. As Ajil, a Ram, the Hebrews say signifies a Sheep of
above a year old. These made very large Peace Offerings, and consequently a
liberal Feast upon them.

For peace offerings.] The very same order is here observed that was at Aaron's
Consecration: First Sin Offerings, then a Burnt-offering, and then a
Peace Offering was offered to the LORD, VIII. 14, 18, 22.

And a meat offering mingled with oil.] Which was to complete the
Peace Offerings, on which they were to feast; that Meat might not be without
Bread to it.

For to day the LORD will appear to you.] Give you an illustrious Token of his
Presence, by sending Fire from Heaven, or from the Brightness of his GLORY to
consume the Sacrifice, v. 23, 24. Whereby they were all assured that both the
Institution of this Priesthood, and the Sacrifices offered by it, were
acceptable to the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 5. And they brought that which Moses commanded.] Both Aaron ( v. 2.) and
all the Congregation ( v. 3.) brought all the Offerings which Moses required.

Before the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Where these Sacrifices were to be
offered.

And all the Congregation drew near, and stood before the LORD.] Approached to
the door of the Tabernacle, and stood there by their Sacrifices, looking
toward the Holy Place; and worshipped the LORD.

Ver. 6. And Moses said.] Unto the Congregation.

This is the thing which the LORD commanded that ye should do.] I require this
of you by the commandment of God; who will demonstrate, by a visible Token, his
Presence among you.

And the glory of the LORD shall appear unto you.] That Glory which filled the
Tabernacle when it was erected (XL Exodus 34, 35.) openly showed it self to them
all, ( v. 23.) and declared his Grace and Favor toward them, by consuming
their Sacrifice, as an acceptable Oblation to him, v. 24. Whereby a particular
Honor also was done unto Aaron, who was hereby most illustriously owned to be
God's High Priest; and all other Persons deterred from pretending to his Office.

Ver. 7. And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the Altar, and offer thy
sin-offering, and thy burnt-offering.] One of them after the other; in the
order wherein they were directed, viz. his Sin-offering first, to make his
Burnt-offering accepted.

Make an atonement for thy self, and for the people.] First for himself (as the
Apostle observes VII Hebr. 27.) that then he might be capable to offer for the
Sins of the People. This was the great imperfection of the Aaronical Priests,
that they were Sinners like other Men: by reason whereof, they were bound, as
for the people, so also for themselves, to offer for sins, V Hebr. 3.

And offer the offering of the people, and make an atonement for them.] After
he had offered both the Sin-offering ( v. 8.) and the Burnt-offering ( v. 13.)
for himself; then he was to begin to offer for the People. For his own Sins
being expiated, and his Burnt-offering being accepted, he was fit to procure
Remission and Acceptance for them.

Ver. 8. Aaron therefore went unto the Altar.] That he might be ready to
perform his part of the Service, which was to sprinkle the Blood; after he had
first of all offered the Morning Sacrifice. See v. 17.

And slew the Calf of the sin-offering which was for himself.] Ordered it to be
slain: for this was no part of the Priests work, as I showed upon the first
Chapter, v. 5.

Ver. 9. And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him.] They received it in
Basins, as it run from the Calf, when it was killed (See I. 5.) and brought it
unto him; who stood at the Altar, to receive it, and do what follows.

And he dipped his finger in the blood.] The forefinger of the right hand, which
had been sanctified to this Ministry, by putting the Blood of the Sacrifice of
Consecration upon the thumb of the right hand, (VIII. 23, 24.) whereby we grasp
all things, and cannot hold them strongly, nor perform any thing well if that
be wanting.

And put it upon the horns of the Altar, etc.] See IV. 25.

Ver. 10. But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver.] See IV.
8, 9.

He burnt upon the Altar, as the LORD commanded Moses.] Laid or disposed them
upon the Altar, to be burnt by the heavenly fire, ( v. 24.) as most understand
it. And the LXX. justify this Opinion; who though they here translate it, He
offered it on the Altar; yet v. 13. where there is the same phrase, they
expressly translate it, (...), he laid the Burnt-offering upon the Altar: and
again, v. 17. in the same manner, (...), etc. he laid it upon the Altar,
besides the burnt-sacrifice of the morning. For common fire, it is supposed,
was no longer to be used when Aaron's Sacrifice began; as it had been all along
before. But there is no certainty in this: and we may as well take the words in
their proper sense, that Aaron burnt this and the following Sacrifice, as Moses
had done before, (VIII. 14, 21, 28.) until the Burnt-offering for the People
came to be offered, which God consumed by fire from himself: and then followed
those other Sacrifices mentioned v. 17, 18. For all these Sacrifices, for Aaron
and for the People, could not be laid upon the Altar at once; but one after
another, in the order here directed: and consequently this Sacrifice, here
mentioned, was actually burnt upon the Altar, to make way for those which
followed it.

Ver. 11. And the flesh and the hide, he burnt with fire without the camp.] See
VIII. 17.

Ver. 12. And he slew the burnt-offering, and Aaron's sons presented to him the
blood, etc.] See I. 5.

Ver. 13, 14. And they presented the burnt-offering unto him, with the pieces
thereof, etc.] All that is contained in these two Verses, is explained in the
first Chapter, ( v. 8, 9.) where the Law about burnt-offerings is delivered.

Ver. 15. And he brought the peoples sin-offering, etc.] Having offered all
that was necessary for himself; now he became fit to make Supplication for the
People.

And offered it for sin, as the first.] In the same manner, as he offered the
foregoing Sin-offering, for himself, v. 8, etc.

Ver. 16. And he brought the burnt-offering.] Here being no express mention of
burning it, some from thence conclude, that this was the Offering, which alone
was consumed by fire from the LORD. See v. 24.

And offered it according to the manner.] Laid it upon the Altar, as Moses had
directed; in the first Chapter of this Book.

Ver. 17. And he brought the meat offering, etc.] Which attended upon
Burnt-offerings, XV Numb. 2, 3, 4, etc.

Beside the burnt-offering of the morning.] This shows that Aaron began his
Priestly Function, with the Morning Sacrifice; which preceded all other: and
was never omitted, for the sake of any other Sacrifice that was to follow it;
and it had always a Meat Offering waiting upon it, XXIX Exodus 39, 40.

Ver. 18, 19. He slew also the Bullock and the Ram, for a sacrifice of
peace offerings.] These two Verses are explained in the third Chapter; which
treats of such kind of Offerings.

Ver. 20. And he put the fat upon the beasts, etc.] That it might by elevation
and waving, be presented unto the LORD; and then burnt upon the Altar. See VII.
30.

Ver. 21. And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for a
wave-offering before the LORD.] The Fat being burnt upon the Altar, as God's
portion; these were the portion of the Priests; who feasted upon God's Meat;
for they were solemnly presented unto him, before they had them. See VII. 34.

Ver. 22. And Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people.] Imploring the
Divine Blessing upon the People; which he afterward pronounced. At this day,
they that are of the Family of Aaron, going up the steps which lead to the
place where the Book of the Law is kept, lift up their hands as high as their
heads, and pronounce a Blessing in their Synagogues, upon the Assembly. And
they say the ancient Custom was, which is still observed, not only to lift up
and spread their hands, but then to join them together by the thumbs, and the
two fore-fingers; dividing the other from them, in that Figure which is
represented by an eminently learned Person, J. Wagenseil, in his Commentary
upon Sota, cap. 7. p. 672. and 1132.

And blessed them.] We read of no order for this; but natural Reason taught
them, from the beginning, that the Priestly Office consisted in praying for the
People, and Blessing them: We find an Example of it in XIV Genesis 18, 19. And not
long after Aaron's Consecration Moses delivered from God a form of words,
wherein the Priests should bless the People, VI Numb. 24. And at this day,
there is nothing done among the Jews with such Solemnity, and in which they
place so much Sanctity as this. For when the Blessing is pronounced in their
Synagogues, they all cover their Faces; believing they would be struck blind,
if they should look up; because the Divine Majesty, at that time, sits upon the
hands of the Priest. So the same Wagenseil observes, in the place abovenamed:
which shows not only how laborious they have been to maintain in the Peoples
minds an opinion, that God is still as much present with them in their
Synagogues, as he was anciently in the Tabernacle and Temple: but how high a
value they set upon the Divine Blessing pronounced by his Ministers.

And came down from offering the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and
peace offerings.] He pronounced the Blessing before he came down from the
Altar, which stood upon raised Ground, (though there were no steps to it, XX
Exodus 26.) that all the People might the better see what was done, while he
offered all these Sacrifices for them, and lift up his hands to implore God's
Blessing upon them.

Ver. 23. And Moses and Aaron went into the Tabernacle of the Congregation.]
The Sacrifice being ended, it is likely Moses went with Aaron into the
Sanctuary, to instruct him how to sprinkle the Blood, and to burn Incense, and
order the Shewbread, and such like things as were to be done only in the Holy
Place.

And came out, and blessed the people.] I suppose that all the Sacrifices
beforementioned might be offered after the Morning Sacrifice ( v. 17.) which
took up a great deal of time, before they were all completed. After which
Moses and Aaron went into the Sanctuary, and stayed there till the time of the
Evening Sacrifice; and then came out and dismissed the People with a new
Blessing, when the Evening Sacrifice was finished.

And the Glory of the LORD appeared unto all the people.] That Glory which
filled the Tabernacle, XL Exodus 34, 35. now appeared without: either at the
door of it, or upon it, in the sight of all the People, as Moses had foretold,
v. 6.

Ver. 24. And there came a fire out from before the LORD.] Either out of the
Sanctuary, from the Holy of Holies; or from that Glory which now appeared unto
them, and sent out flashes of fire which burnt up the Sacrifice. In either of
these senses, it may be said to come from the face of the LORD, as the Hebrew
phrase is.

And consumed upon the Altar the burnt-offering and the fat.] It seems to me
most natural and easy, to take this Burnt-offering and its Fat, for the
Evening Sacrifice; which concluding the work of this day, God gave a special
Token of his acceptance of all the other Sacrifices, by consuming this: and
likewise publicly testified his approbation of all the forementioned Rites of
the Ministry of Aaron, whose Authority was hereby established, in a miraculous
manner. To confirm this, it may be noted; that, as the place which God chose
for his Worship and Service, was afterward designed in the time of David after
the very same manner, 1 Chronicles. XXI. 26. So it was at the time of the Evening
Sacrifice, as may be gathered from 2 Samuel XXIV. 15. where it is said the
Pestilence continued from Morning, to the time appointed, that is, to the
Evening; and then David saw the Angel, who commanded Gad to bid him set up the
Altar in the Threshing-floor of Araunah; where God answering him by fire from
Heaven, it made him say, This is the House of God, and this is the Altar of
Burnt-offering, 1 Chronicles. XX. II. 1. And when Solomon built the Temple in that
very place, it was thus consecrated by fire coming from Heaven, and consuming
the Burntsacrifice, as well as by the Glory of the LORD filling the House, 2 Chronicles. VII. 1, 2, 3. And it is very probable also, that this was at the time of
the Evening Sacrifice: for the former part of the day had been spent in
bringing the Ark into the House of the LORD, and in Solomon's Prayer; as we
read in the two foregoing Chapters. Certain it is, that the Authority of Elijah
to restore God's true Religion and Worship, was thus justified, 1 Kings XVIII.
38, 39. and it was at the time of the offering the Evening Sacrifice, v. 36.
From whence that Prayer of the Psalmist, CXLI Psalm. 2. Let the lifting up of my
hands be as the evening sacrifice.

All this was so notorious, that Julian himself acknowledges that fire came
down from Heaven in the time of Moses, and again in the days of Elijah, (...),
consuming the Sacrifices; as we find his words related by St. Cyril, L. X.
contra Julianum. And this gave such a Divine Authority to the Jewish Religion,
that it is no wonder to find, that the Pagans endeavored to get credit to
their Religion, by the like reports of fire, from an invisible Power consuming
their Sacrifices: which perhaps was sometimes really done by the Prince of the
Power of the Air, as the Apostle calls the Devil. However that be, there are
several Instances of this in Pausanias, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Valerius
Maximus, and Pliny. But Servius may serve instead of all; who upon those words
of Virgil in Aeneid. XII. -- faedera fulmine sancit, says, that anciently they
did not kindle fires upon their Altars, sed ignem divinum precibus eliciebant,
etc. but they procured by their Prayers Divine fire, which inflamed their
Altars. And Solinus says, cap. 11. that the flame sprung out of the Wood by a
Divine Power. Si Deus adest, si sacrum probatur, Sarmenta licet viridia ignem
sponte concipiunt, etc. If God be present, if the Sacrifice be acceptable, the
Faggots, though green, kindle of themselves; and without any one to set them on
fire, a flame is raised by the Deity to whom the Sacrifice is offered. Thus
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed Gideon's Sacrifice, VI Judge.
21. They that would see more of this out of Pagan Writers, may consult J.
Dilherrus Dissert. Special. de Cacozelia Gentil. cap. 11. But especially
Huetius in his Alnetanae Quaestiones, L. II. cap. 12. n. 21.

But whether this Fire which now came from before the LORD consumed Aaron's
Sacrifice instantly, or only set it into a flame, which consumed it leisurely
in the sight of all the People, cannot certainly be determined. The Jews seem
to suppose the latter; the heavenly fire being now kindled, which continued
ever after by a constant supply of Fuel, whereby it was kept perpetually
burning, as is ordained VI. 12, 13. See Note on that place. Where to me it
seems very observable, that this Law of keeping in the fire perpetually, is
ordered to be put in execution at the Evening Sacrifice, v. 9. of that Chapter.
Which is a sufficient Reason to incline one to think, that the Celestial Fire
now came, as I have supposed, at the Evening Sacrifice, and consumed the
Burnt-offering.

Which when all the people saw, they shouted.] They fled not from it, as Men
affrighted, but shouted for joy: or, as Abarbanel's phrase is, they lifted up
their voices with singing, and prayed to God, or rather praised him. Just as
they did when the Fire came down at the Consecration of Solomon's Temple, When
the people saw it, they praised the LORD, saying, for he is good; for his mercy
endures for ever, 2 Chronicles. VII. 3.

And fell on their faces.] Worshipped God, with humble Thankfulness; who hereby
testified his Presence among them, and his gracious Acceptance of them. For
thus he had of old showed his Respect to Abel, IV Genesis 4. and to Noah, VII. 20.
and to their Father Abraham; whose Sacrifice was thus accepted in the Evening,
when the Sun went down, XV Genesis 17.

And there was great reason that both Priests and People should rejoice at this
sight: For, as the Author of the Book Cosri discourses ( Pars III. sect. 53.)
if a Man look only at the foregoing part of the Work of this day (the killing
of the Sacrifices, the Blood running about their hands, their slaying of them,
washing the Entrails, rinsing the Pieces of the Flesh, sprinkling the Blood,
laying the Wood in order, kindling the Fire) they would rather set his Mind
further off from God, than draw it near to him: till after all these things
performed orderly, he saw the Fire coming down from Heaven, testifying God's
gracious acceptance of the Sacrifice; or felt another Spirit excited in him,
beyond any thing he was acquainted withal before; or had Divine Dreams, or
Heroical Motions; which he believed were the Effects of what he had been doing,
etc. And no doubt, all good Men, in future Ages, felt their Minds raised, by
the thoughts that the Sacrifices they offered, were as acceptable to God, as
that offered at this time; being consumed, in some sort, by the same Fire,
which burnt continually on this Altar; and after this day was never
extinguished till the Captivity. Which seems to be the Original of that
Expression of the People, in their Prayer for their King, That God would
remember all his Offerings, and accept (turn to ashes, it is in the Hebrew) his
burnt Sacrifice, XXI Psalm. 3.

Such acceptable Sacrifices, St. Cyril tells Julian, we Christians still offer,
but infinitely better, being Spiritual and Intellectual, (and consequently
nearer to the Divine Nature) and that by Fire sent from Heaven, viz. the Holy
Ghost (of whom this Fire was but a Figure) (...), illustrating the Church, and
inabling the Members of it to offer continually the sweet smelling Sacrifices
of Faith, and Hope, and Charity, and Righteousness, Temperance, Obedience,
perpetual Doxologies, and all other Virtues, L. X. contr. Jul.

CHAP. X.
Ver. 1. AND Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron.] His two eldest Sons, VI Exodus
23.

Took either of them his Censer.] Here are two of their Errors expressed in
these words, if Abarbanel conjecture aright, (who supposes this to have happened
on the last day of their Consecration, when Fire came down from Heaven) First,
That they adventured, without any order from God, to go and burn Incense in the
Sanctuary. For though this did not belong to the Office of the High Priest
alone, yet upon this Solemn Day Aaron only was commanded to perform the whole
Service; as upon the Day of Expiation, IX. 7. And this account Bochartus gives
of their Offense, that sine vocatione, thus obtulerunt, they offered Incense,
without any call to it, Hierozoic. P. I. L. II. cap. 49. p. 557. And secondly,
both of them went about this Work, whereas the Incense was to be offered only
by one; and not by two at a time. Procopius Gazaeus adds a third Error, that
they attempt this, out of the due season for it: which was only in the Morning
and Evening.

And put fire thereon.] As the Priests were required to offer no strange
Incense, XXX Exodus 9. so, in all reason, they were to think, it was not to be
offered with strange fire; but only with a Coal from that Altar, where there
was a fire kindled by God himself.

And offered strange fire before the LORD.] Here are two sins more (if
Abarbanel take it right) that they brought Fire from another place, without the
Sanctuary; and did not take it from the Altar: and then, that they attempted to
go into the most holy place; which he thinks is signified by these words,
before the LORD. The first of these is the Opinion also of Aben-Ezra, and other
learned Men among the Jews; who by strange fire understand, fire that did not
go out from before the LORD, IX. 24. that is, was not taken from the Altar of
Burnt-offering; where Fire from Heaven lately consumed their Oblations. And so
R. Bechai: They imagined that the Fire on the Altar of Burnt-offerings, was
only for consuming Sacrifices; and therefore they fetched some from without, for
the burning Incense. But as to the second thing, it does not seem to me
probable; for Aaron himself had not yet gone into the Holy of Holies.

Which he commanded them not.] This they did (says Aben-Ezra) from their own
proper Motion and Opinion; without any Authority from God: for whose order they
should have waited, if his Mind was not already sufficiently declared, as it
was fully afterward XVI. 12.

How two such excellent Men as these (who had had the honor to be called up to
God, when he appeared on Mount Sinai, and to have a sight of him, and to eat
and drink in his Presence, XXIV Exodus 1, 9, 10, etc.) came to be so rash, and
to fall so unadvisedly into so great an Error, as this here mentioned, cannot
be certainly resolved. But it seems to me highly probable, that at the Feast
upon the Peace Offerings, they had eaten and drunk too liberally; which made
them forget themselves, and fall into this gross mistake. For I can see no
other reason, why that Command v. 8. of not drinking Wine or strong Drink, when
the Priests were to go into the Sanctuary, is annexed unto this story of their
Death and Burial; but only this, which I have now alleged; that their
Miscarriage arose from drinking too much Wine, before this Office was to be
performed.

Ver. 2. And there went out fire from the LORD.] As they were entering into the
Sanctuary, or as they stood at the Golden Altar ready to offer Incense; Fire
came out from the most Holy Place (where the Glory of the LORD was) and struck
them dead.

And devoured them.] It did not reduce their Bodies to Ashes, nor so much as
burn their Clothes, ( v. 5.) but they were killed, as Men sometimes are with
Lightning; which penetrates into the Vital Parts, and puts a sudden end to
their Life. That Is meant here by devoured them; took away their Breath in a
moment. From which Expression the Hebrew Doctors conclude, that when any body
was condemned to be burnt, it was not to be consumed to Ashes, but only
exanimated by the Fire; because this is called devouring or burning, here in
this place. See Gamera Sanhedrim, cap. 7. n. 1.

And they died before the LORD.] Fell down dead in the House of God. Which may
seem too great a Severity, till it be considered, how reasonable and necessary
it was, to inflict a heavy Punishment upon the first Transgressors of a Law,
concerning a Matter of great moment, to deter others from the like Offense.
Many instances of which there are in Scripture: Some observed by St. Chrysostom
upon VI Psalm. 2. where he gives this account, why the Man who gathered a few
sticks upon the Sabbath Day, was adjudged to be stoned, as Blasphemers were;
because it was a very heinous thing, (...), etc. as soon as a Law was enacted
immediately to break it: which made it necessary it should be thus severely
punished, to strike such a Terror into others, that they might not dare to do
the like. Which was the reason, he observes, of the sudden Death of Ananias and
Sapphira, mentioned Acts V. Isidore of Peleusium has made the same observation
( Lib. I. Epist. 181). and goes so far back, as to our first Parents, who were
dreadfully punished, for a seemingly small Offense, because they were the first
Transgressors. The same others have observed, of the punishment of Cain, who
committed the first Murder; of the filthiness of Sodom; of the Idolatry of the
Golden Calf; the Covetousness and Sacrilege of Achan; the Disobedience of
Saul, the first King of Israel; the sudden Death of Vzzah, who was the first
that presumed to touch the Ark of God.

Ver. 3. And Moses said unto Aaron.] To satisfy him in the Justice and Wisdom
of this dreadful stroke, at which he could not but be extremely afflicted.

This is that the LORD spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come
nigh me.] To come nigh unto God, is, in the holy Language, to perform the
Office of a Priest, XIX Exodus 22. XVI Numb. 5. who having the honor of
attending upon the Service of the Divine Majesty, were bound to approach into
his Presence, with the greatest Reverence. We do not read indeed those very
words, which Moses here recites, in the foregoing Books: But, as many things
were spoken to them, which are not recorded, so the sense of these words are in
the place forenamed, XIX Exodus 22. and the reason of them, in XXIX Exodus 43,
44. where the Tabernacle being said to be sanctified by the Divine Glory, and
the Priests being sanctified to minister unto him therein (which was seven days
a doing, as we read here VIII. 35.) they were plainly taught to draw nigh to
God with a holy Fear, and to do nothing rashly, nor without order from him. For
God being peculiarly known by the Name of the Holy One, i. e. who has
incomparable Perfections, such as no other Being has; he justly required to be
accordingly worshipped, suitable to his most surpassing Greatness; by peculiar
Rites of his own prescribing, in a different manner from all other Beings. It
was, for instance, below his Emenency, or rather Supereminent Majesty, to have
common Fire (such as they employed in their Kitchins) used for the burning
Sacrifice upon his Altar. And in like manner all other parts of his Service
were, in reason, to be performed after such a fashion, as might signify their
sense of the peculiar Excellencies of the Divine Nature; who therefore sent
Fire from Heaven, as only fit to burn perpetually upon his Altar.

And before all the people will I be glorified.] This may be thought to be but
a solemn Repetition of what was spoken before; as the manner is in these Books,
to deliver the same thing twice in different words. Or the meaning is, if they
who draw nigh to me, will not sanctify me, I will vindicate my own honor, by
such Punishments, as shall openly declare to all, that I am the Holy One. Thus
God is said to be honored upon Pharaoh, by drowning him in the Redsea, XIV
Exodus 4.

And Aaron held his peace.] Silently adored the Justice of the Holy One; and
did not complain of his Severity. For this does not seem to be the effect
merely of great Grief, but of great Reverence to the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 4. And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel, the uncle
of Aaron.] It appears from VI Exodus 18. that Vzziel the Father of Mishael and
Elzaphan ( v. 22.) was the younger Brother of Amram the Father of Aaron, and
consequently Aaron's Uncle.

And said unto them, Come near, and carry your brethren.] All near Kindred are
called Brethren in Scripture. And these Cousin Germans of theirs are appointed
to carry them out, because Aaron's other Sons were now attending upon God in
their Ministration, upon the Day of their Consecration. But without this
special order, these two Persons could not have been admitted to come near into
the very Sanctuary, being not of the Family of Priests, though of Kin to him.

From before the Sanctuary.] See v. 2.

Out of the Camp.] For anciently they buried not in their Cities, but in the
Fields adjacent to them, XXIII Genesis 9, 17. and so they did in after times,
XXVII Matthew. 7. and VIII Luke 27. where the Tombs are plainly intimated to be
without the City.

Ver. 5. So they went near.] There being two Accents upon the Hebrew word for
draw near, the Cabbalists from thence observe (I know not upon what grounds)
that these Men did not come into the very Sanctuary where the dead Bodies lay,
but drew them out with long Poles, and those of Iron, being afraid of the Fire
wherewith Nadab and Abihu had been killed: or rather, fearing to go into the
Sanctuary, or too near it. See Hackspan's Cabala Judaica, n. 58.

And carried them out in their Coats, etc.] Their Linen Vestments wherein they
ministered; which having touched dead Bodies, were no more fit to be used in the
Divine Service.

As Moses had said.] As he had directed in his order which he gave them.

Ver. 6. And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar, and unto Ithamar his
sons.] These two were all the Sons that Aaron had now remaining; from whom came
two great Families of the Priests; which, in the days of David, we find very
numerous, (though more of the House of Eleazar than of the other) when they
were by him divided into XXIV Classes, and had their Courses of waiting
appointed them, 1 Chronicles. XXIV. 4, etc.

Uncover not your heads.] The Hebrew Doctors interpret it quite contrary, Let
not the head of your hair grow; so long, that is, as to cover their Faces;
which was the custom of Mourners, 2 Samuel XV. 30. XIX. 4. and many other places.
And thus Onkelos, and the Arabic Version set forth by Erpenius, and many of
the Jewish Commentators, (such as R. Solomon and Aben-Ezra) who give the same
account of XXI Lev. 10. where the same thing is required of the High Priest.
And the time of their letting their Hair grow on such occasions, they determine
by the Law of the Nazarites, who were not to cut their Hair all the time of
their Vow of Separation, which the Jews say was at least XXX days, VI Numb. 5.
Therefore the Priests were not to let their Hair grow so long: if they did,
they were incapable of officiating. Only they make this difference between the
common Priests, and the High Priest; that this Law did not bind the Priests at
all times, but only in their Course of Ministration: but the High Priest (whose
Presence was always necessary in the Sanctuary) might never let his Hair grow;
but was bound every Week to have it cut even, on the Eve of the Sabbath. See
Seldom L. II. de Success. in Pontiff. cap. 6.

But the foundation of all this is not very strong; for it relies chiefly on
the use of the Hebrew word (...) in that place of Numbers VI. 5. where it
signifies Hair: from whence they conclude the Verb here may have the same
Notion, and signify the growth of Hair. But this is not the usual
signification of it in Scripture, where it commonly imports the rejection of
something; as of good Counsel, I Prove. 25. of Reproof or Instruction, XIII
Prove. 18. XV. 32. And being joined with the Head, plainly signifies the
uncovering it. See V Numb. 18. And therefore so the LXX. understand it here; as
if they were forbidden to put off their Bonnets. But that they always did, as
soon as they had performed their Sacred Office in the Sanctuary: and therefore
it may be meant of making their Heads bare by shaving them, or bald by pulling
off the Hair, as the manner was in Mourning, XV Isa. 2. XLI Jer. 5. XLVIII. 37.
and many other places. And in this, the Priests among the Jews directly opposed
those among the Egyptians who shaved their Heads, as appears by what Minutius
Faelix, and Lampridius, in the Life of Commodus, say, concerning the Priests of
Isis. And Herodotus also in his Euterpe, whose words are these, (...). In other
places the Priests of the Gods nourish their hair; but in Egypt they are shaved.

Neither rend your Clothes.] Which was another Rite of Mourning; not only among
the Jews, but among all People in ancient Times, especially in the Eastern
Countries; as every one knows that has read any of their Authors. See I Job
20. And it was used on many other occasions among the Jews, as well as in their
Funerals; particularly when any Man blasphemed, XIV Numb. 6. 2 Kings XIX. 1.
when any ill Tidings came, which put them into a Passion, 2 Kings V. 7. or any
Misfortune befell them, XLIV Genesis 13. XI Judge. 35. But was thought so unseemly
in a Priest, especially when he ministered, that the Jews say, they whose
Garments were rent by accident, were as incapable of ministering, as they who
rent them themselves in Mourning.

The reason of this Precept was (as R. Levi of Barcelona well observes,
Praecept. CLV.) that it being not allowed in those Countries for Mourners to
come into the Presence of their Kings, (as appears by the History of Esther)
much less was it seemly for any that attended upon the Divine Majesty, to come
into his House in such a Habit.

Lest ye die.] As Nadab and Abihu did. For after such a Monition as this, they
had highly dishonored God, if they had appeared in his Sanctuary in such an
indecent manner.

And wrath come upon the people.] For want of Priests, to make atonement for
them, when they offended.

But let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the
LORD has kindled.] He does not prohibit the rest of the People, who were not
Priests, to mourn for them; but rather requires it of them all: that they might
be sensible of their loss, and of the the sin which was the cause of it. And it
is likely the People bewailed them, by rending their Clothes, and baring their
Heads, and putting Ashes upon them; or, some such Rites, then in use among them.

Ver. 7. And ye shall not go out from the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. For it is supposed the seven days of their Consecration were not
yet quite ended, (VIII. 35.) or they had begun some other Ministration in the
Sanctuary; and therefore were not to stir out of the Court of it, till it was
sanctified. And the Hebrews think this Law did not only bind Aaron and his
Sons, at this time; but their Posterity for ever: that if they heard of the
death of any of their Kindred, when they were ministering in the Sanctuary, they
should not stir from their Duty: For that would have been to show a greater
affection to a dead Friend, than to the living God. This appears to be true, by
the like command to this, and in the same words, laid particularly upon the
Highpriests, XXI. 12.

For the anointing of the LORD is upon you.] You are devoted and consecrated by
a Solemn Unction (VIII. 10, etc.) to the Service of God; which must not be
omitted out of respect to any Person whatsoever. For in this Precept (as R.
Levi Barcelonita observes, Praecept. CLVII.) the Dignity and Majesty of the
Divine Worship was consulted; which, if his Ministers had deserted on such
occasions, for a moment, would have been brought into contempt. For it would
have been a declaration, that there was something in the World more to be
regarded, than God's Service. And therefore the punishment of Death is
threatened (in the foregoing words) to those who were guilty of such an offense.

And they did according to the word of Moses.] Staid in the Tabernacle, without
any of the usual Tokens of Mourning. Wherein they performed an eminent piece of
Obedience to God; whose commandment suppressed those natural Affections, which
are very hard to be kept in subjection.

Ver. 8. And the LORD spoke unto Aaron, saying.] It may be thought, that the
LORD was so pleased with his Obedience, that he himself now spoke unto Aaron;
whereas hitherto he had spoken to him by Moses.

Ver. 9. Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou nor thy sons with thee.] By
Wine, every one knows is meant that Liquor, which is pressed out of Grapes: And
by Schechar (which we translate strong Drink) is meant such Liquors, as were
made, in imitation of Wine, of Dates, or Figs, and many other sorts of Fruits;
also that which was made of Honey, which we call Mede, and Metheglin. There are
many sorts of such Liquors mentioned by Pliny (in his Natural History, Lib.
XIV. cap. 16.) which he calls Vina factitia.

When ye go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] To perform your Ministry.
At other times they might drink Wine: and, if we may believe the Jews, they did
not offend against this Precept, if before they went into the Sanctuary, they
drank no more than the fourth part of a Log: which contained an Egg-shell and
an half. If they exceeded this measure, then their Ministry, they say, was
profaned, and they were liable to death, by the hand of Heaven. See R. Levi of
Barcelona, Praecept. CLVIII. who has many Niceties about this matter; as has
also Maimonides, mentioned by the learned Dr. Outram in his Book de
Sacrificiis, Lib. I. cap. 6. n. 9.

Lest ye die.] As their Brethren did; See upon v. 1. where I observed it to be
very probable, that they were burnt with Fire from the LORD upon this account.
They that think it worth their while, may see after what manner the Cabbalists
make out this, and what Reflections they make upon it, in Theod. Hackspan's
Cabala Judaica, n. 144, 145.

It shall be a statute for ever throughout your Generations.] And such a Law
there was in some Heathen Countries, that no Magistrate, all the year he was in
Office, nor any Judge, while he was in Action and Employment, should (...), so
much as taste a drop of Wine. So Plato tells us; with which Eusebius compares
this Law of Moses, Lib. XII. Praepar. Evang. cap. 25. And Chaeremon the Stoic,
describing (in Porphery's Book (...), L. IV.) the Diet of the Egyptian Priests,
tells us that (...), some of them drunk no Wine at all; and others, very little.

Ver. 10. That ye may put a difference between holy and unholy, between clean
and unclean.] Here is the ground and reason of this Precept; that they might
have their Wits about them, (as we speak) and preserve their Minds from being
clouded (as Nabad's and Abihu's were, who put no difference between holy Fire
and common) and so be able both to put a difference (as the first words may be
translated) between holy and unholy, etc. and also to teach the People all the
Statutes, which God had delivered to them, as it follows in the next Verse.

And here it must be observed, that as some days and places were more holy than
others, so were some parts of the Sacrifices also; which they might not eat
themselves, but were reserved for the Altar. Some Beasts also were clean, and
others so unclean, that they might neither be offered in Sacrifice, nor eaten
at their common Tables, XI. 47. Some Men and Women also were so unclean, that
they were not to be admitted into their ordinary Conversation; much less into
the Sanctuary, Chap. XII, XIII. Of all which the Priests were the Judges, and
therefore had need to be perfectly sober, that they might make an accurate
difference between one thing and another. And for such a like reason it was,
the Egyptian Priests were so abstemious in drinking Wine, because they looked
upon it, as (...), an impediment to the finding out of Truth. So Chaeremon
speaks in the forementioned Book.

Ver. 11. And that ye may teach the Children of Israel all the Statutes, etc.]
Which concern the Rites and Ceremonies of God's Worship.

Ver. 12. And Moses spoke unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar, and unto Ithamar his
sons that were left.] This was still spoken on the same day; a little after
what he had said to them v. 6, 7.

Take the meat offering that remains of the offerings of the LORD made by
fire, etc.] He seems to have been afraid, that Aaron's grief, for the loss of
his Sons, might have so disturbed his Mind, as to have made him negligent in
some part of his duty; or that Eleazar and Ithamar, through mistake or
forgetfulness, might have offended against some of the Laws lately delivered
about Sacrifices; which therefore he here repeats, that they might be exactly
observed. And in the first place, that they should eat what remained of the
meat offering, as was commanded VI. 16. Where it is required also, as it is
here, to be eaten without leaven; and beside the Altar, in the Court of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; as it is there expressed.

For it is most holy.] See there VI. 17.

Ver. 13. And ye shall eat it in the holy place.] This he repeats, because they
might possibly have forgotten it, or not sufficiently attended to the
difference between things most holy, and things only holy. The former of which
the Priests alone might eat, and that only in the holy place: the other all
their Family might eat (as he says in the next Verse) in any place that was
clean.

Because it is thy due, and thy sons due, etc.] No body might eat it but holy
Persons; for so God directed Chapt. II. 3. VI. 16, 17, 18. VII. 9, 10.

Ver. 14. The wave-breast and the heave-shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place.] They were not bound to eat these in the Court of the Tabernacle, (as in
the former case v. 13.) but in any part of the Camp that was not defiled.

Thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee.] These being those which the
Jews call lighter holy things, might be eaten by the whole Family; as was
before observed.

For they be thy due, and thy sons due, which are given you out of the
sacrifice of peace offerings, of the Children of Israel. They were bestowed
upon them by an express Grant, VII. 34. where though only his Sons be
mentioned, as they are here, yet it is plain all of their Family, who were
clean, might eat of these things. See upon VII. 19.

Ver. 15. The heave-shoulder and the wave-breast shall they bring with the
offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave-offering before the
LORD.] This also he inculcates again, which had been said before (VII. 29, 30.)
that they must take care first to wave these things before the LORD, and to
burn the Fat upon the Altar: for till this was done, they had no right to eat
these things.

And it shall be thine, and thy sons with thee.] When they had been presented
to the LORD of the whole Earth, and he had received his part, these became
theirs by an express Grant from him, VII. 32, 33, 34.

By a statute for ever.] As long as such kind of Sacrifices should last.

Ver. 16. And Moses diligently sought the Goat of the sin-offering.] Which had
been offered for the People, IX. 15.

And behold, it was burnt.] This justified Moses his suspicion and fear, that
some mistake might have been committed in other matters; because he found, upon
a diligent inquisition, that they had burnt upon the Altar, those parts of the
sin-offering, which they ought to have eaten themselves, VI. 26, 29. In which
it was the easier for them to mistake, without diligent observation of Moses
his directions; because the sin-offering which had been offered for Aaron
himself, was just before wholly burnt without the Camp, IX. 11. and so were all
the Sin Offerings, for the High Priest, and for the whole Congregation, ordered
to be, IV. 12, 21. that is, if their Blood was carried into the Holy Place,
then nothing of them might be eaten, VI. 30. But otherwise, their Flesh was to
be eaten in the Court of the Tabernacle, as is expressly commanded, VI. 26. This
distinction they either did not well observe, when it was delivered; or being
oppressed with sorrow, for the loss of Nadab and Abihu, they did not think it
fit to feast at this time upon the Flesh of this Offering. For so Aaron excuses
this Fact, v. 19.

And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar.] He says nothing to Aaron: either
because he was loath to add to his Grief; or because it was the business of his
Sons to look after this Sacrifice, and to see that the Flesh of it was disposed
of according to God's orders.

The sons of Aaron, which were left alive.] Who, by the punishment upon their
Brethren, should have learnt greater caution in their Ministry.

Ver. 17. Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-offering in the holy place?] That
is, obeyed the Commandment which I gave you, VI. 26.

Seeing it is most holy.] VI. 25.

And God has given it you.] VI. 29.

To bear the iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement for them before
the LORD.] God bestowed upon the Priests this Reward of their Service, that
they might be the more willing to take upon them the Peoples Sins, and to make
an Expiation carefully for them. And indeed, the very eating of the Peoples
Sin-offering, argued the Sins of the People were, in some sort, laid upon the
Priests; to be taken away by them. Which being done, they had reason to rejoice
also in a Feast upon this Sacrifice; which God had been pleased to accept, for
the taking away of the Sins of the People. From whence the Sacrifice of Christ
may be explained, who is said to bear our iniquity, (as the Priest is said here
to do) all our Sins being laid on him; who took upon him to make an Expiation
for them, by the Sacrifice of himself. For the Priest here by eating of the
Sin-offering, receiving the Guilt upon himself, may well be thought to
prefigure one, who should be both Priest and Sacrifice for Sin: which was
accomplished in Christ.

Ver. 18. Behold.] Observe what I say to you.

The blood of it was not brought in, within the holy place.] It was none of
those Sacrifices which I commanded you to burn entirely; but required you to
eat of it, VI. 26, 30.

Ye should indeed have eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded.] For as
there was a peremptory Law forbidding the Priests to eat the Flesh of any
Sacrifice, whose Blood was brought into the Holy Place, to make atonement with
it: so there was as peremptory a Law, that they should eat the Flesh of those
Sacrifices for Sin, whose Blood was not brought in thither.

Ver. 19. And Aaron said unto Moses.] Though Moses questioned only Eleazar and
Ithamar, yet Aaron makes the answer: they not being able perhaps to give an
account of what they had done, though sensible of their mistake.

Behold, this day have they offered their sin-offering, and their
burnt-offering before the LORD.] His Apology for them seems to be this, that
they had not wholly violated God's Command; but performed the Substance of it,
though they had failed in one Circumstance. For they had not only offered the
Sin-offering for the People (for that is meant by their Sin-offering) but also
their Burnt-offering (IX. 15, 16.) and that before the LORD, in the place where
he ordered them to be offered. In all this Aaron was the principal Minister,
but they assisted him: For it is expressly said, They presented unto him the
Blood of the Peace Offerings, (which at the same time were also offered) and
they put the fat upon the breasts, when he burnt the fat upon the Altar, IX.
18, 20.

And such things have befallen me.] After this was done, followed the death of
Nadab and Abihu, who went in to burn Incense: which struck him into such a
Consternation, and made him so exceeding sad, that he was not fit to feast with
Eleazar and Ithamar upon the Sacrifice; and so suffered them to burn it.

And if I had eaten the sin-offering to day, should it have been accepted in
the sight of the LORD?] Would God have been pleased with me, if in such Sadness
and Sorrow, I had eaten of the Sacrifice? This is the reason whereby he
justifies the omission of which his Sons were accused; in not eating the
Sin-offering in the Holy Place. The blame of which he takes upon himself; for
to have eaten it with a sad Countenance and a heavy Heart, he thought would
have been to pollute it. And therefore he chose to forbear it, and to give it
wholly to God, by burning the Flesh of it, as he had done the Fat; which he
hoped would be more acceptable, than to eat it in grief. And to eat it without
grief and sorrow was impossible: for though they had not been so dutiful to
him, as they ought to have been; yet he could not extinguish the Affection of a
Father toward them, nor suddenly cease to mourn inwardly for their untimely
death.

From this place Maimonides gathers, there was but one day of Mourning due to
the dead, viz. the first: the rest were added by the Constitution of the Elders.

Ver. 20. And when Moses heard that, he was content.] He was either satisfied
with his reason, and thought he had done well, (for Nature seems to have
directed what was afterward enjoined, that they should rejoice in their
Feasts, XII Deuteronomy. 7, etc. and not eat holy things in their mourning, XXVI. 14.)
or he would not further charge him with a Fault, for which there was so fair an
Excuse. For where there is no wilful Contempt, but rather a Respect intended in
any Action, all good Men are inclined to make a favorable Construction of it,
and grant it an Indulgence, though there be some Error in it.

CHAP. XI.
MOSES having mentioned, in his preceding Discourse about Sacrifices, several
sorts of Uncleanness, (V. 2, 3.) and in the foregoing Chapter (X. 10.)
commanded the Priests to keep themselves sober, that they might at all times be
able to distinguish between clean and unclean, takes an occasion from thence,
to give an account of that matter. For otherwise, that which we read (Chapter
XVI.) would here have most naturally followed (as appears from the 11th Verse
of it) being about the principal Sacrifice, whereby all manner of Uncleanness
was to be expiated; which he now inserts in the midst of those things, that
belong to that head. For first, he treats in this Chapter of unclean Meats; and
in the XII, XIII, XIV, XVth of unclean Persons, Garments, and Habitations. And
then, (after he has directed how to make the great Atonement for the whole
Nation, and some other things) he returns in the latter end of the XVIIth
Chapter, to speak of some forbidden Food; and Chapter XVIIIth of unclean
Marriages: And after a Repetion of several Laws (Chapt. XIX.) of some greater
Uncleanness: and Chapt. XXI. of Priests that were unclean: and lastly, of
Sacrifices not fit to be offered, Chap. XXII.

Ver. 1. And the LORD spoke unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them.] The
Consecration of Aaron being now completely finished, God spoke to him, as well
as unto Moses; he being also highly concerned to teach the People the
difference that is here made between several sorts of Meats, (X. 11.) which
Moses assures them was enacted by Divine Authority.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, saying.] They were all to take
special notice of what follows, because by the Diet here prescribed, they were
discriminated from all other People in the World.

These are the beasts that ye shall eat, among all the beasts that are on the
earth.] God having bestowed upon Mankind, after the Flood, every living thing
to be their Food, IX Genesis 3. it has raised a question among learned Men, why
God should limit and restrain his own People from the benefit of this general
Grant. And some have thought this so unaccountable, that they have said it is
in vain to enquire into the reason of the difference that is made here of
Meats: concerning which P. Cunaeus declares (as Plutarch does of the Laws of
Solon and Lycurgus) that no doubt they were enacted with wise Counsel; but the
reason of the Authors cannot be known, Lib. II. de Republ. Hebraeorum, cap. 24.
But others think the reason is plain enough; and the Jews are of opinion that
the Creatures, here called unclean, were forbidden to be eaten, because they
were unwholesome Food. So Maimonides discourses at large, in his More Nevoch. P.
III. cap. 48. where he says there can be no doubt, that every thing here
prohibited, yields a bad Nourishment, except it be Swines-flesh and fat: and
yet he endeavors to show, that there is no reason to think otherwise of those
two. R. Levi of Barcelona is of the same mind, but pretends not to be able to
demonstrate it as Maimonides does. For the Sum of a long and pious Discourse,
which he has upon this Subject ( Praecept. LXXIX. where he treats of that
Flesh which was torn by wild Beasts) amounts to this: That the Body being the
Seat of the Soul, where it does its business, God would have it fitted to the
Desires and Employments of the Soul. And therefore the Law, says he, removes
from us all those things which may hinder the Soul in its operations. For which
reason such and such Meats are forbidden, as breed ill Blood: among which, if
there be some whose hurtfulness is neither visible to us, nor to Physicians, do
not wonder at it; for the faithful Physician who forbids them, is wiser than
any of us.

This opinion I cannot think to be wholly groundless: for though there be some
Creatures here prohibited, which seem to us of as good Nourishment, as those
which are allowed; yet considering that Climate wherein the Jews lived, and the
temper of their Blood, which was very hot, and apt to be extremely corrupted,
(as appears by the unusual Leprosy to which they were obnoxious, more than
other Nations) it is reasonable to conclude that God had some respect to this,
in the ordering of their Diet. See J. Wagenseil Confut. Carminis R. Lipmanni,
p. 556. Yet I cannot think this to have been the chief reason of this Law
(though it be very agreeable to the peculiar care God had of this People, that
he should not only give them Civil and Sacred Laws, but direct them in the
smallest Matters, as he did in their Apparel, Building, etc.) but the main
drift and scope of it was, that the Israelites might be separated from all
other Nations in the World, by a Diet peculiar to themselves: which kept them
from such a familiar Conversation, as otherwise they might have had with the
Gentiles; and consequently from learning their idolatrous Customs. And I do not
see why I should not add, most of the Creatures, which are reckoned unclean,
were such as were in high esteem and sacred among the Heathen. As a Swine was
to Venus, the Owl to Minerva, the Hawk to Apollo, the Eagle to Jupiter, and
even the Dog to Hecate, etc. Whence Origin justly falls into an high admiration
of Moses his wisdom; who so perfectly understood all Animals, and what relation
they had to Demons, that he pronounced all those to be unclean, (...), etc.
which were esteemed by the Egyptians, and other Nations, to be the Instruments
of Divination; and those to be clean, which were not so, Lib. IV. contra
Celsum, p. 225. And if in Moses his time such Creatures were not sacred to
Demons, it is a greater wonder that he should mark those out for impure, which
proved to be so sacred in after Ages: As a great number of Birds mentioned by
Porphyry ( Lib. III. (...)) who says the Gods used them as (...), to declare
their mind to Men: and several other Creatures, mentioned by other Authors, as
peculiarly appropriated to other Deities.

Many have discoursed largely of the Moral Reasons of these Precepts;
particularly a very learned Man now living, Joh. Wagenseil, in his Annotations
on that Title in the Misna called Sota, fol. 1171, etc.

Ver. 3. Whatsoever parts the hoof, and is clovenfooted.] There are some
Creatures which Porphyry (in the Book forementioned, Lib. IV.) calls (...),
whose Hoofs are solid, and not at all divided; such as Horses, Asses, and
Mules: Others that are (...), divided into several parts, like Toes; as Lions,
Wolves, and Dogs: But a third sort that are only (...) (as Aristotle calls
them) divided into two parts; as Oxen, Deer, Sheep, Goats, etc. And these are
of two kinds; for some divide the Hoof into two parts, but it is not cloven
quite through; as the Camel, whose Hoof is parted above, but joined by a thick
Skin below, and therefore reckoned among the unclean Beasts. Others both
divided and cloven, which are those allowed by this Law to be clean Creatures.

And cheweth the end among beasts, etc.] As all those Beasts do, which are not
(...) (as Aristotle calls them, Lib. X. cap. 50.) that is, have not a Set of
Teeth both above and below: Such are Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, which want upper
Teeth; and therefore bring their Meat up again into their Mouths, after it has
been some time in the Stomach; that it may by a new chewing of it, be better
prepared for digestion. So the Author of Porta Coeli, who explains this very
exactly, when he says, For want of upper Teeth they cannot chew their Food
perfectly at one time; nor can the Stomach make a perfect digestion till it be
ground a second time. And therefore such Creatures are provided with a a double
Stomach: an upper, into which the Meat goes down after the first chewing; and
another, into which it is sent, after it has been grinded a second time.

That shall ye eat.] The Hebrews truly observe (particularly R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CLIX.) that all kinds of Animals, which had not every
one of these Marks (of parting the Hoof, and being clovenfooted, and chewing
the Cud) were unlawful to be eaten.

Ver. 4. Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat, of them that chew the end, or of
them that divide the hoof.] This is added as an Explication of the foregoing
Rule, to show, that if any of the forementioned Marks werewanting, such
Creatures must not be eaten.

As the Camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divides not the hoof, etc.] The
latter part of this Character is not to be understood, as if the Camel did not
divide the Hoof at all; but not quite through, so as to be cleft, as well as
divided. For though its Hoof be divided above, it coheres below, as R. Solomon
observes. And so does Aristotle, Lib. II. cap. 1. and Pliny, L. XI. cap. 45.
This being so very plainly expressed in this Law, it is something strange that
Heliogab^lus should order the Flesh of Camels and Ostriches to be served up to
his Table, Dicens, praeceptum Judaeis ut ederent: saying, The Jews were
commanded to eat them; as Lampridius reports his words, cap. 28. Salmasius
indeed upon that place says, he found these two words, Struthiones and
Camelos, joined together to make one word, in a MS. of the Palatine Library,
which reads Struthiocamelos exhibuit in caenis. Which seems to some to mend the
matter; but then they are forced to interpret praeceptum by concessum; as if he
had said, God did not forbid this Meat to the Jews: which is altogether
uncertain. It is better to say, That though many of the Pagans did read the Law
of Moses, yet they did it carelessly, without sufficient attention to it.

Ver. 5. And the Coney.] Much might be said to justify our Translation of the
word Saphan, by the English Coney, if it could be proved that they chew the
Cud; which they do not, having upper Teeth. Therefore Bochart, by many
Arguments, proves this word Saphan to signify a Mountain Mouse; which, as
Solomon says, XXX Prove. 26. Make their holes in Rocks: which Rabbets do not;
but this Creature does, as he proves out of the Arabian Writers; who call it
Aljarbuo, and say it chews the Cud. See Hierozoicon, P. I. L. III. cap. 33.

Because he cheweth the cud, etc.] Or rather, Though he chew the cud, yet
wanting the other Mark, they were to look upon it as unclean.

Ver. 6. And the Hare, because he cheweth (or, though he cheweth) the cud, but
divides not the hoof, he is unclean unto you. The same Author shows in the
same Book, cap. 37. that the Hebrew word Arnebeth is rightly translated a Hare.
For though no Author, but Moses, says it chews the Cud, yet Aristotle says
something like it, Lib. III. cap. 22. where he observes it has a runnet in the
Stomach. And Th. Bartholinus in his Anatom. Hist. Cent. 2. Histor. LXXXVI.
tells us, That in his Dissection of an Hare, though he found but one Stomach,
which made him wonder at first, that Moses should reckon it among the Creatures
that ruminate, yet he found that what was wanting in the simple Stomach, was
supplied by the largeness of the intestinum Caecum. Which Gut is of a great
bigness, consisting of two parts. In one of which he found liquid and white
Excrements (like to Chyle) as if it were another Stomach: The other part,
toward the Ileon, being full of black Excrements.

Ver. 7. And the Swine, though he divide the hoof, and be cloven-footed, yet he
cheweth not the cud: he is unclean to you.] Though the Swine has the first
part of the Mark of a clean Creature completely, being cloven-footed, as well
as having the Hoof divided, yet not chewing the Cud, it is forbidden to be
eaten. And this, no doubt, was the sole foundation of the Jews abstaining from
this Meat. Whose filthy feeding and wallowing in the Mire Maimonides fancies,
was the only cause why it was prohibited, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 48. To
which others add, its feeding upon Flesh, as Vossius observes, L. III. de orig.
and progressu Idol. c. 42. where he gives other reasons also for it. One of
which, viz. that it was apt to breed the Leprosy, to which they were very
subject in those Countries, is ingeniously treated of by Petrus Cunaeus in his
Republ. Hebraeor. Lib. II. cap. ult. and more lately by another very learned
Person, J. Wagenseil, Carminis R. Lipmanni Confutatio, p. 556. To which Clemens
Alexandrinus adds several other reasons, Lib. VII. Strom. p. 718. and there are
many more in Lactantius relating to Morality, Lib. IV. Divin. Instit. cap. 17.
But whatsoever grounds there might be of this Prohibition, that alone could not
be the reason, why the whole Nation of the Jews abhorred this more than any
other unclean Creatures, which were equally forbidden with this. Insomuch, that
they would not, when they spoke of it, mention its proper name; but called it
another (or a strange) thing. Which arose sure from some other cause, that, in
process of time, made this the most abominable of all other Creatures. And that
was, I take it, because the Gentiles used it in their Sacrifices and Mysteries
of Religion; and because nothing was accounted a more delicious Food among many
great Nations: which (if a vehement abhorrence had not been infused into the
Jews of this Creature) might have invited them to their Tables, and bred such
Familiarity with them, as might have concluded in Idolatry. Pliny observes Lib.
VIII. cap. 51. that no Creature affords greater plenty of delicious Dishes at
their Tables than this, Neque alio ex animali numerosior materia ganeae, etc.
Insomuch that old Homer, relating how Eumaeus entertained Ulysses ( Odyss.
XIV.) says only that he killed a great Hog of five years old, and that only
for five Guests. They that would see more of this, may look into Petrus
Castellanus, Lib. II. de Esu Carnium, cap. 1, 2, etc. where he shows also out
of Varro ( Lib. II. de Re Rustica, cap. 4.) that the Gentiles knew of no
ancienter Sacrifices than this, after they began to offer Animals upon their
Altars. For they thought that would be most acceptable to their Gods, which
best pleased themselves: insomuch that a Swine, which the later Greeks called
(...), was anciently called (...), ab illo verbo quod dicitur (...), from that
word which signifies to Sacrifice. For the first Sacrifices were of this
Creature, as appears by the Mysteries of Ceres, in which a Sow was offered; and
at their Marriages the ancient Kings and great Men of Etruria offered the like
Sacrifice; and so did the Latins and Greeks in Italy. The Hierapolitans indeed
looked upon Swine as unclean, and would neither eat them, nor offer them to
their Gods; nor would they of Pessinuntium in Galatia: quod prorsus Mosaicum
est, which they learnt in all likelihood from Moses, as Huetius thinks,
Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. cap. 11. n. 1. But in many other Nations this Food
was highly valued: and Athenaeus, I observe, gives the very same reason of its
Name that Varro does, Lib. IX. Deipnos. (...). From whence it is, that
Aristophanes calls them (...), Mystical Swine, in his Acharnan: because, as the
Scholiast there explains it, (...), They were offered in the Mysteries of
Ceres. And Julian himself, in his Oration upon the Mother of the Gods ( Orat.
V.) confesses, (...), It was deservedly believed to be a grateful Sacrifice to
the Terrestrial Gods, p. 332. Edit. Patav.

Ver. 8. Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcass shall ye not
touch.] Some think the latter part of this Precept signifies no more, but that
they should not meddle with their Carcass to prepare it for Meat, (as the word
touch seems to be used, III Genesis 3.) though they did not eat it. But others
take it more largely, that they should not so much as open them, to take out
the Fat, and apply it to any use. In this the Jews are so scrupulous, that they
say they may not touch them (though alive) with one of their Fingers, for fear
of the Leprosy. It being a Proverbial saying among them, which we read in the
Treatise Kidduschin, That ten measures of Leprosy descending into the World,
Swine took to themselves nine of them, and the rest of the World one.

If we may believe Herodotus, Lib. II. cap. 47. the Egyptians looked upon Swine
as so unclean, that if any one touched one of them by chance, as he passed by,
he was bound to wash himself, with his Garments, in the River. Certain it is,
that not only they, but the Arabians, and some other neighboring Nations, did
abstain from Swines flesh, as Bochartus and others have observed, (See his
Hierozoicon. P.I. L. II. cap. 57. p. 702. and Petr. Castellanus, L. II. de Esu
Carnium, cap. 4.) which they learnt, I doubt not, at first from the Jews; and
afterward found other reasons for it. This abhorrency of Swine is propagated
into far distant Countries among the Mahometans; particularly into Mindanao,
one of the Philippine Islands; where, if any one have but touched one of these
Creatures, he is not permitted to come into any Bodies House, for many days
after. So Dampier relates in a late Voyage round the World, chap. 12. p. 343.
where he says, The Sultan's Brother having a pair of Shoes made him by one of
their Ships Crew (which they seldom wear there) fell into a great Passion, when
he was told the Thread, wherewith the Shoes were sewed, was pointed with Hogs
bristles; and would not wear them.

Ver. 9. These shall ye eat, of all that are in the waters.] Though some of the
Heathens abstained perpetually from all Fish, and others only for some time,
(...), when they were under strict Obligations of Purity, (as Julian tells us
in the forementioned Oration V.) But God left his People at greater liberty,
forbidding to them only some kinds of Fish; by abstinence from which they were
sufficiently distinguished from those Nations, which ate all indifferently, and
accounted Fish the greatest delicacy.

Whatsoever has fins and scales.] If both these Marks did not concur in a
Fish, they were not to eat it. But their Doctors say, (as we learn from R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CL.) that if but one Scale was found on a Fish, it was
accounted lawful; and they needed not to observe whether it had Fins or no: for
all that have Scales, they say, have Fins; though, on the contrary, all that
have Fins have not Scales. They observe also, secondly, that it was lawful to
eat young Fish before their Scales appeared, if they were of that kind, which
have Scales when they are grown. And, thirdly, all Fishes that have Scales when
they are in the Sea, but cast them when they are taken out, are lawful.

In the Waters, in the Seas, and in the Rivers.] By Waters in this place, as
distinguished from Seas and Rivers, are meant Lakes and Ponds. And so Moses
expresses all the places where Fish is found.

Ver. 10. And all that have not fins, nor scales, etc. shall be an abomination
to you.] There was an ancient Law among the Romans, made by Numa, That no Fish
which wanted Scales, should be used in those Feasts which they made in honor
of their Gods. So Pliny tells us, Lib. XXXII. Not. Hist. cap. 2. where he
quotes an ancient Writer for it.

Ver. 11. They shall be even an abomination unto you.] The next words explain
what he means by abomination; that they should not eat their Flesh, nor touch
their Carcases.

Ver. 12. Whatsoever has no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be an
abomination unto you.] He repeats it again, that they might take notice, that
this alone was a sufficient Mark of difference: And therefore he does not give
any instance of particular Fishes, that might be eaten or not eaten; as he did
of Beasts. He uses also the word abomination concerning prohibited Fishes,
(which he does not of such Beasts, whom he only calls unclean) because there
was greater danger of their transgressing in this matter; Fishes being a more
usual Food among the Eastern People, than Flesh. Insomuch, that among the later
Greeks, the word (...), which signifies all manner of Victuals, came to be used
peculiarly for Fish. See Bochartus in his Hierozoic. P. I. Lib. I. cap. 6.
where he observes also the greatest Luxury was committed in this sort of Food:
which any one may see that reads Athenaeus.

Ver. 13. And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the
fowls, they shall not be eaten.] Here are no Notes given, as in the two
foregoing sorts of Creatures, to distinguish clean Birds from unclean: And
therefore the Hebrew Doctors say, all Birds are lawful to be eaten, but these
XXIV mentioned in this Chapter; which they were to have in abhorrence. Yet they
adventure to give four Marks of a clean Bird; the principal of which are, If it
do not fasten its Talons; i. e. be not rapacious: and have one Claw longer than
the rest. See R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept. CLXI.

They shall be an abomination.] This is repeated to make them more careful in
this matter.

The Eagle.] He names in the first place, the King of Birds, as Pindar calls
the Eagle, -- (...). whose Flesh is very hard, and whose Nature is very
rapacious: and therefore, both upon a Natural and Moral Account, some Authors
fancy it was forbidden to be eaten. See Vossius, Lib. III. de Orig. and Progr.
Idol. cap. 77. But I think Origin has given a better Account of it, in the
place I named above; that Moses by his admirable Wisdom understood what
Creatures were looked upon as Prophetical by the Egyptians, and other Nations;
and these he prohibited to the Jews: Among which he expressly names the Eagle
and the Hawk, Lib. IV. contra Celsum, p. 225. For Diadorus Siculus says ( Lib.
I.) that (...), The People of Thebes worship the Eagle, looking upon it as a
Royal Bird, and worthy of Jupiter. And Julian in his Oration upon the Mother of
the Gods (Orat. V.) says, That in the time of their strictest Purifications,
they were permitted (...) (so Spanhemius truly reads in the late Edition of
Julian's Works) to eat Birds, (...), except a few, which had been commonly held
Sacred. Which is a plain acknowledgment of the sacredness of some Birds among
the Gentles.

The Ossifrage.] All Authors, in a manner, agree, that the Hebrew word Peers
signifies a kind of Eagle; but what kind is not so certain. Boobartus thinks it
is rightly tranflated by Junius, as it is by us, the Ossifrage: for the Hebrew
word Paras, in III Micab 3. is used for breaking of bones. See Hierozoie. P.
II. Lib. II. c. 5.

The Ospray.] This is also of the same Species; and signifies that sort, which
the Greeks call Haliaetus, the Sea-Eagle. But Bochartus in the same Book, cap.
6. thinks the Hebrew word Oznija, rather signifies that which they call
Melaniaetus, the black Eagle. Which though it be the least, yet is the
strongest of all other, and therefore called Valeria by the Romans: and was so
noted for many other qualities, besides its great strength, that it makes it
probable Moses did not here omit it.

Ver. 14. And the Vulture, and the Kite after his kind.] No wonder Interpreters
differ in their Translation of the two Hebrew words, Daa and Aja; the former of
which we translate a Vulture, the latter a Kite (which others translate quite
contrary, taking Daa, or Raa, as it is called in Deuteronomy, for a Kite)
because there is no way to find the signification of them, unless it be by the
roots, from whence they may be thought to be derived. Which makes Bochart think
the first word ought to be translated a Kite, called Daa, from its very swift
flight. Most of the ancient and later Interpreters also, are of his mind. As
for the second word in this Verse, Aja, some take it for a Vulture: but
Bochart, from several observations, judges it to be a kind of Hawk or Falcon.
See in the same Book, cap. 8. After this word there follows in Deuteronomy XIV.
13. the name of a Bird which is here omitted, called Daja, which he takes for
the black Vulture; as the Reader may find in the next Chapter, cap. 9.

After his kind.] Though there be some little difference in shape, yet these
Birds all belong to one Species. See v. 22.

Ver. 15. Every Raven after his kind.] No Body doubts that the Hebrew word
Oreb, (which signifies blackness) is rightly translated a Raven: of which the
Arabian Writers mention four kinds. And some think under this name is
comprehended, not only Crows, and Daws, and Choughs; but Starlings and Pies
also. See Bochartus, cap. 10. p. 202.

Ver. 16. And the Owl.] The Hebrew word Bathjaana, it appears, by many places
in the Prophets, signifies a Bird which inhabits the Wildernesses, and desolate
Places. See XIII Isa. 21. XXXIV. 13. L Jer. 39, etc. By which the ancient
Interpreters of Scripture almost unanimously understand the Ostrich; though a
very learned Man of our own Nation ( Nic. Fuller in his Miscellanies, Lib. VI.
cap. 7.) endeavors by a probable Argument to support our Translation. But it
has been the constant persuasion of the Jews, that God did not permit them to
eat the Flesh of an Ostrich, which is no where forbidden, if not in this word.
And therefore Bochartus maintains, against our Fuller, and labors to prove
that Bath-jaana signifies the fentale Ostrich, P. II. Hierozoiv. Lib. II. cap.
14. where he shows the word Bath (i. e. daughter) is prefixed to the name of
many Birds, without any respect to their Age, and does not signify their young
ones; but only the females.

And the night Hawk.] In the next Chapter to that now named, the same Bochart
proves that the Hebrew word Thacmas (which we here translate the Night-Hawk)
signifies the male Ostrich. For there is no general name for this Bird in the
Hebrew Language, to comprehend both Sexes, (as there is for an Eagle and a
Raven) and therefore Moses mentions both Male and Female distinctly; that none
might think, by forbidding one of them only, he allowed the other.

And the Cuckoo.] The LXX. St. Hierom, and some later Interpreters, translate
the Hebrew word Sachaph by the Greek word (...), a Sea-gull. Which the same
great Man, beforementioned, thinks most probable, c. 18.

And the Hawk after his kind.] There is the greatest consent in the Translation
of the Hebrew word New, which all agree signifies an Hawk; from its strength
and swiftness in flight, which made it Sacred to Apollo. For Eustathius
observes upon Iliad. X. That (...), an Hawk flies, as the Sun moves, very
swiftly. And every one knows there are very various kinds of these birds.
Callimachus mentions Six, Aristotle X. and Pliny Sixteen sorts. See Bochart in
the same Book, cap. 19.

Ver. 17. And the little Owl.] Interpreters generally agree that Chos signifies
a kind of Owl; following the LXX. who translate it (...). Yet Bochart has
collected a great many ingenious Arguments, to prove that it signifies that
Bird, which the Greeks call (...), a Bittern. See there cap. 20.

And the Cormorant.] Though the same learned Person does not approve of this
Translation, yet he acknowledges the Hebrew word Salach signifies some
Sea-bird, which sits upon Rocks, and strikes at fishes with great force, and
draws them out of the Waters. And so the Talmudists, in the Treatise called
Cholut, expound it; and the Gloss upon it there says, it signifies the Crow of
the Waters, that is, a Cormorant.

And the great Owl.] There are various Translations of the Hebrew word Jansaph,
which St. Hierom takes for a Stork, and others for a Bustard: But Bochart
acknowledges the Syriac and Chaldee Translation to be the most probable; which
is the same with ours.

Ver. 18. And the Swan.] In this Translation we follow St. Hierom: but Jonathan
takes it for a kind of Owl, which he calls Otja. Whereby he means, no doubt,
that Bird which Aristotle calls (...): which he says is like an Owl, having
Tufts of Feathers about its ears; from whence it has the name of O^^, L. VIII.
cap. 12. And so the Chaldee, the Syriac, and the Samaritan here translate the
Hebrew word Thinsemeth, which a great many Modern Interpreters follow; who take
this for that which the Latins call noctua, as the former for that Owl which
they call bubo.

The Pelican.] That the Hebrew word Kaath signifies a Pelican is not disputed.
But that it also signifies the Bird we call an Hern, is not improbable; being
joined with Chos in the CII Psalm 6. which is a Bird that makes an unpleasant
noise, especially that kind of them that cries like a Bittern, and is called by
later Writers Butorius.

And the Gier-Eagle.] There are many various Opinions about this Bird, which
the Hebrews call Racham. But Bochart has shown out of the Arabian Writers,
that it signifies a kind of Eagle, or Vulture: for sometimes they call it by
one of these names, sometimes by the other. It being of a dubious kind, between
an Eagle and a Vulture; and therefore happily by us translated a Gier-Eagle,
that is, a Vulture Eagle, which Aristotle calls (...). See Hierozoic. P. II. L.
II. cap. 25, 26, 27. where Bochart shows it is such a harmless and good natured
Bird, that thence it had the name of Racham, and in Arabic of Rachama: and was
made the Hieroglyphick of Mercy and Tenderness among the Egyptians, if Horus
Apollo may be believed.

Ver. 19. And the Stork.] There are vastly different Interpretations of the
word Chasida; which imports kindness no less than the foregoing Racham. But
there is no Reason to depart from the Opinion of the later Hebrews, who take
it, as we do, to signify a Stork. The Piety (as the Latins call it) of which
BIrd, is celebrated by all Authors, and is the very import of the Hebrew word
Chasida. But it feeds upon Serpents, and therefore, as Bochart imagines, was
prohibited to be eaten by the Jews: though upon this account it was had in
honor by the People of Thessaly, and by the Egyptians, as he observes in the
forementioned Book, cap. 29.

The Heron after his kind.] There are at least ten different Interpretations of
the Hebrew word Anapha; among which ours is one. But it being derived from a
word which signifies anger, Bochartus rather takes it for a Mountain Falcon;
which is a fierce Bird, and very prone to anger.

And the Lap-wing.] The Hebrew Doctors take Dukiphath for a Mountain Cock,
which has a double Crest, and thence has its name, according to R. Solomon.
Or rather it may be so called from the place where it resorts; for Dik in
Arabic is a Cock, and Kepha a Rock, from whence Bochart probably conjectures
this Bird had its name, because it lives in mountainous places. And he thinks
the LXX. and the Vulgar have rightly translated it (...) and Vpupam: which is
the sense also of four Arabian Interpreters. It is a portentous kind of Bird,
which has a Crest from its Bill to the hindermost part of its head; and one of
the principal Birds used in the ancient Superstitions of the Magicians and
Augurs, as he observes cap. 31.

And the Bat.] As Moses begins the Catalogue of Birds with the noblest, which
is the Eagle, so he ends it with the vilest, which is a Bat; being of a dubious
kind, as Aristotle observes, between a Bird and a Mouse, Lib. 4. cap. 13. where
he says it does (...), etc. See the famous Bochartus, who shows that its name
in Hebrew, which is Attaleph, imports it to be a Bird of Darkness. Whence that
phrase in the Prophet, II Isaiah 20. In that day a man shall cast his Idols of
Silver and Gold to the Bats and the Moles; i. e. they shall no more appear to
delude Men with their glittering brightness, but be utterly destroyed.

Ver. 20. All Fowls that creep.] The Hebrew word Oph is not well translated
Fowls; but signifies rather all flying things going upon all four. All flying
things that go upon four feet are here forbidden; such as all kinds of Flies,
and Wasps, and Bees, as Jonathan here explains it. A Fly indeed is observed to
be (...): but though it have six feet, yet it goes only upon four, as not only
Lucian, but Aristotle notes; the two forefeet serving for other uses. See
Bochart in his Hierozoic. P. II. L. IV. cap. 9.

Shall be an abomination to you.] It is observed by some, that the Birds here
forbidden are either rapacious, and live on Flesh, (as Eagles and Hawks, etc.)
or are Night-Birds, (as Owls, etc.) or haunt Lakes and Marshes, (as the
Bittern, etc.) or are heavy, and not easily raised from the Earth, as the
Ostrich; or live in Graves or in Dung, as the Vpupa, and some of those flying
things mentioned in this Verse: and upon these accounts are forbidden by Moses;
who allows all those that live upon a cleaner Food, as those that follow do.

Ver. 21. Yet these may ye eat, of every flying, creeping thing, etc.] In this
Verse he excepts such flying Insects, as besides their four feet, wherewith
they go, have two legs or thighs which enable them to leap upon the Earth, as
well as to go. Such are all the Locusts mentioned in the next Verse: unto which
Aristotle ascribes six feet, whereas Moses mentions but four. In which they do
not disagree; for Aristotle plainly says, they have six feet, (...), if we
take into the number the parts with which they leap, L. IV. cap. 6. Which two
hinder leaping legs, Moses distinguishes from the other four wherewith they go.

Ver. 22. Even these of them ye may eat.] There are nine kinds of Locusts
mentioned in the holy Books; four of which are here permitted to be eaten.

The Locust after its kind.] The Hebrew word Arboh is sometimes a common Name
for all Locusts; but here signifies a peculiar sort, of that kind
beforementioned, which leapt, as well as went.

The bald Locust after its kind.] The Hebrew word is Solam: so called, as
Aben-Ezra thinks, because it climbs up Roots, in which it delights.

The Beetle after its kind.] This sort of Locust, called Chargol, seems to have
its name from the vast company wherein they fly together. But it is not fitly
translated a Beetle; for none ever eat Beetles; nor are they four-footed, with
legs to leap withal. Therefore Chargol is another sort of Locusts, unknown to
us in these Countries; and so is that which follows; for a Grasshopper is not a
sort of Meat: But there were Locusts of that shape, which were large and fleshy
in the Eastern Countries, and very good Food.

The Grasshopper after its kind.] The Hebrew word Chagab signifies (as I said) a
sort of Locusts, the original of whose Name Aben-Ezra intimates may be found in
the Arabic Tongue. In which Chahageba signifies to cover as with a Vail: And
in such Troops these Locusts fly, that sometimes they seem to darken the Sun it
self. But by what marks these were distinguished from one another, the Hebrews
differ so much, that it plainly snows they are wholly ignorant in this matter.
The most that can be made of what they say, is, (as a Man very learned in these
things has observed, ( Job Ludolphus in his Dissertation de Locustis, P. I.
cap. 23.) that Chargol has both a bunch on its back, and a Tail also: Arbeh
has neither: Solam only a Bunch, and not a Tail; and Chagab a Tail, but no
Bunch. Which, whether it be true or false, it does not much concern us to know.
But it is evident, that before our Savior's time, they knew very well and
certainly, what kind of Locusts are here meant; and accordingly perfectly
understood what they might eat, and what not. For otherwise John the Baptist
would have been hard put to it, who had no other Diet but this and Honey. And
indeed in desert places, there was little other Food but this; by which whole
Armies of Men have been relieved, when they were in danger to perish in Libya.
For that Locusts were a common Food in the Eastern and Southern Countries, is
so known, that I need not produce any Authorities for it. Nay, among the Greeks
also, as Bochartus has shown in his Hierozoic. P. II. L. IV. cap. 7. And
Vossius, L. IV. de Orig. and Progr. Idol. c. 78. But no Body has given such
satisfaction in this matter, as the forenamed Ludolphus; who has shown at
large how many Nations live upon them, in his Commentary upon his Aethiopick
History: and more lately in his most excellent Dissertation concerning Locusts.
Wherein he relates what Clouds of them came into Germany not long ago (in the
Month of August, in the Year One thousand six hundred ninety and three) of
which he seeing Hogs and Hens and other Creatures feeding greedily, he and his
Family adventured to eat freely of them also; and found the taste of them like
that of a Crab. And a Jew of Jerusalem, who was then in their Country, assured
him that the Locusts in Judea were much of the same shape with these in
Germany; which he demonstrated to him by a draught he had made of them.

After his kind.] Here it may be fit to note, in the conclusion of all, that
this phrase, after his kind, (which is so often repeated in this Discourse of
Fowls and flying things) does not necessarily signify that there are different
kinds of every Bird or flying thing to which it is applied; but only imports
every one of that kind. For he does not speak in the Plural Number, according
to their kinds; but in the Singular, after his kind: which only denotes that
the whole Species is prohibited. And what he says of some Fowls, is in reason
to be applied to all; though, to avoid repetition, he does not add these words
[after his kind] to every one of them.

Ver. 23. But all other flying creeping things which have four feet, shall be
an abomination to you.] Whether they were Locusts, or any other kind of
Creature, who came under this Character, they were to avoid them carefully.

Ver. 24. And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever touches the carcass of
them, shall be unclean.] If they did either eat of them, or so much as touch
the carcass of them, they might not be admitted to come into the Tabernacle,
nor eat of any holy thing, nor converse with their Neighbors.

Until the even.] He does not say they were to wash themselves, or their
Clothes (as in the following Verse) which would incline one to think, that
their mere Separation for all the day, from Communion with God and with one
another, was their Cleansing, without any other Purification. But there are so
many Commands for washing themselves and their Clothes, in other Defilements no
greater than this, that it has persuaded some to think such Cleansing was
necessary in this case also. See XV. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10. and several other Verses
in that Chapter.

Ver. 25. And whosoever bears ought of the carcass of them.] Though it were
only to carry them out of the Camp or City; or remove them out of the way, that
they might not infect the Air.

Shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.] His Body also, in all
likelihood, was to be washed; as was required in other Purifications. No time
is appointed for this, which perhaps a Man might think fit to do presently; but
notwithstanding he was to remain unclean till the Setting of the Sun.

Ver. 26. The carcass of every beast which divides the hoof, and is not
cloven-footed, etc.] He takes occasion from hence to inform them, that it was
as unlawful to touch the carcases of Beasts before prohibited to be eaten ( v.
3, etc.) as of the Fowl and flying things now mentioned. But while they were
alive it was not unlawful to touch them; for they used Camels, and Horses, and
Asses, for their necessary Service; and therefore it is so expressed in other
things, v. 31. when they are dead.

Ver. 27. And whatsoever goes upon his paws, etc.] Has feet with fingers like
unto a hand; for so it is in the Hebrew, Whatsoever goes upon his hands: Such
as the Ape, the Lion, the Bear, Dogs and Cats, etc. whose fore-feet resemble
hands: These might neither be eaten, nor their carcases touched, without
incurring uncleanness till Sunset.

Ver. 28. And he that bears the carcass of them shall wash his clothes, etc.]
See v. 25.

Ver. 29. These also shall be unclean unto you.] So that they might not so much
as touch them (as it is explained v. 31.) when they were dead; much less eat
them.

Among the creeping things that creep upon the earth.] Among things that have
such short feet, that some of their bellies seem to touch the ground.

The weasel.] Though most Interpreters follow this Translation of the Hebrew
word Choled, yet Bochartus has alleged a great many probable reasons that it
signifies a Mole. And one is, because it is joined here with the Mouse. See
Hierozoicon P. I. L. III. cap. 35. where he treats of this very largely.

The Mouse.] All acknowledge the Hebrew word Achbar signifies a Mouse; and more
especially a field Mouse, which does great mischief there; and thence has its
name, as the same Bochartus shows in the foregoing Chapter of that Book. But
all sorts of Mice are here to be understood, as Jonathan observes who thus
paraphrases this word, The black Mouse, the red and the white; for they are of
so many colors.

The Tortoise after its kind.] The same Author has taken a great deal of pains
to prove that Tzab does not signify a Tortoise; but as the LXX. and St. Hierom
take it, a land Crocodile. Which is a large sort of Lizzard, a Cubit long, with
which Arabia abounds: out of which Language he endeavors at large to prove the
truth of this Interpretation, Lib. IV. cap. 1.

Ver. 30. And the Ferret.] Out of the same Language, and the Syriac and
Samaritan Paraphrase, the same judicious Writer proves, that Anaka signifies
another sort of Lizzard, which the Latins call Stellio, and in those Countries
has a shrill cry. See there cap. 2.

And the Cameleon.] Most of the ancient Interpreters take Coach for another
sort of Lizzard, which is the strongest (as this Name imports) of all other;
and in these Countries was famous for its incounters with Serpents and Land
Crocodiles; as the forenamed Bochartus shows out of the Arabian Writers, lb.
cap. 3.

And the Lizzard.] All the ancient Interpreters agree that the Hebrew word
Letaa signifies a sort of Lizzard; but of what kind, it is hard to determine.
The aforesaid Bochart out of the Arabian Writers has shown, it is like to that
which is of a reddish color, and lies close to the Earth, infecting the Meat,
which it touches, with its venom, Ib. cap. 4.

The Snail.] The same admirable Person, with great probability, still thinks
Moses speaks of a sort of Lizzard called here Chomet, because it lies in the
Sand, which in the Talmudick Language is called Chometon, Ib. cap. V.

And the Mole.] It is apparent that the word Thinsemeth, which we here
translate a Mole, is of a very doubtful signification: For in the 18th Verse of
this Chapter it signifies a sort of Fowl; as here, in all probability, another
sort of Lizzard. And if we may guess what sort, by the original of the word, it
probably signifies the Cameleon, which gapes to draw in Air. See Bochart.
Hieroz. P. I. L. IV. cap. 6. But after all that can be said, it must be
acknowledged the significations of all these words are lost among the Jews; as
Aben-Ezra confesses upon this Verse: Neither these eight sorts of creeping
things, nor the Birds before mentioned, are known to us, but by Tradition.
Which is as much as to say, they are not known at all; for there is no
Tradition about them, as the Talmudists acknowledge; who send those who are
doubtful what Birds are lawful, and what not, to be informed by those that are
Masters of the Art of Fowling. Which might help to convince the Jews, were they
not resolved to shut their Eyes, that difference of Meats is now ceased,
because they know not what is forbidden, and what not, in many cases. And
consequently the Messiah is come, to whom the gathering of the people was to
be, (according to their Father Jacob's Prophecy, XLIX Genesis 10.) so that they
should be no longer separated, but all Nations collected into one Body, and
converse freely together, without any danger of being defiled. For Idolatry
being abolished by him, there was no reason remaining for keeping up the
discrimination between Jews and Gentles, by a different Diet. This some of the
ancient Jews saw very well, who said, that in the days of the Messiah, it
should not be unlawful to eat Swines-flesh, no more then it was while they were
subduing the Land of Canaan. This Tradition is acknowledged by Abarbanel
himself in his Rosch Amanah, where he disputes for the Eternity of their Law,
and endeavors to elude this Tradition of the ancient Doctors by Allegorical
Interpretations. See J. Carzovius in Schickard. Mischpat hammelech, c. 5.
Theorem XVIII.

Ver. 31. These are unclean to you among all that creep, whosoever touches
them when they be dead, shall be unclean.] The Jews understand this with
respect to the touching the dead Carcases of these Creatures, and make the
sense of it to be, These eight alone are unclean to you; all other Reptiles, as
Serpents and Scorpions, etc. you may touch, and not be polluted. Thus R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CLII. For nothing was unclean by Moses his Law, whilst
it was alive, but only a Leper, and a Woman in her Separation. Worms, Dogs,
Swine, etc. were unclean to be touched, only when they were dead.

Until the evening.] v. 4. This was a plain document, as Pellicanus there
observes, that there was no impurity in the things themselves; but it was
merely a prudential Constitution, to make such Defilements end with the day
wherein they were contracted.

Ver. 32. And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, does fall, it
shall be unclean.] That is, it might not be used till it was cleansed. Whence
the same R. Levi says, the Jews are wont to call these the Fathers of
Pollutions; because by their contact they defiled other things (Vessels, and
Raiment, etc.) as well as Men, Praecept. CLII. where he acknowledges that the
reason why these Creatures made things unclean, more than others, is not
manifest. But he gives this pious Admonition thereupon; If by our reason we be
able to discern the usefulness of some Precepts, let us be very thankful for
it: but if we cannot find how they are any way profitable to us, let us believe
that God, in his infinite wisdom, saw the benefit we should receive by it, and
therefore commanded it.

Whatsoever vessel it be wherein any work is done, it must be put into water,
etc. so shall it be cleansed.] The Heathens purified all things, in a manner,
by washing them in water; but Moses requires only these things, which were of
common use, to be so purified, in case of any defilement. And therefore
Maimonides faith, Such Laws as these were made to lessen their Labor and
Service; and if there be any thing in them that seems too troublesome and
tedious, it arises from our ignorance of the Rites and Customs of those times,
which make such Precepts necessary. P. III. More Nevoch. cap. 47.

Ver. 33. And every earthen vessel, whereinto any other of them falls,
whatsoever is in it shall be unclean.] It defiled both the Vessel, and that
which was contained in it.

And ye shall break it.] This is prescribed VI. 28. because such Vessels were
of no great value.

Ver. 34. Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water comes shall
be unclean.] The Jews have many Observations about these sorts of Pollutions:
but the simple meaning is, that any Meat, which might otherwise be lawfully
eaten, was made unclean, if any Water poured out of such a Vessel as is before
named, had come upon it. For the Water being defiled, it made the Meat on which
it came to be unclean also. This appears to be the sense, by what follows.

And all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel, shall be unclean.] It
might not be drunk out of such a Vessel, though otherwise it was not
prohibited. But though liquid things were by such means made unclean, yet not
dry things (such as Bread) because they did not so soon receive any Effluviums
from a dead Carcass, as Liquid things did. This they gather from v. 37, 38.

Ver. 35. And every thing whereupon any part of their carcass falls, shall be
unclean.] Though the whole Carcass did not fall upon the things here named, yet
if any part of it did, they were not fit to be used any more, but were to be
broken in pieces. See v. 33. The design of all which Laws is very visible, that
by making the Israelites very cautious how they touched these things, or any
other on which they fell, they might much more abhor to eat any unclean
Creature; and thereby be kept a separate People from all other Nations, from
whose familiar Conversation they were by this means restrained, and
consequently in less danger to learn their Idolatrous Customs.

Whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, etc.] Some translate the last words
simply pots: and Conr. Pellicanus has pertinently observed, that those places
where Meat and Drink were commonly prepared (such as Ovens, and Pots, and
Wine-vessels, and Cellars) it became them to preserve very clean and pure:
which is the reason that Moses requires them to be broken down, if any part of
the Carcass of unclean Creatures fell upon them.

For they are unclean.] Rendered hereby unfit for use.

And shall be unclean unto you.] And therefore shall not be used by you as
heretofore.

Ver. 36. Nevertheless a fountain, or pit, (or cistern, as some translate it)
wherein there is plenty of water, shall be clean.] This Exception seems to have
been a merciful Provision for their speedy Cleansing from such Pollutions as
they frequently contracted; by allowing them to make use of any Collection of
Waters (notwithstanding any such Carcass had fallen into them) in their own
private Grounds, as well as in the public Baths; such as Bethesda seems to
have been, which had five Porches; that they who labored under the same sort
of Pollution, might betake themselves to the same Porch, and go down into the
Water together. If this had not been permitted, it might have been impossible
(considering the few Rivers they had in that Country) to have cleansed
themselves after their Defilements.

But that which touches their carcass shall be unclean.] The Man who drew out
these Carcases out of such Waters, was to be unclean till the Even; i. e.
Separated, as I said before, from the Tabernacle and from common Conversation.
Or the meaning may be, that the Instrument, whatsoever it was, which he used to
pull the Carcass out of the Fountain or Cistern, should be unclean, and not
used any more.

Ver. 37. If any part of their carcass fall upon any seed which is to be sown,
it shall be clean.] If a Mouse, for instance, was found dead among the Wheat
that was to be sown, it might notwithstanding be used for Seed: But other
Wheat, which was not intended for Seed, was made unclean, and might not be used
till it was washed. The reason of this difference is plain, because the Seed
that was to be sown, went through many alterations before it could become Food,
which took away all the pollution.

Ver. 38. But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their carcass
fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.] Wet Seed might be supposed to have
received some tincture from the Carcass, which dry did not: And not being so
fit to be sown till it was dry, was in that time to be cleansed.

Ver. 39. And if any beast of which ye may eat, die.] Either of it self, or
torn by Wild-beasts; or be suffocated, so that the Blood remain in the Veins.

He that touches the carcass thereof, shall be unclean until the even.] Such
Meat became unlawful, not only to be eaten, but to be touched.

Ver. 40. He that eats of the carcass of it, shall wash his clothes, and be
unclean until the even: he also that bears the carcass, etc.] See v. 24, 25.
He speaks of such as eat of this Meat ignorantly: for if they did it knowingly,
it was a presumption to which cutting off is threatened, XV Numb. 30.

Ver. 41. And every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.] Except those
beforementioned v. 21, etc.

Shall be an abomination: it shall not be eaten.] Such as Worms and Serpents:
which for this very reason are counted vile and filthy, because they crawl upon
the Earth.

Ver. 42. Whatsoever goes upon the belly, and whatsoever goes upon all four,
and whatsoever has more feet, etc.] This Verse seems to be an Explication of
the foregoing. For some creeping things have such short feet, that they are not
to be discerned by our naked Eyes, but they appear as if they went upon their
Bellies. Others have feet apparently; and some only four (as Moles, etc.)
others have many more than four, as Caterpillars, and Hoglice, which we call
Millepedes, and those called Centapees in the Philipine Islands (mentioned in
Dampier's late Voyage round the World, p. 320.) not because they have really a
thousand, or an hundred feet, but because they have a great many. And the
Scolopendra, which the Arabians call Nedall, is another of this sort, which,
they say, has precisely XLIV feet, viz. XXII. on each side, as Bochart notes
Lib. IV. c. 6. p. 1. And so the English call the Centapees beforementioned,
forty legs, which are on each side of the Belly.

Among all the creeping things that creep upon the earth.] Here Nachmanides is
something curiously critical, and bids us observe, that Moses speaking (both
here and in the foregoing Verse) not merely of creeping things, but of such as
creep upon the Earth; does not intend such little Worms as are in Pease, or
Figs, or Dates, or other Fruit, which were not included in this Precept, but
might be eaten.

Ver. 43. And ye shall not make your selves abominable by any creeping thing
that creeps, neither shall ye make your selves unclean with them, that ye
should be defiled thereby.] They made themselves abominable if they did eat
them: and they made themselves unclean if they did but touch them. R. Levi of
Barcelona fancies, that in this Verse Moses speaks particularly of things
creeping in the Waters; as in the foregoing, of things creeping on the Earth.
And then, as all those Worms which are in Fruit, were not to be deemed
unlawful; so all those little Animals which move in the Waters, might be drank
together with the Water which was drawn out of Wells, or Pits, etc. and which
were bred in Water kept in Vessels.

Ver. 44. For I am the LORD your God.] See III Exodus 15, 18.

Ye shall therefore sanctify your selves.] By this separate sort of Diet, and
other forementioned Observances.

And ye shall be holy, for I am holy.] The word holy signifies sometimes that
which is most excellent, and highly exalted above all other things. In which
sense God here puts them in mind, that he being the most eminent in all
Perfections, incomparably above all the Gods of the Nations, both in his
Nature, and in his Works, (particularly in their Redemption out of Egypt, v.
45.) it was but reasonable that they should be distinguished from all other
Nations, in their manner of living; and particularly by abstaining from all the
Defilements beforementioned. For he having declared them an holy People (XIX
Exodus 6.) it was but just that they should live after another fashion, than the
rest of the World; and look upon those things as unclean to them, which were
not so to other People. See XXII Exodus ult.

Neither shall ye defile your selves with any manner of creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth.] Here being a different word used in the last Clause
from that in the foregoing (both which signify creeping things) Maimonides
here distinguishes between them; and says, that the first word Scheretz
signifies such creeping things as are produced by Male and Female; and Romesch
(which is the other word) such as arise out of Putrefaction. Which is now
discovered to be an Error; there being no such Animals as are produced merely
by the power of the Sun, out of putrified matter; but all out of some Seed or
other which comes from Male and Female. This therefore is only a Repetition of
what was delivered before, and now confirmed by an unanswerable reason.

Ver. 45. For I am the LORD your God that brings you up out of the Land of
Egypt.] This was a benefit so fresh in their minds, that he speaks of it as if
it were now a doing: and being the first and greatest benefit, (the very
foundation of the rest) there could not be a higher aggravation of Guilt, than
to be insensible of this Obligation, XXXII Exodus 8.

To be your God.] He having redeemed them out of Slavery, made them thereby his
own People; over whom he had a peculiar Dominion, in the right of this
Redemption. See XX Exodus 2.

Ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.] They being his peculiar People, he
separated them from all other Nations by peculiar Laws; which made them
different from all other People, as he himself was, from all other Beings.

Ver. 46. This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, etc.] That is, this
is the Rule you are to observe in eating of Beasts, and Fowl, and Fishes, and
things that creep on the Earth. Of which four sorts of living Creatures Moses
had treated in this Chapter, though not in that very order wherein they are set
down in this Verse: but first of Beasts, v. 2, 3, etc. then of Fishes, v. 9,
etc. then of Birds, v. 13, etc. and lastly of creeping things, v. 20, etc. Some
of all which kinds he forbad them to eat, for such reasons as I have already
mentioned: unto which this may be added, that by not allowing them an entire
liberty to eat every thing, but rather laying many Restraints upon them, he
intended to prevent that Gluttony and Luxury which is the ruin of a State; unto
which nothing administers more than too great variety of Meats, the desire of
which is insatiable.

Ver. 47. To make a difference.] To direct you how to make a difference.

Between the unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten,
and the beast that may not be eaten.] There was no uncleanness in any of these
things, but what was made by this prohibition of them. But there being great
reason to prohibit them, it was very necessary that both Priests and People
should observe, and be well skilled in, the Marks whereby what was lawful to be
eaten, might be known from what was unlawful. Upon which account this is so often
repeated, and the same here expressed twice in different words.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] The Directions in this Chapter
are given to Moses alone; whereas those in the foregoing were delivered unto
Aaron also; as those are in like manner which follow about the Leprosy (XIII.
1.) because Aaron and his Sons were peculiarly concerned in those matters, to
make an exact difference between clean and unclean, (X. 10, 11. XIV. 57.) in
which there was some difficulty; and therefore they are charged by God himself
to attend carefully to the Laws he gave about them. But there was no such
difficulty in what belonged to the Purification of Women; and therefore it was
sufficient that they received Admonitions from Moses concerning it.

Ver. 2. If a woman have conceived seed, and born a man-child.] Whether it were
born alive, or dead; were an Abortive, or come to its full time: this made no
difference, as the Hebrew Doctors understand it.

She shall be unclean seven days.] For the first seven days after the Birth of
the Child, she was neither to partake of any holy thing, nor to have common
Conversation with others; her Husband not being permitted to eat and drink with
her all that time: for they that attended her became unclean also. And so they
were accounted among the Heathen, as Dilherrus observes out of Plautus (in his
Dissert. Special. de Cacozelia Gentilium, cap. 3. where he says, the Women
that assisted at the Labor solemnly washed their hands, and had a Sacrifice
offered for them on the fifth day after the Delivery. Plautus his words indeed
will not warrant all this, which I find in his Truculentus, Act. 2. Scen. 4.
where the Harlot says, she will Sacrifice for the Child on the fifth day
according to the Custom. Quin Diis Sacrificare hodie pro puero volo
Quinto die, quod fieri oportet. --
Where Scaliger observes that the Greeks were wont to purify their Children on
the fifth day; but the Latins on the eighth, if they were Daughters, and on
the ninth, if they were Sons; which was called Dies lustricus.

According to the days of the separation for her infirmity, shall she be
unclean.] That is, her Case shall be the same with that of a Menstruous Woman,
who was in a state of the highest Uncleanness, XV. 19, 20. For every thing she
touched was unclean, and made those so, who touched that thing.

Ver. 3. And on the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised.] This is here mentioned to show, that one reason for not
Circumcising the Child till the eighth day, was its Mothers Uncleanness the
first seven days of her lying in; which made the Child unclean also.

Ver. 4. And she shall then continue.] From the seven days end.

In the blood of her purifying.] In the Purification of her Blood: For all the
following days were days of Purification; not of entire Separation.

Three and thirty days.] All the days of her Uncleanness were forty: And for
the first seven days, she was to be separated from all Conversation with her
Neighbors; but the following three and thirty, she had free Conversation with
them, and was only excluded from the Sanctuary, and from eating of the
Peace Offerings, or the Paschal Lamb, and (if she were the Wife of a Priest) of
the Tithes, and other lesser holy things; of which otherwise she might have
eaten.

She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the Sanctuary, until the days
of her purification be fulfilled.] If Maimonides may be credited, the Zabij, an
ancient sort of Idolaters in those Eastern parts, had a great number of tedious
and tiresom Customs about the Purisication of their Childbed-women; from all
which God freed his People, by restraining them only from coming into his
Sanctuary, or partaking of holy things; but otherwise leaving them at liberty
to perform all manner of Offices in their Family, during the time of their
Purification, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47. It is apparent also that other
Gentiles kept their Women from their Temples, a long time after their
Childbirth; and that Superstitious People would not so much as go within their
doors. See Dilherrus in the forenamed Book and Chapter.

Ver. 5. And if she bear a Maid-child, then shall she be unclean two weeks, as
in her separation.] The time of strict Separation, when they brought forth a
Female, was double to that which was prescribed ( v. 2.) when they brought
forth a Male. And so also was the time of their Purification: which lasted
threescore and six days, as they in the other Case by thirty and three. The
reason of which difference, not only the Jews, but others also derive from the
greater redundancy (as R. Levi Barcelonita calls it, Praecept. CLXVI.) of Blood
in the latter Case, than in the former; and from the flowness of Nature in its
operation, which made the Purgation longer before it was effected. Hippocrates
himself treats of this difference (in his Book de Natura Puerp.) where he
says, Women are sooner purged after the Birth of Males, than of Females: See
Joh. Meursius in his Syntagma de Puerperio, cap. 6, 7. The natural weaknesses
of Women also, during this time, required quiet and little Company: from which
the very temper of their Blood in those Climates made a longer Separation more
necessary, than in these colder Regions. But if there were no such apparent
reason to be given of these things, yet vel ex ipsa veneranda antiquitate, and
simplicitate suscipienda forent, and minime contemnenda (as Conrad. Pellicanus
speaks upon the foregoing Chapter, v. 35.) they ought for the sake of their
venerable antiquity and simplicity to be duly regarded, and not to be despised.

Ver. 6. And when the days of her Purification are fulfilled, for a son, or for
a daughter.] Which was not till the end of the fortieth day for a Son, and the
eightieth day for a Daughter. And therefore the Offerings here mentioned, were
not offered till the day after, viz. the LXI. day for the one, and the LXXXI.
day for the other; because till then her Purification was not perfected, as
Maimonides observes in his Book de Sacrificiis, Tract. V. sect. 5. where he
observes also, that they might not eat of holy things, till these Sacrifices
had been offered for them.

And she shall bring a Lamb of the first year.] Which then was in its greatest
Perfection, as has been often noted.

For a burnt-offering.] In gratitude to God for giving her a safe Deliverance,
and bestowing a Child upon her, and raising her up to her former strength, and
bringing her again to his Sanctuary. Where, by this Offering she also commended
her self and Child to his continued Care and Blessing, and implored his Divine
Guidance and Assistance in its Education. For these Offerings, as I observed
before, were a kind of Supplication which they that brought them made to God:
and there was nothing that pious People could more earnestly desire on such
occasions, than that God would take their little ones into his tuition. Who are
continually liable to so many Dangers, that without the special Favor of God,
and the Custody of his Angels, they could never grow to be able to take any
care of themselves. They are the words of Conradus Pellicanus upon this place;
who thence infers how necessary it is, that the People of the Church should be
admonished frequently, to commend their Children unto God both by private and
by public Prayers, and take care of their Instruction, lest they become like
the Horse, and the Mule, that have no Understanding.

And a young Pigeon, or a turtle Dove for a sin-offering.] To complete her
Purification from her Uncleanness. For that is here meant by Sin; the impurity
which the Law made, by Separating such Persons from others, and from the
Sanctuary, for a time. And thus a Sin-offering is commanded to be brought by a
Leper, when he was cleansed; who was charged only with a Legal Uncleanness, not
a Moral. And it is more plain, from what is ordained concerning menstruous
Women, whose Courses were purely natural, and yet they were to offer a
Sin-offering when they were gone, XV. 30. because the Law accounted that a
state of Uncleanness. And from the case of a Nazaarite, who had unwillingly
touched a dead Body, V Numb. 11. where it is said, he had sinned by the dead;
i.e. was legally polluted. And this may be the reason, perhaps, why a
Burnt-offering is here mentioned before the Sin-offering, which is wont to
precede the other, v. 7, 8.

It may be conceived indeed that in all the forementioned Cases, those Persons
(especially Lepers) had some way offended God, before or in their state of
Separation; and therefore were to have their sin (properly so called) expiated
by a Sin-offering. And R. Bechai also gives another probable account of it;
that this Sacrifice was offered not for her own Sin, but the Sin of her first
Parent, the Mother of all Living, who brought Sin and Sorrow into the World:
for from a bad Stock, there cannot sprout good Branches; and therefore God
appointed this Offering for the Expiation of that primary Sin.

Unto the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, unto the Priest.] It was
a most wise Constitution (as a Person of excellent Learning, Dr. Alix,
observes) which bound this People, from their first coming into the World, to
their going out of it, to have a dependence upon the Priests and the Levites
(who for that purpose were dispersed through all the Tribes of Israel, that
People might be instructed by them, how to govern themselves in all the
passages of Human Life) For there are Laws not only about Marriages and
Successions, but about their lying in, whether of a Son or Daughter, and about
all they were to do while that time lasted, and when it ended; and indeed all
the time they lived, and when they went out of the World; in their Funerals,
and Mourning for the Dead.

Ver. 7. Who shall offer it before the LORD, and make an atonement for her.] By
this Offering she was restored to the liberty of God's House, and to partake of
holy things. For so it follows,

And she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood.] No longer separated
from holy Society.

This is the Law for her that has born a male or a female.] All this
principally respected the Women; yet not excluding her Child; who (it appears
by S. Luke II. 22.) was on this day of his Mothers Purification, presented unto
the LORD. That indeed had respect to the Law about the Firstborn: but a very
ancient MS. and the Syriac, and Origin, taking this for the day of their
Purification, and not merely of hers ((...)) it plainly shows the Child could
not be admitted into the Divine Presence, no more than the Mother, till the
days abovementioned were accomplished.

Ver. 8. And if she be not able to bring a Lamb, then she shall bring two
Turtles, and two young Pigeons, etc.] This was a merciful provision for the
poorer sort, as in other cases, V. 7, 11. And from this very place we may
learn, in how mean a Condition the Mother of our LORD was; who for her
Purification did not bring a Lamb (unto which her Piety, no doubt, would have
prompted her, if she had been able) but only this lower sort of Offering, as we
read II Luke 24.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean.] This
Sacrifice was as available, as the other, to restore her to Communion with
God's People. The Greeks imitated this; among whom the fortieth day was
insignis (as Censorinus speaks) famous or remarkable upon more accounts than
one. For Women with Child did not go to the Temple ante diem quadragesimum
before the fortieth day: and after their Delivery, commonly they were not fit
to go out till forty days more, (his words are, quadraginta diebus pleraeque
foetae graviores sunt, nec sanguinem interdum continent) during which time
their little ones were sickly, never smiled, nor were out of danger. Which is
observed by that great Physician Celsus, Lib. II. cap. 1. Maxim, omnis
pueritia primum circa quadragesimum diem periclitatur. And therefore, when this
day was past, they were wont to keep a Feast (as Censorinus there tells us,
cap. 11. de Die Natali) which they called (...) at which time, it is likely,
they offered Sacrifices also, as the Jewish Women did.

CHAP. XIII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying.] Here God speaks to
Aaron again, as well as unto Moses, (See XI. 1.) because he and his Posterity
were peculiarly concerned in the following Laws about the Leprosy; both in
judging and cleansing of it.

Ver. 2. When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh.] For there this
Disease lay, and showed it self.

A rising, a scab, or a bright spot.] The Leprosy appeared in one of these
three forms; either as a tumor or swelling; or a scab; or a bright spot in the
skin.

And it shall be in the skin of his flesh, like the plague of Leprosy.] There
were some Swellings, and Scabs, and Spots, which were not the Leprosy, but
only like it. And therefore Moses here teaches the Priests how to discern
between a true Leprosy, and the resemblance of it; that accordingly they might
either pronounce a Person clean, or unclean; shut him up, or let him have his
liberty; shave him, or let his Hair grow.

Plague of Leprosy.] If we may believe Pliny, Lib. XXVI. cap. 1. this Disease
was peculiar to Egypt, which he calls genetrix talium vitiorum: And if
Artapanus in Eusebius says true ( Lib. IX. Praepar. Evang. cap. 27.) Pharaoh,
who sought to kill Moses, was the first who was struck with this Disease, and
died of it. So false is the story of Manetho, who, to hide the true cause of
the Israelites departure out of Egypt, says that they cast out a company of
leprous People, of whom Moses was the Captain. Out of Egypt, it is likely, this
Disease spread into Syria, which is noted likewise to have been much infested
with such foul irruptions in the Skin: which have as many various names, as
there are Risings, or Breakings out, or Spots there; and are commonly all
comprehended under the name of Leprosy, as P. Cunaeus observes, L. II. de
Republ. Judaeorum, cap. ult. But Moses here distinguishes them, and seems to
instruct the Israelites, that the Leprosy which he speaks of, was no common
Disease, but inflicted by the Hand of Heaven. So the Hebrew Doctors understand
it; particularly R. Levi Barcelonita ( Praecept. CLXVIII.) a leprous Man ought
not to look upon his disease as a casual thing; but seriously consider and
acknowledge that some grievous sin is the cause of it. Which made the knowledge
of their Priests so admirable (as the Author of the Book Cosri speaks, P. II.
sect. 58.) that they were able to understand what was divine in the Leprosy,
and what was from natural temper. For that there was something Divine in it, is
confirmed by the story of Naaman, 2 Kings V. 7. where the King of Israel
plainly declares none but God could cure a Leper: whom therefore they looked
upon as smitten by God; and thence called the Disease the Plague, or stroke, of
Leprosy, and sometimes simply the Plague or Stroke, v. 3, 5, 17, 22. of this
Chapter. For they could not understand how such a Pestilent Disease, as
infected not merely Men's bodies, but the very Walls of their Houses and
Garments, should proceed merely from ordinary Causes, and therefore they
thought there was an extraordinary hand of God in it.

Then he shall be brought to Aaron the Priest, or unto one of his sons the
Priests.] Not to the Physicians, but to the Priests; who were the only Judges,
whether it was a true Leprosy or no: And if it were, could best direct him to
his cure (by Repentance and Prayer to God) and cleanse him when he was cured.
But they might resort to any Priest whatsoever, as Mr. Seldom observes out of
the Talmud (where there is a large Treatise of this matter) though he was
maimed in any part of his Body, and so unfit to minister at the Altar, provided
his eyes still continued good, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 14. number. 5.

Ver. 3. And the Priest shall look on the plague in the skin of his flesh.]
When there is a suspicion that it is the Leprosy. The same great Man observes,
that this inspection might be made upon any day of the Week, but the Sabbath or
Festivals. Yet not in the night, nor in any hour of the day, but the IVth, Vth,
VIIIth, and IXth: For they accounted the morning, evening, and noon, not such
proper times to make this inspection. Which they say also might be made by any
Israelite; though none but the Priest could pronounce one clean, or unclean.
For though perhaps the Priest was ignorant, and stood in need to be informed by
wiser Persons than himself; yet that Man who was not a Priest, could only
direct him what to judge, but not give the Judgment. According to that Law, XXI
Deuteronomy. 5. Out of their mouth, or by their word, shall every stroke be tried:
which particularly relates to the Leprosy, XXIV. 8.

And when the hair in the plague is turned white, etc.] He begins with the last
of the three Indications of a Leprosy, viz. the bright Spot. In which, if the
very Hair was turned white, and it was not only a superficial whiteness, but
the Spot seemed to have eaten deeper into the very Flesh, then it was to be
judged a true Leprosy. R. Levi Barcelon. expresses it thus; when there was one
or more places so white, that their whiteness was like that of an Egg-shell, or
more glossy, then it is the Leprosy.

And the Priest shall look upon him.] Having made this inspection, and found it
to be the Leprosy.

And pronounce him unclean.] Command him to be separated from the Congregation,
and shut up by himself, v. 46.

But though all the Israelites, Children and Servants, as well as others, were
under this Law, yet no Gentile nor the Proselites of the Gate were; as
Maimonides and the rest of the Hebrew Doctors tell us.

Ver. 4. If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh.] i.e. If there
be barely a white Spot in the skin, which has not altered the Hair.

And in sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned
white.] The forenamed R. Levi explains this passage thus; If it were not a
perfect white, but something duskish, below the whiteness of an Egg-shell, he
was to look upon it as that which might prove a lesser sort of foulness in the
Blood and Skin, short of the Leprosy; which infected the very Hair in that
place.

Then the Priest shall shut up him that has the plague seven days.] He had
something like the Plague, which might prove to be it; and therefore he was to
be separated from others so long, that some judgment might be made, whether it
was, or would be so or no: for seven days commonly make considerable
Alterations in the state of all Diseases.

Ver. 5. And the Priest shall look on him the seventh day.] Until which it was
not likely any certain Judgment could be made.

And behold.] Observe this.

If the plague in his sight be at a stay.] In the Hebrew the words are, If the
plague stands in his sight; i. e. seems to him not to have spread it self
at all in the Skin, as it follows in the next words. Or, as it may be
translated, If it continue in the same color, which it had before, and were
not altered: For the Hebrew word signifies color, as well as sight. And if
this Translation be right, then here are two Marks which the Priest was to
observe ( viz. whether the Spot had not altered its complexion, and whether it
had not spread further in the Skin) but according to our present Translation
there is but one; the next Clause being but the Explication of this.

Then the Priest shall shut him up seven days more.] The case remaining
dubious, he was to make a further Trial.

Ver. 6. And the Priest shall look on him again the seventh day, and behold, if
the plague be somewhat dark.] The Priest was to mark diligently, whether there
were any alteration in the color, and that which was bright before, now looked
dark; which justifies the second Interpretation of the first Clause in the
foregoing Verse.

And the plague spread not in the skin.] This was another token, by which the
Priest was to be governed in his Judgment.

The Priest shall pronounce him clean.] He was to be shut up no longer, but
left at liberty, to go abroad and freely converse with his Brethren.

It is but a Scab.] An ordinary Scab, or Scurf, short of the Leprosy: Such as
is now in Guam and Mindanao, which Dampier (in his late New Voyage round the
World, chap. 12.) describes to be a dry Scurf, all over the Body, that causes
great itching, and raises the outer Skin in small white flakes, like the
Scales of little Fish, when they are raised on end with a Knife. But he did not
perceive, that they made any great matter of it; for they did not refrain any
Company for it.

And he shall wash his Clothes, and be clean.] Having been suspected to have a
Leprosy, and something like it appearing, which had kept him separate from his
Brethren several days, he was to use this small Purification; because there was
some kind of Impurity in his Blood, which broke out into the Skin, though not
infectious.

Ver. 7. And if the scab spread much abroad in the skin.] The second sort of
Leprosy was a Scab, (v. 2.) which seems to have been of two kinds: One of
which Moses joins to what he says of the swelling; and the other to what he
says of the bright Spot.

After he has been seen of the Priest for his cleansing.] That is, after the
Priest has pronounced him clean, v. 6.

He shall be seen of the Priest again.] A new inspection was to be made by the
Priest. And if any Man (as Maimonides says) was so profane as carelessly to
neglect it, by not going to the Priest, and showing him his case, his
punishment was to have his Leprosy cleave to him for ever.

Ver. 8. And if the Priest see, that behold, the scab spreads in the skin.]
Though it lurked for a time, yet this spreading of it in the Skin, was to be
taken for an evident mark that it was the Leprosy.

Ver. 9. When the plague of leprosy is in a man.] That is, when there is a
suspicion of the first sort of Leprosy mentioned v. 2. and called a Rising, or
Swelling.

Then he shall be brought unto the Priest.] By those who feared his Company
might be infectious; but good Men went of themselves to him.

Ver. 10. And the Priest shall see him.] Diligently view and consider the
nature of the Scab.

And behold, if the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair
white, and there be quick raw flesh in the rising.] If upon Examination the
Priest found a third mark, besides the two former, ( whiteness in the Skin, and
the hair turned white) viz. that it had eaten into the very Flesh; he was to
look upon it, as an undoubted Leprosy.

Quick raw flesh in the rising.] Quick or living Flesh (as the Hebrew word is)
signifies soun d Flesh not corrupted. So the meaning seems to be, if it have
broken through the Skin, and in the raw sound Flesh there appeared white Spots,
there needed no further consideration; for it would soon taint the whole mass
of Blood.

Ver. 11. It is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh.] The two first signs
were very bad, particularly the second, the hair turning white (just as a
Plant, says Procopius Gazaeus, or a Flower dies, together with the Earth in
which it grows) but this last was far worse; being a mark of an inveterate Evil
that had been long breeding, and got not only into the Skin and the Hair, but
into the very living Flesh, which, as the same Procopius speaks, it began to
corrode, and would devour.

And the Priest shall pronounce him unclean.] Without any further Examination.

And shall not shut him up.] Because there was no need of any more proof, nor
any doubt, whether it was the Leprosy, or no.

For he is unclean.] It was apparent from the Tokens, which were already very
visible.

Ver. 12. And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin.] He calls that a
Leprosy, which was not truly so, but was by some thought to be so, because it
had a likeness to it.

And the leprosy cover all the skin of him that has the plagne.] i. e.
Seems to have it.

From his head even to his foot, wheresoever the Priest looks.] An irruption
in every part of his Body, which was spread all over with Scabs.

Ver. 13. He shall pronounce him clean that has the plague.] This sort of
breaking out, from top to toe, as we speak, was not to be looked upon as the
Plague of Leprosy; being rather a relief to the Body, than a disease.

It is all turned white, he is clean.] There was no danger in this irruption;
Nature having only discharged those putrid salt Humors which were in the
Blood. Just as those among us, who have the Measels and Small Pox, are likely
to do well, when they come out every where; but not when they stick in the Skin.

Ver. 14. But when raw flesh appears in him, he shall be unclean.] When the
sound Flesh appeared speckled with the forementioned Spots, it was an evident
token that it was a settled Leprosy: Nature being not able to throw out the
ill Humor into the Skin; but working inward into the Flesh.

Ver. 15. And the Priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be
unclean.] When he sees the sign before-named, he shall make no further
Examination, but declare him to be unclean.

For the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.] This was so undoubted a mark,
that there needed no more. Which makes Moses repeat it, that the Priest might
observe it the more carefully, when he made his inspection.

Ver. 16. Or if the raw flesh turn again.] If there was such an alteration in
it, that it was freed from these pestilent Spots.

And be changed into white.] Look like other Flesh, which has a white Skin
upon it.

He shall come unto the Priest.] Desire him to make a new Examination of the
state of his Body.

Ver. 17. And the Priest shall see him.] Take a view of his Body; especially in
those parts where the Leprosy was suspected to be.

And behold, if the plague be turned into white, etc.] If upon due
consideration, his Body appear alike white every where, and no Spots to be seen
in the Flesh, the Priest was to delare him to have no Leprosy remaining.

Ver. 18. The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a bile, and
is healed.] In this and the following Verses, he treats of such a Leprosy, as
arose out of Ulcers, which had been healed: and afterward there was a new
eruption which might prove a Leprosy.

Ver. 19. And in the place of the bile.] Where the Bile formerly broke out; but
seemed to be healed.

There be a white rising, or a bright spot white.] These two are the first and
the last Indications of a Leprosy mentioned v. 2.

And somewhat reddish.] This is a mark not hitherto mentioned: which some
render exceeding shineing; or an inflammation which looks very red. For so the
Hebrew word adamdameth seems to import; it being certain, that the doubling of
the Radicals of any word increases the sense. This is apparent from abundance
of instances in other words; which are heaped up together by Bochartus in his
Hierozoicon, P. II. L. V. cap. 6. where he observes with respect to this word,
that it being impossible, that the same thing should be both very white, and
very red, it has made most Interpreters expound this word adamdameth, as we
do, somewhat reddish; quite contrary to the true sense of the word, which
imports an high degree of some color, and therefore ought to be translated
exceeding glistering. For Adam signifies not only red, but also to glister: and
accordingly, Persons very leprous are said in Scripture to be as white as Snow,
IV Exodus 6. XII Numb. 10. 2 Kings V. 27. See v. 49. of this Chapter.

And it be showed to the Priest.] That he might pass his Judgment upon it,
whether it were the Leprosy, or no.

Ver. 20. And if when the Priest sees it, behold, it being in sight lower than
the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white, etc.] If upon a serious search,
it appear to have the two marks here mentioned (which are those before set down
v. 3.) the Priest was to declare him unclean.

It is a plague of leprosy broken out of the bile.] In the place where the
Bile formerly was, v. 19.

Ver. 21. But if the Priest look on it, and behold, there is no white hair
therein, and it be not lower than the skin.] If he find upon search, neither of
the two marks before-named.

But be somewhat dark, etc.] Though it had not eaten into the Flesh, (which was
a certain sign of a Leprosy) yet if it changed color, there was some ground
of suspicion: and therefore he was to be shut up seven days. See v. 4.

Ver. 22. And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the Priest shall
pronounce him unclean.] The spreading of the Spot was a token the Blood was
much vitiated, and that this foul Disease was begun in the Body.

It is a plague.] Of Leprosy.

Ver. 23. But if the bright spot stay in its place, and spread not, etc.] If it
continued in the same condition, and made no progress, it was an indication the
Bile was breaking out again; which did not make him unclean.

Ver. 24. Or if there be any flesh in the skin, whereof there is a hot
burning.] In the Hebrew the words run thus, Or the flesh, when it shall be in
the skin a burning fire. That is, when there is an inflammation made in the Skin
and the Flesh, by an hot burning Coal, or some such thing, falling upon it. For
in the foregoing Paragraph ( v. 16, etc.) he speaks of Ulcers which arose of
themselves from bad Humors in the Body; and here of such as were made by fire.

And the quick flesh that burns.] The part of the Body that is burnt.

Have a white bright spot, somewhat reddish, or white.] Very shining. See v.
19. For this was a sign of the Leprosy broken out in that burnt place, which
otherwise would have looked black.

Ver. 25. If the hair in the bright spot be turned white, etc.] See v. 20.

Ver. 26. But if the Priest look upon it, and behold, there be no white hair,
etc.] The same direction is given here, as in the foregoing case v. 21.

Ver. 27. And the Priest shall look upon him the seventh day, and if it be
spread abroad much in the skin, etc.] This Verse and the next contain the same
marks with those v. 23, 24.

Ver. 28. It is a rising of the burning.] A tumor made by fire, or a hot iron,
etc. which burnt the part. A mere inflammation (as he calls it in the end of
this Verse) arising from that burning.

Ver. 29. If a man or woman has a plague upon the head, or the beard.] Such a
kind of Disease, Pliny says, came into Italy in the middle of the Reign of
Tiberius Caesar, which they called Mentagra, because it commonly began in the
Chin; and was so filthy, ut quaecunque Mors praeferenda esset, that any death
was preferrable to it, Lib. XXVI. Not. Hist. cap. 1.

Ver. 30. Then the Priest shall see the plague, and behold, if it be in the
sight deeper than the skin, etc.] There are the same marks of this sort, with
those of the former: only, instead of a white Hair, which there was in other
kinds of Leprosies, there was a yellow Hair in this; and not so thick as the
white.

Ver. 31. If it be not in sight deeper than the skin, etc.] This was some
indication that it was not a Leprosy; yet if there were no black Hair in it
(as it here follows) which was a sign of Soundness and Health, v. 37. the case
was not certain, but doubtful; and therefore he was to be shut up seven days,
to see what it would prove.

Ver. 32. And in the seventh day the Priest shall look on the plague.] So he
calls it, because it had a resemblance of the Leprosy.

And behold, if the scall spread not.] For this was the nature of the Disease,
which Pliny describes in the place abovementioned, that it spread it self in
many Persons, from the Chin all over the Face, except the Eyes; and went down
to the Neck, the Breast, and the Hands, foeda cutis furfure, with a filthy
Scurf of the Skin, which is here called a Scall.

And there be no yellow hair in it.] This, with the foregoing and the following
sign (that it was, not in sight deeper than the Skin) made it probable it was
not the Leprosy. Yet he was not upon this immediately discharged; but a
further trial, as the next Verse tells us, was to be made before he was set at
liberty.

Ver. 33. He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave, etc.] For
sureness sake, the Head and Beard were to be shaven (which might be performed
by any Body) that the Priest might the better discern, whether the Scall spread
or no. Only the place where the Scall appeared was not shaven; because the
Priest was to observe, of what color the Hair in it was. So R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CLXXII. They shave round about the Scall, leaving only
the two next hairs; that they may know the decrease or increase of the Disease.

And the Priest shall shut him up that has the scall, seven days more.] In
which time some considerable alteration would be made one way or other.

Ver. 34. And in the seventh day.] Before it was completed.

The Priest shall look on the scall, and behold, if it be not spread, etc.]
Here are the same marks which were mentioned before; that if the Scall did not
spread in the Skin, nor eat into the Flesh, he was not to be shut up any
longer, but pronounced clean; and, after he had washed his Clothes, be admitted
into the Society of God's People again. See v. 6.

Ver. 35. But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing.] It
fell out sometime, that the Scall, which had stood at a stay for a Fortnight,
and seemed neither to spread, nor corrode at all, began to go on to the
neighboring parts.

Ver. 36. Then the Priest shall look on him, and behold, if the scall be spread
in the skin, etc.] If he found this single mark, that after the Scall had been
at a stand a good while, it began to spread much, he was not to trouble himself
for any further token, by seeking for the yellow hair (v. 30.) but immediately
declare him to be a Leper.

Ver. 37. But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, etc.] If after this, the
Scall stopped again, and made no further progress; and withal there was a black
hair appeared in it, (which the Priest could not find before, but now was grown
up in it) he was to take it for an evident sign that the Man was cured of his
Leprosy. For the Hair being restored to its natural color, was a certain
indication that the Blood was cleansed from its impurity.

Ver. 38. If a man or woman, have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, even
white bright spots.] i.e. No other sign of the Leprosy, but only this.

Ver. 39. Then the Priest shall look, and behold, if the bright spots in the
skin of their flesh is darkish white, etc.] In this case the Priest was to
observe, whether the Spots had any thing of a cloudiness in them; for if they
had, it was not a Leprosy: if they were perfectly clear, and bright, then it
was.

Ver. 40. And the man whose hair is fallen off his head.] i. e. From the hinder
part of it.

Ver. 41. And he that has his hair fallen off from the part of his head
toward his face, etc.] The design of these two Verses is, to instruct the
Priest, that the mere falling off of the hair from his head, which made him
bald, either behind or before, should not be taken to be a sign of the Leprosy.

Ver. 42, 43. And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white
reddish sore, etc.] If either in the hinder, or forepart of a bald head there
appeared a white sore, exceeding bright (as it should be translated) like that
which appeared sometimes in the Skin, v. 24. then, as it here follows, he was
to be looked on as a leprous Man.

Ver. 44. The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean.] As unclean, as any
of the forenamed Persons.

His plague is in his head.] The Leprosy appears in his head, as in other
Persons it appears in the skin of their Bodies.

Ver. 45. And the leper in whom the plague is.] Any of the forenamed sort, of
Leprosies.

His clothes shall be rent.] After the manner of Mourners (as some take it)
that he might sensibly declare his afflicted Condition. For upon any sad
occasion, they were wont in those Countries to rend their Clothes, IX Ezra 3,
5. II Job 12. Others indeed think this was intended only for a mark of his
uncleanness: but I do not see why it might not serve to both ends.

And his head bare.] This was another token of mourning. But the Hebrew Writers
unanimously translate these words quite contrary: the Phrase in the original
being, his head shall be free; i. e. say they, from cutting or shaving: which
was as much as to say, he should let his hair grow long. This also was a sign
of sadness and sorrow. See X. 6.

And shall put a covering upon his upper lip.] Either he was to cover it with
his hand, or with the skirt of his Garment, which they threw over their heads,
when they were in a state of mourning. Of which this was another sign, XXIV
Ezekiel. 17, 22. as it was also of shame, III Mich. 7. Some will have all these to
be marks only for Men to avoid them: but that is sufficiently taken care of, in
the last words of this Verse.

I shall only add, That the Hebrews well observe that none were bound to any of
these things, who were shut up on suspicion of Leprosy; but only such as were
absolutely pronounced to be leprous.

And shall cry, unclean, unclean.] Give notice to Passengers not to come near
him, by crying out aloud, so that they might hear him, I am in the most unclean
condition wherein any man can be. Some fancy this was required, that Men might
avoid infection: but the true reason was, that they might avoid legal
Pollutions by conversation with them; as appears by the next Verse. Jeremiah
seems to allude to this, IV Lament. 15. And there seems also to have been the
like care among the Heathen, to give notice of any place which was unclean,
that none might be defiled by it. So Servius tells us upon IV Aeneid. that the
Romans were wont to set a Cypress-tree (which being cut down, could not grow
again) before the door of a dead Man's House, Ne quis sacram rem facturus,
imprudens domum praeteriret, lest any Man, who was going to perform Sacred
Offices, should unawares pass by his door.

Ver. 46. All the days wherein the plague shall be in him, he shall be
defiled.] Remain in that desolate state.

He is unclean.] Separate from Company.

He shall dwell alone.] 2 Kings XV. 5.

Without the Camp shall his habitation be.] There were three Camps, (as the
Hebrews commonly observe) that of the Divinity (or the Sanctuary) that of the
Levites, and that of the Israelites: out of all which a leprous Man was to be
removed, that no Man might have conversation with him, but only such who were
leprous like himself; who in after times were shut out of the Cities, as now
out of the Camp, 2 Kings VII. 3.

Ver. 47. The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in.] This is a matter
which we do not now understand; that a Leprosy should not only cleave to a
Garment, and infect it, but appear and be seen in it. As, in the next Chapter,
Moses speaks also of Leprosy in an House (XIV. 34.) which he does not mention
here, because they had no Houses in the Wilderness, but dwelt in Tents covered
with Skins, and such like things: in which, as well as in Garments, he supposes
the Leprosy will be. See XIV. 34. But what kind of Disease this was, which
appeared in insensible things, the Syrians and Egyptians perhaps might then
understand, but we now are ignorant, as P. Cunaeus speaks; Cujusmodi id vitium
in rebus inanimatis fuerit, Syri fortasse and Egyptij tunc intellexerunt; nos
hercle ignoramus, L. II. de Republ. Hebraeor. cap. ult. And indeed it seems to
have been a Divine stroke, as Moses himself signifies, XIV. 34. and appears not
only from the place abovementioned, 2 Kings V. 7, 27. but from XV. 5. of the
same Book. And so the Jews have always understood it, particular Maimonides,
who in his Treatise on this Subject, cap. 16. sect. 9. says, That this change
in Garments and Houses, did not proceed from natural causes, but was a sign and
a miracle in Israel. That is, an extraordinary punishment inflicted by God, as
a token of his high displeasure. And it is not at all incredible, that such a
strange Plague should then infest them, which is not now known in the World;
when we consider what unusual Diseases there have been in other Countries,
unknown in former times; which afterward have also vanished, and are now to be
found only in Books. Pliny mentions several new Diseases, omni priori aevo
incognitos, unknown to all Ages past; some of which were peculiar to some
Provinces, and touched not others. Concerning which he did not know what to
say, but only this: Quid hoc esse dicamus, aut quas Deorum iras? What shall we
call this? or from what great anger of the Gods does it proceed, that the
Diseases which already certainly infest men's bodies (which in number are above
three hundred) should not be sufficient; but new ones are still to be feared?
Lib. XXVI. Not. Hist. cap. 1. He looked, that is, upon these strange Diseases,
as sent by God, when Men had highly incurred his displeasure. The last Century
was famous for such an extraordinary Plague (as Johannes Wierus, who then
lived, often calls it) when the Scurvy, which was confined before to some
Northern Regions, near the Sea, overran the Low Countries, being at that time
unknown in Germany, Italy, France, and Spain, which were entirely free from it.
See his Observationum Medicarum, Lib. I. sect. 1.

Whether it be a woollen garment or a linen.] There is a great dispute among
the Talmudists, whether Garments made of Camels hair (which they called the
Wool of Camels) were comprehended under these words, or no.

Ver. 48. Whether it be in the warp, or woof of linen or of woollen.] In the
inward or outward part of it.

Whether in a skin, or in any thing made of skin.] They were more likely to be
infected, than woollen or linen Garments; because they had been part of the
body of living Creatures.

Ver. 49. And if the plague be greenish, or reddish in the garment, etc.] There
seems to be great reason in what Maimonides says, in his Treatise of the
Leprosy, that the Hebrew word Jerakrak (which is made by the doubling of the
Radical Letters) should be interpreted the most intense green; such as is in
the Wings of a Peacock (as he speaks) or in the Leaves of a Palm Tree. As the
word Adamdam, in like manner, signifies the highest degree of another color,
viz. redness; such as the brightest Scarlet: See v. 19. And if a spot of these
colors were found in a Garment or Skin, as broad as a Bean, it was a
sufficient ground to think it might be the Leprosy; if it were not so broad,
it was accounted clean.

It is a plague of leprosy, etc.] It was justly to be suspected; and therefore
was to be brought to the Priest, for his judgment to be passed upon it. Who was
to make a trial what it would prove, by shutting up that Garment or Skin
wherein the Spot was, for the space of seven days; as is directed in the next
Verse.

Ver. 50. And the Priest shall look upon the plague, etc.] If upon his
inspection, he found the forenamed tokens, he was to do with it, as he did
with Persons who were under a suspicion of a Leprosy.

Ver. 51. If the plague be spread in the garment, etc.] There were three
certain marks (as Maimonides notes) of the Leprosy in a Garment; the extreme
greeness or redness of the Spots in it; and the spreading of them after they
were first discovered.

The plague is a fretting leprosy.] The Hebrew word Mamereth, which we
translate sretting, is very variously rendered by the ancient Interpreters; as
Bochart has observed in his Hierozoicon. P. I. L. II. cap. 45. where, from the
Arabic Tongue, he thinks it may be best translated an exasperated, or
irritated Leprosy: That is, very sharp and pricking (which suits well with our
Translation) eating into the Garment or Skin, till it was consumed. Abarbanel
translates it painful: because this sort of Leprosy in the body of a Man, was
full of anguish. And so this word is used in XXVIII Ezekiel. 24. where a Thorn is
called Mamir; and translated by us a grieving Thorn.

Ver. 52. He shall therefore burn that garment, etc.] It seems this Leprosy
could never be got out of the Garment or Skin wherein it was; which therefore
was ordered to be burnt, as never likely to be fit for use.

Ver. 53, 54. If it be not spread in the garment, etc.] If the Spot was at a
stay, and did not proceed further, then the Garment, as the following Verse
directs, was to be washed, and shut up for seven days; in which time it
appeared whether the impurity were quite gone, or still remained.

Ver. 55. If the plague has not changed its color.] If washing had not
altered that vicious color, but it still continued very red or green.

And the plague be not spread.] Or, though it be not spread; yet it was to be
pronounced unclean, and adjudged to be burnt.

It is fret inward.] Though it did not spread in breadth, yet it fretted in
depth.

Whether it be bare within or without.] In the Hebrew the words are, In the
baldness of the hinder part, or in its forepart: which seems to be a manner of
speaking taken from v. 42, 43. where he treats of bald heads. And the meaning
is, whether it eat into the right side of the Garment (which is compared to the
forehead) or into the wrong side (which is compared to the hinder part of the
head) making it as bare as a bald head is, when there is not a hair left. For
this sort of Leprosy was wont to eat off the nap of the Cloth, and make it
threadbare.

Ver. 56. And if the Priest look, and behold, the plague be somewhat dark,
after the washing of it, etc.] If it had changed its color, from very green or
red, and become duskish (or, as Abarbanel understands it, the Spot was
contracted or shrunk up in the washing; so that it was gone in part, if not in
whole) then the Priest was to cut out that part of the Garment where the Spot
was; there being some indication that the whole Garment might not be tainted.

Ver. 57. If it appear still in the garment, etc.] If after that Spot was cut
out, the neighboring parts appeared to have a tincture of a very green or red
color, it was to be taken for a demonstration that there was a spreading
Leprosy (as it here follows) in the Garment or Skin, which would proceed till
it was entirely infected with it.

Thou shall burn that wherein the plague is, with fire.] Therefore, the
Leprosy being incurable, there was no other remedy but to destroy the thing
wherein it was.

Ver. 58. And the garment, either warp or woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it
be, which thou shall wash, if the plague be departed from them, etc.]
Whatsoever, after washing, had no appearance of such Spots as are
beforementioned ( v. 49, etc.) remaining in it, there was no further trial to
be made of it, but being washed a second time, it was to be accounted clean; i.
e. fit for common use.

Ver. 59. This is the Law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen or
linen, etc.] By these Rules the Priests were to judge, whether Garments were
lawful to be used or no; and accordingly to determine: as by the Rules in the
foregoing part of the Chapter, they were to judge and pronounce whether Men and
Women were fit to be allowed to keep company with others. And when we consider
how nice and diligent many Nations were, and still are, in their washings,
after any sort of defilement, it is no wonder (as Conradus Pellicanus here
glosses) that some Laws of Cleanliness, even about their Garments, were
prescribed to the Jews; which admonished them of that inward purgation of their
hearts from all impure affections; about which they were to be far more
solicitous. I have forborne to apply what is here said of the Leprosy, in this
Chapter, to the various degrees of Pollutions that are in men's minds; because
that would have made this Book too large; and it is done already by a great
number of Commentators, both Modern and Ancient; particularly, among the later,
by Procopius Gazaeus, and Hesychius Presb. Hierosolymorum, who, sometimes, have
done it very ingeniously.

CHAP. XIV.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] All that is said before,
concerning the Rules whereby they were to discern the Leprosy, from the like
Diseases, were given unto Aaron as well as unto Moses, XIII. 1. For Aaron and
his Posterity were constituted the Judges of such matters, in which they had
need to be well studied and versed. But the way and manner of cleansing a Leper
is delivered only to Moses, to be by him given unto Aaron and his Sons, who
were to depend on him as God's great Minister, and their Instructor in all
Religious Rites.

Ver. 2. This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing.] The
manner and means which God has ordained of purifying a Leper (as Maimonides
expounds it) and restoring him to the Communion of God's People.

He shall be brought unto the Priest.] Not to the House of the Priest; for he
was to go out to the Gate of the Camp, (as appears by the next Verse) and
thither the Leper was to be brought to him. But these words seem to import the
Leper was first to come toward the Camp (unto some place which the Priest, it
is likely, appointed) and then the Priest, having notice of it, was to go out,
and look upon him.

Ver. 3. And the Priest shall go forth out of the Camp.] To the place where the
Leper was, XIII. 46.

And the Priest shall look.] Diligently examine in what condition the Leper is,
by the Rules mentioned in the foregoing Chapter.

And behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper.] The Priest, no
doubt, had been informed, before he went to make the inspection, that there
were good grounds to believe the Man was freed from his Leprosy.

Ver. 4. Then shall the Priest command to take for him, etc.] That some of his
Friends, or such as he ordered, should provide what follows for his
Purification.

Two birds alive, that are clean.] The margin of our Bibles translates it two
Sparrows: and they who take the word in this sense have some pretty conceits
about it. Particularly this; That it signifies him who had lately sat alone,
like a solitary Sparrow on the House top (as the Psalmist speaks) to be now
admitted into the Society of others again. But Origin takes these Birds to have
been Hens, (and so Scaliger shows out of Nicander, that the Greek word (...)
anciently signified; Exerc. 230.) and the LXX. better translate it, (...), two
little Birds, of any sort whatsoever, provided they were clean, i. e. lawful to
be eaten, as the Vulgar truly interpret it. For to restrain it to Sparrows had
been very absurd, whether they had been clean Birds or unclean; because it had
been in vain to say a clean Sparrow, when the whole Species was so by the Law;
and more unaccountable to require a clean Sparrow, if all had been unlawful, as
Bochart rightly observes Lib. I. Hieroz. cap. 22. P. II.

Grotius takes this to have been the (...), or Gift, which is mentioned VIII
Matthew. 4. which was presented by the Leper in the day of his Cleansing; rather
than those mentioned v. 10. of this Chapter. But I can see nothing of the
Nature of a Gift or Present in these Birds, which were not to be offered at the
Altar.

And cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hysop.] Why his Purification was to be made
by these things, Maimonides says he could never understand ( More Nevoch. P.
III. cap. 47.) But Abarbanel adventures to guess at the reason, and imagines
that these four things, the living Birds, the Cedar, the Scarlet, and the
Hysop, signified the Leper to be cured of the four Evils under which he had
labored; in his Flesh, his Humors, his Color, and Smell, which were
represented by the four things beforementioned; and were now all become sound
and good. For the living Birds, he thinks, were a sign that his dead-flesh was
restored to vigor and life again. And the Cedar-wood, which is not easily
corrupted, denoted the Putrefaction was cured which the Leprosy had made in
the Humors of his Body. The Scarlet thread or wool, was an indication of his
good Complexion restored to him: for this is a bright and grateful color, as
the Leprosy was livid and loathsome; signifying (says he) his Blood was
purified, which made a lively color return into his Countenance. And lastly,
the Hysop, which in that Country was a very odoriferous Plant, signified the
nastiness and stench of that Disease was gone. Whatsoever any one may judge of
this account of these things, I think it is very plain, that the Jews being
possessed with a great detestation of the filthiness of the Leper, it was
necessary (as Pellicanus observes) that they should be as strongly persuaded,
by a great many prolix, laborious, and public Ceremonies used for Men's
Purification from it, that they were fit for their Society again.

I omit the moral Reasons which are given by R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept.
CLXXIII. for the use of the forementioned things; and the mystical
significations of these, and all the following Rites of Purification: which the
most learned and ingenious Bochartus has drawn out in near twenty particulars,
Hierozoicon P. II. Lib. I. cap. 22.

Ver. 5. And the Priest shall command, that one of the Birds be killed.] Not as
a Sacrifice; for that could be made no where but at the Altar; whereas this was
without the Camp, at a great distance from the Sanctuary; and therefore was
used only as a Rite of Cleansing. See v. 49.

In an earthen vessel, over running water.] There seems to be a transposition
(as is very usual) in these words; the sense being, over an Earthen Vessel,
that has running, i. e. Spring Water in it. For so R. Levi Barcelonita, in the
place before named, describes this Ceremony, The Priest takes a new Earthen
Vessel, and pours into it living water, till it be a quarter full: which was
the measure, according to the Tradition of the Scribes. Who say also, that the
best and fattest of the two Birds was killed over the Water, and the the Blood
pressed out so long, that the Water was discolored with it; and then he dug
a hole, and buried the dead Bird before the Leper.

Ver. 6. As for the living Bird, he shall take it, and the cedar-wood, and the
scarlet-wooll, etc.] He took a stick of Cedar-wood (as R. Levi Barcelonita
describes this Rite, and Maimonides says the same) which was a Cubit long; and
tying the Bird to it, with its Tail uppermost, together with a bunch of Hysop,
of a handful long, and as much Scarlet-wooll as weighed a Shekel; he then dipped
the Birds Tail and Wings, with the Hysop and Scarlet-wooll, in the Water
tinctured with the Blood of the other Bird.

Ver. 7. And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from his
Leprosy.] R. Levi will have it, that he sprinkled the back of his Hand,
toward the top of it, with this Water and Blood.

Seven times.] In token of a perfect Purification. See IV. 17.

And shall pronounce him clean.] So as to let him come into the Camp, (from
whence he had been excluded) as, in after times, into the City.

And shall let the living Bird loose, into the open field.] The manner of doing
it (as the same R. Levi relates) was, the Priest going into the City, threw the
Bird over the Walls toward the Wilderness. The intention of which was, to show
that the Leper was restored to a free Conversation with all his Neighbors, as
the Bird was, with the rest of its kind. See v. 53.

Ver. 8. And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes.] He was to do
this, and what follows, before he could be admitted into the Camp.

And shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water.] i. e. Wash his whole
Body. All which contributed to cleanliness.

And after that, he shall come into the Camp.] But not enter into his own
Habitation; as appears by the words following.

And tarry abroad out of his Tent seven days.] They lived in Tents while they
remained in the Wilderness, which every Man had apart, for himself and for his
Family. Unto which a Leper was not restored immediately after his Admission
into the Camp; for fear there should be any undiscerned remainder of his
Disease, whereby his Wife and Children might be endangered. For which reason he
might not lie with his Wife, till seven days were over.

Ver. 9. But on the seventh day he shall shave all his hair off his head, etc.]
This may be thought to have been the time appointed for the shaving mentioned
in the foregoing Verse: but R. Levi, and other Hebrew Doctors, understand it of
a second shaving at the seven days end, that they might be assured nothing of
the Leprosy remained.

Even all his hair he shall shave off.] Under his Armholes, and in other places
of the Body where it uses to grow; as well as the Hair of his head, and his
beard, and his eyebrows.

And he shall wash his clothes.] This seems to be a second washing, after the
first, at the end of seven days. And the Hebrew Doctors note, that the killing
of the Bird, the shaving and the sprinkling, were all to be done in the day
time; the rest might be done either by day, or by night.

Also he shall wash his flesh in water.] His whole Body. For which end such a
measure is prescribed by the Hebrew Tradition, as would cover it entirely.

And he shall be clean.] So as to be not only restored to his Tent, but
admitted to go to the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and offer the Sacrifices
appointed (in the following part of this Chapter) for his complete
Purification. Till which time he was called Mechussar Kapparah, one that needed
Expiation; and was not permitted to eat of the holy things.

Ver. 10. And on the eighth day.] If we may believe the Hebrew Tradition, he
washed himself again on this day, in the Court of the Women; where there was a
Room, called the Chamber of the Lepers, provided for that purpose. So
Maimonides. Which great Caution was imitated by the primitive Christians, who
would not receive great Sinners into their Communion again, till they had made
a long trial of the Truth of their Repentance.

He shall take two he-lambs without blemish, and one ewe-lamb without blemish.]
There were three kinds of Sacrifices to be offered upon this occasion, viz. a
Trepass Offering, a Sin-offering, and a Burnt-offering: for which these three
Lambs were to be provided.

Of the first year.] Such were all the Lambs to be, both Male and Female.

And three tenth deals of fine flour for a Meat Offering.] To each of these
Sacrifices there was a Meat Offering appointed, consisting of a tenth part of
an Ephah of fine Flour, i. e. an Omer. See XVI Exodus 36. Which is a thing
unusual; for we read of no Meat Offerings ordered (in the IV. and Vth Chapters
of this Book, which treat of them) to accompany either Trespass-offerings or
Sin Offerings. But there were peculiar Rites belonging to the cleansing of a
Leper, different from the common Usages; to make him sensible how great a Mercy
he had received from God, who alone could cure this Disease which his hand had
inflicted.

Mingled with oil.] As the manner was in Meat Offerings. See Chap. II. v. 1.

And one log of oil.] Which served to another purpose, mentioned v. 15, 16. of
this Chapter. And Oil being of an healing virtue, may be thought to denote the
perfect Health and Soundness to which the Leper was now restored; as the
fragrancy of it put him in mind of the Happiness he now enjoyed.

A Log was the smallest Measure among the Jews, containing about half a Pint of
our Measure, as a very learned Prelate of our own (Dr. Cumberland) has
computed in his Scripture Weights and Measures, p. 86.

Ver. 11. And the Priest that makes him clean.] Who performs this office of
declaring the Leper perfectly clean.

Shall present the man that is to be made clean, and those things before the
LORD, at the door, etc.] He set the Man in the first place at the Eastgate of
the Court of the Israelites (which in after times was called the Gate of
Nicanor) with his face toward the Sanctuary. For here all those, who needed
Expiation, stood: it being unlawful for them to enter into the Court of the
Israelites, until the Expiation was made. So Maimonides observes in his
Treatise called Mechussare Kapparah, sect. 4.

Ver. 12. And the Priest shall take one he-lamb, and offer him.] Next he was to
bring one of the Lambs to the same place, and present him to the LORD; as is
directed in the end of the Verse: For that is meant here by offering him; the
slaying of him following in the next Verse.

For a Trepass Offering.] After the manner that the Trespass-offerings were
offered (of which see Chap. VII.) that he might beg pardon of God (as Abarbanel
understands it) for such sins as he had ignorantly committed.

And the log of oil.] Which was presented at the same time with the Lamb.

And wave them.] Both the Lamb, and the Log of Oil.

For a wave-offering before the LORD.] Which was done by waving them to and
fro, up and down, and turning toward all the four quarters of the World, as
was noted before. But Maimonides says, this was waved toward the East: and if
he waved them both together, or separated one from the other, the Lamb first,
and afterward the Log of Oil, it made no difference.

Ver. 13. And he shall slay the Lamb.] The Lamb was brought, says the same
Author in the forenamed Treatise, to the Door of the Court where the leprous
Man stood; who stretched out his hands into the Court, and laid them upon his
Sacrifice: after which it was killed, as is here directed.

In the place where he shall kill the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering.]
See VI. 25.

In the holy place.] In the Court of the Tabernacle, at the North-side of the
Altar of Burnt-offering, (Chap. I. 11.) which was a place more holy than the
Entrance, or East End of the Court, where the Peace Offerings were to be
killed, III. 2.

For as the sin-offering is the Priests, so is the trepass offering.] See VII.
7. Both of them were to be eaten by the Priests in the Court of God's House;
and therefore were equally holy.

It is most holy.] See II. 3.

Ver. 14. And the Priest shall take some of the blood of the
trepass offering.] There stood two Priests, as Maimonides represents it (in
his Treatise beforementioned, sect. 4.) ready to receive the Blood of the
Lamb: one, in an holy Vessel, with which he sprinkled the Altar; the other, in
his right hand, which he poured into his left: And then with the forefinger of
his right hand, put it upon the right Ear, etc. of him that was to be cleansed.

And the Priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his
right foot.] The Priest standing within the Court at the Entrance of it, and
the Man standing still without; the Man thrust his Head within the Gate, and
the Priest put some of the Blood which he held in his hand upon the tip of his
right Ear. After which, the Man stretched out his right Arm, and the Priest put
some of the same Blood upon the Thumb of his right Hand: and next, his right
Leg, on the great Toe of which he likewise put some more Blood. Thus Maimonides
in the same place. Where he says, If the Priest had put the Blood upon the
left Ear, Thumb, or Toe, all had been of no effect. And he adds, ( sect. 5.)
that the Blood was put upon half of the flap of his Ear; and upon the whole
breadth of the top of his Thumb, and great Toe; for if he put it on the sides,
or beneath, it was ineffectual. Which is very reasonable to believe, because
there was no natural efficacy in these things to cleanse a Leper; but it
depended wholly upon the will and pleasure of God, which was punctually
therefore to be observed; that by the exact performance of all these Ceremonial
Signs (as Pellicanus speaks) in the face of the Church, all Men might be
satisfied that he was perfectly purified; and he might be publicly authorized
to associate himself with the rest of God's People, and be no longer abominated
by them for his impurity. For the signification of these Ceremonies some think
to have been, that he was restored to free Communion with God, and with Man.
See XXIX Exodus 20. And Abarbanel looks upon them as a signification also, that
the Leprosy began in those parts of the Body (which are less fleshy and fat)
and were now therefore particularly declared clean. But whatever the intention
of them was, there was a just and wise reason, no doubt, for them; though at
this distance from those Ages, Countries, and Customs, etc. we may not be able
to discover it.

Ver. 15. And the Priest shall take some of the log of oil, and pour it into
the palm of his own left hand.] Or, as Maimonides says, he might pour some of
it into the left hand of the other Priest, who sprinkled the Blood at the Altar.

Ver. 16. And the Priest shall dip his right finger in the oil, etc.] The
forefinger of his right hand, as the same Hebrew Doctor observes.

And shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger, seven times before the LORD.]
At every sprinkling he dipped his finger in the Oil, and directed it toward the
most holy place, where God dwelt: though if it were not exactly directed to it,
the same Doctor says, the sprinkling was good.

Ver. 17. And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand, shall the Priest put
upon the tip of the right ear, etc.] Then the Priest returned to the Man who
was to be cleansed, upon the tip of whose Ear, and Thumb, and Toe, he had put
the Blood of the Trepass Offering, and put some of this Oil upon that Blood.
Which seems to have been a Token of Forgiveness by the Blood; and of Healing by
the Oil.

Ver. 18. And the remnant of the oil that is in the Priests hand, he shall pour
upon the head of him that is to be cleansed.] Which one thing, if it were
omitted, the Leper was not cleansed. As for the rest of the Log of Oil, which
was not all poured into his hand, but only some of it ( v. 15.) that was
distributed to the Priests (as the same Maimonides observes) who alone might
eat it, in the Court of the Tabernacle, as they did other holy things. But none
might taste of it, before the sprinkling, and other things beforementioned,
were performed. If any Man did, he was beaten; as he was who are the holy
things before the sprinkling of the Blood. For that was a great profaneness
for any Person to take his portion, before God had that which belonged unto him.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD.] This seems to
suppose that the Leprosy was inflicted as a Punishment for some Sin, which by
this Sacrifice was taken away. But the word make atonement does not always
signify the taking away Sin; but sometimes merely making a thing fit for holy
uses. Thus Moses is said to make an atonement for the Altar, XXIX Exodus 36, 37.
(See there.) and in the same sense may an Atonement be said to be made for the
Leper by this Sacrifice; which restored him to be made partaker of the holy
things offered at the Altar. See below v. 53.

Ver. 19. And the Priest shall offer the Sin-offering.] The other He-lamb
mentioned v. 10. which was to be offered after the manner of the Sin-offering,
for such Offenses (as Abarbanel understands it) as he knew he had committed.

And make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed.] His atonement was begun
by the Trepass Offering (v. 18.) and was advanced by this. Which Abarbanel
thinks was added, to make Men more cautious how they contracted any sort of
Impurity, which would put them to great charges, before they were purged from
it. For he could find no other reason, he says, for the like Sacrifices which
were offered by him that had an Issue, or had meddled with a menstruous Woman,
or been defiled by the dead, or tasted swines-flesh, or any creeping thing.

And afterward he shall kill the burnt-offering.] This being a Present to God
himself, was not accepted till by the other Offerings for Trespass and Sin, the
Man was purified. And this I take to be properly the (...), or Gift, mentioned
by our Savior, VIII Matthew. 4.

Ver. 20. And the Priest shall offer the burnt-offering, and the meat offering
upon the Altar.] There were so many Offerings made, to show the greatness of
his Uncleanness, and now his perfect Cure. We read of no Meat Offering made
with the two former Sacrifices, but the three tenth deals of fine flour
(mentioned v. 10.) seem to signify, every one of these Sacrifices, the
Trepass Offering, the Sin-offering, and the Burnt-offering, had its proportion
of a tenth deal of Flour offered with it. But if we think the whole was
appropriated to the Burnt-offering, yet it was the same thing to the Leper,
whose cleansing cost him as dear one way as the other. Only by understanding it
thus, the Priest perhaps had a greater reward for his pains; if we suppose he
only burnt an handful upon the Altar, (as the manner was in these Offerings)
and had all the rest to his own use. See Chap. II. v. 2, 3.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.] By
this, his Atonement was completed; and he was made so perfectly clean, as to
be admitted to be partaker of the Altar, when Peace Offerings were sacrificed.

But this very long Process, through so many different Rites, and for so many
days, before Men could be purified from a legal defilement in their Bodies, was
a plain instruction to all Persons of good sense, how much more difficult it
would prove to cleanse their Souls from those moral Impurities which they
contracted by long habits of sin: and what great pains must be taken both by
the Sinners themselves, and by God's Ministers, to root them out; and with what
repeated Prayers the Mercy of God toward them was to be implored; of which
they ought not hastily to presume.

Ver. 21. And if he be poor, and cannot get so much.] The Divine Goodness
always made a merciful provision, that his Service should not be burdensome to
Men; and therefore took care the Poor should not be charged with too costly
Sacrifices; and yet partake of the benefit of them, as much as the Rich. See I.
14, 17. V. 11, etc.

He shall take.] After he had undergone all the Purgations beforementioned,
from the fourth Verse of this Chapter to the tenth: which continued for seven
days together. For though his Poverty excused him from such chargeable
Sacrifices, as others of greater ability were to offer; yet he was to be at all
the trouble and pains that others took for their Purification; there being not
one of the Rites before prescribed, which are omitted in the following Verses,
only they were less expensive.

One Lamb for a trepass offering.] It is not determined whether it should be
an He-lamb or an Ewe-lamb; and therefore it was left indifferent, for the
greater ease of his Poverty; only it was to be of the first year, and without
blemish, as is prescribed v. 10.

To be waved.] According to the directions given v. 12.

To make an atonement for him.] Which was effected by this, as well as by a
more valuable Sacrifice; when it was the best he had to offer.

And one tenth deal of fine flour, mingled with oil.] Instead of three tenth
deals, which the richer sort were to offer, v. 10. But if a poor Man had vowed
he would offer all that is prescribed in that Verse, in case God would be
pleased to cure him, he was bound thereby (as Maimonides says in the forenamed
Treatise) and this smaller Sacrifice would not serve for his Cleansing; but by
the help of his Friends, or Neighbors, he was to procure all that he had vowed.

And a log of oil.] This is the same quantity, the better sort were to offer;
for Oil was not dear in this Country.

Ver. 22. And two turtle doves, or two young pigeons.] Instead of the other two
Lambs, required of those who could provide them v. 10.

Such as he is able to get.] The best he could procure: but the meanest would
be accepted, if he could get no better.

And the one shall be a sin-offering, and the other a burnt-offering.] Neither
of which were to be omitted, though the things offered were but mean. See I.
14. V. 11. it being necessary he should perform all Religious Services,
according to his Ability. And I think, the observation of Conr. Pellicanus is
not absurd, that though there was an exchange made of two Lambs for two Turtle
Doves, or two young Pigeons, in consideration of a Man's Poverty; yet no Person
whatsoever, whether Rich or Poor, could be cleansed without the Sacrifice of
one Lamb: which may well be looked upon as a figure of the Lamb of God, who
alone takes away the Sins of the whole World.

Ver. 23. And he shall bring them on the eighth day.] This plainly suggests,
that this poor Man had done all that was prescribed on the seven days
foregoing, as well as the rich.

For his cleansing unto the Priest, unto the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, etc.] See v. 10, 11, etc. where all that follows here, unto v.
33. is explained: there being the same Rites prescribed, and in the same words,
about a poor Man, which were used for the Cleansing of the rich.

Ver. 24. And the Priest shall take the Lamb of the Trepass Offering.] See v.
12.

Ver. 25. And he shall kill the Lamb.] See v. 13.

And shall take some of the blood of the Trepass Offering, and put it upon the
tip, etc.] See this explained v. 14.

Ver. 26. And the Priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left
hand.] See v. 15. It is not said either there or here how much, but only some
of the Oil (as it is there translated) that is, as much as the Priest thought
would be sufficient.

Ver. 27. And the Priest shall sprinkle with his right finger, etc.] According
to the Directions given before v. 16.

Ver. 28. And the Priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand, upon the tip
of the right ear, etc.] See v. 17.

Upon the place of the blood of the trepass offering.] It being not said here,
upon the blood of the Trepass Offering, (as the words are v. 17.) but upon the
place of the blood. The Jews infer from thence, That if the Blood laid upon the
tip of the Ear, Thumb, or Toe, were by any means wiped off, it was sufficient
to lay the Oil in the very place where the Blood had been. So Maimonides in the
forenamed Treatise, concerning those that wanted Expiation, sect. 5. But that
which he there adds is very unreasonable; That if a Man wanted the Thumb of his
right hand, or the great Toe of his right Foot, or the Lap of his right Ear, he
could never be purified from his Uncleanness. For it is not to be thought that
God would make his Cleansing impossible, who was maimed or defective in any of
these parts: which had been to add one Misery to another. Therefore in this
Case the Blood and the Oil might be put upon the parts next to these.

Ver. 29. And the rest of the oil that is in the Priests hand, he shall put
upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, etc.] See v. 18.

Ver. 30. And he shall offer the one of the turtle doves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get.] i. e. The best that he is able to procure.

Ver. 31. Even such as he is able to get.] He repeats it again, that the Man
might not be troubled if he was not able to procure the very best, provided he
did his endeavor to bring the best that his Estate could reach.

The one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, etc.] See v.
19, 20.

Ver. 32. This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy.] Who was
shut out of the Camp, because of the Leprosy, which formerly appeared in him.

Whose hand is not able to get that which pertains to his cleansing.] Who is
so poor, that he cannot procure what is prescribed to those that are able to
make such Offerings as are beforementioned ( v. 10, etc.) for their reception
into the Congregation again, when they are found to be free from their Leprosy.

But here Maimonides puts this Case; Suppose a Man having brought the Offering
of the Poor, suddenly becomes Rich; or on the contrary, having brought a rich
Man's Offering, immediately becomes poor, what is to be done? He answers; If
this happen before the Sacrifices be finished, he is to proceed according to
the state in which he was when his Sin-offering was offered: that is, offer the
Sacrifice of a rich Man, viz. another Lamb, if he was then rich; or the
Sacrifice of a poor Man, if he was then poor.

Ver. 33. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying.] Now he again
speaks to them both conjunctly, (which he did not v. 1.) as he had done XIII.
1. because Aaron and his Sons were peculiarly concerned to judge concerning the
Leprosy in Houses, as well as in their Inhabitants.

Ver. 34. When ye come into the Land of Canaan.] This seems to import that the
Leprosy did not infect their Habitations, till they came into the Land of
Canaan. When some of the Rabins say (as R. Levi Barcelonita observes, Praecept.
CLXXVII.) that God sent this Plague for the good of the Israelites, into
certain Houses, that they being pulled down, the Treasure which the Amorites
had hidden there, might be discovered. But this looks like one of their Dreams,
who are not willing to think themselves, at any time, out of the Favor of God.

Which I give you for your possession.] From these words (and those in the
conclusion of this Verse, where Canaan is called the Land of their Possession)
Moses bar Nachman draws a better conclusion; That the Leprosy was a Divine
Stroke in this Country, and no where else; because it was a holy Land, bestowed
upon the Israelites by God, who dwelt here himself, and punished great Offenses
against his Divine Majesty with this sore Disease; whereby he banished them
from his Presence, till they amended.

And I put the plague of Leprosy upon a House, etc.] These words seem to be a
good ground to think, that this Plague was a supernatural stroke: not like the
Contagion which now adheres to the Houses and Clothes of those who have the
Pestilence. Thus Abarbanel understands it, when he says, I put the Plague, it
shows the thing was not natural; but proceeded from the special Providence and
Pleasure of the blessed God. And so the Author of Sepher Cosri (Pars II. sect.
58.) God inflicted this Plague of Leprosy upon Houses and Garments, as a
punishment for lesser Sins: and when Men continued still to multiply
Transgressions, then it invaded their Bodies. So that it began in the Houses
which were not infected by the Inhabitants; but the Inhabitants by the Houses.
And Maimonides will have this to have been the punishment of an evil Tongue;
i.e. of Detraction and Calumny; which began in the Walls of his House, and went
no further, but vanished, if he repented of his Sin. But if he persisted in his
rebellious Courses, it proceeded to his Household Stuff: and if he still went
on, it invaded his Garments; and at last his Body, More Nevoch. P. III. cap.
47. The very same is quoted by Muscatus out of Midrash Ruth, to this sense;
That God is so very merciful, as not at first to inflict Punishment on Men's
Bodies, as appears in the Case of Job; whose Goods were first destroyed, and
then his Children, before his Body was touched. And in the Plagues of Egypt it
self, whose Vines and Fig Trees God smote, and then their Cattle, before he
killed their Firstborn. In the same manner the Plague of Leprosy, first
invaded a Man's Habitation; though not the whole House, but some Stones only,
in the beginning of it. Then it spread all over, till the House was pulled
down. From thence it went to Men's Garments; and, if they did not amend, to
their Bodies; till in the issue they were shut out of the Camp, from the
Company of their Brethren. R. Levi Barcelonita explains it after the same
manner, in the place beforementioned. And Abarbanel thinks the end and
intention of this Miracle (as he calls it) was, to be a Caution and Admonition
from God, that the Man might be converted from his Sins: as if the Stone in the
Wall had cried out, and the Beam out of the Timber answered it (as Habbakkuk
speaks, II. 11.) to the Master of the House, saying, Turn unto the LORD thy
God, O Israel: behold the Plague is come into thy House; and if thou will not
be converted, it shall abide upon thee and thy Children. And this he says is
the Opinion of their Rabbis.

In an house.] They had no Houses till they came into Canaan; but dwelt in
Tents.

Of the land of your possession.] The Jews were so fond of Jerusalem, that they
have excepted it from this Plague; because, says the forenamed R. Levi,
Jerusalem was not divided among the Tribes; and therefore cannot be
comprehended under the name of their possession. This he had out of the G^mara
of Bava kama, where this is reckoned among the ten Privileges of the holy
City, That it was not defiled with the Plague of Leprosy. See Constable.
L'Empereur in his Annotations on Bava kama, cap. 7. sect. 7.

Ver. 35. And he that owes the house, shall come and tell the Priest, etc.] As
soon as any Inhabitant (for he is meant by him that owes the House) had a
suspicion that this Plague was in his Dwelling, he was bound to give notice of
it to the Priest; or else was in danger to incur a further punishment.

Ver. 36. Then the Priest shall command that they empty the House.] Of all the
Household Stuff; and that the Inhabitants also should go out of it.

Before the Priest go into it to see the plague.] To see whether that which the
Man suspected, was the Plague or no.

That all that is in the House be not made unclean.] Till the Priest had given
his Judgment, all things in the House were accounted clean: as till a Man was
pronounced by him to have a Leprosy, no body was bound to avoid his Company.

And afterward the Priest shall go in to see the House.] When it was cleared of
every thing that might hinder his exact inspection.

Ver. 37. And behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house.] They were
principally to be searched, together with the Pavement, and the Roof; where
this Plague appeared.

With hollow strakes.] There was the same kind of mark of a Leprosy in an
House, that there was of it in the Body of a Man: For if a Spot was deeper than
the Skin of the Flesh, (XIII. 3.) it was a bad token: in like manner, when
there were hollow or depressed strakes in the Wall of an House (or, as it is in
the latter end of this Verse, in sight lower than the Wall) it was a sign of
the Leprosy, which began to corrode and eat into it. This seems to be the
import of the Hebrew word Schickharuroth, which signifies something that lies
deep, and is sunk into the place where it is. For that is a more probable
derivation of the word, from Schakah, than that of Forsterus, who derives it
from Schakar, which signifies false. And so the LXX. translate it by the Greek
word (...), signifying the Leprosy had so eaten into the Stones, as to have
pitted them, (as we speak in our Language) i. e. made a cavity in them. Which
the Jews justly look upon as a thing very extraordinary; a miraculous effect
(as Maimonides calls it) of the Divine hand.

Greenish or reddish.] Which was the mark of a Leprosy in a Garment, XIII. 49.

Ver. 38. Then the Priest shall go out of the House, to the door of the house.]
Where he was to stay till he had seen the House shut up; that none might go
into it, and thereby be endangered to be defiled.

And shut it up seven days.] In which time he might be able to make a certain
Judgment, whether it was the Leprosy or no, (See XIII. 4.) For the Plague
would sooner appear, when the House was not inhabited.

Ver. 39. And the Priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look.]
Make a new inspection, as he did when a Man, or a Garment were suspected to
have the Leprosy, XIII. 6, 51.

And behold, if the plague be spread in the walls of the house.] This was a bad
sign, in a Man's Body, or Garment, XIII. 5, 51.

Ver. 40. Then the Priest shall command that they take away the stones in which
the plague is.] As far as it was spread in the Walls of the House; which it
seems were generally made of Stone, when they came to Canaan. Meaner Houses,
the Jews say, were not infected with the Leprosy: nor an Habitation called a
House (as their Doctors affirm) unless it had four Walls of four Cubits high,
built of Stones and Timber, v. 45.

And they shall cast them into an unclean place, without the City.] Where they
threw their Dung, and all manner of Filth. For such places there were without
their Cities; as there were others where no manner of Filth might be thrown;
which were called clean places. See IV. 12.

Ver. 41. And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, etc.]
All the rest of the Walls, where no Spots as yet appeared, were to be scraped;
that if any of the Contagion stuck to them, it might be taken away, and the
spreading of it prevented. For which end, these Scrapings were also thrown out
into the same unclean place, where the Stones were laid.

Ver. 42. And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those
stones.] Put fresh untainted Stones, in the room of the other which were taken
out of the Walls.

And he shall take other mortar and plaster the house.] Command them to lay
fresh Plaster all over the Walls, where they were scraped.

Ver. 43. And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, etc. after
he has taken away the stones, etc.] If after all the forementioned care (of
putting in new Stones, scraping, and new plaistering the Walls) the same marks
appeared again, which are mentioned v. 37. the House was to be pulled down, as
it is directed in the next Verse but one.

Ver. 44. Then the Priest shall come and look.] Upon notice given him; or
perhaps he was bound to come after a certain time, and examine the state of it.

And behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy.]
Of the same nature with that in a Garment, which could not be stopped. See XIII.
51.

It is unclean.] Incapable to be cleansed from the Leprosy, and therefore (as
it follows) to be demolished.

Ver. 45. And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber
thereof, and all the mortar of the house.] This was a damage to the Owner, but
it was to prevent a greater unto him, and unto others: and was not done till
there was no remedy. For if he had hearkened to the Stones that cried out of the
Wall, (as Abarbanel speaks) saying, Repent and amend, etc. (which was the
meaning of this Plague) the Infection would have spread no further. See v. 34.
The same Author fancies, that this Plague in their Houses, was an Emblem of the
Idolatry they would exercise there, when they came into Canaan: And that the
pulling down of their Houses, was a sign of the destruction of the Sanctuary it
self, because of their iniquities. This seems to be something forced: but we
may not unfitly look upon this manner of proceeding with their Houses, when
they were infected (some of the Stones whereof were taken out, etc. before all
was pulled down) as a representation of God's proceedings with them, when they
rebelled against him: For first, some of them were removed; and then the whole
Nation, by degrees, very much impaired: before they were all carried captive
out of their own Land.

And he shall carry them forth out of the City, into an unclean place.] Order
them to be carried to the place, where the Stones and the scrapings of the
House, mentioned v. 40, 41. were thrown. Which may well be looked upon as a
Figure of their being carried away for their wickedness into Heathen Countries,
which in Scripture are called unclean Lands. Such the Land of Canaan was before
they came into it, IX Ezra 11. and such were all People uncircumcised, LII Isa.
1.

Ver. 46. Moreover, he that goes into the house all the while that it is shut
up, etc.] If he did but enter within the door of the House, while it remained
under a suspicion of being defiled, he contracted a defilement himself, under
which he lay till Night. Which strict care to keep the Israelites free from all
such Pollutions, is an admonishment to us (as Conradus Pellicanus well notes)
to avoid all suspected Places, and Company: according to the Exhortation of the
Apostle, Abstain from all appearance of evil.

Ver. 47. And he that lies in the house, shall wash his clothes.] It sufficed
for the cleansing of him that only entered into such an House, but made no stay
there, to be separated for a short time from Society: But he that lay there all
night, was to do more for his Purification; being in more danger to bring away
the Infection, if there were any.

And he that eats in the house shall wash his clothes.] He that made a Meal
there, was also exposed to danger, and therefore was bound to wash his Clothes
(which were very apt to catch the Infection) though he did not stay so long as
to lie there.

Ver. 48. If the plague has not spread in the house, after it was plaistered,
then the Priest shall ponounce the house clean.] Just as it was in the Leprosy
in Men's Bodies, or Garments, XIII. 6, 53.

Because the plague is healed.] A stop being put to its progress, it was a sign
the House was free from the Plague, of which it was suspected.

Ver. 49. And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar-wood, and
scarlet, and hysop.] The very same Rites are used for the cleansing of an
House, which were appointed for the cleansing of a Man, v. 4. And the reason of
it was, as Abarbanel well conjectures, to denote that the House was smitten for
the Man's sake; who was to look upon himself as saved and preserved by the
Divine Mercy.

It is not said here indeed that these two Birds should be alive and clean (as
is directed v. 4.) but that is necessarily understood; for he is ordered
immediately to kill one of the Birds, and let the other fly away, (as in the
former case) and nothing unclean could be of effect to cleanse a Man from
Uncleanness.

Ver. 51. And he shall take the cedar-wood, and the hysop, etc.] This whole
Verse is explained before v. 6. which differs not from this in any thing; but
only, that the living Bird is there mentioned in the first place, and here in
the last: and in this Verse is more distinctly declared, that all these things
should be dipped, in the blood of the slain Bird, and in the running water.

Ver. 52. And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, etc.]
There is nothing to be observed here, more than before, but only this, That the
House is said to be cleansed by the living Bird, as well as by the blood of
that which was slain: its flying away being a declaration the House was free
for any Man's Habitation. Thus the Scapegoat, which was let run into the
Wilderness, took away the Sins of the People, as well as the Goat offered at
the Altar. See XVI. 5.

Ver. 53. And he shall let go the living bird out of the City, into the open
field.] This justifies what the Jewish Doctors say upon v. 7. See there.

And make an atonement for the house.] An Atonement was made for the House, no
otherways than for the Altar (See upon v. 18.) by cleansing it so, as to make
it fit for any Man to dwell in it.

And it shall be clean.] The Owner (who was commanded to forsake the House, v.
36.) or any one else might return to it, and inhabit it, as before it was
suspected to have the Plague in it.

Ver. 54. This is the law for all manner plague and leprosy, and scall.] The
Rule whereby to judge and to cleanse all Leprosies in the Bodies of Men; and
that Leprosy in the Head or the Beard, called a Scall, XIII. 30, 31, 32, to v.
38.

Ver. 55, 56. And for the Leprosy of a garment, and of an house, and for a
rising, etc.] The foregoing Verse, and these two, are a recapitulation of the
Laws delivered in the XIIIth Chapter, and in this.

Ver. 57. To teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean.] To guide the
Priest in judgment, when to pronounce a Man, a Garment, or an House infected
with the Leprosy; or when to declare them free from it.

This is the Law of Leprosy.] Here is a Conclusion of what belongs to this
Matter. Which profane Minds, who love to disparage the Holy Scripture, and
admire no ancient Authors, but such as Homer, Virgil, and Plautus (to use the
words of Pellicanus upon v. 39.) may deride as unworthy to be made a part of a
Divine Law. But Men better disposed may discern herein the great goodness of
God to the Israelites, whom he had adopted for his peculiar People, in taking
care to give them Precepts about all manner of things, which were many ways
profitable, both for the regulating their Manners, and preserving their Health;
and accustoming them to an exact Obedience to him, in every thing. And who does
not see that by these external Rites and Ceremonies, he admonishes us to keep
pure Consciences void of Offense, both toward God and Men; in a strict
observance of all the Rules of our most holy Religion?

CHAP. XV.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, and to Aaron, saying.] For Aaron was
particularly concerned to see these Laws observed, as well as the foregoing.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them.] Moses, it is
likely, first delivered these Laws to them, in the presence of Aaron; who
afterward instructed and exhorted them to the observance of them.

When any man has a running issue.] He speaks of that Disease, which
Physicians call a Gonorrhaea: which commonly proceeded from an ill course of
Life, and had in those Countries a great virulency in it. If it proceeded
merely from some strain in the back, by carrying too great a Burden, or by
violent leaping (and several other natural Causes, (which Maimonides enumerates
in his Mechuss. Kapparah, cap. 2.) the Man was not defiled with it, nor
concerned in this Law. And therefore the Causes from whence it proceeded, were
diligently to be considered, as Maimonides there admonishes; which might be
discerned by such effects, as made it a very nasty and offensive Disease in
those hot Countries, as it is sometimes here in these colder Climates.

Out of his flesh.] The word Flesh signifies the Secret Parts, as it does VI.
10. XVII Genesis 13. XVI Ezekiel. 26. and other places.

Because of his issue he is unclean.] Upon that account alone he was to be kept
from the Sanctuary, and separated from Company. See v. 31.

Ver. 3. And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue.] The Rule whereby to
judge of it.

Whether the flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue,
it is his uncleanness.] Whether there were a continued distillation of the
corrupt Matter, or it was so coagulated as to stop in the passage: either way,
it made the Man unclean.

Be stopped from his issue.] Rather, with his issue; as the Hebrew words will
bear.

Ver. 4. Every bed whereon he lies that bath the issue, is unclean: and every
thing whereon he sits, etc.] This, and the following Verses, unto v. 13. are
a demonstration that this Disease made a Man legally Unclean to a very high
degree: being so offensive, that not only every thing he touched became
unclean, but whosoever touched such things, was made unclean also. There is
little in them, that needs any Explication: the only difficulty was to know,
whether a Man labored under this Disease. Which was not wholly left unto his
Conscience to determine; but his Countenance discovered it: the continual Flux
making a great alteration in the whole habit of his Body. For virulent
Gonorrhaea's sometimes last several years, (as Th. Bartholinus says he knew
one that had it ten years, and was reduced to skin and bone) being frequently
accompanied with Inflammations and Ulcers in the neighboring parts, from which
the filthy Humor flows, Bartholin. Histor. Artatom. Cent. II. Hist. XXXVI.

Ver. 5. And whosoever touches his bed.] Upon which he has lain.

Shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water; and be unclean until the
even.] Which was the Law in other Cases, when Men bad touched an unclean thing,
XI. 28.

Ver. 6. And he that sits on any thing, whereon he sat that has the issue.]
Though he did but just sit down, and did it ignorantly; presently rising up
aagain as soon as he knew his Error; he became defiled, and might not go to the
Sanctuary till he was purified, by washing his Clothes and himself in water.

Ver. 7. And he that touches the flesh of him that has the issue.] That is,
any part of his Body.

Ver. 8. And if he that has the issue spit upon him that is clean, etc.] By
the same reason, if he blowed his Nose upon him, it defiled him.

Then he shall wash his clothes.] i. e. The Man upon whom the Spittle fell.

Ver. 9. And what saddle soever he rides upon, etc.] By the same reason that
the Seat he sat upon, was defiled, v. 4.

Ver. 10. And whosoever touches any thing that was under him, etc.] Either the
Saddle, or any thing else that was under him when he rode.

And he that bears any of those things, etc.] Removes them from one place to
another; though it be to carry them out of the way, that others may not be
defiled by them unawares.

Ver. 11. And whomsoever he touches that has the issue (and has not rinsed
his hands in water) he shall wash, etc.] It is somewhat doubtful, whether these
words (has not washed his hands in water) belong to him that had the Issue; or
to him that his hands touched. Most understand it of the former, That if the
Man who had an Issue touched any other Man, and had not first washed his hands,
that Man whom he touched should be defiled. But the Syriack takes it to refer
to the Man that was touched by him, who, if he did not immediately wash his
hands with water, was to be cleansed after a more laborious manner, by washing
his Clothes, and bathing himself in Water. But I do not see how washing of his
hands could cleanse him; when the Man that had the Issue, touched perhaps some
other part of his Body.

Ver. 12. And the vessel of earth that he touches, which has the issue, shall
be broken, etc.] That it might not be employed hereafter to any use. See XI.
33. VI. 28.

And every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.] Such Vessels were not
broken, but only well washed, because they were not so easily made as the
other; and were of more value. There are so many washings prescribed here, and
on other occasions, that it is reasonable to believe, there were not only at
Jerusalem, and in all other Cities, but in every Village, several bathing
places contrived, for these Legal Purifications; that Men might without much
labor be capable to fulfill these Precepts. And one cannot but think, that such
frequent washings were enjoined, to admonish them how carefully they ought to
preserve Purity of Heart and Life.

Ver. 13. And when he that has an issue is cleansed of his issue.] It having
ceased for some time.

Then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing.] That there
might be sufficient proof made, whether the Issue was stopped: that is, he was
really cured.

And wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh.] In the conclusion of the seventh
day.

In running water.] i. e. Spring Water (as we speak) which was most pure.
River-water was the same which comes from Springs.

And shall be clean.] So that he might keep Company with his Neighbors; but
not have Communion with God at the Sanctuary, till after the following
Sacrifices were offered. For, if in the end of the seventh day, after his
washing, the Flux returned again, all this labor was lost, and he was to stay
seven days more; as Maimonides observes in his Treatise on this Subject, cap. 3.

Ver. 14. And on the eighth day.] If he continued free from the Flux, after his
washing on the seventh day, in the Evening.

He shall take to him two turtle doves, or two young pigeons.] These were the
Sacrifices appointed for the meaner sort of People, who were not able to be at
the charge of a Lamb, or other Sacrifices of the Flock or Herd, V. 7. XII. 8.
And perhaps the great trouble the Man had endured, and given others while he
labored under this Disease, might be considered so far, as to put him to as
little charge as might be, for his Purification.

And come before the LORD, unto the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] But not into the Court of the Israelites, till his Sacrifices
were offered.

Ver. 15. And the Priest shall offer them, the one for a sin-offering, and the
other for a burnt-offering.] As in the Case of a poor Leper, (XIV. 31.) who was
bound also to offer a Trepass Offering of greater value.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD, for his
issue.] Perfectly restore him to partake of holy things; of which he was
debarred while he had his Issue. And here it may be fit to observe, That the
greater part of all the Legal Defilements, depended upon the Seat or Place of
the Divine Majesty; (as the Author of Sepher Cosri speaks, Pars III. sect. 49.)
whose Presence there made their Country be called the Holy Land, and was the
ground of all these Injunctions about Cleanliness. To which, he thinks, they
have no Obligations at this day, now that they live in an unclean Land, ( i. e.
among us Gentiles) and want the Presence of the Divine Majesty among them.

Ver. 16. And if any man's seed of copulation.] Though the holy Writers speak
very plainly of some things, that we think it not so modest to name in that
manner; yet it is observable on the other hand, that in things of the same
nature, they use Circumlocutions to express them, which we stick not to speak
of in blunter words. As when they say, The water of the feet, meaning Urin; and
call going to Stool, Uncovering of the feet: which shows that it is nothing but
the vast difference of Times, and Places, which makes that Language seem
uncivil to us, that was not so to them; and on the contrary, made them very
cautious in their Expressions, where we think it unnecessary.

Go out from him.] Involuntarily; in his sleep, or otherwise: which the Hebrews
call keri, i. e. accidental.

Then he shall wash all his flesh with water, and be unclean until the even.]
This was one of the smallest Legal Pollutions, from which they were soon
cleansed without any Sacrifice. And which some of them think did not oblige
them to wash, unless they intended to go to the Sanctuary. But though that
Opinion be true, yet this Rite had such a respect to the Sanctuary, that now
they have none, they do not think themselves bound to use it on such occasions.

Ver. 17. And every garment, and every skin, etc.] These things were made so
unclean by such Accidents, that they might not be used the next day; nor till
they were washed.

Ver. 18. The woman also with whom man shall lie, with seed of copulation.] It
is no wonder the holy Writers speak so plainly of these Matters; being Men of
great simplicity, free from all wantonness, commonly far advanced in years;
among whom Marriage, and a numerous Issue, were accounted the greatest
Blessings; and therefore coveted by all, and renounced by none.

They shall both bathe themselves in water, etc.] There is no sort of Pollution
in the act of Marriage, which is of God's own Institution, but what this Law
made: and the Law made it, as Theodoret thinks, that the trouble of such
constant Purification after it, might preserve them from the immoderate use of
it. So those words of his signify, (...), Quaest. XX. in Levit.

Ver. 19. And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood.]
In the Hebrew the words run much clearer; And a woman when she shall have an
issue of blood, and her issue be in her flesh. The latter part of which are
added, to distinguish this from bleeding at the Nose, or from the Haemorroids,
(which did not pollute any body) For the word Flesh here signifies, as it does
v. 2.

She shall be put apart seven days.] From her Husband, and from the Sanctuary:
to which these sorts of Uncleanness have a peculiar respect, as I before noted.
And Maimonides here, not unfitly, observes, That whereas the Zabij accounted a
Man polluted if he did but speak with a menstruous Woman, or if the Wind, which
came from the quarter where she was, blew upon him; God only required her not
to meddle with Holy Things, nor to approach to the Sanctuary. Otherwise, she
might eat all manner of common Meat, and perform all Domestic Offices for her
Husband, as formerly; only not lie with him while she remained in this
condition. So he explains this More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47.

And whosoever touches her, shall be unclean until the even.] If they were
grown Persons, as Menochius well observes; for Infants were excepted from this
Pollution, by their Age, and the Necessities of Nature. The same is observed by
Maimonides, in the Chapter forenamed; That the more frequent any of these
Uncleanness were, the greater and longer Purifications were required. As
touching of a dead Body, especially of Friends and Neighbors, being the most
usual, it could not be cleansed but by the Ashes of the red Heifer, (which were
not easily had) and not till seven days were passed. In like manner Fluxes, and
menstruous Pollutions, because they oftener happened, and were more grievous, than
touching the unclean, those therefore that labored under them, had need of
seven days Purification; but they that touched them, of one day only, before
they became clean.

Ver. 20. And every thing that she lies upon in her separation, shall be
unclean, etc.] The very same sort of Uncleanness was contracted in this Case,
as in the foregoing v. 4, etc. For if we believe some Authors, it might not
only be properly called her sickness; but such an one as had some infection in
it (at least something offensive) in those hot Countries. See Pliny Lib. VII.
5. and L. XXVIII. 2.

Ver. 21. And whosoever touches her bed, etc.] This and the two following
Verses, contain the very same Prohibitions in this Case, which were given in
the other. See v. 5, 6, etc.

Ver. 24. If a man lie with her at all.] i. e. Unwittingly, not knowing in what
condition she was: for if he did it knowingly, both of them were liable to be
cut off, XX. 18.

He shall be unclean seven days.] As having contracted one of the greatest
sorts of Uncleanness, v. 19. For though this Flux was natural, and beneficial,
and therefore could have no sort of Uncleanness in it, but what was made by
this Law; yet there was a great reason for the keeping Men from the Company of
Women in this condition, if Leprosies and such like Diseases were thereby
propagated, as Theodoret says some think; (...), etc. Especially since they
were so libidinous a People (as he describes them, in words of a very bad
signification) that it was highly necessary to lay such restraints upon them;
and to make even involuntary Pollutions very penal, that they might learn
(...), that all wilful Uncleanness were far more detestable.

Ver. 25. And if a woman have an issue of blood many days, out of the time of
her separation, etc.] As before he spoke of the natural Course of the Blood, so
here of a Disease: which Procopius Gazaeus calls malum immedicabile, an
incurable Evil. So it sometimes proved, as appears by the story of the Woman in
the Gospel; whose case this was, IX Matthew. 20.

All the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her
separation.] She was to be in the same condition with the Woman mentioned v.
19. who was put apart seven days; i. e. as long as her Uncleanness lasted.
Which made the case of those that labored under this Infirmity very
lamentable, because it continued in some many years.

Ver. 26. Every bed whereon she lies all the days of her issue, shall be unto
her as the bed of her separation, etc.] Like the Bed and the Seat of her
mentioned v. 20.

Ver. 27. And whosoever touches these things shall be unclean, etc.] As in the
case forementioned v. 21.

Ver. 28. But if she be cleansed of her issue.] Cured of her Disease.

Then shall she number to her self seven days.] For a trial whether it was a
perfect Cure or no.

After that.] If there were no return of the Flux.

She shall be clean.] So as to be restored to common Conversation: but not to
the Sanctuary, till the following Oblations were made.

Ver. 29. And on the eighth day, she shall take unto her two turtles, or two
young pigeons, etc.] The same Sacrifices which were prescribed in the case of a
Man, who was cured of an Issue, v. 14. And this relates only to the
extraordinary Flux, out of or beyond the usual Course of Nature, ( v. 25.) for
it would have been too burdensome unto some Persons, if they had been bound to
offer thus once a Month.

Ver. 30. And the Priest shall make an atonement for her before the LORD, etc.]
See v. 15.

Ver. 31. Thus shall ye separate the Children of Israel from their
uncleanness.] Take care that they separate themselves; by instructing them,
when they are under any of the forenamed Impurities, to observe the Directions
now given. Thus the LXX. and the Vulgar Latin understand these words.

That they die not in their uncleanness.] Lest I punish them with death, if
they approach unto my Sanctuary, having any of the forementioned Uncleanness
upon them.

When they defile my Tabernacle that is among them.] This shows what is meant
by Separation and Putting apart, in the foregoing Verses: which was principally
from the Tabernacle, where God dwelt. Out of respect to which, and to preserve
their due regard to it (that is, to God himself) all these Cautions were given,
as I observed before v. 15. of this Chapter. And see Chapt. XII. v. 4. what I
noted out of Maimonides, who discourses excellently on this Subject, in his
More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47. where he observes, That there could not well be a
more notable means contrived to maintain an holy fear and reverence of the
Divine Majesty upon their Minds, than to forbid every Person, that was any way
polluted, to come unto his Sanctuary. For there were so many sorts of
Pollutions, made by the Law, that it was very hard to avoid falling under some
of them: and consequently a business of great care, circumspection, and labor,
to approach, as they ought, into the Divine Presence. For if a Man escaped
defilement by a dead body, yet he could not easily avoid being defiled by some
of the eight creeping things, which he might chance to tread upon; or might
fall on his Meat, or his Drink: And if he escaped these, yet he might be
defiled involuntarily by the means mentioned here v. 16. or by touching a
menstruous Woman, or one that had a Flux of Blood; or at least by touching
their Bed, their Seats, or something belonging to them, etc. All which kept a
Man from the Sanctuary; which he could not enter therefore when he pleased, but
was to stay a certain time before he could be admitted to worship God there;
and not then neither till he had washed himself. By all which actions,
reverence, affection and devotion was preserved to the Sanctuary; and Men were
excited to great humility, which in this was principally regarded.

Ver. 32. This is the law of him that has an issue, etc.] In this and the next
Verse, he recapitulates the Matter of this Chapter; as he did, in the latter
end of the foregoing, sum up the Contents of that.

Ver. 33. And of him that has an issue, of the man and of the woman.] Even of
the Person that has an issue, whether it be Man or Woman, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses after the death of the two sons of
Aaron.] This Chapter would have naturally followed the Tenth Chapter, where the
death of those two Persons is related, if that had not occasioned the inserting
some other Laws about Uncleanness, (See Preface to Chapter XI.) which being
delivered, Moses now goes on to give direction about the great Sacrifice, in
which the whole Nation was concerned: as he treated of lesser and common
Sacrifices, in the beginning of the Book.

When they offered before the LORD, and died.] See X. 1. This is mentioned
again, to make the Priests careful not only to Sacrifice unto the LORD alone,
but after such a manner as he ordered.

Ver. 2. Speak unto thy brother Aaron, that he come not at all times into the
holy place, within the vail.] Into the holy place without the Vail, he, or some
of the other Priests, were bound to go every day, Morning and Even, when they
offered Incense: But into this, as none of them might go at all, so he not at
all times, when he went into the other; but only upon one particular occasion,
which is mentioned here in this Chapter.

Before the Mercy-seat, which is upon the Ark.] This being the place of God's
special Presence, none might enter into it but his principal Minister; and he
no oftener than the Divine Majesty allowed; which was only once a year, (it
appears from v. 29.) when he offered the great Sacrifice here prescribed. And
so much was intimated to Moses before, XXX Exodus 10. And the Jews add, That on
this day of the year he might go in but four times; once to burn Incense; a
second time to sprinkle the Blood of the Bullock; then to sprinkle the Blood of
the Goat; and lastly to fetch out the Censer wherein he burnt Incense. If he
went in a fifth time, he died for his presumption, as they say; particularly R.
Levi Barcel. Praecept. CCLXXXVI. Such sacred places the Gentiles had in some
Countries, which, according to this pattern, were opened only once a year.
Particularly Pausanias mentions in his Book Boeotica the Temple of Dindymene:
which they thought it was not lawful to open more than one day in the year:
(...). And the same he says of another in the same Book; and in his Eliaca of
the Temple of Orcus, (...), etc. It is opened once every year. See Dr. Owtram's
excellent Book De Sacrificiis, Lib. I. cap. 3.

Lest he die.] As his Sons had done for their Presumption, in offering with
other fire than God allowed. In the like danger Aaron himself had been, if he
had come into the Divine Presence without his leave, and without such caution
as is given v. 13. which is the reason of this order here delivered to Moses,
and by him to Aaron, for the prevention of any such dangerous mistake.

For I will appear in the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat.] That was God's own
Dewlling Place, where his GLORY appeared; into which therefore none might
enter, but when he appointed, and as he directed. The only difficulty is, what
is meant by the Cloud, wherein he says he will appear on the Mercyseat. One
would think he meant, as usually, the Cloud wherein the Divine Glory resided,
XL Exodus 34, 35. 1 Kings VIII. 10, 11. But the Cloud seems to have been on the
outside of the Tabernacle; and within a Glory or great Splendour only
unclouded. And therefore most, I think, understand this of the Smoke of the
Incense, that the High Priest burnt when he entered into the most holy place;
which was the Cloud wherewith the Mercy-seat was then covered, v. 13. And there
is great reason for this Opinion: for if there had been a Cloud in the most
holy place, over the Mercy-seat, before the High Priest entered, what need had
there been to make a new Cloud of Smoke, (as he is ordered v. 13.) when the
Divine Glory was sufficiently obscured already. Besides, in the place
beforementioned (XL Exodus.) the Cloud, as I now observed, is said to be without
the Tabernacle, and to cover it; the Glory only being within: and in the other
place of the Book of Kings (and 2 Chronicles. V. 13, 14.) it is said only to fill
the House of the LORD, i.e. the Body of the Temple: but not to be settled upon
the Mercy-seat. Where we may very well doubt whether there was any Cloud, or
no; but only the Divine GLORY. The only ground that I can see for it, is, that
God is said there to dwell in thick darkness: which seems to import, that the
Divine GLORY was wrapped up in a Cloud. But however that be expounded, these
words which we here translate, I will appear in the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat,
may very well be rendered, I will be approached in a Cloud ( i. e. of Incense)
For so this word we translate appear is used XXIII Exodus 15. not for God's
appearing to them, but for the Peoples appearing before him: and this sense the
13th Verse seems to enforce, as Campegius Vitringa has observed, Lib. I.
Observe. Sacr. cap. 11.

Ver. 3. Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place.] As he might come into it,
only once a year; so then with such preparation, and in such a manner, as is
here prescribed. And the Jews say, that he was separated from his own House and
Family seven days before, and dwelt apart from them in a Chamber of the Temple;
that he might the better prepare himself for the Offices of this day, by
sprinkling the Blood of the daily Sacrifice, burning Incense, and such like
things. And lest he should be either ignorant of his Duty, (as some proved, in
the latter end of their State, when the High Priesthood was bought for Money)
or forgetful, the Sanhedrim sent some to read before him the Rites of this day;
who adjured him also to perform every thing according to God's Command. The
night before also they let him eat but little, that no accident in the night
might make him unfit to officiate the next day; and that he might awake the
sooner, and begin the Service of the day betimes, as they did upon all great
Solemnities. All this, and a great deal more, is related in Codex Joma, cap. 1.
And Mr. Seldom likewise has observed out of Sepher Schebat Jehuda, with what a
magnificent Pomp the High Priest was conducted from his own House, when he went
to the Temple, seven days before this Day of Atonement, accompanied by the
King, and the whole Sanhedrim, the Royal Family, and the whole Quire of
Priests, etc. Lib. III. de Synedr. cap. 11. n. 7. Something like this was the
Triumph wherein our blessed High Priest Christ Jesus was conducted to
Jerusalem, five days before he offered himself there, for the Sins of the whole
World, XII John 1, 12, 13.

With a young bullock for a sin-offering.] To be offered for himself, and for
his Family, as appears from v. 6. For no other Sacrifice was allowed for the
Sin of the High Priest (though it were dubious) but only a young Bullock, IV.
2, 3.

And a ram for a burnt-offering.] Which accompanied the Sin-offering at his
Consecration, VIII. 18. But first of all the Morning Sacrifice was offered,
with the Additionals usual on this Day, (as the Jews say) viz. a Bullock, a
Ram, and seven Lambs, all for Burnt-offerings.

Ver. 4. He shall put on the holy linen coat, etc.] There were eight
Garments-belonging to the Attire of the High Priest: four of which are here
mentioned, which the Jews call his white Garments; and four more mentioned
XXVIII Exodus 4. which they call the golden Garments; because there was a
mixture of Gold in them; whereas these were all made of fine Linen. Upon other
days, when the High Priest officiated, he was bound to put them on all (not one
of the eight being wanting) but on this day, when he went in to the most holy
place, he put on only those four, which were the Habit of the ordinary Priests,
as well as his. This, some conceive, was in token of Humility, because this day
was appointed for Confession of Sins, and Repentance, etc. Upon which account
they imagine also, these Linen Garments were courser than those which he wore
every day with his golden Garments. But all the Jews agree, that these
Garments, which he wore on the Day of Expiation, were made of the purest and
most precious Linen of all other: which they call (in Massechet Joma, cap. 3.)
fine Linen of Pelusium, which was a City in Egypt, famous for the richest and
whitest Linen, as our Sheringham shows (in his Notes on that Treatise) out of
Pliny and Silius Italicus. And if we may believe the Talmudists, as the
High Priest put on fine Linen of Pelusium in the morning of this day, so he put
on fine Linen of India ( i. e. in their Language, of Ethiopia or Arabia, as
Braunius observes, Lib. I. de Vest. Sacerd. cap. 7. n. 9.) in the evening of
it; which was not of much less value than the other. And this is not
disagreeable to Moses, who says God commanded the Priests Garments to be made
for glory and beauty, XXVIII Exodus 2. And therefore the High Priest appeared
even upon this day, in a splendid and noble Habit; which was not inconsistent
with inward Humility and Lowliness of Mind; whereby the comely and beautiful
performance of God's Service, was not to be obstructed. For whereas upon other
days, the High Priest washed his hands and his feet in the Brazen Laver; on this
day, if we may believe the Jews, he washed them in a Vessel of Gold, as the same
Braunius observes out of Massechet Joma, c. 4. There are those who fancy the
High Priest went into the most holy place, with the Ephod and Breast Plate,
whereon were the Names of the Children of Israel: but that is quite contrary to
what Moses here delivers, who mentions no other Garments but these of fine
Linen which he wore upon this day; no not when he went into the holy place ( v.
23.) And the Hebrew Doctors all thus understand it, as Mr. Seldom shows out of
them and Josephus, Lib. II. de Succession. in Pontific. Hebraeor. cap. 7. p.
250.

Yet the Roman Church has grounded a solemn Practice upon the forementioned
fancy; the Priests, and Bishops too, being wont on Good Friday to minister only
in the Habit of Deacons, while they are reading or singing the Office of the
Passion: But when they come to the Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) then
they put on richer Vestments, proper to their order. Which is a mistaken
Imitation of the Ceremonies under the Law, upon this great Day of Atonement;
when the High Priest never put on any of his golden Garments for the Service of
it.

And he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh.] To cover his secret
parts. For the word Flesh is to be understood here as in XV. 2.

And shall be girded with the linen girdle, and with the linen mitre, etc.]
These two, with the two foregoing, make up the four white Garments: which might
possibly, as the Jews say, be made of the finest and richest Linen that could
be got, that the High Priest might appear splendid, in the simplest Habit
wherein he ministered. But it is evident he was not allowed to appear in those
Garments which were wrought with Gold, and Scarlet, and Blue, and Purple,
(XXVIII Exodus 6, 8, etc.) because such very sumptuous Apparel, it must be
acknowledged, was not so suitable to the Service of the day. On which the
High Priest (as the Hebrew Gloss notes upon this place) did not so much put on
the Person of a Patron, as of an Accuser; Confessing their Sins before God, and
begging pardon for them.

These are holy Garments.] To be used only when he ministered in the Sanctuary,
XXVIII Exodus 2.

Therefore he shall wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.] There was no
need, upon other days, to wash more than once, in the beginning of Divine
Service; but on this great Day he washed five times, as often as he shifted his
Garments, and went from one ministry to another; as appears in part from v. 23,
24. where see what I have observed. Here he seems to speak of his washing after
he had offered the Morning Sacrifice, etc. in his golden Garments: and then
began the Service of the day in these white Garments alone.

Ver. 5. And he shall take of the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] The
former Sacrifices v. 3. were for himself: these for all the People.

Two Kids of the Goats for a Sin-offering.] These two Goats made but one
Sin-offering; which is described more largely and particularly, v. 8, 9, 10.
The former perhaps, which was sacrificed to the LORD, was to procure those good
things which they had forfeited by their sins: and the other (the Scapegoat,
as we translate it) to avert those Evils which they had deserved: For the name
that is commonly given it by the Greeks signifies its power to turn away
Punishments. Or the simple reason of it might be, that the Israelites by this
double Sacrifice (for both were presented before the LORD) might be the more
fully satisfied of the Expiation of their Sins. There is the like example
before, of two Birds appointed for the cleansing of a Leper's House; one of
which only was killed, the other let fly away; but both of them are said to
cleanse the House, and to be for atonement, XIV. 49, 52, 53. In which some of
the ancient Fathers thought they saw a notable Type of our LORD Christ. Whose
Sacrifice, as it was prefigured by all the Legal Sacrifices (for the Paschal
Lamb it self was a Type of him sacrificed for us, 1 Corinthians. V. 7.) so by this
more especially on the Day of Expiation. Which was of greater and more
universal efficacy than all the rest, and therefore represented him more fully
than the other did. Insomuch that these two Goats joined in one Sacrifice, may
be thought to represent one Christ, consisting of two Natures. For since it was
not possible, as Theodoret expresses it, to adumbrate both the (...), that
which was mortal, and that which was immortal in Christ; he commanded two to be
brought, (...) that the Goat which was offered in Sacrifice, might prefigure
the passible Nature of his Flesh: and that which was let go, might show the
impassible Nature of his Divinity, Quaest. XXII. in Levit. And St. Cyril
Discourses, to the same purpose, in his ninth Book against Julian.

And one Ram for a Burnt-offering.] Which was no more than was appointed for
Aaron himself, v. 3. who herein is equalled with all the Princes of the People;
in whose name this Ram seems to have been offered.

Ver. 6. And Aaron shall offer his Bullock of the Sin-offering, which is for
himself.] Not by killing it, which was done afterward ( v. 11.) but only by
presenting it before God to be sacrificed; which was done with a solemn Prayer,
wherein he beseeched God to be propitious unto him and his. The form of it is
set down in Massechet Joma, cap. 3. sect. 8. He laid his hand upon the head of
the Bullock, and said, I have done amiss, and been rebellious, and sinned
before thee, I and my House. I beseech thee now, O LORD, remit my Rebellion and
my Sin which I have committed, and my House, etc.

And make an atonement for himself, and for his house.] For his Family, as I
said v. 3. and for all the Priests; who are called the House of Aaron, CXV
Psalm. 10, 12. CXXXV. 9. And I do not see why all the House of Levi should not
also be understood: For they are not comprehended under the name of the
Congregation of the Children of Israel (mentioned in the Verse before) and
therefore must be contained here under the name of the House of Aaron. See I
Numb. 49.

Ver. 7. And he shall take the two Goats.] Mentioned v. 5. which were to be of
equal stature, of the same color, and the same price (as the Hebrew Doctors
say in Joma, cap. 6.) both designed to the same end, the Expiation of their
Sins.

And present them before the LORD at the door of the Tabernacle, etc.] All the
Sin Offerings which were made for the Congregation, were presented either by
the High Priest, or by the Elders (IV. 15.) and by them devoted to God, to be
sacrificed on his Altar. For this presenting of the Goat, is the same with his
offering of the Bullock in the Verse foregoing; in which was nothing else but
his solemn Consecration of them, as I said, to be sacrificed. According to
which pattern, our blessed LORD and Savior, a little before he suffered upon
the Cross, and made himself a Sacrifice for us, voluntarily offered himself to
die for our sins. Which is the meaning of those words of his XVII John 19.
where praying for his Apostles, he says, For their sakes I sanctify my self:
that is, offer my self to die as an Expiatory Sacrifice for them. For that
(...) sometimes signifies as much as (...), Dr. Owtram has demonstrated, Lib.
II. de Sacrificiis, cap. 3. And so St. Chrysostom here expounds these words, I
sanctify my self, by (...), I offer thee a Sacrifice; or consecrate and devote
my self to be sanctified. And it is not an improbable Conjecture of another
very learned Friend of mine, now also with God (Dr. Spencer) that the
appointing of two Goats to be both presented to God at the same time, and with
the same Rites, was to preserve the Jews in a belief that there is but one
principle of all things; who both bestows good things, and inflicts evil.
Contrary to the opinion of the Gentiles, who made two Principles, one good and
the other bad; which was the ancient belief of the Chaldaeans, and other
Eastern People, and from them propagated to the Greeks and Romans. Most of
whose Sacrifices (as another very learned Man of our own Country has observed)
had respect to these two Principles; to one of which they offered in the
Morning, and to the other at Night. See Dr. Windet de Vita Functorum statu,
sect. 3. where he observes that there are plain footsteps of this old Error at
this day, through all the East, as far as China: for there was an endeavor to
infect Christianity with it, by Manes the Persian, in the Reign of the Emperor
Aurelian; nor was there any Heresy that spread so far as this Dotage did.

Ver. 8. And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two Goats.] The manner of it is
described in the same Treatise ( Massechet Joma, cap. 3. sect. 9.) The
High Priest went to the East-part of the Court, on the North-side of the Altar,
having the Sagan (his Vicar) on his right hand, and the head of the House of
the Fathers on his left. There stood two Goats, with an Vrn or Box, which they
call CALPI (the very same name which Lucian, and the Scholiast upon
Aristophanes, give to the same thing, as our learned Sheringham upon that Book,
and Bochart in his Hierozoicon, have observed). Into this Urn the two Lots were
cast, which were made of Box-wood (as the Misna here says) and in after times
came to be of Gold. But Maimonides in his Treatise on this Subject, says they
might be made either of Wood or Stone, or any Metal; provided one of them was
not bigger than the other, (nor one of Gold, the other of Silver, etc.) but
both every way equal, as the Goats were to be. Upon one of these Lots was
written the name of the Goat which was for the LORD; and on the other that
which was for Azazel. And then the Priest shaking the Urn, and putting in both
his hands (as it there follows in Joma, cap. 4.) took up a Lot in each. And if
he brought up God's Lot in his right hand, the Sagan, who stood there, said, My
Lord, lift up thy right hand: If in his left hand, the Head of the Fathers
said, Lift up thy left hand. And so the Priest let the right hand Lot fall upon
the Goat that stood on the right hand; and his left hand lot upon the other.

One lot for the LORD.] To be offered unto the LORD at the Altar.

The other lot for the scapegoat.] Or, as it is in the Hebrew, for Azazel; as
some have anciently translated it. Now why a Goat was offered in Sacrifice, and
another Goat let go free, laden with their sins, rather than any other
Creature, may be understood, perhaps, from the inclination of the Heathen World
in those days, when they worshipped Demons in the form of a Goat. The
Egyptians were famous for this, and the Israelites themselves (it appears from
the XVIIth Chapter of this Book, v. 7.) were prone to offer Sacrifices le
Seirim; which signifies Demons in that form. And therefore to take them off
from such Idolatrous Practices, God ordained these Creatures themselves to be
sacrificed and slain, to whom they had offered Sacrifice. And the young ones he
appointed for this purpose, (for so Seirim signifies) which the Egyptians most
of all honored, and abhorred to offer or kill. So Juvenal: -- Nefas illic
foetum jugulare Capellae.
Satyr. XV. V. II. Now from hence perhaps it was that some fancied Azazel
signified the Devil; as R. Menachem and R. Eliezer among the Jews; Julian among
the Heathen; and some great Men lately among us. Who conceive that as the other
Goat was offered to God at the Altar, so this was sent among the Demons, which
delight to frequent desert places, and there appeared often in the shape of
this Creature. But this will not agree with the Hebrew Text, which says this
Goat was for Azazel, as the other was for the LORD. Now none sure will be so
profane, as to imagine, that both these Goats being set before the LORD, and
presented to him, as equally Consecrated to him, he would then order one of
them to be for himself, and the other for the Devil. We must therefore be
content with our own Translation, which derives the word Azazel from Ez, a
Goat; and azal, to go away; and fitly calls it the Scapegoat: So Paulus
Fagius, and a great many others: against which I see nothing objected, but that
Ez signifies a she Goat, not a he. Which made Bochartus fetch this word from
the Arabic; in which Language Azala signifies to remove, or to separate. And
this agrees well enough with the name of this Goat, according as the ancient
Translators understood it; some of which, as Symmachus, render it (...), the
Goat going away: others, as Aquila, (...), the Goat let loose: and the LXX.
(...). In which they had no thought of the notion of this word among the
Greeks, who called those Demons by this name, who were esteemed (...) and
(...) (as J. Pollux speaks) averters of evil things from them: But simply
meant, as Theodoret interprets it, (...), the Goat sent away into the
Wilderness. And so St. Hierom expounds it, Hircus emissarius: which agrees with
the notion which Bochartus puts upon the word out of the Arabic Tongue. This
Goat being sent away into remote places, there to remain separate from the
Flock to which he belonged; and that upon a Mountain (as the Jews fancy) in the
Wilderness of Sinai, which from this Goat was called Azazel: But I see no
ground for this.

Ver. 9. And Aaron shall bring the Goat upon which the LORDS lot fell.] In the
Hebrew the word is, went up: For he first took it up out of the Urn, and then
let it fall upon the Goat.

And offer him for a sin-offering.] Devote him to God to be a Sacrifice for
their Sins; beseeching him to accept of this Sacrifice for that end. So the
word offer, I observe, signifies v. 6. order being given afterward for the
killing of the Goat, v. 15.

Ver. 10. But the Goat on which the lot fell to be the Scapegoat, shall be
presented alive before the LORD.] This shows that the Scapegoat was equally
consecrated and devoted to God, as the other was: though not to be killed, but
sent away alive; after the other had been offered in Sacrifice.

To make an atonement with him.] For this was a Sin-offering, though not slain,
no less than the other: as appears from v. 5. which shows these two Goats made
but one Sin-offering: Which was partly slain at the Altar, and partly let go
(as it here follows) to run whether he would; the more perfectly to represent
the taking away of their Sins, and removing their iniquity (as the Prophet
speaks, III Zach. 9.) by virtue of this Offering for them.

Some indeed have thought that this Goat was not sacrificed, but only presented
alive before God, and so let go; lest it should be thought God could not
forgive their Sins, unless he was appeased by some slain Beast: which
imagination was destroyed by letting this Sin-offering be left alive, at full
liberty to run quite away. But I can see no ground for such a Construction;
because these were not two, but one Sin-offering, as I said before: which being
slain in part, established that opinion in them, of the impossibility of
obtaining reconciliation, without a bloody Sacrifice. Certain it is, that the
whole Law supposes this, that without shedding of blood is no remission, as the
Apostle observes IX Hebr. 22. And therefore it will be more agreeable to the
Holy Scriptures, if we think, as some do, That the first Goat represented our
LORD in his Sufferings, and this other in his Resurrection; whereby he was
freed from the Bands of Death: both his Death and his Resurrection being for
our Deliverance, as the Apostle shows IV Romans ult.

And let him go free.] Whether he pleased. For so the Hebrew word Schalac (
send him away, or dismiss him) signifies in Scripture, entire liberty, such as
God demanded for the Israelites from Pharaoh, IV Exodus 23. V. 1.

For a Scapegoat.] Into remote places.

Into the Wilderness.] In token their sins were quite carried away, to be found
no more: for the Goat was not merely sent into the Wilderness, but into the
most desert places of it, as appears from v. 22.

Ver. 11. And Aaron shall bring the Bullock of the sin-offering, which is for
himself, etc.] This former part of the Verse is word for word the same with v.
6. which shows that offering there (as we translate it) was nothing else, but
bringing it to be offered; or presenting it before the LORD, to be a Sacrifice
for himself, and for his Family. But now his bringing it, was, that it might be
killed immediately, as it follows in the latter part of this Verse.

And shall make an atonement for himself and his house.] By killing it, as the
next words tell us.

And shall kill the Bullock of the sin-offering, which is for himself.] He was
first to offer for himself, before he could acceptably offer for the People, as
the Apostle observes V Hebr. 3. IX. 7. And, as the Jews tell us (in Massechet
Joma, cap. 4. sect. 2.) he again put his hand upon the head of the Bullock, and
made the Confession and Supplication beforementioned, upon v. 6. And when he
had done, then he killed the Bullock with his own hands. For though all other
Sacrifices might be killed by any person, yet the High Priest himself was bound
to kill this; as they say in the same place of the Misna, sect. 3. And having
received the Blood of the Bullock in a Basin, he delivered it to another Priest
to keep it in continual agitation, till he had offered Incense in the holy
place; that so it might not grow thick and be clotted; but be kept liquid and
thin, fit to be sprinkled before the Mercy-seat.

Ver. 12. And he shall take a Censer full of burning coals of fire.] Which he
held in his right hand.

From the Altar before the LORD.] From the brazen Altar where the Bullock was
slain: for Coals were burning before God no where else but there.

And his hands full of sweet Incense, beaten small.] With his left hand he took
as much of the Incense mentioned XXX Exodus 34, 36. as his hand would hold
(besides the Incense which he burnt every Morning and Evening, which was a
whole pound) and put it into a Cup.

And bring it within the vail.] With both these, the Censer of Coals, and the
Cup of Incense, (the former in his right hand, the other in his left) he went
within the Vail, which divided the holy place from the most holy: And set down
the Censer; and then (as it follows in the next Verse, see there) threw the
Incense upon the burning Coals. This the Hebrew Doctors take to have been so
difficult a work, that in the Gemara upon Joma ( cap. 1.) they say some of the
elder Priests were sent to him beforehand, to show him how he should fill his
hand with the Incense. And the Misna there says, that they adjured him in these
words; We are the Legates of the great Sanhedrim, and thou art our Legate and
theirs; we adjure thee, we adjure thee by him whose name dwells in this House,
that thou change not any one thing of all that we have said unto thee. And so
they parted with tears on both sides. The reason of which solemn Adjuration,
they say, was, That the Sadduces affirmed, he might burn the Incense without
the Vail, and so enter into the most holy place; directly contrary to this
Text, which required him to do it within; where no body could see what the
High Priest did, and consequently could not tell whether he performed the
Service there aright. Therefore they took this Oath of him, in the latter Ages
of their State, when some of the Faction of the Sadducees were thrust into the
Priesthood, as Mr. Seldom probably conjectures, Lib. III. de Synedriis, cap.
11. n. 2. This was the first time of the Highpriests going into the Holy of
Holies on this great Day.

Ver. 13. And he shall put the Incense upon the fire before the LORD.] He
entered (as the Misna says in Joma, cap. 5.) with his Face toward the South;
and so went side-ways (for he might not look upon the Ark, where the Divine
Glory was) till he came to the Staves of the Ark; where he set down the Censer,
and put on the Incense. And having filled the House with a Cloud of Smoke, he
went out backward (out of reverence to the Divine Majesty) into the holy place
without the Vail. Where, when he was come, he made this short Prayer, May it
please thee, O LORD God, that this year may be hot and also wet; that the
Scepter may not depart from the Family of Judah, nor thy People Israel want
food; and that the Prayer of the wicked may not be heard. And then he presently
went out of the Sanctuary, and showed himself to the People; that they might
not suspect he had done amiss, and miscarried in his Office. For so, they say,
it sometimes happened, that the High Priest, having violated these holy Rites
appointed by God, was struck dead in the holy place.

The Incense which was burnt every day in the holy place, at the Golden Altar,
representing the Prayers of the Saints, as St. John teaches us (VIII Rev. 3,
4.) this Incense which was burnt in the Holy of Holies, may well be thought to
represent the Prayers of the High Priest himself, which he made upon this
occasion; as our blessed Savior did before he offered the great Sacrifice of
himself, (XVII John, of which more hereafter) with the Blood of which he now
appears in the Heavens before God for us.

That the Cloud of the Incense may cover the Mercy-seat that is upon the
Testimony. So that nothing of it might be seen: it being the place of the
Residence of the Divine Majesty, (XXV Exodus 21, 22.) whose Glory was
inaccessible.

That he die not.] By gazing on the Divine Glory. See v. 2. and XXXIII Exodus 20.

Ver. 14. And he shall take of the blood of the Bullock.] Having done what is
commanded in the foregoing Verses, he came out of the Sanctuary, and went to
the Priest, whom he left at the Altar of Burnt-offering, stirring the Blood in
the Basin, which he delivered to him (as I observed v. 11.) And taking it from
him went with it (the second time) within the Vail; and standing where he did
before, when he burnt the Incense, sprinkled it as is directed in the words
following.

And sprinkle it with his singer.] The very root or essence of a Sacrifice (as
the Maxim of the Jews is) lies in the sprinkling of the Blood.

Upon the Mercy-seat.] One would think, by this Translation, that he sprinkled
the Mercy-Seat it self, with some of the Blood. But all the Jews understand it
quite otherwise: and indeed the Hebrew words are Al pene, over against the
Face, i. e. as they interpret it (in the Misna beforementioned, cap. 5.)
toward the Mercy-Seat. And so it follows in the next words, and before the
Mercy-seat shall he sprinkle. Only this difference there was in the sprinkling,
that this Particle al, they think, imported that he was to make the first
sprinkling, here mentioned, toward the top of the Mercy-Seat. The Vulgar Latin,
wholly omits this part of the Verse, and only mentions the latter sprinkling,
seven times contra propitiatorium over against the Mercy-Seat Eastward.

Eastward.] I should have thought the observation of our learned Countryman
(Mr. J. Gregory) very remarkable, if he had been commanded only to sprinkle the
Blood Eastward. For then there might have been room for his Conjecture, that
though Aaron at all other times turned his face toward the West (where the
most holy place was) and at the very killing of the Goat and the Bullock, not
only looked that way himself, but turned their Faces toward the West (as the
Jews say in Joma) yet when he came to perform the chief part of this Mystery,
he turned his back upon the beggarly Elements of the World, and sprinkled this
Blood eastward, to represent the Man, whose name is the East, i. e. Christ. But
I do not see how this agrees with this sprinkling the Blood before the
Mercy-seat; which could not be done without looking toward the West. And
therefore it must be confessed that he did not sprinkle it Eastward; but
standing Eastward of the Mercy-Seat, with his Face toward it, he performed
this Office, as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. III. de Synedr. cap. 16. p. 426. Or
it may be said to be done Eastward, because that part of the Ark before which
he sprinkled, looked Eastward.

And before the Mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven
times.] This is a distinct sprinkling from the foregoing, which was done but
once, and toward the upper part of the Mercy-Seat; but this was done seven
times, toward the lower part of it, as the Jews understand it: who say he
sprinkled eight times in all, but none of the Blood touched the Mercy-Seat. So
the Gemara on that place, and Maimonides in his Jom hakippurim and Obediah
Bartenoca, whose words are these; The drops of Blood did not come upon the
Mercy-seat, but fell upon the Ground; as two of our very learned Countrymen
have observed, Mr. Sheringham upon Joma, and Dr. Owtram, Lib. I. de
Sacrificiis, cap. 16. n. 4.

Seven times.] Concerning this Number seven, See before IV. 6. This was the
second time of going into the Holy of Holies upon this Day.

Ver. 15. Then shall he kill the Goat of the sin-offering, that is for the
people.] The Blood of which was received in a Basin, as that of the Bullock
was, (See v. 11.) and he carried it within the Vail, (as here follows) and did
just as he had done before, v. 14. But whether he first burnt Incense, as he
had done before he brought in the Blood of the Bullock, is uncertain: It is
likely the Fume that had been then made, still remained; so that there was no
need to renew it.

And do with that blood, as he did with the blood of the Bullock, and sprinkle,
etc.] For he stood in the same place (as the Misna observes) and there
sprinkled once toward the top of the Mercy-Seat; and then seven times before
the bottom of it. Which is not here expressly said, but is to be understood from
what goes before; which orders him to do with this Blood as he had done with
the other.

This now was the third time of his going into the most holy place, upon this
day. See v. 2.

Ver. 16. And he shall make an atonement for the holy place.] By the sprinkling
beforementioned (both of the Blood of the Bullock and of the Goat, as I gather
from v. 18.) God's own dwelling place was purified: the Blood (which was
sprinkled seven or eight times before the Mercy-Seat) being thrown, it is
probable toward both sides of it.

Because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel; and because of their
transgressions in all their sins.] The many sins whereby they had transgressed
God's holy Laws, the whole year before, had made them so unclean, that it
provoked God to leave them, and made this most holy place unfit for his
Habitation; unless he were reconciled to them: For it was seated among an
unclean People, as the rest of the Sanctuary was; and on that score might need
an Atonement. See XXIX Exodus 36, 37.

And so shall he do for the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] When he had done
all this within the Vail, he was to do the same without, in the Sanctuary:
where he sprinkled first the Blood of the Bullock, and then the Blood of the
Goat, against the Vail which parted the Sanctuary, from the Holy of Holies. So
the Misna in the place forementioned; and R. Solomon Jarchi upon these words;
As he sprinkled part of the Blood of both Sacrifices, once above, and seven
times beneath, in the inward Sanctuary; so he sprinkled toward the Vail
without, once above, and seven times below. For they all agree the Blood was
not sprinkled upon the Vail, but before it: by which sprinkling the Sanctuary
was purified, as the Apostle observes, when he says, Almost all things were,
by the Law, purged with Blood, etc. IX Hebr. 21, 22, 23.

That remains among them, in the midst of their uncleanness.] Surrounded by a
sinful People, who were full of Legal, as well as other Impurities: and had
been likewise defiled by many, who had ignorantly come into it, in their
uncleanness. So Maimonides judiciously observes. It could scarce be avoided,
but some or other would ignorantly, and some presumptuously offend, by going
into the Sanctuary, or eating holy things when they ought not: and therefore
God commanded this Expiation to be made for the Pollutions of the Sanctuary and
its Utensils, by such means, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47.

Ver. 17. And there shall be no Man in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, when
he goes in to make an atonement in the holy place.] During this action, none
of the Priests, who used to attend in the Tabernacle, were to come into it,
till the High Priest had expiated its Uncleanness; which it was supposed to
have contracted, by their coming into it all the year before.

Until he come out.] Of the holy place.

And have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the
Congregation of Israel.] Finished all that he had to do there, for the
Expiation of his own Sins, and his Families, and all the Peoples. That is, from
the time of his going to offer Incense, till he came out to purify the
Tabernable. Some of which time he spent in Prayer to God, (as I observed v.
13.) for all the People; as he had done before when he presented the
Sin Offerings to him; with solemn Supplication, for himself and for his
Household, and for all the Congregation of Israel; the Forms of which are extant
in their Books. In conformity to which, when our blessed Savior consecrated
himself to be a Sacrifice for us (as I noted upon v. 7.) he first commended
himself to God, in that solemn Prayer before his Death, XVII Joh. v. 1, 2, etc.
and then his Apostles, who were his Household, v. 9, 10. and so forward to the
20th Verse; and then prayed for all that should believe on him; i. e. the whole
Congregation of Christian People, from v. 20. to the end. Immediately after
which he went to the place, where he was apprehended, and led to be Condemned
and Crucified, XVIII John 1. See Dr. Owtram de Sacrificiis, Lib. II. cap. 3. n.
3.

Ver. 18. And he shall go out unto the Altar that is before the LORD.] These
words, before the LORD, seem to restrain this to the Golden Altar, where
Incense was offered in the Sanctuary: and so I find it is generally
interpreted, even by the Jews themselves (in Joma, cap. 5. sect. 5.) as well as
Christians. But the words, he shall go out, plainly signify his coming from
the Sanctuary, where the golden Altar was (and had been cleansed, we may well
suppose, together with it, v. 16.) into the outward Court, to the Altar of
Burnt-offering, which was also before the LORD, (XXIX Exodus 11.) though at a
greater distance from him: and which, one would think, stood in need to be
cleansed, as much as the Altar of Incense. Now unless it was ordered to be
cleansed in these words, I can see no care taken about it at all. In XXX Exodus
10. there is express mention indeed made of making an atonement upon the Altar
of Incense once a year; and nothing said of the other: and if we will so
understand it here, then the words, he shall go out, must have respect to his
going into the holy place, mentioned in the Verse before.

And make an atonement for it.] This is generally understood, as I said, of the
golden Altar, because such express mention is made of its Purification yearly,
in the place now mentioned, XXX Exodus 10. And no doubt, that which is here
commanded, was done there, when he made Atonement for the Table, where it
stood: But there being the same need, as I said, to expiate the other Altar
(where no fewer Errors had been committed than here, and which stood nearer to
an unclean People, who encompassed it) I cannot but think that its here
included.

And shall take of the blood of the Bullock, and of the Goat.] He put the Blood
of the Bullock and of the goat together; and then poured them into another
Vessel, that they might be well mingled. For here is no command in this place,
that he should go round the Altar twice; and tip the Horns of it, first with
the Blood of the Bullock, and then of the Goat, separate one from the other; as
the Misna in Joma observes, cap. 5. sect. 4.

And put it upon the horns of the altar round about.] He began at the
North-east corner, and so went to the North-west; and from thence to the
South-west, and lastly to the South-east: and as he came near to each corner,
he put the Blood upon it. So the Jews describe this matter in the same place,
sect. 5.

Ver. 19. And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven
times.] Not upon the middle of the Altar, but nigh the corners; viz. in the
place where he ended when he put the Blood upon the horns of the Altar. So the
Jews say in the place abovenamed, sect. 6. And I do not see, why the Particle
upon should not be expounded here, as in v. 15. (if their interpretation be
true) to signify that he sprinkled the Blood before the Altar; which he did
not touch.

And shall cleanse it and hallow it, from the uncleanness of the Children of
Israel.] The Jews refer this cleansing to his taking the Coals and the Ashes
from the Altar, that he might sprinkle the Blood in a clean place. And then the
words are to be translated, He shall sprinkle the blood, etc. having cleansed
and hallowed it. But the conclusion of the Verse determines us to another
fense, which is, That by sprinkling the Blood he cleansed and sanctified it,
from the uncleanness of the children of Israel, whereby it had been defiled:
the Priests having either come in their uncleanness thither, or not performed
their Service as they ought there; and the People thereby remaining in their
Impurities.

Now when the High Priest had done all this, the Jews say (in the Misna
before-named) he poured the rest of the Blood of the Bullock and Goat, at the
bottom of the Altar of Burnt-offerings, (where, I conceive, he concluded this
Atonement) for there was a conveyance to carry it away, as I observed upon IV.
7. And they make account also, that if every thing was not done in this order,
it was ineffectual, and was to be done over again. For example; If the Blood of
the Goat, was sprinkled before the Blood of the Bullock (contrary to the
directions v. 14, 15.) he returned, and sprinkled the Blood of the Goat, after
that of the Bullock, etc.

Ver. 20. And when he has made an end of reconciling the holy place.] Making
it fit to continue God's dwelling place, v. 16.

And the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] By this I think is meant the
Sanctuary, and every thing in it; particularly the golden Altar.

And the Altar.] Of Burnt-offerings, where he ended his Atonement for the whole
House of God.

He shall bring the live Goat.] Two had been presented to the LORD, v. 7, 10.
that is, solemnly consecrated and devoted to be expiatory Sacrifices; one of
which having been slain, the other was now brought to be made an Expiation for
Sin, after another manner. And he was brought, no doubt, to the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, where they were wont to lay their hands upon
other Sacrifices, I. 3, 4.

Ver. 21. And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live Goat.]
Laying of the hand upon the head of the Beast, was a Rite used in all sorts of
Sacrifices, whether Burnt-offerings, Peace Offerings, or Sin Offerings. See I.
4. III. 2. IV. 4, 33. In which places, mention is made only of laying on his
hand: But here the High Priest is commanded to lay on both hands, as he and his
Sons did, in the Sacrifice of the Bullock, and the Ram at their Consecration,
VIII. 14, 18. The meaning of which was, the more solemnly and entirely to
devote the Sacrifice to the uses for which it was designed; which, in this
Sacrifice, was to bear all their Sins. For they were all laid upon this
Sacrifice, unto which the punishment of them was transferred: This Rite
signifying as much as if they had said, Whatsoever we have done amiss, let not
us, but this Sacrifice be charged with it: that is, let it bear the punishment
which we deserve. Such phrases there are 2 Samuel I. 16. IX Esther 25. VII Psalm.
16. and other places.

And confess over him.] This must have been understood, if it had not been
expressed: for imposition of hands was always accompanied with Prayer, of one
sort or other, according to the occasion of it. Insomuch that the Jews say,
Where there is no Confession of Sins, there is no Imposition of Hands; for
Imposition of Hands belongs to Confession. See Dr. Owtram de Sacrif. Lib. I.
cap. 15. n. 8. And it is observable, that the High Priest made Confession three
times on this day. First for himself, and then for his Brethren the Priests,
and now for the whole Congregation; saying this Prayer, (as they tell us in
Joma, cap. 6. sect. 2.) I beseech thee, O LORD; this People the House of
Israel, have done wickedly, and been rebellious, and sinned before thee. I
beseech thee, now O LORD, expiate the Iniquities, the Rebellions, and the Sins,
which thy People the House of Israel, have done wickedly, transgressed and
sinned before thee. According as it is written in the Law of Moses thy Servant
(viz. in the 30th Verse of this Chapter) on that day he shall make an Atonement
for you, to cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your Sins before the
LORD. Which last word (LORD) as soon as all the Priests and the People, that
were in the Court, heard pronounced by the High Priest, they bowed and fell
down flat upon their Faces, and worshipped, saying, Blessed be the LORD; let
the Glory of his Kingdom be for ever.

All the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their transgressions, in
all their sins.] These three words, Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins, are
the very words used by the High Priest in his Confession beforementioned;
which comprehend all manner of Offenses, whether committed deliberately, or
not, against Negative, or Affirmative Precepts, (as they call them). Grotius in
his Notes on this place, has thus distinguished them, but whether exactly, or
not, cannot be determined. But it is probable that Sins, signify Offenses
committed by Error, not deliberately; Iniquities, such as were deliberately
committed against the prohibiting Precepts; and Transgressions, those that were
deliberately committed against commanding Precepts. All except those to which
cutting off was threatened, which were not expiated by any Sacrifice.

Putting them upon the head of the Goat.] By putting his hands on the head of
the Goat, and confessing their Sins over him (with Prayer to God to remit them)
they were all charged upon the Goat, and the punishment of them transferred
from the Israelites unto it. Just as the Sins of all Mankind were afterward
laid upon our Savior Christ (as the Prophet speaks, LIII Isa. 6.) who his own
self bare our sins in his own body, (says S. Peter 1. II. 24.) the punishment
passing from us to him, who was made Sin for us, 2 Corinthians. V. 21. Which
Expressions are manifest Allusions unto this Sacrifice on the great Day of
Expiation: which was the most illustrious Figure of the Sacrifice of Christ;
and shows, beyond all reasonable contradiction, that Christ suffered in our
stead, and not merely for our benefit. For it is very evident, the Sacrifice
offered on this day, was put in the place of the People; and all their Sins,
that is, the punishment of them, laid upon its head. And it appears by the form
of all other Sin Offerings, which were occasionally offered at other times,
that he who brought them put off the guilt, which he had contracted, from
himself, and laid it on the Sacrifice, which was to die for him. Which he did
by laying his hand on the head of it at the door of the Tabernacle, while it
was yet alive. Then with his hand so placed, he made a Confession of his Sins,
for which he desired forgiveness by the offering of this Sacrifice: That is, he
prayed by these Rites, that the Beast being offered and slain, he might be
spared from punishment; which was a plain transferring the guilt from himself
unto his Sacrifice. Which being yet alive, and thus laded with his guilt, was
then brought to the Altar, and there slain for the guilty Person: That is, it
died in his stead; for there was no other reason of its being put to death
there, and in that manner.

I have insisted the longer on this, because nothing can better explain the
true meaning of Christ's dying for us: which was by transferring the suffering
due to our Sins, upon him; as the manner was in the Legal Sacrifices. Which was
a thing, let me add, so notorious in the World, that other Nations from hence
derived the like custom, to that here mentioned by Moses. Particularly the
Egyptians, as David Chytraeus has long ago observed, and since him many others
out of Herodotus: who tells us ( Lib. II. cap. 39.) that they made this
Execration over the Head of the Beast which they sacrificed; (...) that if any
evil was to fall, either on themselves who sacrificed, or upon the whole
Country of Egypt, it might be turned upon the head of that Beast. And this, he
says, was the custom over all the Land of Egypt; and the reason why no
Egyptian would taste of the head of any Animal. Nor was this the Notion of the
Egyptians only, but of other Countries also; who called those Sacrifices which
were offered for them (...), being sacrificed in their stead; and the Life of
the Beast given for theirs. Thus the Greeks sometimes sacrificed Men, when some
very heavy Calamity was fallen upon them, whom they called (...), Expiations to
purge them, for their Sins, by suffering in their room. For they prayed thus
over him, who was devoted every year, for the averting Evils from them, (...)
Be thou our Cleansing; that is, our Preservative and Redemption, or Ransom. And
with these words they threw him into the Sea, as a Sacrifice to Neptune. And
thus the Massilienses did, as Servius tells us (upon the 3d Aenead.) in time of
a Plague, praying ut in ipsum reciderent mala totius Civitatis, that on him
might fall the Evils of the whole City.

And shall send him away.] As soon as the Confession was over, the Goat was
sent away.

By the hand of a fit man.] By a Man prepared before hand, (as the Ancients
interpret it) or, that stood ready, for this purpose. Jonathan says, he was
designed for it the year before; others say only the day before; and that the
High Priest appointed him: who might appoint any body, whom he thought fit; but
did not usually appoint an Israelite, as they say in Joma, cap. 6. n. 3.

Into the wilderness.] It is not certainly known what Wilderness this was; but
the Hebrews call it the Wilderness of Tzuk, which, they say, was ten Miles from
Jerusalem. And they say, that at the end of each Mile there was a Tabernacle
erected, where Men stood ready with Meat and drink, which they offered to him
that went with the Goat, lest he should faint by the way. And the Nobles of
Jerusalem, they add, accompanied him the first Mile; further than which they
might not go, because this day was a Sabbath. After which, they that were in
the first Tabernacle accompanied him to the next; and they that were there to
the third; and so forward to the last; that they might be sure to have this
great work done, of carrying their Sins quite away from them. So we read in the
Treatise on this Subject, called Joma, cap. 6. sect. 4, 5. which Maimonides
has explained, as I have now done.

Ver. 22. And the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities.] This shows
more fully still, the nature of this Sacrifice, in which all their iniquities,
i. e. the punishment of them was laid, that he might carry them away. For this
Goat was not capable to bear their sins, but only their punishment; as Christ
also did, who knew no sin, and yet was made sin; by having the punishment of
our sins laid on him. For that this Scapegoat, which was loaded with their
sins, was a Sin-offering, is plainly said before in this Chapter; and
consequently represented Christ (who is our Sin-offering) as well as the other
part of this Sin-offering did, whose Blood was carried into the holy place. And
in some regard this Scapegoat was a very notable representation of him; if it
be true, that our Savior entered upon his Office, of being the Mediator of our
reconciliation with God, upon this great Day of Atonement, which was the Day on
which he was Baptized, as our Dr. Jackson, together with some good Chronologers
think. For though the Tradition of the Western Church be, that his Baptism was
on the Sixth of January, yet as Jansenius, and some others of the Roman
Communion, do not think fit to follow it, so he judges it more probable to have
been on the Tenth of September. In the beginning of which Month, when the Feast
of Blowing of Trumpets was celebrated (as we read XXIII of this Book, 24.) John
Baptist began to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, and call the Jews to
Repentance. Who accordingly flockt to him, and confessing their sins, were
baptized by him in Jordan; where our Savior also being baptized on the Tenth
day, which was the Day of Atonement, and being declared the Son of God by a
Voice from Heaven, was immediately driven by the Spirit into the Wilderness, as
St. Mark tells us I. 12. Which was a manifest indication (he thinks) to John
Baptist, that this was the Redeemer of the World prefigured by the Scapegoat;
who going into the Wilderness on the Day of Atonement, immediately after the
People had made Confession of their sins, gave him to understand (who was well
acquainted with the meaning of the Legal Rites) that he was sent by God to take
upon himself the Sins of the World, and carry them away, by being, in due
season, offered to God, and slain as a Sacrifice to God for them. And this he
did at that very time, when the Paschal Lamb was killed, (as I have shown upon
XII Exodus 6.) to the end that they might take notice he was the Lamb of God,
whose Sacrifice that Lamb prefigured: as by being led into the Wilderness on
the same day the Scapegoat was carried thither, he showed that the Mystery
represented by that Ceremony, was exactly fulfilled in him.

This Notion of his I thought good to mention (though as far as I know, he is
singular in it) because it carries some probability in it, if what the Apostle
says, 2 Coloss. 17. be well considered, That the Law contained shadows of
things to come, the body of which was Christ. Who was a Body consisting of so
many different parts, and so complete (as he observes) that no one, nor a few
Legal Ceremonies, could perfectly fore-shadow it: But as the Ceremonies were
many, and almost infinite; so every one did fore-shadow some part or piece of
this complete Body: That is, no remarkable part of it, no special Event or
Action, which concerned our Savior Christ, but was fore-shadowed by some or
other Legal Ceremony. See Christ's Answer to John's Question, numb. 62, 63, 64.
And his Ninth Book upon the Creed, concerning the Consecration of the Son of
God, (which was printed several years after) sect. 4. chap. 24. n. 5, 6, 7, 8.
where he resumes this Argument, and endeavors to answer this Question; Why,
since Christ was to accomplish the Legal Priesthood and Sacrifice, by his
bloody Sacrifice upon the Cross, he did not offer himself, and die upon this
very Day of Atonement. To which he gives full satisfaction: but it is too long
here to be inserted.

Unto a land not inhabited.] So the LXX. translate the Hebrew word gezera,
(...), a Land into which no body came, or a desolate Country. The Hebrew word
properly imports a Land cut off (as Bochart. observes, Lib. II. Hierozoic. cap.
54. P. I.) that is, from habitable Countries: not which cuts off what is sent
into it, by its rugged and sharp stones, as the Jews expound it. This still
sets out the design of this Sacrifice, which was to free Men so perfectly from
the punishment of their sins, that they should not fear the return of them any
more. For this Goat was not merely sent into the Wilderness, but into the most
inhabitable and inaccessible part of it (as the Greek word properly signifies)
where none were likely ever to see it again.

And he shall let go the Goat in the wilderness.] When he came to the last
stage, no body accompanied him that led the Goat, any further; but he went the
tenth Mile alone by himself; and the Men in the Tabernacle only stood looking
to see what he did with it. And the Misna says (in the place before-named)
that he threw it headlong down the Rock Tzuk; where, they say, it was broke in
pieces before it came to the middle of it; or, as Jonathan says, God raised a
storm which blew the Goat down with a mighty force. But this is contrary to the
very words of Moses, who says, he was to let the Goat go, or dismiss him, in
the Wilderness, to run whither he would. And it seems contrary also to the
intention of this Law, which was that only one of the Goats should be killed,
the other let go alive. Whereby was represented, that their sins, which were
expiated by the Blood of the Sacrifice, should not return again to be charged
upon them. Or, that they were as free from their Sins, as the Leprous Person
was from his Confinement, when the Bird was let fly into the Fields. Which
perfect freedom from the punishment of their sins, was further signified by the
burning of the Flesh, the Skin, and the Dung of the Sin-offering, without the
Camp: which denoted that all memory of the sins, for which this Expiation was
appointed, was clean removed and abolished.

The Jews will have it, that a piece of Scarlet Cloth being tied upon the Horns
of this Scapegoat (as another was about the Neck of the Goat which was
sacrificed) when the Man had brought it to the top of the Rock Tzuk, he divided
the Cloth into two pieces, and let the Goat go away with one, but tied the
other to the Rock, that he might see when it changed color, and became white,
as they say it did when the Goat was thrown down headlong. Anciently indeed
they say, this Scarlet Cloth was tied to the Gate of the Temple, and if it
turned white when the Goat was sent away, (as they pretend it usually did)
there was great joy among the People; because it was a sign their sins were
forgiven, according to that of the Prophet, I Isa. 18. Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow, etc. But if it did not change its color
into white, they hung down their heads, and were full of sorrow; they looking
upon it as a Token of God's anger. Which I relate only for this purpose, that I
may take notice how the same Authors, who tell this story, confess, that for
forty years before the destruction of the second Temple, that is, from the time
of our Savior's death, this shred of Cloth never changed its color at all.
Which, if it be true, was a notable Token of the Wrath of God coming upon them,
for their crucifying the LORD Christ.

Ver. 23. And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] All
that the High Priest did about the Scapegoat, was performed at the Door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; where he laid his hands upon him, and confessed
over him all their sins, (See v. 20, 21.) which being done, and he having sent
the Goat away, he is now ordered to come into the Sanctuary it self.

And shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the
holy place.] See v. 4. The Jews say there were two sorts of white Garments,
which he wore on this day: One in the Morning, which were made of fine Linen of
Pelusium, which was a third part of greater value than those he wore in the
Evening, which were of Indian Linen. Now here he speaks only of the Garments
that he wore in the Morning, wherein he had hitherto officiated; but is
ordered, after he had done all this, to put them off; there being many other
things to be still performed upon this day; yea, he was to go once more into
the holy place, in order to which he put on other Garments; as will appear in
what follows.

And shall leave them there.] Never to be used more, either by him, or by any
body else. But they were laid up when they were left; and new ones made against
the next year, as the Gemara upon the third Chapter of Joma relates. And the
same is affirmed by Maimonides, R. S. Jarchi, and others mentioned by Braunius,
L. II. de Vest. Sacerd. cap. 25. n. 9. R. Levi Barcelonita also gives the same
Exposition of it, Praecept. 99. and see Mr. Seldom, Lib. III. de Synedr. cap.
11. p. 143.

Ver. 24. And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place.] Either in
the Laver which stood in the outward Court, or in a Room in the Tabernacle,
which in after time was called Happervah; where the Priest, they say, washed
himself upon this day, every time he changed his Garments. And this agrees well
enough with the words of Moses, which here follow, that when he had put on his
Garments, he should come forth; that is, from this Chamber, to perform such
Offices as are after mentioned. The end of this washing, in this place, seems
to have been, that he might purify himself after he had touched the Goat,
which bare all their iniquities, v. 21. as the Man that carried him into the
Wilderness was to wash, after he had done that business, v. 26. Though others
will have it, that it was in token he had now finished the Expiation. Certain
it is, here is another washing distinct from that mentioned v. 4. when he put
on the white Garments. Which in part justifies what the Misna says in Joma,
cap. 3. sect. 3. that the High Priest washed five times upon this day; all in
the House Happervah, except the first; which could not be in the Court of the
Tabernacle, because he was to wash before he entered into it. For there were
five Ministeries to be performed upon this day, at each of which he changed his
Garments; and between every Ministry, when he changed his Garments, he washed
himself. There is a long Discourse about this, and about washing his hands and
his feet, in Torah Cohanim, quoted by our learned Countryman Mr. Sheringham,
in his Annotations upon Codex Joma, p. 57. etc. which they endeavor to ground
upon the very words of this Verse.

Now as the leading of Christ into the Wilderness, upon the Day of Atonement,
was fore-shadowed by the Ceremony of the Scapegoat; so his Baptism on the same
day was as expressly fore-shadowed or prefigured, as any event concerning him,
either was or could be, by the Legal Ceremony here mentioned, of Aaron's
washing his Body in the holy place. They are the words of Dr. Jackson in
Christ's Answer to John's Question, sect. 64. where he endeavors to make out
this.

And put on his garments.] Viz. His other Garments, wherein he officiated upon
other days; which the Jews call his golden Garments, to distinguish them from
the white Garments; which alone he wore when he went into the most holy place.
And the Jews call by this name of golden Garments, all the eight Garments of
the High Priest: four of which were common to him with the lower Priests, and
were made only of Linen, (yet they never call them by the name of white
Garments, which they appropriate to those in which he went into the most holy
place) the other four, which gave the name to all the rest, were proper only to
the High Priest himself; viz. the Robe (which had Bells of Gold at the bottom)
the Ephod, the Breast Plate, and the Golden-plate upon his forehead: which
being put over the other four common Garments, made him appear as if he were
all clothed in Gold. For they either consisted of solid Gold, as the Plate on
his forehead; or had solid Gold appendant, as the Robe had; or had Gold
interwoven, as the Ephod, and the Breast Plate. Now he put on these, after he
had put off the Linen Garments mentioned v. 4, 23. which were never used, but
when he ministered in the Holy of Holies; where he did not appear with the
Breast Plate of Vrim and Thummim, and the rest of the golden Garments, as some
learned Men have imagined; particularly Corn. Bertram in his Book de Republ.
Hebr. cap. 7. where he says, Hujus Sacerdotis erat semel in anno adytum
sanctuarij adire, indutus ipso Ephode. It belonged to the High Priest to go
once in the year into the most secret place of the Sanctuary, clothed with the
Ephod. Which is directly contrary to v. 4. of this Chapter. But many other
great Men have fallen into the same mistake. See J. Braunius de Vestitu
Sacerdot. Hebr. Lib. II. cap. 20. n. 29. and cap. 25. n. 9, 10.

And come forth.] From the place where he put on his golden Garments, unto the
Altar of Burntofferings.

And offer his burnt-offering, and the burnt-offering of the people.] I take
this for the daily Evening Sacrifice, which usually was one Lamb; but on this
day was two Rams, one for himself, and another for the People; unto which there
was an additional offering of seven Lambs of the first year; as they tell us in
Joma, cap. 7. sect. 3. But before this, they there say, he went and read to the
People out of the Book of the Law, which was with great Ceremony delivered to
him. And he might read either in his Pontifical Habit, or in his own Robes
(which he pleased) for Reading was no Ministry, as the Gemara there observes.
This pleading began at XXIX Numb. 7. etc. where the Sacrifice of seven Lambs is
ordered upon this day.

And make an atonement for himself and the people.] Rather, having made an
atonement: which was already done by other Sacrifices; not by these.

Ver. 25. And the fat of the sin-offering shall be burnt upon the Altar.] This
also, I think, should be translated in the same manner, having burnt the fat of
the sinoffering: which was done, I suppose, in the Morning when both the
Bullock and the Goat were offered for Sin, v. 11, 14. but was not mentioned
till now, to show that their Sacrifices were not perfected, till both Aaron and
the People were reconciled to God; after which their burnt Sacrifices were
acceptable to him. This burning of the Fat was ordered in all Sin Offerings,
IV. 8, 10, 26. and therefore was not now to be omitted. And perhaps it was
reserved to be burnt, when the Flesh of the Bullock and the Goat was burnt
without the Camp, v. 27. which was in the conclusion of all the Services of
this Day.

Ver. 26. And he that let go the Goat for the Scapegoat.] After the Man had
dismissed the Goat, it was not lawful for him to return further back than one
Mile, to the last Tabernacle; where he was permitted to rest himself after his
labor, and not remain all Night in the Wilderness. So they tell us in Joma,
cap. 6. sect. 6.

Shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water.] This Goat being a
public (...), or Purgation (upon whom all their sins were thrown) was
extremely impure: and therefore could not be touched, without rendering the
Person, who led him away, unclean in the highest degree. Which was the reason
that he was bound to wash both his Clothes, and also his whole Body in water,
before he could so much as come into the Camp. Porphyry observes the same
custom among the Heathen, who (...), (as his words are) in such kind of
Sacrifices as those for the averting Evils, permitted no Man who had meddled
with them, to come into the City, or to go to his own House, (...), who had not
first washed his Clothes and his Body in some River, or in Spring Water, L. II.
(...), sect. 44. For nothing is more known than that such a kind of
Purification for washing themselves, was a Custom all the World over; and
continues to this day in the Eastern or other hot Countries; not only among the
Mahometans, but the Pagans; who plunge themselves frequently three times one
after another into their Rivers, rising up with their faces to the East, as all
Travelers into those parts tell us.

And afterward come into the Camp.] Have free Conversation with his Brethren;
and I suppose, without any further Ceremony, be admitted to the Sanctuary.

Ver. 27. And the Bullock for the sin-offering, and the Goat for the
sin-offering.] Mentioned v. 11, 15.

Whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place.] Of which we
read in the same place, v. 14, 15.

Shall one carry forth.] But first they were ripped up, and the Imurim, as they
call them, (mentioned IV. 8, 9.) taken out, to be burnt upon the Altar. And
then the Priest dissected them, (as the Misna says in Joma, cap. 6. sect. 7.)
not into pieces, as was wont to be done in Burnt-offerings; but made only deep
Incisions, letting the parts hang still together. Which being done, four Men,
says R. Solomon, carried them forth upon two Staves or Bars; one being not
able to do it: and accordingly the LXX. translate these words (...), they shall
carry forth. But one Person, it is likely, had the principal care, to see them
burnt; which is the reason he only is mentioned.

Without the Camp.] Into a clean place, where the Ashes were wont to be poured
out, IV. 12. There were three Camps (as I noted before, XIII. 46.) the Camp of
the People, unto which Jerusalem answered in after times; the Camp of the
Levites, unto which answered the Mountain of the House (as they called it) the
whole Circuit about the Temple; and the Camp of God, or the Sanctuary with all
its Courts, unto which answered the Temple and its Courts. So Maimonides in his
Treatise called Beth Habbechira, cap. 7. Now as these Sacrifices were carried
to be burnt without the Camp of the People, when they were in the Wilderness;
so they were burnt without the City of Jerusalem, after the Temple was built
there.

Which illustrates the words of the Apostle, XIII Hebr. 10, 11, etc. where he
takes it for granted, as a thing they all knew, that Jerusalem answered to the
Camp of Israel: And from thence shows, that the Mystery prefigured by this
Goat, whose Blood was brought into the holy place to make atonement (as he
speaks in this Verse) was accomplished in our blessed LORD and Savior, who,
that he might sanctify the People with his own blood, suffered without the
Gate, as the Apostle there observes: that is, without the City, yet near the
Suburbs of Jerusalem; whose Type or Figure was the Camp of the Israelites in
the Wilderness.

And the intent of the Apostle in this, and other such like Observations, was
to show, that our Savior's Sufferings on the Cross, were a most true and
proper Sacrifice; a Sacrifice fully satisfactory for the Sins of the World: or
rather, more satisfactory for all the Sins of Men against the Moral Law of God,
than the Sacrifices on the Day of Atonement, the Passover, or other Anniversary
Solemnities, were for sins merely against the Law of Ceremonies: As the Apostle
shows in the foregoing part of that Epistle, IX Hebr. 13, 14.

And they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.]
Here it is plain, there was more than one, who carried the Bodies of these
Beasts without the Camp; they being too heavy for any single Person to bear.
And they burnt them entirely, (See IV. 11, 12.) except what was offered upon
the Altar. Yet Josephus is pleased to except (...), by which he seems to mean
their Rumps, Lib. III. cap. 30. In which he forgot himself; for though these
were comprehended under the Imurim of some Sacrifices, (See VII. 3.) yet
neither here, nor in the fourth Chapter, v. 8, 9. is there any mention of this
Fat; nor is it comprehended under the Fat mentioned above v. 25. which the
Misna in Joma says, was the Fat of the inwards only.

Ver. 28. And he that burns them.] The Vulgar Latin, I think, rightly
translates it, Quicunque combusserit, whosoever burns them: for there was
more than one, as I said before, employed in this business.

Shall wash his clothes, etc.] Being defiled by touching the Sacrifices, which
were charged with so many sins; as he that carried away the Scapegoat was, v.
26. where there is the very same order in the same words.

Now when all this was done, the Misna says ( cap. 7. Joma, sect. 4.) the
High Priest washed himself again, and put on his white Robes, which were proper
to this day; and went into the most holy place, to fetch out the Censer, with
the Dish, or Cup, which he carrried in when he went to burn Incense, v. 12, 13.
And when he came out from thence, he washed, and put on his golden Garments, and
offered Incense upon the golden Altar, and trimmed the Lamps. Which being done,
they brought him his own Garments which he wore constantly; and when he had put
them on, they accompanied him to his House, where he entertained his Friends
with a Feast, being come out of the Sanctuary in peace; that is, safe and in
health. For by shifting his Garments, and washing so often, he was in danger to
catch Cold, (as we speak) and they did sometimes fall into various Diseases
upon this occasion, as P. Cunaeus observes out of Maimonides, L. II. de Repub.
Hebr. cap. 14. and some died in the holy place, not having performed the
Service duly. Which made it very reasonable, that he and his Friends should
rejoice, when he returned in health and safety.

Ver. 29. And this shall be a statute for ever unto you.] Till the coming of
Christ, in whom all that these Sacrifices signified, was accomplished: who put
an end therefore to this Legal Dispensation. See XII Exodus 14.

That in the seventh month.] When they had gathered in all the Fruits of the
Earth, and thereby had the more liberty to attend such a solemn Service. Which
was the reason perhaps, why there were more Solemnities appointed in this
Month, than in any other Month in the Year; as appears from XXIII. of this
Book. It had been anciently also the first Month of the year, being the Month,
it is likely, wherein the World was created: But upon the deliverance of Israel
out of Egypt, the Month Abib, by God's special command, was ordered to be the
first. Yet not absolutely, but only in respect of that which was most eminent,
viz. for the Ecclesiastical Account: For as to their Civil or Temporal Affairs,
the seventh Month (Tisri) still retained the precedence.

On the tenth day of the month.] The Arabians imitated this; calling the Fast
of the Tenth day of the Month Moharram, by the name of Ashura; which is exactly
the Ashor (tenth day) here mentioned by Moses; from whom these People derived
it, before the appearance of Mahomet: Who finding the Jews, when he came to
Medina, fasting upon this day Ashura, asked them the reason of it; who told him
(as the Mohammedan Writers report) it was in remembrance of Pharaoh's being then
drowned in the Red Sea: whereupon he said, I have more to do with Moses than
you, and thereupon commanded his Followers to fast on this day. See Dr. Pocock
upon Abal-Farajius concerning the Manners of the Arabians, p. 309, 310. But
this is plainly an idle Tale invented by him, or his Followers; for the Jews
would rather have feasted, than fasted upon the day of such a Deliverance. But
it shows that this Day was remarkable among the Jews, and solemnly observed by
them, wheresoever they were; and was chosen by God, rather than any other Day
of the Month, (if we may believe Maimonides, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 43.)
because it was the day on which Moses came down from the Mount, with the second
Tables in his hand, and proclaimed to the People the Remission of their great
Sin, in worshipping the golden Calf; in memory of which it was ordered to be
entirely a Day of Repentance, and of Divine Worship.

Ye shall afflict your souls.] By Fasting and Abstinence, not only from all
Meat and Drink, but from all other Pleasure whatsoever. Insomuch that they
might not wash their Faces, much less anoint their Heads, nor wear their Shoes,
nor use the Marriage Bed; nor read (if their Doctors say true) any portion of
the Law, which would give them delight: For example, the story of their coming
out of Egypt, and leading them through the Red Sea, etc. so far is the
Mohammedan story from having any color of truth. It is likely also, that to
increase their Grief, they rent their Clothes, (as they did in other Fasts in
after times) put on Sackcloth, girded it close to their Flesh, sprinkled Ashes
on their heads, etc. Which were all intended, no doubt, to work in them an
inward sorrow for all their sins, with an hearty abhorrence of them, and
resolution to mortify and abstain from them. For though the word Soul be
generally expounded the sensitive part of us, which is afflicted by fasting,
(as the Prophet Isaiah expounds this Phrase, LVIII. 3, 5.) yet it is absurd to
think that God was pleased with this alone, without that inward Compunction of
Mind, which made them break off their sins by righteousness: which the Prophet
there declares was the only acceptable Fast to the LORD.

The Hebrew Doctors here observe, that they did not afflict little Children on
this day, by making them fast from all Food, till they were of the Age of
Eleven years: But only taught them what they were to do when they came of Age,
that they might be accustomed to the Precept. See Joma cap. 8. sect. 4.

And do no work at all.] Not only abstain from all Pleasure, but from all
Labor whatsoever: nothing being to be done upon this day, but Confessing of
Sins, and Repentance; as Maimonides expresses it in the place beforementioned.

Whether it be one of your own Country, or a Stranger that sojourneth among
you.] The Hebrew word Ezrach is extant only here and XXIII. 42. which signifies
as much as one that had his original among them, being born an Israelite, as it
is there expressed. The opposite to which is gher (a Stranger we translate it)
one that was of another Nation, but had embraced the Jewish Religion, and lived
among them; who in the New Testament is called a Proselyte.

Ver. 30. For on that day shall the Priest make an atonement for you.] If upon
this day, they afflicted and humbled their Souls (as Conr. Pellicanus glosses)
with fasting, and prayer, and anguish for their sins, with alms also;
beseeching God's mercy with tears and sighs in sackcloth and ashes; resting
from all servile works, and devoted wholly to the LORD.

To cleanse you.] From all the Transgressions and Sins mentioned v. 16. from
which both the High Priest, and his Family, and all the People were to be
purged on this day. For which reason the greatest care was to be used, to see
it rightly observed, because all their happiness depended upon it. For the Land
of Canaan was promised them, upon condition that they kept the Law, offering
all the Sacrifices therein prescribed; especially this great Sacrifice, which
was to cleanse them from the guilt of all their Neglects, or Breaches of this
Law. Which should teach us Christians to conclude, That as the Inheritance of
that good Land, was assigned the Jews in consideration of their Sacrifices, as
the condition of that Covenant, by which they were prescribed; so the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven, is made over to us by the Covenant of
Grace, in consideration of the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ Jesus, of
which they were a Figure. For it is his Blood that cleanses us from all
unrighteousness, (as St. John speaks) and secures our Claim to the heavenly
Inheritance.

That ye may be clean from all your sins.] If a Man was bound to offer
Sacrifice for any sin that was certain, he was not excused from it by this
Sacrifice on the Day of Expiation; but was bound to make that other Sacrifice
also. But the Day of Expiation freed those, who were bound to offer Sacrifices
for dubious Offenses. So Maimonides says (in his Treatise of Offenses
committed through Error, cap. 3. sect. 9.) that those sins which were known to
none but God, were taken away by this solemn Day of Expiation, without any
other Sacrifice. But the Misna in the last Section of Joma, acknowledges very
honestly, that the Day of Expiation did not purge Men from the guilt of the
Offenses they had committed against their Neighbor, unless they first gave him
Satisfaction.

Before the LORD.] Who dwelt among them, and would continue to do so, if they
observed his Laws, and took care to be thus cleansed from all their sins. But
least any Man should mistake this matter, it may be here fit to observe, that
there were no Sacrifices at all appointed by the Law of Moses for Capital
Offenses; and therefore when he speaks here of making them clean from all their
sins upon this day, such as these (for instance, Murder, Adultery, Idolatry,
etc.) are not included: for this great Sacrifice could not obtain a Pardon for
them, but only for Offenses committed against the Ritual Laws contained in this
Book, and that also when they were committed through Error or Ignorance: for if
they were done presumptuously, cutting off was threatened to them. See XV Numb.
from v. 22. to v. 32. And this appears plainly from the Sacrifices themselves
that are here appointed; which had no virtue in them from their own worth and
value, but only from God's Institution, to make Expiation for any Sin. For the
death of a Bullock or a Goat, was not of such account with God, that it could
prevail for the taking away of guilt, unless he had given it such a power. And
that power which he was pleased to allow unto them, was neither infinite, nor
could it be so. For the guilt that they were principally designed to abolish,
was not of such a nature as to require such an Expiation: It arising from
things which were neither good nor evil in themselves; and therefore could not
create such a guilt. Such were all the uncleanness from certain natural
Fluxes, from touching a dead Body, and innumerable other such like Impurities:
which depending wholly upon the will of God, who by a positive Law made such
things to bring Men under a guilt; by the same Will he appointed a
proportionable Expiation of it by these Sacrifices, whose power to cleanse
depended also purely upon his pleasure. And if they had any virtue to purge Men
from the real guilt of sins committed against the Eternal Laws of God; this
they had not of themselves, but from the most gracious Will of God, who was
pleased to apply to this purpose, the future Satisfaction of the immaculate
Lamb of God, of which these Sacrifices were a Shadow and Type. For a Body being
prepared for the Son of God, and he offering himself for us, that was a
Sacrifice of such infinite value in its own nature, that it expiated all manner
of sins of all Men. To this effect, that excellent Person Joh. Wagenseil
discourses, in his Confutation of R. Lipman's Carmen Memoriale, p. 488.

Ver. 31. It shall be a Sabbath of rest unto you.] In the Hebrew the words are
a Sabbath of Sabbaths, i. e. a great or perfect Sabbath, like that of the
Seventh day in every Week; on which they might do no manner of Work. And so the
Seventh day is called just as this is, a Sabbath of Rest, or Sabbath of
Sabbaths. See XXXI Exodus 15. XXXV. 2. which gave occasion to those jeers we
meet withal in Martial and others, at the Jews fasting on their Sabbath days:
For reading Moses his Books carelessly, they fancied the Jews observed as strict
a Fast upon every Sabbath day, as they did on this, which was but once a year.

And ye shall afflict your Souls by a statute for ever.] See v. 29.

Ver. 32. And the Priest whom he shall anoint, etc.] The High Priest, who
should be anointed and consecrated in his Father's stead, (when he was dead) is
here ordered to make this Atonement yearly. That is, what was now done by
Aaron, was to be done by every High Priest successively, when he was legally
put into his Office; by vesting him with the Priestly Garments, anointing him,
and offering the Sacrifices of Consecration, VIII. 7, 10, 22.

This Statute confined the sacred work of this day to the High Priest, who
alone could perform it: But it shows withal, as the Apostle observes, the great
imperfection of this Legal Priesthood, which could not, by reason of death,
continue always in one Person: but there were many Priests, succeeding one
another in the Office, which became often vacant. Whereas our great
High Priest, because he continues for ever, i. e. never dies, has an
unchangeable Priesthood: and therefore is able to save to the uttermost, or
evermore, those that come to God by him, VII Hebr. 23, 24, 25.

And shall put on the linen clothes, even the holy garments.] He was to take a
special care not to officiate on this day, in any other Garments, but those
mentioned v. 4. which were peculiarly appropriated to this Service, and called
the white Garments; which were a Figure perhaps of the perfect Purity of our
great High Priest, who, as it there immediately follows, (VII Hebr. 26.) is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.

Ver. 33. And he shall make an atonement for the holy Sanctuary, etc.] In this
Verse he only sums up the whole duty of the day; in which a general Atonement
was made, for all Things, and for all Persons. The only thing to be observed
is, That the Expiation of the Sanctuary, the Tabernacle and the Altar, preceded
the Expiation of the Priests and of the People, who were to be expiated by the
Sacrifices offered there. But the Expiation of the High Priest himself, who was
to make the Expiation of the Sanctuary, preceded all the rest; as is apparent
from v. 11.

Ver. 34. And this shall be an everlasting statute.] The repetition of this the
third time (See v. 29, 31.) shows of how great importance it was, that this
annual Solemnity should be observed.

Unto you.] The Highpriests (beforementioned) of whom he speaks in the Plural
Number, because none of them could continue always, (as I observed v. 32.) but
enjoyed the Office successively, upon the death of their Predecessors.

To make an atonement for the Children of Israel, for all their sins once a
year.] This is only a repetition of what was said v. 30. that it should be
incumbent on the High Priest by a perpetual Obligation, to make an Atonement
for the Peoples sins on this day; as it was incumbent on the People ( v. 29.)
to afflict their Souls upon this day.

And he did as the LORD commanded Moses.] The Service of this day was
immediately performed by Aaron, according to the forenamed order.

CHAP. XVII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] After he had ordered the great
Anniversary Sacrifice, in the foregoing Chapter; he gives some Directions about
other Sacrifices, for which there would be occasion every day.

Ver. 2. Speak unto Aaron and his Sons, and all the Children of Israel.] Who
were all concerned in what follows; and therefore this Command is directed to
the whole house of Israel, (v. 3.) to whom this was delivered, it is likely, by
their Elders: or else Moses himself went from Tribe to Tribe, and spoke to
their several Families.

And say unto them, This is the thing which the LORD has commanded.] Enjoined
by a Special Law.

Ver. 3. Whatsoever man there be of the House of Israel, that kills an Ox, or
Lamb, or Goat.] viz. For a Sacrifice or Offering, (as it follows v. 4.) these
being the only Creatures of the Herd and the Flock, that were permitted to be
brought to God's Altar. There are those indeed, who think, Moses speaks of
killing these Creatures for common use; which it was lawful for them to do any
where, after they came to the Land of Canaan, (XII Deuteronomy. 15.) but now they were
not to kill them, for their food, unless they brought them to the door of the
Tabernacle, and there first sacrificed some part of them to the LORD, before
they tasted of them themselves. By which their sacrificing to Demons was
prevented, (to which they were prone, v. 7.) and they also constantly feasted
with God, while they dwelt in the Wilderness. But this is better founded upon
XII Deuteronomy. 20, 21. where it is supposed that they had thus done, while they
remained in the Wilderness; and were so near to the House of God, that they
might easily bring thither every Beast they killed for ordinary use. But they
were dispensed withal as to this, when they came into Canaan, and could not
possibly, when they had a mind to eat Flesh, go so far as to the Tabernacle or
Temple, which was many Miles from some of them. Instead whereof, they were
bound to come at the three great Festivals, and appear before God at his House,
wheresoever they dwelt.

In the Camp, or that kills it out of the Camp.] This seems to show that he
does not speak of killing these Beasts, ad usum vescendi, as St. Austin's words
are, for the use of eating, (for that they did not do out of the Camp, but in
their Tents) but de Sacrificiis, he speaks concerning Sacrifices. For he
prohibits (as he goes on) private Sacrifices, lest every Man should take upon
him to be a Priest, etc.

Ver. 4. And brings it not unto the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, to offer an offering unto the LORD.] In ancient time every Man
had performed the Office of a Priest in his own Family: But now that liberty is
taken away, because they had abused it to Idolatry: and every Man was bound to
bring his Sacrifice to the House of God, where none but the Sons of Aaron could
officiate, and had the most sacred Obligations on them to offer only to the
LORD. The very Heathens themselves in future times, found it necessary to enact
the very same; as appears by Plato in the latter end of his Tenth Book of Laws,
where he has these memorable words: (...). Let this be a Law imposed
absolutely upon all, that no Man whatsoever have a sacred place in private
Houses; but when he has a mind to offer Sacrifice, let him go to the public
Temples, and deliver his Sacrifice to the Priests, whether Men or Women, (...),
whose business it is to take care, that these things be performed in an holy
manner. By which it appears that these were two established Principles of
Religion in wise Men's minds, to Sacrifice publicly, and to bring their
Sacrifices to the Priests; who were to take care to offer them purely. Unto
which Moses adds one thing more, that their public Sacrifices should be
offered only at one place: which was a most efficacious preservative from all
strange Worship; nothing being done but under the Eye of the Ministers of
Religion, and the Governors of the People. Insomuch that St. Chrysostom (as
our learned Dr. Spencer observes, Lib. I. de Rit. and Leg. Hebr. L. I. cap. 4.
sect. 1.) calls Jerusalem, which was afterward established to be this place,
(...), a kind of bond or knot, whereby the whole Nation were tied fast to the
Judaical Religion.

Before the Tabernacle of the LORD.] Before the Divine Majesty, which dwelt in
the Tabernacle; round about which they all inhabited, and were so near it while
they traveled in the Wilderness, that, as there was no trouble in bringing all
their Sacrifices thither, so they knew certainly whether to go. And thus the
Hebrew Doctors observe it was when they came into Canaan; where, while the
Tabernacle was fixed in Shilo, none might Sacrifice any where else: But when it
wandered uncertainly (after Shilo was destroyed) being sometimes in Mispeh,
sometimes at Gilgal, and at Nob, and Gibeon, and the House of Obed-Edom, they
fancy it was lawful to Sacrifice in other places. For so we find Samuel did, 1.
Sam. VII. 9. IX. 13. (where he sacrificed in an high place) XI. 15. XVI. 2. and
David, 2 Samuel XXIV. 18. and Elias, 1 Kings XVIII. 23. But these may be thought
extraordinary acts, done by an immediate warrant from God; for none of these
Persons were Priests, but Prophets guided by Divine Inspirations. See Dr.
Owtram Lib. I. de Sacrific. cap. 2.

Blood shall be imputed unto that man, he has shed blood.] He was to be
punished as a Murderer; that is, die for it. For to have Blood imputed to a
Man, in the Hebrew phrase, or to be guilty of Blood, is to be liable to have
his Blood shed, or to lose his Life. Which, as of old, it was the punishment of
every one, who killed another Man, (IX Genesis 6.) so here he is condemned to die
who sacrificed any where, but at the Tabernacle.

And that man shall be cut off from among his people.] This, not another
punishment, (unless we suppose it relates to his Posterity) and therefore the
first word should be translated, not and, but for. And the meaning either is,
that the Magistrate should pass the Sentance of Death upon him, or God would
destroy him himself. The latter sense is most probable, because he threatens (
v. 10.) to execute Vengeance with his own hand, upon him that was guilty of
eating Blood. It is thought indeed by some, that cutting off does not signify
death; but, as in other places of this Book, cutting off is so evidently joined
with death, that so little cannot be meant by it, as depriving such Persons of
the privileges of God's People, (for instance, when any offered his Children
to Moloch, XX. 2, 3, 4, 5. or did not afflict his Soul on the Day of Atonement,
XXIII. 29, 30.) so here in this place, it most certainly signifies the putting
him that was guilty of this Crime, to death; because he was to be punished as a
Murderer. Which severe Penalty was enacted in this case, to preserve the
Israelites from Idolatry. For if they had been permitted to offer Sacrifice
where they pleased, they might easily have forsaken God, by altering the Rites
which he had ordained; nay, by offering to strange Gods: particularly to the
Demons, which, in those days, frequented the Fields, and endeavored to
persuade the ignorant, that they were Gods; as seems to be intimated in the
next Verse, and v. 7.

Ver. 5. To the end.] Or, For this cause; i. e. to avoid that heavy punishment
beforementioned.

That the Children of Israel may bring their Sacrifices.] Or, Shall bring: as
the Vulgar Latin translates it, (regarding the sense, more than the words) Ideo
Sacerdoti offerre debent, etc. Therefore they ought to bring to the Priest
their Sacrifices, etc.

Which they offer in the open field.] Where the Pagans erected their Altars, to
procure fruitfulness to their Fields. Insomuch that Libanius says (in his
Oration (...)) that the Temples, or Holy Places, were the very Soul or Life of
the Fields: (...). And that in them lay the hope of the Husbandmen: (...). How
old this Idolatry was, we cannot certainly tell; but it continued a long time
among the Israelites, as we learn from the Prophet Jeremiah, XIII. 27. and
Hosea XV. 11. where he says, Their Altars were as heaps in the furrows of the
field: that is, there were abundance of them; notwithstanding this early
prohibition given by Moses. And among the Gentiles, Festus tells us they
offered Sacrifices to the terrestrial Gods, in terra, upon the very ground
(according to the Hebrew phrase here, on the face of the field) but to the
infernal Gods, in terra effossa, in holes or pits dug in the Earth; and to
the caelestial, in aedificiis a terra exaltatis, in Buildings exalted above the
Earth; i. e. upon Altars: which had their name from hence, ab altitudine, from
their height, as both he and Servius also tell us. And every one knows that
they delighted to set them in high places, on the tops of Mountains and Hills;
especially where there were Groves and shady Trees; under which they set them,
even in Valleys, and in the Highways, Fields and Meadows. For they were so
fond of them, that those who were against erecting of Temples to their Gods (as
Zeno was) yet never sacrificed without Altars; which they set in the open Air,
to signify they believed he whom they worshipped could not be circumscribed.

Even that they may bring them unto the LORD.] Or, They shall bring them even
unto the LORD: who had settled his Habitation at the Tabernacle, and would be
worshipped no where else with Sacrifices.

Unto the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation unto the Priest.] Here
seems to be another reason, why they were not permitted to offer in the Field;
because God would have none but the Priests (Men appointed by himself, to
attend for this purpose at his House) to offer Sacrifices to him, according to
the Rites he had prescribed.

And offer them for peace offerings unto the LORD.] Upon these words
Nachmanides grounds the forenamed opinion, That whilst the Jews continued in
the Wilderness, they ate no Meat at their own private Tables, but what had been
first offered to God at the Tabernacle. Behold, says he, God commanded that
all which the Israelites did eat, should be Peace Offerings. Which was
afterward altered, when they came to Canaan, and lived remote from the House
of God. And such a Custom prevailed among the Gentiles, who would not sit down
to eat at their Tables, till they had offered Bread and Wine unto their Gods.
Thus it was among the Chaldees, as appears from I Daniel 8. But then they had
many Altars every where, even in their own private Houses. Whereas here in the
Wilderness, there was but one Altar; which could not contain all the Fat that
was to be burnt on it every day, if we suppose the Israelites to have commonly
killed Beasts for their own eating. It seems to be the truer opinion that they
seldom or never did that, while they were in the Wilderness; but all the Beasts
they killed were for Sacrifice, of which Moses here speaks. So R. Levi
Barcelonita ( Praecept. CLXXXVII.) and other Jewish Doctors, they are here
forbidden to offer a Sacrifice to God any where, without the Tabernacle. He
mentions indeed only Peace Offerings; but the reason is, because they were most
common; being offered not only for all the Mercies they had received, but for
all they desired to obtain from God; as Abarbanel observes upon the VIIth
Chapter of this Book, where the several sorts of them are mentioned. Men were
more forward also to bring these Offerings than any other, because they were to
have their share of them, and feast upon them.

Ver. 6. And the Priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the Altar of the LORD, at
the door of the Tabernacle.] This depends upon the foregoing command of
offering all their Sacrifices at the Tabernacle; that so the Blood might be
sprinkled upon the Altar, (and poured out at the bottom of it, as is required
in other places of this Book) and not kept together in a Vessel, or a hole in
the Ground: As the manner of the ancient Idolatry was, when they offered their
Sacrifices in the Field, and sat about this Blood, and feasted upon the Flesh
of their Sacrifice. So Maimonides says the Custom of the Zabij was, More
Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46.

And burn the fat.] So the manner was in all Sacrifices: which is said also, to
be for a sweet savor unto the LORD. See I. 8, 9. III. 3, 5. IV. 35, etc.

Ver. 7. And they shall no more.] It seems by this they had been guilty of
other Idolatrous Practices, besides that of worshipping the Golden Calf, XXXII
Exodus And so much is expressed XXXII Deuteronomy. 17. And it was a sin of which their
Fathers had been long guilty, especially in Egypt, XXIV Josh. 14. XX Ezekiel. 7.
XXIII. 2, 3. which they had not left, but continued in the Wilderness, V Amos
25.

Offer their Sacrifices unto Devils.] These words show the reason why God
commands them, under such a heavy Penalty, to offer only in one place, at the
Tabernacle; because, while they sacrificed in the open Fields, they had been in
danger to be seduced by Demons, who were wont to frequent those places,
(especially in Deserts) and present themselves to ignorant People, as if they
were Gods, and entice their Devotion toward them. Which Demons, or Evil
Spirits, appeared, it is likely, in the form of Goats; and therefore are here
called Seirim, which properly signifies Goats. And has made some imagine that
they really sacrificed to these Creatures, as some of the Egyptians did, who
held Goats to be sacred Animals. So Diodorus tells us, Lib. II. (...), etc.
they deified a Goat; upon the same account that the Greeks worshipped Priapus.
Herodotus in his Euterpe, cap. 46. says the same of the Mendesij, who, he
says, worshipped the Males more than the Females. And many other Authors
mentioned by Bochartus (in his Hierozoicon P. I. L. II. cap. 53.) report the
same. But I question whether the Egyptians were guilty of such Idolatry, in the
days of Moses. Nor is there more truth in their opinion, who think the
Israelites now worshipped Images in this form of Goats. Which the LXX. seem to
have thought, when they translated it (...), to vain things, as Idols are
called in Scripture. And yet this very word Seirim is by the Greek Translators
rendered (...), XIII Isaiah 21. which we here follow; only instead of Demons
translating it Devils: whom the ancient Zabij worshipped; they appearing to
them in the form of Goats; and this Custom was universally spread (as
Maimonides thinks) in Moses his time, which was the cause of this Precept, More
Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46.

And indeed nothing is more common in the Writings of the ancient Heathen, than
the mention of Fauns, and Satyrs, and Aegipanes, whose shape below was that of
a Goat. And to this day, in the solemn Conventions of Witches, the chief Devil
that presides in their Assemblies, is said by all, that have examined such
matters, to have the form of a Goat. And our famous Countryman Alexander
Hales, in his Discourse upon the Scapegoat (which is in his Summa, P. III. Q.
55.) derives the reason of it from the frequent appearance of Demons in this
shape in the Wilderness; as Mr. Seldom observes in his Prolegomena to his Book
de Diis Syris. They that would see more of these Seirim, may consult J. G.
Vossius, L. I. de Orig. and progr. Idolol. cap. 8. and Bochartus his
Hierozoicon. P. II. L. VI. cap. 7.

There is one indeed (Anton. Van Dale) who has lately endeavored to explode
all these Fancies, as he esteems them, of Demons: which he would have to be
the mere invention of the ancient Chaldaeans; and from them derived to other
Nations. But he will never be able to make any wise Man believe, that the World
was so sottish, as to worship the Images of Goats (which he takes to be meant
by Seirim) if there had not been an appearance of some thing in that shape,
which they accounted Divine.

After whom they have gone a whoring.] i. e. With whom they have committed
Idolatry. For this sin was justly called by the name of whoredom, ever after
they were solemnly contracted and espoused to God, to be his peculiar People
(XIX Exodus 5.) Which is the reason that he is said, so often, to be a jealous
God (particularly XX Exodus 5.) highly incensed, that is, at their worshipping
other Gods, besides him. For this, and such like words are never used but
concerning Idolatry; which Ezekiel describes as the foulest Whoredom, XVI. 22.
and particularly mentions this Whoredom with the Egyptians, v. 26. and the
Assyrians, v. 28, etc.

This shall be a statute for ever unto them, throughout all generations.] These
words seem to me to determine the sense of the foregoing Precept, to which they
relate, (from v. 2, etc.) not to be, that all the Meat they killed for their
own Tables should be Peaceofferings: for that, all confess, was not a statute
for ever (if it were one at all) throughout all generations; but only while
they were in the Wilderness.

Ver. 8. And thou shall say unto them, whatsoever man there be of the house of
Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you.] These words also show he
speaks in the foregoing, of bringing all Sacrifices whatsoever to the
Tabernacle; the same Law which was given before to the Israelites, being now
extended to all Strangers that sojourned among them. By whom he means all such
as were Proselytes to the Jewish Religion. So the LXX. here translate it; and
they add the very same words to v. 3. where the house of Israel is only
mentioned in the original Hebrew. The only question is, What sort of Proselytes
are here intended? And I take it, he speaks of the Proselytes of Righteousness
(as the Jews call them) who were Circumcised, and thereby embraced the whole
Religion of Moses. And this, I find, is the general opinion: though some few
learned Men contend, that any Stranger who had renounced Idolatry (whom they
called, A Proselyte of the Gate) might bring their Sacrifices to the Altar.
Which one can hardly allow (though asserted by so great a Man as Grotius, Lib.
I. de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 16.) because he speaks of the same Strangers
here, which are mentioned v. 10. where all such Strangers are forbidden to eat
Blood. Which plainly belongs to such Strangers as were become Jews by
Circumcision: for other Strangers might eat it, as appears from XIV Deuteronomy. 21.
where the Israelites are allowed to sell what died of it self, to a Stranger,
that he might eat it, if he pleased: and such Creatures had their Blood in them.

That offers a Burnt-offering, or Sacrifice.] i. e. Any other Sacrifice
besides Burnt-offerings, viz. Sin Offerings, or Trespass-offerings, or
Peace Offerings. None of which were accepted, but from such as were admitted
into the Jewish Religion: though the pious Gentiles, the Jews say, might bring
Burnt-offerings.

Ver. 9. And brings it not to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
to offer it unto the LORD.] As he ordered their Peace Offerings to be, v. 4, 5.

Shall be cut off from among his people.] This demonstrates that the foregoing
Precept, and this, belong to the same matter; being enforced with the same
Penalty, v. 4. And it also shows that the Strangers beforementioned, signify
such Gentiles as were Circumcised: for otherwise they were not of the Body of
the People of Israel, from which they are threatened to be cut off, if they did
not observe this Law.

Ver. 10. And what man soever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers
that sojourn among you.] See v. 8.

That eats any manner of blood.] This is forbidden before, III. 17. and
repeated again VII. 26. (See both those places) where it is explained what
Blood he means; either of Birds, or Beasts. Nothing is said of Fishes, because
they were not offered at the Altar, and have little Blood in them: nor is there
any direction given any where, how they should be killed. It is said indeed in
this place, that they should not eat any manner of Blood; but the meaning seems
to be, neither of Blood offered at the Altar; nor of Beasts killed for their
own use: Or else it is to be limited as before, to the Blood of Beasts and
Birds, ( v. 13.) for Fishes were not at all considered. And here the reason is
added why they should not eat Blood, (which was not mentioned in the forenamed
places) because it was the Life of the Beast, and was therefore reserved to
make Atonement for their Souls.

I will even set my face against that soul, etc.] That is, be extremely angry
with him, and severely punish him, by cutting him off (as it here follows) from
the Body of the Nation. Maimonides observes in the forenamed place ( More
Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46.) that this is the same Expression which is used
against him that offered his Children to Moloch, XX. 3. and that this phrase is
never used in Scripture concerning any other sin, but only these two, Idolatry
and eating Blood. For the eating of Blood gave occasion (he shows) to one kind
of Idolatry, in the worshipping of Demons: whose Food the ancient Idolaters
imagined the Blood was; by eating of which their Worshippers had Communion with
them. See XVI Psalm. 4. and Grotius there.

Ver. 11. For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you
upon the Altar, to make an atonement for your souls, etc.] Some think here are
two distinct Reasons against eating of Blood: but the words, as they lie in the
Hebrew, may well be translated, Because the life of the flesh (of any Beast,
that is) is in the blood, therefore I have given it to you (or, appointed it
for you) upon the Altar, to make an atonement, etc. Which is as much as to say,
The Life of the Beast lying in the Blood, I have ordained it to expiate your
sins, that by its death in your stead, your life may be preserved: and
therefore I require you not to eat that, which is appointed for so holy an end.
For it would have been very unseemly, if they had vulgarly used that, to which
they owed the favor of God, and their very Lives.

Nothing could be more rational than this Precept, viz. That a thing so sacred,
as to be peculiarly appointed for them upon the Altar, should not lose that
honor and esteem that was due to it. As the Blood would have done, if it had
been allowed to be commonly eaten; for that is very contemptible which goes
into the Draught, (as our Savior speaks) and at last becomes Ordure.

For it is the blood that makes an atonement for the soul.] The Blood, that
is, of the Sacrifices, which by God's appointment are offered to expiate your
sins; that is, to preserve you from perishing. For to make an Atonement, and to
be a Ransom, are the very same thing; as appears from XXX Exodus 12. compared
with v. 15, 16. And to be a Ransom, is to deliver from Death, as appears from
the words in that place, they shall every Man give a Ransom for his Soul, unto
the LORD, that there be no Plague among them. For the sins of the Sacrificer
being laid upon the Beast which he offered, by imposition of his hand on its
Head, and confessing them there, they were taken away by the Blood of that
Beast, unto which they were translated. And that not merely by the Obedience of
him that offered the Sacrifice, (which the followers of Socinus say, God
accepted) but by the Blood of the Sacrifice it self, as these words expressly
declare, which was offered in his stead. Thus Theodoret upon these words; God
commanded the Soul of the Irrational Creature, with its Blood, (...), etc. to
be offered, instead of thy Rational and Immortal Soul. And thus the Jews
themselves understand it; particularly Aben-Ezra upon these words, says, the
Soul, instead of the Soul; i.e. the Soul of the Beast was offered instead of
the Soul of the Man. And R. Solomon Jarchi to the same purpose; One Soul comes,
and makes Expiation for another Soul. And Maimonides more largely; I have
spared the Soul of the Man, and given this Blood upon the Altar; that the Soul
of the Beast may make Expiation for the Soul of the Man. And so Abarbanel and
many more, which may be seen in Dr. Owtram's most learned Book De Sacrificiis,
Lib. I. cap. 22. n. 11.

Ver. 12. Therefore I said unto the Children of Israel, No soul of you shall
eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood.]
What other reason soever there was before, for not eating Blood (See IX Genesis
4.) this is the reason why God forbad it to the children of Israel; and to all
that joined themselves unto their Religion.

Ver. 13. And whatsoever man there be of the Children of Israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catches any Beast or Fowl
that may be eaten.] Though no other Beasts or Fowls be mentioned, but those
that were taken in Hunting, (that being a very common thing in those days) yet
the Precept extends to all those that were bred at home, and were allowed by
the Law for their Food. So a MS. Author, mentioned by J. Wagenseil, in his
Annotations upon Sota, cap. 2. excerpt. Gemarae, n. 6. where he puts abundance
of Cases upon this Subject.

He shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.] Though it
was not the Blood of a Sacrifice offered at the Altar, but of a Beast or Bird
killed for their own use; they might not eat it, but bury it in the Ground;
lest any Beast should lick it up, as it is commonly interpreted. Maimonides
has found a deeper reason for this, which is, That no Body might meet, and
feast about it. By which means Moses broke their Society and Fellowship with
Demons: who in those times were thought to feed upon the Blood, in a Bowl, or
Hole; whilst their Worshippers sat about it eating of the Flesh. So he writes
in the place often beforementioned, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46. And this was
the more necessary while they remained in the Wilderness, because Demons were
wont to haunt such places, and there appear; but not in Cities or habitable
Places. See Mr. Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 4. p. 201. If a Man therefore
saw his Neighbor kill a Beast, and neglect to cover its Blood with Dust, he
was bound to go and do it himself; because God speaks here unto the Children of
Israel, i. e. to all of them, ( v. 12.) as R. Levi Barcelonita glosses,
Praecept. CLXXXV. And the forenamed MS. mentioned by Wagenseil, says, they
covered the Blood with this form of Benediction, Blessed be the LORD our God,
the King of the World, who has sanctified us with his Precepts, and commanded
us to cover Blood. Which shows they thought this a Precept of great weight.

Ver. 14. For it is the life of all flesh, etc.] Whether of Beasts or Fowl
beforementioned: and therefore prohibited to be eaten by them, (as was before
observed) because it was offered to God, and accepted by him for their Life,
when they had forfeited it by their sins.

Therefore I said unto the Children of Israel, ye shall eat the blood of no
manner of flesh.] See v. 12. Where the same thing is said, but not so fully as
here: for he only says in that Verse, No soul of you shall eat blood: but in
this, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh.

For the life of all flesh is the blood thereof.] This is so often repeated (no
less than three times in this Verse) the more to deter them from eating Blood:
which was the Life of the Beast, and therefore offered to God, as the LORD and
Giver of Life; and consequently belonged to no Body else.

Ver. 15. And every soul that eats that which dies of it self.] And
consequently had the Blood remaining in it; as all things also, which were not
rightly killed had, (the Hebrews think) and therefore here forbidden.

Or that which was torn with Beasts.] Which was nothing else (as Maimonides
speaks) but the beginning to be a dead Carcass, More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 48.

Whether it be one of your own Country, or a stranger.] By a Stranger is meant
one that had embraced the Jewish Religion: for other Gentiles might eat such
things. Nay, the Israelites themselves (as Maimonides observes) when they went
to War, and entered the Countries of the Gentiles, and subdued them, might eat
that which died of it self, or was torn of Beasts; nay Swines-flesh, and such
like Food, when they were hungry, and could find no other Meat. See Schickardi
Mishpat Hamelek, cap. 5. Theor. 18.

He shall both wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, etc.] When he
had eaten these things unwittingly, and came to know it, he was thus to purify
himself. If he did it knowingly, it was an high Crime, against an express Law,
repeated more fully XIV Deuteronomy. 21. and punished, as some think, with Death. But
I suppose they mean, he was obnoxious to the Divine Displeasure, and in danger
to be cut off by him, if he did not offer a Sacrifice to expiate his Offense:
which seems to be allowed in such Cases, as it was for greater Offenses, VI. 1,
2, etc. And the Jewish Doctors say, he who violated this Law, was only to be
beaten: for cutting off, either by the hand of God, or the Court of Judgment,
was not threatened to sins of so light a Nature as this. So Maimonides observes
in his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 41.

Ver. 16. But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh, he shall bear his
iniquity.] Be liable to be punished by God, for the neglect of the means of his
Purification. And if while he continued thus unclean, he adventured to eat of
the Peace Offerings, he was in danger to be cut off from his People, VII. 20.

CHAP. XVIII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] It is not said, when the LORD
delivered these Laws to Moses; but it is likely after the other, and before
those that follow.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them.] They were all
concerned in these Laws about Marriage; and therefore they are directed to the
whole Body of the People: who received them, I suppose, by their Elders and
Heads of the Tribes, to whom Moses delivered them, and charged they should be
communicated to every Family and Household. See XVII. 2.

I am the LORD your God.] I have a right to give you Laws (being your
Sovereign, upon more Titles than one) to which all Human Customs must yield,
though long practiced, and spread every where in the World. This reason is
mentioned six times in this Chapter; and oftener in the next. See v. 4.

Ver. 3. After the doings of the Land of Egypt wherein ye dwell, shall ye not
do: and after the doings of the Land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye
not do.] The Manners of these two Countries (of Egypt wherein they had dwelt a
long time; and of Canaan, wherein they were going to settle) they were in the
greatest danger to imitate: Especially in taking the liberty of making such
Marriages, as they saw practiced among them, against which they are here
severely cautioned. But though these words seem to have a particular respect to
those Marriages, yet Maimonides extends them to all their other Practices, for
which they could see no reason. Magic being in much use among them, in
dressing their Trees, and ploughing their Ground, and such like common things:
in which they had a respect also to the disposition of the Stars of Heaven,
which led them to the Worship of them; as he shows at large in his More Nevoch.
P. III. cap. 37. R. Levi Barcelonita also extends these words to the Customs of
all other Nations, ( Praecept. CCLXII.) which he that observed, was to be
beaten. But the Doings, or Customs, which Moses here speaks of, seem to be
those that follow v. 6, 7, etc. as appears from v. 24, etc. And the other
Customs of those Nations, about their Clothes, and cutting their Hair (which
the forenamed Author mentions) are forbidden in other places.

Neither shall ye walk in their Ordinances.] The Hebrew word Chukkoth, which we
commonly translate Statutes, and here Ordinances, seems to import that the
incestuous Marriages here mentioned, were allowed by the Laws and Constitutions
of those Countries; which made their Wickedness the more intolerable, v. 24.

Ver. 4. Ye shall do my Judgments, and keep my Ordinances to walk therein.]
Frame your Lives according to the Laws and Rules which I give you to observe;
and not according to their wicked Practices, which were grown into Customs and
Precedents. The Gemara Babylonica mentioning these words, says, it is a
Tradition of their Doctors, that by Mishpatim (which we translate Judgments)
are to be understood such Natural Laws, as all Mankind are bound to observe,
though there were no written Commands for them: such as those against Idolatry;
and those about uncovering the Nakedness of such near Relations, as are here
mentioned; and Murder, etc. And by Chukkim (Ordinances, or Statutes) such Laws
are meant as depended only on the Pleasure of God; and obliged none but those
to whom they were given: such as those, about Meats and Garments, and Leprosy,
etc. Against which, lest any one should object, it is here added, I am the LORD
your God.

I am the LORD your God.] I, who am your Sovereign LORD; and by redeeming you
from the Egyptian Bondage, am become, in a special manner, your God, have
ordained these things. Therefore let no Man dispute them, or make a question of
them, as the forenamed Gemara expounds these words. See Seldom, Lib. I. de Jure
N. and G. cap. 10. p. 122. where he observes that the Laws called Statutes,
are, in their Language, such as depend only on the Royal Authority.

Ver. 5. Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes, and my Judgments.] Observe the
Laws beforementioned. For the word we here translate Statutes, is the same
with that translated Ordinances, in the foregoing Verse.

Which if a man do, he shall live in them.] Not be cut off; but live long and
happily, in the enjoyment of all the Blessings which God promised in his
Covenant with them.

I am the LORD.] Who will faithfully keep my Covenant, and fulfill my Promises,
VI Exodus 3.

Ver. 6. None of you.] In the Hebrew the words being isch, isch, (as much as to
say, Man, Man) that is, no Man; the Talmudists take it as if he had said,
neither Jew nor Gentile. For all Mankind, they say, are comprehended under
these Laws about Incest. Nay, the very Karaites (or those who adhere only to
the Scripture, and reject all Talmudical Expositions) are of this mind, as Mr.
Seldom observes, Lib. I. de Vxore Hebr. cap. 5. But the Talmudists themselves
do not all understand this matter alike. For some of them think all the
Gentiles (at lest those who were under the Dominion of the Israelites) were
bound to refrain from all incestuous Marriages; to which Death is threatened by
the Law. But others of them think they were concerned only in those six things
which were unlawful before the Law of Moses was given. See Seldom, Lib. V. de
Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 1. and cap. 11. p. 596, etc. But the ancient Hebrews
give a good reason for all these Laws, as Grotius observes, Lib. II. de Jure
Belli and Pacis, cap. 5. sect. 13. n. 2.

Shall approach.] Some of the Jews have been so rigorous, as to expound this
word, as if it bound them not to have any familiarity with the Persons after
named. ( R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept. CLXXXVIII.) which is against all Reason
and natural Affection. The plain sense is, they should not approach, or come
near to them, for the end afterward mentioned, viz. to uncover their Nakedness.
Nay, this very phrase is used for the same thing (XX Genesis 4.) without the
addition of uncovering their Nakedness.

Any that is near of kin to him.] It must be confessed that these words near of
kin, do not sufficiently express the full sense of the Hebrew phrase; nor are
they of a determinate signification: for a Man maybe near of kin to a Woman,
who is not the remainder of his flesh, as the Hebrew phrase is: that is, so
near of kin to him, that nothing comes between them. This is properly the
nearness of flesh here spoken of; she that is immediately born of the same
Flesh that a Man is, or she out of whose Flesh he is born; or she that is born
out of his Flesh: that is, in plainer words, a Man's Sister, Mother, or
Daughter. These are a Man's own immediate Relations; which the Karaites call
the Foundation and Root of all that is here forbidden, as Seldom notes, Lib. I.
Vx. Hebr. cap. 2. For the sake of whom, the rest here mentioned are prohibited,
having a nearness of flesh to them, viz. his Father or Mother's Sister; his
Granddaughter, and his Niece. For the best Explication of this Phrase, is the
express Particulars mentioned by God himself in this place.

To uncover their nakedness.] To have Carnal knowledge of her, as the Scripture
modestly speaks in other places. For nakedness in the holy Language signifies
the Secret Parts, which natural Modesty teaches all civilized People to cover;
and not to reveal them to any but those whom they marry. Therefore not to
uncover the nakedness of the Persons here named, is properly, not to take them
in Marriage; and much less to have Knowledge of them without Marriage.
Answerable to this is the Name of a Virgin, whom the Hebrews call Alma, which
is as much as covered, clothed, or veiled: because those parts were never
exposed to any one, but those to whom they were espoused and joined in Marriage.

I am the LORD.] By my Authority, who am your Sovereign, and the Sovereign of
the World, these Laws are enacted: and I will punish those that break them.

Ver. 7. The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, thou
shall not discover.] It is commonly thought by Interpreters, that the Particle
we translate or, is here as much as that is, (for so it signifies in some
places, particularly 1 Samuel XXVIII. 3.) So that the latter part of the Verse is
only an Explication of the former, and makes them but one Prohibition, against
a Man's marrying his Mother. And this indeed the next words seem to imply, she
is thy Mother; who bare thee, and therefore not to be taken to be thy Wife,
much less to be otherwise known by thee. But we may as well think, that the
nakedness of the Father, and of the Mother, are both here mentioned, to show
neither the Daughter might marry her Father, nor the Son his Mother; and
consequently, that in all the following Particulars, Women were concerned just
as Men were; though the Men be only mentioned. And under the Name of Father and
Mother, are comprehended Grandfather or Grandmother, or other Progenitors
before them.

She is thy mother, thou shall not uncover her nakedness.] This is the very
first Prohibition; it being a going back in Nature for a Man to marry his
Mother. Which though it was practiced in those days by the Canaanites, and
Egyptians, and by the Persians also, in after times, and some other Eastern
Countries, yet in the Western part of the World (as Mr. Seldom observes) such
Marriages were nunquam non execranda, execrable in all Ages, Lib. V. de Jure
Not. and Gent. cap. 11. p. 601, etc. Such were the Marriages of Oedipus with
Jocasta, of Nero with Agrippina, Pelopeja and Thyestes her Father, of whom
Aegistus was born; which every Body detested. See Grotius de Jure Belli and
Pacis, Lib. II. cap. 5. sect. 2. For the Law of Nature was against such
Marriages, notwithstanding the practice of Persons, nay whole Nations, whom God
gave up to (...) (as St. Paul shows) dishonorable affections, for their other
sins; especially for their forsaking him, and falling to Idolatry.

Maimonides gives this as the general reason of prohibiting this, and all the
following Marriages, because the Persons here forbidden to be so joined
together, are all, in a manner, such as are wont to live together in the same
House, (for so Fathers, Mothers, Children, Brothers and Sisters do) who might
easily be tempted to lewdness one with another, if even marrying together were
not severely forbidden. And thus the LXX. translate the words of the foregoing
Verse, none of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, (...), or,
as other Copies, (...), to those that are so near of kin, that they usually
dwell in the same House; as Parents and Children; Brothers and Sisters; and the
Brothers and Sisters of our Parents. Mahomet, as lewd and impudent as he was,
had not the boldness to control these Laws; but in the fourth Chapter of his
Alcoran expressly forbids his Followers to marry their Mothers, their
Mothers-in-law, etc. and a great many of the rest which here follow.

Ver. 8. The nakedness of thy fathers wife shall thou not uncover.] That is, of
a Stepmother. Such was the incest of Reuben with Bilhah, XXXV Genesis 22. and of
Absalom with the Wives of his Father David, 2 Samuel XVI. 21, 22. And of
Antiochus Soter with Stratonice; who abhorring from such a Conjunction, was
taught that all things were honest that pleased the King. But the thing it self
is so hateful, that the very naming it is a Condemnation; and therefore it is
all one with the prime Natural Law, which prohibits the Conjunction of Parents
and Children. For she that is one flesh with my Father (as a great Man speaks)
is as near to me as my Father, and that is as near as my own Mother. As near, I
mean, in the estimation of Law, though not in the accounts of Nature: and
therefore, though it be a Crime of a less turpitude, yet it is equally
forbidden, and is against the Law of Nature, not directly, but by
interpretation, Book II. chap. 2. Ductor Dubitantium Rule 3. n. 29.

It is thy fathers nakedness.] He having known her, it was not permitted the
Son to have her also. Nay, the Jews say, if the Father had only espoused her,
it was not lawful for the Son to have her to Wife: or if he had divorced her,
it was not lawful for the Son to have her, even after he was dead. See R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CXCI. Buxtof. de Sponsal. p. 16, 17.

Ver. 9. The nakedness of thy sister.] As the nearness of flesh (mentioned v.
6.) above a Man is, his Mother; and below him is his daughter: so on the side
of him, is his Sister.

The daughter of thy father.] Though she were begotten by his Father of another
Wife, not of his Mother; yet he might not marry her.

Or the daughter of thy mother.] Born of her by another Husband, not by his
Father.

Whether she be born at home, or born abroad.] Be legitimately born, in
wedlock; or illegitimately, out of wedlock; as the Talmudists expound it. See
Seldom, Lib. V. de Jure N. and G. cap. 10. p. 591. where he observes, that
though the Egyptians (as Philo and others report) with such like Nations,
thought the Marriage of Brothers and Sisters to be lawful, and it was practiced
also in Greece; yet the greatest Men in the Western Countries condemned such
Marriages; which some of the Greek Philosophers also disallowed: and Euripides
himself called barbarous, even when it was practiced. Insomuch, that in after
Ages this wicked Custom was quite abolished; and that before Christianity was
well settled among them. For Sextus Empiricus says, that in his time it was
utterly unlawful. See there cap. 11. p. 603, 605, etc. Where he shows, the
Romans always abhorred such Marriages; nay, it was late before the Persians
took up this abominable Custom, after the example of Cambyses: who being in
love with his own Sister, as Herodotus relates (in his Thalia, cap. XXXI.) and
having a Mind to marry her, which was never practiced before in that Country;
he commanded the Royal Judges (as he calls them) who were the Interpreters of
the Laws, to advise whether he might lawfully do it, or no. Who to please him,
and yet not seem to give an illegal opinion, answered, (...), etc. That they
could find no law which permitted a Brother to marry his Sister: but there was
a Law that the Persian King, might do, even what he would. See Grotius, Lib.
II. de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 5. sect. 13.

Even their nakedness thou shall not uncover.] It shall be unlawful to thee to
marry any of the forenamed Sisters. For though the Marriage of Brother and
Sister was necessary in the beginning, when God created but one Man and one
Woman, by whose Children the World was peopled; yet, when it was so, there was
great reason that it should be made utterly unlawful, as many have
demonstrated. Particularly Bishop Tailor in his Ductor Dubitantium, Book II.
chap. 2. Rule 3. n. 24, 25, etc. For now it is next to an unnatural mixture (as
he speaks) it has something of confusion in it, and blending the very first
partings of Nature; which makes it intollerably scandalous, and universally
forbidden; for if it were not, the mischief would be horrible and infinite.

Ver. 10. The nakedness of thy sons daughter, or of thy daughters daughter;
even their nakedness thou shall not discover.] This Law concerns a Man's
Grand-daughters, by his Son or his Daughter; whether legitimately or spuriously
begotten; as R. Levi Barcelonita expounds it, Praecept. CXCIII. Who adds in the
next Precept but one, this is another Prohibition, Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy daughter: which (says he) is not expressly mentioned in this
Law, because it was not necessary. For a Man's Grandchildren, either by Sons
or Daughters, which are more remote, being forbidden, there was no need to say
it was unlawful for him to marry his own Daughter.

For theirs is thy own nakedness.] They have their original from thy Nakedness.
For which reason some of the Jews extended this to those Descendants which were
still further off; as an Hedge to this Law. So R. Levi calls it in the place
forenamed. The ancient Romans also (as our Mr. Seldom shows) were very strict,
in restraining the Marriage of Men with their Nieces, either by their Brothers
or Sisters, and with others mentioned in the following Laws of Moses, Lib. V.
de Jure Not. and Gentium, etc, cap. 11. p. 605. etc.

Ver. 11. The nakedness of thy fathers wives daughter, begotten of thy father
(she is thy sister) thou shall not uncover her nakedness.] This Prohibition,
seeming to be the same with that v. 9. some of the Hebrews have expounded this
concerning the Daughter of a Mother-in-law begotten by another Father. For the
words may be thus translated, as Mr. Seldom observes the order of them will
bear ( Lib. I. de Vxore Hebr. cap. 4.) The nakedness of the Daughter of thy
Father's Wife (for she that is born of thy Father, is thy Sister) thou shall
not discover. And with this the Greek, and several other Versions of the Bible
agree, who make the Prohibition of the Wives Daughter to end, before he speaks
of his own Sister. And it is the sense of the principal Men among the Karaites,
as he shows cap. 6. But this is against the constant sense of the Hebrew
Doctors, who say it is lawful to marry the Daughter of a Mother-in-law, which
she had by another Husband; for there is no nearness of Flesh at all between
these two. And therefore, as in the ninth Verse, the Marriages of all Brothers
and Sisters in general, are forbidden, so here more particularly the Marriage
with a Sister by the same Father, though not by the same Mother: which was
necessary to be expressly forbidden, because before the Law, the Sons of Noah
thought it lawful to marry a half Sister (as we speak) by the Father's side,
though not by the Mothers. See Buxtorf. de Spons. and Divort. p. 15, 16. And
this was the ancient Law of Solon among the Athenians, that they might marry
(...), their Sisters by the same Father, but not (...), their Sisters by the
same Mother; as Joh. Meursius shows in his Themis Attica, Lib. I. cap. 18. And
if the one of these had not been in so many words prohibited, as well as the
other, the Jews might still have continued in that practice, which was usual
before the Law. See Sam. Petitus in Leges Atticas, p. 440.

Some are of the opinion, that, in the ninth Verse, the Son of a second Venture
is forbidden to marry the Daughter of the first: and here, the Son of the first
Venture to marry the Daughter of the second. And others fancy that the Sister
here meant, is one that was adopted by his Father.

Ver. 12. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy fathers sister.] And it
made no difference whether she was his Father's Sister legitimately, or
illegitimately begotten by his Grandfather; as R. Levi Barcelonita represents
the opinion of the Hebrew Doctors, Praecept. CXCVII. Such Marriages also were
prohibited by the ancient Romans, as Mr. Seldom observes in the place forenamed
( Lib. V. cap. 11. p. 605.) though before the Law of Moses, they are supposed
to be lawful; for it is commonly thought that his Father Amram married his Aunt
Jochobed, VI Exodus 20. and therefore no wonder it was practiced in other
Countries, who were not acquainted with this Prohibition: particularly at
Sparta, where Herodotus says in his Erato, cap. 71. Archidamus their King
married Lampito, who was Sister to his Father Zeuxidamus, (...); Leutychides
(who was Father both to her and to Zeuxidamus) giving her to him in Marriage.

She is thy fathers near kinswoman.] So near, that as he could not be permitted
to marry her, so his Son also, who was but a little further removed from her,
was forbidden to touch her. And by the same reason that a Man might not marry
his Aunt, an Uncle might not marry his Niece. Which though practiced among the
Romans after Claudius married Agrippina, till the time of Constantine; yet it
was a new thing, as Claudius himself acknowledges in Tacitus, ( Nova nohis in
fratrum filias conjugia, Lib. XII. Annal. Marriages with our Brother's
Daughters are new things with us.) And all he could say for it, was, That it
was common in other Nations, nec lege ulla prohibita, and not forbidden by any
Law. And indeed the newness of it so frighted Domitian, that he would not
venture upon it; nor did many use it. Which shows that this Law had some
foundation in Nature; which made those Men cautious about such Marriages, who
had nothing else to guide them. Or, at least, there had been such a long Custom
against them, in the Western part of the World, that Men, who were otherwise
very bad, would not help to alter it.

Ver. 13. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mothers sister: for she
is thy mothers near kinswoman.] There is the same reason for this, as for the
former Prohibition: the Aunt by the Mother's side being as near to a Man, as
his Aunt by the Fathers.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy fathers brother.] This is
explained in the next words, Thou shall not approach to his Wife: that is, not
marry thy Uncles Wife. And therefore much less might an Uncle marry his
Brother's Daughter: as Herodotus tells us Darius married Phrataguna the
Daughter of his Brother Atarnes, who gave him all his Estate with her; and
Leonides, King of Sparta, married Gorgo the Daughter of his Brother Cleomenes.
See Lib. VII. (called Polymnia) cap. CCXXIV. and CCXXXIX.

She is thy Aunt.] By such near Affinity, that Marriage is forbidden with her,
as well as with an Aunt by Consanguinity, v. 12, 13. In which the ancient
Romans also were very strict, as our Seldom observes in the place abovenamed.
And it made no difference, whether he were only Espoused to her, or had after
Marriage divorced her, or was separated by Death: or whether he was his
Father's Brother legitimately, or spuriously, as R. Levi Barcelonita observes,
Praecept. CXCIX. and CC. Where he notes, that though the Fathers Brother's Wife
be only mentioned, yet the Mothers Brother's Wife is also prohibited. This is
repeated XX. 20.

Ver. 15. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter-in-law: she is
thy sons wife, etc.] Though only espoused to him; and therefore much more when
solemnly married; as the same R. Levi explains it, Praecept. CCI. where he has
the same observation as before; that if she was afterward divorced, he might
not marry her: and that it is probable the Wife of a Bastard Son is prohibited;
for he is his Son, though a Child by a Slave, or a Stranger, is never called a
Man's Son.

Ver. 16. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brothers wife, etc.]
Unless he died Childless; for in that case the next Brother was bound to marry
her, XXV Deuteronomy. 5. See Buxtorf de Spons. p. 25. and Grotius in XIV Matthew. 4.
Much less might a Man marry his Brother's Daughter, (as was before noted) who
was nearer to him, and of his own Flesh. Which was so much abhorred by the
ancient Romans, that Claudius Caesar durst not celebrate his Marriage with
Agrippina, till he had got a Decree of the Senate for it, Quo justae inter
patruos, fratrumque filias, nuptiae etiam in posterum statuerentur: which made
the Marriage of Uncles with their Brother's Daughters to be lawful for the
future; which hitherto had been without example. So Tacitus relates in the
forenamed Book of his Annals, cap. 5. where he says, notwithstanding this
Decree, there were none found, but only one Man, who desired such Matrimony;
and most thought he did it to gain Agrippina's favor: Neque tamen repertus
est, nisi unus, talis matrimonii cupitor, etc.

Ver. 17. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of a Woman and her daughter.] If
a Man married a Widow that had a Daughter; it was a wicked thing to marry that
Daughter, either while her Mother lived, or after she was dead.

Neither shall thou take her sons daughter, nor her daughters daughter, to
uncover her nakedness.] To preserve them from this, the Jews added, as a Hedge
to this Law, a Prohibition to marry the Grand-daughters of such Daughters, as
R. Levi Barcelonita tells us, Praecept. CCV.

For they are her near kinswomen.] Of such Consanguinity with her (from whom
they directly come) as makes it very Criminal in him that is one with her, to
marry them.

It is wickedness.] The Hebrew word Zimmah imports more than Wickedness. The
LXX. translate it (...), Impiety; the Vulgar Latin, Incest; others nefarious
wickedness: which is the word in the Civil Law, for those Marriages that are
contrary to Nature. Such were these in some measure; though not in the highest
degree.

Ver. 18. Neither shall thou take a wife to her sister.] There are a great many
eminent Writers, who following our Marginal Translation, [one wife to another]
imagine that here plurality of Wives is expressly forbidden by God? And they
think there is an example to justify this Translation in XXVI Exodus 3. Where
Moses is commanded to take care the five Curtains of the Tabernacle were
coupled together one to its sister (as the Hebrew phrase is) i. e. one to
another. And so the Karaites interpret this place, That a Man, having a Wife,
should not take another while she lived. Which, if it were true, would solve
several difficulties: but there are such strong Reasons against it, that I
cannot think it to be the meaning. For as more Wives than one were indulged
before the Law, so they were after. And Moses himself supposes as much, when he
provides a Man should not prefer a Child he had by a beloved Wife, before one
by her whom he hated, if he was the eldest Son. Which plainly intimates an
allowance in his Law, of more Wives than one. And so we find expressly their
Kings might have, though not a multitude, XVII Deuteronomy. 17. And their best King,
who read God's Law day and night, and could not but understand it, took many
Wives, without any reproof: Nay, God gave him more than he had before, by
delivering his Master's Wives to him, 2 Samuel XII. 8. And besides all this,
Moses speaking all along in this Chapter of Consanguinity, it is reasonable (as
Schindlerus observes) to conclude he does so here: not of one Woman to another;
but of one Sister to another. There being also the like reason to understand
the word Sister properly in this place, as the words Daughter and Mother in
others, v. 17. and XX. 14. where he forbids a Man to take a Woman and her
Daughter, or a Woman and her Mother, as Theodorick Hackspan judiciously notes,
Disput. I. de locutionibus sacris, n. 29. See Seldom, L. V. de Jure Not. and
Gent. cap. 6. and Buxtorf. de Sponsal. p. 28, 29.

The meaning therefore is, That though two Wives at a time, or more, were
permitted in those days, no Man should take two Sisters (as Jacob had formerly
done) begotten of the same Father, or born of the same Mother, whether
legitimately or illegitimately, as the forenamed R. Levi expresses it,
Praecept. CCVI. Which though it may seem to be prohibited before, by
consequence and analogy (because the Marriage of a Brother's Wife is forbidden
v. 16.) yet it is here directly prohibited, as other Marriages are; which were
implicitly forbidden before. For v. 7. the Marriage of a Son with his Mother is
forbidden: and v. 10. the Marriage of a Father with his Daughter.

To vex her.] There were wont to be great Emulations and Jealousies, and
contentions between Wives (some of them being more beloved than others, and
also superior to them) which between two Sisters would have been more
intolerable, than between two other Women: who not being a consanguinitate,
aequiore animo sub eodem marito, aetatem una agant (as Petrus Cunaeus speaks,
Lib. II. de Repub. Hebr. cap. 23.) of the same Consanguinity (as two Sisters
are) might live with more equal and quiet minds under the same Husband. The
Vulgar Latin understands this, as if Moses forbad them to make one Sister their
Wife, and the other their Concubine; which could not but beget the greatest
discords between them.

In her life time.] From hence, some infer that a Man was permitted to marry
the Sister of his former Wife, when she was dead. So the Talmudists; but the
Karaites thought it absolutely unlawful, as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. I. de
Vxore Hebr. cap. 4. For it is directly against the Scope of all these Laws,
which prohibit Men to marry at all with such Persons as are here mentioned,
either in their Wives life time, or after. And there being a Prohibition v. 16.
to marry a Brother's Wife, it is unreasonable to think Moses gave them leave to
marry their Wive's Sister. These words therefore, In her life time, are to be
referred, not to the first words, Neither shall thou take her, but to the next,
To vex her, as long as she lives. Chaskuni refers it to both the Sisters,
according to the Targum. and makes this the sense; least they should both be
afflicted Widows as long as they live: for no Body would marry either of them,
being defiled by such an incestuous Conjunction, for which God cut off their
Husband.

In this the ancient Christians were so strict, that if a Man, after his Wife
died, married her Sister, he was by the tenth Canon of the Council of Eliberis,
to be kept from the Communion five years.

Ver. 19. Also thou shall not approach to a woman.] No, not to his own Wife, as
the forenamed R. Levi expounds it, Praecept. CCVII. though all other Women
also are comprehended, even their Canaanitish Slaves, as he observes.

As long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.] Which was seven days, XV.
19. All the Laws about Marriages unto this place, seem to have a special regard
to the wicked Customs among the Egyptians; who, above all other People, were
then polluted with such incestuous mixtures. And now he proceeds to direct them
to abhor the Customs of the Canaanites; who were polluted more than other
Nations, with Adulteries, and offering their Children to Molech, and the rest
of the foul Crimes which follow. For against the practices of these two
Nations, the Egyptians and the Canaanites, Moses cautions them v. 3. and
accordingly first mentions the doings of the Egyptians, unto this place; and
then those of the Canaanites in the following Verses.

Ver. 20. Moreover, thou shall not lie carnally with thy neighbors wife.]
While he lived with her: for this was to commit Adultery.

To defile thy self with her.] This signifies the foulest impurity, as appears
from v. 23. and was punished with death, XX. 10.

Ver. 21. And thou shall not let any of thy seed.] i. e. Of their Children, as
it is explained XVIII Deuteronomy. 10. This was a Spiritual Adultery, and therefore
here mentioned.

Pass through the fire to Molech.] It is certain that Molech was particularly
worshipped by the Children of Ammon, (at least in future Ages, 1 Kings XI. 7.)
but seems to have been the Name of many of the Heathen Gods, and the same with
Baal: both of them signifying Dominion. This appears by comparing XIX Jer. 5.
with XXXII. 35. But more especially it signifies the Sun, the Prince of the
Heavenly Bodies, (See Vossius de Orig. and Progr. Idolol. Lib. II. cap. 5.) as
the Queen of Heaven was the Moon, VII Jer. 18. Now it is evident by several
passages in Scripture, that the ancient Pagans (whom the Israelites were prone
to imitate) not only made their Children pass through the fire; but also
offered them in Sacrifice unto Molech. The former I take to be forbidden in
this Law; the latter in XX. 3. where giving their Children to Molech is
prohibited under a severe Penalty, of being put to death for that Crime:
whereas there is no Penalty annexed here to their making them pass through the
fire. Which I take therefore to have been a less Crime than the other; though
an idolatrous Rite practiced by those, who abhorred the cruelty of offering the
very Life of their dear Children to Molech. Instead of which this Rite was
devised, of making them pass through the fire (for though the word fire be not
here in the Hebrew Text, yet it is understood by all, and expressed XVIII Deuteronomy.
10.) by way of Purification, and Lustration, as they called it; and by this
means to dedicate them to the Worship and Service of Molech. And therefore,
being a Rite of Initiation, whereby Parents consecrated their Sons and
Daughters to their Deities; we never find it mentioned in Scripture, but only
concerning Children (not concerning Men and Women) whom the Israelites are
forbidden to dedicate in this manner; which was in truth, to alienate them from
the LORD God of Israel.

Now that this was practiced among the ancient Pagans as a Rite of Initiation,
appears particularly in the Mysteries of Mithra, (See Suidas upon that word)
and continued long among the Persians, if we may believe Benjamin Tudelensis,
in his Itinearium, p. 214. See G. Schickardi TARICH, p. 126, etc. And this very
phrase make to pass unto (for the word fire, as I said, is not here mentioned)
signifies as much as ad parts ejus transire, to be addicted to any one; like
that phrase (...), to come unto God, XI Hebr. 6. And so this Hebrew Phrase is
used XIII Exodus 12. and may very well be thus understood here, for devoting, or
making over their Children unto Molech. For the Heathen thought their Children
unclean, and obnoxious to the Anger of their Gods, and consequently in danger
to be taken away from them, if they were not thus expiated, as Maimonides tells
us, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 37. And on the contrary, they fancied (as R. Levi
Barcelonita observes, Praecept. CCVIII.) that if only one of their Children
were thus consecrated to Molech, all the rest were blessed, and should be
prosperous. For he very nicely takes notice that the Israelites are forbidden
to make any of their seed to pass through the fire: It not being the manner, he
says, to make them all pass. But the idolatrous Priests (to make the People
more willing to this Service) cunningly persuaded them, that if any one Child
was offered to Molech, it procured a Blessing upon all; and if there was only
one Child in a Family, they laid no Obligation on the Parents to do this.

The manner of doing it, at this distance of time, cannot certainly be known.
Some say their Parents carried them through two fires upon their shoulders.
Others, that they were led between them by their Priests: and so R. Levi in the
place before-named; The Father delivered the Child to the Priest, in the name
of the Idol; just as it is said concerning Legal Sacrifices (XV. 14.) he shall
give them to the Priest. Others think that the Priest, or some Body else, waved
the Child about in the very flame, while Men and Women danced round the fire;
nay, leaped through the flame. And Joh. Coch observes, upon the Title
Sanhedrim, cap. 7. n. 7. that some are of the opinion, the Children thus
dedicated, did not walk, but dance through the fire: which being an emblem and
representative of the Sun, plainly signified such Children were consecrated to
that Deity. And this comes nearer to the Hebrew phrase, as we translate it,
that they did not pass between fires, but through the fire. But which way
soever it was done, whether they waved the Child through the very fire, and
presented it to Molech, before whom the fire was kindled, or led it between two
fires; when they had so done, the Priest restored the Child to the Father
again. And in some such way Ahaz made his Son to pass through the fire,
according to the abomination of the Heathen, 2 Kings XVI. 3. which cannot be
meant of his burning him: for Hezekiah his Son outlived him, and succeeded in
his Throne. See Theodoret in IV King. Quaest. 47. Maimon. de Idol. c. 6. sect.
14. n. 4, 5, 6, 7. and Vossius his Notes; with Simeon de Muis in CVI Psalm. 37.

Neither shall thou profane the name of thy God.] By offering their Children
to Molech, they in effect rejected and disowned (as I before observed) the LORD
God of Israel: which was to pollute his Name, by giving that honor, which was
due to him alone, unto another God: For he gave them Children; who were
therefore to be devoted to none but him.

I am the LORD.] The only Sovereign of the World; who will severely punish the
Transgressors of this Law.

Ver. 22. Thou shall not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is an
abomination.] A detestable wickedness; condemned by all Nations: though
practiced by some lewd Persons among them. Insomuch that the Apostles of Christ
make mention of it, with the greatest abhorrence, I Romans 27. 1 Corinthians. VI. 9.
1 Timothy I. 10. For not only several of the Roman Emperors were infamous, upon
this account; but some also of the Greek Philosophers.

This Prohibition is repeated, according to Maimonides, in XXIII Deuteronomy. 17. whom
our Translation follows; there shall not be a Sodomite of the Sons of Israel.
But Onkelos interprets that place otherwise.

Ver. 23. Neither shall thou lie with any beast, etc.] i. e. Of any kind
whatsoever. Some are apt to say, What need was there of such Prohibitions? when
it is so monstrously unnatural, to mix with Creatures of a different Species
from us, as all Beasts are. But such Persons do not understand, that this was
not only practiced in Egypt (against whose doings he cautions them, v. 3.) but
was also made a piece of Religion: Women devoted to the Worship there used,
most filthily submitting to the Lust of their sacred Goats. So Strabo tells us,
Lib. VII. p. 802. that at Mendes, where they worshipped Pan, (...), Goats
(which were there also worshipped) lay with Women. For which he quotes Pindar;
as do also Priscianus and Aelian, Lib. VII. de Animal. cap. 19. as Casaubon
there notes. And Herodotus vouches this upon his own knowledge, and says they
did it openly (so (...) signifies) when he was in Egypt. His words are these in
his second Book called Euterpe, cap. 46. (...). This prodigy happened in this
part of Egypt ( i. e. among the Mendesians) when I was there, a Goat had to do
with a Woman in the view of all. (...). How long this beastly Custom had been
among them, none can tell, but these words import, that then it was notorious;
and so far from being kept secret, that they rather made an ostentation of it.
Which I look upon as an argument that this had been a very old practice;
otherwise they would have blushed at it.

Ver. 24. Defile not your selves in any of these things.] This seems to relate
particularly to the sins beforementioned, v. 20, 21, 22, 23. See v. 26.

For in all these the Nations are defiled, which I cast out before you.] The
seven Nations that inhabited the Land of Canaan, (mentioned in many places,
particularly VII Deuteronomy. 1.) were so overrun with these filthy Vices, that God
could not bear with them, but ordered them to be destroyed for this very
reason. Which was a sufficient Caution to the Israelites, who came in their
room, to keep themselves from such Impurities.

Ver. 25. And the Land is defiled.] To make the Israelites the more abominate
such doings, he represents the very Land, in which they dwelt, as sensible of
the foul wickedness of the Inhabitants; who were a loathsome burden to it,
which it could not digest.

Therefore do I visit the iniquity thereof upon it.] I am about to punish them,
upon that account.

And the Land it self vomiteth out its inhabitants.] A most eloquent figure,
expressing the excessive loathsomness of their wickedness: which made their own
Country nauseate them, and throw them out, as our Stomach does Meat that
offends it. The same expression is used v. 28. XX. 22. III Rev. 16. Theodoret
expounds this word by (...), which signifies their Expulsion, as an execrable
People. And indeed the word vomit in Scripture is used for that which is most
detestable and abominable, XXVIII Isa. 8. XLVIII Jer. 26. II Habakk. 10.

Ver. 26. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments.] These Laws I
have given you. See v. 4, 5.

And shall not commit any of these abominations.] From this word abominations,
which the Nations God cast out, to make room for them, are said to have
committed v. 27. some conclude that every one of the foregoing Marriages,
mentioned in this Chapter, are in their own nature sinful; the Nations who had
no positive Law to forbid them, being cast out for such Pollutions. But the
mere force of this word will not warrant such a conclusion; because several
things are called in this Book an abomination, which have no moral turpitude in
them; but were made so by God's positive Laws, as Mr. Seldom observes ( Lib. V.
de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 11. p. 598.) from XI Lev. 10.20, 41, 42. where
several sorts of Creatures are forbidden to be eaten, as abominable: And the
Sacrifice of a Bullock or a Sheep that had a blemish, is said to be an
abomination, XVII Deuteronomy. 1. not from the very nature of the thing; but from the
Prohibition which God had made against such Offerings.

It is most reasonable therefore to refer the abominations here spoken of, to
those foul things mentioned in the latter end of this List ( v. 20, 21, 22,
23.) and to those in the beginning, v. 7, 8, 9, etc.) For lying with ones
Mother, or Mother-in-law, or Sister, was always an abomination. But we cannot
say the same of every one of the rest (the Law it self following, or rather
requiring in one case, the marriage of a brother's wife) which were made an
abomination by the Law now given to the Israelites.

Neither any of your own Nation, nor any Stranger that sojourneth among you.]
That is, any Proselyte, who had embraced their Religion. See XVII. 8.

Ver. 27. For all these abominations have the men of the Land done, which were
before you, etc.] He admonishes them to beware of these Abominations, by the
example of those who were utterly undone by them. For God is no respecter of
Persons; but would punish them in the same manner, if they did the same things.

Ver. 28. That the Land spue not you out also, etc.] As it did at last IX Jer.
19. XXXVI Ezekiel. 17.

Ver. 29. For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls
that commit them, shall be cut off from among their people.] The multitude of
the Offenders shall not keep off the Punishment; but they shall suffer by the
hand of the Judges, or by the Hand of God, if they neglect their Duty. See XVII
Genesis 14.

Ver. 30. Therefore shall ye keep mine Ordinances.] Live by all these Rules
which I have now given you.

That ye commit not any of these abominable Customs, which were committed
before you.] By observing every one of these Laws, they were kept at a distance
from those greater Abominations, mentioned in the beginning, and in the latter
end of these Prohibitions. The positive Laws (or Ordinances) now added, being
in the nature of an antemurale, or an out-work; to stop their proceeding to the
higher Crimes, which were against the Law of Nature.

I am the LORD your God.] As their LORD, he had Authority to make these Laws:
and as their God, they had particular Obligations to observe them. Nay, it was
a singular token of his Love to them, that he prescribed these Laws of Chastity
and Modesty: that thereby he might preserve them an holy People to him, pure
and free from those abominable filthinesses, and those indecent Conjunctions
that were practiced in the World. For as the ancient Rule was, Semper in
omnibus conjunctionibus, non solum quod liceat considerandum est, sed and quod
honestum est: In all Marriages, it is always to be considered, not merely what
is lawful, but what is honest and seemly. Which is more true in the Christian
Religion, than in any other: For thereby Marriage is advanced, to represent the
Unity that is between Christ and his Church. And besides, in contracting
Marriage we are not only to have regard to our own Conscience (as Joh. Brentius
wisely observes, upon the forenamed Rule of the ancient Law) but to Succession
also, and to Inheritances. And therefore, id agendum, quod and boni viri
honestum judicant; and a legitimo Magistratu permittitur: that is to be done,
both which good Men judge to be honest, and is allowed by lawful Governors.

CHAP. XIX.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] The following Precepts, which
contain in a manner all their Duty, seem to have been delivered to Moses
immediately after the former; being in great part a Repetition of some
principal things, which had been already commanded.

Ver. 2. Speak unto all the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] It is
uncertain whether he delivered these Precepts only to their Elders and Heads of
their Tribes, to be communicated by them to the People; or at several times he
called every Family of every Tribe, and spoke these words to them himself.

And say unto them, Ye shall be holy, for I the LORD your God am holy.] This
very thing was said to them before, with respect to several Meats which are
forbidden them, XI. 44. See there. And now is repeated with a peculiar respect
(as Maimonides thinks, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47.) to the filthy Marriages
and abominable Idolatries mentioned in the foregoing Chapter; as it is repeated
again in the next Chapter, XX. 7, 26. with respect to some other things. It
being a general reason, why they should be separated from all other People, by
the observation of peculiar Laws, (which is the meaning of being holy) because
they were the Worshippers of him, whose most excellent Nature transcended all
other Beings, not only in Purity, but in all other Perfections.

Ver. 3. Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father.] This Duty is
called Honor in the fifth Commandment, (XX Exodus 12.) and the Father there put
before the Mother; which being here called fear, and the Mother put before the
Father, it shows, says Maimonides, that honor and fear are equally due to
both, without any difference. And the proper Expressions of Fear and Reverence
are, (according to those Doctors) not to sit in their Seat, nor to contradict
them in any thing they say; much less to cavil against them; nor to call them
by their proper names, but to add the Title of Sir, etc. (as we speak) or the
like. And the Expressions of Honor, are not to sit down in their Presence; and
to provide them with Necessaries, if they fall into Poverty, etc. See Seldom,
Lib. II. de Synedriis, oap. 13. p. 557, etc. and R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept.
XXVII.

And keep my Sabbaths.] Obedience as well as Reverence is included in the word
Fear: but if Parents commanded them to break the Sabbath Day, or to profane any
other day consecrated to God's Service, they were not to be obeyed.

I am the LORD your God.] I rested on the Sabbath Day; who am your Sovereign,
and therefore have power to require you to rest on any other days. Particularly
on the great Day of Atonement, XVI. 31. when I am so gracious as to accept of
an Expiation for all your sins. This is repeated v. 30. and XXIII. 3.

Ver. 4. Turn ye not unto Idols.] Not so much as to look upon them; no, nor to
think of them (as R. Levi Barcelonita expounds it, Praecept. CCXXV.) much less
to enquire after what manner the Gentiles worshipped them, (which is expressly
forbidden XII Deuteronomy. 30.) for by this means they might be allured to Idolatry.
The word we here translate Idols, is a word of contempt, signifying a thing of
naught. Or, as some of the Jews will have it, this word Elilim, is compounded
of the Particle al, signifying not; and El, i. e. God. As much as to say, which
are not gods; and therefore called in Scripture Vanities, which can do neither
good nor hurt.

Nor make to your selves molten gods.] This seems to have respect to the Golden
Calf, which they made to worship, and is called a molten Calf, XXXII Exodus 4.
But all graven Images are no less forbidden: for if to look toward an Idol was
a sin, much more was it to make an Image of any sort, to worship it. The Jews
are something curious in their observations upon this Precept. For, in the Book
Siphra, they say, that they might not make molten Gods for others, much less
for themselves. Whence that saying, He that makes to himself an Idol, violates
a double Precept; first in making it; and then in making it to himself. See R.
Levi beforementioned, Praecept. CCXXVI.

I am the LORD your God.] The same reason is given in the foregoing Verse, for
the observation of their Sabbaths: and that of the seventh day every Week, was
ordained in memory of the Creation of the World; and consequently intended as a
Preservative from Idolatry, (as I observed upon Exodus XX. 8.) which perhaps
makes these two Precepts be here put together. But it is evident Moses does not
observe the order wherein these Precepts were first delivered; but rather
inverts it, beginning with the fifth Commandment, and so going back to the
fourth; and here to the two first.

Ver. 5. And if ye offer a Sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD.] As they
were to avoid all Idolatry, so they were to be careful to perform the Service
due to the true God, in a right manner. Peace Offerings are only mentioned,
because they were the most common Sacrifices; being of three sorts. See VII.
11, etc. XVII. 5.

Ye shall offer it at your own will.] Either of the Herd, or of the Flock; Male
or Female, III. 1, 6. Or rather (as the Vulgar Latin and the LXX. understand
it) they were to offer it so, that it might be acceptable to the LORD:
according to the Rules prescribed in the seventh Chapter.

Ver. 6. It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow.] This
shows he speaks particularly of those Peace Offerings which were a Vow, or a
voluntary Offering, VII. 16. for Sacrifices of Thanksgiving might not be kept
till the morrow, but were to be eaten on the same day, v. 15. of that Chapter.
See the reason of this XXIII Exodus 18. the latter end.

And if ought remain till the third day, it shall be burnt with fire. See VII.
17.

Ver. 7. And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable. See VII.
18.

It shall not be accepted.] See there. This seems to justify the sense which
the Vulgar puts upon those words v. 5. which we translate, according to thy
will.

Ver. 8. Therefore every one that eats it, shall bear his iniquity.] See VII.
18.

Because he has profaned the hallowed things of the LORD.] By keeping them
till they were in danger to stink, or to be corrupted.

That soul shall be cut off from his People.] By the Judges, if the thing was
known: otherwise by the Hand of God.

Ver. 9. And when ye reap the harvest of your Land.] Which was a time of great
joy, when they offered, its likely, many Peace Offerings of that sort
beforementioned.

Thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field.] But leave a sixtieth
part (as their wise Men have determined it) and that in the extreme part of the
Field, rather than any other place, that the Poor might know where to come for
it; as R. Levi Barcelonita explains it, Praecept. CCXIII. And this, whether
they were in the Land of Israel, or out of it, as Mr. Seldom observes out of
the Talmudists, Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 6. p. 692. where he shows
it was the custom to add something to the sixtieth part, proportionable to the
largeness of the Field, or the multitude of the Poor, or the greatness of the
Crop.

Neither shall thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.] That is, if an ear or
two of Corn fell (as they cut it, or bound it up) out of the Sheaves, or from
under their Sickle, they were not to gather them up from the ground, but leave
them for the Poor, as often as they fell. But not if there fell three ears at a
time, as the Talmudists determine. See Mr. Seldom in the place abovenamed; and
the same R. Levi, Praecept. CCXIV.

Ver. 10. And thou shall not glean thy vineyard.] When they had cut off the
great Bunches, they were not to examine the Vine over again, for the scattered
Grapes, or small Clusters.

Neither shall thou gather every grape of thy Vineyard.] If any fell to the
ground as they gathered them, they were not to take them up. That is, if one or
two Clusters fell; but not if three, much less, if more: for they construe this
as they do the Precept about Ears of Corn ( v. 9.) They also say, they were
bound to leave the Corners of the Vineyard uncut, as well as the Corners of the
Field. R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept. CCXXX. and CCXXXI. and Mr. Seldom, Lib.
VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 6. in the place before-named. And these
Precepts obliged such Strangers as sojourned among them, (mentioned XVII. 8.
XVIII. 26.) who before they were admitted to embrace the Jewish Religion, were
examined whether they understood that they must observe such and such Precepts,
particularly these here mentioned, which were propounded to them plainly and
distinctly: and after they had promised to keep them, they were Circumcised,
etc. As G. Schickard observes out of the Talmud the custom, was, after the
destruction of Jerusalem, in Mishpal Hamelek, cap. 5. Theorem XVII.

Thou shall leave them for the poor and the stranger.] Though by Stranger the
Jews think is understood a Proselyte of Righteousness, (as they call him who
had embraced their Religion, (by receiving Circumcision) yet they did not
hinder any poor Gentile from partaking of this Charity, as the same R. Levi
says. And if any one transgressed any of the Precepts contained in these two
Verses, he was beaten; as Mr. Seldom shows, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. 13. n. 8.

I am the LORD your God.] I give you the Country to which you go, with these
reserves for the Poor: and have been so bountful to you, that I require you to
be so them.

Ver. 11. Ye shall not steal.] Here are several Moral Precepts put briefly
together, for the maintaining Justice and Truth; without which Societies cannot
be preserved. And first he forbids Theft; the coveting of other Men's Goods,
being the Source of the other Sins that follow. And whether they were the Goods
of an Israelite, or of a Gentile Idolater, that any Man stole, he was bound to
make Restitution, as R. Levi observes, Praecept. CCXXXII. See XXII Exodus 1.

Neither deal falsely.] This is a Divine Caution (as the Hebrew Doctors observe)
against denying a thing that was deposited with them; or, which they had found,
etc. which they would never pretend they had not, if they were disposed to be
sincere and upright in their Dealing.

Neither lie one to another.] Words being intended to declare the Mind, and for
no other end; he that hears us speak has a right in Justice to be done him,
that what we speak be true. For otherwise he does not know our mind by our
words; and then we had better be dumb. But though all kind of lying be contrary
to the intention of God, in giving us Speech; yet this relates particularly to
such lies whereby a Man's Neighbor was injured; defrauded, for instance, of
his Goods which he had deposited with another; or of the just Debts which were
owing him, etc. But though the simple denying of such things was not punished
with beating, as Mr. Seldom represents the opinion of the Talmudists, Lib. II.
de Synedr. cap. 11. yet he that denied a thing deposited with him, was not
admitted to be a Witness in any case, though he had not forsworn himself, unto
which this lying disposed him. So R. Levi, Praecept. CCXXXIII.

Ver. 12. And ye shall not swear by my name falsely.] Much less was it lawful
for them to confirm the lies forementioned, with an Oath. So the Jewish
Doctors interpret it, as Mr. Seldom observes in the same place. If any Man did,
and was found guilty, he was adjudged to restore the principal, and a fifth
part more, VI. 5. And whether he forswore himself knowingly, or ignorantly, he
was to expiate his Crime with a Sacrifice. But if he was ignorant of that
Command concerning a Sacrifice; or if, though he had the thing which he denied
in his keeping, yet he had really forgot it, when he swore he had it not; he
was freed both from the fifth part, and from the Sacrifice. See V. 4.

Neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God.] By calling God to witness
unto a frivolous thing, or to a rash Resolution. As if a Man swore in his anger
he would not speak to such a Person, but afterward did; or, he would not eat
of such Meat, etc. In such cases, the Jews say, when a Man's heart was touched
with Repentance for his rashness and incogitancy; he was to go to some wise
Man, or to three Neighbors, and desire them to absolve him from his Oath, of
which he truly repented. Which they did, when they found him truly penitent;
saying, Be thou loosed, or, It is remitted to thee, or the like. So Seldom
observes out of Maimonides, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 11. n. 9.

Plato has said some remarkable thing, concerning Forswearing, and also of
Lying and Deceit. For which I refer the learned Reader to his eleventh Book of
Laws, p. 916, 917. Edit. Serrani.

I am the LORD.] And therefore expect the greatest Reverence to my Name; and
that you should deal honestly one with another.

Ver. 13. Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him, etc. Here are
several Precepts, almost coincident in their sense: but have some peculiar
Negations belonging to them. For (as R. Levi Barcelonita observes) in all
things from which God would have them carefully abstain, he multiplies
admonitions, Praecept. CXXXVI. Accordingly here to defraud, is to keep in ones
hand that which belongs to another: and such a Person, he says, is called an
Oppressor in Scripture. The Vulgar Latin refers it to that which Men get from
others by Calumny: as the next words relate to that which is wrested from them
by open violence.

Neither rob him.] The same R. Levi expounds this of that which is taken from
another by manifest force, and does not belong to him that takes it, Praecept.
CCXXXVII. For so the Hebrew word gazilah signifies, that which a Man wrests out
of the hand of another, against his will, 1 Chronicles. XI. 23.

The wages of him that is hired, shall not abide with thee all night till the
morning.] For this was a kind of force and robbery, to detain what was owing to
him, against his will. In the XXIV Deuteronomy. 15. the words are, Thou shall give him
his hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it. From whence the Hebrew Doctors
conclude there were two sorts of People that wrought for hire: one were
day-labourers, whom Moses speaks of in this Verse; another laborers by night,
of whom he speaks in Deuteronomy. Neither of which were to stay for their Wages
beyond the time appointed: but the one were to have it before the Sunset, the
other before Morning; for it was due as soon as the day, or the night was done.
So the Misna, The Day-labourer requires his wages all night; and the night
Labourer all day. See the forenamed R. Levi, Praecept. CCXXXVIII. who gives
this reason for it; That the merciful God would have his Creatures subsist;
which poor Laborers cannot do, if they want their wages to buy them Victuals.
Upon which account the detaining of their Wages, is said to be a crying sin, in
that XXIV Deuteronomy. 14. and in St. James V. 4.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not curse the deaf.] No Israelite, whether Man or Woman,
was to be cursed; though he could not hear the Curse, and so was insensible of
the Injury, as R. Levi explains it, Praecept. CCXXXIX. For there was the
addition of barbarous baseness in it, to curse or revile a Person, who was not
capable to answer for himself, nor do himself right: and the Case of the Sick,
and the Infirm, or the Absent, was the same with the Deaf. As for others, who
were not Deaf, it was forbidden to curse them, says Maimonides, because it
provoked to Anger and Rage; which stirred Men up to take Revenge.

Nor put a stumbling block before the blind.] This is as inhuman as the former;
proceeding from so great Malice, that the Hebrew Doctors seem to think Men
incapable of it. And therefore expound it of giving ill Counsel to simple
People, and advising them to their Damage. So R. Levi, Praecept. CCXL. which is
no less contrary to Nature, then laying a stumblingblock in the way of those
that cannot see to avoid it; and a far greater sin, because it abused their
Minds, and might tend to the hurt of their Souls.

But shall fear thy God.] Believing he sees and hears, and will avenge the
Cause of those who cannot right themselves; because they know not who injured
them. If any Man was convicted of either of these Crimes, he was beaten.

I am the LORD.] And am therefore to be feared and obeyed.

Ver. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment.] The Jews take this to be
an Admonition to their Judges, that they should have an equal regard to the
Plaintiff and Defendant; and not prefer the one before the other. Whence these
words are thus explained in Siphra, Thou shall judge thy neighbors justly; not
letting one party stand, and bidding the other sit; nor suffering one to speak
as much as he pleases, and bidding the other be short. See Seldom de Synedr.
Lib. II. cap. 13. n. 10. But none has explained this so largely as Maimonides
in the whole XXI Chapter of Sanhedrim, where he in general defines the just
Administration of Justice to consist in an equal respect to both Parties in the
Suit; so that one of them have not the liberty to say what he will, and the
other be cut short. And then descends to many particulars, wherein equal
respect to both Parties is to be observed: some of which it will be fit to
mention, because they illustrate the words of St James, in the second Chapter
of his Epistle, v. 2, 3, 4. If two Parties appear in a Cause, one of which is
clothed in precious Garments, the other is ragged, or in a poor Habit; let it
be said to him that is the more honorable, Either do you bestow upon your
Adversary as good Apparel as you have on your self, or else put on such as he
wears, that you may be both alike, and then appear before the Court of
Judgment. By no means let the one sit, and the other stand: but let them both
be commanded to stand: or if it please the Judges to give them both leave to
sit, let not one of them sit in a high place, the other in a low; but both on
the same Bench, one by the side of the other. See R. Levi Barcelonita,
Praecept. CCXVII. who observes, that Mankind are preserved by righteous
Judgment; and therefore if a Judge was found to have given an unjust Sentance,
he was condemned to make Restitution to him, whose Cause he had perverted,
Praecept. CCXLI.

Thou shall not respect the person of the poor.] See XXIII Exodus 3.

Nor honor the person of the mighty.] This R. Levi explains ( Praecept.
CCXLII.) as he did the first Clause; The Judge shall not bid the great man sit
down, while the meaner stands; but both shall stand before the Judge, as if
they were in the Presence of the Divine Majesty, who stands in the midst of
the Judges, LXXXII Psalm. 1. If by the favor of the Judges both were permitted
to sit, yet when Sentence came to be pronounced, both rose up and stood;
according to XVIII Exodus 13.

But in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor.] The observation of
Maimonides seems to be too nice and curious, who from this place gathers, that
though the lowest Court of Judgment ordinarily consisted of no less than three
Judges; yet by the Law one of them might sit alone as Judge in Matters not
Capital, because it is said here in the singular Number, In righteousness shall
thou judge thy Neighbor. For at the same time he acknowledges, their wise Men
require that he should take some Assessors to him; when they say, Do not judge
by thy self alone; for there is no sole Judge, but one only, viz. God. See
Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 14. n. 2. and Guil. Schickardi Mishpal
Hamelek. cap. 4. Theorem XIV.

Ver. 16. Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people.] The
Vulgar Latin takes the Hebrew word Rachil to signify one that goes about with
Calumnies. But it may simply signify, as we translate it, a Talebearer: whom
Aben-Ezra compares to a Merchant or Peddler, (as the Hebrew word imports) who
buys of one, what he sells to another, and goes about the Country as a
Talebearer does from House to House; carrying to one, what he has heard at
another; saying, Such a one has said so and so of you, whereby Peace and
Concord is destroyed among Men. For commonly such Men carry false stories to
their Neighbors, or add to the true, and secretly backbite others; which has
moved many to think a Detractor is meant by this word, who hopes by his Tales
of others to get some advantage to himself, as every Trader does by his
Merchandise. Whence the Jews say, An evil Tongue kills three: him that speaks;
him that hears; and him of whom he speaks, R. Levi Praecept. CCXLIII.

Neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor.] Much less, be a
false Witness against him, to the indangering of his Life. So it is commonly
interpreted, because the Accusers and Witnesses stood before Judges, who sat in
the Courts of Judgment. But R. Levi Barcelonita, and the rest of the Hebrew
Doctors, generally understand it otherwise; that no Man should suffer his
Neighbor to perish in Judgment, or other ways, when he could free him by his
Testimony or Assistance, Praecept. CCXLIV. So it is said in Siphra in so many
words; Whence do we gather that he who can clear another by his Testimony, must
not suppress it in silence? Because it is said thou shall not stand against the
blood of thy Neighbor. Whence it follows, that if a Man saw his Neighbor any
way in danger, he was bound, if he could, to deliver him; not only when his
Life was in hazard, but that which is as dear as Life, ones Honor and
Chastity. Thus if any one went about to force a Woman, espoused to another,
etc. he that saw it was bound to Rescue such a Person, though with the death of
him that made the Attempt. For this was a piece of Justice, which they
committed to private Men, as Mr. Seldom shows out of the Jewish Authors, Lib.
IV. de Jure N. and G. cap. III. p. 481, etc. But then, they restrain this
Charity only to themselves, and from the word Neighbor argue, that they are
bound to do thus, only to an Israelite. Nay, (which is strange) some of them
are so selfishly ill natured, that they fancy they are forbidden to do such
kindness to a Gentile. See there p. 485.

Ver. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart.] When thy Brother
has done thee any wrong, do not conceal a secret hatred against him in thy
Breast, but tell him plainly of his Fault, as the next words seem to direct. It
appears by this, they were ill Interpreters of the Law, who thought it forbade
only external acts of sin, but not evil affections, which were not executed.

Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor.] Time after time (if he will not
be sensible of it at first) argue the case with him, and reprove him for his
fault. And if he will not amend, do it publicly, (as the Vulgar Latin
interprets it) and bring him before the Judges. So R. Levi, Praecept. CCXVIII.
But he extends this to all sins, whether against God, or against themselves:
which, he thinks, they were bound to reprehend privately, and then publicly,
if the Offenders did not grow better.

And not suffer sin upon him.] He interprets it, But not put him to confusion.]
For nothing is more grievous to a Man then that: and therefore Reprehension
ought to be mild and gentle, especially when the Offense is against ones self;
but in those against God, greater sharpness is allowable. So he discourses
Praecept. CCXLVI. the words in the original being, Thou shall not bear sin upon
him; charge him with his Guilt too severely; or, as others take it, Thou shall
not accuse him of any Crime whereof he is not guilty. Our Translation in the
Margin of our Bibles takes it, as if by not reproving their Neighbors, they
brought the guilt of his sin upon themselves; for so the words there are, That
thou bear not sin for him. Which is an excellent sense, if the Hebrew word alau
did not signify upon him, not for him. And yet some of the Jews have thus
understood it: this saying of Rabbi Chanina being famous among them, Jerusalem
had not been destroyed, but because one Neighbor did not reprove another. See
Seldom, Lib. I. de Synedr. cap. 9. p. 280. Where he observes the Doctrine of
the ancient Jews was (drawn from this Text) that when one Man offended another
in things concerning themselves, relating to their Civil Affairs, he was to be
reproved by his Neighbor, once, or twice, or thrice, if the matter required;
but without sharpness; and so that he was not exposed to public shame. But if
the Offense was against God, in matters of Religion, they say private Reproof
was first to be given; and if that did not work amendment, then public before
all. And they admitted public Reprehension upon no other score: but said, He
that publicly puts his Brother to shame, shall have no part in the other World.

Ver. 18. Thou shall not avenge.] Not deny to do their Brethren a kindness, out
of a remembrance of any injury received from them, as R. Levi interprets it,
Praecept. CCXLVII. By which means, as he observes, Strife and Contention was
abolished, and Peace and Concord established among Men. It may be thought also,
that as they are forbidden to take Revenge themselves for the Wrongs any one
did them; so likewise to seek for Redress from the Public, merely to satisfy
their wrath and desire to have the injurious Person suffer, and not to prevent
the like or greater Mischiefs for the time to come.

Nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people.] When thou do thy
Neighbor a kindness, do not spoil it, by upbraiding him with all his Faults.
For the Hebrew word Natar signifies having something in reserve in ones Mind,
particularly Anger or Wrath; which our Translation frequently supplies to make
out the sense, III Jer. 12. CIII Psalm. 9. 1 Nahum 2. And so the LXX. understand
it here, (...), etc. And thou shall not be angry with the Children of thy
People.

But thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.] In not doing to him, what thou
would not have done to thy self; and taking such care of him, and what
belongs to him, as thou would have him to do of thee and thine. This, says
R. Aquiba (as R. Levi observes, Praecept. CCXIX.) is the great sum of the Law;
i.e. many Precepts depend upon this: for he that thus loves his Neighbor, will
neither steal any thing from him, nor violate his Wife, nor murder so much as
his good Name, nor remove his Landmark, nor offend him any other way. The
same, in a manner, with what St. Paul says XIII Romans 8, 9, etc.

The only question is, Who is to be understood here by their Neighbor? which
the Jews would restrain to themselves; and have the meaning to be, That one
Israelite should love another, but he is not bound to love a Stranger in the
same manner: which is directly against Moses his command, v. 34. And certain it
is, the word Neighbor comprehends more than Israelites; as appears by the last
Commandment, which forbids them to covet their neighbors wife: which did not
give them leave sure, to covet the Wife of a Gentile, provided they did not
covet the Wife of an Israelite. A Neighbor therefore is every other Man, as in
XXII Deuteronomy. 26. and more plainly in XI Exodus 2. where the Egyptians are called
their Neighbor. And therefore D. Kimchi says very honestly upon the XVth
Psalm. 3. A Neighbor is every one with whom we have any dealing or
conversation. Which justifies our blessed Savior, in making this Command, of
Loving their Neighbors as themselves, to reach all Men, with whom they had to
do, X Luke 27, 28, etc.

I am the LORD.] Unto whom you are all equally subject; and upon that account
ought to love one another. See v. 34.

Ver. 19. Ye shall keep my statutes.] This may be thought to be premised to
what follows; lest such Commands as are contained in this Verse, seeming small,
should be neglected by them.

Thou shall not let thy Cattle (or rather make them) gender with a diverse
kind.] As Horses with Asses, Goats with Sheep, etc. whose mixture one with
another they were by no means to procure. But if they did of themselves come
together, it was lawful to use such Heterogeneous Creatures, as were so
produced. For they did not abhor the use of Mules, which were either begot by
accident among them, or brought from other Countries to them.

The reason the Jews commonly give for this Precept, is, because God having
made all things perfect in their kind, it was a presumptuous attempt to go
about to mend his Creation, and add to his Works. By this means also Men were
deterred from unnatural Mixtures, which they saw to be abominable in Brutes. So
R. Levi Barcelonita (Praecept. CCXLIX.) and Philo, whose words are very
ingenious ( Lib. de Creatione Princip.) Things of the some kind were made for
Society one with another; but things heterogeneous (as we call them) were not
intended to be mixed and associated: and therefore he who attempts to mingle
them, (...), wickedly destroys the Law of Nature. To the same purpose Josephus.
See Seldom, Lib. VII. de Jure N. and G. sec. Hebr. cap. 3. p. 798. Maimonides
also himself gives this reason of this Precept, ( More Nevoch. P. III. cap.
49.) where he says, No Creature has a desire commonly, to mix with a Creature
of another kind; and therefore Men ought not to promote such a desire. But
after all, there might possibly be a respect in this Precept to some Idolatrous
Customs, which Moses intended to prevent or abolish: for there is good ground
to think the following Precepts in this Verse were so intended; and in after
times, some Gentiles did procure such Mixture of Creatures, as are here
forbidden (Mules, for instance) in honor of their Gods. See our learned Dr.
Spencer, Lib. II. de Leg. Hebr. Ritualibus, cap. 20. where he endeavors to
prove, that by Cattle in this place are peculiarly meant Oxen and Asses, which
were used in Husbandry; and are of such different Natures, that none would ever
have thought to procure their Conjunction, unless he had been moved to it by
the Devil.

Thou shall not sow thy field with mingled seed.] The reasons of this,
according to the Jews, are the same with the former: and R. Levi extends it to
Trees; which, he says, they were not to ingraft of different kinds, one upon
another. But it concerns, they say, only such Seeds and Plants as are for Men's
food; not those which are for Medecin, Praecept. CCL. But Maimonides found a
particular reason for this Precept, from the Idolatrous Customs of the old
Zabij: Who not only sowed different Seeds, and grafted Trees of a diverse kind
upon one another, in such or such Aspect of the Planets, and with a certain
form of words, and fumigations; but also with abominable filthiness, at the
very moment of the Incision. Which he proves out of a Book, concerning the
incision of an Olive into a Citron: and doubts not, that God forbad his People
to sow with mingled seed, that he might root out that detestable Idolatry, and
those preternatural Lusts which abounded in those days, More Nevoch. P. III.
cap. 37.

Neither shall a Garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.] In the
Hebrew the words are, A Garment of mixtures of Schaatnez, shall not come upon
thee. But that they might certainly know what Schaatnez was, it is explained in
XXII Deuteronomy. 11. to signify (as we translate it) a Garment of Woollen and Linen
mixed together. The Jews have taken abundance of pains to find out the original
of this word; which Bochartus derives from the Arabic word Saat, which
signifies to mingle, and nez, which signifies to weave. Hierozoicon P. I. Lib.
II. cap. 45. But Joh. Braunius, I think, has demonstrated, that it does not
import the weaving of any different things together; but only of Linen and
Woollen: and that by Woollen is to be understood only what is made of the Wool
of Sheep, not of Camels or Goats, which they called by the same name, Lib. I.
de Vestitu Sacerd. Hebr. cap. 4. n. 2, 3, 6. Where he observes out of
Maimonides, in his Halach. Kelaim, that if a Man saw an Israelite wear such a
Garment, it was lawful for him to fall upon him openly, and tear his Garment in
pieces; although he were his Master, who taught him Wisdom. And the reasons for
this abhorrence, are commonly such as are given of the former Precepts; to
preserve them from the horrid Confusion which was among the Gentiles, by
incestuous and unnatural Mixtures. But Maimonides takes it to have been
principally intended, as a Preservative against Idolatry: The Priests of the
Gentiles in those times wearing such mixed Garments, of the product of Plants
and Animals, with a Ring on their finger, made of some Metal, as he says, he
found in their Books, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 37. By which mixture, it is
likely, they hoped to have the beneficial influence of some lucky Conjunction
of the Planets or Stars, to bring a Blessing upon their Sheep and their Flax.

Ver. 20. Whosoever lies carnally with a Woman that is a bondmaid, betrothed
to an husband.] The Jews had some Servants that were Gentiles; who, if they
embraced the Jewish Religion, were baptized; sometimes with the reservation of
their Servitude, and sometimes with the full grant of Liberty. But some there
were in a middle Condition; partly free, and partly servile; viz. when part of
their Redemption-money had been paid, and part was still behind. Now as while a
Woman was a perfect Slave, no Israelite might marry her: so when she was partly
free, though he might Espouse her, and the Espousals were valid, yet they could
not be of full force, till her liberty was perfected. And of such a Maiden the
Hebrew Doctors understand Moses to speak in this place, that was in part free,
but not wholly; as the next words interpret it.

And not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her.] Not entirely, but in part
redeemed: and consequently her Freedom not absolutely granted to her.

She shall be scourged.] If she had been perfectly free, both he that lay with
her, and she her self should have been put to death, XXII Deuteronomy. 23, 24. But
being not fully free, and consequently not fully his Wife, who had espoused
her, it was not reckoned Adultery; and therefore punished only with scourging.
See Seldom, Lib. V. de Jure N. and G. cap. 12. p. 613. And Maimonides, I
observe, thus expounds it, of a Woman that was not a mere Servant, and yet not
completely free, but between both, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 41. But whereas we
mention here in the Text, the Scourging only of the Woman; in the Margin it is
rightly noted that the Hebrew words are, There shall be scourging; viz. of them
both, as the Vulgar Latin, with great reason, understands it. And the Hebrew
word Bikkoreth properly signifies scourging with Thongs made of a Bulls or Oxes
Hide; as Bochartus observes in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. cap. 28. and
cap. 33. n. 8.

They shall not be put to death, because she was not free.] Her Master not
having set her quite at Liberty, her Marriage was not complete: which freed her
from suffering Death; though some Punishment she deserved, because it was begun.

Ver. 21. And he shall bring his Trepass Offering unto the LORD, unto the
door, etc.] Which was not enjoined her, because she had not wherewithal to
offer for her Expiation: all she had being her Masters, and not her own.

A Ram for a Trepass Offering.] Which was the proper Sacrifice in such a case,
V. 17, 18.

Ver. 22. And the Priest shall make an atonement for him with the Ram of the
trepass offering.] She needed an Atonement as well as he, being equally guilty
in consenting to the Fact; and being espoused to another, seems to have had a
greater guilt upon her; and therefore was left in a lamentable condition,
without any public assurance of God's pardon.

For his sin which he has done.] Which had so much guilt in it, that besides
the punishment he suffered in being Scourged; this Satisfaction was to be made
to God.

And the sin which he has done, shall be forgiven him.] By virtue of the
Sacrifice; which would not have been accepted if she had been perfectly a
Freewoman: but the sin would have cost his own life and hers also, XXII Deuteronomy.
23, 24.

Ver. 23. And when ye shall come into the Land, and shall have planted all
manner of Trees for food.] The Precept is so general, that the boldness of R.
Zerika is unaccountable; who would have it understood only of the Vine, which
if it be not cut, its Grapes are not so large, nor the Wine so good, nor fit to
be offered at the Altar, etc. as his opinion is represented in Pirke Elieser,
cap. 29. But Moses expressly mentioning all manner of Trees for food, there is
no color for this limitation; and a very good account may be given of this
Prohibition, if we have respect only to natural reason. For young Trees grow
better, if they be stripped of their Fruit; the Juice of which is waterish and
unconcocted, having neither pleasant smell nor taste; as Nachmonides observes:
and therefore not fit for Food; and upon that score not fit to be offered as
the First Fruits to God.

But besides all this, Maimonides affirms there was an Idolatrous custom among
the Zabij, to which this Law of Moses may reasonably be thought to be opposed:
For they imagined all Trees would be blasted, or their Fruit fall off, whose
First-fruit was not part of it offered in their Idol Temples, and the other
part eaten there: as their Children, they thought, would not thrive, unless
some of them passed through the fire. And therefore God commanded his People to
forbear to eat the Fruit of any Tree, till the fourth year; and not doubt of
the fruitfulness of their Plantations, though they did not Consecrate the Fruit
of the years foregoing, after the manner that the Gentiles did. More Nevoch. P.
III. cap. 37. where he observes some Trees brought forth Fruit in one year;
some not till the second; and others not till the third; according to the
different ways wherein they were planted.

Ye shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised.] That is, as unclean; and
therefore to be cast away as the Foreskin was.

Three years it shall be as uncircumcised to you; it shall not be eaten of.]
And therefore they plucked off the Buds when they put forth, that they might not
grow into Fruit; or if any by chance did, they threw it away, as unfit for
food. But this is meant only of such Fruit Trees as they planted after they
came to Canaan; not of such as they found already planted there. And it was the
same thing, whether he planted them himself, or bought an Orchard, or Vineyard,
etc. of another Israelite, or had it left him as an Inheritance, or bestowed on
him as a Gift: the three first years the Fruit was not to be used.

Ver. 24. But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy, to praise
the LORD withal.] It was to be offered as the First-fruit to God, and eaten by
the Priests: which, as Maimonides says in the Book forenamed, cap. 49. was to
excite them to Liberality, and give a check to their Appetites, as well as to
Covetousness. Yet there are those who say this Fruit of the fourth year was to
be eaten by the Owners before the LORD at Jerusalem, (when his dwelling was
settled there) as they eat the second Tithe. So R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept.
CCXX. shows at large. And they observe many Benefits which the Israelites
received by this means; not only in exciting their Thankfulness to God, but
their Love to that Holy Place; unto which some of their Family might conceive
such an affection, as to settle there, and learn the Law.

Ver. 25. In the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may
yield unto you the increase thereof.] He would not have them think that they
should lose any thing, by staying till the fifth year for the Fruit of their
Trees; but promises them here, that by forbearing so long, their Trees should
be the more exceeding fruitful.

I am the LORD.] Who bestowed this Land upon them, to hold of him by what
Tenure he pleased; by whose Blessing they might expect to receive the Increase
thereof abundantly; without the help of such wicked Arts as Maimonides says the
Zabij used. Who, letting certain things lie till they were putrified, and, when
the Sun was in such or such a degree, sprinkling them about the Trees which
they had planted, with certain Magical Ceremonies, they fancied Flowers and
Fruits would be produced sooner than they could have been without these
practices.

Ver. 26. Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood.] This is an admonition, as
R. Levi Barcelonita fancies ( Praecept. CCLII.) against Gluttony and
Drunkenness; such as the rebellious Son was guilty of, XXI Deuteronomy. 18, etc. which
made Men prone to shed blood: for so he understands this Precept, Thou shall
not eat upon blood; i. e. eat till thou art excited to shed blood: unto which
he applied XXXII Deuteronomy. 15. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. But this is a very
forced Interpretation; and our Translation is not exact: for he does not say,
Ye shall not eat any thing, with the blood; but ye shall not eat upon the
blood, or at the blood. Which Oleaster very sagaciously suspected to be a piece
of Superstition unknown to him. And so did the LXX. when they translated it, Ye
shall not eat, (...), upon the Mountains, which was an Idolatrous Custom
mentioned in IV Hosea 13. and here forbidden, as Procopius and Hesychius
imagine. But the Hebrew word haddam no where signifies a Mountain, but Blood,
as the Vulgar here truly translates it. There is a Greek Scholion which renders
these words (...), ye shall not eat on the house top. Which, in all likelihood,
as some have conjectured, was a mistake of the Transcriber for (...), upon the
blood: which is the litteral Translation of the Hebrew phrase; and imports
something more than is prohibited, XVII. 12. where he simply says, No soul of
you shall eat blood. But here warns them against an Idolatrous Practice of the
Zabij: who, to enter into the Society of Demons, and obtain their favor, were
wont to gather the blood of their Sacrifices, into a Vessel, or a little Hole
dug in the Earth; and then, sitting about it, to eat the Flesh of the
Sacrifices: imagining that by eating as it were of the same food, (for they
thought the Demons fed upon the blood, as their Worshippers did upon the
flesh) they contracted a Friendship and Familiarity with them. So Maimonides
relates in his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46. For the prevention of which
Idolatrous Custom, God ordered their Sacrifices to be offered only at one
place, where his own House was: and there the Priests sprinkling the blood, and
they eating the flesh of their Peaceofferings, God and they feasted together
upon them. Nachmanides is wont to oppose Maimonides in his Notions; yet this
was so plain, that he confesses, as Dr. Cudworth has observed (in his Treatise
of the Right Notion of the Lord's Supper, Chap. ult.) that blood it self was
forbidden in the Law, upon the account of the Heathens performing their
Superstitious Worship in this manner, by gathering together blood for their
Demons, and then coming themselves, and eating of it with them, whereby they
were their Daemon's guests; and by this kind of Communion with them, were
enabled to prophecy, and foretell things to come. And this Interpretation is
the more probable, that they hoped, by eating of the blood of the Sacrifices,
or the flesh, or both, to have such familiarity with them, as to receive
Revelations from them, and be inspired with the Knowledge of secret things, if
we consider the two other Prohibitions in this Verse, that are joined with this
of not eating upon blood: which show that it was a Rite of Divination.

Neither shall ye use enchantment.] In the Hebrew the words are lo tenakashu;
which all agree signify some Superstitious observation, or other; whereby they
made omens, and guessed what should happen to them; either from Men's sneezing;
or the breaking of a Shoes Latchet; or the name of a Man they met withal; or
some Creatures crossing their way; or passing upon their right hand, or their
left. And most, following the LXX. and the Vulgar Latin, take it for Divination
by the flying, or crying, or pecking of Birds. But the word Nachash, signifying
a Serpent, and having no relation at all to Birds, the famous Bochartus thinks
tenachashu (which seems to be derived from thence) to relate rather to the
ancient (...), Divination by Serpents, than to their (...), Divination by
Birds. For it was very much in use among the Gentiles in old time, as appears
from Homer (in his VIIth Iliad.) where Chalcas seeing a Serpent devour eight
Sparrows, with their Dam, divined how long the Trojan War would last. And many
such instances he heaps up together in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. I. cap. 3.
R. Levi Barcelonita ( Praecept. CCLIII.) refers this to any kind of Divination;
by their Staff falling out of their hand; by a Serpent creeping on their right
hand; or a Fox going by their left, etc. which made them forbear any work they
were about: but he thinks withal, it may signify, as we translate it,
Enchantment; to cure Wounds (for instance) by reading a Verse of the Law; or
laying the Book of the Law, or a Phylactery, upon a Child's head to procure
sleep: which are such Superstitions as are now in use among some Christians;
who hang the first Verse of St. John's Gospel about Peoples Necks to cure an
Ague. But such things could not be meant by Moses, who had not yet delivered
them a Copy of his Laws: nor can we certainly fix upon any other in particular
which were then in use. See J. Coch upon the Title Sanhedrim, cap. 7. n. 18.
and Maimonides de Idololatria, cap. 11. sect. 4, 5, 6, etc. where he gives a
great number of instances of such Superstitious Observations, as were in use
among the Heathen: some of which are mentioned by Theophrastus in his
Characters of Superstition; and by Plutarch in his Book on the same subject;
and are derided by Terence in his Phormio, Act. IV. Scen. 4. With which
Superstitions the greatest Persons were anciently very much infected; and they
were so settled in Men's minds, that when they became Christians, they could not
presently shake them off; as appears by the frequent Reprehensions, which St.
Chrysostom (and others) give to those who continued to be governed by them.
Particularly in his VIII Homily upon the Colossians, he chides his People
severely for contemning the Cross of Christ, and calling in old drunken Women,
with their Salt, their Ashes, and Soot to free those that were bewitched. And
more especially in his VI Hom. against the Jews, he sharply rebukes those that
used (...), Charms and things hung about the Neck to cure Agues; whereby they
got a worse disease in their Souls, and wounded their Consciences, etc. And in
other places he Reprehends their observing of Omens, good and bad; some of
which which were very strange. See Tom. VI. p. 610, 611. Edit. Savil.

Nor observe times.] Take no notice of days, according to the Precepts of
Astrologers, who made some to be lucky, others unlucky. For the Jews generally
think something of this nature is here forbidden; the Hebrew word teonenu being
derived, they imagine, from Onah, which signifies time (as R. Levi
beforementioned says, Praecept. CCLIV.) such an hour being thought by
Superstitious People to be fit for business; but another very cross to it.
Which Opinion God seems to have intended to extinguish, by appointing the
Sabbath, as the only day of the Week upon which they should rest from their
Labors: leaving all the other six days, to be employed in their business,
without any difference of days or hours. But there being no such signification,
as many think, of that word in the Hebrew Language, they rather derive teonenu
from Anan, a Cloud; imagining Moses to forbid them to mark the flying of the
Clouds; or to make observations from their Motions; which was a thing common
among the Gentiles. But Maimonides, who in the XI Chapter of Avoda Zara
interprets it, as we do, of observing times, by esteeming one day fortunate,
and another unfortunate; mentions another Notion of this word from ain, an eye:
and says in the same Treatise, that Juglers, who delude Men's sight, in playing
their tricks, are comprehended under the Name of Meonim. And there are those
also, who deriving this word from ana^ to answer; think it intends such as
pretended to tell their Fortunes.

I shall not determine which of these is most likely; but only observe, that
there was no Superstition of this sort more ancient than that of Astrology:
which was in use among the old Chaldaeans, who pretended to cast Men's
Nativities (as we speak) and thence to tell their Fortunes. But this sort of
Men were rejected, as Strabo tells us, Lib. XV. by the Astronomers of that
Country: and so they were by the best Philosophers in other Nations, as Tully
tells us, who calls their pretenses Chaldaeorum Monstra, Lib. II. de Divin. And
therefore no wonder God cautions his own People against them, as he does not
only here, but by his Prophets, especially Jeremiah X. 2, 3. Learn not the way
of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are
dismayed at them, etc. But then this Caution was most necessary, when they were
going Captives into that Country; which at that time was undoubtedly infected
with this Error, but may be thought, perhaps, not to have been so in the days
of Moses; and therefore I say no more of it, but this, That all those whom we
call Juglers, were sometimes comprehended under the Name of Chaldaeans: who
seemed to perform wonderful things, as vomiting fire, and transforming Straws
into Birds, etc. which relate to the other Notion of Meononu, derived from
(...), which signifies an eye: which they deluded by the slight of their hand,
or other means.

Some of the Jews confess, that their Nation is at this day extremely addicted
to these things. See Wagonsail his Annot. on Sota, p. 529, etc. where he
recites a long passage to this purpose, out of Fredericus Franciscus
O^^ingensis a converted Jew; whom one of his own Nation undertaking to confute,
he confirmed the Charge.

Ver. 27. Ye shall not round the corners of your head.] Or, The ends of the
hair of your head. For the Hebrew word peah, which we translate corners,
signifies also the ends or extremities of any thing: And the meaning is, they
were not to cut their hair equal, behind and before; as the Worshippers of the
Stars and the Planets; particularly the Arabians did (as R. Levi of Barcelonita
interptets it, Praecept. CCLV.) For this made their head have the form of an
Haemisphere.

The LXX. translate it (...). Where Sisoe is the same with the Hebrew Sisith,
which signifies that Lock, which was left in the hinder part of the head, the
rest of the hair being cut in a Circle. And thus the ancient Arabians cut their
hair, as Herodotus tells us, in imitation of Bacchus. Whence, as Bochartus
notes ( Lib. I. Canaan, cap. 6.) the Idumaeans, Ammonites, Moabites, and the
rest of the Inhabitants of Arabia Deserta, are called circumcised in the
corners, i. e. of the head, IX Jer. 26. And the Greek Scholiast on that place,
says, that in his time the Saracens were so cut.

But there are those, who thinks this refers to a Superstitious Custom among
the Gentiles, in their mourning for the dead. For they cut off their hair, and
that round about; and threw it into the Sepulcher with the Bodies of their
Relations and Friends: and sometimes laid it upon the Face, or the Breast of
the dead, as an Offering to the Infernal Gods, whereby they thought to appease
them, and make them kind to the deceased. For that this relates to the dead, is
probable from the like Law, repeated XIV Deuteronomy. 1. and from the next Verse to
this. See Maimonides de Idol. c. 12.1, 2, 5.

Neither shall thou mar the corners of thy beard.] There were five corners (as
their phrase is) of their Beards; one on either Cheek, and one on either Lip,
and one below on the Chin: None of which, much less all, they might shave off,
as the manner of the Idolatrous Priests was; if we may believe Maimonides P.
III. More Nevoch. cap. 37. But if the former have respect to their mourning for
the dead, I do not see why this should not also be so interpreted: the Gentiles
being wont (as Theodoret observes) to shave their Beards, and smite their
Cheeks, at the Funerals of their Friends.

Ver. 28. Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh.] Either with their
Nails, or with Knives, or other sharp Instruments; as the manner of the Heathen
was.

For the dead.] To pacify the Infernal Spirits, and make them propitious to
the dead; which was the end at which the Gentiles aimed in slashing themselves.
Otherwise, simple tearing their Flesh out of great Grief and Anguish of Spirit,
does not seem to be prohibited, no more than tearing off their hair; which were
in use among the Jews, without any offense against this Law, XVI Jer. 6, 7.
XLI. 5. and other places. See Maimon. de Idol. cap. 13. sect. 10, 11, 12, 13.
J. Gerard. Vossius de Idol. p. 209. Edit. 1. and Gierus de luctu Hebraeorum,
cap. 10. sect. 2, 3. Huetius thinks that Law of Solon's, which was transcribed
by the Romans into the XII Tables, That Women in mourning should not scratch
their Cheeks, had its original from this Law of Moses, Demonstr. Evang. Propos.
IV. cap. 12. n. 2.

Nor print any mark upon you.] If this refer to the dead (as the foregoing
Prohibition does) than these Marks were made by the Gentiles in their Flesh, at
the Funeral of their Friends; that by the Compunction and Pain they felt in
their Bodies, they might Appease the Infernal Powers. And so Aben-Ezra
understands it: though there be no footsteps, that I can find of this, in any
other Author; but it is probable only, from what goes before. There is far
greater reason for another Exposition, that these Prints were made in the
Flesh, that they who had them might be known to belong to such or such a God.
For it was the custom of Idolaters, says the often-named R. Levi, Praecept.
CCLVII.) to devote themselves to their Gods, by Notes or Signs, signifying they
were their Servants, (for every one knows, in future times, Slaves had Marks
set upon them to certify to whom they belonged) redeemed with their price, and
stamped with their mark. And these Marks were made with a hot Iron, in their
Hands, Foreheads, or Necks: or they were pricked with a Needle dipped in Glastum,
as he says, which made blue Spots in their Skin; as the manner was among the
Arabians, especially the Scenitae. And they expressed either the very name of
the God, to whose Service they were Consecrated; or else by a proper Character
denoted whom they honored: as a Thunderbolt signified they were devoted to
Jupiter, a Spear or Helmet, to Mars; a Trident to Neptune, etc. And these were
Signs (or Sacraments as we may call them) whereby they were solemnly addicted
to their Worship.

It is possible there might be some Nations then that made some Marks in their
Flesh, as an Ornament to them: for at this day the Women in Greenland do not
paint their Faces, which are very swarthy, but stigmatize them in several
places, by drawing a Needle and Thread, dipped in Whales grease, through the
Skin, in what figure they please. Such Tho. Bartholinus says he had seen;
though he fancied they did not this as an ornament, but in token they were
marriageable; for they that were not, had no such Marks, Anatom. Histor. Cent.
IV. Hist. 90. But if any such thing were in use in ancient times, it easily
might degenerate into the Idolatrous Custom beforementioned: For nothing more
certain then that they made such Marks in honor of Mars the God of Battle; and
that he who devoted himself to Hercules, received (...), Sacred Marks, giving
up himself to that God, as Herodotus speaks ( Lib. II. cap. 13.) of one that
fled to his Temple in Egypt. And Lucian says of the Priests of the Syrian
Goddess, (...), etc. they were all marked; some in their Wrists, others in
their Necks: from whence all the Assyrians (...), carry such Brands, or Marks,
in their Flesh. And so are the Jews, that were initiated in the Egyptian Rites,
said (by the Author of the Third Book of Maccabees) to be stigmatized with the
Leaves of Ivy, which were the insignia of Bacchus. From which ancient practice,
it is probable, Christians have derived the Custom of printing the Jerusalem
Cross upon the Arms of those, who go to visit our Savior's Sepulcher. See
Tollius in Carmina inedita Gregor. Nazianz. p. 160. I shall add no more, but
that the Jews themselves were so inclined to receive such a Badge as this, that
they made no scruple to print the name of their own God in their Flesh: as
appears by that saying mentioned by Schickard out of the Title Sopherim; If any
Man write the name of GOD upon his flesh, let him neither wash, nor anoint in
that place. See his Mishpat Hameleck, cap. II. Theorem V. and Carpzovius his
Annotations upon it.

I am the LORD.] For this reason such Marks were forbidden, because the
Israelites were peculiarly devoted to him, as their Sovereign Lord and
Benefactor, (for the Syriack adds your God) and therefore were not to own any
other but him: whose Mark they had received in Circumcision; which made all
other absolutely unlawful.

Ver. 29. Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore.] It is
scarce to be imagined that any Man would prostitute his Daughter, to be a
common Strumpet; though he might possibly overlook the lewdness to which she
had given up her self. Therefore here in all probability, is prohibited the
exposing their Daughters, as a piece of Religion, to the Service of such filthy
Deities, as were worshipped in those days, by Acts of Uncleanness in their
Temples. For which purpose both Men and Women were there kept, as Persons
consecrated to such uses. Our great Seldom has observed something of this in
his Discourse upon Succoth-Benoth. See Syntagma de Diis Syris II. cap. 7.

Those are fansiful Interpretations which R. Elieser and R. Akiba make of these
words; who say, a Man prostitutes his Daughter, who did not get her a Husband
when she was marriageable; or married her to an old Man, Gem. Sanhedrim, cap.
9. n. 1.

Lest the Land fall to whoredom.] Unto which nothing could contribute so much,
as to make Whoredom a piece of Religion.

And the Land become full of wickedness.] By such abominable Idolatries (as St.
Peter calls them) and many other foul sins, particularly Murders, which flowed
from hence; as Maimonides observes in his More Nevoch. P. III. c. 49.

Ver. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths.] Not the days consecrated by the Gentiles
to the Service of their Gods: but the Solemn days which I have appointed for
the remembrance of my benefits. See v. 2.

And reverence my Sanctuary.] This Reverence consisted principally, in coming
to it so prepared as the Law required; in such Purity and Cleanness as was
there prescribed; and then behaving themselves there with an awful Humility.
But the better to secure this Reverence, the Masters in Israel ordained, that
no Man should come into the Mountain of the House, with a Staff, or a Sword, or
a Girdle with a Purse, or with Shoes on his feet: and that no Man should spit
there, nor make it a thorow-fare; nor go out of it with his back toward the
Sanctuary; but go backward leisurely with his face toward it, till he was out
of the Gate, etc. So Maimonides in his Beth Habechira, cap. 7. R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CCXXI. and see Petrus Cunaeus, Lib. II. cap. 12. de
Republ. Hebr.

But the great thing which secured the Reverence due to the Sanctuary, was,
that which I mentioned at first, the strict Purity from all Legal Defilements,
with which they were to be prepared: which made it very difficult to be in a
condition to approach it. For when there were so many ways of being defiled,
and so much time required to make Men clean again, and so many things, in many
Cases, to be done for that purpose, it was not possible that they should be fit
to come thither very often, without exceeding great care and diligence: as I
observed before out of the same Maimonides, P. III. More Nevoch. cap. 47. Which
very much tended to preserve their Reverence to the Sanctuary. For Men led by
sense, as they were, make nothing of those places to which they may go when
they please: but those to which they cannot be admitted, without much
Solemnity, and only at certain times, and after great pains to fit themselves
for it, they are apt to have in great esteem.

I am the LORD.] Whose Majesty dwelt in that House: unto which therefore no
Body might approach, either for Prayer or for Sacrifice, without an awful sense
of him. For so Maimonides explains it, in the place now named; The Sanctuary it
self was not to be reverenced, but he who commanded that reverence.

Nor did this Reverence belong only to the Tabernacle or Temple, instituted by
God's express Command; for that Ceremonial Service, which was unlawful to be
performed any where else (for then it might seem proper only to that Ceremonial
Dispensation, and to be now vanished under the Gospel) but the perpetual
practice of the Jewish Nation shows, that they thought themselves obliged by
this Precept to use Reverence in their Synagogues. Which were neither
instituted by any written Precept of the Law, nor for any Ceremonial Service,
which was confined to the Temple: but for public Assemblies, to hear the Law
read and expounded; and to offer the Prayers of the People to God. For in the
Psalms of Asaph (where there is the only mention we find of Synagogues in the
Old Testament) they are called, not only Houses and Assemblies of God, but also
Sanctuaries (as the word is here in Moses) LXXIII Psalm. 17. LXXIV. 4, 7, 8.
LXXXIII. 12. See Mr. Thorndike in his Rights of the Church in a Christian
State, p. 213.

Ver. 31. Regard not them.] Do not go to consult them; nor follow their
Directions.

That have familiar spirits.] It is uncertain what is here meant by Oboth;
which we translate familiar Spirits. But the word Ob signifying a Bottle, or
hollow Vessel, XXXII Job 19. the Jews think it probable that Oboth here
signifies such as the Greeks call (...), who had a Spirit or Demon speaking
out of the Belly, or Chest, with an hollow voice, as if it came out of a
Bottle. So the Woman whom Saul went to consult, is called baalath ob, a
Mistress of such a Spirit: where it is plain ob signifies the Spirit, or
Demon, (See XX. 27.) and he or she that had familiarity with such a Spirit,
was properly called Baal, or Baalath ob, the Master or Mistress who possessed
it, and gave Answers by it, with a voice that seemed to come out of the lower
parts of the Belly. In one place indeed the LXX. translates it (...), XIX Isa.
3. They that speak out of the Earth; because the Voice coming from the lower
parts of her that was possessed, seemed to come out of the Earth; as Mr. Seldom
explains it in de Diis Syris.

R. Levi of Barcelonita says the manner of it was thus, ( Praecept. CCLVIII.
after certain Fumes, and other Ceremonies, a Voice seemed to come from under
the Arm-holes (so he takes it, and so it is said in Sanhedrim, cap. 7. n. 7.)
of the Person that had the familiar Spirit, which answered to the Questions
which were asked. For this he quotes Siphra. But if it came from under the
Arm-holes, still it was so low and hollow, as if it had been out of the bottom
of the Belly, or the Cavities of the Earth. Others imagine such Persons had the
name of Oboth, because they were swelled with the Spirit, as a Bladder is when
it is blown. However it was, this continued till the times of the Gospel, as
appears from XVI Acts 16. For she that had the Spirit of Python was the same
with an (...), as Plutarch informs us. See Casaubon and L. de Dieu on that
place. The famous Pythia, who delivered the Oracles of Apollo, sat over a
hole, and by her Secrets Parts received the Spirit which swelled her, and made
her utter Oracles, as Origin observes, Lib. VII. contra Celsum; and St.
Chrysostom, Hom. XXIX. in I Epist. ad Corinth. See Beyerus in his Annot. upon
Seldom de Diis Syris, p. 226, etc.

There are those that look upon all that these Authors say, as old Stories to
which no Credit is to be given. But Aug. Eugabinus affirms, That he himself had
seen such Women, called Ventriloquae, (which is the same with the Greek (...))
from whom, as they sat, a Voice came out of their Secret Parts, and gave
Answers to Enquiries. And Caelius Rhodoginus ( Lib. VIII. Antiq. Lect. cap.
10.) says this is not to be entertained with Laughter; for not only he saw
such a Woman, and heard a very small Voice coming out of her Belly; but
innumerable other People, not only at Rhodigium, but in a manner through all
Italy. Among whom there were many great Persons (who had her stripped naked, that
they might be sure there was no fraud) to whom a Voice answered unto such
things as they enquired. Hieron. Oleaster also upon XXIV Isa. 4. says, he saw
such an one at Lisbon; from under whose Arm-holes, and other parts of her, a
small Voice was heard, which readily answered to whatever was asked.

Neither seek after Wizards.] The Hebrew word Jideonim importing Knowledge, as
all confess, signifies such as we call Cunning-men; who pretended to tell what
was lost, or what Fortune people should have. And these were Men (as far as I
can judge) as the other were mostly Women; who held intelligence with some
Demon. For this word seems to have the very same derivation in Hebrew, which
the other has in Greek: for all say, (...) are as much as (...), knowers; and
Jideonim are as much as Joadim, which is the very same, futurorum conscij, as
Mr. Seldom observes. And so the LXX. translate it (...), 2 Kings XXI. 7. though
here and XX. ult. they render it (...), and elsewhere (...). This knowledge
they pretended to obtain, (as some think) by looking into the Entrails of their
Sacrifices: or, as Maimonides will have it, by putting the Bone of a certain
Bird, called Jadua, into their Mouths, with certain Fumes and Adjurations;
which made them fall into an Ecstasie, and foretell things to come, R. Levi
Barcelonita, Praecept. CCLIX. And there are those who think that these Jideonim
were such as pretended by Charms to cure Diseases, etc. of which we can have no
certainty, and it seems to rely only on the LXX. in this place, who, as I
observed, translate it by a more general word, in another.

To be defiled by them.] With the foulest sins. For seeking to these, was a
forsaking of God; and one peculiar kind of Idolatry. And therefore they that
were guilty of it were to be stoned (as the same R. Levi observes) if they
committed this sin knowingly, and there were Witnesses of it. If there were no
Witnesses, then they were left to God to be cut off by his hand, XX. 6.

I am the LORD your God.] Unto whom you are to seek for all that you desire.

Ver. 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head.] That they might accustom
themselves to Modesty and Humility, (as Maimonides glosses upon this Law, More
Nevoch. P. III. cap. 36.) for the maintenance of which the usage was, they say,
to rise up to them, when they were at the distance of four Cubits: and as soon
as they were gone by, to sit down again; that it might appear they rose up
purely in respect to them. To this Nature directed all civilized People; who
anciently, as Juvenal says, Satyr. XIII. believed this a great wickedness, to
be punished with death, if a young Man did not rise up to an old. Credebant hoc
grande nefas, and morte piandum,
Si juvenis vetulo non assurrexerat, --
And such a Law there was established among the Lacedaemonians, (...), That
aged Persons should be reverenced no less, than if they were their Fathers. And
so Plato, (...), Let every one reverence him that is elder than himself, in
deed and in word, Lib. IX. de Legibus, p. 875. Where he requires that a Youth
should honor a Stranger that was his ancient: and has this memorable saying,
(...), etc. That Youth should glory more in obeying well, than in ruling well.
And first of all in obeying the Laws; for this is all one with serving God: and
next in giving honor to old Men; and to those especially, who have passed
their days honorably, and with glory. See more to this purpose in Henricus
Stephanus de juris civilis font. and rivis. And there was the greater reason
for this Reverence toward old Men in this Nation, there being nothing else
among them but Age and Experience that could distinguish them: for they were
all equally noble, and equally rich; of the same Profession, and brought up in
the same manner.

And honor the face of the old Man.] Or of the Elder: that is, of those who
were skilful in the Law, as the Jews interpret it; and I see no reason to
contradict it, (as some have done) since he speaks of aged Persons before. See
Mr. Seldom, Lib. I. de Synedr. cap. 14. where he deduces this at large: and
another excellent Writer of our own, Mr. Thorndike in his Rights of the Church
in a Christian State, p. 214, etc. For if such as taught the Law had not been
honored before Men, no body would have minded their words, nor received what
they propounded, about things to be known or to be done, as Maimonides words
are in his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 36. And it made no difference of what Age
he was, whether an old Man or a young; (for some Elders, it appears by Daniel,
were not aged) but the same honor was given to him, even by wise Men; as R.
Levi Barcelonita shows, Praecept. CCXXII.

And fear thy God.] This is the fountain of all Virtue; particularly of the
forementioned: God having imprinted a venerable Character upon those who are
grown aged, especially on such as are wise, and instruct others in Virtue. But
some of the Hebrews think that in this Verse there are three Degrees of Honor
enjoined, to three Ranks of Men: one to the Aged; the next to the Wise and
Learned; and the third to the Judges; who they imagine are here meant by Elohim
(God) whom they are commanded to fear or reverence.

I am the LORD.] Most high above all; and therefore greatly to be feared.

Ver. 33. And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your Land, ye shall not vex
him.] Not so much as by upbraiding him with his being a Stranger; or his having
worshipped Idols heretofore. For of such a Stranger they understand this, as
was become a Proselyte to their Religion. See XVII. 8, 12, 13. and XXII Exodus
21. But common Humanity teaches every Body, to be kind to all manner of
Stangers, and not merely to refrain from oppressing them, or giving them
vexation. Plato has most excellent Discourses about this in several places:
particularly Lib. V. de Legibus, where he shows, that God is the Avenger of all
Wrongs done to Strangers, more than of those that are done to our fellow
Citizens: (...), etc. For a Stranger being destitute of Friends and Kindred, is
the greater object of pity, both of Men and of God. And therefore he that can
hurt most, should be most ready to help him, etc. See p. 729, 730. Edit.
Serrani. Upon which account he makes it lawful for a Stranger to pluck any of
the best Fruit, as he is upon his way, whether Grapes, Figs, or Apples, etc.
Lib. VIII. p. 845. And the Corn being divided, as he would have it into twelve
parts; and a twelfth part divided into three; he orders one of those third
parts to be given to Strangers, p. 847, 848. (...), for a Stranger or Sojourner
ought to be comforted, in a most friendly manner, etc. See Lib. XII. p. 952,
953.

Ver. 34. But the stranger that dwells with thee, shall be as one born among
you.] They understand this only of such a Stranger, who by Circumcision was
become a perfect Proselyte: whom they were to be so far from oppressing, that
they were to treat him as if he had been a Native Jew, and love him as a
Brother.

And thou shall love him as thy self.] He had commanded them, v. 18. to love
their Neighbor; i. e. an Israelite (they expound it) as themselves: and now he
commands them to love a Stranger with the same Affection; which demonstrates,
they think, he was become an Israelite; and therefore was to have the same
Privileges with themselves, both in all Civil and Sacred things. And this, no
doubt, was true that they were bound to treat such a Proselyte with a tender
Affection, and to make no difference between him and an Israelite. For he was
to be admitted to eat of the Paschal Lamb, and of the Peace Offerings: and he
might marry with an Israelite; insomuch that Moses says, One Ordinance shall
be for both, XV Numb. 15. All the difference I can find, was, That they never
admitted any Stranger to be a Member of the great Sanhedrim. But
notwithstanding all this, I cannot think it reasonable to exclude all other
Strangers from their Affection; but they were bound to love them, and to be
kind to them, though not to embrace them with such a strict Friendship as the
other. And to confirm this, it may be observed, That in the fourth Commandment,
the Stranger within their Gate signifies, as they confess, not him that was a
perfect Proselyte, but only one that had renounced Idolatry. And so they
understand the word Stranger in the XXVth Chapter of this Book, v. 47. and I
see no reason why such a Stranger should not be admitted here to have a share
in their Affection, who was become a Worshipper of the true God, though he had
not taken upon him to observe the whole Law.

For ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt.] This Reason is little less than a
Demonstration that such Strangers as I now mentioned, are comprehended in the
foregoing Precept. For the remembrance of what their Condition was in Egypt, is
that whereby they are moved to have pity on those whom they found among
themselves in the same: and they and the Egyptians were not of the same
Religion, but found such kind entertainment there a long time, as they were to
give to those who were of their Religion.

This Argument indeed became stronger, when any Persons were incorporated with
them, and become more one with them than they were with the Egyptians; but was
of great force to procure kindness to those who did not live by their Laws.

I am the LORD your God.] Who have done so much for you when you were mere
Strangers, that you should not stick to be kind to those who are in the like
Condition.

Ver. 35. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment.] The Hebrews refer this
word judgment to all the following particulars; and think that Moses uses it
here to show of what moment this Law is, which he calls doing judgment. So that
he who measures or weighs, has the Office of a Judge; and if he commit any
fraud in his Measures or Weights, he is a corrupter of Judgment, and is called
wicked, abominable, accursed. They are the words of R. Levi Barcelonita,
Praecept. CCLX. where he adds that such Men are the cause of five Mischiefs,
which are imputed to unjust Judges: who defile the Land; profane the Name of
God; remove the Presence of the Divine Majesty; bring a Sword upon the People;
and at last carry them captive out of their own Country. And therefore great
Punishments have been enacted in all Countries against this Crime, as
destructive to Human Society: Particularly Justinian ordained that such
Offenders should be beaten (...) sorely, as impious People.

In mete-yard.] By which they measured Lands, Cloth, and such like things: for
Middah (as Fosterus observes) is the Measure of continued quantity, viz. in
things dry.

In weight.] By which they paid and received Money in those days; and sold
Brass and Iron, and things of like nature.

Or in measure.] The Hebrew word Mesurah (from whence seems to come the Latin
Mensura, and our English word Measure) denotes the Measure of Discrete Quantity
(as we speak) as of Corn; and of all continued Fluid Quantity, as of Wine and
Oil. And the forenamed R. Levi will have it to signify the very least of such
Measures; about which, says he, the Law concerns it self, that Men should be
exact in them, as well as in the greatest. And so Hesychius here notes, that
Moses provides against all Injustice in small things, as well as in great: for
what the possession of a Field, or a House is to a wealthy Man, that the
measure of Wine or Corn, or the weight of Bread is to the Poor, who have daily
need of such things for the support of their Life.

Ver. 36. Just balances, just weights.] This Verse only positively requires
strict justice in those things, wherein the former Verse forbad all deceit. And
these two words refer to things sold by weight.

A just Ephah and a just Hin shall ye have.] These two words Ephah and Hin,
comprehend all sorts of Measures of things, whether wet or dry. And that they
might have such just Weights and Measures among them, the Standard of them was
kept in the Sanctuary, by which all were to be governed; as appears from 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 29. See XXX Exodus 13. The Jewish Doctors also say, that it was a
Constitution of their wise Men, for the preventing all Fraud in these matters,
that no Weights, Balances, or Measures should be made of any Metal, as of Iron,
Lead, Tin, etc. (which were obnoxious to rust, or might be bent, or easily
impaired) but of Marble, Stone, or Glass, which were less liable to be abused.

For these Constitutions Moses was so famous, that his Name was celebrated on
the account of them in other Nations. Nay, Lucius Ampelius (a rude kind of
Writer, but who had collected much out of better Authors) says, that Mochus
was the Inventer of Scales and Weights; and that his memory is preserved in the
Constellation called Libra. Now if for Mochus we read Moschos, it is the very
name of Moses in Hebrew (viz. Moscheh) who is called so by other Authors, as
the learned Huetius observes in his Demonstr. Evang. Propos. IV. cap. 7. n. 16.

I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt.] This is
the general reason for their Obedience; which is repeated in this Chapter above
a dozen times. Sometimes more briefly, I am the LORD; and sometimes a little
larger, I am the LORD your God: and here with this addition, which brought you
out of the Land of Egypt. Whereby he in a special manner demonstrates himself,
both to be their LORD (faithful to his promise, VI Exodus 3.) and their God: who
obliged them to his Service, by the most singular benefit.

Ver. 37. Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes and all my judgments, and
do them.] These words, Statutes and Judgments, comprehend all the Laws of God:
some of which were Prohibitions, which they were to mark and observe
diligently, so as to abstain from such things; and others Precepts or Commands,
which they were to practice and do according to them.

I am the LORD.] No more need be said to engage your Obedience in every thing
than this, that I am your Sovereign, and the Sovereign of the whole World.

CHAP. XX.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Sometime after the delivery of
the Laws mentioned in the two foregoing Chapters; the chief of them were
enforced with the addition of Penalties, which are set down in this Chapter.

Ver. 2. Again, thou shall say to the Children of Israel.] Repeat what I said
before (XVIII. 21.) and add this which follows unto it.

Whosoever he be of the Children of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth
among you.] The Proselytes, who had embraced their Religion, were no less
concerned in this Law, than the Native Israelites. See XVII. 8, 10, etc.

That gives any of his seed unto Molech.] This looks like the Prohibition
before given XVIII. 21. and R. Levi gives this reason of its repitition,
because it was a piece of Idolatrous Worship so usual in those days, when the
Law was delivered, that there needed great endeavors to preserve them from it,
Praecept. CCVIII. And Maimonides also observes (as I noted upon XVIII. 21.)
that Idolaters used to fright People into this Worship, by telling them their
Children would dye, if they did not make them pass through the fire, and
thereby devote them to their Gods. But upon due consideration of these words,
it may appear probable that there is something more in them than in the former;
importing a higher degree of this sin. For to give their Children to Molech,
seems to be no less than to offer them in Sacrifices, (So Christ giving himself
for us constantly signifies in the New Testament) which was a more horrid
thing, than merely making them pass through the fire, which did them no hurt.
And therefore this Crime is here forbidden under the Penalty of Death; whereas
in the XVIIIth Chapter no punishment is threatened. Certain it is, Children were
really burnt upon the Altars of the ancient Pagans, especially in times of
great Distress, when they hoped to pacisie the Anger of their Gods, by offering
to them the dearest thing they had. See our great Seldom Lib. de Diis Syris
Syntagm I. cap. 6. where he shows the Phaenicians offered their Children to
Saturn, (so Porphyrius expressly says, Lib. II. de Abstin.) who is said by the
Poets to have devoured his own Children; and by many is thought to be the same
with Molech. Though others take it for the Sun, to whom it is certain Human
Sacrifices were offered. Many Authors make mention of it; and Eben Batrich
thinks such Sacrifices began in the days of Serug, and were first used among
the Syrians. Which is a very probable Opinion, as Johan. Geusius has
demonstrated, Lib. de Victimis Humanis, Pars I. cap. 4, 5. And it is easy to
conceive how, from the Syrians, this abominable practice was derived to the
Phaenicians, who worshipped the Sun, under the name of Baal, or Bell, as
Herodian, Lib. VIII. testifies. Which does not contradict what others say, that
they were devoted to the Worship of Hercules: for by him is meant the Sun also,
as his very name imports, viz. Or-Col, which in that Language signifies as much
as him that illuminates all things. From the Phaenicians this Worship of
offering Human Sacrifices, was propagated to the Carthaginians, and other
People of Africa, among whom this impious Idolatry continued till the time of
Hannibal, as Bochartus gathers out of Silius Italicus, Lib. IV. Mos fuit in
populis quos condidit advena Dido
Poscere caede Deos veniam, ac flagrantibus aris,
Infandum dictu, parvos imponere natos.
Who says the Carthaginians were wont to appease their Gods, by burning their
Children on their Altars: and then follows (after the words now mentioned) the
Lamentation of Imilce the Wife of Annibal, whose Son was, by lot, to be
sacrificed, Lib. I. Canaan, cap. 28. And this wicked Custom continues still to
this day, among some of the People in the Southern Parts of Africa, as good
Authors affirm; it having spread it self all over the World (as appears by the
Discoveries that have been made in America) even into the Northern Countries of
Scythia. But I shall content my self with observing only what the Scripture
says concerning a People in the East, called Sepharvites, who burnt their
Children in the fire to Adramelech, 2 Kings XVII. 31. which God seems to have
been the same with Molech here mentioned by Moses; only with the addition of an
Epithete signifying their high opinion of him: For Adra is as much as potent or
mighty, and therefore Melech signifying a King; Adramelech is in our Language
mighty King. Now that the Children of Israel, notwithstanding this severe
Prohibition against it, imitated this barbarous Worship, is evident from 2
Kings XXIII. 10. VII Jer. 31. XIX. 5. CVI Psalm. 37, 38. and we may very well
think the Prophet Micah also alludes to it, VI. 7. as Isaiah LVII. 5, 6. and
Ezekiel XVI. 20, 21, 36. XXIII. 37, 39. likewise do.

The manner of Sacrificing their Children, and the figure of the Idol to which
they offered, is described by many, according to the Jewish Notion;
particularly by Paulus Fagius out of Jalkut: who makes it an hallow Image,
having seven Apartments in it (according to the number, I suppose, of the seven
Planets) into one of which, viz. the lowest, the Infant was thrown when it was
red hot, as Flour, a Turtle Dove, a Sheep, etc. were into the rest. We can have
no certainty of this, but such kind of Statues were found in the West Indies
when they were discovered, as Ludovicus Vives observes in Lib. VI. cap. 19. de
Civitate Dei. And Diodorus Siculus in his Bibliotheca, Lib. XX. describes the
Statue of Saturn among the Carthaginians, as stretching forth its hands down
toward the Earth; so that the Child which was put into them, might roll and
fall, (...) into a gulf full of fire. Benjamin Tudelensis in his Travels
(about 500. years ago) affirms, that in some Islands in the East, the
Worshippers of Fire were wont to leap into it, in performance of some Solemn
Vow, and were counted by all to be happy Men. Which I mention here, because he
says these Fires were kindled in a Valley, as those among the Jews were in the
Valley of Hinnom, p. 108, 109.

He shall surely be put to death.] Sufficient proof being made of the Fact,
XVII Deuteronomy. 6.

The people of the Land shall stone him with stones.] Which was the proper
Punishment in this, and in some other Cases; particularly Adultery, v. 10. and
Blasphemy, XXIV. 14, etc. The manner of it is described out of an Hebrew MS.
(Ez Hechajim) by J. Wagenseil upon Sota, cap. 3. to have been thus: He that was
to be punished with stoning was stripped naked, having only a covering before,
and set upon an high place, attended by the Witnesses against him, his hands
being bound: one of the Witnesses giving him a strong push, threw him down
headlong from thence. If this fall killed him, there was an end: But if Life
remained in him, the Witnesses took up a Stone, which was laid there on
purpose, as big as two Men could lift, and threw it upon him; and before he
quite expired, all the People that stood by threw stones at him, according to
the Law, XVII Deuteronomy. 7. A Woman was only stripped to her shift.

Ver. 3. And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from
among his people.] In case, that is, there was not sufficient proof against
him, God threatens that he himself would take care to punish him, by cutting
him off from the Land of the Living. R. Bechai, and others, observe that this
cutting off is threefold in the Law: one is, the cutting off the Body, i. e.
shortning Men's lives; which is threatened to six sins in Scripture. The second
is, the excision of the Soul only: which is threatened by Moses six and twenty
times; and particularly to incestuous Marriages. The third is, excision both of
Soul and Body: which is threatened to fifteen sins; among which they reckon this
of giving their Children to Molech. See Seldom, Lib. VII. de Jure N. and G.
sec. Hebr. cap. 9. p. 828, 829, etc.

To defile my Sanctuary.] By this Sin God's Sanctuary was defiled, as well as
his holy Name profaned, because they sacrificed to Molech in other places,
despising the Tabernacle, which was the only place appointed by God, where
Divine Service was to be performed. And therein consisted part of the Honor
and Reverence which God required to his Sanctuary, (XIX. 30.) that it should be
looked upon as the only place, where acceptable Sacrifices could be offered to
him. And therefore then it was dishonored and defiled, when they offered
Sacrifice in any other place, as they did, in after times, to Molech in the
Valley of Hinnom, as I observed before, 2 Kings XXIII. 10. Where they built
High Places to Baal (which is another name for the Sun) on purpose that they
might offer their Children upon them, XX Jer. 5, 6. XXXII. 35. This was a plain
Contempt of God, and of his Sanctuary, which they forsook as if it had not been
an holy, but a defiled place. Otherwise they would have kept to it, and offered
no where else; nor after any other manner than according to the Rites thereof.

And to profane my holy Name.] By giving the Name of God and his Honor, to
such an abominable Idol.

Ver. 4. If the People of the Land.] In that part of the Country where this
Crime was committed.

Do any way hide their eyes from the man, when he gives of his seed unto
Molech, and kill him not.] If they connived at what he did, and dissembled
their knowledge of it; or would not speak the whole Truth, and endeavor to
convict him of this foul Crime, that he might be stoned.

Ver. 5. Then will I set my face against that man, and against his family.] As
the Idolater was liable to this punishment, from the hand of Heaven, (See v.
3.) so they that favored him, and would not testify against him when they
knew him guilty, fell under God's high displeasure, (which is meant by setting
his face against them) and so did all their Children, whom God threatens to
destroy. He speaks indeed in the singular number, because commonly in such
cases, there was some one Person, by whose Authority others were persuaded to
wink at such Offenses, and not to discover what they knew of them. But all such
Men are threatened with the Divine Vengeance in the next words.

And will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, etc.] That is, all
others who, following his Example, favor such Idolaters, and protect them from
punishment. For every one knows that Idolatry is called by the name of Whoredom
in Scripture; because God having espoused the Israelites to himself, as his
peculiar People their forsaking him, to serve other Gods, was a Spiritual
Adultery.

To commit whoredom with Molech.] i. e. To worship him as their God.

Ver. 6. And the soul.] i. e. The Person.

That turns after such as has familiar spirits, and after wizards.] Who they
were that pretended to have familiar Spirits, or were Wizards, see XIX. 31.
where they are commanded not to regard them: and here, if any did consult them
(which is called turning after them) cutting off is threatened to them; that is,
shortning their days: for such Persons are reckoned by the Jews, as the chief
of those six sorts of sinners, who were liable to the first kind of Excision,
which I mentioned v. 3. As for the Man himself who had a familiar Spirit, or
was a Wizard, he was to be stoned, if he was discovered and convicted, v. 27.
And so they observe in Sanhedrim cap. 7. n. 7.

To go a whoring after them.] It was a kind of Idolatry to seek to such People
for advice or relief; being a forsaking of God, and putting confidence in them.
Though sometimes to go a whoring, signifies the commission of any grievous sin,
which Idolatry usually led men unto; as Mr. Seldom has noted Lib. III. de
Vxore Hebr. cap. 23.

There is some reason to think, there was something magical in the Oblation of
their Children to Molech; and that thereby they consulted with Demons about
things future, or secret; because such Superstitions are here immediately
forbidden, after the Prohibition of giving their Children to Molech; and
because they are frequently joined together in other places, as in XVIII Deuteronomy.
10, 11. 2 Kings XVII. 17. XXI. 6. Certain it is, that in after times they did
Sacrifice Children, (...), that they might Divine, by looking into their
Bowels, as Joh. ^^^sius has shown out of Porphyrius, Philostratus, Herodotus,
and others, Lib. de Victimis Humanis, Pars I. cap. 17.

I will even set my face against that soul, etc.] See v. 3, 5.

Ver. 7. Sanctify your selves therefore.] Worship therefore God alone; to
whose Service you are set apart.

And be ye holy.] Keep your selves free from all Idolatry. See 11.44.

I am the LORD your God.] See XIX. 2, 3, 10, etc.

Ver. 8. And ye shall keep my Statutes and do them.] Be governed by these Laws,
and not by the Customs of other People.

I am the LORD which sanctify you.] Separated you to my self from all other
People; by peculiar Laws which I have given you.

Ver. 9. For every one.] Or, If any one: the Particle we translate for
signifying frequently with, or if.

That curses his Father or Mother.] Reproacheth them with Imprecations.

Shall surely be put to death.] i. e. Be stoned. And it made no difference,
whether he cursed them when they were alive, or after their death, as R. Levi
Barcelonita says the Rule of their Doctors was, yet they resolve that unless he
cursed them by some proper name of God, he was not liable to be put to death,
but was only scourged, Praecept. CCLXI. See XXI Exodus 17.

His blood shall be upon him.] When the Law only says a man shall die the
death, the Jews understand it of strangling; which was the easiest punishment
among them. For where there was not an express mention of the kind of death,
they thought the most favorable was to be inflicted. But when the Law adds,
his blood shall be upon him, they say it is meant of stoning. And the meaning
of this phrase is, he shall perish by his own fault; and therefore his blood,
that is, his death, shall not be vindicated. The blood of one that was slain
being innocent, was upon the Murderer, and therefore avenged. But he that was
put to death for his Crimes, had his Blood upon himself, and no body was to
bear it, the Executioner himself being not guilty of Blood.

Ver. 10. And the man that commits adultery with another man's wife, etc.] By
the ancient Law of Draco and Solon, the Husband of the Adulteress, if he found
them in the fact, might kill them both, or put out their Eyes, or stigmatize
them; or make the Adulterer pay a Fine, if he had a mind to spare his Life. See
Meursius in his Themis Attica, Lib. I. cap. 4, 5. and the Leges Atticae set
forth by Petitus, Lib. VI. Tit. 4. where it appears that it was infamous for
the Husband to live with his Wife, after she had committed Adultery: And that
it was unlawful for her to enter into the public Temples, or go dressed in the
Streets. If she did, any body might tear off her Clothes, and beat her; only
not kill her. See S. Petiti Comment. p. 460. etc.

The adulterer and adulteress shall surely be put to death.] It is not left to
the Husband's liberty, by this Law, whether he would spare their Lives or no:
but the Fact being proved, they were both to die for it. Only it is not said
here, what kind of Death they should suffer: nor was the same kind of Death
inflicted upon all that were guilty of this Crime. For if the Daughter of a
Priest played the Adulteress, she was to be burnt, XXI. 9. and the Adulterer to
be strangled, as the Jews understand it. If a man lay with a Virgin espoused to
another man, but not yet married, they were both to be stoned, by the express
words of the Law, XXII Deuteronomy. 23. But Adultery with a married Woman, if we may
credit the Jewish Doctors, was punished with strangling. See Seldom, Lib. III.
Vxor. Hebr. cap. 2. For when we meet with this phrase, they shall surely die,
it is always meant of Death by the Sentence of the House of Judgment (as they
speak) and if the Law add no more, they resolve it to be by strangling. If
these words be added, their blood shall be upon them, then they say, they were
to be stoned. This I observed before; and shall add now, that strangling, as
they describe it, was not such a punishment as our hanging men by the neck: but
the Criminal, being stuck up to the knees in dung, they tied a Napkin about his
Neck, and drawing it hard at both ends, choked him. There was such a thing as
hanging men on a Gallows, (as we speak) but it was after they were dead, and
only such as had been stoned: and not all them neither; but such alone as had
been stoned for Blasphemy, or Adultery. See Joh. Carpzovius upon Schickard's
Jus Regium, cap. 4. Theorem. XIV.

The greatest thing that can be objected against this account of the punishment
of Adultery, is that which St. John tells us the Jews said concerning the Woman
taken in the very act of it, Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be
stoned, VIII Joh. 5. But it may be answered, that this Woman was espoused only,
and not yet married: and so by the Law, as I observed before, was to be stoned,
XXII Deuteronomy. 23, 24. If this seem absurd, that the Adultery of one espoused
should be accounted a greater Crime than of one married (for stoning was an
heavier punishment than strangling) it ought to be considered, that the love of
those who were newly espoused, was commonly more fervent than theirs who were
married; especially among the Jews, who for light causes were wont to be
divorced from their Wives. And therefore no wonder if the Adultery of the
former was judged a greater Crime than of the latter.

Ver. 11. And the man that lies with his fathers wife, etc.] This was
condemned before, as an heinous sin (XVIII. 8.) and now the penalty of Death is
inflicted upon the Offenders.

Their blood shall be upon them.] All the Hebrew Doctors agree, that
wheresoever we meet with this phrase, it is meant of stoning; as I before
observed.

Ver. 12. If a man lie with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be
put to death.] This was forbidden XVIII. 15. and the same penalty is here
enacted, as against the former Crime.

They have wrought confusion.] By perverting the order which God has
appointed, and making great disturbance in the Family, etc. It is the same word
that is used for a more foul sin, XVIII. 23. and therefore shows this to be an
abominable mixture.

Ver. 13. If a man also lie with mankind, etc.] This also was condemned before,
XVIII. 22. but the penalty not declared till now.

They shall surely be put to death, etc.] By stoning; unless one of them was
under a force, and then that Law took place, which we find XXII Deuteronomy. 25, 26.

Ver. 14. And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness.] See
XVIII. 17.

They shall be burnt with fire.] Which was an higher punishment than stoning,
as that was higher than strangling. R. Levi Barcelonita, Praecept. CCXXIV.
describes the manner of it to have been thus: They set the Malefactor in dung
up to the knees, and then tied a Cloth about his Neck, which was drawn by the
two Witnesses, till they made his Mouth gape; into which they poured hot melted
Lead down his Throat, which burnt his bowels. And thus the rest of the
Talmudists expound it. But I see no good Authority they have for it; the word
for burning being the same that is used, when mention is made of burning with
Fire and Faggots, as we speak. And R. Elieser ben Zadock says he saw a
Priest's Daughter thus burnt for Fornication. But the Doctors commonly say the
Judges were ignorant of the Law; or that they were Sadducees who then had got
into the Seat of Judgment, who followed the very Letter of the Scripture.

Both he and they.] That is, both the Mother and Daughter, if the Mother were
consenting to it. Otherwise, only the Woman that offended. From whence the
Karaites formed this Rule, after the same manner that men were obliged by a
Precept in Scripture, the Women were obliged also, Seldom. Lib. Uxor. Hebr.
cap. 5.

That there be no wickedness among you.] That others may be deterred from the
commission of such enormous Crimes: For the Hebrew word imports more than
ordinary wickedness. See XVIII. 17.

Ver. 15. And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death.] See
XVIII. 23. This Death was by stoning, as appears from the next Verse.

And ye shall slay the beast.] Just as they were to destroy, not only the
Inhabitants of an Apostate City, but their Cattle also, etc. (XIII Deuteronomy. 15,
16.) to terrify others from committing the like sin. And, as the Talmudists
observe, that there might be no Memorial left of so foul a Crime, by Men's
pointing at the Beast, and saying, There goes the Beast that such a Man lay
with. They might have added, to prevent monstrous Births. See Seldom, Lib. I.
de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 4. Maimonides gives a good reason, why a Beast that
killed a Man should be slain; as a punishment to the Owner, for looking no
better after it: but his application of it to this matter seems impertinent,
More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 40. Bochartus his Gloss is far better; The Beast was
killed as an Instrument in the Crime; just as a Forger of Deeds is hanged with
his Pen and Counterfeit Seals; and a Conjurer with his Magical Books and
Characters. And this also is useful for an Example, though not to other Beasts,
yet to Men; whose concern it is to consider that if Beasts were not spared, who
were not capable of sinning, what would become of them, who committed such
Crimes, against the known Law of God, and the impressions of Nature it self,
Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. 2. cap. 16.

Ver. 16. Their blood shall be upon them.] This relates to the Man and the
Woman (mentioned in these two Verses) who committed this foul Crime: for a
Beast is not capable of punishment. But as the Canon Law speaks, Pecora inde
credendum est jussa interfici, quia tali flagitio contaminata refricant facti
memoriam, it is to be believed that the Beasts which were polluted with such a
flagitious wickedness, were therefore commanded to be slain, because they rubbed
up the memory of the Fact. Which is the very reason given of it in the Mischna,
Tit. Sanhedrim, cap. 7. n. 4. And so R. Solomon, The Beast was killed, lest it
should be said, there is the Beast for which such a Woman was put to death.

Ver. 17. If a man shall take his sister, etc.] Whether she was his Sister by
the whole Blood, (as we speak) or by half Blood only; by the Fathers side, or
Mothers; he was not permitted to marry her by the Law mentioned XVIII. 9.

And see her nakedness.] It is the same with uncovering her nakedness to lie
with her; as it is there expressed, and here in the end of the Verse ( he has
uncovered his sisters nakedness) the sense of seeing being put for that of
touching, or any other in this Language.

It is a wicked thing.] A flagitious, or nefarious wickedness, as the Vulgar
expresses it. But the Hebrew word Chesed signifying sometimes in the
Prophetical Language Mercy and Indulgence, the Talmudists take these words, as
if they came in by a Parenthesis, to obviate an Objection which might be made,
that Cain and Abel married their Sisters. True, says Moses, that was by an
indulgence in the beginning, arising from the necessity of things; when there
were none but Brothers and Sisters in the World. But now they shall be cut off
in the sight of their People, who marry such near Relations. So the Gemara
Hierosol. ad Tit. Sanhedrim. See Seldom, Lib. V. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 8.
p. 581. And so the Chaldee Paraphrase, ascribed to Jonathan, whose words are
these; It is a filthy thing; but I used an indulgence to the first Men by whom
the World was to be propagated, until Mankind was sufficiently multiplied:
after that, whosoever does any such thing, let him be cut off, etc.

And they shall be cut off in the sight of their people.] Publicly put to
death. See v. 10.

He shall bear his iniquity.] i. e. The punishment of it, Chap. V. 1.

Ver. 18. And if a man shall lie with a Woman, having her sickness, etc.] Here
the Sentance of Death is pronounced upon them; whereas in XV. 24. it is only
said, the Man should be unclean seven days. Therefore many think in that place
he speaks of doing this ignorantly; and here of doing it knowingly. But if the
Man might be ignorant of the condition she was in, the Woman her self could
scarce be so: and therefore others think, when the fact was altogether private,
they only incurred a Legal Impurity for a certain season; but when it was
publicly known, and proof made of it before a Judge, it was a capital Crime.
Because it was done in contempt and despite of the Law: otherwise, it could not
have been so publicly known, as to be legally proved. Whether this Law oblige
in the state of Christianity, is at large discussed by Bishop Tailor (not to
mention other Writers abroad) in his Doctor Dubitantium, Book II. Chap. 2. Rule
3. n. 8. and Book III. Chap. 2. Rule 2. n. 3. etc.

Ver. 19. And thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mothers sister, etc.]
See XVIII. 12, 13.

They shall bear their iniquity.] It not being said, they shall die, or be cut
off, (as in the former cases) it has made some conclude this Sin, being not of
so high a nature as the foregoing, was punished only as those that follow v.
20, 21. where they that committed them are threatened to die childless.

Ver. 20. If a man shall lie with his uncles wife, etc.] See XVIII. 14.

They shall die childless.] This is understood by some as if Moses meant they
should be put to death, before they could have any fruit of such a Conjunction.
But most think he only means, that either they should have no Children; or that
their Children should not live, but die before their Parents; or be looked upon
as a spurious Issue, and not inherit their Estate: which is the sense St.
Austin puts upon these words. And Procopius Gazaeus also mentions it; and says
this was the Roman Law about all incestuous Marriages, Semen eorum non
recensebitur inter liberos; Such Issue shall not be reckoned among their
Children.

Ver. 21. And if a man shall take his brothers wife, etc.] See XVIII. 16.

They shall be childless.] See v. 20.

Ver. 22. Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, etc.]
Particularly these concerning the foregoing matters. See XVIII. 4, 5.

That the Land whether I bring you to dwell therein, spue you not out.] As it
did the former Inhabitants. See XVIII. 25, 28.

Ver. 23. And ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nation, which I cast out
before you.] Viz. of the Amorites, as the Hebrews rightly expound it: for they
were the principal Nation in Canaan, and extremely given to Idolatry. R. Levi
Barcelonita extends this to all their Customs, in cutting their hair, and such
like, ( Praecept. CCLXII.) but it seems here particularly to relate to their
Marriages, and Idolatry. See XVIII. 3.

For they committed all these things.] These words show, that the foregoing
have particular respect to their abominable Marriages and Idolatry.

Therefore I abhorred them.] So as to cast them out of their Country, XVIII.
25. Onkelos translates it, My word [MEMRI] abominated them. Which is a plain
intimation of a Notion they had in ancient times of more Persons than one in
the Deity: and particularly here denotes him whom St. John calls the WORD. For
Memra (Word) plainly signifies a Person in this place; and a Person of the same
Essence with Jehovah.

Ver. 24. But I have said unto you.] Made you a promise.

Ye shall inherit their Land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, etc.]
For he promised to expel the former Inhabitants of that Country, to make room
for them. See III Exodus 8, 17. XXIII. 27, 28. XXXIII. 3.

I am the LORD your God which have separated you from other people.] This may
refer either to what goes before, that they should not live like other Nations,
because he had by peculiar Laws, as well as by signal Deliverances,
distinguished them from all the People of the Earth: or to what follows, that
he had made such a difference between them, and other People, that in their
very Diet they should not agree with them, much less in the forenamed
Impurities. For that the difference of Meats was instituted, to keep them from
familiar conversation with their idolatrous Neighbors, is very evident (as I
before observed) and the Gentiles themselves took notice of it, and looked upon
them as unsociable People upon this very account. Josephus often mentions this
Objection against them. And Euphrates complains (in Philostratus de vita
Apolon. Lib. cap. 2.) That of old they separated not only from the Romans, but
from all Mankind: for they had invented (...), a manner of living that would
not let them mix with other People, either at a common Table, or in their
Prayers or Sacrifices.

Ver. 25. Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean,
etc.] According to the prescriptions in the XIth Chapter: which are here
briefly repeated, to enforce the observation of the foregoing Precepts against
such incestuous Marriages as other Nations allowed; their Law not permitting
them so much as to eat such Meat as those Nations did; but to account many
things, which they freely used, unclean and abominable.

Ye shall not make your selves abominable, etc.] See XI. 43.

Which I have separated from you, as unclean.] Forbidden you to eat; and
thereby separated you from all other People. Which had this intention in it
(among others already mentioned) that this Nation, from whom the MESSIAH was to
spring, might be kept pure and sincere; free from all mixture with strange
People: unto which nothing contributed more efficaciously (as an excellent
Person has observed) than the difference of Meat, which made it not easy for
them to contract Acquaintance, much less Friendship with other Nations. And
truly, unless the People from whom the Messiah was to come, had been kept
separate from other Nations, either all hope of him would have been lost, or
many in every Country, to the great hurt and destruction of Mankind, would have
pretended to be the Person. Whereas by keeping them a People distinct by
themselves, it came to pass that all Countries thereabouts were filled with a
report, that the Lord of the World shall come out of Judaea. See Joh.
Wagenseil. Confut. Carm. Lipman. p. 554, etc.

Ver. 26. And ye shall be holy unto me, for I the LORD am holy.] See XI. 44.
XIX. 2. and v. 7. of this Chapter.

And have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.] The very
difference of Meats, which they used, was a Token that God had separated them
from other People, to be subject to such Rites and Laws as he ordained: and
hereby also they were so severed from others, as to be kept from the most
familiar Conversation with them (which is at Meals) and thereby they were
preserved from the danger of being seduced to the Worship of strange Gods.

Ver. 27. A man also or woman that has a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard,
etc.] The consulting such Persons is forbidden XIX. 31. and the penalty added
v. 6. of this Chapter: and here the Persons themselves who were proved to have
a familiar Spirit, or to be a Wizard (what they are, see there) are condemned
to the heaviest punishment; which was by being stoned to death. For which
Severity Maimonides gives this reason; Because it is the very Scope of the
whole Law to root out Idolatry, and abolish the very name of it. And therefore
God ordered Magicians to be stoned, because, without doubt, they are Idolaters;
though in a manner peculiar and different from the Vulgar. And the greater part
of such evil Arts being practiced by Women (which is the ground he thinks of
that Law, XII Exodus 18.) toward whom Men are naturally pitiful; therefore
Moses says in this place, A man also or woman that has a familiar spirit,
etc. like to which we find in no Precept, not about the profanation of the
Sabbath: but in this case it was necessary expressly to mention Women as well as
Men; because of Men's natural tenderness and clemency toward Women. Thus he,
More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 37. Procopius Gazaeus his Gloss on these words is
very pious, but something fanciful; He that is hardened like a stone to virtue,
deserves to be stoned. For Magic commits Murders, digs up Sepulchers, disturbs
the souls of men. For Magicians are Men who corrupt Human Nature.

CHAP. XXI.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD said unto Moses, speak unto the Priests.] This Law about
the Priests, perhaps, follows that last mentioned ( v. 27. of the foregoing
Chapter) to show unto whom they should resort, and of whom they should inquire,
viz. of the Priests: who should always be ready for any Priestly Office, and
for common Conversation.

The sons of Aaron.] His Daughters were not concerned in the following
Prohibitions; because they had nothing to do in offering Sacrifices, as
Maimonides observes, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47.

There shall none be defiled for the dead.] By touching the dead Body, or
coming (as the Hebrews say) within four Cubits of it, or entering into the House
where it lay, (though it were to take care of the Funeral) or by following the
Corpse to the Grave, or making any Mourning for the Dead. Because by these
things they were legally polluted, for no less than seven days (XIX Numb. 11,
14.) and consequently unfit for the Service of God, and for Conversation with
their Neighbors. Who had the greater Reverence also for them, when they saw
their Dignity to be so great, that they were not permitted to perform such
Offices, as others were obliged unto. For this, no doubt, was intended very
much, to put an honor upon the Priesthood; as it was also in other Nations,
particularly among the Romans: who would not have their Pontifex to look upon a
Funeral, as Bochart observes out of Seneca, ( Hieroz. P. I. Lib. III. cap. 4.)
and the Flamen Dialis might not go into the place where the Coffin was. For
which reason, as Servius tells us ( ad Lib. III. Aeneid.) they ordered a Bough
of a Cypress-Tree to be stuck at the door of the House where a dead Body lay,
that the High Priest might not ignorantly go into it. It appears also by Plato,
that it was thus likewise among the Greeks. For he would have the Priests, of
both Sexes, to accompany one that had discharged the Office of a Censor well,
unto his Grave when he was buried, as unto a pure Funeral, ((...)) but for
this, he says, they must ask leave of Apollo, Lib. XII. de Legibus, p. 947. See
Porphyrius de Abstin. Lib. II. sect. 50.

Among his people.] The Jews are so Critical, as from the word [beammo] among
his People, to gather; that if a Man did not die among his People, but in a
strange Country, where there was no Body to take care of his Funeral, and see
him buried, a Priest might do it himself, rather than his Body should lie above
ground.

Ver. 2. But for his kin that is near unto him.] Here is an Exception to the
general Rule; because it would have been very hard to restrain natural
Affection from carrying them to their Parents, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, when they died. Which Cases would not often happen, as Maimonides
observes in the place before alleged: and they are particularly named, that
there might be no mistake; nor any color to extend this Indulgence to
Relations more remote.

For his mother and his father, and for his son and for his daughter, and for
his brother.] If any have a mind to know the Rabbinical Reasons, Why the Mother
is here put before the Father; and v. 11. the Father before the Mother, with
such like things, he may consult Simeon de Muis in his Varia Sacra, p. 356, etc.

Ver. 3. And for his sister a virgin.] I see no reason why it should be
restrained to his whole Sister, both by Fathers and Mothers side (as some of
the Hebrew Doctors would have it) for that his half Sister by either of them,
was nigh unto him (as it here follows) it appears by the Law about incestuous
Marriages, XVIII. 9.

Which has had no husband.] To take care of her Funeral: which her Brother
therefore, though a Priest, might. It is commonly observed that there is no
mention here of his Wife. But Maimonides with great reason thinks it was lawful
for him to mourn for her: but it was needless to mention her, who, by the Law
of God, was dearer to him than Father or Mother. And there is this Argument for
it, that Ezekiel, who was a Priest, is forbidden, by a special command, to
mourn for his Wife, which otherwise he would have done, XXIV. 16, etc.

Ver. 4. But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people.]
But though he might defile himself for such very near Relations, yet he might
not for the greatest Man in the Nation, who was not so near of kin to him. This
seems to me to be the easiest and the most natural sense of this Verse, by
adding the particle lamed (which in the two foregoing Verses is put before
Mother, Father, Son, Daughter, Brother and Sister) to Baal, i. e. chief man,
(as we translate it) nothing being more usual than to omit such a particle,
which yet must be understood when it has been often beforementioned. And thus
the Vulgar Latin understands it. And the sense is the same, if we take it as
our Translation seems to intend it. But he shall not desile himself (for any
other) being a chief man, etc. As for the Marginal Translation, I can see no
ground for it: and there must be a greater Supplement by adding [for his wife:]
which one cannot well think is here forbidden, as I observed on the foregoing
Verse. They also who translate it, A chief Ruler shall not defile himself, etc.
have still less reason; the whole Discourse in this place being concerning the
Priests.

To profane himself.] He himself, in Sacred Offices, being the greatest Person,
would have been profaned, i. e. rendered a common Man; if he had mourned for
any, but those whom Nature had very closely linkt him unto.

Ver. 5. They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave
off the corners of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.] Though
they were allowed to mourn for some persons, yet for none after this manner:
that is, according to the Custom of certain Places in Chaldaea, as Aben-Ezra
glosses upon these words. And he might have added also of the Egyptians: among
whose Ceremonies we find this in after times, and it is likely had been very
ancient. For Jul. Firmicus tells us, in the beginning of his Book, That in
their Annual Lamentations of Osiris, they were wont to shave their heads, that
they might bewail the miserable misfortune of their King, by depriving
themselves of the ornament of hair, etc. And he adds, that they did tear their
flesh, and cut open the scars of their old wounds, etc. where Johan. Wouver
observes the same out of several other Authors. And Plutarch in his Book of
Superstition, says they generally used in mourning to be shaven; whereas the
Hebrews let their hair grow. See X. 6. XIX. 27.

Ver. 6. They shall be holy unto their God.] Attend to their Office, unto which
they are peculiarly consecrated: and not, without great necessity, be at any
time unfitted for it.

And not profane the name of their God.] By doing as the common People did; or
rendering themselves incapable to Minister unto the LORD; as they were when they
were any way defiled.

For the Offering of the LORD made by fire.] They attend upon his Altar; where
the Burnt-offerings, Peace Offerings, and all the rest were offered.

And the bread of their God do they offer.] The word And is not in the Hebrew;
and the sense will be clearer if it be left out: The offering of the LORD made
by fire, being called The bread of their God, i. e. his Meat, or Food. For the
Altar was his Table; and what was burnt thereon was in the Nature of his
Provision: which in the Scripture Language is comprehended under the name of
Bread. So Solomon Jarchi says, whatsoever may be eaten is called bread, (See
III. 11.) Thus Fruit is called Bread, XI Jer. 19. and Milk, XXVII Prove. 27. and
Honey, 1 Samuel XIV. 28. And therefore no wonder the Sacrifices are here called
by that name, and by Malachi his Meat or Food, III. 12. Which phrase is used,
as the Author of Sepher Cosri well observes, to keep up the Notion that God
dwelt gloriously, and kept House among them, Pars II. cap. 26.

Ver. 7. They shall not take a wife that is a whore.] All incestuous Marriages
were as much forbidden Priests as any other Men. But besides, here are three
sorts of Persons, whom it was unlawful for a common Priest to marry, though
there was no Kindred between them. The first is a Whore; whereby the Hebrew
Doctors understand, not only one that was a common Prostitute, but one that was
not an Israelite, or an Israelitish Woman with whom a Man had lain, whom it was
unlawful for her to marry. Which comprehends not only all such as are forbidden
in the XVIIIth Chapter of this Book; but those also in XXIII Deuteronomy. 2, 3. See
Seldom de Successionibus, Lib. II. cap. 2. and 3. and Vxor Hebraica, Lib. I.
cap. 7. Lib. III. cap. 23.

Or profane.] A Woman was accounted so (as he shows in the same place) who was
either descended from such a Person, as is beforementioned; or who was born of
such a Conjunction, as is here forbidden to a Priest. And there are those who
think it may be understood of one that had been consecrated to a false Deity;
whom she served with the use of her Body, which she exposed to the Worshippers
of that Deity. Who though she afterward repented, and became good, yet a
Priest was not to marry her, no more than an ordinary Whore. But the simplest
meaning of these three seems to be, that they should not marry one that had
prostituted her Body, or that had been any way vitiated, though against her
will; or was of suspected Chastity; or (as it follows) was devorced from her
Husband.

Neither shall they take a Woman put away from her Husband.] For commonly Women
were put away for some fault, as Abarbanel notes; and were presumed not to be
such as a Priest should desire. To the same purpose Procopius Gazaeus. A
Priest, says he, should not only fly from manifest Evils, as Fornication, but
decline whatsoever may blemish his Fame: now a Woman that is put away by her
Husband, lies under a suspicion of something that is bad. For which reason (as
Mr. Seldom observes in the place abovenamed) a Priest might not marry her, whom
her Husband's Brother refused to marry after his death.

For he is holy unto his God.] Consecrated, after a special manner, to the
Service of the Divine Majesty; and therefore was not to dishonor his
Priesthood by such Marriages as were not of good reputation. If he did, he was
not to be suffered to Minister, until he had given such a Wife a Bill of
Divorce; as Maimonides says in Biath Hamikdasch, cap. 6. An example of which
there was in Manasseh the Brother of Jaddua the High Priest; who marrying,
contrary to the Law, the Daughter of Sanballat the Samaritan, was commanded
either to put her away, or not to come to the Altar. See Seldom, Lib. II. de
Successione in Pontificatum, cap. 6. p. 238.

Ver. 8. Thou shall sanctify him therefore.] This seems to be spoken to Moses,
and to all that should succeed him in the Supreme Authority, that they should
take care the Priests should not marry with such Persons; or if they did, not
be suffered to Minister in the Priests Office, till they had put them away.
Accordingly we find, that to keep the Priesthood pure, and to avoid all
suspicion of any such pollution, the Names of the Priests Parents were
carefully preserved in the Genealogical Tables, as we learn from II Ezra 62.
VII Nehemiah 64. See Seldom de Succession. in Pontif. Lib. II. cap. 3. Vxor
Hebr. Lib. I. cap. 7.

For he offers the bread of thy God.] Ministers at the Altar. See v. 6.

He shall be holy unto thee.] Keep himself pure, that he may not be unfit to
offer Sacrifice for the People, as need shall require.

For I the LORD which sanctify you am holy.] I who have taken you to be my
peculiar People, excel in all Perfections; and therefore require Persons of
extraordinary Sanctity to minister unto me.

Ver. 9. And the daughter of any Priest, if she profane her self by playing the
whore.] The Hebrew Doctors understand this of one married, at least espoused.
So Aben-Ezra and R. Sol. Jarchi say expressly, Our Rabbis confess with one
mouth, that one not espoused is not concerned in this Law. See Seldom Lib. I.
Vxor. Hebr. cap. 6. and Lib. III. cap. 23. p. 488.

She profaneth her father.] She was doubly guilty. First in profaning, i. e.
dishonouring her self; who being the Daughter of such an eminent Person,
committed such an heinous Crime. And secondly in dishonouring her Father, whose
Reputation hereby suffered.

She shall be burnt with fire.] Which was the sorest Punishment among the Jews,
(See XX. 14.) and was not inflicted upon other Persons, in this Case, (who were
barely stoned, XXII Deuteronomy. 24.) but only upon the Daughter of a Priest, from
whom greater Virtue was expected. But if the Witnesses of this Fact were
convicted of Perjury by other credible Witnesses, produced by the Woman, or her
Father, then both her Husband who accused her, and those false Witnesses,
suffered the same Punishment that she should have done. See Seldom, Lib. III.
Vxor. Hebr. cap. 1. p. 321.

Ver. 10. He that is the High Priest among his brethren.] Hitherto the Laws
given in this Case concern the common Priests: now follow those by which the
High Priest was to govern himself; who was under peculiar Laws more strict than
the rest.

Upon whose head the anointing Oil was poured, etc.] He having a peculiar
Consecration different from the rest, by pouring the holy Oil upon his Head,
and clothing him with the most glorious Robes, (See VIII. 7, 8, etc.) was in
all reason to distinguish himself, more than the rest of the Priests, from
common Men.

And that is consecrated.] In the Hebrew the words are, whose hand is filled;
as it was with the fat and the right shoulder of the Ram of Consecration, etc.
by which he was hallowed to minister in the Priests Office, XXIX Exodus 22, 23,
24.

To put on the Garments.] To be High Priest.

Shall not uncover his head.] Rather, Shall not let his hair grow neglected
without trimming; as the manner was in token of mourning. So Onkelos and
Jonathan, and a great many more. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Successione in
Pontificatum, cap. 5. p. 235. and what I have noted upon the tenth Chapter of
this Book, v. 6.

Nor rent his Clothes.] Another token of mourning, which he was to forbear.
Though the Talmudists will have it, that he might rent his Garments at the
bottom, about his feet; but not at the top, down to his breast; as P. Cunaeus
observes out of Mass. Horajoth, Lib. II. de Rep. Hebr. cap. 3. Before his
Anointing, and Consecration, and putting on the holy Garments, it was not
unlawful for him to attend the Funeral of his Father. And therefore Eleazar was
present when Aaron died, (XX Numb.) being as yet in a lower Ministry, and not
completely advanced to the Office of High Priest, but only declared Aaron's
Successor by putting on him his Garments. See X. 6.

Ver. 11. Neither shall he go in to any dead body; nor defile himself for his
father, or for his mother.] He might not go into the House, where the Body of
his Father or Mother lay dead (which was permitted to the inferior Priests, v.
2, 3.) and consequently he was not to make any external signs of mourning for
Son or Daughter, Brother or Sister.

Ver. 12. Neither shall he go out of the Sanctuary.] If he was there when he
heard of the death of his Father or Mother, he was not to stir out from thence
till he had sinished his Ministry. See X. 7. For he had a little House (after
the Temple was built) within the Precincts of it, where he commonly remained
all the day time; which was called Lischcath cohen gadol, the Parlour of the
High Priest, as Cunaeus observes out of Mass. Midoth, Lib. II. de Republ. Hebr.
cap. 3. At night he went to his own dwelling House, which was in Jerusalem, and
no where else. There he might perform all the Offices of a Mourner, except
those which are here forbidden; and the People came to comfort him (as
Maimonides relates in his Treatise on this Subject) and, sitting upon the
ground, while he sat in his Chair at the Funeral Feast, they said let us be thy
Expiation, ( i. e. let all the Grief that is on thee, fall upon us) unto which
he answered, Blessed be ye from Heaven; as their words are reported in
Sanhedrim, cap. 2. n. 1.

Nor profane the Sanctuary of his God.] By preferring his Affection to the
Dead, before the Service of God in the Sanctuary: or by returning thither to
his Ministry, when he had been defiled by the dead; which had been a great
profanation. For he that touched a dead Body, was unclean seven days, XIX Numb.
11, 12.

For the crown of the anointing Oil of his God is upon him.] Some supply the
word and between Crown and anointing Oil; and so make two reasons why he should
distinguish himself from all other Men. First, because the holy Crown, as it is
called XXIX Exodus 6. which had holiness to the LORD engraven on it, XXVIII
Exodus 36. was set upon his Head: and his Head also was anointed with the holy
Oil, XXX Exodus 25, 30. whereby he was, in a special manner, consecrated to the
Service of the most High. But there is no need of this; for the anointing Oil
it self was that which sanctified him to his Office, and was poured on him,
after the holy Crown was set on his head, VIII Lev. 9, 12. And so these words
may be translated, The Consecration (for so the Hebrew word Nezer signifies) of
the anointing Oil of his God is upon him. That is, he must remember he is
solemnly devoted unto my Ministry, by that anointing; and therefore must not
leave it to attend any other.

I am the LORD.] Whose Servant he is, by a peculiar Obligation.

Ver. 13. And he shall take a Wife.] From the word Wife in the singular number,
the Talmudists generally conclude, that Polygamy was not allowed to the
High Priest; who was to have but one Wife at a time, though other Men were
permitted to have more. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Successione in Pontif. cap. 2.
p. 207. and Vxor Hebraica, Lib. I. cap. 8. If he did take another, he was to
give a Bill of Divorce to one of them before the great Day of Expiation; or
else he was incapable to perform the Offices of it; as P. Cunaeus observes in
the place forenamed out of Joma. But if his Wife died, it was not unlawful for
him to marry again, as Tertullian fancied from this very place, Lib. de de
Monogam. cap. 7. and Exhort. ad Cast. cap. 7.

In her virginity.] And not so much as espoused to any other Person. Nor was
any sort of Virgin thought fit for his Wife, but only one that was newly come
out of her minority, and had not yet attained to her full puberty; as
Maimonides explains the sense of their ancient Doctors. See Seldom, Lib. I.
Vxor Hebr. cap. 7. where he observes also, that this is to be understood of the
High Priest after he was in his Office: for if he had married a Widow before he
was High Priest, he was to keep her, and not put her away when he was advanced
to it. But there are those who imagine this Law obliged all the common Priests,
who were to marry none but Virgins, as they are persuaded from XLIV Ezekiel. 22.
And no less Man than Hugo Grotius seems to be of this opinion, both here and in
his Book de Jure Belli and Pacis, Lib. II. cap. 5. n. 9. in his Annotata to
that Section. But the Hebrew Doctors are all of a contrary mind, and so are
Josephus and Philo, as Mr. Seldom observes in his Addenda to the seventh
Chapter of his first Book Vxor Hebr. and Lib. II. de Success. in Pontif. cap.
2. p. 208. And so Cunaeus also in the place forenamed, speaking of this very
Law, Non enim Sacerdotibus posita eadem Lex fuit. Quippe viduam illi rite
duxerunt, etc. But above all, a later most learned Writer, Joh. Wagenseil, has
largely confuted this opinion, in which he has shown Grotius was singular. For
besides that Ezekiel there supposes they might marry the Widow of a Priest, it
is evident both from Jewish and Christian Interpreters, that the state of
things under the Law is not to be measured by what the Prophet Ezekiel says
concerning the future Temple and Priests. But as Kimchi himself says upon this
place, If this Verse must be expounded of every Priest, it relates to the
greater sanctity of the future Temple: for the Law at first undoubtedly was,
that none but the High Priest was confined to marry a Virgin. What Grotius
alleges out of Josephus to prove his affection, he has shown, with due
respect to so great a Man, does him no Service. See his Annotata ad Mischna
Sota, cap. 4. p. 557, etc.

Ver. 14. A Widow.] This was peculiar to the High Priest, that besides other
Women which no Priest might marry, he alone is forbidden to marry a Widow; as
the same learned Person there shows is the sense of all the Hebrew Writers. And
Moses Kotzensis observes, that by a Widow is to be understood, not only a Woman
that had been married, but if she had been merely espoused, it was unlawful for
the High Priest to take her for his Wife: And by the High Priest, he says, is
to be understood not only the Successor of Aaron, but he also that was anointed
to the War. Which seems to be a stretching of the word beyond its meaning:
though the word Widow may be allowed to comprehend one only espoused; whom he
might not marry, though she had been espoused to his Predecessor.

Or a divorced woman.] No, nor the Wife of his Brother that died without Issue:
which others were bound to marry, but he was not.

Or profane.] The word Chalalah was explained before v. 7. which according to
the Jews, signifies a Woman born of such a Person as a Priest is prohibited to
marry. As if the High Priest had taken a Widow, and had a Daughter by her, that
Child was profane, and might not be married, though a Virgin, by a succeeding
High Priest. And so of the rest. See Buxtorf. de Sponsal. and Divort. p. 37, 38.

Or a harlot.] See v. 7.

But he shall take a virgin of his own people.] He was commanded before to
marry none but a Virgin; and now he is further limited to a Virgin of Israel.
For he does not mean one of his own Tribe; there being instances to the
contrary of a High Priest marrying into the Royal Tribe, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 11.

Ver. 15. Neither shall he profane his seed among his people.] Many think this
refers to what goes before; that he should not debase his Family by such
mixtures as have been mentioned. But I rather think it to be a new Precept, (as
the Vulgar Latin takes it) that as he might marry none but of his own People,
i. e. an Israelite: so among his People he should not match with a vulgar
Person, but with one nobly born. For that was the way to preserve the dignity
of the Priestly Office, at which all these Precepts aim.

For I the LORD do sanctify him.] I have separated him to my self, for a
special and most holy Service. For which reason he was to distinguish himself
from other Men, even in his marriage; to make them the more reverence the LORD
whom he served. Upon this account it was, that many Constitutions were made by
the Elders, forbidding him what was allowed to other People; whereby they
intended to advance his honor. For instance, he was forbidden to go into the
Public Baths, or to Feasts. If he would visit any that mourned, he was to be
attended by other Priests. He was obliged to cut his hair every Week, but never
to shave with a Rason; to be in the Sanctuary every day, and to go home not
above twice in a day; to have but one Wife at a time; and going into the
Temple, to have three other Priests with him, etc. So Maimonides in Cele
Mikdash, cap. 8.

Ver. 16. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Upon this occasion God gave
some other Precepts concerning the Priests, who were to wait upon him in his
House, and at his Table.

Ver. 17. Speak unto Aaron, saying.] Having forbidden such Marriages as would
have been a dishonor to the Priesthood, had they been permitted, he now
forbids any to serve at his Altar, who had the least blemish in his Body; for
that would have disparaged his Divine Service.

Whoever he be of thy seed.] Whether High Priest, or the common Priests.

In their generations.] In future Ages, as well as the present.

That has any blemish.] From these general words, the Hebrew Doctors conclude,
that not only the particular blemishes (afterward mentioned) made them
incapable to minister, but all other whatsoever which appeared in the Body; of
which these here named are but a Specimen or Example. So Maimonides in Biath
Hammikdash, whose words are, The blemishes expressed in the Law, are propounded
for examples of the rest. Which they reckon to be in all CXLII. accounting only
those, which openly appeared, and not those which were inward in the Kidneys,
Bladder, or Bowels; because there are no examples of such in the particulars
which here follow. They are divided by the Doctors into three Classes. Such as
made Beasts unfit to be offered (XXII. 20.) as well as Priests unfit to
minister; of which sort they reckon fifty. And such as only made Priests
incapable to minister: of which sort they reckon ninety. And such as only made
Men look ill-favouredly; which were but two. See Mr. Seldom, Lib. II. de
Successione in Pontific. cap. 5.

Let him not approach.] Unto the Altar.

To offer the bread of his God.] i. e. To Sacrifice. See v. 6. and III. 2.

Ver. 18. For whatsoever man he be that has a blemish.] Though never so wise,
or pious.

He shall not approach.] He makes it a standing Law that no Man that had a
blemish should come to minister unto him at his Altar. And a reasonable Law it
was, approved by Pagans themselves; for it is the very first qualification
which Plato requires in him who was to be made a Priest, that he should be
(...), etc. perfect in all his parts, and not a Bastard; and that he should be
born of honest Parents, who had lived without the blemish of Murder, or any
other Impiety, Lib. VI. de Legibus, p. 759. And such a Law there was among the
ancient Romans: Sacerdos integer sit, That a Priest should be entire in all his
parts. Which Seneca mentioning (IV Controv. 2.) explains it by the example of
Metellus, who losing his Eyes, by adventuring to snatch the Palladium out of
the Flames, when the Temple of Vesta was burnt, was denied the Prieststood. For
though he had done great Service, which did him great honor, yet their Opinion
was, That Sacerdos non integri corporis, quasi mali ominis res, vitandus est; a
Priest who wanted any part of his Body, was to be avoided, as a thing that
boded ill. For thus it was in Sacrifices, and therefore they thought with much
more reason it should be so in the Priests that offered them. See Dilherrus
Disput. Academ. Tom. II. p. 187, etc.

A blind man, or a lame.] Such natural defects, which befall us without, or
against our will, as Procopius Gazaeus observes, are not to be imputed to us as
any fault: and therefore he thinks such Vices in the Mind as answer to these
Blemishes in the Body, are here intended by Moses. Yet he could not but
acknowledge, that if we will follow the literal sense (which no doubt is meant
by these words) it is not becoming to see a Man perform Priestly Offices, who
has any visible blemish in his Body, for instance, that halts, or cannot walk
unless he have one to lead him. But Moses, he still thinks, had a respect to
higher Matters, viz. to all the good qualities that St. Paul requires in a
Bishop. And therefore by a blind Man he understands, one without knowledge; and
by a lame, one that walks not uprightly in the ways of God's Commandments. Such
accommodations are so easy, that I need not further take notice of them.

Or he that has a flat Nose.] In the two first words, blind, or lame, there
was no difficulty: but the word harum (which we translate has a flat Nose) is
not so plain. Yet the Hebrews generally agree it signifies one, the upper part
of whose Nose was so depressed, that the two Eyebrows seemed to meet, and to
be but one: as Bochartus observes out of R. Solomon in his Canaan, Lib. I. cap.
33. p. 655.

Or any thing superfluous.] The Hebrew word Saruae signifies any Member
disproportionable to the rest: but more especially (as their Doctors take it)
the inequality of those Members that are pairs: as when one of Man's Eyes, or
Ears, or Legs, was bigger than the other.

Ver. 19. Or a man that is broken-footed.] Though a Man did not halt, yet if
his Foot was so broken, that it looked deformed, he was incapable to minister
to the Divine Majesty, because it rendered him contemptible in the Eyes of the
People; at least not so graceful, as the Servants of the most High were to be.

Or broken-handed.] Any fracture in the Hand made a Man more remarkably unfit
than the foregoing blemish; because by this part all the Divine Offices were to
be performed.

Ver. 20. Or crook-backt.] The Hebrew word Gibben properly signifies
bunch-backt: whether the bunch came from the luxation of the backbone, or from
a swelling in the flesh.

Or a dwarf.] Who, besides that he looked despicably, was not able to reach up
to the Altar. The Marginal translation may be justified from the Hebrew, for
dark in that Language signifies lean, or slender: but then the meaning must be,
one whose flesh was wasted by a Consumption. The Vulgar took it for one
bleareyed. And the LXX. also thought it signified some Disease in the Eyes, if
the Complutensian Edition be right, where this word is translated (...). But
other Editions leave out the two last words, and then it is uncertain what
(...) signifies: but most likely some ill-favored spots or pustles in the Face.

Or that has a blemish in his eye.] The Hebrew words toballul beeno signifies
one that has a confused spot in the Eye. Which is called by the Chaldee
Paraphrasts, and by the Talmudists, Chillez and Chalazon, which is the very
same with the Greek word (...), importing a concretion of a white Humor (like
to an Hailstone) (...), as Aegineta speaks, and Galen also. See Bochart. in his
Hierozoicon. P. II. Lib. V. cap. 9. But this spot did not make a Priest
incapable to minister (as Seldom observes in the place abovementioned) unless
it was a little prominent; which made the blemish more apparent.

Or be scurvy, or scabbed.] One of these words signifies a dry scurf, or scab;
the other a purulent.

Or has his stones broken.] Is bursten, or has a rupture, as some expound it.
The LXX. translate it (...); by which Procopius Gazaeus understands an
Hermophrodite.

Ver. 21. No man that has a blemish of the seed of Aaron the Priest, shall
come nigh, etc.] This seems to confirm what was observed before, ( v. 17.) that
any other blemish, besides these here particularly mentioned, made a Man
incapable to officiate at the Altar. And in the first place the Hebrew Doctors
reckon five in the Ears, besides the want of them. An Example of which Josephus
gives in the Story of Hyrcanus the High Priest, whose Ears Antigonus cut off,
that if he should return again, he might not resume his Office, Lib. I. de
Bello Jud. cap. 11.

He has a blemish.] This general repetition, is a farther confirmation that
all apparent Blemishes, of the same kind with these here particularly named,
excluded them from ministering at the Altar. And there being some of them that
were permanent or perpetual (as they speak) and others that were transient,
which remained but for a time; no Man that had a Blemish, though only of the
latter sort, was to minister at the Altar, till it was gone.

He shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God.] i. e. The Offerings
made by Fire beforementioned; which are here plainly represented as the Meat
that was served up to his Table. See v. 6. If any of them did presume to offer
at the Altar, there were different Effects of their Contumacy; according to the
different sorts of their Blemishes; which the Hebrew Doctors divide into three
Classes, as I observed v. 17. If any Man having a Blemish of the first sort
ministered, it profaned the very Sacrifice which he offered, and he was to be
scourged. The second sort did not vitiate the Sacrifice, but the Priest was to
undergo the forenamed punishment. The third sort was so inconsiderable, that
neither of these Effects followed, upon his ministering who was blemished by
them; as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. II. de Success. in Pontif. cap. 5. p. 234.

Ver. 22. He shall eat of the bread of his God.] But though such a Priest might
not offer any Sacrifice, yet he might eat with his Brethren of that part of the
Sacrifices, which was given to them for their portion: which no Man in his
Uncleanness might do. Therefore these natural Infirmities were not Legal
Impurities, but only Incapacities (as we speak) which disabled them for their
Office.

Here again the Sacrifices are represented, as the Provision made for the
Divine Majesty. See v. 6, 21.

Both of the most holy.] Such were the Meat Offerings, (II. 3. VI. 17.) the
Sin Offerings, (VI. 25, 26.) and the Trespass-offerings, (VII. 1. See XIV. 13.)
The Shewbread also was a most holy thing: and all such were to be eaten only
by the Males of the Priests Family, in the holy place, XVIII Numb. 9, 10, 11,
etc.

And of the holy.] Such were the Wave-breast, and the Heave-shoulder of the
Peace Offerings, VII. 35. X. 14. and the First Fruits, and the Tithes. But
though the Peace Offerings of particular Persons were among the less holy
things; yet the Peace Offerings of the whole Congregation were most holy. See
XXIII. 20.

Ver. 23. Only he shall not go in unto the vail.] He was not to enter into the
Sanctuary, to burn Incense, or to trim the Lamps, etc.

Nor come nigh unto the Altar.] No nor go to the Altar of Burnt-offering, which
was in the Court of the LORD's House: but he was to sit in the Wood-room, where
he was employed in picking out all the Wood which had any Worms in it, that it
might be laid aside, and not carried to the Altar; as Maimonides and others
relate. He had also another employment, See XIII. 2. If any Man were so
presumptuous, or so forgetful, as to minister notwithstanding the manifest
Blemish which was upon him, he fell under Censure, and was punished according
to the degree of his Fault; as I observed before v. 21. out of Mr. Seldom, who
has, in the place there mentioned, handled this more accurately, than I
thought it needful for me to do.

That he profane not my Sanctuary.] That he might not make others think meanly
of the Service of God; and consequently of God himself: who would have Men, in
their greatest perfection, minister unto him, to preserve in Peoples minds a
sense of his most excellent Being, unto whom they ministered. For which reason
all the foregoing Prohibitions were given, against marrying such Persons as had
been vitiated, etc. and against mourning for the dead, that they might not
profane the name of their God, v. 6. by doing as vulgar People did, or making
themselves incapable to minister unto God, as they were when they were defiled.
And thus Maimonides discourses upon this Subject, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 45.
God commanded his Ministers should wear precious Apparel, and that none should
be admitted to the Ministry, who had any defect in his Body; nay, they who were
deformed and illfavoured were excluded; because the Vulgar do not judge
according to Men's true worth or beauty (which lies in the Soul) but according
to their outward appearance, in the comeliness of their Bodies, and the richness
of their Garments. And therefore the end of all these things was, that God's
House might be had in due honor and reverence.

My Sanctuaries.] This word in the Plural Number, relates to the two parts of
the Sanctuary: the Court where the Altar of Burnt-offering stood (which was an
holy place) and that which was properly called the Sanctuary, wherein the Altar
of Incense was. Into neither of which, a Priest that had any Blemish might
enter, as was said before.

For I the LORD do sanctify them.] I have set apart both those places for my
Service; and therefore no Man with a blemish shall be admitted into them, to
perform any holy Office there. Yet they might come into the Court, to eat with
their Brethren of holy things, but not in their Priestly Garments, which it was
not lawful for them to use.

Ver. 24. And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his Sons, and unto all the
Children of Israel.] They were all acquainted with these Laws, because they
were all concerned the Service of God should be administered acceptably unto him.

CHAP. XXII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] These Commands that follow,
were delivered at the same time with the foregoing; belonging to the same
matter. For though the Priests, who had a blemish, might eat of the holy
things, yet he would have them know that neither they, nor such as were
unblemished, should presume to do it in their Uncleanness.

Ver. 2. Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, that they separate themselves.]
Viz. When they were in their Uncleanness, v. 3.

From the holy things of the Children of Israel.] Abstain from eating ( v. 3,
4, 12.) of that part of the Sacrifices which belonged to the Priests; but was
to be eaten only by such of them as were free from Legal Impurities, VII. 20,
21. Nor were they to eat of the First Fruits which were also their portion,
(XVIII Numb. 12, 13.) but they might eat of the Tithes, which were allowed for
their constant Sustenance.

And that they profane not my holy Name.] This is the very ground of this
Prohibition; that they might preserve in their minds a due reverence to the
Divine Majesty: unto whom, as they might not approach, so they might not meddle
with any thing Consecrated to him, in a state of Legal Impurity. All great
Persons are to be approached with a great deal of Ceremony, especially when any
are invited to their Table; otherwise they might fall into contempt. And
therefore much more was this reverence to be shown to the Divine Majesty, that
they might entertain high Apprehensions of him, by abstaining from all things
belonging to him, when they were under any pollution.

In those things which they hallow unto me.] Which the Children of Israel
devoted unto God: For so the foregoing words, and the next Verse explain it.

I am the LORD.] The greatest regard is to be paid to my Majesty.

Ver. 3. Say unto them, whosoever he be of your seed.] Of the Priests.

Among your generations.] In succeeding times.

That goes unto the holy things.] To eat of them; as appears from v. 4, 6, 12.

Which the Children of Israel hallow unto the LORD.] Offer to him at his Altar.

Having his uncleanness upon him.] For which they were to separate themselves,
v. 2.

That soul shall be cut off from my presence.] Thrust out of the Priests
Office; no more to minister at the Altar; and then it was the act of a Judge:
or cut off from the Land of the Living; which was done by the Hand of Heaven.

I am the LORD.] Who will vindicate my own Honor.

Ver. 4. What man soever of the seed of Aaron.] These words of the seed of
Aaron include his Daughters, as well as his Sons; who might eat of some holy
things, (XVIII Numb. 11, 19.) but not in their Uncleanness.

Is a leper, or has a running issue.] There are eleven Fountains of
Uncleanness (as the Hebrews speak) two of which are these here mentioned; as
appears from XIII. 3. XV. 2.

He shall not eat of the holy things until he be clean.] See XIV. 2. XV. 13.

And whosoever touches any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose seed
goes from him.] These were two other Fountains of Uncleanness, XI. 31, 32, etc.
XV. 16.

Ver. 5. Or whosoever touches any creeping thing, whereby he may be made
unclean.] See XI. 24, etc.

Or a man of whom he may take uncleanness.] XV. 7.

Whatsoever uncleanness he has.] Suppose the Leprosy, XIII. 45. These are two
such Fountains of Uncleanness as the former.

Ver. 6. The soul which has touched any such, shall be unclean until even, and
shall not eat, etc.] So the Law was in the forenamed Cases; as appears by the
places abovementioned.

Ver. 7. And when the Sun is down, he shall be clean.] Having washed his flesh
with water.

And shall afterward eat of the holy things, because it is his food.] God was
so gracious as not to keep a Priest any longer in a state wherein he should
want his necessary, or comfortable Sustenance.

Ver. 8. That which dies of it self, or is torn with beasts, he shall not eat,
to defile himself therewith.] This was forbidden before to all the Israelites,
XVII. 15. but made a Priest no longer unclean than an ordinary Man, because of
the foregoing reason.

I am the LORD.] Who will have my Ministers pure from all such pollutions. The
remainder of which were the uncleanness of the Water of Separation, as
Maimonides speaks, XIX. 21. and of the great Sacrifice of Expiation, XVI. 28.
and of a menstruous Woman, XV. 9. and of a Woman in Childbed, XII. 2. But
nothing made Men so unclean, as the dead Body of a Man; which defiled not only
him that touched it, for seven days, but all that came into the House, and
every thing that was in the House where he died, XIX Numb. 11.14. which was the
reason of the foregoing Law, that the High Priest should not go in to the dead
Body of his Father or Mother; nor any inferior Priest be defiled for any, but
their near Relations, XXI. 1, 2, 11.

Ver. 9. They shall therefore keep mine Ordinance.] Observe this Constitution;
because I, who am their LORD, make it.

Lest they bear sin for it.] Be punished, if they break it.

And die therefore.] As Nadab and Abihu did; who presumed to break another Law
about holy things.

If they profane it.] By eating of the holy things in their Uncleanness.

I the LORD do sanctify them.] Separate them to my Service: and by such
Constitutions teach them carefully to avoid all pollutions.

Ver. 10. There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing.] The holy thing here
mentioned, is that before-named, X. 14. and by a Stranger he does not mean one
of another Nation, but one that is not of the Seed of Aaron, or is not one of
his Family. For the word in the Hebrew is not Nechar, which properly signifies
such a Stranger as is not an Israelite; but Zar, which signifies any one to
whom a thing does not belong; as holy things did not to those, who were not at
least part of the Priests Family, though not of his Race. For that such might
eat of them who were not of their Race, provided they belonged to them as a
part of their Family, appears from the next Verse.

A sojourner of the Priest.] Who boards with him (as we now speak) or dwells in
a part of his House as some understand it) but has a distinct Family.

Or an hired servant.] Such were those who served by the day, (XIX. 13.) or for
a certain time: and after that might dispose of themselves as they pleased.

Shall not eat of the holy thing.] None of these might eat of the Priests
portion, (X. 14. XVIII Numb. 11.) because they were not Members of his Family.

Ver. 11. But if the Priest buy any soul ( i.e. Person) with his money.] There
were those of their own Nation, who by their Poverty were compelled to sell
themselves, or their Children, (XXV. 39.) and others they bought of other
Nations, ( v. 44, 45, etc.) who becoming Proselytes to the Jews Religion, were
permitted to eat of the Priest's Meat, because they became part of his Family.

And he that is born in his house, etc.] They that were born of such purchased
Servants were their Masters Goods; and such a part of their Family, that they
left them to their Children who succeeded them. And therefore they also were
allowed to eat of the Meat of the Priest.

Ver. 12. If a Priests daughter also be married unto a stranger.] Unto one that
is not of the Family of the Priests.

She may not eat of an offering of the holy things.] She lost her right to eat
of those holy things, which she did partake of while she remained a part of her
Father's Family. For that entitled Persons to this Privilege; insomuch that a
Priest, taking a Wife out of another Family, she might eat of them, because she
was one with him, and therefore had more right than a Servant. But for the same
reason a Priest's Daughter married to a Stranger, might not eat of them,
because she was gone out of his into another Family.

Ver. 13. But if the Priests daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no
child.] If she had any Children, they and she made another Family: and they
being begotten by a Father, who was not a Priest, had no right to eat of the
Priest's meat. But if she was left without Children, then she was accounted
still one of her Father's Family; provided she returned (as it follows) to live
with him.

And is returned to her fathers house, as in her youth.] To be a part of his
Family, as she was before she married, X. 14.

She shall eat of her fathers meat.] Have the same privilege she had when she
was a Virgin.

But there shall no stranger eat thereof.] This seems, as I said, particularly
to relate unto her Children, if she had any; who being begotten by one of
another Family, were looked upon as Strangers. See v. 10.

Ver. 14. And if a man.] Who has no right to them.

Eat of the holy thing unwittingly.] Not knowing it to be an holy thing.

Then he shall put the fifth part thereof unto it.] Besides his Sacrifice which
he was bound to offer for his Trespass. See V. 15.

And shall give it unto the Priest, with the holy thing.] He could not give the
Priest the holy thing, which he had eaten: but the meaning is, that he should
make satisfaction to the Priest for the Damage done to him, by paying him the
true worth of the thing, and the fifth part more of its value. See V. 16.

Ver. 15. And they shall not profane the holy things of the Children of Israel,
which they offer unto the LORD.] This seems to refer to the Persons
before-named; none of which should presume to profane Sacred things, by eating
them, when they did not belong to them. The Priests seem also to be concerned
in it, who were not to suffer them to eat such holy things, as it follows in
the next Verse. Or, if it entirely relate to the Priests, the meaning is, they
should not profane holy things, by eating them in their uncleanness, v. 9. And
one reason was, because the Children of Israel, whose Offerings these were,
might be discouraged from bringing them to the LORD, when they saw them so
profaned.

Ver. 16. Or suffer them.] i.e. The People.

To bear the iniquity of trespass, etc.] To fall under the punishment which God
will inflict for their Trespass, in eating things which do not appertain to
them. The Marginal Translation refers this also wholly to the Priests, in this
manner, Or, lade themselves with the iniquity of Trespass in their eating holy
things; viz. in their Uncleanness, and with such Persons (it may be added) as
ought not to eat of them.

For I the LORD do sanctify them.] These words seem to justify this last
Interpretation. See v. 9.

Ver. 17. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] The following Laws, no doubt,
were delivered at the same time with the former; because they still concern the
same matter.

Ver. 18. Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the Children of
Israel.] For they were all concerned in the perfection of the Sacrifices, as
they were in the perfection of the Priests that offered them. See XXI. 24.

And say unto them, whosoever he be.] The Hebrew Doctors say, that the phrase
isch, isch, ( Man, Man, i. e. any Man) is here used, as it was XVIII. 6. to
show that Gentiles are comprehended under this Law, as well as Jews; as Mr.
Seldom observes out of the Gemara Babylon, Tit. Cholin. See Lib. III. de Jure
Not. and Gent. cap. 4. p. 289.

Of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel.] They understand by
strangers in Israel, such as they called Proselytes of the Gate; who were not
Circumcised, but had renounced Idolatry, and joined themselves to the God of
Israel. R. Levi ben Gersom takes perfect Proselytes to be here meant (whom they
called Proselytes of Righteousness) yet not excluding the other.

That will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his
free-will-offerings.] See VII. 16.

Which they will offer unto the LORD for a Burnt-offering.] If a Gentile
brought a Peace Offering to the LORD, it was offered as a Burnt-offering; and
no Meat Offering was permitted to be offered with it, as Maimonides observes.
See Seldom in the place before-named; and v. 25. of this Chapter. And Dr.
Lightfoot gives a large account of it in his Temple Service, chap. 8. sect. 4.

Ver. 19. Ye shall offer at your own will.] So these words are commonly
understood; that the Sacrifices, both of Jew and Gentile, should be
spontaneous, as well as without blemish: though they will bear another sense,
as I observed Chap. I. v. 3.

A male without blemish, of the beeves, and of the sheep, and of the goats.]
See Chap. I. v. 3, 10. All Burnt-offerings were to be Males; though
Peace Offerings might be Females, III. 1, 6. and so might Sin Offerings also,
IV. 32. but all without blemish. For as God accepted only some kind of
Creatures, (viz. Beeves, Sheep, and Goats, and no other of the Herd) so he
would have a choice to be made out of them, of the very best; as had been often
before directed.

Ver. 20. But whatsoever has a blemish, that shall ye not offer.] This general
Rule is here repeated, because he is going to specify what Creatures they
should account blemished.

For it shall not be acceptable for you.] This seems to justify the Exposition
which I said might be given of that phrase in the foregoing Verse, at your own
will; or for your acceptance. See upon I. 3.

Ver. 21. And whosoever offers a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings unto the LORD.]
Which were either to obtain blessings, or to give thanks for them when they
were obtained.

To accomplish his vow.] It was usual to make such Vows, for procuring from God
what they desired, when they undertook a Journey, or went to Sea, or were sick,
or in any danger, etc. An example of which we have in I Jonah 16. where we read
the Mariners in a Storm offered a Sacrifice to the LORD, and made Vows: i. e.
they vowed a Sacrifice to God, (for they could not Sacrifice on Shipboard)
when he had brought them to a safe Port. And so Cicero speaks of certain
Mariners, who being tossed in a Tempest, vowed, if they gained their Haven, Ei
Deo, qui ibi esset, se vitulum immolaturos, They would offer a Calf to the God
of that place. And Homer in like manner brings in the Mother of Telemachus,
vowing perfect Hecatombs unto all the Gods, if she might obtain her desire,
Odyss. XVII. v. 59.

Or a free-will-offering.] This also was a Peace Offering for obtaining
Blessings: not when they were in distress, I suppose, but in general to procure
God's favor to them and theirs.

In Beeves, or Sheep.] And likewise Goats: for all these were allowed in
Peace Offerings, III. 1, 6, 12.

It shall be perfect, to be accepted.] That was accounted perfect, which wanted
none of its parts, nor had any defect in any of them. The Heathen themselves
did not think any other would be accepted, and therefore made a careful choice
of their Sacrifices; as appears by those words of Virgil, Lib. IV. AEneid. v.
57. -- Mactant lectas de more bidentes. Which he calls elsewhere eximij,
singled out as most excellent. Lib. IV. Georg. v. 550.

Quatuor eximios praestanti corpore tauros. And that they might be such, there
was probatio victimarum, a proof made of Sacrifices, as Pliny speaks, Lib.
VIII. cap. 45. where he says such as were lame, or had one leg shorter than
the other, were rejected. Which probation was to be made by those that brought
the Sacrifices; but if they did not do their duty, the Priest upon examination
refused to admit them to be offered.

There shall be no blemish therein.] This is an explication of what he means by
perfect. Which Solon (who seems to have taken the Rites of Religion from Moses)
called (...): in the explication of which word, Hesychius, after several other
expressions, concludes with this (...), which neither has any part more or
less than it should have. Julius Pollux (who reports this of Solon) has a
great number of other words to express the perfection required in Sacrifices,
which were to be (...), Lib. I. cap. 1. some of which are of the same
signification, and serve only to show how complete their Sacrifices were to be.

Ver. 22. Blind, or broken, etc.] In this and the following Verses he mentions
XII blemishes, which render any Beast unfit for Sacrifice. And the first is
blind; under which the Hebrews comprehend that which the Latins call Cocles, a
Beast that has but one eye.

Or broken.] In the Bones of the Thighs, or the Legs.

Or maimed.] Most take it for that which the Latins call mutilum, that which
lacks any part. The LXX. took it more particularly for that which had its
Tongue cut out. The Hebrew Doctors for that whose Eyebrows or Lips were slit,
or cut off. Which is nearer to the Hebrew word charuts than the Vulgar, which
translates it only a Scar.

Or having a wen.] The Hebrews generally understand by the word jabbeleth, that
which the Latins call Verruca, a Wart, or hard Knob rising in the flesh: which
is better than the Vulgar, who translates it papulas, which properly signifies
Pimples, Pushes, or Wheals. But I think our Translation cannot be mended; a Wen
being a more manifest deformity, and more common in Beasts than the other.

Or Scurvy.] This is that which the Greeks call (...), the Itch.

Or scabbed.] Some take this word to signify the same with the Latin impetigo,
i. e. a Ring-worm or Tetter, which spreads in the skin with a dry Scab: though
others take it for that which they call Porrigo, for which I know no English
word, unless it be the mangy. The Hebrews take it for the Porrigo AEgyptiaca,
as Bochart observes, a Scabby Disease of this kind frequent among the Egyptians.

Ye shall not offer these unto the LORD.] Not so much as present them to be
offered in Sacrifice.

Nor make an offering by fire of them upon the Altar unto the LORD.] Much less
burn them upon the Altar, for the LORD will not accept such Sacrifices.

Ver. 23. Either a Bullock or a Lamb that has any thing superfluous.] This
word we had before (which we translate superfluous) XXI. 18. but it properly
signifies the inequality and disproportion that there is between those parts
that are pairs, as the Eyes or Legs; and particularly when one of them exceeds
its just bigness: ex. gr. when one Leg is longer than it should be.

Or lacking in his parts.] This word signifies just the quite contrary to the
other; when one part is less and more contracted than it should be: one Leg
supposed shorter than ordinary. So all the Hebrews understand these words;
particularly Onkelos and Jonathan.

That may thou offer for a free-will-offering.] A very learned Person of our
own takes these words for an Exception to the foregoing general Rule; that such
defects as these two should not hinder the acceptance of a Beast for a
Free-will-offering, though not for a Vow. And it must be acknowledged that is
the most plain and simple sense. But the Jews, as he observes, particularly R.
Solomon Jarchi, expound them otherwise; and will not have this Offering to
signify the Sacrifice of such things at the Altar, but the giving them to the
Priest for some Sacred use; to be sold, for instance, for the reparation of the
Temple, for which they were accepted. See Dr. Owtram, Lib. I. de Sacrificiis,
cap. 9. n. 2.

But for a vow, it shall not be accepted.] Free-will-offerings were much
different from Vows, there being no obligation upon them to offer the former,
as there was to offer the latter: and a less perfect Creature would be accepted
in the one case, though not in the other.

Ver. 24. Ye shall not offer unto the LORD that which is bruised, or crushed,
or broken, or cut.] That is, as the Hebrews interpret it (and so do the LXX.
and the Vulgar) any Beast whose Testicles were compressed or bruised, etc. For
these four ways they used to castrate a Lamb (for instance) and make it a
Wether: and so they did with Kids and Calves, as Bochart observes out of
Aristotle and others, in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. cap. 46.

Neither shall you make any offering thereof in your land.] The word Offering
is not in the Hebrew: and this passage may be thus exactly translated, Neither
in your Land shall ye make, or do. So the LXX. the sense of which the Vulgar
expresses by adding the word this, i.e. the forenamed castration, either by
compression, or contusion, or any other way. For Josephus says it was unlawful
among them to geld any Creature; which was prohibited, to keep them from doing
so with Men, which they were taught to be abominable. And these words suggested
as much, being thus translated, Neither in your Land shall it be done. See
Seldom, Lib. VII. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 3. p. 799.

Ver. 25. Neither from a strangers hand.] By bennechar, the Son of a Stranger
(as it is in the Hebrew) who is called (XXV. 47.) a Stranger and Sojourner, (
viz. a Gentile that dwelt among them) is meant a pious Man of another Nation,
who had renounced Idolatry, and abstained from Blood, and observed the rest of
the Precepts of the Sons of Noah (as they called them) but was not Circumcised,
which would have obliged him to the whole Law of Moses. Such Persons, being
worshippers of the true God, were permitted to bring him Sacrifices to be
offered at his Altar. See Grotius, Lib. I. de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 1.
sect. 16. n. 3.

Shall ye offer the bread of your God from any of these.] Some have taken these
words, as if no Sacrifice was to be accepted from a Gentile, but only Money,
with which the Priest might buy a Sacrifice, and offer it for him. But this is
confuted by v. 18. and here it is evident, he only forbids them to accept of
any Sacrifice which had the forenamed blemishes, from a Gentile. Who might
think them not unacceptable, because the Gentiles made no scruple to offer such
as these last mentioned to their Gods; though their Laws, in some places, were
against it. The Bread of your God: The Hebrews understand hereby to be meant
only Burntofferings; which Maimonides says were accepted from a Gentile, even
Burnt-offerings of Birds, though he had not yet renounced Idolatry. But they
were not to accept from him Peace Offerings or Meat Offerings, or Sacrifices
for Sins of Ignorance (IV. 27.) or Trespassofferings (mentioned VI. 6.) nor was
a Burnt-offering to be accepted, unless it was a Free-will-offering, or a Vow,
as Mr Seldom observes, Lib. III. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 4. But if he
brought such spontaneous Offerings as had the fore mentioned blemishes, the
Priest was to reject them (though the Gentiles might say they were such as had
been accepted by his Gods) or else he was to be scourged. So this Law is
briefly expounded by the Jews when they reckon it up among their Precepts, that
a defective Sacrifice is not to be accepted, no not from the hand of a Gentile,
as he observes in the same Book, cap. 7. where he discourses at large on this
Subject. And it need not seem strange a Gentile should bring any such
Sacrifices (when their Laws, as I observed before, required a choice to be
made) for they were not so curious in their choice, as the Hebrews; but as
Tertullian upbraids them sacrificed enecta, tabidosa, and scabiosa, Apolog.
adv. Gentes, cap. 13. Which the better sort of People perhaps did not offer,
but the Vulgar did: and the Priests made no scruple to accept them.

Because their corruption is in them, and blemishes be in them.] The word
corruption seems particularly to relate unto the forementioned castration: for
it signifies such a Corruption as is the destruction of any Member. See Bochart
in his Hierozoicon, p. 2. Lib. V. cap. 4. And blemishes relate to other
defects, which made them unacceptable. Twelve of which, as I said, are here
mentioned; but the Hebrews look upon them only as Examples and Specimens of
other the like defects; which they make in all to be fifty, as I observed
before out of Seldom, Lib. II. de Success. ad Pontific. cap. 5. Maimonides
gives us a Catalogue of them in his Treatise of Entrance into the Sanctuary,
cap. 7. but to make up that full number, he is constrained to add these three,
which have no example among the XII. here mentioned, viz. such as tremble by
age, or by some disease, or are torn by wild Beasts.

Ver. 26. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] These Laws following being of
the same nature, were in all likelihood delivered at the same time with the
foregoing.

Ver. 27. And when a Bullock, or Sheep, or Goat is brought forth.] These were
the only Beasts that were allowed to be sacrificed, v. 19.

Then it shall be seven days under the dam, and from the eighth day and
thenceforth, it shall be accepted for an offering, etc.] They were not fit for
Food when they were not seven days old, and therefore not for Sacrifice; which
was the Bread or Food of God, as it is called v. 25. But this has been
sufficiently explained before XXII Exodus 30. I shall only add, that I have
since observed that P. Cunaeus has briefly expressed the sense of Maimonides,
which I there represented, ( Lib. III. de Republ. Hebraeor. cap. 5.) and that
the Gentiles were so far from offering Creatures so young, that they thought
them fittest for Sacrifice, when they were two years old; as appears from the
words of Virgil beforementioned, -- Mactant lactas de more bidentes. where
Servius says that bidentes were so called, because they were biennes, two
years of age; for it was not lawful to Sacrifice those that were younger, nor
those that were older.

Ver. 28. And whether it be Cow, or Ewe, ye shall not kill it, and her young
both in one day.] Lest the young one, says Maimonides, should happen to be
killed before the Dam, which would have given the greatest grief to her, More
Nevoch. P. III. cap. 48. Any thing that looked like Cruelty therefore, was by
this Law banished from among them; for they might not so much as kill both the
Young and the Dam on the same day, to offer them to God himself; of which he is
here speaking.

Ver. 29. And when ye will offer a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving unto the LORD.] He
had mentioned Freewill-offerings and Vows before v. 21. and now briefly touches
upon the third sort of Peace Offerings. See VII. 15, 16.

Offer it at your own will.] Male or Female; of the Herd, or of the Flock, III.
1, 7, 12. Or the meaning may be (as has been often said) He shall offer it in
such a manner, as that it be accepted. See I. 3.

Ver. 30. On the same day it shall be eaten, etc.] See VII. 15.

Ver. 31. Therefore shall ye keep my Commandments, and do them, etc.] Because
he had said before v. 30. and now repeats it again in the conclusion of this
Verse, I am the LORD. To whom they owed obedience; especially when he required
they should reverently use all holy things.

Ver. 32. Neither shall ye profane my holy Name.] This may refer either to what
goes before, (that they should not make him and his Service contemptible, by
offering such things as were defective, etc.) or, be taken as a Precept by it
self. And then the Name of God was profaned three ways, (as Mr. Seldom
observes) besides the most grievous of all, by Blasphemy. Either when a Man,
for fear of death, violated the Divine Law; or when he contemptuously and
wantonly broke any Precept; or when a Man of great note, for Knowledge and
Piety gave a Scandal to others by doing such things, as were not perhaps
directly against the Law, yet made him lose all his Authority. See Lib. II. de
Jure Not. and Gent. juxta Disc. Hebr. cap. 10.

But I will be hallowed among the Children of Israel.] Either by the
observation of his Laws, or by punishing those who transgressed them: For so
this phrase is used, X. 3.

I am the LORD which hallow you.] Have separated you to my self, as a special
People, from all others, by Laws different from theirs, and more excellent.

Ver. 33. That brought you out of the Land of Egypt, to be your God.] And
moreover, distinguished you from all others, by singular Benefits: particularly
by delivering you from the most grievous Slavery, that I might make you a happy
People.

I am the LORD.] When you remember my benefits, remember I am your Sovereign,
who expect your Obedience.

CHAP. XXIII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] All the Laws in this Chapter
were delivered at one time, not long after the former.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel.] Who were highly concerned to
observe all the Solemnities enjoined in this Chapter, in such a manner as God
required.

And say unto them, concerning the Feasts of the LORD.] It has been anciently
observed, that (...), the Syrians were great lovers of Feasts. Which made it
the more reasonable (if they were so in Moses his days) that the Israelites,
who were to be their Neighbors in the Land of Canaan, should have so many
Feasts appointed them, weekly, monthly, and yearly; all in honor of their God.
From whence they are called Feasts of the LORD. But this word MOED, which we
translate a Feast, properly signifies an Assembly. And so Mr. Thorndike would
have it here translated; because the name of Feasts is proper to those
Solemnities which are to be celebrated with joy and cheerfulness: whereas under
this general word Moed is comprehended the Day of Atonement, which is one of
the Assemblies here named, v. 27. but was no Feast; being to be observed with
the greatest Humiliation and Affliction that could be expressed. He therefore
exactly translates these words in this manner, The Assemblies of the LORD (for
the word concerning is not in the Hebrew) which ye shall proclaim for holy
Convocations, these are my Assemblies. See Religious Assemblies, Chap. II. All
that can be said for our Translation is, That the Day of Atonement being a Day
of Rest from all Labor, it may go under the Name of a Feast, in opposition to
working days.

Which ye shall proclaim.] Or call, by the sound of the Trumpet, which the
Priests were to blow upon these days, X Numb. 10.

To be holy Convocations.] The same Hebrew, (Mikra) which here signifies a
Convocation, signifies also reading, VIII Nehem. 8. For on these days they were
called to Assemble together to hear the Law read to them, as well as to offer
Sacrifice, and make their Prayers to God, with Thanksgivings for his Benefits.

Even these are my Feasts.] Or my Assemblies, as I said before: the first of
which was the Sabbath, then the Passover, Pentecost, the beginning of the New
Year, the Day of Atonement, and the Feast of Tabernacles: which are all
contained under the general word Moed, and none besides.

Ver. 3. Six days shall work be done.] They were allowed all these for any sort
of business wherein they pleased to employ themselves.

But the seventh day is the sabbath of rest.] See XX Exodus 9, 10. XXXI. 15.
This was the greatest of all Solemnities appointed for Assemblies, returning
once every week; and therefore is set in the head of all the rest; from which
it seems to be distinguished, v. 37, 38. And accordingly in the next Verse,
having here mentioned this as a day by it self, he begins to reckon the Feasts
or Assemblies of the LORD. And the reason why this day was made a Sabbath of
Rest, was, because God himself then rested from his Works. In memory of which
they were to keep this Day free from all Labor, that the belief of the
Creation of the World might be fixed in their Minds; or, as Maimonides phrases
it, ( More Nevoch. P. II. cap. 113.) A belief that nothing is coevous with God.
Whence that saying of theirs (mentioned by Aben-Ezra) whosoever does any work
upon the Sabbath Day, denies the work of the Creation.

Ye shall do no work therein.] They were commanded so to rest on this day from
all bodily labor, as not to kindle a fire, to dress the meat they eat upon it:
which is not required upon any other day, but only this and the great Day of
Expiation, ( v. 28, 30.) Concerning these two days alone it is said, Thou shall
do no work upon it: but of the days of other Assemblies, no more is said but
this, Thou shall do no servile work therein, v. 7, 8, etc. that is, only such
work as they were wont to put their Slaves to do, was prohibited. For though
they might not bake, nor boil their Meat on the Sabbath Day, XVI Exodus 23. nor
on the day of Expiation, v. 28. of this Chapter; yet on other Solemn days they
might make provision for their Tables, XII. Exodus 16. where Aben-Ezra notes of
none of the solemn Assemblies, besides the Sabbath and the day of Atonement, it
is said NO MANNER OF WORK: only of the Passover he says it, and adds an
exception of the Meat of the Soul; that is, what was requisite for the
Sustenance of Nature. As our Mr. Thorndike observes, in the place before quoted.

It is the Sabbath of the LORD in all your dwelings.] To be kept holy in honor
of the LORD, by every man wheresoever he dwelt: For they had Synagogues for
Worship in all their Towns; though most of the other Assemblies could be held
only in the place where the Sanctuary, and afterward the Temple was, whither
all their Males went up thrice a year at the great Festivals. Aben-Ezra
therefore thus glosses upon these words, IN ALL YOUR DWELLINGS, in your Land
and out of your Land; at home and upon the way. To show that the Command XXXV
Exodus 3. (You shall kindle no fire throughout your habitation upon the
Sabbath Day) was to be observed not only whilst they lived upon Manna in the
Wilderness (when God gave them a double portion on the sixth day, that they
might prepare it against the Sabbath, XVI Exodus 5.29.) but in all places,
wheresoever they dwelt afterward.

Ver. 4. These are Feasts of the LORD.] Now follow the Solemn Assemblies which
are to be kept by this Ordinance of mine; besides that of the Seventh day,
which was celebrated from the beginning.

This looks like a Title to all that insues.

Even for holy Convocations. Solemn Mettings of the People, who were called
together to celebrate the Mercies of God with Sacrifices of Thanksgiving and
Public Rejoycings. Such there were in all Nations, who had their (...) (as the
Greeks called them) general Assemblies of all the Country, to do honor to
their Gods. As in Egypt we are told by Herodotus, Lib. II. cap. 59. they did
once a year (...) in honor of Isis, Mars and Diana. The like was in other
Nations, as every body knows.

Dr. Hammond has observed something concerning this phrase holy Convocations,
upon XX S. Matthew. not. c.

Which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.] Or in their appointed times: which
here follow.

Ver. 5. On the fourteenth day of the first month.] See XII Exodus 18.

At even.] See XII Exodus 6.

Is the LORDs Passover.] See XII Exodus 27.

Ver. 6. And on the fifteenth day of the same month, is the Feast of unleavened
bread unto the LORD, etc.] That is, then the seven days of eating unleavened
Bread were to begin, XII Exodus 15.

Seven days ye must eat unleavened bread.] See XII Exodus 19, 20.

Ver. 7. On the first day ye shall have an holy Convocation. XII Exodus 16.

Ye shall do no servile work therein.] Such days as these were not observed so
scrupulously as the seventh day of every week, on which (as I observed before)
they might not coil nor bake, i. e. prepare their Meat; which on this day was
allowed, as appears from the place last named in Exodus. Nor might they stir
out of their place, i. e. take a Journey on the Sabbath, XVI Exodus 29. but on
this day they might: As appears from XVI Deuteronomy. 7. where having sacrificed the
Passover, and eaten it on the fourteenth day at Even, they have leave given
them to go home the next Morning, which was the first day of unleavened Bread.
For on this very day, betimes in the morning, they came out of Egypt, and
traveled from Rameses to Succoth. By servile work therefore we are to
understand their ordinary Labors on other days, from which both they and their
Servants were to abstain on this day. Which it was the custom of all Nations to
forbear, upon such great Solemnities, as Strabo informs us Lib. X. where he
says, (...) This is common both to Greeks and Barbarians, to keep their holy
days, with a festival remission of their labors.

Ver. 8. And ye shall offer an offering made by fire seven days unto the LORD.]
These were not merely idle times, but days for Divine Service; about which
there is a particular direction given afterward, XXVIII Numb. from the 19th
Verse to the 25th, where the Sacrifices for every one of the seven days are
prescribed. And though there is no mention of any particular work of the Moral
Service of God upon these days (no more than there is of that Sanctification of
the Sabbath Day) yet the Jews were not so blind, but that they were able to
perceive the Spiritual Service of God, by Prayers, and Praises, and hearing the
Law, and meditating upon God's works, was required on these days, especially on
the Sabbath: which appears from Josephus, and Philo, and diverse others of their
later Writers.

In the seventh day is an holy Convocation.] XII Exodus 16.

Ye shall do no servile work therein.] It was to be observed as the first day
of the seven; that the Feast might conclude as it began.

Ver. 9. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Though the following Command
could not be yet practiced; yet he would have them take a particular notice of
it, as no less solemnly enjoined than the foregoing.

Ver. 10. Speak unto the Children of Israel.] They being all concerned in this
Precept.

And say unto them, when ye be come into the Land which I give unto you.] In
the Wilderness they sowed no Corn, and therefore could not be obliged by this
Precept till they came to Canaan: nay, till they had driven out the old
Inhabitants, and God had given them rest in the Land of Promise, as Moses
himself seems to expound it, XII Deuteronomy. 10, 11.

And shall reap the harvest thereof.] Begin to reap it, as it is explained, XVI
Deuteronomy. 9.

Then ye shall bring a Sheaf.] Or an handful, as it is translated in the Margin
of our Bibles. And there was the very same custom among the Heathen, to bring
(...), an handful of the new Corn, to be offered to their Gods, as Diodorus
Siculus says the practice was among the Egyptians.

Of the First-sruits.] There were several things comprehended under the name of
First Fruits, which are commanded to be offered unto God, XXIII Exodus 19. The
Greeks have accurately distinguished them by proper and peculiar Names. (...)
were the Firstborn of Men or of Cattle mentioned XIII Exodus Then (...) were
the first Corn that was ripe, or the first fruit of Trees, which they brought
from the Field, or from their Plantations, before they eat any themselves. And
then (...) (which the Hebrews call Terumoth, or Trumoth) were the First Fruits
of their Wine and Oil (XVIII Numb. 12.) and the first Loaves or Cakes made of
their Wheat, mentioned below v. 17. See there.

Of your harvest.] Of Barley-harvest, which began at the Passover, when they
offered the First Fruits here mentioned; as Wheat-harvest began at Pentecost,
when they offered the First Fruits mentioned v. 17, as at the Feast of
Tabernacles those of the Vine, and other Fruit Trees were brought and offered.
And so much weight was laid on this, and there were so many of them, and such
care taken of their payment, because this was held by all Mankind as a
principal part of Religion, to make this early Acknowledgment to God for his
Goodness. Insomuch, that they who offered no First Fruits were looked upon as
Atheists. So Porphyry, Lib. 3. (...), sect. 78. And indeed this was a practice
derived from the beginning of the World, IV Genesis 3, 4. Aristotle himself
testifies as much, when he says Lib. VIII. ad Nichomachum, (...), etc. The
ancient Sacrifices and Assemblies were after the carrying in the Harvest, when
they offered the First Fruits, (...), for they chiefly relaxed themselves at
those Seasons.

Unto the Priest.] Who offered part of it to God, and had the rest himself. For
thus the Jews describe the gathering and offering of them. On the Evening of
the first day of the Passover-week, some were ordered by the Sanhedrim to take
Sickles and Baskets, etc. and go out when it was dark (having a great Company
with them) and cut a Sheaf of Corn; which they brought into the Court of God's
House, and parcht it, (as may be gathered from the second Chapter of this Book,
14, 15, 16.) and having ground it, they sifted it often (no less than thirteen
times) till it was very fine flour. After which they took out a Tenth-deal (an
Omer, which was the tenth part of an Ephah) and brought it to the Priest, who
took out an handful, and put it on the Altar with Oil and Frankincense; and the
remainder he had for himself. See Dr. Lightfoot in his Temple Service, Chap.
XIV. sect. 2. Dr. Owtram de Sacrificiis, Lib. I. cap. 8. n. 6. And J. Wagenseil
upon Sota, cap. 2. Annot. 11.

Ver. 11. And he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD.] They did not offer the
Corn green in the Ears (as I observed in the foregoing Verse) but parcht,
dried, ground, and searsed, and then they waved a Tenth-deal of the Flour,
which came from the Sheaf, as a present to the LORD of the whole Earth.

To be accepted for you.] To procure God's Blessing upon the rest of the
Harvest; and that they might have liberty to use the Corn it produced: which it
was not lawful for them to do, till the First Fruits were given to God.

On the morrow after the Sabbath the Priest shall wave it.] We are not to
understand by the Sabbath the Seventh days Rest, which was the Opinion of the
Sadducees, as R. Levi ben Gersom tells (upon the fifth of Joshua) but the day
here mentioned v. 7. which was a kind of Sabbath, because no Servile work might
be done therein. And therefore this morrow after the Sabbath was the sixteenth
day of Nisan, or the next day to the first of Unleavened Bread. So the LXX
translate it, (...), the morrow after the first: and Josephus more plainly,
(...), etc. on the second day of Unleavened Bread, which is the sixteenth day
of the Month, etc. Lib. III. Antiq. cap. 10. This was the first of the fifty
days, which they reckoned till Pentecost, v. 15. and was the day on which Manna
ceased when they came into Canaan, because then they eat of the Fruits of that
Country (V Josh. 10, 11, 12.) And indeed it was not lawful for them (as I said
before) to eat of the Fruits of the Earth, till after the Passover; because
then the Sheaf of the First fruits was waved, which consecrated the rest of the
Corn. And so God continued Manna to them, till they had other Food to eat.

Ver. 12. And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf, an he-lamb
without blemish, etc.] Though this day was not so holy as the first day of
Unleavened Bread, yet it was a part of the Festival, and was called Moed katon,
a lesser Solemnity; as all the rest of the days were, between the first and the
seventh. And therefore a special Offering is here ordered upon this day,
besides the daily Burnt-Sacrifice; and besides the Sacrifice which was
appointed ( v. 8.) to be offered upon every one of the seven days.

Ver. 13. And the Meat Offering thereof shall be two Tenth-deals of fine flour,
etc.] I observed before (upon the second Chapter, v. 1.) that all sorts of
Bread might be offered to God, as being a very ancient Sacrifice, and commonly
used at every Table: for which reason Wine also is here ordered; but it was to
be simple Wine, not mixed, as was the Heathenish Custom. Salt also was added
(II. 13.) as common at all Tables; but no Honey, nor Leaven, which Men's
Superstition had introduced, (and therefore expressly forbidden in that place,
v. 11.) as it did also Milk, and Herbs, and Leaves of Trees; not a word of
which is to be found in the Law of Moses. But here it is observable, that he
commands two Tenth-deals of fine Flour to be offered; whereas one Tenth was the
common Meat Offering (XXIX Exodus 40.) Because, as one of them was a necessary
attendant on the Lamb (mentioned before v. 12.) so the other was in honor of
the day, which was a lesser kind of Festival.

And the Drink Offering thereof shall be of wine, the fourth part of a hin.]
Here is not a double proportion of Wine ordered, but the usual quantity;
because, perhaps, this was a Thanksgiving only for their Corn, not for their
Vintage, which came afterward.

Ver. 14. And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears,
until the self same day, that ye have brought an offering to your God.] It was
not lawful for them to reap, and therefore not to eat any of the Fruits of the
Earth, till the forenamed First Fruits were offered, as an acknowledgment to
the Donor of them. For nothing was more just and equal, all Men thought, than
to give some part to him, who gave to them all they had: and in the first
place, to give him his due, before they took any thing to themselves. The
Romans in this expressed the sense of all Mankind; who as Pliny tells us, Lib.
XVIII. cap. 2. Ne gustabant quidem novas fruges, aut vina, antequam Sacerdotes
primitias tibassent, did not so much as taste of their Corn or Wine, till the
Priests had offered the First Fruits.

It shall be a statute for ever, etc.] As long as their Polity lasted.

In all your dwellings.] Throughout the whole Land of Canaan.

Ver. 15. And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath.] From
the sixteenth day of Nisan, or the second day of Unleavened Bread; which was
the morrow after the Sabbath, v. 11.

From the day that ye brought the sheaf of the Wave-offering.] This is added
only as a fuller description of the time, from which they were to count.

Seven Sabbaths shall be complete.] Seven whole Weeks, reckoning that day from
which the account begun, for the first day of the first of those Weeks; which
made XLIX. days in all. Maimonides thinks it was for the honor of this great
Day of Pentecost, that they were to count the days till it came; just like a
Man, says he, who expects his best Friend, is wont to tell the days and hours
till he arrive, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 43. And therefore the present Jews
begin this Supputation, with a solemn Prayer, saying, Blessed art thou, O LORD
our God, the LORD of the World, who have sanctified us with thy Precepts, and
command us to number the days of Harvest: and this is the first day. And
thus they go on to pray till the seventh day, when they add, Now there is one
Week: and so they proceed in the same Prayers to the Evening of Pentecost.
Which Feast they not being able now to keep, as the Law appoints, they pray to
God every day, after they have done counting, that he would restore Jerusalem
and the Temple, and then they promise to do all that is here prescribed. And
this counting in some places is performed publicly in their Synagogues; yet so
that every Master of a Family is bound every Night to do it at home. See
Buxtorf. Synag. Judaica, cap. 20.

Ver. 16. Even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye number fifty
days.] The next day after the seventh Sabbath (or Week) made just fifty days;
from which this Feast was called Pentecost: and in the Old Testament, the Feast
of Weeks; because it began the next day after the seven Weeks beforementioned,
XXXIV Exodus 22.

And ye shall offer a new Meat Offering to the LORD.] Viz. Of new Corn made
into Loaves, as it follows in the next Verse: which was the First Fruits of
Wheat-harvest, as the place beforementioned tells us, XXXIV Exodus 22.

This day the Samaritans take to have been the first day of the Week; after the
very Letter of this Law, which is thus made out, by the great Primate of
Ireland: Our blessed LORD being slain at the Feast of the Passover, the whole
Sabbath following (which was the first day of Unleavened Bread) he rested in
his Grave. The next day after that Sabbath, the Sheaf, or Omer of the
First Fruits of the Barley-harvest was offered to the LORD; when Christ rose
from the dead, and became the First Fruits of them that slept. From this day
was the account taken of the seven Sabbaths, or Weeks: and upon the morrow
after the Seventh (that is, upon our Lord's Day) was celebrated the Feast of
Weeks; which is called the day of the First Fruits, (XXVIII Numb. 26.) because
then were offered the First Fruits of their second, or Wheat-Harvest; and
therefore called the Feast of (...) (XXIII Exodus 16.) because then was the
principal, and the Conclusion of the whole Harvest of the year. Upon which day
the Apostles, having themselves received the First Fruits of the Spirit, begat
three thousand Souls, through the Word of Truth; and presented them as the
First Fruits of the Christian Church unto God, and unto the Lamb. Now the
matter being so ordered by God, that in the observation of the Feast of Weeks,
the Seventh day of the Week (the Jewish Sabbath) was purposely passed over, and
that great Solemnity kept upon the first day of the Week, no wonder the
Christian Church has appropriated that day, instead of the Seventh, for the
Service of God.

Ver. 17. Ye shall bring out of your habitations.] These Oblations seem to have
been offered at a common charge, in the name of the whole Nation; which is the
reason of this phrase, Out of your habitations. For to affirm, as some do, that
two Loaves were to be brought out of every House, or at least out of every
Town, is absurd: for they may as well say, seven Lambs (as it follows) which
were offered with this Bread, were to be furnished in like manner, out of every
Family, or Town.

Two Wave-loaves, of two Tenth-deals.] A double proportion, as before v. 13.
which was presented to God, the LORD of the whole World, by waving them to all
quarters. Each Loaf did not contain two Tenth-deals; but there was one in each
Loaf.

They shall be of fine flour.] Of Wheat.

They shall be baken with leaven.] And therefore were not burnt upon the Altar
(for that was unlawful, II Lev. 11, 12.) but wholly given to the Priests.
Whence it was, as the Jews observe, that the Bread accompanying their
Peace Offerings of Thanksgiving were leavened, (VII. 13.) and not burnt on the
Altar, but entirely given to the Priests, the Servants of God, who attended at
his Altar, that they might Feast together with him.

They are the first fruits unto the LORD.] Other First Fruits are mentioned v.
10. but these were the principal, being the First Fruits of Wheat-harvest;
which with all the rest are exactly enumerated by Nehemiah X. 35, 36, 37. And
that place of Pliny, mentioned v. 14. seems to prove that the Heathen offered
both the first of their Fruits, before they brought them out of their Fields
and Vineyards; and also the first of what was made of them after they were
brought home. Which they did partly out of gratitude to God, to thank him for
making the year fruitful; and partly to pray him to grant fruitful Seasons for
the future.

Ver. 18. And ye shall offer with the Bread seven Lambs without blemish, etc.]
This being a great day, and Burnt-offerings being the noblest sort of
Sacrifice, purely in honor of God, a greater number, both of Lambs and other
Creatures, are required upon this Solemnity.

And one young Bullock, and two Rams.] In XXVIII Numb. 27. it is said, Two
young Bullocks, and one Ram, besides the seven Lambs. Perhaps they were left to
their liberty, either to bring one young Bullock and two Rams, or one Ram and
two young Bullocks. Or else, those mentioned in Numbers were distinct
Sacrifices besides those here mentioned: and so Josephus says, Lib. III.
Antiq. cap. 10. that there were offered upon this day, three young Bullocks,
two Rams (it should be three Rams) and fourteen Lambs. All which were offered,
besides the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of every day.

They shall be a Burnt-offering to the LORD, with their Meat Offering, etc.]
There being all sorts of Sacrifices prescribed for the great Solemnity of this
Day, he mentions the Burnt-offering in the first place, because it was the
principal, and offered next to the two Loaves.

Ver. 19. Then shall ye Sacrifice one Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering.]
Next followed the Sin-offering: Which, for a particular sin of the
Congregation, was a Bullock, 18.14. but for the sins of the Nation in general
only a Kid of the Goats. For as Maimonides observes ( More Nevoch. P. III. cap.
46.) the more grievous the Sin was, the viler the Sacrifice; there being no
greater Sin than Idolatry, nor viler Sacrifice than a She-goat: and yet this
was the Expiation of that Sin, as they interpret IV. 27. XV Numb. 17.

And two Lambs of the first year, for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings.] Double
the number, to what was commonly offered. For this being an high day all sorts
of Sacrifices (as I said before) were offered ( Burnt-offerings, Sin Offerings,
and Peace Offerings) upon it: and in greater proportions (except the
Sin-offering) then on other days. And these were the only Peace Offerings of
the whole Congregation of Israel, offered only at this one time of the year,
and never else.

Ver. 20. And the Priest shall wave them with the Bread of the First Fruits,
for a Wave-offering before the LORD.] These Sacrifices, with the
Trepass Offering for a Leper (XIV. 12, 24.) were the only Offerings that were
waved about toward all the corners of the World. So Abarbinel upon this place:
The waving was performed by the Priest, who reached them out, upward and
downward, this way and that way, toward the six quarters of the World; to show
that the Earth is the LORD's, and the fullness thereof. Or, as R. Levi ben
Gersom speaks, that they might understand, the Providence of God is every
where, above and beneath, in every corner of the World.

With the two Lambs.] This seems to signify the forenamed Burnt-offering and
Sin-offering were thus waved, as well as these Peace Offerings: That is, some
part of them all, in the name of the rest; for the Priest could not wave the
whole Body of them, they were so heavy.

They shall be holy to the LORD for the Priest.] Who had not only the Breast
and the Shoulder (as was usual) but all the flesh of these Peace Offerings
(their Blood being sprinkled, and their Inwards burnt) was given unto him, to
be eaten by the Males among the Priests, in the Court of the Sanctuary; even as
the Sin Offerings were. For these Peace Offerings being (as I before-noted) the
only Peace Offerings of the whole Congregation, were reckoned among the most
holy things: whereas the Peace Offerings, of private Men, were less holy; as
Dr. Lightfoot observes in his Temple Service, cap. 8. sect. 4. And the true
reason why the Priest had all the Flesh of these Sacrifices, was, because they
being for the whole Congregation, the Offerers were too many, to have any
portion of them distributed among them.

Ver. 21. And ye shall proclaim on the self same day.] Before the Solemnities
began.

That it may be an holy Convocation to you.] See v. 4. The reason of this holy
Assembly, was partly to commemorate God's great Goodness, in giving the Law
from Mount Sinai, on the fiftieth day after their coming out of Egypt, (which
was the chief end of God's bringing them from thence, as Maimonides speaks, P.
III. More Nevoch. cap. 43.) and partly to thank him for giving them such fair
hopes of completing their Harvest, which had been begun at the Passover.

Ye shall do no servile work therein.] It was to be observed, as the first and
the last days of Unleavened Bread, ( v. 7, 8.) with such a Rest, as made it
little different from a Sabbath. And that great Vision, (as Maimonides calls
it) at the giving of the Law lasting but one day, was the reason the memory of
it was celebrated only for one day in the year; whereas one Feast of Unleavened
Bread lasted seven days; for the day was not sufficient to make them sensible
enough of the Affliction they endured in Egypt. But perhaps one day only was
appointed at Pentecost to be free from all Servile work, because of the great
Business of Wheat-harvest, which was then coming on; and could not permit them
to be so much at leisure, as they were when the Fruits of the Earth were all
gathered. Then they kept a Feast seven days, ( v. 39.) as they did at the
beginning of Barley-harvest, when the Feast of Unleavened Bread was held. At
which time Harvest did not come on so fast, as it did at Pentecost: for the
First Fruits then were of green Corn, parched, and dried, and offered to God,
for the hope they had he would bring the rest to maturity.

Ver. 22. And when ye reap the Harvest of your Land, thou shall not make clean
riddance of the corners of the Field, etc.] This Precept has been sufficiently
explained before, XIX. 9, 10. Only the occasion of its repetition here ought to
be observed; which is the mention of Harvest and First Fruits, which in
gratitude they then offered unto God. Of whose Goodness he would have them so
sensible, as not to be unmindful of the Poor; but to be such Benefactors to
them, that they might still receive more Benefits from God.

Ver. 23. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] These words are frequently
prefixed to a new matter; though delivered at the same time with what went
before.

Ver. 24. Speak unto the Children of Israel, saying.] Who (as I have often
said) were all concerned to take notice of such Precepts.

In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, ye shall have a Sabbath.]
Such a Sabbath as those mentioned v. 7, 8, 21. on which no Servile work was to
be done; as it follows in the next Verse. For the seventh Month was the first
Month of the year, accordding to the ancient computation; and continued so
still to several purposes: particularly with respect to their Jubilee, when
they were to blow the Trumpet as they did on this day: which was the chief New
Moon in all the year; and the more illustrious, because it fell in the time
when all the Fruits of the Earth were gathered.

A memorial of blowing with Trumpets.] It is not easy to tell, of what this
blowing of Trumpets was a memorial. Maimonides in the place forenamed ( More
Nevoch. P. III. cap. 43.) will have it to be instituted, to awaken the People
out of sleep, and call them to repentance; being to put them in mind of the
great Day of Expiation, which followed nine days after. This he explains more
largely in his Jad Chazakah, in the Treatise of Repentance, cap. 3. where he
says, The sound of the Trumpet at this time, did in effect say, Shake off your
drowsiness ye that sleep; and being awaked, watch to your duty. Search and try
your ways; Remember your Creator, and repent. You whom the Vanity of the Times
has led into a forgetfulness of the Truth; who spend your days, wandering after
empty things, which profit nothing; bethink your selves, and take care of your
Souls. Let every one forsake his evil way, and his thoughts which are not good.
And accordingly, he says in the same place, the Israelites were wont to
multiply Alms and Good Works; and to apply themselves to the Precepts (as his
phrase is) from the beginning of the year, till the Day of Atonement, more
diligently than at any other time; rising in the night to pray in their
Synagogues till break of day, etc. But, though this be very pious, I see no
ground for it; no more then for what they say of Commemorating the Deliverance
of Isaac: For why should not blowing of Trumpets be ordered for a preparation
to other Solemn days, and in memory of other Deliverances, as well as this of
Isaac?

It seems more probable that all Nations making great shouting, rejoicing, and
feasting in the beginning of the year, at the first New Moon, (as many have
observed) hoping the rest of the year, by this means, would prove more
prosperous: God was pleased to ordain this great rejoicing among his People, in
honor of himself, upon the Day of the first New Moon, (which was to be
continued every first Day of the Month) that he might preserve them from the
Worship of the Moon; and make them sensible that he alone gave them good years,
and renewed his Mercies daily, from Month to Month, upon them. Bonfrerius
imagines that God put an honor upon this Month, because it was the seventh:
that as every seventh day was a Sabbath, and every seventh year the Land
rested, etc. so every seventh month of every year should be a kind of
Sabbatical Month; there being more Feasts in this Month, then in any other
Months in the Year.

But all this does not explain what this blowing of Trumpets was a memorial of;
which I take to be the Creation of the World; which was in Autumn. Upon which
account it was, that they anciently began their year at this time, as the
Eastern People do at this day. They acknowledged also God's Goodness, in
blessing all the year past, and bringing them to the beginning of a new year;
which they prayed him to make happy to them.

They began to blow at Sunrise, and continued it till Sunset. He that sounded
the Trumpet began with the usual Prayer, Blessed be God, who has sanctified us
with his Precepts, etc. subjoyning these words, Blessed be God, who has
hitherto preserved us in life, and brought us unto this time. When all was
ended, the People said with a loud voice these words of the Psalmist, LXXXIX
Psalm. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O
LORD, in the light of thy countenance. See Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. cap. 24.

Such blowing with Trumpets was used by the Gentiles; particularly in the
Solemnities they observed in honor of the Mother of the Gods: One whole day
(which was the second) being spent in blowing of Trumpets, as Julian tells us
in his fifth Oration upon this Subject, (...), p. 168.

Ver. 25. Ye shall do no servile work therein.] It was a very Solemn Day, like
the Day of Pentecost, ( v. 21.) and others before noted, on which they might
only make provision for their Meals, XII Exodus 16. which were wont to be very
liberal upon this day. And among other Dishes they serve up to the Table a
Ram's head, in the memory of that Ram, which was sacrificed in the room of
Isaac; which they fancy was upon this day.

But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.] About which
Directions are given afterward, XXIX Numb. 2, etc. For it was not to be a Day
of Rest merely, but of Religion.

Ver. 26. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] The following Precept is of
great moment, which makes this Preface to be set before it.

Ver. 27. Also on the tenth day of this seventh month, there shall be a day of
atonement.] This has been explained XVI. 29, 30, 31.

It shall be an holy convocation to you.] On which they were to assemble, to
humble themselves before God, as it here follows.

And ye shall afflict your souls.] See Chapter XVI. I shall only add, That the
Jews fancy this Solemn day of Fasting was appointed, partly to avert those
Diseases which were wont to be rife in the Autumnal Season: and this day chosen
rather than any other, that they might express their Grief at that time, when
the Sin of the Golden Calf was committed.

And offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.] A Burnt-offering; about
which Directions are given in XXIX Numb. 8.

Ver. 28. And ye shall do no work on that same day.] See v. 3. and XVI. 31.

For it is a day of atonement.] Set apart wholly for this work; which is at
large described in the XVIth Chapter.

To make an atonement for you before the LORD your God.] First the Priest made
an Atonement for himself and his Family, XVI. 6, etc. and then for the People,
and for the holy place, etc. v. 15, 16, 33.

Ver. 29. For whatsoever soul he be that shall not be afflicted on that day, he
shall be cut off from among his people.] The Affliction here spoken of
consisted chiefly in abstaining from all manner of Food (as the Jews make
account) from one Evening to the next. In which time, if any Man eat to
satisfy his Appetite, that is, above the quantity of a Date, he was in danger
to be cut off; by the hand of God, I suppose. So they say in Joma, cap. 8. n.
2. Besides which, there were four other Mortifications: for no Man was to put
on his Shoes; nor anoint himself; nor wash his Face; nor enjoy his Wife. See
Buxtorf. Synad. Jud. cap. 26.

Ver. 30. And whatsoever soul he be that does any work in that same day, the
same soul will I destroy from among his people.] The two great things required
on this day, being to Afflict themselves, and to rest from Labor; they who
transgressed either of these Commands, are threatened to be cut off, and that by
God himself, as this Verse teaches us to Expound the foregoing.

Ver. 31. Ye shall do no manner of work. It shall be a statute for ever, etc.]
This is repeated again, because it was a thing of such high importance, that
they should wholly attend to the business of this great Day; which was a Day of
Humiliation, and Repentance, and making their Peace with God. And, as the Jews
themselves observe, there was no Man so good but he had offended in some thing
or other: and besides, they were to Afflict themselves for the Sins of the
whole Body of the Nation.

Ver. 32. It shall be unto you a Sabbath of rest.] As the weekly Sabbath was,
v. 3. when they did not merely rest from Labor, but employed themselves in the
Divine Service; as v. 8. I observed they did on other Sabbaths of lesser
strictness. And this the Heathens themselves could discern, that the design of
their Festivals, which were Days of Ease and remission of Labors, was (...),
to withdraw the Mind from Human Employments, (...), that so a Man may have
leisure to turn his Mind toward God. Which is a most Divine saying of Strabo,
(which I think I have noted before, but cannot be too often repeated) Lib. X.
Geograph. p. 467.

And ye shall afflict your souls in the ninth day of the month at even.] They
kept the High Priest on the Even of the Day of Expiation from eating much,
because it would make him sleepy, as they tell us in Joma, cap. 1. n. 4. Where
our learned Sheringham observes, that the Evening before is called the Even of
the Day of Expiation, because they began the Fast before the setting of the
Sun: so that the whole Evening belonged to the following Sabbath. By which,
these two places, XVI. 29. where it is said they shall Afflict their Souls on
the tenth day, and this Verse which says on the ninth day, which seem to clash
one with another, may be easily reconciled. For they began to afflict
themselves in the conclusion of the ninth day, and ended the Fast in the
conclusion of the tenth. See Menasseh ben Israel, Quest. 4. ad Lev.

From even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.] This justifies what was
just now said, That this Day began in the Even of the ninth day, and continued
till the Even of the tenth.

Your Sabbath.] So this day was called, because no manner of work might be done
on this day, no more then on the Seventh, or weekly Sabbath, v. 31. And so it
is called by the Prophet, LVIII Isaiah 13.

Ver. 33. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] The same Preface is prefixed
to this, as to the rest; because it was one of the three greatest Solemnities
appointed by God in remembrance of his Benefits. See v. 39.

Ver. 34. The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be the Feast of
Tabernacles, for seven days unto the LORD.] It was to begin on the fifteenth
day, and continue seven days, as the Feast of Unleavened Bread did. The design
of this Feast is thus expressed by Maimonides, who compares it with the
Passover. Which served, says he, ( More Nevoch. P. III. c. 43.) to preserve
the memory of all the Miracles which God did in Egypt, out of which he brought
them at that time; as the Feast of Tabernacles did to preserve the memory of
the Signs and Wonders he did in the Wilderness; where he afforded them his
Divine Protection under a glorious Cloud, and preserved them without any
Houses, both in the cold of Winter and heat of Summer. In short, there are two
ends mentioned in this Chapter, of the Institution of this Festival: one to
give thanks for the Fruits of the Earth, which were then gathered, v. 39.
another, and the principal, in a grateful remembrance that they dwelt in Booths
forty years, and were brought into better Habitations when they came to Canaan,
v. 42, 43.

Ver. 35. And on the first day shall be an holy Convocation, etc.] It was to be
observed as the day of Pentecost, v. 21. And they every one carried in their
hands the Bough of some goodly Tree, as the Hebrews understand the first words
of v. 40. Josephus describing this Festivity Lib. III. Antiq. cap. 10. mentions
in the first place Boughs of Myrtle.

Ver. 36. Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.]
The peculiar Sacrifices, with their Meat Offerings, which were to be offered on
these seven days, are distinctly set down in XXIX Numb. from the thirteenth
Verse to the end. Where it will be most proper to consider them.

On the eighth day shall be an holy Convocation unto you.] See v. 4.

And ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.] A Burnt-offering,
with a Meat Offering attending upon it; according to the appointment in XXIX
Numb. 36, 37.

It is a solemn Assembly.] This is a new word, which is not used hitherto
concerning any of the Feasts here mentioned; signifying, as we translate it in
the Margin, a day of restraint, or rather, a closing, or concluding day; for
then the Solemnity ended. And so Theodoret, (...), the Conclusion of the
Feasts. Whence the last day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread is also called by
this Name of Atzereth, XVI Deuteronomy. 8. And so is the Feast of Pentecost (which was
kept in the end of seven Weeks) called by Josephus by the same name of Asartha,
Lib. III. Antiq. cap. 10. This therefore as it was the last, so it was the
great day of the Feast, as St. John calls it, VII. 37. On which day they read
the last Section of the Law, and so concluded the reading of the whole five
Books of Moses. And thence any great Solemnity is called by this name of
Atzereth, 2 Kings X. 20. I Joel 14. This seems to me to be a far better account
of this word, then that which the Jews commonly give, who render it a day of
detention; because, says Abarbanel, they were bound to detain the Feast to
this day (whereas no other Feast continued more then seven days) staying at
Jerusalem till it was over. Whence this day seems to him to be to the Feast of
Tabernacles, as the Day of Pentecost was to the Passover. For as they were
bound to count seven Weeks from that time, and then make this fiftieth day a
Feast; so they are here commanded, after the seven days of the Feast of
Tabernacles, to stay and feast one day more. Others of them, as R. Solomon
Jarchi, say this was as if a Man, having been entertained by his Friend seven
days, should, to express greater kindness to him, be detained one day more.

And ye shall do no servile work therein.] But spend their time in Feasting,
Mirth and Rejoicing; with thankful Acknowledgments of God's Benefits to them.
See v. 7, 8.

Ver. 37. These are the feasts (or Assemblies) of the LORD, which ye shall
proclaim to be holy Convocations.] This was the Preface to them, v. 4. and now
is the Conclusion; to make them the more observed.

To offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD, a Burnt-offering and a
Meat Offering, and a Sacrifice, etc.] These Offerings are particularly set down
(as has been noted all along) in the XXVIII. and XXIXth of Numbers. And by a
Sacrifice seems here to be meant a Sin-offering; which is ordered, throughout
those two Chapters, together with Burnt-offerings upon all these Festivals.

Ver. 38. Besides the Sabbaths of the LORD.] i. e. Beside the Sacrifices
appointed upon all the Sabbaths in the year: which were not to be omitted, if
any of the Feasts here mentioned fell upon the seventh day of the Week.

And beside your gifts.] Most understand by Gifts, such Presents as Men made to
God, beyond their Firstfruits and Tenths. But it may be thought only a general
word, including the two particulars which follow, Vows and Free-will-offerings.

Ver. 39. Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered
in the fruit of the Land, etc.] Here is no new injunction in this Verse, but
only an inforcement of what was said before: the very same days being appointed
to be observed, with those named v. 24. Therefore the Hebrew Particle Ak should
not have been translated also, but surely, or certainly, or truly; as we
translate it in other places: particularly XXIX Genesis 14. Surely thou art my
bone and my flesh. LXXIII Psalm. 1. Truly God is good to Israel. II Lament. 16.
Certainly this is the day that we looked for.

When ye have gathered in the fruit of the Land.] These words give a reason of
the repetition of the Command; because there was something more designed in
this Festival, than merely the remembrance of their Condition in the
Wilderness; which was to express their Thankfulness to God for their desired
Harvest, which they had now gathered. For which cause, besides the seven days
which were in Commemoration of their dwelling in Tents in the Wilderness, there
was an eighth added to acknowledge his Mercy, of receiving the Fruits of the
Earth.

Ye shall keep a Feast unto the LORD seven days.] These were the Feasts of
Tabernacles, which lasted all these seven days.

On the first day shall be a Sabbath.] See v. 35.

And on the eighth day shall be a Sabbath.] In the institution of the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, it is said in the seventh day is an holy Convocation, ye
shall do no servile work therein; i. e. it shall be a Sabbath, v. 8. but here
the eighth day has that honor put upon it (not the seventh) being added to
the Festival for a peculiar reason; and therefore to be observed in a very
solemn manner. For the Feast of Tabernacles fell in the time of Vintage, when
the Fruits of the Earth were, in a manner all gathered, XVI Deuteronomy. 13. From
whence it is called by the name of the Feast of Ingatherings, XXIII Exodus 16.
not because the whole Feast was celebrated on this account; but because a
principal part of it was kept on this score, viz. the eighth day; as the other
seven days were in memory of their dwelling in Tents. But that the eighth day
had no relation to this, is apparent; for they did not dwell in Tabernacles on
the eighth day of this Feast, but only on the seven preceding. Which being
ended, they returned to their Houses, and kept this day there to another
purpose, here named: for so it is expressly said v. 42. Ye shall dwell in booths
seven days. Which being over, a great Solemnity continued to another purpose;
and was kept after another manner, not in Booths, but in their Houses. So
Maimonides in his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 43. That we go from the Feast of
Tabernacles to another Solemnity, on the eighth day, it tends to make our joys
perfect: which could not be done in Tabernacles, but in large and spacious
Houses and Palaces. Where they made still greater Feasts, as well as sung the
Praises of God at the Temple, with Trumpets and Instruments of Music. In which
Service, some say those three Psalms were used, which have the Title of
Al-hagittith ( viz. VIII. LXXXI. and LXXXV.) For Gath signifies a Wine Press;
and therefore they think these Psalms were sung in the time of the Vintage.
Certain it is, that the two last named were sung at some great Solemnity,
wherein they celebrated God's wonderful Providence over them. And that they
used to sing and shout at their Vintage, is clear, from IX Judge. 27. XVI Isa.
9, 10. XLVIII Jer. 33. II Hosea 15. Which the Gentiles imitated, who when they
pressed their Grapes, sung a Song to Bacchus, which was thence called (...),
the Song of the Wine Press. See Scaliger. Lib. I. Poet. cap. 55.

Now this being a time of such great Rejoicing, in both respects, it led
Plutarch into a fancy that the Jews celebrated two Feasts unto Bacchus at this
time. For he writes in his Symposiaes, Lib. IV. Probl. 3. That in the midst of
Vintage the Jews spread Tables furnished with all manner of Fruit, and lived in
Tabernacles, made especially of Palms and Ivy wreathed together; and call the
day which goes before the Feast, The Day of Tabernacles. And then a few days
after, says he, they keep another Festivity, which openly shows it was
dedicated to Bacchus, for they carried Boughs of Palms in their hands, etc.
with which they went into the Temple, the Levites (who he fancies were called
so from (...), which was the name of Bacchus) going before with Instruments of
Music, etc. All which may very well incline us to think that the Gentiles
corrupted this holy Festivity, (as they did other Sacred Institutions) and
turned it into the profane Bacchanalia: which is no improbable conjecture of
Jo. Mich. Dilherrus in his Dissert. de Cacozel. Gentil. cap. 3.

Ver. 40. And ye shall take you on the first day.] Then they began to build
their Booths, that they might dwell in them the rest of the Feast.

Boughs of goodly Trees, etc.] Some fancy that this is not a direction for the
building of Booths with these Branches, but for the carrying them in their
hands, as Josephus tells us, Lib. III. Antiq. cap. 10. And they say these
Branches were called Hosanna's, because they sung those words of the Psalmist
as they marched along with these Boughs in their hands, Save now [in the Hebrew
the word is Hosan-na] O LORD: O LORD send now prosperity, CXVIII. 25. And this
is so riveted in the Minds of the Jews, that Aben-Ezra makes it the Opinion of
the Sadducees to hold that they were for any other use. But it is evident from
VIII Nehem. 15. that they cut these Branches to make Booths, and not to carry
in their hands; though it is likely that this might also be thought a fitting
Expression of Joy in after times; especially after they were expelled out of
their own Land. It is not unlikely also that they celebrated this Festival by
singing of Hosanna's, among other tokens of Rejoicing; praying for a happy new
year, whose Feast went a little before on the first of this Month. Whence the
Rabbis call this Feast of Tabernacles by the name of Hosanna; and the last day
of it they call Hosanna Rabba. And they repeat this often in their Prayers at
that time, as they tell us in their Minhagim (or Books of Rituals) saying, For
thy sake, O our Creator, Hosanna.
For thy sake, O our Redeemer, Hosanna.
For thy sake, O our seeker, Hosanna.
As if they beseeched the blessed Trinity, to save them, and send help to them.
In short, they call the Prayers they say at this Feast, by the name of
Hosanna's, as Joh. Michael Dilherrus has observed, Lib. II. Electorum, cap. 20.

Boughs.] The Hebrew word Pri signifies Fruit, as is noted in the Margin of our
Bibles. From whence some have gathered that they were to be the Boughs of
Fruit-bearing-trees: nay, the Jews fancy they were to be Boughs with their
Fruit, as well as Leaves, on them. But Buxtorf made no doubt (in his XVIth
Chapter of Synag. Judaica) that the word is rightly translated a Bough, whether
without Fruit, or with it: though in later Editions of that Book this passage
be lest out.

Goodly Trees.] The Hebrew word hadar does not merely signify that which is
beautiful and goodly, but that which is large and well spread; as is observed
by Hottinger in his Smegma Orientale, Lib. I. cap. 7. where he thinks these
words may be thus exactly translated, Take to you the Boughs of Trees with
broad Leaves, such as the Branches of Palm Trees. So that hadar is a general
word, and Branches of Palm Trees, a special instance of a Tree with spacious
Leaves; which were the fittest to be used, because they were best able to
defend them, either from heat or cold, or rain. Maimonides takes this word to
signify the Boughs of a particular Tree, which he will have to be a Citron.
And the Jews are so possessed with this opinion, that, at this day, they fancy
the Feast cannot be celebrated without such Branches. And therefore the Jews
now in Germany send into Spain, and endeavor to get one every year with the
Pome-citrons on it. And after the Feast they offer the Citrons to their
Friends, as a great present. Hottinger says he had one presented to him at
Heidelberg, that very year he wrote his Book now mentioned. See Dr. Lightfoot
in his Temple Service, chap. 6. sect. 3. and Buxturf. Synag. Jud. cap. 21.

Branches of Palm Trees.] With which Judea abounded, and was so noted for them,
that in the ancient Coins a Palm Tree represented that Country.

And the boughs of thick Trees.] Which were shady, and afforded a good shelter.
The Jews take these for Myrtles, which have very thick Leaves and Boughs, close
one to another; though the Leaves be small.

And Willows of the Brook.] If this Translation be right, it is likely they
served only to twine about the rest, and bind them together. And therefore in
Nehemiah VIII. 15. no mention is made of them: their Tabernacles not consisting
of such Boughs, which were used only for the compacting and tying together the
other.

And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God seven days.] These were the
seven days of the Feast of Tabernacles (as I noted before) which were spent in
Feasting and other tokens of Joy; with Thanks to God for his great Goodness,
who had brought them out of the Wilderness, where they had no Fig Trees, Vines
or Pomegranates, into a Country which abounded with fruitful Trees of all
sorts. Which was the reason, Maimonides thinks, that Moses bids them take the
Boughs of the most goodly Trees wherewith to build their Booths, More Nevoch.
P. III. cap. 43.

But of all the Joys at this Festival, none was comparable to that of drawing
and pouring out water: concerning which the Talmudists have this noted saying,
He that never saw the rejoicing of drawing Water, never saw rejoicing in all
his life. The manner of which is described out of the Jewish Writers, by Dr.
Lightfoot in his Temple Service, Chap. 16. sect. 4. And our blessed Savior is
thought to allude to it, when in the last, the great day of this Feast, he
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, etc. out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water, VII John 37, 38. But I have not
met with any one that gives a tolerable reason of this Custom at the Feast of
Tabernacles. Which I take to have been in memory of that Water which followed
them all the time they were in the Wilderness, without which they had perished:
and in thankfulness to God, that he had brought them into a Land of Brooks of
Water, of Fountains and Depths that spring out of Valleys and Hills, as well as
into a Land of Vines and Fig Trees, and Pomegranates, etc. as Moses speaks,
VIII Deuteronomy. 7, 8.

Ver. 41. And ye shall keep it a feast unto the LORD seven days in the year.]
He repeats it again, because it was of very great importance that they should
keep in mind such a singular Benefit as this, of their Preservation in the
Wilderness.

It shall be a statute for ever in your generations.] For the end mentioned v.
43.

Ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month.] They came out of Egypt in the
first Month; and then began to dwell in Tabernacles at Succoth (XII Exodus 37.)
and from that place were conducted ever after under the Cloud, XIII Exodus 20,
21. Which being in that Month we call March, some may think it had been most
proper to have kept this Feast at that time of the year, (...) not in
September. To which the Jews answer, That in March Summer began, when it was
usual for People to dwell in Booths, as more refreshing than Houses. So that if
they had kept this Feast then, it would not have been known that they dwelt in
Booths by a singular Command of God, and in memory of a Divine Benefit; but Men
would have thought the season of the year led them to it. Therefore God
appointed it in the seventh Month, which is a time of Cold and Rain, when Men
commonly left their Tabernacles, and betook themselves to their Houses, that it
might appear they did not go out of their Houses into Booths for their own
pleasure, or from common Custom, but by the Divine Precept, in memory of a
mavelous Benefit. Yet the fifteenth day of this Month was appointed for the
beginning of this Feast, because it was upon the fifteenth day of the first
Month that they marched out of Egypt to Succoth.

Ver. 42. Ye shall dwell in Booths seven days.] They left their Houses for
seven days, and went into the Fields, and pitched their Tents there; or on their
House tops; or in their Court-yards, as we read in VIII Nehem. 17.

All that are Israelites born shall dwell in Booths.] Sick People were
excepted; and the Rabbis also freed Women and little Children from this
Obligation. If the Rain likewise proved so great that they could not live there
dry, and the Cold so intense that it endangered their Healths, they might all
return to their Houses.

Ver. 43. That your generations may know that I made the Children of Israel to
dwell in booths.] This expresses the end and intention of this Feast, which was
to preserve a memory in future Ages, of the Goodness of God to their
Forefathers, in affording them his Divine Protection; which overshadowed them
^^d was a covering to them (when they had no Houses) by that glorious Cloud
which went before them to conduct them. For all the forty years they were in
the Wilderness, it overspread them like a Tabernacle, and defended them from
the Injury of the Weather, and wild Beasts, and all their Enemies; they having
no other shelter, in that desolate place, but only this. And consequently, this
Feast was instituted to make them sensible, how very happy they were in goodly
Cities and fine painted Houses, (as Maimonides speaks in the place
abovementioned) when they came to the good Land promised to their Fathers, who
wandered in an howling Wilderness, without any certain dwelling place.

And another Feast was tack't to this on the eighth day on purpose, to make
them more sensible of the happy exchange of their Condition from a Wilderness,
into a Land of Corn, and Wine and Oil, which they had plentifully gathered. Dr.
Lightfoot in his Harmony of the Evangelists upon III Luke 21. has another
reason for the Observation of this Festival: For which I can see no ground, and
therefore do not mention it, but refer the Reader to the first Volume of his
Works, p. 477.

When I brought them out of the Land of Egypt.] For the very first place where
they rested, after their first days march out of Egypt, was called Succoth, (as
I observed before) that is, Tabernacles: because here they began to spread
their Tents, in which they lived ever after, for forty years. Nay, in the very
Land of Canaan there were some who preferred Tents before Houses; as appears by
that phrase we meet with so often, when any Assembly or Army was dissolved;
They went every man to his Tent. And indeed, it was the most ancient way of
Living, for Shepherds, and such as fed Cattle, as Moses observes IV Genesis 20.
and therefore no wonder it lasted so long among the Israelites, who originally
were such People.

I am the LORD your God.] Whose Commands ought to be observed, and whose
Benefits ought to be remembered.

Ver. 44. And Moses declared unto the Children of Israel the Feasts of the
LORD.] So he was commanded to do, v. 2. they being concerned, as much as Aaron
and the Priests, in keeping these holy Solemnities, in honor of the LORD.

CHAP. XXIV.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Directions having been given,
after the setting up of the Tabernacle, for the several sorts of Sacrifices
that were to be offered there, (particularly upon the great Day of Atonement)
and Aaron and his Sons having been consecrated, and care taken that none of
their Posterity should Minister before God, but such only as were without
blemish; nor any other Sacrifices be offered, but such as were every way
perfect; and only such Feasts observed, as are mentioned in the foregoing
Chapter; he proceeds now to give order for the daily Service of God in the
Sanctuary, which was not yet settled, till the Princes had all made their
Offerings, etc. VII Numb. 1, 2, etc. VIII. 1.

Ver. 2. Command the Children of Israel, that they bring unto thee.] The daily
Sacrifices were to be maintained at the public Charge; and so were the Incense
and the Lamps: and therefore it was proper to speak to all the People, in whose
name the Priests performed all these things, to take care they should be
furnished with them. See XXX Exodus 13, etc.

Pure Oil-olive, beaten, for the light, to cause the Lamps to burn
continually.] All this has been explained XXVII Exodus 20. where this order was
first given, and now is commanded to be put in execution. It is not improbable,
that the Oil, to make it more pure and free from all Dregs, passed through two
Strainers into the Lamps; as Fortunatus Scacchus endeavors to make out,
Myrothec. I. Elaiochris. Sacr. 10.

Ver. 3. Without the vail of the Testimony, etc.] This is a short expression,
which in XXVII Exodus 21. is delivered more fully, without the Vail, which is
before the Testimony, that is before the Ark.

Shall Aaron order it.] He or his Sons, as it is explained in XXVII Exodus 21.

From the evening unto the morning.] The Hebrew word Boker properly signifies
that part of the Morning, which is from break of day till Sunrise; and the
other word Arvaim the Evening, after Sunset till it be dark. Therefore very
early in the Morning, and late at Night, the Priests were to look after the
Lamps.

Before the LORD continually.] For the Lamps burnt on one side of the
Sanctuary, as the Table stood on the other side with the Shewbread on it: and
both of them before the LORD, i. e. before the Ark of the Testimony, where the
Divine Majesty dwelt, XXV Exodus 30. XXVI. 35.

It shall be a statute for ever, etc.] XXVII Exodus 21.

Ver. 4. He shall order the Lamps upon the pure Candlestick.] The Candlestick
was made of pure Gold, XXV Exodus 31. XXXVII. 17. and thence seems to be called
the pure Candlestick, XXXI Exodus 8. But here it is possible, Moses may have
respect to the making it clean every day, before the Lamps were lighted.

Before the LORD continually.] See XXX Exodus 7, 8.

Ver. 5. And thou shall take fine flour.] Of the best Wheat.

And bake twelve Cakes.] These are called the Bread of the Presence (which we
translate Shewbread) in the place now named, XXV Exodus 30. where see what I
have noted. They were prepared by the Levites, 1 Chronicles. 9.32. XXIII. 29. and
were in number XII. to represent the Twelve Tribes of Israel, as continually
before God, i. e. under the care of his gracious Providence. Nor was this
number diminished after the Apostasy of Ten Tribes from the Worship of God at
the Tabernacle; but still Twelve Cakes were set before the LORD; because there
were a remnant of true Israelites among them, (1 Kings XXX. 18.) and this was a
constant Testimony against those Apostates, and served to turn them back to the
right Worship of God at that place; where they were assured they and their
Sacrifices would be acceptable, and no where else. Which made Abijah mention
this to Jeroboam and the Ten Tribes, among other things, that should induce
them to repent of their forsaking God and his dwelling place; where he tells
them, The Priests the. Sons of Aaron minister, and the Levites wait on their
business: And they burn unto the LORD every morning and every evening,
Burnt-sacrifices and sweet Incense: the Shewbread also set they in order upon
the pure Table; and the Candlestick of Gold with the Lamps thereof, to burn
every evening, etc. See 2 Chronicles. XIII. v. 9, 10, 11, etc.

Two tenth deals shall be in one Cake.] That is, two Omers; for an Omer was the
tenth part of an Ephah, XVI Exodus 36. Where we likewise read v. 22. that every
Israelite, while they were in the Wilderness, gathered just his his quantity
against every Sabbath. On which day these Cakes being set upon God's Table, (as
it here follows v. 8.) Dr. Lightfoot thinks, both the Measure and the Time,
were designed to put the Israelites in mind of their Sustenance in their
Wilderness.

Ver. 6. And thou shall set them in two rows, etc.] One upon another, as the
Hebrew Writers expound it. Who say also, that they were set length-wise cross
over the breadth of the Table: and that they were ten hand-breadths long, and
five broad, and seven fingers thick. See Dr. Lightfoot's Temple Service, Chap.
14. sect. 5.

Upon the pure Table.] It was called pure; because it was overlaid with pure
Gold, XXV Exodus 24. and we may be sure, was kept very clean and bright.

Before the LORD.] Who dwelt in the most holy place; before which the Bread was
set.

Ver. 7. And thou shall put pure Frankincense.] The best that could be got,
unmixed with any thing else. And there was no better in the World, than their
neighboring Countries afforded.

Upon each row.] On the top of each row of Cakes, there was set a golden Dish,
with an handful of Frankincense therein.

That it may be on the bread.] Or, for the bread. That is, offered unto God,
instead of the Bread; which was to be given to the Priests, who waited on him
at his Table, for their portion.

For a memorial.] For an Acknowledgment of God and of his Sovereignty over
them; and to beseech him to be always gracious to them, (See Chap. 2. v. 2.)
and to represent also (as Conradus Pellicanus understands it) that God was ever
mindful of his People, and had a great love to them; for the eyes of the LORD
are over the righteous, and his ears open to their prayers.

Even an offering made by fire unto the LORD.] The Frankincense being set upon
the Bread, they seem to be considered as one thing: part of which was to be
offered unto God; and the rest to be given to his Ministers. Now instead of the
Bread, which was the principal, the Frankincense was burnt every Week unto the
LORD, when the Bread was eaten by the Priests. Which Bread, it is evident, ( v.
9.) is called one of the Offerings of the LORD made by fire: because this
Frankincense, which stood upon it all the Week, was burnt as an Oblation to him.

Ver. 8. Every Sabbath he shall set it in order before the LORD continually.]
The Shewbread was prepared the Evening before: and then on the Sabbath four
Priests went in to fetch away the old Loaves and Frankincense that had stood
there all the Week before; and other four followed after them to carry new
ones, and Frankincense in their stead. For two of them carried the two rows of
Bread (six Cakes apiece) and the other two carried each of them a golden Dish,
in which the Frankincense was set upon the Bread. See Dr. Lightfoot of the
Temple Service, Chap. 14. sect. 5.

Being taken from the Children of Israel.] At whose charge they were provided;
though prepared by the Levites. See X Nehem. 32, 33.

By an everlasting Covenant.] By virtue of that Command (which they had all
agreed to observe) which required the Shewbread to be set before the LORD
always, XXIV Exodus 3. XXV. 30.

Ver. 9. And it shall be Aaron 's and his sons.] Who as God's Servants, eat of
the Bread which came from his Table.

And they shall eat it in the holy place.] For the most holy things could be
eaten no where else. See VI. 26, 29.

For it is most holy unto him.] See Chap. II. of this Book, v. 3.

Of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.] It need not seem strange that this
Bread, which was not burnt upon the Altar, as Meat Offerings were, should be
reckoned among the Offerings made by fire: for as the Altar (where those
Meat Offerings were burnt) is called God's Table, I Mal. 12. so this Table
where the Shewbread stood was really God's Altar. Insomuch that the Bread
which was set upon it before him, was looked upon as offered upon him: and the
Frankincense set upon the Bread as a part of it, being really burnt, it may be
called an Offering made by fire. Thus the Gentiles also, as an excellent Person
of our own has observed, thought Tables, rightly dedicated unto their Gods, to
supply the place of Altars. So Macrobius says ( Lib. III. Saturnal. cap. 11.)
it evidently appeared by Papyrian's Law, That arae vicem praestare posse mensam
dicatam, a Table consecrated might serve instead of an Altar. Of which he gives
an instance in the Temple of Juno Populonia; and then proceeds to give a reason
for it, because Altars and Tables, eodem die, quo aedes ipsae, dedicari solent,
were wont to be dedicated on the same day with the Temples themselves. From
whence it was that a Table, hoc ritu dedicata, dedicated in this manner, was of
the same use in the Temple with an Altar. See Dr. Owtram de Sacrificiis, Lib.
I. cap. 8. n. 7.

By a perpetual statute.] As long as these Sacrifices lasted.

Ver. 10. And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian,
went out among the Children of Israel.] In the Hebrew the words run thus; And
there went out the son of an Israelitish woman, and he was the son of an
Egyptian man, in the midst of (or, among) the Children of Israel. Which last
words signify, that though his Father was an Egyptian by birth, yet he was
become a Proselyte by Religion. And was one of those (it is probable) who went
along with the Israelites when God brought them out of Egypt, XII Exodus 38. So
R. Solomon Jarchi interprets this phrase, Among the Children of Israel. Hence,
says he, we learn that he was a Proselyte of Righteousness. And Aben-Ezra to
the same purpose, He was received into the number of the Jews. See a great many
more in Mr. Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedriis, cap. 1. numb. 2. where he observes,
That it is the common Opinion of the Jews, this Man was the Son of him whom
Moses killed in Egypt, II Exodus 12.

And this son of the Israelitish woman, and a man of Israel, strove together in
the Camp.] When God was delivering the foregoing Laws unto Moses, this Case
seems to have happened. And the Jews say the Controversy between these two was
this: The former, looking upon himself as having a good right to it by his
Mother, came and endeavored to set up a Tent among the Children of Dan, in
that place where their Tribe had pitched their Tents: which was opposed by one
of that Tribe, who told him the right of his Mother would do him no service,
unless his Father had been an Israelite: for the Law was (II Numb. 2.) that
every Man of the Children of Israel should pitch by his own Standard, with the
Ensign of their Father's House. Which Law, though given afterward, yet they
suppose was the Rule before: by which this Man was condemned, by those that
heard the Cause, to be in the wrong.

Ver. 11. And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the Name of the LORD, and
cursed.] Sentence being given against him, he uttered blasphemous words against
God himself, (perhaps renounced the LORD) and also cursed those Judges that had
condemned him.

The Jews commonly think that this Blasphemy was his pronouncing the peculiar
Name of God; which he heard at Mount Sinai, when the Law was given. But this is
a mere fancy; for there were some reproachful words uttered against God, as
well as against the Judges, as appears from v. 15. And they themselves
acknowledge, that a Proselyte was guilty of death, whether he cursed by the
proper Name of God, or any other, as Mr. Seldom shows, Lib. II. de Jure Not.
and Gent. cap. 12. Pellicanus thinks it probable that this Man mocked at the
foregoing Laws which were delivered about the Worship of God; and contemned God
himself when he was told by whose Authority they were enacted.

And they brought him unto Moses.] If the occasion of their strife was such as
the Jews imagine, then Mr. Seldom thinks it highly probable that the Cause had
been heard and judged by some of the lesser Courts established by Jethro's
advice, (XVIII Exodus 21, 22.) where the Blasphemy had been so plainly proved,
that he was convicted of it: but they doubting about the Punishment of so high
a Crime, referred the consideration of that to Moses, as the Supreme Judge.

And his mothers name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the Tribe of
Dan.] I see no reason of mentioning the name of the Woman from whom he was
descended; but that all might be satisfied of the Truth of this History.

Ver. 12. And they put him inward.] Committed him to Prison; that he might be
secured till his Punishment was declared.

That the mind of the LORD might be showed them.] In the Hebrew the words are,
That it might be expounded to them ( viz. by Moses) according to the mouth of
the LORD: that is, as the LORD should declare to him. And so Onkelos renders
them, Till the matter was expounded to them, according to the sentance of the
word of the LORD. For it is noted here by a famous Commentator among the Jews,
(as Mr. Seldom observes in the place before mentioned, Lib. II. de Synedr. c.
1.) that God was consulted about this matter, because they did not know whether
he was to die for this crime; or whether his judgment was to be expected from
the hand of Heaven, or otherwise. Whence Jarchi says, they did not know whether
he was guilty of death or not. And so Theodoret Q. XXXIII. in Lev. There was no
Law, as yet, about this matter. But there was a plain Law, that whosoever
cursed his Father or Mother, should die, XXI Exodus 17. from whence they might
justly infer he was to be so punished, who cursed his heavenly Father; there
being also another Law against those that reviled the Judges and Rulers, XXII
Exodus 28. And therefore I take it, they only doubted what kind of death he
should die, about which Moses consulted the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 13. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] It Is likely Moses went into
the Sanctuary to enquire of God, who from the Mercy-seat pronounced the
following Sentence against him; and also made a perpetual Law about this Case,
with some others.

Ver. 14. Bring forth him that cursed without the Camp.] This is the Sentence
pronounced by the mouth of God, from whom they expected it. And first he orders
the Criminal to be carried forth out of the Camp, as an unclean, (V Numb. 2,
3.) nay an accursed thing, VII Josh. 24.

And let all that heard him.] Next, he orders the Witnesses to be produced, who
heard him speak the blasphemous words.

Lay their hands upon his head.] This was a peculiar thing in this Case, Hands
being laid upon no Man's head condemned by the Sanhedrim, but only upon a
Blasphemer. By which Ceremony they solemnly declared, that they had given a
true testimony against him, and thought him worthy of the Death he was
condemned to suffer. And perhaps prayed God, that all the punishment of this
Sin might fall upon this Man, and not upon them, nor the rest of the People.
And so the Jews tell us their manner was to say, Let thy blood be upon thy own
head, which thou have brought on thy self by thy own guilt.

And let all the Congregation stone him.] This was the last part of the
Sentence, that when they that heard him Curse had taken off their hands, all
the Congregation should stone him. Which is the same Punishment the Law
inflicted on him that cursed his Father or his Mother, XX. 9. See there.

Ver. 15. And thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel, saying.] Upon this
occasion a new Law is made, in express terms against Blasphemy.

Whosoever curses his God.] Some of the Hebrews understand this of a Gentile
who lived among them, and was not yet solemnly made a Proselyte of the Gate,
that if he cursed the God which was worshipped in his Country, he should die
for it. See Seldom Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. ult. And Procopius
Gazaeus extends the words to such Persons as cursed the God they worshipped,
though he were a false God. Which is according to the common Rule of the
Talmudists, that where we find these words isch, isch, ( man, man, which we
well translate whosoever) they comprehend Gentiles as well as Jews. But no
doubt this Law particularly concerned the People of Israel; whom God intended
by this Law to preserve from such horrid impiety, as is here mentioned.

Shall bear his sin.] Be stoned. See XX. 9. If the word curses be understood
in the proper sense, Procopius well observes, that nothing could be more
senseless than this Sin, and upon that account deserved stoning; for he that
curses his God, upon what God will he call to confirm his curse? But the
Hebrew words seems to import only speaking contemptuously of God.

Ver. 16. And he that blasphemeth the name of the LORD shall surely be put to
death, etc.] It is uncertain whether this be an higher degree of the Sin
mentioned in the foregoing Verse; or only a repetition of the same Law, with a
more express declaration of the punishment he should bear for his sin. The Jews
unreasonably understand it of him alone that expressed the Name, i. e. the most
holy Name of God, as they say in Sanhedrim, cap. 7. number. 5. where Joh. a Coch
observes out of the Jerusalem Targum on XXXII Deuteronomy. that it is thus explained,
Woe unto those that in their Execrations use the holy Name; which is not lawful
for the highest Angel to express. But this is a piece of their Superstition:
the meaning undoubtedly is, That if any Man reproached the most High, he should
die for it; but the mere pronouncing his holy Name, could be no Crime, when Men
might swear by it, though not take it in vain, VI Deuteronomy. 13. XX Exodus 7.

All the Congregation shall certainly stone him.] As they were ordered to do
with the present Offender, v. 14.

As well the stranger, as he that is born in the Land, etc.] By Stranger may be
meant a Proselyte like the Egyptian, whose Offense was the occasion of this
Law: But the Jews extend it to Samaritans and Gentiles; only they say, such
were to be punished by the Sword, and not by Stoning.

Ver. 17. And he that kills any man, shall surely be put to death.] This Law
was given before XXI Exodus 12. And it is not easy to give an account, why it
is here repeated after the Case of a Blasphemer. Perhaps it was upon the
occasion of the last words in the foregoing Verse, As well the stranger, as he
that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the LORD, shall be
put to death. For, after the following Laws, they are repeated again as a
general Rule, v. 22. that no Man might think it hard a Stranger should be
punished for Blasphemy, as much as an Israelite; when in other Cases the same
Judgment passed upon them both. Procopius Gazaeus thinks a Murderer is joined
with a Blasphemer, because they have the same mind and intention; the one
desiring to destroy God, if it were possible, as the other does his Neighbor.
Therefore the Law puts them together; just as on the contrary, when it commands
the love of God, it couples with it the love of our Neighbor. So he.

Ver. 18. And he that kills a beast, shall make it good, beast for beast.] It
was not incongruous, as the same Procopius speaks, to annex unto the Law
against Murder, a Law against other Injuries. And concerning this, see XXI
Exodus 33, 34. For the Hebrew word Behemah here used, signifies such
domesticktame Beasts as are there mentioned.

Ver. 19, 20. If a man cause a blemish in his neighbor, as he has done, so
shall it be done to him, etc.] This Law concerns only free Persons, not their
Slaves: and has been explained, XXI Exodus 24, 25.

Ver. 21. And he that kills a beast, he shall restore it: and he that kills
a man, he shall be put to death.] This is a short repetition of the two first
Laws here mentioned, v. 17, 18. to make them the more regarded.

Ver. 22. Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one
of your own Country.] In these, and in all other Cases, as well as Blasphemy, (
v. 16.) you and the Stranger shall be judged by one and the same Law.

For I am the LORD your God.] Who will neither favor your wickedness, nor
suffer theirs to go unpunished; but do equal Justice unto all. Yet the Jews, by
a Stranger here, will understand only a Proselyte of Righteousness, as they
call him: that is, one who had entirely embraced their Religion; for such
alone, they imagine, were equalled with them. See Seldom, Lib. IV. de Jure Not.
and Gent. cap. 1. page 468.

Ver. 23. And Moses spoke unto the Children of Israel, that they should bring
forth him that had cursed, out of their Camp, etc.] It appears by this, that
all the foregoing Admonitions were repeated to Moses, upon the occasion of the
Law against Blasphemy, before he proceeded to put it in execution.

And the Children of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses.] Executed the
whole Sentence pronounced by God against the blasphemous Person, v. 14.

CHAP. XXV.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses in Mount Sinai, saying.] That is, in the
Wilderness of Sinai, I Numb. 1. For they stayed almost a whole year not far
from this Mountain; from whence they did not remove till the twentieth day of
the second Month of the second year after their coming out of Egypt. See X
Numb. 11, 12. And thus the Hebrew Particle Beth is often used for by or near;
as in XXXVII Genesis 13. V Josh. 13. and we find this expression again in the end
of the next Chapter, and in the conclusion of this Book. Which shows that all
here related was delivered to Moses in the first month of the second year after
their coming out of Egypt, immediately after the Tabernacle was set up, XL
Exodus 17.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them.] For what
follows was of universal concernment.

When ye come into the land which I give you.] This Law, though delivered
before they left Mount Sinai, could not take place till they came into Canaan.

Then shall the land keep a Sabbath.] Rest from being tilled, or sown, etc.
See XXIII Exodus 11.

Unto the LORD.] In obedience to him; and in honor of him. Some have
understood the foregoing words, When ye shall come into the Land which I give
you, as if they were to begin the Sabbatical year as soon as they entered into
Canaan: which is very absurd; for so, not the seventh, but the first, would
have been the year of Rest. And that had been very inconvenient, if not
destructive; the War making such great waste, no doubt, that Provision would
have been very scarce, if no care had been taken for the ensuing year. It is to
be considered also, that the old store upon which they lived when they entered
into the Land of Promise, was the fruit of the labor of the Canaanites, and
not of the Children of Israel. The meaning therefore is, that the seventh year
after their entrance into Canaan, or rather, after they were settled, and had
rest in it, they should let the Land rest.

The only question is, When this year was to begin? whether in the month of
Tisri, (which answers to our September) which was the ancient beginning of the
year; or in Nisan, (answering to our March) which was made a new beginning of
it, by an express Law, XII Exodus 2. the former still continuing the beginning
of the year for Civil things, as this for Sacred. Now there is great reason to
think that this Sabbatical year was to commence from September, when all their
Harvest was over, which began in March. Then they were not to sow, as they were
wont to do in October and the following Months; but to stay till the return of
this Season the next year. For if this year had been to begin in March, they
could not have reaped the Harvest of the sixth year.

Ver. 3. Six years shall thou sow thy fields, and prune thy Vineyard, and
gather in the fruit thereof.] XXIII Exodus 10. But what was allowed in other
years, is forbidden in this.

Ver. 4. But in the seventh year shall be a Sabbath of rest unto the Land, a
Sabbath for the LORD.] Or, unto the LORD, (as we translate it before v. 2.) who
though he gave this Land to them, continued the Proprietor of it (as he
declares v. 23.) and the LORD in chief, himself. Of whom they held it by this
Tenure, that they should till it, etc. only six years together, for their own
use; and in the seventh, let it lie in common, for such uses as he appointed.
And it was for the honor of the LORD, that they observed this Law: for as the
weekly Sabbath was an acknowledgment that they were his, so this Sabbatical
year was an acknowledgment that their Land was his.

Thou shall neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.] By this he explains
what he means by letting it rest. And these two words, sow and prune,
comprehend all other things that were usually done about their Fields or Trees;
as plowing, digging, dunging, etc. And though a Vineyard be only mentioned, yet
it is plain by XXIII Exodus 10. that Olive-yards are comprehended under the same
Law: and these are mentioned only as examples of all other Fruit Trees, which
were to be left in common, as these were.

Maimonides seems to be something too curious in what he says upon this
Subject; for inquiring why Moses mentions only these two things, sowing and
pruning, his resolution is, That for these two, if Men offended in them this
year, they were punished with that scourging called Malkut; but if they
offended in any other sort of Labors belonging to the Culture of the Fields,
or of Trees, they were not punished with the scourging of Malkut (which was by
a certain measure, not exceeding thirty nine stripes) but with the scourging
called Mardut, i. e. of Contumacy and Rebellion, which was without number or
measure. As if a Man dug or ploughed his ground; if he gathered out the
stones, or dunged it, etc. if he planted Trees, or grafted, etc. he suffered
the scourging of Rebellion. And more than this, he says it was not lawful in
the seventh year to plant any Tree, though it was not a Fruit-tree; nor to cut
off the dead Branches; nor to make a smoke under them to kill the Worms; nor to
anoint young Plants to preserve them from the bitings of Birds, etc. If they
did, they were liable to the scourging of Murdut. Nay, he is so nice, as to say
it was unlawful to sell to any Man any Instrument of Husbandry, in this year;
as a Plough, a Yoke, a Sieve, etc. yet he allows them, when they were under the
oppression of the Gentiles, and bound to find Provision for their Armies, to
sow so much as would maintain them. Of which things he discourses at large in
his Treatise called Schemitta ve Jobel, cap. 1. and cap. 7.

Ver. 5. That which grows of it self.] Either from Seed which fell casually
the year before; or from the old Root which sprouted out again, as Maimonides
expounds it in the same Treatise, cap. 4. which is wholly about such things.

Of thy harvest.] Of the Corn scattered last Harvest. He says nothing of their
Gardens; which, it is probable, every Man had to his own private use, and was
not bound to lay them open to all.

Thou shall not reap.] That is, says he, not the whole Field, so as to gather
it into Cocks, and to tread out the Corn with his Oxen, (if any did, they were
scourged with thirty nine stripes) but they might cut down a little, in common
with other Persons, and shake it out, and eat it, as he there determines, sect.
2.

Neither gather the grapes of thy Vine undressed.] In the Hebrew the words are,
The Vine of thy Separation: for it was separated this year from his dressing.
And what he gathered in common with others, was not to be pressed in a
Wine Press, but with another Instrument; the like he says of Olives, and of
Figs, and other things, which were to be ordered after another manner in this
year, then in the foregoing, sect. 23.

For it is a year of rest unto the Land.] This general reason is so often
repeated, to make them sensible they were no more to do any thing about their
Land this seventh year, then they were to labor upon the seventh day. But he
acknowledges, that if a Gentile hired Land in their Country, he was not bound
to let it rest, sect. 29. of that Chapter.

Ver. 6. And the Sabbath of the Land.] Here the word Sabbath signifies the
Fruit that grew in the Sabbatical year; as the word Sabbaths is used before
XXIII. 38. for the Sacrifices upon the Sabbaths.

Shall be meat for you.] This explains the prohibition of reaping any Corn this
year, or gathering any fruit, not to be meant absolutely; but only that they
should not look upon any thing that grew this year, as peculiarly theirs,
because it grew in their ground; but let all be common to others, as well as
themselves.

For thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, etc.] This, and the next
Verse, show that all the Fruits of the Earth, were perfectly in common this
year: for the very Beasts were not excluded, and therefore much less any Man
that dwelt among them, though he was uncircumcised. But it is very plain
likewise, that the Owner of the Land and his Family were not forbidden to take
their share; but might gather for their daily use as well as others: only not
lay up any thing separate for themselves.

Ver. 7. And for thy Cattle, and for the Beast that are in thy Land, shall all
the increase thereof be meat.] For his own Cattle, and for other Men's: which
were not to be fed with the Fruits which are proper to Men, (as Maimonides
observes in the same Book, cap. 5. sect. 5.) but if they came of themselves,
and eat Figs, for instance, they were not to be hindered. But it seems probable
that wild Beasts might be driven out of their Vineyards, etc. in this year, as
well as others; because they made such waste, as would have very much damaged
the owner for the future. As for all other tame Creatures, the Jews (if we may
believe Maimonides, cap. 7.) were so superstitiously careful they should have
an equal share with themselves; that when there was no Fruit any longer for the
Beasts in the Field, they ceased to eat what they had gathered for themselves;
and if they had any thing of it left, threw it out of their Houses.

Ver. 8. And thou shall number seven Sabbaths of years unto thee, etc.] Which
put together made XLIX years, as it follows in the rest of this Verse. They
began their first Account (as Maimonides there observes) from the fourteenth
year after their entrance into Canaan: for they were seven years in conquering
the Land; and seven more in dividing to every one their portion; so that the
first Sabbatical year was in the one and twentieth, and the first Jubilee in the
sixty fourth year after they came to the Land of Promise: So he cap. 10. where
he observes they numbered seventeen Jubiles from that time, to their Captivity
in Babylon, which fell out in the end of a Sabbatical year, and the thirty
sixth of the Jubilee.

Ver. 9. Then shall thou cause the Trumpet of the Jubilee.] The word Jobel
(which we translate Jubilee in the next Verse) is not in the Hebrew, but Teruah,
which in the Margin we translate loud of sound. For the Trumpet was blown after
a different manner at this time, than upon other occasions, that every one
might understand the meaning of it.

To sound.] In the Hebrew the word is, cause it to pass, that it might be heard
every where, throughout the Land. So these words may be most literally
translated, Thou shall cause to pass the Trumpet loud of sound.

On the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement.] This day was
very fitly chosen, that this year might begin at the same time that a general
Atonement was made for the Sins of the whole Nation. For they would be the
better disposed, to forgive their Brethren their Debts, when they craved Pardon
for their own.

Shall ye make the Trumpet sound (or pass) throughout all your Land.] This is
repeated, to make them careful to awaken every one to their duty, by the sound
of the Trumpet at every door; there being an unwillingness in most People, to
part with their Servants, and their Lands, etc. which they had long enjoyed.
And therefore every private Man, as Maimonides says, was bound to blow with a
Trumpet, and make this sound nine times, that they might fulfill these words of
this Precept, throughout all your Land. By this means, as R. Levi Barcelonita
notes, every one was the better inclined to hearken, when he saw it was a duty
incumbent on the whole Country, which all were to perform.

Ver. 10. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year.] Distinguish it from all other
years, by doing what follows. Maimonides fancies that these two Precepts of
numbering seven Sabbaths of years, v. 8. and of sanctifying the fiftieth year,
were delivered only to the House of Judgment; whose business, no doubt, it
peculiarly was, to give notice of this year, and to cause the Trumpet to be
sounded, and all the following Precepts to be observed. Schemitta ve jobel,
cap. 10. number. 1.

And proclaim liberty.] Unto all Servants, who were this year made free.

Throughout all the Land.] Even in all the Highways, as Aben-Ezra glosses; that
every one might have notice.

Unto all the Inhabitants thereof.] That is, to all the Children of Israel who
were Servants; or so poor that they had sold their Estates, as it here follows.
From these words the Jews gather, that after the Tribes of Reuben and Gad, and
half Tribe of Manasseh were carried Captive, Jubiles ceased. They are the words
of Maimonides in the forenamed Treatise; for then all the Inhabitants of the
Land were not in it. And therefore much more ^hen they were all carried
Captive, they only numbered the rest of every seventh year, without any Jubilee.

It shall be a Jubilee unto you.] Whence this year has the name of Jobel; there
are so many Opinions, that Bochartus himself scarce knew which to follow.
Josephus says it signifies (...), liberty; and the LXX and Aquila translate it
(...), remission: having a regard to the thing, rather than to the import of
the word Jobel; which never signifies any thing of that nature. D. Kimchi tell
us that R. Akiba, when he was in Arabia, heard them call a Ram by this name of
Jobel; and thence some fancy this year was so called, because it was proclaimed
with Trumpets of Rams-horns. But what if there were no such Trumpets? as
Bochart thinks there were not, these Horns being not hollow. See Hierozoicon P.
I. Lib. II. cap. 43. p. 425, etc. where several other Opinions are confuted.
The most probable that I meet withal, is, that it was called Jobel from the
peculiar sound which was made with the Trumpet, when this year was proclaimed.
For the Trumpet blowing for several purposes, viz. to call their Assemblies
together; to give notice of the moving of their Camps; to excite Soldiers to
fight, and to proclaim this year; there was a distinct sound for all these
ends, that People might not be confounded, but have a certain notice what the
Trumpet sounded for. And this sound mentioned before ( v. 9.) was peculiarly
called Jobel; as Hottinger thinks, who considers a great many other Opinions,
in his Analecta Dissert. III. wherein he follows Joh. Forsterus, who, near an
hundred years before, observed that Jobel, which we commonly translate Trumpet
(XIX Exodus 13. and other places) does not signify the Instrument it self, but
the sound that it made. And when it is used absolutely, alone, it signifies
this year; which was called Jobel from that sound which was then made; as the
Feast of Unleavened Bread was called Pesach, from the Angel passing over them,
when he slew the Egyptians. The Opinions of the Hebrew Writers about it, are
collected and largely represented by Josephus de Voisin, Lib. I. de Jubilaeo,
cap. 1.

And ye shall return every man unto his possession.] Unto his Field, or his
House, which his Poverty had forced him to sell; but now was restored to him
without any price; because they were not sold absolutely, but only till this
year. By which means the Estates of the Israelites were so fixed, that no
Family could ruin it self, or grow too rich. For this Law provided against such
Changes; revoking once in fifty years all Alienations, and setting every one in
the same Condition wherein they were at the first. By which means Ambition was
retrenched; and every Man applied himself with affection, to the improvement of
his Inheritance, knowing it could never go out of his Family. And this
application was the more diligent, because it was a religious duty, founded
upon this Law of God.

And ye shall return every man unto his family.] From which he had been
estranged by being sold to another Family; either by himself, or by his Father,
or by the Court of Judgment. So here are two parts of the liberty forenamed,
more expressly declared: Their Land, which was alienated, returned to the first
Owner; and such as were sold for Servants into another Family, came home again
to their own Family, being freed from their Servitude. Which was a figure of
that acceptable year of the LORD, as St. Luke calls it, IV. 19. in the Prophet
Isaiah's Language; wherein our blessed Savior preached Deliverance to all
Mankind. The Jews themselves are not so stupid, as to thin^ nothing further was
intended, but only freedom from bodily Servitude, in this year of Jubilee: for
Abarbanel himself, in this very Verse, endeavors to discover something of a
Spiritual Happiness. For the former part of the words now mentioned, Ye shall
return every man to his possession, he says belong to the Body: but the latter
part, And every man unto his family, belongs to the Soul, and its return to
God. So several others, whom J. de Voisin produces in the forenamed Book, cap.
2. And if our Dr. Lightfoot has made a right Computation, the last year of the
Life of our Savior, who by his Death wrought an Eternal Redemption, and
restored us to our heavenly Inheritance, fell in the year of Jubilee; the very
last that was ever kept. For if we count from the end of the Wars of Canaan,
which was seven years after they came into it, (and I do not know why we should
not think they began to number then, and not seven years after, as Maimonides
would have it) there were just fourteen hundred years to the thirty third of
Jesus Christ; that is, just XXVIII Jubiles. And it is the Confession of the old
Book called Zohar, as he observes, That the Divine Glory should be freedom and
redemption in a year of Jubilee. See Harmony of the New Testament, sect. 59. And
Vsserij Chronologia Sacra, cap. 13.

Ver. 11. A Jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you.] It is a question
whether the year of Jubilee was the year following the forty ninth year; or the
forty ninth year was the Jubilee; which, reckoning the foregoing Jubilee for one,
was the fiftieth year. Josephus Scaliger in his fifth Book de Emend. Temporum,
and several other great Men are of this last opinion; to avoid a great
inconvenience which otherwise would ensue, viz. That the forty ninth year being
the Sabbatical year in which the Land was to rest, if the next year to that had
been the Jubilee, two Sabbatical years would have come immediately one after
another, for the Land was to rest in the year of Jubilee, as it here follows.
One would have expected therefore that in the forty eighth year there should
have been a special Promise, that the Land should bring forth Fruit for four
years, and not for three only; as the Blessing is promised every sixth year, v.
21. Thus Jacobus Capellus reasons in his Historia Sacra and Exotica ad A. M.
2549. But others think this Objection not to be so great as to make them depart
from the letter of this Law, which says v. 10. Ye shall hallow the fiftieth
year: and here in this Verse, A Jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you.
Though a very learned Man, P. Cunaeus thinks this is of no great moment either
way; for it is usual in common speech, Septimanam octidum appellare (and
Hospinian in like manner, we call a Week octiduum ( eight days) because we
reckon utramque Dominicam both the LORD's days) And the greatest Writers
anciently called an Olympiad, which contained but the space of four complete
years, by the name of Quinquennium. See Lib. I. de Republ. Judaeorum, cap. 6.
Yet, besides the express words of the Law, the Consent of the Jews sways very
much the other way: for they accurately distinguish between the Schemitta, or
Year of Remission, and Jobel, the year of Jubilee, even then when these two
Solemnities immediately succeeded each other; as I shall have occasion to
observe on the next Verse.

Ye shall not sow, neither reap that which grows of it self in it.] Because
it was the Sabbatical year, ( v. 4, 5.) as some will have it; from the
observance of which they were not absolved by its being the Jubilee. But others
think, as I observed, that the Jubilee it self, was a new Sabbatical year.

Ver. 12. For it is the Jubilee.] He does not say it is the Sabbath of the Land,
as he does of the seventh year, v. 6. Which makes for their opinion who think
the Jubilee was not the same with that, but a new Sabbatical year: so that two
years together they neither sowed nor reaped. But they that maintain the other
opinion, look upon this only as a new reason why they should forbear such
labor this year; because, besides that it was the Sabbatical year, it was also
the Jubilee: a time of great joy, in regard of the Liberty to which every one
was restored; which made it more necessary every one should enjoy what the
Earth brought forth of it self, and none appropriate any thing to themselves.

It shall be holy unto you.] Because it was the LORD's Sabbath. v. 3. Separate
from the common Employments of other years; being dedicated to the uses
expressed in this Law, v. 10. which are two, Manumission of Servants, and
Restitution of Men to their ancient Possessions. Unto which some add a third,
viz. Remission of Debts. But the Jews are of a quite contrary opinion; that in
this the year of Jubilee differed from the Sabbatical year; that Debts were
remitted in the one, but not in the other. Whence those words of Maimonides in
the Treatise I have so often mentioned, cap. 10. sect. 16. In this the
Sabbatical year excels the Jubilee, that it remits Debts, which the Jubilee does
not: But the Jubilee in this excels the Sabbatical year, that it sets Servants
free, and restores Possessions, which the other does not. And the Jubilee
likewise restores Possessions in the very beginning of the year: but the
Sabbatical year does not release Debts till it be ended.

Ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.] By plucking what they
needed for every days use; but not by reaping, and gathering, and laying up in
Barns.

Ver. 13. In the year of this Jubilee ye shall return every man to his
possession.] This being the most remarkable thing belonging to the Liberty of
this year, it is therefore here again repeated. For it was so famous, that the
Heathens themselves took notice of it: insomuch that Diodorus Siculus says,
Lib. XI. it was not lawful for the Jews (...), to sell their own Inheritances.
Meaning, as Mr. Seldom expounds it ( Lib. de Success. ad Leges Hebr. cap. 14.)
to sell them quite, so as to alienate them for ever from their Families; which
is expressly forbidden v. 23. And so the Locrians, as is observed by Aristotle
in his Politics, were prohibited by their Laws to sell their ancient
Possessions. See P. Cunaeus Lib. I. de Repub. Jud. cap. 4.

Many Reasons are given by learned Men for this Law among the Jews, (See
Menochius Lib. III. de Repub. Hebraeor. Quaest. 3.) The most obvious is, that
by this Law God fixed the Jews to the Land of Canaan: since all their
Possessions were so entailed, that the right Heir of any of them could never be
wholly excluded from his Estate; but it would entirely return to him after a
certain number of years. And by this means also they preserved a distinct
knowledge of their several Tribes and Families to which they belonged: for
which end their Genealogies were of necessity to be carefully kept, that they
might be able to prove their right to the Inheritance of their Ancestors. By
which means, as Menochius notes, it was certainly known of what Tribe and
Family the Messiah was when he was born. And M. Alix has taken notice (which
is worth observing) that God ordered things so, that they should have the means
of preserving their Genealogies, by not suffering them to continue in Captivity
out of their own Land, for the space of two whole Jubiles. For they were but
LXX years in Babylon; in which short time their Genealogies could not be easily
confounded; especially since several who saw the first Temple burnt, lived to
see the second begin to be rebuilt. Two other Reasons are most judiciously
managed by Petrus Cunaeus, Lib. I. de Republ. Hebr. cap. 3. to which I refer
the learned Reader.

Ver. 14. If thou sellest ought to thy Neighbor, or buyest ought of thy
Neighbors hand, ye shall not oppress one another.] As Moses took care that the
Wealth of some should not oppress the Poverty of others, by making the
foregoing Law, that a poor Man should not lose his Land for ever; so in the
buying of a poor Man's Land, he would not have the rich Man give less for it
than it was worth; no more than the poor Man require more for it than its just
value, till the year of Jubilee. The Hebrew Doctors have formed a Rule about
this: that if a Man bought any thing for a sixth part less than its worth, or
sold it for a sixth part more than its worth, he was bound to restore that
sixth part: but nothing at all if it were short of a sixth part, wherein he had
damaged his Neighbor. But if the difference was more than a sixth part, the
Buyer might rescind his Contract, if the Bargain was not quite finished, and
require his Money again. And the Seller (if the damage was on his side) might
at any time require the thing to be returned to him, at the price for which he
sold it. See Seldom, Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 5.

Ver. 15. According to the number of years after the Jubilee, thou shall buy of
thy Neighbor.] They were to consider how many years were gone since the last
Jubilee; and consequently to purchase the Profits of the remaining years till
the next. For they could not either by Sale, or any other Contract, transfer
plenum fundi dominium (as Cunaeus speaks) their full interest in the Land, to
any other Man.

And according unto the number of years of the fruits, he shall sell unto
thee.] He that sold the remaining term of years till the Jubilee, was to
consider that every sixth year there was no Fruit; and therefore he should
demand nothing for them: but set his price only according to the number of the
other years, not reckoning those.

Ver. 16. According to the multitude of years thou shall increase the price
thereof, and according to the fewness of years thou shall diminish the price.]
This is added only to make what was said before plainer; that the price should
rise or fall, according as there were more or few years to come before the next
Jubilee. For example Maimonides puts this Case; If there be ten years to the
Jubilee, and a Man buy another Field for an Hundred pence; after which the
Buyer having enjoyed it three years, the Seller has a mind to redeem it, he
must then give to him that bought it of him Seventy pence. In like manner if
the Buyer have enjoyed it six years, the Seller must give him Forty pence.

For according to the number of the years of the Fruits does he sell unto
thee.] Therefore if a Man, says the same Maimonides ( cap. 11. number. 6.) sell
another a Field full of Fruit, and after two years would redeem it, he must not
demand him to restore the Field as he sold it, full of fuit, because it is said
here, according to the multitude of years, or fewness of years (and in the
foregoing Verse) according to the number of years after the Jubilee) which show
the years only were to be considered in the Redemption, and not the Fruits.

Ver. 17. Ye shall not therefore oppress one another.] The Seller by demanding
too much; nor the Buyer by giving too little.

But thou shall fear thy God.] For nothing could be so powerful as the Fear of
God to restrain them from Oppression; and to preserve an equality between the
Land to be sold, and the price to be paid.

For I am the LORD your God.] Whose Land this is, and by whose Favor you enjoy
it.

Ver. 18. Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments.] Which are
the Tenure whereby you hold this Land of me.

And ye shall dwell in the Land in safety.] And if you obey them, you shall not
be disturbed in it by your Enemies.

Ver. 19. And the Land shall yield her increase, and ye shall eat your fill,
and dwell therein in safety.] He incourages them in their Obedience, by a
promise of Plenty and Abundance; as well as of Safety and Security in their
Possessions.

Ver. 20. And if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year? etc.] To
take away all distrust of his Promise, he removes an obvious Objection which
might arise in their Minds; that they might want food if they neither sowed,
nor gathered in their increase, in the seventh year, as he required.

Ver. 21. Then will I command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it
shall bring forth fruit for three years.] This is the Answer to the doubt they
might have of wanting Sustenance, that he would bless them with such a
plentiful Crop in the sixth year, as should be sufficient for that and for the
two following years. From which Petrus Cunsus thinks the Argument very strong,
that there were not two Sabbatical years together, one in the forty ninth, and
another in the fiftieth year; for then the Earth in the sixth year, should have
brought forth not for three years, but for four; which was never heard of in
any Country. Palestine indeed was a Country, to which God afforded an
extraordinary blessing, beyond the common Laws of Nature; yet since there are
no Testimonies of so great and frequent a Miracle in the Book of God, we ought
not easily to believe this. Thus he Lib. I. de Republ. Hebr. cap. 6. To which
it may be replied, that this was not so frequent as he makes it, but only once
in fifty years: and the reason why Moses here says, the Land should bring
forth fruit for three years, and not for four, is because he speaks only with
respect to the common Sabbatical years (every seventh year) not to the great
Sabbatical year, as they call the XLIXth. Before which God may very well be
supposed to have blessed the Earth with a larger Crop than in any other
preceding sixth year. Besides, though it is said they should not sow in the
Jubilee, v. 11. yet it is not said they might not prune their Trees, as it is of
other Sabbatical years, v. 4. so that they might be dressed as in other common
years, to yield a plentiful Increase for their support in the succeeding year.

Ver. 22. And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit, until the
ninth year.] Some have interpreted these words, as if they were to eat the old
store, till the Fruits of the ninth year came in; and bring it as an Argument
that the Sabbatical year began in March: whereas the plain sense is, that the
Fruits of the eighth could not be thrashed out for food till the ninth year.
And then the next words,

Until her fruits come in, ye shall eat of the old store.] Are not to be
understood of the Fruits of the ninth year, but of the Fruits of the eighth,
which were to be eaten in the ninth. Till then they were to live upon the old
store; which served for two years, beside the sixth.

Ver. 23. The Land shall not be sold for ever.] Having mentioned the selling of
their Land ( v. 14, 15, 16.) he here again enacts it should not be sold for
ever. Which may be called the Lex agraria of the Jews; whereby Estates were
preserved in the Family to which they belonged, at the division of the Land by
Joshua. For they could not be quite cut off, as the words are in the Hebrew,
which we translate for ever; or as it is in the Margin, for cutting off: so
that the Seller and his Heirs should be cut off from it, as Mr. Seldom
interprets it. Or, as the LXX. (...), by an alienation never to be rescinded:
but all Estates were at the Jubilee to return to their first Owners, or their
Heirs, though they had changed Possessors an hundred times, by being sold so
often. And the same Law held in Donations, as much as in Sales, as Maimonides
observes. Yet this is to be understood only of absolute Alienations, without
any mention of time: for if any Man sold without fraud an Estate to his
Neighbor for sixty years, it was not to return to him or his Heirs in the year
of Jubilee, which came before the expiration of that term: for in the Jubilee,
says he, nothing returns but that which was sold for ever, Halicoth Schemitta
ve Jobel, cap. 11. sect. 2. And see Seldom de Successionibus ad Leges Hebr.
cap. 24.

For the Land is mine.] I reserve to my self the Supreme Dominion in it, and
propriety of it; and have disposed it to you, on such terms as I thought fit.

For ye are strangers and sojourners with me.] These words suggest another
sense of the foregoing; that their Land was God's, as he dwelt in a special
manner there in the Sanctuary, which was his Royal Palace: And they were all
his Tenants, who held the Land of him as long as he pleased; but were no more
to him, than the Proselytes were to them. The Land was his, and not theirs; and
they did but enjoy the use and the fuits of it, but had not the property. See
Mr. Mede page 157.

Ver. 24. And in all the Land of your possession, ye shall grant a Redemption
for the Land.] If any Man whose Poverty had forced him to sell his Land, grew
afterward so rich, that he was able to redeem it before the year of Jubilee,
this Law provides he should be permitted to do it, and the Buyer could not
refuse it. But then this was to be done honestly and truly: he was not to
borrow Money of another Man to redeem it; no, nor sell other Land to redeem
that which he had sold before, which they looked upon as a Fraud to the Buyer.
Therefore he had this right, only in case he was grown rich since the sale:
otherwise, he was to stay till the year of Jubilee, when it returned to him for
nothing. So Cunaeus out of the same Maimonides, Lib. I. cap. 2.

Ver. 25. If thy brother be waxen poor, and has sold away some of his
possession.] No Man, if we may rely upon the same Maimonides, might sell his
House or his Field till the time of Jubilee, unless Poverty compelled him to it.
For it was not lawful to sell it, that he might lay up the price of it in his
Coffer; or exercise Merchandise; or buy Goods, Servants, or Cattle; but only
buy necessary Provision with it. But if any Man did transgress, and employ the
Money otherwise, the sale notwithstanding was held to be good.

And if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall be redeemed what his
brother sold.] Here is a further enlargement of this Liberty, that if any of
his near Relations would redeem the Land he had sold (though he was not able to
do it himself) it should be allowed. For the design of Moses in this Law was,
Ne paucorum opulentia quandoque caeteros opprimeret, lest the wealth of a few
should at any time oppress the rest.

Ver. 26. And if the Man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem
it.] In the Hebrew it is his hand has attained and found sufficiency: which
justifies the limitation the Jews put upon this, (as I observed v. 24.) that he
should not have the right of Redemption, unless he was grown able to repurchase
it, since the sale of it.

Ver. 27. Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the
overplus unto the man to whom he sold it.] This was the manner of the
Redemption: they counted how many years were gone since the Sale; and if there
remained just so many more to the Jubilee, then he paid the Buyer half the price
at which he purchased it, for its Redemption. But if the number of years from
the Sale to the Jubilee, were not equal, then he deducted proportionable to the
years he had enjoyed it since the purchase, and gave him as much as the years
remaining till the Jubilee were worth. And if he sold a Field at first for an
hundred pounds, suppose, and he that bought it, sold it to another for two
hundred, he was to redeem it, as Maimonides says, according to what was first
given for it, because it is said here he shall restore the overplus unto the
man to whom he sold it: In like manner, if a Man sold a Field for an hundred
pound, which in the hands of the Buyer so improved, that it might be sold for
Two hundred, the Redemption was to be according to what was first paid for it.
But if he sold it for Two hundred pound, and it was grown so much worse that it
was worth but an hundred, it was to be esteemed in the Redemption according to
the present value. His reason is, Because the condition of him that sold his
Inheritance was always to be bettered; and the condition of him that bought it
to be made worse.

Ver. 28. But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is sold
shall remain in the hand of him that has bought it, until the year of Jubilee.]
If he could not pay him the Money it cost him, according to the forementioned
proportion, nor any of his Kindred redeem it for him; then he that bought it
was to enjoy all the Profits of it till the Jubilee.

And in the Jubilee he shall go out, and he shall return to his possession.] The
Purchaser was to quit his possession of the Land; and he that sold it enjoy it
again for nothing. And whosoever he was that possessed the Land at the Jubilee,
though it had been sold never so often before it came to him, the Jubilee
ejected him; and restored the Land to the first Owner or his Posterity. For no
Man, as was before observed, could either by Sale, or any other Contract,
transfer the full Dominion of his Land to another Man; so that it should be his
for ever.

Ver. 29. And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled City, then he may
redeem it within a whole year after it is sold.] This Verse and the next make a
great difference between Houses in walled Cities, and Lands in the Country. If
such Houses were sold, Men could not redeem them from the Purchaser when they
pleased, but must do it within the compass of a year, or else they were barred
for ever: and the year of Jubilee would not relieve them.

Within a full year may he redeem it.] He might redeem it the next day after he
had sold it, if he pleased; paying the full price that was given for it. And if
he that sold it was dead, his Son might redeem it; or if he that bought it was
dead, it might be redeemed from his Son, if done within the year. But his
Kindred could not redeem it; nor might he borrow Money to redeem it; nor redeem
it by parcels: but he might sell some of his Goods to redeem it. So Maimonides
in the forementioned Treatise, cap. 12. where he says, If a Man sold an House
in such a City, and the Jubilee fell out in the year of Sale, it did not restore
the House to the seller; but continued his that bought it, unless within a year
from the day it was sold it was redeemed.

Ver. 30. And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the
house shall be established for ever to him that bought it.] The Reasons for
this Law seem to be such as these; That by this means (as Menochius observes,
Lib. III. de Republ. Hebr. cap. 11.) Cities might be better filled with
Inhabitants; who were invited thither, when they had hope of a Settlement
there. And secondly, that Men might not rashly and easily part with their
Houses, which they could never recover, after they had let one year slip, which
was allowed for their redemption. And thirdly, Tribes and Families were not
distinguished by Houses they had in Cities: from whence it was that the Levites
might possess them, who otherwise are said to have no possession in the Land of
Canaan. And lastly, perhaps it was intended by this Law, that Proselytes, who
were not of the Hebrew Nation, and could have no Fields or Vineyards, might yet
have something of their own stable and certain; and not be forced always to
want a perpetual possession.

It shall not go out in the Jubilee.] They say in the G^mara of Bava kama, that
the Houses in Jerusalem were not subject to this Law; because that City, as
they pretend, did not belong to any certain Tribe. See L'Empereur upon that
Book, cap. 7. p. 172.

Ver. 31. But the houses in the Villages, which have no walls round about them,
shall be counted as the fields of the Country, etc.] The quite contrary Law is
made for Country-houses; which might be redeemed at any time: and if they were
not, returned to their first Owners at the Jubilee. The reason of this
difference is very plain: for the Houses in walled Cities were their own proper
Goods; but in the Country they were accounted part of the Land which was God's.
And so these words are to be understood, they shall be counted as the fields in
the Country: that is, fall under the same Law with the Lands, v. 23.

Ver. 32. Notwithstanding the Cities of the Levites.] Of which we have an
account XXXV Numb. 2. These are accepted from the foregoing Law concerning
Houses in walled Cities, as it here follows.

And the Houses of the Cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at
any time.] Not any of their Houses; but only those which they possessed in the
XLVIII Cities assigned to them for their Habitations. If they purchased Houses
in any other places, they were subject to the same Law with other Men, v. 29.
Insomuch that a Levite, who was Heir to his Mother who was an Israelite, was to
redeem as other Israelites did, and not after the manner of the Levites; for
the Levites had a Right different from other Men only in the Cities of their
Possessions; as Maimonides observes in the forecited Book, cap. 13. But if an
Israelite was Heir to his Mother a Levite, he redeemed as the Levites did,
though he were not of that Tribe; because the Right of their Redemption was
tied to the places, and not to the persons, as he there speaks.

Ver. 33. And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the House that was sold,
and the City of his possession (i.e. in the City of his possession) shall go
out in the year of Jubilee.] If he did not redeem it before, it was to come back
to him for nothing in this year. But there is another Translation in the
Margin, which the first words will bear, viz. If one of the Levites redeem
them. Though he was not near of kin, ( v. 25.) yet any Levite might redeem any
of these Houses: However, they were to be restored to that Tribe at the Jubilee.

For the Houses of the Cities of the Levites.] It is plain by this, that in the
foregoing words he speaks of the Houses, and not of the Cities themselves.

Are their possession among the Children of Israel.] They were of the same
nature of the Land that other Tribes had; which could not be alienated for
ever. For they having no other Possessions that could be sold, but Houses, it
was reason these Houses should return to their Owners at the Jubilee, as other
Men's Possessions did, v. 10.

Ver. 34. But the field of the Suburbs of their Cities.] See XXXV Numb. 4, 5.

May not be sold]. As their Houses might be: but if any Man bought them, the
Bargain was immediately void. The Tradition among the Jews (as Maimonides says
in the same place) that not be sold in this place signifies not be changed: so
as to turn a Suburb into a Field, or a Field into a Suburb: but Fields,
Suburbs, and Cities, were to continue perpetually in the same state.

For it is their perpetual possession.] Their Fields were to be always in their
own hands. And the reason why Houses may be sold, when the Fields could not,
seems to be this; because the Houses belonged to particular Levites, who might
alienate them for a time, and not suffer much by it; but the Fields of the
Suburbs were common to the whole Body of the Levites, who would have been
undone, if they had wanted Pasture for their Flocks, which were all their
Substance. Some indeed fancy that these Suburbs were enclosed, and every Family
of them had its several Portion: but as there is no proof of this; so had it
been thus, such Families could not without great inconvenience, have wanted
their Lands for the feeding of their Flocks.

Ver. 35. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen to decay with thee.] In
the Hebrew it is, When his hand fails: so that he is not able by his Labor
to support himself and his Family.

Then shall thou relieve him.] By bestowing Alms upon him (as the Jews
interpret it) not by lending him Money: though the following words seem to
incline this way. See Seldom, Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 6.

Yea, though he be a stranger or a sojourner.] By a Stranger they understand a
Proselyte of Righteousness; and by a Sojourner, a Proselyte of the Gate, as Mr.
Seldom there observes out of Jarchi and Abarbanel, p. 694. They say Hyrcanus
was the first that began (...), to entertain Strangers of other Countries, by
building Hospitals for their Reception.

That he may live with thee.] Have a comfortable Subsistence by the Relief of
Charitable People: for every Jew, they say, was bound to contribute something
toward it; and this was to prevent their selling themselves, as some did,
through extreme Poverty, v. 39.

Ver. 36. Take thou no usury of him, or increase.] Though these are
promiscuously used, yet the next Verse seems here to expound Usury to signify
that which is taken for Money; and Increase that which is taken for Corn,
Fruits, or Goods. They that would see more of these two words, Nesek and
Tarbith, may consult Salmasius de Vsuris, where he has largely discoursed of
them. I shall only further observe, that this Precept follows the other of
Relieving poor People by Alms, very fitly: because it is as great a Charity
unto some to lend them Money without Usury, as it is to give freely unto
others. See Notes on XXII Exodus 25. XXIII Deuteronomy. 19.

But fear thy God.] Lest he that is so good to thee, should punish thee for thy
inhumanity toward the Poor; of whom he has a care, as well as thee.

That thy brother may live with thee.] This is repeated, to show that by these
Laws God intended to provide for the Poor such a comfortable Subsistence in
their own Country, that they might not be tempted to forsake it, and therewith
perhaps forsake their Religion.

Ver. 37. Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals for increase.] Some thought if they lent Money freely, they might
receive more than they lent of other things; therefore the latter Clause of
this Verse was added, to prevent such Oppressions as St. Hierom mentions; who
says, some would lend a Neighbor ten Bushels, of Corn suppose, in Winter, to
receive fifteen Bushels for it the next Harvest.

Ver. 38. I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the Land of
Egypt.] Who have obliged you with far greater Blessings, then I command you to
bestow upon others.

To give you the Land of Canaan.] Under such Covenants as have been mentioned.

And to be your God.] To preserve you in the possession of it, in Peace and
Plenty, if you keep these Covenants, v. 18, 19.

Ver. 39. And if thy brother that dwells by thee, be waxen poor, and be sold
unto thee.] Some were sold by the Court of Judgment, when they had committed
Theft, and were not able to make Satisfaction: of whom the Hebrews interpret
that place XXI Exodus 2, etc. Others were sold by their Parents, v. 7, 8. of
that Chapter. But others sold themselves, being reduced to great Poverty,
notwithstanding the Alms that had been bestowed upon them, and the Money or
Goods that had been freely lent them. And of such the Hebrew Doctors understand
these words; and say, it was not lawful for a Man to sell himself, till his
Poverty was extreme, and he had nothing at all left, but must preserve his
Life, by the price which was given for him. Thus Maimonides in these words, A
man might not sell himself to lay up the Money which was given for him; nor to
buy Goods; nor to pay his Debts: but merely that he might get Bread to eat.
Neither was it lawful for him to sell himself, as long as he had so much as a
Garment left. See Seldom, Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 7. where he
observes that the Court of Judgment might not sell a Thief of their Nation, to
any but to an Hebrew: not to a Proselyte of either sort; much less to a mere
Gentile. But if an Hebrew sold himself to a Proselyte, or to a Gentile, (which
he was admonished not to do) the Bargain was good: but he was to be redeemed by
his Kindred, or by the People, as it here follows, v. 48, 49. Which other
People imitated, who derived their Laws from Moses; particularly the ancient
Indians (as Huetius observes out of Diodorus) whose Philosophers commanded that
none of their Nation should submit themselves to Servitude, Demonstr. Evang.
Propos. IV. cap. 6.

Thou shall not compel him to serve as a bond-servant.] As a Slave; which they
bought of other Nations; or took in their Wars: over whom they had an absolute
Dominion (as they had over their Goods, or Cattle) and might bequeath them and
their Children to their Sons and Posterity for ever, ( v. 45, 46.) or sell them
and their Children at their pleasure.

Ver. 40. But as an hired Servant, and as a sojourner.] They were to treat him
gently; as they did those who let out their Service for Wages, for a certain
time; and then were at their own disposal again.

Shall he be with thee.] Some of the Jews have carried this very far in
Speculation. For thus they gloss upon this place in Jalkut: Let him be with
thee in Meat and Drink; so that thou do not eat bread of fine flour, and he of
bran; nor thou drink old Win^, and he new; nor thou lie on a soft Bed, and he
upon Straw. But it is not likely that this was their practice.

And shall serve thee unto the year of Jubilee.] Beyond which time it was not
lawful to keep him in Service: for in the very beginning of this year all such
Servants were immediately dismissed. Which made the year of Jubilee such a time
of joy, that for nine days together before it began, these Servants kept a kind
of Saturnalia, in prospect of their approaching Happiness. For as Maimonides
says in the latter end of the tenth Chapter of Schemitta ve Jobel, from the
beginning of the year, until the Day of Atonement, Servants were neither
dismissed, nor yet served their Masters; but they did eat, and drink, and made
merry; wearing Garlands on their heads. And when the Day of Atonement came, the
Sanhedrim commanding the Trumpet to be sounded, all Servants immediately went
whether they pleased; as Lands were restored to their first Owners.

Ver. 41. And then shall he depart from thee.] His Master to whom he was sold
might keep him till the Jubilee: Whereas he that was sold by the Court of
Judgment might go free, if he pleased, in the seventh year of Release, XXI
Exodus v. 2.

Both he and his Children with him.] He that bought a Servant of the Court of
Judgment, was bound to maintain his Wife and Children, if he had any, with
Meat, Drink, and Clothes: and yet they were not bound to serve him, much less
did they remain Servants, when their Fathers or Mothers Servitude was at an
end; as Mr. Seldom observes in the forenamed place: and therefore it was much
more reasonable in this case, that he and his Children should go out together.

And shall return unto his whole family.] From which he was gone, while he
remained a Servant.

And unto the possession of his fathers shall he return.] If any was befaln
him, since his Servitude.

Ver. 42. For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the Land of
Egypt.] A good reason why they should not be treated like Slaves; because they
were all redeemed by God out of the slavery of Egypt, into a state of perfect
liberty.

They shall not be sold as bondmen.] Not publicly, and in the common place of
Sale, or in the street; but privately, and in a way of honor, (as the Jewish
phrase is) So Maimonides alleged by Mr. Seldom in the forenamed place, p.
705. But the plainest sense is, they should not be used like Slaves, while they
continued in Servitude: for though they had the use of them in all bodily
Employments, yet their Bodies or Persons were not theirs, and therefore they
might not use them as they pleased. So it follows in the next Verse.

Ver. 43. Thou shall not rule over him with rigor.] As Pharaoh did over all
the Israelites, I Exodus 13, 14. or as the Israelites were wont to do over their
Servants of other Nations; but gently use their Service in such Employments, as
would not be unworthy of them, if they were Freemen.

But shall fear thy God.] Remembering that they were all Slaves in Egypt, and
delivered by his wonderful goodness: which was thankfully and reverently to be
acknowledged.

Ver. 44. Both thy bondmen, and thy bond-maids, which thou shall have, shall
be of the heathen.] If they would have any Slaves, they were to be such of
other Nations, as were sold to them, or were taken by them in their Wars.
Whence the very name of Mancipia came, as the Roman Lawyers tell us, quasi manu
capti: and the name of Servus also, which signifies one who was saved, when he
might have been killed.

Round about thee.] He does not say, in the midst of thee, for they were bound
to destroy the People of Canaan.

Of them shall ye buy bondmen, and bond-maids.] If they had need of their
Service. But it does not appear that they had any great number of them; nor had
they any great occasion for them, being themselves so laborious, and breeding
their Children to look after their Land and their Cattle (in which their
Estates chiefly consisted) and being also so very numerous in a small Country.

Ver. 45. Moreover, of the children of the strangers, that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy.] Whether they were perfect Proselytes by
Circumcision, or only Proselytes of the Gate (as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. VI.
de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 8.) their Children were not exempted from being
made Slaves, if they sold them to the Hebrews.

And of their families that are with you, which they begat in your Land.] If
any of their Family or Kindred, as the LXX. translate it, had begat Children in
Judea, and would sell them, the Jews might make a purchase of them.

They shall be your possession.] Become your proper Goods, and continue with
you as your Lands do; unless they have their Liberty granted to them. And the
first sort of Proselytes obtained it three ways: either by purchasing it
themselves, or by their Friends; or by being dismissed by their Master, by a
writing under his Hand; or, in the Case mentioned XXI Exodus 26. where the loss
of an Eye or a Tooth by the Master's Severity, serve only for Examples of other
maims, which procured such a Servant his Liberty. But the second sort of
Proselytes did not obtain their Liberty, if we may believe the Hebrew Doctors,
by this last means, but only by the two first. And the year of Jubilee gave no
Servants of either sort their Liberty.

Ver. 46. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your Children after
you.] To whom they might bequeath the very Bodies of them and their Children.

To inherit them for a possession.] That they might have the same power and
dominion over them that they had over their Lands, Goods, or Cattle.

They shall be your bondmen for ever.] Not have the benefit of the year of
Jubilee, but be your Slaves as long as they live; unless they by any of the
means beforementioned obtained their Liberty.

But over your brethren the Children of Israel, ye shall not rule over one
another with rigor.] As they did over the Slaves before-named; whose Masters
(as the Hebrew Doctors say) were not bound to find them Food and Raiment; and
besides, might treat them with the greatest Severity, provided they did not
strike out an eye, etc.

Ver. 47. If a sojourner or stranger.] The Chaldee interprets these words, an
uncircumcised Proselyte. And so Maimonides says, they signify one who has
undertaken the Precepts of the Sons of Noah; whom they also call in their
Books, the pious among the Gentiles. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Jure Not. and
Gent. cap. 3. p. 153.

Wax rich by thee.] As many of them did by Trading; though they could not
purchase Land.

And thy brother that dwells by him waxes poor.] Which was a Case, Moses
supposes before v. 35. might happen.

And sell himself unto the stranger and sojourner by thee.] So I observed
before v. 39. they might do; though they were admonished not to do it: And the
Bargain held good, though they sold themselves to a Gentile. So Onkelos here
translates it, if thy brother sell himself to an Aramite, i. e. to an Idolater.
For Idolatry was thought to have sprung first from them: Terah and Nahor being
Aramites, who were the first Idolaters mentioned in the holy Scripture.

Or to the stock of the strangers family.] To one that sprung out of the Family
of a Profelyte: who though now incorporated into the Jewish Nation, yet being
originally of a Strangers stock, was not to have the privilege to keep a
Hebrew sold to him from the benefit of Redemption.

Ver. 48. After that he is sold.] And actually in the possession of a Stranger.

He may be redeemed, etc.] The Hebrews understand this, as if some of his
Kindred were bound to redeem him; or if they did not, he was to be redeemed at
the Charge of the Country: And that, though he sold himself a second time,
after he had been redeemed. But if he sold himself a third time, they looked
upon him as unworthy of Redemption; unless it were merely to save his Life. See
Seldom, Lib. VI. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 7. But the 54th Verse seems to
suggest, that they were not bound to redeem him; though they might, if they
pleased, and his Master could not refuse it.

One of his brethren may redeem him.] This Redeemer (says R. Bechai) is the
MESSIAH the Son of David, of the Tribe of Judah. Which I mention to show, that
the Jews thought there was something more Divine couched under this Law of the
Jubilee (as I observed v. 10.) then the very Letter of it imported. Though the
truth is, they wretchedly mistook the business of the MESSIAH: for the same R.
Bechai (speaking of this Section of the Law) says, It contains a sign and a
hope to Israel of Redemption from the Captivity of the four Monarchies: as if
the Messiah should have nothing to do, but to put them in possession of their
own Country, and to make them Lords of the World.

Ver. 49. Either his uncle, or his uncles son may redeem him, etc.] Here the
Persons are named by whom his Redemption might be made: which, in short, was by
any Man of his Family.

Or if he be able, he may redeem himself.] If, after his sale, an Estate fell
to him, whereby he became able to redeem his Liberty.

Ver. 50. And he shall reckon with him that bought him, from the year that he
was sold to him, unto the year of Jubilee, etc.] That no Injury might be done to
his Master, they were to compute how long he had served him, and how long he
had still to serve, and what price was paid for him: and then according to the
number of years gone, and to come, he was to make his Demands. Which is the
meaning of the following words, And the price of his sale, shall be according
to the number of years.

According to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him.] The labor
and service that he had done him, was to be valued, as they would do that of an
Hireling, (who wrought for so much, by the day or the year) and deducting that
from the price which was given for him, the remainder was the price of his
Redemption.

Ver. 51. If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall give
again the price of his redemption.] If he had served but a few years, and there
were many to come before the Jubilee; then there was less to be deducted from
what his Master gave for him, and the price of his Redemption was higher. But
if there remained but few years unto the year of Jubilee, (as it follows in the
next Verse) then less was to be given for his Redemption,

Ver. 53. And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him.] His Master was
to treat him as a hired Servant, who let out his Service for Wages by the year:
and that both with respect to the price of his Redemption, and to his usage
while he remained in his Service; as appears by the next words.

And the other shall not rule with rigor over him.] Use him harshly and
severely: for one Israelite was not permitted to use another in that manner, v.
43. and therefore much less was it to be suffered from a Stranger.

In thy sight.] If they observed any such rigorous usage, they were to
endeavor to get it remedied by the Authority of the Magistrate.

Ver. 54. And he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out in the
year of Jubilee.] If neither his Kindred nor Country redeemed him, nor he was
able to redeem himself ( v. 49.) from the time he was sold, to the year of
Jubilee, he was to stay till then: when he went out, as others did, without
paying any thing for his Liberty. By which it is evident, that he had not the
benefit of the seventh year of Release, as Hebrew Servants had who served
Hebrew Masters. For it had been unequal, if Hebrews sold to Proselytes, had
been discarged from their Service so soon; when the Children of Proselytes sold
to Hebrews ( v. 45.) were to be their Inheritance for ever. It was more
reasonable (and therefore so here enacted) that the Hebrews sold to Proselytes
should not be free till the year of Jubilee, unless they were redeemed by
themselves or their Friends. By which Law also they were made more careful not
to sell themselves to Strangers.

He and his children with him.] It seems a Proselyte was bound, when he bought
a Hebrew Servant, to maintain his Family while he served him: as the Hebrews
were bound to do, when they bought one of their own Nation, v. 41.

Ver. 55. For unto me the Children of Israel are servants, they are my
servants, whom I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt.] He would not have
them serve with rigor, nor beyond the year of Jubilee, because they were his
Servants by a peculiar Title; being redeemed by him from the Egyptian Bondage;
where they were held a long time in cruel Servitude, v. 38.

I am the LORD your God.] Your Sovereign; who will be ever kind to you, while
you serve and obey me.

CHAP. XXVI.
Ver. 1. YE shall make you no Idols.] This Precept has been often mentioned:
but being now to enforce all his Precepts by the most solemn Promises and
Threatenings, he repeats the principal thing upon which all depended, which was,
that they should keep close to the Worship of him the only God; and abhor all
Idolatry, which he knew would corrupt their Manners.

The Hebrew word Elilim, has been observed before XIX. 4. to express Contempt:
signifying the Idols (as we translate it) which the Heathen worshipped, to be
mere empty Vanities, things of naught, as we speak; and therefore to be
rejected with disdain, rather than any way regarded.

Nor graven Image.] The Hebrew word Pesel signifies the Image of any thing hewn
out of Wood or Stone: See XX Exodus 4. These Images the Gentiles did not
Worship, till they were dedicated and consecrated with certain Rites and
Ceremonies, (which were very various, according to the difference of the
Deities, and the Superstitions of several Countries) by which Consecration they
imagined their Gods were invited to be present in these Images and Statues:
otherwise they were not so stupid, as to worship Wood and Stone.

Neither rear up a standing Image.] The Hebrew word Matsebah is translated by
the LXX. (...), a Pillar, as we also translate it in the Margin. And if we
translate it Statue, or standing Image, we are not to understand by it, the
figure of a Man, or of any other Creature: but as the Hebrews seem rightly to
take it, for any Work, an Altar for instance, which is erected and set up for
Sacred Assemblies to be held thereat; though they be to the true God. So
Maimonides (as Mr. Seldom observes Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 6.) who
says, this was the custom among Idolaters, to erect such Statues to their
Gods. And so Pausanias says (in his Achaica) that in ancient time among the
Greeks, universally (...), rude Stones, instead of Images, had Divine honors
paid to them. See Maimonides de cultu Stell. and Plan. cap. 6. sect. 8. These
were the most ancient Monuments of all other; and being plain and simple, might
be thought to be less tempting and inviting, than those Images which had the
figure of Men, or other Creatures: yet even these God forbids to his People,
because he would have no Representation of him whatsoever; though it might seem
to have no danger in it. These were they which the Greeks called (...). See
upon XXVIII Genesis 19. and Seldom de Diis Syris, Syntag. 2. cap. 1.

Neither set up any Image of Stone in your Land.] There was greater reason they
should not set up Eben Maschkith, which signifies carved or figured Stone that
had Pictures cut in it, as the Hebrews understand it. See Maimonides in the
place before-named, and Dionys. Vossius his Notes upon him. And Mr. Seldom
observes also it was unlawful to set up these in their Land (as Moses here
speaks) though it were without the Temple: and it was no more permitted to a
Proselyte, then to an Israelite. If any Man did make such Statues he was beaten.

Possibly this may signify such Images, as were common among the Egyptians in
after times; which were not Representations of their Gods, but were full of
Symbols and Hieroglyphics, expressing some of the Perfections of their Gods.
These God would as little allow among his People, as any of the former: such
caution he used to prevent this sort of Idolatry, by Image Worship.

To bow down unto it.] Though they did not worship it; but only worship God
before it.

I am the LORD your God.] Who admit of no such things where I am worshipped, XX
Exodus 4.

Ver. 2. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, etc.] See XIX.
30. Where there is the same Precept. Which seems to be here repeated, because
if they kept his Sabbaths, they would preserve them from Idolatry; being
appointed for the worship of the Creator of all things: especially if they had
such a sense of his Divine Majesty, as wrought Reverence in them, even to his
Sanctuary.

Ver. 3. If ye walk in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments, and do them.] If
the regard you have to my Majesty, make you obedient to my Laws.

Ver. 4. Then will I give you rain in due season.] Here follow the Promises of
all things that Men naturally most desire, for their happy living here in this
World. And first he assures them they should have fruitful Seasons, which
depended upon Rain in due time, V Jerem. 24. For Canaan was not a Country like
Egypt, which was watered and made fertile by the overflowing of their River: but
without Rain was quite barren.

And the Land shall yield her Increase.] Corn for the use of Men; and grass for
the Cattle.

And the Trees of the Field shall yield their Fruit.] Which was very various
every one knows, such as Figs, Pomegranates, Dates, Apples, etc. which he
promises they should never want.

Ver. 5. And your threshing shall reach unto the Vintage, etc.] This is a
promise of such plenty of Corn, that before they could have reaped it all, and
threshed it out, the Vintage would be ready, and call for their labor about
it: and before they could have pressed out their Wine, it would be time to sow
again. As much as to say, they should have such abundance, that they should
have scarce time enough to receive and lay up one blessing before another came
upon them.

And ye shall eat your bread to the full.] Have no want of any sort of
Provision (which is comprehended under the name of Bread) but as much as you
can desire. Which promise may seem to have a peculiar regard to the Command
lately given, XXV. 4, 11. though there he took care to secure them by a special
Promise, that they should not want in those year, ( v. 20, 21.) and therefore
much less in any other.

And dwell in your Land safely.] Plenty would have been little satisfaction to
them, if they had been in danger to lose it, or to be disturbed in it: and
therefore he promises to defend and protect them in the secure enjoyment of it.
See XXV. 18, 19.

Ver. 6. And I will give peace in your Land.] There shall be no Insurrections
or Seditions in your Country; which are wont to arise from Poverty and
Discontent. For this seems to relate to Peace among themselves; as the latter
end of the Verse to Freedom from the Desolations their Enemies might make among
them.

And ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid.] It is a promise to
preserve them from House-breakers and Robbers.

And I will rid evil Beasts out of the land.] Which (as it will appear from v.
22.) made lamentable havoc, when they increased, and were let loose upon them:
but these God promises to extirpate, if they would be obedient, either by
hindering their breed; or making them devour one another; or driving them out
of their Country.

Neither shall the Sword go through your Land.] Their Enemies should not be
able to penetrate their Country, to make any Ravage there.

Ver. 7. And ye shall chase your Enemies, and they shall fall before you by the
Sword.] This supposes their Neighbors might Invade their Country, but should
fail in their attempt, and be driven away with shame.

Ver. 8. And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall
put ten thousand to flight.] That is, a few shall be too hard for a great
multitude; as it proved in the Conquest of Canaan. Insomuch that Joshua says
XXIII. 10. One man of you shall chase a thousand. Which was fulfilled in the
days of Gideon, who with three hundred Men, put to flight a vast Army, VII
Judge. 22.

And your Enemies shall fall before you by the Sword.] Which commonly made a
greater slaughter in their flight, then was made in the battle.

Ver. 9. For I will have respect unto you.] The reason of which great Success
(as well as of the Plenty before mentioned) he would make them sensible, was
God's great kindness and favor toward them, as the reward of their obedience.
This Joshua most thankfully acknowledges, XXIII. 9.

And make you fruitful and multiply you.] Make you a populous, and consequently
a powerful Nation.

And establish my Covenant with you.] Keep it inviolably, and most certainly
perform it. See VI Genesis 18.

Ver. 10. And ye shall eat old store.] Have a great deal of old Corn left, when
the new is come in.

And bring forth the old because of the new.] Have so much of it left, as to
want room for it, when the new is to be laid up.

Ver. 11. And I will set my Tabernacle amongst you.] This is the great promise
of all, that his Tabernacle, wherein he dwelt among them, should remain and
abide with them: For it was set already among them; but now he promises it
should be fixed: that is, his Divine Presence should continue with them.

And my soul shall not abhor you.] I will not cast you off, because of your
Offenses; for which I have appointed an Expiation.

Ver. 12. And I will walk among you.] Conduct you from place to place, all the
time you are in this Wilderness. For he dwelling in the Tabernacle, in the
Cloud of Glory, which covered it: when that Cloud was taken up, the Ark
presently moved to go before them, and led them to the next Station, where they
should pitch their Tents, X Numb. 11, 12. See XXV Exodus 8. This is given as the
reason why they should keep their Camp from all Impurities. See XXIII Deuteronomy. 12,
13, 14.

And I will be your God, and ye shall be my People.] Bring you to the Land of
Canaan; and there continue with you, and bless you, as my peculiar People.

Ver. 13. I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the Land of
Egypt.] I will not leave my own work imperfect; but as I delivered you from the
Egyptian Slavery, so I will continue to preserve your Liberty and Happiness.

That ye should not be their Bondmen.] Remain any longer their Slaves, as they
intended to make you for ever.

And I have broken the bands of your yoke.] When you could not deliver your
selves, I set you free from the heavy burdens which oppressed you.

And made you go upright.] They were so loaded with insupportable burdens in
Egypt, that they could not look up; but hung down their Heads with heaviness:
till God by setting them free, made them go out from thence, not with dejected,
but with cheerful Countenances. For that is the meaning of making them go
upright: as Freemen, not bowed down with Oppression; but lifting up their Heads
for Joy at their Deliverance. See XIV Exodus 8.

Ver. 14. But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
Commandments.] After the promise of these extraordinary Blessings, as the
Reward of their Obedience, he threatens them with as extraordinary Plagues and
Calamities, if they were disobedient. And as nothing moves us more powerfully
than hope of some Good, or fear of some Evil; so there are no greater Blessings
in this World than those which God's Promises gave them hope to enjoy, nor
greater Evils than those of which his Threatenings put them in fear. But such is
the Divine Goodness, he always offers Mercy before he proceeds to Judgment: and
mingles Judgment with Mercy before he proceeds in rigor of Justice. Which will
appear in the following Threatenings.

Ver. 15. And if ye despise my Statutes, or if your soul abhor my Judgments.]
They were not thus wicked at the first; but disobedience to God's Commands
(mentioned in the foregoing Verse) proceeded to a contemptuous neglect of them;
and that in time to an abhorrence of them.

So that ye will not do all my Commandments.] Though often admonished by his
Prophets; whose Messages they not only rejected, but slighted and despised.

But that ye break my Covenant.] By forsaking him, and falling to Idolatry. For
that was the principal thing in the Covenant, That they should have no oter
God, but him alone.

Ver. 16. I also will do this unto you.] I will alter the method of my
Providence toward you.

I will even appoint over you.] Or, as it is in the Hebrew, upon you: causing
the following Diseases to seize upon them (as the Phrase signifies) and arrest
them. That they might feel the heavy displeasure of him, whose Laws they set at
naught.

Terror, Consumption, and the burning Ague.] It is not certain what Diseases
are comprehended under these words: especially the first, Behalah, which we
translate terror. But coming from a word importing haste and precipitancy, I
take it to signify the falling sickness: whereby People are so suddenly
surprised, that they sometimes fall into the fire, by which they sit.

The other two words probably are rightly translated. For the next, Sachepheth
is by Kimchi and a great many others understood to signify a Consumption or an
Hectic Fever: though R. Solomon and some others, seem to take it for a
Dropsy; for he says it is a Disease that puffs up the flesh, or (as David de
Pomis) makes it to break out in Blotches. See Bochart in his Hierozoic. P. II.
Lib. II. cap. 18. As for the last word, Chaddachat, it coming from a word
denoting great heat, may well be translated a burning Fever.

That shall consume the eyes.] Make you look ghastly.

And cause sorrow of heart.] Take away all the comfort of Life.

And ye shall sow your seed, but your Enemies shall eat it.] Next to Bodily
Sickness, he threatens them with the Incursions of their Enemies: which was an
higher punishment than the former, according to that of David, it is better to
fall into the hands of the LORD then into the hands of Men.

Here also it is observable, he does not threaten the worst that their Enemies
might do to them; but first, that they should carry away their Harvest, and
make a Scarcity among them: and in the next Verse, speaks of delivering them to
be slain by them.

Ver. 17. And I will set my face against you.] Be extremely angry with you. See
XVII. 10.

And ye shall be slain before your Enemies.] The neighboring Nations oftimes
made great slaughter of them, and conquered them: as we find in the Book of
Judges; and in the beginning of the first Book of Samuel.

They that hate you shall reign over you.] And grievously oppressed them, IV
Judges 3. VI. 2, etc. This made them very contemptible; and was a just
punishment of their contempt of God's Laws.

And ye shall flee when none pursues you.] Lose all your Courage: directly
opposite to the promise v. 7, 8.

Ver. 18. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me.] If by these sore
punishments they were not reclaimed from their Idolatrous Practices, he
threatens to send greater.

Then will I punish you seven times more for your sins.] The number seven is
used for any indefinite multitude, and therefore here signifies a great
increase of their Plagues: which by their continued Provocations, became more
and more grievous, then in former Ages.

Ver. 19. And I will break the pride of your power.] That Power wherein you
glory. Which some understand of the Sanctuary; which in the days of Eli, was
forsaken of the Ark of God's strength, (as the Psalmist calls it) 1 Samuel IV.
10, 11. But it seems rather to relate to their numerous Forces, which at the
first were every where victorious: but after sundry Defeats in foregoing times,
were in the days of Saul reduced to such straits, they hid themselves in Caves,
and Pits, and Thickets, etc. and there was not a Sword or a Spear to be found
in any of their hands (save Readiness and Jonathan's) when they should have fought
with their Enemies, 1 Samuel XIII. 6, 7. 22.

And I will make your Heaven as iron, and your Earth as brass.] The one, he
means, should afford no Rain, and the other, for want of moisture, bring forth
no Fruit: which must needs make a sore Famine among them.

Ver. 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain, etc] This is a further
description of that Calamity; when after all their labor in ploughing and
sowing their Land, or digging and dunging their Trees, they brought forth
nothing for their Sustenance. We read in Scripture of such Famines, wherein Man
and Beast were ready to perish; particularly 1 Kings XVII. 1, 12. XVIII. 15. 2
Kings VIII. 1.

Ver. 21. And if ye walk contrary unto me.] Go on in your Idolatrous Courses,
directly contrary to my Commands, v. 1.

And will not hearken unto me.] Be obedient to the Admonitions of his Prophets,
whom he sent to call them to Repentance.

I will bring seven times mo plagues upon you according to your sins.] As their
Sins increased, so did their Plagues; for these that follow are more dreadful
than the foregoing. And it was a high aggravation of their sins, that they
would take no warning by the severe Punishments, which God inflicted upon their
Forefathers. This augmented his Plagues upon succeeding Generations: which, as
Dr. Jackson speaks, usually run by the scale of sevens. So that if we call the
litteral meaning to a strict Arithmetical Account, these later Plagues were
Nine and forty times heavier than the former. But it is most likely, a certain
number is put for an uncertain: yet denoting a very great increase of their
Punishments, beyond what had been in preceding times.

It ought to be observed that there is in the Margin another rendering of the
first words of this Verse, (If ye walk contrary to me) which some follow; If ye
walk at all adventures with me. That is, live carelessly, as if you had no
regard at all to me; I will have as little regard to you, or concern for you.
But the ancient Translations go the other way.

Ver. 22. I will also send wild Beasts among you, which shall rob you of your
Children, etc.] If the terrible famine would not work upon their stubborn
hearts, no more than the forenamed sicknesses and wars, ( v. 16, 17, 19, 20.)
then he threatens they and their Cattle should be devoured by wild Beasts. The
principal of which were Lions, unto which the depopulation and devastation of
Countries are ascribed in Scripture; particularly in the Prophet Jeremiah II.
15. IV. 7. where the Assyrians and Nebuchadnezzar are therefore compared to
Lions, because by those fierce Beasts Countries were sometimes laid desolate;
Man and Beast being destroyed by them. We read of no other, that killed the
People planted in Samaria by the King of Assyria, instead of the Israelites
whom they carried away Captive, 2 Kings XVII. 25. And God threatened to destroy
the remnant of Moab by the same means, XV Isa. 9. But there were other wild
Beasts also to do this Execution, V Jerem. 6. As Bears, who killed Two and
forty Children at one time, 2 Kings II. 24. Serpents and Cockatrices, VIII Jer.
17. And in general, that Prophet threatens the destruction of Judea by such
Creatures, XV Jerem. 3. Nor are Examples wanting in other Histories of such
Calamities; one Monument of which continues still in the Church. For the Solemn
Prayers in ROGATION Week, were first instituted (as Sidonius relates) by
Mamertus Bishop of Vienne in France, for this reason among others, that Wolves
and other wild Beasts did very great mischief in those parts. See Sirmondus in
Lib. VII. Epist. 1. Nay, some Countries have been so infested with smaller
Creatures, particularly Spain by Conies, that they left nothing untouched:
being noxious not only to Roots and Seeds, but subverting whole Towns, which
were undermined by them. And in the Neighboring Islands called Baleares, they
were so plagued with them, that they were forced to Petition Augustus to send
Soldiers to defend them from these little Animals. See Bochartus in his Phaleg.
Lib. III. cap. 7.

And your highways shall be desolate.] For Travelers would not venture into
the Highways, for fear of the wild Beasts; and because of the scarcity of
People to give them entertainment. It is observable that this Plague is
directly opposite to the Blessing promised unto their Obedience, v. 6. where he
says, I will rid evil Beasts out of the Land: which was never overrun with
them, till it was overspread with wickedness.

Ver. 23. If ye will not be reformed by me, by these things.] He would have
them observe his Hand in all these Punishments; by which he intended their
Reformation.

But will walk contrary unto me.] See v. 21.

Ver. 24. Then will I also walk contrary unto you.] Serve you in your kind; and
still make your Plagues more grievous, as your Stubbornness grows more
obstinate. To what was said before of this matter, I shall add the
Interpretation of Maimonides in his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 36. where he thus
glosses on this place: If when I inflict upon you these Punishments, you
believe them to be accidental things, mere Chances (so he understands the word
keri, which we translate contrary) then will I deal with you according to your
Opinion, and lay more heavy Punishments upon you. For because they believed
these Plagues happened by accident, which were the Consequents of their false
Opinions and evil Works, therefore they did not reform them: as Jeremiah says,
V. 3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved. Thus he.

And will punish you yet seven times for your sins.] If we should follow the
litteral Exposition mentioned v. 21. then those Plagues there threatened being
seven times multiplied, would make the Plagues threatened in this Verse, for
their multiplied Transgressions, three hundred and forty three times greater
than the first, v. 18. But the meaning is only, that they should still grow
more numerous, and more destructive.

Ver. 25. And I will bring a sword upon you.] This seems to be no new Plague,
having been before threatened v. 17. Therefore the meaning is, that he would
send three sore Judgments upon them, all at the same time, viz. War,
Pestilence, and Famine: which are contained in this and the next Verse. Of War
and Famine at once, See XIV Jerem. 18. XVI. 4. Of Pestilence added to them,
together with Captivity, XV. 2, 3, 4. XLIV. 12, 13. and see VI Ezekiel. 11, 12.
and still worse XIV Ezekiel. 21.

That shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant.] My quarrel with you for the
breach of that Covenant which you solemnly made with me, XXIV Exodus 3, 8. XXXIV
Exodus 10.11, 12, etc.

And when you are gathered together within your Cities.] Thinking there to
defend your selves against your Enemies, by impregnable Fortifications.

I will send the Pestilence among you.] To destroy the Soldiers in your
Garrison.

And ye shall be delivered into the hand of the Enemy.] Forced to surrender;
because you have no Men left to defend the place.

Ver. 26. And when I have broken the staff of bread.] Taken away its power to
nourish you (as Bochart expounds it) or rather taken Bread it self from you,
which is the support of Life, by a sore Famine, v. 10. If they either wanted
Corn to make Bread, or their Corn had no heart in it (as we speak) either way,
they would be starved.

Ten women shall bake your Bread in one Oven.] That is, there shall be such
Scarcity, that a small Oven shall be sufficient to bake Bread for ten Families;
i. e. for a great many, as the number ten in Scripture signifies, 1 Samuel I. 8.
XIX Job 3.

And they shall deliver you again your bread by weight.] Distribute to every
one in the Family, a certain quantity; not enough to satisfy them, but only
(as we speak) to keep Body and Soul together. So it follows:

And ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.] Never have enough to satisfy their
hunger; but by eating, made to crave the more to eat. So Pellicanus glosses,
who thus concludes his Notes of these Verses, Haec sunt arma Dei contra
insensatos, etc. These are the Weapons of God against stupid Wretches; which no
wicked Man can evade, when God in anger begins to fall upon them. Let no Man,
though never so great and rich, hope to be safe from the Hand of the Lord, who
can kill Kings by Worms and Lice when he pleases.

Ver. 27. And if you will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary
to me.] If all these Plagues have no better effect upon you than the former.
See v. 21, 23, 24.

Ver. 28. Then will I also walk contrary to you in fury.] His Indignation rises
proportionable to their Offenses. For now he not only says he will set his
face against them (as he speaks v. 17.) but proceed against them, in fury: by
such Punishments as should quite ruin them.

And I, even I will chastise.] The very manner of Speech expresses Anger and
Indignation: being as if he had said, I will make you know who it is that you
have despised, v. 15. The word jissarti also, which we render chastise, imports
smarter Punishments than those expressed by hickethi, I will smite, or punish
you, v. 24.

Seven times for your sins.] If we should by a litteral account multiply the
number of Plagues mentioned v. 24. seven times, the threatening here would
amount to this: That their Rebellion, not amended by so many Plagues, but
continued still from Age to Age (notwithstanding all the Corrections inflicted
on them for their Reformation, v. 23.) should in conclusion be punished one
thousand one hundred ninety seven times more severely than at first, v. 18. But
the simple sense is, That their obstinate contempt of his Laws, should be
punished with new and more grievous Plagues. Which was fulfilled, as our Dr.
Jackson observes (Book I on the Creed, chap. 22.) in their Captivity, in the
days of Manasseh, Jehojachim, and Zedediah: and again in the time of Ptolomy
the first under Antiochus Epiphanes. For these later Calamities were at least
seven times greater (both for extent and durance) than the former Persecutions,
which they suffered from the Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, and Syrians. By
all which, and by what follows, it plainly appears that these Threatenings were
a kind of Prediction. For Moses evidently foresaw they would not prove so
obedient as he desired, (XXXI Deuteronomy. 27, 29.) and consequently that these
Threatenings, in case of Disobedience, would turn into Prophecies. Unto every
one of which their History exactly answers, as the Book of Deuteronomy will
give me occasion to show more fully.

Ver. 29. And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye eat.] This is the very utmost Calamity that could come upon
a People: and yet (as Conradus Pellicanus observes) it is put before the
throwing down of their High Places and Images, etc. As if the devouring of
their Children (such was their incredible Lust after Idols) would seem a less
Evil to them, than the loss of their Images.

This was fulfilled among the Israelites in the Siege of Samaria, 2 Kings VI.
29. and among the Jews in the Siege of Jerusalem before the Babylonian
Captivity, IV Lament. 10. and in the last Siege by Titus, as Josephus relates,
Lib. VII. de Bello Judaico, cap. 8.

Ver. 30. And I will destroy your high places.] Where they were wont to worship
their Idols, according to the manner of the Heathen; who built Temples, and
Altars, and offered Sacrifices to their Gods, upon Mountains and high Hills;
especially such as were shaded with Trees. Insomuch that the Indians in
Philostratus call the high Mountain Caucasus, (...), the House of the Gods. And
the ancient Persians (as Herodotus says in his Clio, cap. 131.) (...), going
up to the top of the highest Mountains, there offered Sacrifices unto Jupiter;
calling the whole Circle of the Heavens, by that name. And in the Island Naxus
the highest Mountain was also consecrated to him; as from his worship on Mount
Athos he is called (...) in Hesychius. They that would see more of this matter,
may look into Cuperus his Apotheosis Homeri, p. 15, 16, etc. And the reason of
their choosing these places for their Worship was, because they thought their
Sacrifices would be more acceptable there than in Valleys. For, as Lucian
himself says, they thought themselves in such High Places to be nearer to
their Gods, and so should more easily obtain Audience, (...) Lib. de De^ Sir.
and Tacitus says the same in the last Book of his Annals.

How much the Israelites were inclined to follow the Nations of the World in
this, appears too plainly by their History; which shows that High Places were
frequented in the Reigns of their good Kings, as well as of their bad. Yea,
they were so fond of them, that when they could not go to them, they offered
upon the tops of their Houses, XIX Jerem. 13. XXXII. 29. I Zephan. 5.

And cut down their Images.] The Hebrew word Chammanecem, which we translate
your Images, properly signifies Temples erected for the worship of the Sun, as
Aben-Ezra says upon this place. For it is certain that the Hebrews call the Sun
Chamma; from whence comes the word Chamman, the Temple of the Sun: whom the
ancient Phoenicians took to be the Lord of Heaven. So Sanchoniathon, (...)
(speaking of the Sun) (...). Though it is very probable, that as Superstition
increased, the name of Chammanim was given to other Temples, as well as those
of the Sun. See Bochart in his Canaan, Lib. II. cap. 17. Others take this word
to signify what the Greeks call (...) and (...), Temples of the Fire; which
being worshipped by the Eastern People, Temples were erected in honor of it.
But this is not much different from the former: the Persians worshipped the Sun
in the Fire, which was the Symbol and Representative of the Sun. See Seldom
Syntagma II. de Diis Syris cap. 8.

And cast your carcases upon the carcases of your Idols.] Which were both burnt
together, as some imagine. However, this expresses the utmost Contempt both of
them and of their Idols; who were alike detestable. Their fondness of them also
when they were alive, seems to be represented by throwing them upon them when
they were dead. And the Hebrew word gillulim (which we barely translate Idols)
importing something belonging to the Dunghill, is taken by some to signify the
Images of Baal-peor; who was worshipped, as the Jews say, after a most beastly
manner. These Idols, whatsoever they were, though dressed up finely, yet were
no better then dead Carcases, without any Life or Soul in them. And we might
think (if that Superstition were so old) that Moses alludes to the little
Images of Isis, which were made of Plaster and Clay, and are found frequently
in the Sepulchers of Egyptians at this day. Unto which Christoph. Arnoldus (in
his Epistle to Wagenseil) thinks the Talmudists allude, when they say that
Pharaoh's Daugher, becoming a Proselyte to the Jewish Religion, washed her self
in the River Megullile from these dunghill Idols (as some render it) of her
Father's House, Excerp. Gemarae in Sota, cap. 1. sect. 40. The Dutch
Interpreters translate it Dreck-goden, not merely for the matter (as Arnoldus
thinks) but also for the form of a Beetle, which lives in dung. For so they
represented Isis, as Plutarch tells us in his Book de Isid. and Offic. See
Wagenseil Sota p. 1176.

And my soul shall abhor you.] As so offensive to me, that I can bear with you
no longer. This is directly opposite to his promise, if they would be obedient,
v. 11. My soul shall not abhor you.

Ver. 31. And I will make your Cities waste.] Their Walls being thrown down,
and their Houses burnt.

And bring your Sanctuaries unto desolation.] They had but one Sanctuary; and
therefore some think their Synagogues are comprehended under this name; for
they are sometimes called Sanctuaries, as I observed before. But the Sanctuary,
properly so called, having several parts, which were all holy, Moses may be
thought to speak of it here in the Plural Number. As Jeremiah represents the
Jews, saying, The Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the
LORD are these, VII. 4. That is, both these Courts wherein we stand, as well as
that of the Priests, and the most Holy Place, are all the LORD's Temple. Or the
word your is to be applied to such places of Worship as they themselves had
consecrated, in opposition to God's Sanctuary.

And I will not smell the savor of your sweet odours.] This seems to determine
the meaning of Sanctuaries, to God's own House; where sweet odours of Incense,
made of several sweet Spices, were daily offered unto him. Which being a
representation of their Prayers sent up to him, he here declares that he will
not be appeased by them, nor by any Sacrifices they could offer to him, but
utterly reject them.

Ver. 32. And I will bring the Land into desolation.] The People being carried
captive; or forced to flee into strange Countries, v. 33.

And your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.] They that
possess this Country, out of which you are expelled, shall be amazed when they
reflect upon the Calamities that are fallen upon you. Which Jeremiah describes
as very dreadful, VII. 20. And often mentions the Astonishment wherewith they
were struck, who beheld them, XVIII. 16. XIX. 8. XXV. 9, 11. and see 2 Chronicles.
XXIX. 8, 9. which shows this began before Jeremiah's time.

Ver. 33. And I will scatter you among the heathen.] Some fled into one strange
Country, and others into another; according as they could find means and
opportunity: insomuch that there were no known places where they were not
dispersed. So Jeremiah threatens XIII. 24. XV. 4.

And I will draw a sword after you.] So Jeremiah threatens those that would go
into Egypt for safety; that the sword which they feared, should overtake them
there, XLII. 16, 17, 18.

And your Land shall be desolate, and your Cities waste.] For they that were
left there, and their Enemies to whom the Country was given, were now enough to
cultivate the Land, and build their Cities. By all this, as well as by what
follows, it appears that here is a plain Prediction of the Miseries that came
upon Israel, by Tiglath-Pileser and Salmanasar; and upon Judah by
Nebuchadnezzar; who laid their Cities waste, destroyed the Sanctuaries,
despoiled them of their Goods, drove them into strange Countries, and, as it
here follows, made their Land keep its Sabbaths.

Ver. 34. Then shall the Land enjoy her Sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate,
and ye be in your enemies Land, etc.] This is a most bitter reproach to them
for their ingratitude to God, and inhumanity to their Brethren, in not keeping
the Sabbatical year, mentioned in the foregoing Chapter. Dr. Hammond has
another notion of the word, which we translate enjoy: See Note g. upon Psalm.
102. p. 504.

Ver. 35. As long as it lies desolate, it shall rest.] Lie untilled; as it
ought to have done every seventh year. And it lay thus seventy years; because,
as some think, they had neglected to keep so many Sabbatical years. Which we
cannot think to be true; without supposing that they kept none for half the
time from their entrance into Canaan, till they were expelled out of it, by the
Captivity of Babylon.

Because it did not rest in your Sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.] For in these
four hundred and ninety years, says Procopius Gazaeus, when they were under the
Government of Kings, there were seventy years to be kept as Sabbaths: which,
that the Land might enjoy its Sabbaths, were spent in the Captivity of Babylon.
We do not expressly read indeed of this profane neglect, while they dwelt in
their Land: but Jeremiah complains that they did not in his time give their
Servants Liberty in the seventh year, (XXXIV. 17.) and he gives this as one
reason why God delivered them up to Slavery, (for so I understand those words I
Lament. 3. Judah is gone into captivity, because of affliction, and because of
great servitude.) And from thence we may conclude that the same covetous humor
(and distrust of God's Providence) made them not suffer their Land to rest in
that year. Especially since the Author of the second Book of Chronicles
expressly mentions this as a reason of their Captivity, to fulfill the word of
the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah the Prophet, until the Land had enjoyed her
Sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept Sabbath, to fulfill
threescore and ten years, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 21. Now their Punishment in this was
made the more remarkable, if it be true that both the Kingdom of Samaria, and
the Kingdom of Judah were destroyed in a Sabbatical year: and that immediately
after a Jubilee, the City and Temple were destroyed by Titus, according to
Scaliger's Computation. And so I observed before Maimonides makes account (XXV.
8.) that the year when they were carried captive to Babylon, and the first
Temple destroyed, was in the expiration of a Sabbatical year, Schemitta ve
Jobel cap. 10. sect. 3.

Ver. 36. And upon them that are left alive of you.] This imports that the Body
of the People should be destroyed.

I will send a faintness into your hearts, in the Lands of their Enemies.]
Where their Spirits Sunk, under their present Miseries.

And the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them.] And yet they were condemned
to live, in continual dread of more Miseries. For the Hebrew word we translate
faintness signifies softness: which could not support the weight of their
Affliction. And this last Phrase imports such a timourness as should make their
Life always uneasy to them, and such a cowardice as should render them vile
and despicable. And so they are noted at this day to be mean spirited, and
faint hearted: it being scarce ever heard, that a Jew listed himself for a
Soldier; or engaged in the defense of the Country where he lives.

And they shall flee, as flecing from a Sword, and fall when none pursues.]
Fancy they hear the sound of Trumpets, or clashing of Arms; which made them
start, and run away, any fall into a swoon, when there was no danger. Such
Terrors the Heathen themselves have observed, in Men of an evil Conscience; who
were afraid of their own Shadow, as they say of Orestes.

Ver. 37. And they shall fall one upon another.] As people are wont to do, when
they make too much haste, and run confusedly; or the foremost hinder the flight
of those that follow, XLVI Jerem. 16.

As it were before a Sword, etc.] For fear of the Sword; as this Hebrew Phrase
certainly signifies, and is so translated in the Margin of our Bibles, XXI Isa.
15. XXXI. 8. See Bochartus in his Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. II. cap. 8.

And ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.] Being so timorous,
as to flee, when there were none, (as it goes before) they could not stand
before them, when they appeared.

Ver. 38. And ye shall perish among the Heathen.] Die with Grief, or by
Diseases, Poverty, Oppression, and hard Usage.

And the Land of your Enemies shall eat you up.] Insomuch that the ten Tribes
never returned to their own Land: but either perished by Hunger, and bad
Accommodations; or were swallowed up (as we say) into the Body of another
Nation.

Ver. 39. And they that are left of you shall pine away, in their iniquities,
in their enemies Land.] With grief and sorrow, and sad reflections upon the
Miseries into which their sins, and the sins of their Fathers had thrown them.
Insomuch that Death was more acceptable to them than Life, VIII Jerem. 3.

And also in the iniquities of their Fathers shall they pine away with them.]
Especially those of Manasseh King of Judah, whose wickedness was so great, that
the zealous Reformation which his Grandchild made, could not turn away the
fierceness of God's great wrath against them, 2 Kings XXIII. 26, 27.

Ver. 40. If they shall confess their iniquity, etc.] Though Moses had been
above three times as long in recounting the Plagues which he either foresaw, or
feared would come upon them for their sins, than in the Blessings which he
promised should follow their Obedience: yet he plainly shows that the Blessings
would have far excelled the Curses, had not their Disobedience hindered. For
after all these dreadful Calamities were come upon them, he concludes with a
most gracious promise that God would restore them to their own Land, from
whence they were expelled, if they truly repented of those sins which were the
cause of it.

That he means by confessing their iniquities, and the iniquities of their
Fathers, etc. acknowledging them with such unfeigned sorrow, as wrought
Repentance; without which he gave them no hope of Deliverance. And it is well
observed by a great Divine of our own, That if without confession of their
fathers iniquities, they could not be absolved from their own; their fathers
iniquity not repented of, was their own; and so was the punishment due unto it.

And that they have walked contrary to me.] Both they, and their forefathers:
whose ways had been so contrary to God's Laws, that, if they sincerely
confessed it, God expected they should take the quite contrary course, and
observe those Precepts carefully which their Fathers had violated.

Ver. 41. And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them
into the Land of their Enemies.] Be sensible that all the Miseries they have
endured, came not by chance; but the just Punishment I sent upon them for their
sins: particularly that it was by my order, that they were carried captive into
a strange Land.

If then their uncircumcised heart be humbled.] By an uncircumcised heart seems
to be meant an heathenish temper of mind, insensible of God: which made them
stubborn and refractory; and therefore this Phrase is the same with an hard
heart. For which there was no cure, but such remarkable Judgments, as evidently
carried in them the marks of a Divine Hand. Which when they saw, and submitted
to it, he gives them hope of deliverance.

And they accept of the punishment of their iniquity.] Patiently bear it, as
their just desert; and acknowledge they do not deserve to be delivered from it.

Ver. 42. Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant
with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham.] See III Exodus 6. He promises to
restore them to their own Land; according to the Covenant made with their
Forefathers, that he would give it them, for an everlasting Possession. For to
remember a Covenant, or Promise, in Scripture Language, is to perform it, and
make it good. Accordingly we find the forenamed Confession made by Daniel
(Chap. IX.) and he makes it in the name of all the People; among whom, no
doubt, there were many that heartily joined with him: and then followed their
wonderful Restoration in the Reign of Cyrus, of which we read I Esra, etc.

And I will remember the Land.] Re-people it with its former Inhabitants, etc.
See 2 Chronicles. 36. v. 22, 23. where this immediately follows the Relation he had
made of the Land being laid desolate.

Ver. 43. The Land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her Sabbaths,
etc.] This Verse is very obscure; unless we take it to speak of a new Expulsion
out of their Land, after their Reduction to it. And then the next words

And they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity.] Must be
interpreted, after they had accepted, or though they had accepted, etc. This
made their sin the more provoking; that they offended God again, when he had so
graciously forgiven them, and delivered them from a dismal Captivity.

Because, even because they despised my Judgments, and because their soul
abhorred my Statutes.] Returned to the very same wicked disposition, for which
they had been formerly expelled, v. 15. This was fulfilled by degrees, by the
Successors of Alexander, and at last by the Romans.

Ver. 44. And yet for all that, when they be in the Land of their Enemies.] He
would not have them utterly despair of Mercy, even after a new Banishment:
which has now continued many Ages. For this Promise is not yet fulfilled, as
Dr. Jackson observes Book I. on the Creed, Chap. 31. sect. 9.

I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them
utterly.] As we see at this very day, they are not destroyed utterly: but
remain a great Body in several Countries; after above six hundred years
Expulsion from their own Land.

And to break my covenant with them.] Never more to own them for my People.

For I am the LORD their God.] I still continue to have a peculiar right to
their Obedience; as they have to my kindness, if they will return to their duty.

Ver. 45. And I will for their sakes remember the Covenant of their Ancestors,
etc.] The meaning cannot be, that God would be so gracious for their sakes who
were so very wicked: but, as the words in the Hebrew are, he would for them (i.
e. for their good and advantage) remember the Covenant of their Ancestors, whom
he had brought forth out of the Land of Egypt. That is, once more deliver them
from their miserable Condition, and restore them to his Favor; that he may be
their God. And that great Man (now mentioned on the foregoing Verse) observes,
That the continuation of their Plagues seems so much interrupted, and the
Plagues themselves so much mitigated, in the last Age (since the Gospel has
been again revealed) as if their Misery were almost expired, and the Day of
their Redemption drawing nigh. But then they must first confess their Iniquity,
and the Iniquity of their Fathers, (as Moses speaks before, v. 40.) with their
Trespass which they trespassed in crucifying Christ the LORD: and accept the
Punishment of their Iniquity, acknowledging that so horrid a Crime, deserved so
long and so heavy a Punishment. For every Child (as he observes in another
place (Book XI. p. 3750.) is born, as it were, heir to his fathers sins, and to
their Plagues; unless he renounce them by taking their Guilt upon him, and such
hearty Confession as this Law prescribes; and patient Submission of himself to
God's Correction.

Ver. 46. These are the Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws, which the LORD made
between him and the Children of Israel.] This may be thought to refer either to
all the foregoing Book of Laws; or to what is said in this Chapter. Menochius
thus expounds it, these are the Punishments which God threathed, to the
breakers of his Laws. But it is more reasonable to take in the whole, in this
manner these are the Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws (together with the
Promises and Threatenings annexed to them) which the LORD made between him and
Israel.

In Mount Sinai.] See XXV. 1.

By the hand of Moses.] By the Ministry of Moses, who delivered these Laws,
from God's own Mouth.

It is obvious to observe, that instead of, these are the Laws which the LORD
made between him and the Children of Israel, Onkelos the famous Chaldee
Interpreter, has between his WORD and the Children of Israel. Which Theodorick
Hackspan produces, among other places, to prove that in those Paraphrasts the
WORD of the LORD signifies no more than (...) himself. Which, though it be true
in some places, yet in others, as I have observed before, it cannot have that
signification; particularly in CX Psalm. 1. where the Hebrew words are, The LORD
said unto my Lord, which are thus expounded by Jonathan, The LORD said unto his
WORD. Where it can signify nothing, but another Divine Person. And so Onkelos
might intend it here; that the LORD made all these Laws between his Eternal
WORD and them.

CHAP. XXVII.
Ver. 1. AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Some Religious People, it is
possible, were touched with such a sense of what Moseshad now delivered, in the
foregoing Promises and Threats, that they thought of giving themselves wholly
unto God, or of vowing some of their Goods to him: and therefore he gives Moses
further Directions for the regulating of such Vows.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them, when a Man shall
make a singular Vow.] And first, If any Man vowed himself, or his Children,
wholly to the Service of God in the Tabernacle, he directs what was to be done
in that case. Which he calls a singular, or extraordinary Vow; and by Philo is
called (...), the great Vow: it being a wonderful piece of Devotion (as the
word japhli in the Hebrew imports) because Men were desirous to help God's
Priests in the meanest Ministry; such as bringing in Wood, carrying out Ashes,
sweeping away the Dust, and such like.

The person shall be for the LORD, by thy estimation.] The meaning would have
been more plain, if the words had been translated just as they lie in the
Hebrew, According to thy estimation, the person shall be for the LORD. For this
immediately suggests to ones thoughts, That the Service of the Persons
themselves thus devoted, was to be employed in the Tabernacle; but a value set
upon them by the Priest, and that to be employed for the LORD, i. e. for holy
uses; for repairing the Sanctuary, suppose, or, any thing belonging to it. The
reason why God would not accept the Persons themselves, as they desired, but
the value of them for his Service; seems to be because there was a sufficient
number of Persons peculiarly designed for all the Work of the Tabernacle; which
he would not have incumbered by more Attendants there, than were needful.

Ver. 3. And thy estimation shall be.] That the Priest might not either
overvalue, or undervalue any Person; the Rates are here set down, which he
should demand for their Redemption.

Of the male from twenty years old, even unto sixty years old.] For at Twenty
years of Age (says Procopius Gazaeus) Men begin to be fit for business, and
continue so till sixty; when it is time to leave it off.

Thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver.] That this one Rule should
serve for all Men, though of different qualities, Philo thinks was fit for
several reasons, which he gives in his Book of Special Laws. The principal is,
because God regarded only the Vow; the value of which was equal whosoever made
it, whether a great Man or a poor.

After the shekel of the Sanctuary.] See XXX Exodus 13.

Ver. 4. And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.]
Women could not be so serviceable as Men, and therefore were valued at a less
rate: For all that they could do was to spin, or weave, or make Garments, or
wash for the Priests and Levites.

Ver. 5. And if it be from five years old, even unto twenty years old.] It
appears by this, that though a Child of five years old, could not make a Vow,
yet his Parents might solemnly devote one of that Age to God; and it did oblige
them to pay what is here required for the use of the Sanctuary.

Thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten
shekels.] Less is required than for those above twenty; because their Life was
more uncertain; and they were less capable to do any Service, before they came
to their full growth.

Ver. 6. And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, etc.] Before a
Child was a Month old, it seems it was not capable to be devoted to God; but
then it might. And still less was still demanded, as the value of them; because
Children so small were very weak and imperfect; and the price therefore set
accordingly. But the words may be understood not of Children that were a Month
old, but that were in the first Month of their Life: And Samuel we find was
devoted to God before he was born.

Ver. 7. And from sixty years old and above, if it be a male, then thy
estimation shall be fifteen shekels, etc.] They are valued much less after
sixty than before, ( v. 3.) because their Service then was little worth, and
their Life likely to be short.

And for a female ten shekels.] The Hebrews think it observable, that in their
youth ( v. 3, 4.) Males were valued almost double to Females: but now in old
Age, they are made almost of equal value. For old Women continue very
serviceable in many things, when old Men are not: whence they have a saying, An
old Woman in an House, is a Treasure in an House.

Ver. 8. And if he be poorer then thy estimation.] If he be not able to pay,
according to the forenamed Rates.

Then he shall present himself before the Priest.] Who was then in attendance
at the Tabernacle: for he does not speak of the High Priest, but of the lower.

And the Priest shall value him.] According to the best Information he could
get of his Ability; as it here follows.

According to his ability that vowed, shall the Priest value him.] He was to
examine his Condition; and accordingly set such a Rate upon him as he might be
able to pay, without undoing his Family.

Ver. 9. And if it be a Beast.] Now he proceeds to the second Case; which was
when any Man vowed to give God a Beast, of some sort or other.

Whereof men bring an offering unto the LORD.] And first he mentions clean
Beasts, such as God accepted at his Altar; as these are explained by the
opposite unclean Beast, v. 11.

All that any man gives of such unto the LORD.] Whether to be sacrificed, or
not.

Shall be holy.] Set apart for God's Service, according to the nature of his
Vow: to be offered at the Altar, if he so expressed it; or to be given to the
Priests and Levites, if that was his desire; or to be sold for the service of
the Tabernable, if it was left at large.

Ver. 10. He shall not alter it, nor change it.] Some think these words alter
and change, are two Expressions of the same thing. But the first word may
signify, that he should not alter it for any other Beast, or Thing; and the
second, that he should not change it for any Beast of the same kind: but that
very Beast, which was vowed, was to be given to the uses intended; and no other
accepted in its stead, though it were really better.

A good for a bad, or a bad for a good.] If Men had been left to their liberty,
either to give unto God the Beast they had vowed, or another in its room, they
might have given a bad instead of a good, as Maimonides observes, which had
been a great profaneness. But supposing those that were truly Religious, would
have brought a good instead of a bad (that is, one much fatter, and more
valuable) God would not suffer it; because he would preserve a Reverence to
things once Consecrated, which he would not should return to common uses,
though a better thing was substituted in its room. If any Man did change what
he had vowed, though it were for the better, he was to be beaten; as Maimonides
says in his Treatise on this subject, cap. 1.

And if he shall at all change Beast for Beast, then it and the exchange
thereof shall be holy.] The Man was to be beaten, and both the one and the
other Beast, was to become God's. Which the Jews understand thus, (as
Maimonides tells us in the same Treatise) that if he changed the Beast he
vowed, twice or thrice, nay, a thousand times, they all became holy: and he was
also to suffer the Punishment of stripes for every one of them.

Ver. 11. But if it be an unclean Beast, of which they do not offer a Sacrifice
unto the LORD.] Some comprehend under this, such Beasts, as though in
themselves clean, yet had some blemish in them, which rendered them unfit for
Sacrifice. But as they could not be offered in Sacrifice, so one would think it
was not lawful to vow them either to that, or any other holy use.

Then he shall present the Beast before the Priest.] That he might consider the
worth of it.

Ver. 12. And the Priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad.] Of a great
price or a small. He was not allowed to exchange it for a clean Beast; both
because it was dedicated to God, and because that exchange might have been a
great damage to the Priest: many unclean Beasts being of greater value than
some clean; an Horse or a Camel, for instance, of greater price than a Sheep,
or a Goat.

As thou valuest it, who art the Priest, so shall it be.] He directs his speech
to the Priest, to awaken his Conscience, to attend and make upright Judgment;
because that was to be the value of it, which the Priest determined it to be
worth.

Ver. 13. But if he will at all redeem it.] It was in the Man's choice; either
to leave the Beast with the Priest, or to pay him the Money at which he had
rated it.

Then he shall add a fifth part thereof, unto thy estimation.] If he chose the
latter, it was a sign he thought it worth more, than the price which the Priest
had set upon it: who could not understand the value of it, so well as himself.
And every Man, as Maimonides observes ( More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46.)
regarding his own advantage, and inclining naturally to save what he can; if a
Beast were not rated at its just value, he that had vowed it would be disposed
rather to redeem the Beast, than let the Priest have it. Which is the reason
that God orders, he should in this case pay a fifth part more than the Priest
set upon it, that he might be sure to give the full value.

Both this, and the foregoing Law, was to preserve that from being vile and
cheap, which bare the Name of God (as he there speaks) and was consecrated to
his uses.

Ver. 14. And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the LORD.]
By vowing it to God's Service: for of such sanctifying he speaks in this
Chapter, and this is the third Case about Vows. Which commonly consisted in
promising to God some part of their Estates; either to serve for Sacrifices, or
to be kept for some Sacred uses. Whence came those vast Treasures which were in
the House of God, mentioned 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 26, 27, 28. for they were chiefly
Oblations of part of the Spoils taken from their Enemies, which David and Saul
and Abner and Joab had dedicated: together with the Oblations of such Persons
as Samuel the Seer, who is there said to have dedicated a great deal to
maintain the House of the LORD.

Then the Priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad, etc.] He makes
the same Law in this case, which he had done about unclean Beasts; that the
Priest should consider the worth of it, and accordingly set the price: having
respect to the condition of the House, whether it was great, or little, old or
new, etc.

As the Priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.] That was to be the fixed
price; which no Man was to attempt to alter.

Ver. 15. And if he that sanctified it, will redeem his House.] If he that
vowed it to God, chose afterward rather to pay the price himself, then part
with the House, he was to submit to the Law made in the foregoing Case; which
was, to add a fifth part to the Rate set upon it. For there was another reason
why many might make this choice, (besides that mentioned in Verse 13.) because
if they did not redeem it, the House could never return to them again; no, not
at the Jubilee. For it is probable, the Law concerning Lands (which immediately
follows) was the Rule for Houses also: which were valued according to their
distance from the year of Jubilee, at a higher or lower price, as Lands were, v.
18, 22, 23.

Then shall he add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation, and it shall
be his.] He that gave us the Law (says Maimonides in his Treatise on this
Subject, cap. ult.) knows the most intimate sense of all men's souls, and
penetrates into the most secret recesses, and lurking places of humane desires:
and he seeing that their love of riches would make them very saving; so that,
if out of a religious motion they had consecrated any thing to him, they would
be prone to repent of it; he therefore ordained, that if any man had a mind to
redeem what he had consecrated, he should add a fith part to its just value:
that is, pay well for it.

Ver. 16. And if a man shall sanctify unto the LORD.] By a Vow; after the same
manner that some did a House, v. 14.

Some part of a field.] This seems to signify that it was not lawful for a Man
to vow his whole Field; that is, all his Estate: because God would have no Man's
Family undone and made Beggars, to enrich his Sanctuary.

Of his possession.] Not purchased by him, but descended to him as an
Inheritance from his Ancestors.

Then thy estimation shall be according to the seed thereof.] It shall be
valued, according to the quantity of Seed which is required to sow it.

An Omer of barley-seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver.] So much
Land as an Omer of Barley would sow, was to be rated at fifty Shekels. And so
proportionably: so much as would take up two Omers at an hundred; or half an
Omer at five and twenty. Menochius thinks it was to be rated at so much yearly;
but there is not the least intimation of this in the Text: and his only reason
for it, is this of Abulensis, That it would have been too little to give for a
piece of Land to be held XLIX. years. See Lib. II. de Republ. Hebraeor. cap.
19. Quest. 7. Which is of no force at all; for it is plain God designed a
moderate Rate should be set upon all things which Men vowed to him; where by
Men were not discouraged to vow. And this yearly Rent had been excessive and
oppressive: For a piece of Land, which an Omer of Barley ( i. e. about a Pottle
of our Measure) would sow, could yield no great Crop, and consequently could
not be of a considerable value: Barley also being much cheaper than Wheat.
Concerning an Omer see XVI Exodus 36.

Ver. 17. If he sanctify his field from the year of jubilee.] Make this Vow
immediately after the Jubilee, or in that year.

According to thy estimation.] Beforementioned of fifty Shekels for an Omer of
Barley.

It shall stand.] It shall be so rated; and nothing abated.

Ver. 18. But if he sanctify his field after the jubilee.] Some years after.

Then the Priest shall reckon unto him the Money according to the years that
remain, even unto the year of jubilee, etc.] The Priest was to compute how many
years were gone since the last Jubilee, and how many yet remained till the next:
and accordingly to deduct from the rate of fifty shekels beforementioned;
either more or less, as the years yet to come were more or fewer.

Ver. 19. If he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it, then
shall he add the fifth part, etc.] The very same Rule is given in this Case, as
in those of unclean Beasts and Houses, v. 13, 15.

Ver. 20. And if he will not redeem the field.] When the Priest has set
hisvalue upon it, and tells him he may have it again at such a rate, if he
pleases; and he refuses the offer.

Or if hehave sold the field to another man.] That is, if the Priest upon his
refusal, have sold it to another Man; and afterward he that vowed it has a
mind to it himself, and would give the price at which he might have had it.

It shall not be redeemed any more.] He was then excluded from all benefit of
Redemption.

Ver. 21. But the field when it goes out in the jubilee.] Out of the possession
of him to whom the Priest sold it.

Shall be holy unto the LORD.] Shall not return to him that vowed it; but
continue God's portion.

As a field devoted.] Being solemnly consecrated to the Divine Service.

The possession thereof shall be the Priests.] Who were to have the Inheritance
of it for their better support. But they might sell it ( Menochius thinks) nay,
were bound to sell it, to some of the Kindred of him that devoted it, or to
some of his Tribe: For otherwise Lands would go out of the Tribe to which they
belonged; and besides, the Priests were to have no Inheritance in the Land,
XVIII Numb. 20. See him Lib. II. de Republ. Hebr. cap. 19. and his Annotations
upon this place. But these seem not to be solid Reasons why the Priests should
not enjoy this Land themselves. For though they were not to have any
Inheritance in the Division of the Land of Canaan, yet if any sell to them by
the means now mentioned, (which was but very seldom, since Men were very
careful to preserve their Inheritances) God does here bestow such Land upon his
Priests: who might possess it, if they pleased, because they had it in God's
right; or else sell it, ( v. 20.) and keep the Money to their own use.

Ver. 22. And if a man sanctify unto the LORD a field which he has bought.]
And consequently could enjoy only till the Year of Jubilee; when it was to
return to the Family of whom he purchased it.

Which is not of the fields of his possession.] No part of his Paternal
Inheritance, (as that mentioned v. 16.) but bought of the Priests, to whom it
was fallen by a Vow; or of him to whom the Priests had sold it.

Ver. 23. Then the Priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation.]
Set a value upon it, according to his judgment.

Even unto the year of jubilee.] With respect to the number of years, between
the time of the Vow and the year of Jubilee.

And he shall give thy estimation in that day.] Presently pay the Price that
the Priests has set upon it, without the addition of the fifth part (as
Menochius well observes in the place beforementioned) which he who redeemed
his Paternal Inheritance was bound to pay over and above the price at which the
Priest esteemed it, v. 19. For this was not so much worth as that, being but
for a term of years till the Jubilee.

As an holy thing unto the LORD.] As a thing devoted unto God, instead of the
Land, which was redeemed with this Money.

Ver. 24. In the year of jubilee the field shall return unto him, of whom it was
bought, etc.] Not unto him who bought the Field, and then vowed it to God; but
unto the Hereditary Owner: which is the meaning of the next words, Even unto
him to whom the possession of the Land did belong.

Ver. 25. All thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the
sanctuary, etc.] Full weight, according to the Standard kept in the Sanctuary.
See XXX Exodus 13. and XIX of this Book, v. 36.

Ver. 26. Only the firstling of the Beasts, which shall be the LORD's
firstling, no man shall sanctify it.] By vowing it to be a whole
Burnt-offering, or a Peace Offering unto the LORD, as Maimonides expounds it.
The reason was, because no Man could lawfully vow that, which was not his own,
as the Firstlings were not; they being the LORD's already, as it follows in the
end of this Verse.

The same Reason held (as Maimonides likewise observes) in all things belonging
to God, as Tenths. Yet they devised ingeniously enough (as he speaks) a way to
give these Firstlings to God by a new Obligation, and yet not offend, as they
imagined, against this Law. For they interpret these words of Firstlings
already brought forth: No Man might sanctify such, but while they were in the
Womb, they might; saying, I vow that Lamb (suppose) which my Ewe goes with, to
be a whole Burnt-offering to God, if it be a male. But they could not vow it
for a Peace Offering, because no Man could alter any thing for his own profit.

Whether it be ox, or sheep.] Under these two are comprehended all other kind
of Creatures, whose Firstlings belonged to God.

It is the LORD's.] III Numb. 13. VIII. 17. For this reason no Man was to
presume to vow such things: it being a kind of mockery to make a present of
that to another, which was his own before. See Mr. Mede concerning this Verse
p. 512.

Ver. 27. And if it be of an unclean beast.] Most understand this of the
Firstling of an unclean Beast. Against which there is this Objection, That such
things were before ordered to be redeemed, not with Money, but with a Lamb,
XIII Exodus 13. Therefore it seems more reasonable to understand this of the
Firstling of such an unclean Beast, which a Man had redeemed, ( v. 13.) but
afterward devoted to God: which he might do; for, after the Redemption, it was
become his own again.

Then he shall redeem it according to thy estimation.] At the rate thou shall
set upon it.

And shall add a fifth part of it thereto.] As was ordained before in the like
case, v. 11.

Or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation.]
Any other Man might buy it, at that rate the Priest had set upon it; and the
Money was applied to holy uses.

Ver. 28. Notwithstanding, no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto the
LORD.] Nothing that was devoted by that sort of Vow, which was called Cherem
(as the word is here in the Hebrew) with a Curse (as the word implies) upon
themselves and others, if the thing was not employed according to their Vow.

Of all that he has, both of man and beast, etc.] All manner of things which
might be sanctified to the LORD by the forementioned simple Vow, might be thus
devoted and consecrated to him by a Cherem: i. e. Beasts and Houses and Lands,
and even Men themselves, as far as they had power over them. For that is meant
by those words, all that a man has. See next Verse.

Shall be sold or redeemed.] For this was the peculiar nature of this sort of
Vow; that the things devoted by it, should remain irreversibly, and unalterably
to the use unto which it was devoted: for the Person was accursed, that applied
it to any other use than that to which it was consecrated.

Every devoted thing.] Of this kind.

Is most holy to the LORD.] Other things devoted by a simple Vow were holy, v.
9, 10, etc. but these were most holy, so that none might touch them but the
Priests: and they were so strictly applied to the Divine Service, that they
could not be alienated, either by Sale, or Redemption, or Commutation, or
Donation, or any other way. See Mede p. 160.

Ver. 29. None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed, but
shall surely be put to death.] Some learned Men have, from these words,
asserted, That Parents and Masters among the Jews, had such a power over their
Children and Servants, that they might devote them to Death, and so kill them;
only the Sentence of the Priest was to concur, to whom every devoted thing
fell, as his portion. This is maintained by Ludov. Capellus, and confuted by
Mr. Seldom, Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. juxta Discipline. Hebr. cap. 6.
where he judiciously observes, That this Power would have too much entrenched
upon the sixth Commandment, if private Men might have, at their pleasure, thus
disposed of their Children and Slaves. And in the next Chapter he explains the
sense of this Verse; and proves indeed that there may be a Cherem (minhaadam)
of men, or from among men, as well as of beasts; but this word has four
several senses among the Hebrews. First, It signifies the Sacred Gift it self,
which was devoted to God, or to holy Uses; and so it signifies in the foregoing
v. 28. Secondly, It signifies that which was devoted to Perdition and utter
Destruction; either by the right of War, or upon the account of Capital
Enmities: an Example of which we have in Jericho, VI Josh. 17. where the whole
City was a Cherem (devoted to Destruction) as a Punishment to their Enemies:
yet so that the Metals were made a Cherem of the first sort; that is, Sacred to
the LORD and his Holy Uses. And thus the great Sanhedrim (called in Scripture
the whole Congregation) might devote those to be a Cherem, who going to the
Wars, did not obey orders, and perform the Charge laid upon them. An Example of
which we have XXI Judge. 5. 1 Samuel XIV. 24. I omit the other two for brevities
sake, (of which there are Examples VI. Josh. 26. X Ezra 8. XXIII Acts 12, 14,
21. See Seldom. Ib. cap. 7. and 8.) because the Cherem here mentioned by Moses
is of this second sort. For it is evident that the Cherem of the first sort,
mentioned v. 28. was of such things, over which they had an entire power, to
dispose of them as they pleased. And therefore those words, both of Man and
Beast, the Hebrews understand of their Slaves, whether Men or Women (who were
Canaanites or Gentiles, not others) who were in their power as much as their
Beasts, to give away, or to sell. But to take away their Life, or to give them
to be slain, was not in their power: but all the effect of this Cherem was,
that the whole right which they had to the Service of such Slaves, was
transferred, by him that devoted them, to the Service of the Priests, and
Sacred Uses. See Seldom in that Book, cap. 9. p. 518, etc. But though they
might not devote their Servants to death, yet they might their Enemies, before
they went out to war with them; and such of their own People also as did not
observe the Military Laws. An Example of which we have XXI Numb. 2. Upon which
account also, the Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead were slain, XXI Judge. 9, 10. for
violating the solemn public Cherem, pronounced against those that came not up
to Mizpeh, v. 5. And this is the Cherem spoken of in this Verse. See Seldom
cap. 10. For as for the Cherem whereby a Man was Excommunicated, it only loaded
him with many Curses, and made him execrable, so that no Man might come near
him; but did not touch his Life, as he there shows, p. 520.

Ver. 30. All the tithe of the Land, etc. is the LORD's.] By an ancient right
before the Law of Moses was delivered. For this is the first time we find any
mention of a Law about Tithes: for which he giving no reason, it is a sign this
was a pious Usage all the World over; and therefore being no new thing, but
what all Nations practiced, the Jews could not think it burdensome to them;
unless they would be wholly irreligious, and not acknowledge God to be the
Author and Fountain of all the plenty and happiness they enjoyed. Which was the
intention of paying Tithes; as the Gentiles anciently did, and the Jews
themselves, after Victory over their Enemies. For which there being no Precept
that appears, what can we think, but that natural Reason, and the common Custom
of Mankind (founded perhaps upon some direction given to our first Parents from
above) taught them to make this Acknowledgment to God, as the Author of their
Successes and Safety, as well as of all Plenty and Prosperity. See XIV Genesis 19.
and XXVIII. 22.

Whether of the seed of the Land, or of the fruit of the Trees.] By the seed of
the Land is meant Corn (as Rasi expounds it) and by the fruit of the Trees Wine
and Oil. For thus they are reckoned up in other places, XVIII Numb. 12. where
he gives the Priests, the First Fruits of the Wine and Oil and Wheat. And the
like we read in XVIII Deuteronomy. 3, 4. and in XIV Deuteronomy. 23. they are commanded to
eat before God, the tithe of their Corn, of their Wine, and their Oil. Under
which last is comprehended the Fruit of all other Trees; as under the word Seed
in this place, seems to be comprehended all manner of Herbs, as well as Corn.
For so the Pharisees understood it; and our Savior does not disallow it.

It is holy unto the LORD.] God having declared his right in the Tithe, in the
beginning of the Verse, here commands that it be reserved to him as his
portion. Which he afterward conferred and settled upon the Levites, by a
special Donation, XVIII Numb. 21.

Ver. 31. And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add
thereto the fifth part thereof.] Mr. Seldom in his History of Tithes, Chap. 2.
speaking of the second Tithe mentioned XIV Deuteronomy. 23. which was to be spent at
Jerusalem (either in kind, or else if it were too far thither, by turning it
into Money, and therewith to buy Provision to make Feasts) says, that to this
Tithe do the Jews apply that of XXVII Lev. 30, 31. But for this he quotes only
R. S. Jarchi: who, though he were a great Talmudist, yet must not be thought to
understand the sense of all their Doctors. Aben-Ezra it is plain (to name no
more) takes it otherwise; making Moses to speak of such a Tithe as Abraham gave
Melchisedeck, and Jacob vowed to God. Lyra, I might add, a converted Jew,
agrees with him. And there is great reason for it; no such thing as a second
Tithe being as yet ordained: and when they were commanded, and the changing of
them into Money allowed, there is not a word said of adding a fifth part, (See
XIV Deuteronomy. 24, 25.) which is sufficient to show that Moses, in these two Verses,
speaks of the first Tithe, which was paid to the Levites, by a Law made some
time after this; which transferred the right that God had in the Tithe of the
Land, unto them. Which if any Man had a mind to redeem, and not pay it in kind,
God allows him so to do; because the Tithe was not more holy than things vowed
to God, spoken of before: but then he was to do, as in the case of such things,
( v. 13.) add a fifth part, over and above, to what such a portion of Tithe was
esteemed to be worth. The reason of which was, as Mr. Calvin well observes, not
that the Priest should get more than his due by the Man who desired to redeem
his Tithe; but that the Man might not make a gain of the Priest. For it is
seldom seen that a Husbandman desires to pay Money, rather than his Tithe;
unless he propound some considerable advantage to himself.

Ver. 32. And concerning the tithe of the Herd and of the Flock.] Every one
knows that by the Tithe of the Herd here is meant Calves, and by the Flock is
to be understood Lambs and Kids, I Lev. 2. For this was the Tithe of those
young ones that were brought forth that year; the same Cattle not being again
tithed every year. And he speaks of clean Beasts, which were allowed in
Sacrifice; for Tithe was not paid of other Beasts; but their firstborn only
was the LORD's. This Tithe was paid to God every year, as an Eucharistical
Sacrifice, for all the Benefits they received from God by their Cattle.

Even of whatsoever passes under the rod.] This expresses the manner of this
Tithing; which, if we will believe the Jews, was thus: They were all brought
into a Sheep-cote, (says Maimonides in his Treatise of Firstborn, cap. 7. in
the beginning) in which there was but one Gate or Door, and that so narrow, as
to suffer no more than one to come out at once. Their Dams being placed
without, and the Gate opened, the young ones were invited by their Bleatings,
to press to get out to them: and as they passed by, one by one, a Man who stood
at the Gate with a Rod, colored with Oker, told them in order, and when the
Tenth came out, whether it was Male or Female, sound or not, he marked it with
his Rod, and said, Let this be holy in the name of the Tenth. And this account
R. Solomon, and others, give of this matter: of which Notion they are so fond,
that R. Bechai (upon XVII Numb.) makes Jacob (who vowed Tithe of all that God
should give him) to have decimated his Children on this manner, beginning at
Benjamin, and stopping at Levi, who was the Tenth, according to that reckoning:
and has some pretty conceits about it. But Bochartus thinks Moses does not
speak here of the Rod of the Tithes, but of the Shepherd's Crook; and so does
Aben-Ezra, the Syriack and the Vulgar: For the Flock passed under his Rod, as
often as he numbered them: which was every Morning and Evening (if he was a good
Shepherd) especially in the Evening. See Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. II. cap. 44. p.
499. Of this Jeremiah speaks XXXIII. 13. and Ezekiel alludes to it, when he
says XX. 37. I will cause you to pass under the Rod. Where Kimchi notes it is
the same Phrase with this in Leviticus, and as much as to say, As he that
tells his Sheep holds a Rod in his hand, and tells them one by one, and
brings out the Tenth for the Tithe, so will I number you; and the sinners shall
perish, etc.

The tenth shall be holy unto the LORD.] That is, says Maimonides (in his
forenamed Treatise called Bechoroth) the Fat and the Blood of them was offered
at the Altar; and then the Owners eat the Flesh any where in Jerusalem, as they
did the lesser holy things. For the Priests had no portion of them, but all
belonged to the Owner; as did the Paschal Lamb. If there was any Blemish in
them, whether before or after the Tithing, then they might be eaten in any
place. And so Bartenora (as Dr. Owtram observes, Lib. I. de Sacrificiis, cap.
11.) we do not find in the whole Law, that any part of these Tenths was given
to the Priests. So a great many other of their Doctors, who observe that Moses
does not reckon these among the XXIV. Gifts (for so many they make the whole
number of them) which were bestowed upon the Priesthood. But, as there is
nothing else in Scripture to warrant this, which no where prescribes how these
Tenths should be employed, but only declares that they are holy to the LORD; so
this very Phrase, I should think, sufficiently signifies that they belonged to
the LORD's Ministers. And if not entirely to the Priests, much less entirely to
the Owners of them (before they were the LORD's) but if they were to eat them
at Jerusalem, as the Jews imagine, the Levites sure were to have their share,
and the Stranger and other poor People: as they were to have in their second
Tithe of Corn, wherewith they made Feasts there, XIV Deuteronomy. 27, 28, 29.

Ver. 33. He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
change it.] It is not easy to give an account why God required so punctually
the tenth Calf, Goat or Lamb, that though it were never so lean, or blemished,
he would not suffer it to be exchanged for a better; unless it were to avoid
all Disputes, Strife and Contention. There are those indeed that think the
reason was, because in those Ages, this was looked upon as so Sacred a Number,
that it mystically denoted God: whose Divine Perfections, Providence, and
Bounty, they were thought to acknowledge, who gave the Tenth to him; which was
not to be altered and changed, no more than he himself can be.

If he change it at all, then both shall be holy.] As it was in Beasts vowed to
God, v. 9, 10.

It shall not be redeemed.] Nor might they sell it; no more than suffer it to
be redeemed. If they did, he that sold it or bought it, got nothing (as
Maimonides speaks) and besides, the seller was to be scourged, as he that sold
the Cherems given to the Priest, v. 28. Bechoroth cap. 6. sect. 5.

Ver. 34. These are the Commandments which the LORD commanded Moses, for the
Children of Israel, in Mount Sinai.] That is, these moreover were added to the
foregoing Commandments, before they removed from the Wilderness of Mount Sinai.
See XXV. 1. XXVI. ult. For having said before in the Conclusion of the
foregoing Chapter, These are the Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws which the
LORD made, etc. which respect all that proceeded in this Book; the Commandments
here spoken of can relate to nothing more, but the Laws delivered in this
Chapter about Vows, and devoted Things, and Tithes.

Which Laws ought not to be passed over, without serious consideration how far
we may be concerned in them. And therefore to make what I have noted about
them, more useful to us in these days, I desire the Reader to observe, That the
very same pious Inclinations have ever been in all good Christians, which Moses
here supposes (in the former part of this Chapter) would be in the Jews, to
devote some part of their Goods, their Houses, or Lands to the Service of God:
which became sacred things, and were to be employed to no other use but that.
The very first Christians had so much of this Spirit in them, that they sold
all their Possessions, and Goods, and let every one that needed have a share of
them (II Acts 45. IV. 35.) because the whole number of Believers attended to
nothing else, but the Service of Christ; and the Apostles also were to be
furnished with means, to go and propagate the Gospel in all the World. Where,
as soon as the Christian Religion prevailed in any place, immediately there
were the like voluntary Oblations made, in such a proportion, as served not
only for the support of the Service of God in that Church, but helped to
maintain the Christians at Jerusalem, who had been brought low by parting with
their Estates, to further the first preaching of the Gospel. This we find in a
great number of places: but it may suffice to say, that the Feasts of Charity
were maintained out of these Oblations.

By which it is apparent, that they took themselves to have the very same
Obligations upon them in this matter, which the Jews formerly had: and
therefore it is no wonder that Tithes came in time to be devoted for the
maintenance of God's Ministers. For it is senseless to imagine that the Gospel
which constrained them to give up themselves to God, should not constrain them,
with the same freedom of mind to give some of their Goods (as Moses here
supposes the Jews would do) for the maintenance of his Service. And it is as
unreasonable to think, it did not move them to give the Ministers of God as
honorable a maintenance, as had been allowed under the Law of Moses.

Which required besides the Tenth here mentioned, another Tithe of the
remainder, to be spent in Sacrifices at Jerusalem, of which the Levites had
their share, as I observed from XIV Deuteronomy. 22, 28. To which if we add the
Firstborn, with all Sin Offerings, and the Priests share of Peace Offerings,
and the Skins of the Sacrifices, (which alone made a good Revenue, as Philo
observes) and likewise all such Consecrations as are mentioned in this Chapter,
the Levites Cities and Suburbs; it will easily appear it could not be so little
as a fifth part of the Fruit of the Land which came to their share.

Now the reason we find no such certain Rate determined by the Gospel, as was
by this Law, is because there was no need of it. And for the same reason there
was none, for a good while, settled by the Church: all the Revenues belonging
to it, which served for all sort of pious uses, arising from the Devotion and
Oblations of the People, which were more then enough for God's Service. This
was visible in the beginning of our Religion, when the first Christians far
out-did any thing that had been done under the Law. And they could not imagine,
that they who succeeded them would fall so short as not to offer sufficient for
God's Service; though not so much as they had done, because there could not be
the same necessity. And so Mr. Seldom himself observes, that this reason is
given by Agobardus why nothing was decreed in Councils, or publicly
promulgated by the Fathers in the first Ages, concerning giving of their Goods,
and adorning Churches, because there was no necessity of it; the Religious
Devotion, and Love of Christians to such things ultro aestuante, being very
fervent and abounding of its own accord.

And when Love began to wax cold, so that they found it needful to make Laws
about such things, they could not think fit to order less for the settled
Maintenance of God's Service then the Tenth, (besides all voluntary Oblations)
which had been the part most eminently limited under the Law of Nature, long
before the Law of Moses. See Irenaeus Lib. IV. cap. 34. where, he says,
Christians, having greater hopes, could not give less then they did in former
times, when their hope was lower.

I shall add but one Observation more, from an excellent Person of our own
Church (Mr. Thorndike in his Rights of the Church, etc. p. 219.) that as all
such Consecrations, as here are mentioned by Moses, tended to Communion with
God, by the participation of Sacrifices offered to him; which were maintained
by such Contributions: so whatsoever is devoted by Christians unto such holy
uses, as to build and repair Churches, to maintain holy Assemblies, and to
support those who minister God's Ordinances, or enable the Poor to attend upon
them, has the like intention; to obtain an interest in the Sacrifice of
Christ, represented in the Eucharist; which is the chief part of the Service
rendered to God in the Church. This is notably exemplified in the account which
Tertullian gives of Marcion the Heretic, ( Lib. de Praescriptionibus, cap.
30.) who when he first embraced the Faith of Christ, and was received into the
Church, pecuniam Catholicae Ecclesiae contulit, contributed a Sum of Money to
the Church: which Money, when he fell off from the Christian Truth to his own
Heresy, was streightway thrown out together with him. This both demonstrates
that they continued, in those days, to bring Offerings into the Treasury of the
Church; and that the intention of them was, that they might have Communion with
the Church in all its Services: for when Men fell off from Christianity, they
cast out their Offerings, in token they had no Communion with them.

I end all with the words of Conradus Pellicanus upon the thirtieth Verse of
this Chapter: which will show the sense of the first Reformers in this matter.
All the Tithe is the LORD's, and remains so for ever, etc. and therefore Tithes
are to be paid by Divine and Natural Right; and religiously expended according
to his appointment, etc. And if Tithes should not be sufficient for the
maintenance of those who ought to be sustained in the Church, at the public
Charge; the Ninths or the Eights ought of necessity to be raised by the
Judgment and Consent of the Church. For the Law of Charity dictates this, and
the excellent, irreprehensible Ordinance of God. Which Charity binds more
strongly in the Evangelical Law, than in the Mosaical: inasmuch as the Church
ought to be more perfect than the Synagogue; and Charity than Fear.

The End of the Book of LEVITICUS.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. 11. 24. read Aammikdath. 15. 22. r. two Marble Tables. 21. 21. r.
Arcadica. 34. 38. r. Tothah. 36. 19. r. Ashes were thrown out. 74. 24. r.
concerning the Trepass Offering. 85. 22. r. Esch-jah. 88. 1. r. Mincah of
Initiation. 92. 11. r. most holy. 97. 27. Dilherrus. 102. 30. r. (...). 104.
21. r. lie under. 137. 12. r. Dilherrus. 140. 5. r. attempted. 143. 25. r.
eminency. 146. 18. r. (...) 148. 16. r. finished. 160. 3. d. the. 162. 9. r.
Heliogabalus. 167. 6. r. yet God. 172. 23. r. Cholin. 176. 4. r. Arbeh. 177.
30. r. Locusts. 199. 2. r. this disease. 237. 19. r. Gemara. 250. 31. r.
opinion be not true. 257. 20. d. Book before Baeotica. 265. 12. d. i. e. 26. r.
to be sacrificed. 285. 1. r. purge them from. 290. penult. r. where they were
left. 291. 10. and 28. r. Happarvah. 293. 31. r. This reading began. 295. 4. d.
(...). 354. 9. r. be so to them. 356. 1. r. remarkable things. 365. antep. r.
Nachmanides. 376. 13. r. Anah. 377. 10. r. Wagenseil. 12. r. Offingensis. 401.
11. r. Joh. Geusius. 403. penult. blasphemy or idolatry. 419. 15. r.
successione. 425. 3. r. assertion. 430. 8. r. dak. 438. 5. r. from which. 453.
6. r. Hebrew word. 468. 9, 10. r. the Feast. 10, 11. r. one day. 478. 27. r.
Feast of Tabernacles. 489. 27. r. this quantity. 508. 31. r. think nothing.
521. 30. r. Gemara. 527. 20. r. old wine. 528. 19. r. his own family. 540. 9.
r. on these verses. 554. 10. r. that he will. 555. 3. r. not enough. 29. r. in
those four. 560. 16. r. though they had. penult. r. 1600. years. 563. 27. r.
was not to be.


