A DISCOURSE ABOUT TRADITION; Showing what is meant by it, AND WHAT TRADITION
Is to be received, AND WHAT TRADITION Is to be rejected.

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher, for Robert Horn, at the South Entrance of
the Royal Exchange, and Fincham Gardener, at the White Horse in Ludgate Street,
1683.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT TRADITION.
AN obligation being laid upon us at our Baptism, to believe and to do the
whole will of God, revealed unto us by Christ Jesus; it concerns every one that
would be saved, to enquire where that whole, entire will of God is to be found?
where he may so certainly meet with it, and be so informed about it, that he
may rest satisfied he has it all?

And there would be no difficulty in this matter, had not the worldly interests
of some men, raised controversies about it; and made that intricate and
perplexed, which, in it self, is easy and plain. For the Rehearsal of the
Apostles Creed at Baptism, and of that alone; as a Summary of that Faith, whose
sincere profession intitles us to the Grace there conferred; warrants the
Doctrine of the Church of England, in its VI. Article, that the Holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it
should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary
to Salvation.

But this strikes off so many of the Doctrines of the present Roman Church,
which are not to be found in the Scripture, nor have any countenance there;
that they are forced to say: the faith once delivered to the Saints (mentioned
by S. Jude) is not entirely delivered in the Scripture; but we must seek for
the rest in the Traditions of the Church. Which Traditions, say they, are to be
received as a part of the Rule of Faith, with the same Religious reverence that
we do the Holy Scripture.

Now, though this is not really the bottom of their hearts (as will appear
before I have done) but they finally rest for their satisfaction in matters of
Faith somewhere else; yet this being plausibly pretended by them, in their own
justification, that they follow Tradition; and in their accusations of us, that
we forsake Tradition: I shall briefly let all our people see, who are not
willing to be deceived, what they are to judge and say in this business of
Tradition. About which a great noise is made, as if we durst not stand to it,
and as if they of the Roman Church steadfastly kept it, without any variation:
neither of which is true, I shall plainly show in this short Discourse.

The meaning of the word.
Which for clearness sake shall begin with the meaning of the word TRADITION:
which in English is no more than delivering unto another; and by a Figure
signifies, the matter which is delivered; and among Christians the Doctrine of
our Religion delivered to us. And there being two ways of delivering Doctrines
to us, either by writing or by word of mouth; it signifies either of them
indifferently: the Scriptures, as you shall see presently, being Traditions.
But custom has determined this word to the last of these ways, and
distinguished Tradition from Scriptures, or writings: at least from the Holy
Writings; and made it signify that which is not delivered in the Holy
Scriptures, or writings. For though the Scripture be Tradition also, and the
very first Tradition, and the fountain of all true and legitimate Antiquity;
yet in common language Traditions now are such ancient Doctrines, as are
conveyed to us some other way: whether by word of mouth, as some will have it,
from one generation to another; or by humane Writings, which are not of the
same authority with the Holy Scriptures.

How to judge of them.
Now there is no better way to judge aright of such Traditions, than by
considering these four things.

First, The Authors of them, whence they come. Secondly, The matter of them.
Thirdly, Their Authority. Fourthly, The means by which we come to know, they
derive themselves from such Authors, as they pretend unto: and consequently
have any authority, to demand admission into our belief.
1. For the First of these, every body knows and confesses, that all Traditions
suppose some Author, from whom they originally come, and who is the deliverer
of those Doctrines to Christian people: who being told by the present Church,
or any person in it; that such and such Doctrines are to be received, though
not contained in the Holy Scriptures, because they are Traditions; ought in
Conscience to inquire from whom those Traditions come, or who first delivered
them: By which means they will be able to judge, what credit is to be given to
them, when it is once cleared to them, from what Authors they really come. Now
whatsoever is delivered to us in Christianity, comes either from Christ, or
from his Apostles, or from the Church (either in General, or in part) or from
private Doctors in the Church. There is nothing now called a Tradition in the
Christian World, but proceeds from one or from all of these four Originals.

2. And the matter which they deliver to us, (which is next to be considered)
is either concerning that Faith, and godly life, which is necessary to
Salvation; or concerning Opinions, Rites, Ceremonies, Customs, and things
belonging to Order. Both which, as I said, may be conveyed either by writing or
without writing; by the Divine writings, or by humane writings: though these
two ways are not alike certain.

3. Now it is evident to every understanding, that things of both sorts which
are delivered to us, have their Authority, from the Credit of the Author from
whence they first come. If that be Divine, their Authority is Divine; if it be
only Humane, their Authority can be no more. And among Humane Authors, if
their credit be great, the authority of what they deliver is great; if it be
little, its authority is little: and accordingly must be accepted with greater
or lesser reverence.

Upon which score whatsoever can be made to appear to come from Christ, it has
the highest authority, and ought to be received with absolute submission to it,
because he is the Son of God. And likewise whatsoever appears to have been
delivered by the Apostles in his name, has the same Authority: they being his
Ministers, sent by Him, as He was by God the Father; and endued with a Divine
Power, which attested unto them. In like manner, whatsoever is delivered by the
Church, has the same Authority which the Church has: which though it be not
equal to the foregoing (the Church having no such Divine Power, nor infallible
judgment, as the Apostles had) yet is of such weight and moment, that it ought
to be reverenced next to theirs. I mean, the sense of the whole Church; which
must be acknowledged also to be of greater or lesser Authority, as it was
nearer, or farther off from the times of the Apostles. What was delivered by
their immediate followers, ought to weigh so much with us, as to have the
greatest humane Authority; and to be looked upon as little less than Divine.
The Universal consent of the next Generation, is an Authority approaching as
near to the former, as the Ages do one to another. But what is delivered in
latter times has less humane Authority, though pretending to come, but without
proof, from more early days: and has no Authority at all, if it contradict the
sense of the Church, when it was capable to be better acquainted with the mind
of Christ, and of his Apostles.

As for particular Churches, their Authority ought to be reverenced by every
member of them; when they profess to deliver sincerely the sense of the Church
Universal; and when they determine, as they have power to do, Controversies of
Faith, or decree Rites and Ceremonies (not contrary to God's word) in which
enery one ought to acquiesce.

But we cannot say the same of that which comes from any private Doctor in the
Church, modern or Ancient: which can have no greater Authority than he himself
was of; but is more or less credible, according, as he was more or less
diligent, knowing, and strictly religious.

4. But to all this, it is necessary that it do sufficiently appear, that such
Doctrines do really come from those Authors, whose Traditions they pretend to
be. This is the great, and the only, thing; about which there is any question,
among sober and judicious persons. How to be sufficiently assured, that any
thing which is not delivered unto us in the Scriptures, does certainly come;
for instance, from Christ, or his holy Apostles. For in this all Christians are
agreed, that whatsoever was delivered by Christ, from God the Father, or by the
Apostles from Christ, is to be embraced and firmly retained, whether it be
written or not written: that makes no difference at all, if we can be certain
it came from Him, or them. For what is contained in the Holy Scripture, has
not its Authority, because it is written: but because it came from God. If
Christ said a thing, it is enough: we ought to submit unto it: but we must
first know that he said it; and let the means of knowing it be what they will,
if we can certainly know He said it, we yield to it.

But how we can be certain (at this distance of time, from his being in the
world) that any thing, now pretending to it, was said by Christ, which is not
recorded, in the Holy Scriptures; there is the business. And it is a matter of
such importance, that it cannot be expected any man should be satisfied without
very good evidence of it: but he may very reasonably question, whether many
things be not falsely ascribed unto Him, and unto his Apostles; which never came
from them. Nay, whether those things, which are affirmed to be the Doctrines of
the Primitive Church, and of the whole Church, be not of some later Original;
and of some particular Church, or private Doctors in the Church: unto whose
Authority that reverence is not due, which ought to be paid, and which we
willingly give unto the former.

Now according to this state of the matter, any good Christian among us (who is
desirous to know the Truth, and to preserve himself from Error) may easily
discern what Traditions ought to be received, and held fast; and what we are
not bound unto, without any alteration; and what are not to be received at all,
but to be rejected; and how far those things are from being credible, which the
Roman Church now would obtrude upon us, under the name of Apostolical, or
ancient Traditions; without any Authority from the Holy Scriptures, or (in
truth) any Authority but their own, and some private Doctors, whose opinions
cannot challenge an absolute submission to them.

But to give every one, that would be rightly informed, fuller satisfaction in
this business; I shall not content my self with this General Discourse: but
shall particularly and distinctly show what Traditions we own, and heartily
receive; and then what Traditions we cannot own, but with good reason refuse.
These shall be the two Parts of this short Treatise: wherein I shall endeavor
that our people may be instructed not merely to reject Errors, but also to
affirm the Truth.

PART I. What Traditions we receive.
I. AND in the first place we acknowledge that what is now holy Scripture, was
once only Tradition; properly so called: that is Doctrine by word of mouth. In
this we all agree, I say, that the whole Gospel or Doctrine of Christ, which is
now upon record in those Books, we call the Scriptures; was once unwritten,
when it was first preached by our blessed Savior, and his Apostles.

Which must be noted to remove that small Objection, with which they of the
Roman Church are wont to trouble some peoples minds, merely from the Name of
Traditions: which Saint Paul, in his Epistles, requires those to whom he
writes, carefully to observe. Particularly in that famous place: 1 Thessalonians. II.
15. where we find this exhortation, Therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold
the Traditions, which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle.

Behold, say they, here are things not written, but delivered by word of mouth;
which the Thessalonians are commanded to hold. Very true, (should the people of
our Church say, to those that insist upon this) but, behold also, we beseech
you, what the Traditions are of which the Apostle here writes; and mark also
when it was that they were partly unwritten.

For the first of these, it is manifest that he means by Traditions, the
Doctrines which we now read in the holy Scriptures. For the very first word
therefore is an indication that this verse is an inference, from what he had
said in the foregoing. Now the things he before treated of, are the grand
Doctrines of the Gospel, or the way of Salvation revealed unto us by Christ
Jesus, from God the Father: who has from the beginning (says he, v. 13. 14.)
chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the truth, whereunto he has called you, etc. This is the sum of the Gospel:
and whatsoever he had delivered unto them about these matters, of their
sanctification, or of their faith, or of their salvation, by obtaining the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ (to which they were chosen, and called, through
their sanctification, and faith) this he exhorts them to hold fast; whether it
was contained in this Epistle, or in his former preaching: for he had not
occasion now to write all that he had formerly delivered by word of mouth.

Which afterward was put in writing: for mark (which is the second thing) the
time when some things remained unwritten; which was, when this Epistle was sent
to the Thessalonians. Then some things concerning their salvation, were not
contained in this Letter: but, as yet, delivered only by word of mouth unto
this Church. I say, to this Church; for it does not follow, that all Churches
whatsoever, were, at the time of the writing of this Epistle, without the
Doctrine of the Gospel completely written; because among the Thessalonians,
some Traditions or Doctrines were as yet unwritten. Which can in reason be
extended no farther than to themselves, and to this Epistle; which did not
contain all the Evangelical Doctrine, though other writings, which it is
possible were then extant in some other Churches, did.

And, I say, as yet unwritten in that Church; because the Thessalonians, no
doubt, had afterward more communicated to them in writing, besides this
Epistle, or the former either; viz. all the Gospels, and the Acts of Apostles,
and other Apostolical Epistles, which we now enjoy. Which writings, we may be
confident, contain the Traditions, which the Apostle had delivered to the
Thessalonians, by word: concerning the Incarnation, Birth, Life, Miracles,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our blessed Savior; and concerning the
coming of the Holy Ghost, and the mission of the Apostles: and all the rest
which is there recorded for our everlasting instruction.

And therefore it is in vain to argue from this place, that there are still, at
this day, some unwritten Traditions; which we are to follow: unless the Apostle
had said, hold the Traditions which ye have been taught by word, which shall
never be written. And it is in vain for us to enquire after any such
Traditions, or to rely upon them when they are offered unto us: unless we were
sure, that there was something, necessary to our Salvation, delivered in their
Sermons, which was never to be delivered in writing; and unless we knew where
to find it, as certainly, as we do that which they have committed to writing.

And it is to no more purpose to show us the word Tradition, in other places of
Saint Paul's writings: particularly in the III. Chapter of the same Epistle, v.
6. where, by Tradition, S. Chrysostom understands the Apostle's Example, which
he had given them; and so it follows, v. 7. for your selves know, how you ought
to follow us, etc. or it may refer to the commandment he had given them in his
former Epistle IV. 11. (which the Reader may be pleased to compare with this)
but cannot with any color be expounded to signify any Doctrine of Faith,
about which the Roman Church now contends with us. For it is plain, it has
respect to their good manners, and orderly living: for the information of which
we need go no whither, but to the holy Scriptures; wherein we are taught fully
enough, how we ought to walk, and please God in all things.

The same may be said of that place, 1 Cor. XI. 2. Now I praise you, Brethren,
that you remember me in all things, and keep the Traditions (or Ordinances, as
we render it, or Precepts, as the Vulgar Latin it self has it) as I delivered
them unto you. For we are so observant of what he has delivered, that we are
confident, if Saint Paul were now alive, and in this Church, he would praise us
(as he does the Corinthians) for keeping the Traditions, as he delivered them;
and on the contrary reprove and condemn the Roman Church, for not keeping them,
as they were first delivered. And we have good ground for this confidence:
there being an instance in that very Chapter, which demonstrates our fidelity
in preserving the very first Traditions, and their unfaithfulness in letting
them go. For he tells us, v. 23. that he had delivered to them, what he had
received of the Lord: and that which he received and delivered, was about the
whole Communion (as you may read there and in the following verses, 24, 25.)
in both kinds; the Cup, as well as the Bread. Thus, he says, the Lord
appointed it, and thus he delivered it: and this Tradition we keep entire, as
he received it of the Lord, and delivered it to his Church, in this Epistle;
which is a part of the holy Scripture: whereas they do not keep it, but have
broken this Divine Tradition, and give the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood
otherwise than Saint Paul delivered, keeping the Cup from the people.

By which I desire all, that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, to judge which
Church keeps closest to the Apostolical Tradition (for so Saint Paul calls this
Doctrine of the Communion in both kinds; that which he delivered, or left as a
Tradition with them) they that stick to what is unquestionably the Apostolical
Doctrine, or they that leave it, to follow those Doctrines (or presumptions
rather) which at the best, are very dubious and uncertain?

And farther, I desire all that read this Paper, to consider, whether it be
reasonable to think that those Rites, which have no Authority in the holy
Scripture (but were instituted perhaps by the Apostles) have been kept pure and
uncorrupted; according to their first intention: when those sacred Rites (for
instance the holy Eucharist) are not preserved entire, which are manifestly
ordained in the holy Writings.

And so much may serve for the first thing: for it would be too long, to
explain all the rest of the places of holy Scripture, which they are wont to
allege (though the word Tradition be not mentioned in them) to give a color
to their present pretenses: How pertinently, may be judged by these places now
considered.

II. Secondly then, That word of God which was once unwritten, being now
written; we acknowledge our selves to be much indebted to the Church of God in
all foregoing Ages, which has preserved the Scriptures and delivered them down
to us, as his word: which we ought to do unto those that shall succeed us; as
our Church teaches us in its Twentieth Article: where the Church is affirmed
to be a Witness and a keeper of holy Writ.

This Tradition we own; it being universal, continued, uninterrupted, and
undenied. Though, in truth, this is Tradition in another sense of the word; not
signifying the Doctrine delivered unto us, but the manner and means of its
delivery.

And therefore, if any member of our Church be pressed by those of the Romish
persuasion, with this Argument, for their present Traditions, that Scripture it
self is come to us by Tradition, let them answer thus: Very right, it is so,
and we thank God for it; therefore let this be no part of our dispute; it being
a thing presupposed in all discourses about Religion, a thing agreed among all
Christian people, that we read the word of God when we read the holy
Scriptures. Which being delivered to us, and accepted by us as his word; we see
no necessity of any other Tradition or Doctrine, which is not to be found
there, or cannot be proved from thence: for they tell us, they are able to
make, even the men of God, wise unto Salvation.

And if they press you again and say, how do you know that some Books are
Canonical and others not; is it not by a constant Tradition? Answer them again
in this manner: Yes, this is true also, and would to God, you would stand to
this universal Tradition; and receive no other Books, but what have been so
delivered. But know withal, that this universal Tradition of the Books of
Scripture (unto which you have added several Apocryphal Writings, which have
not been constantly delivered, as those we receive) is no part of the Tradition
or Doctrine delivered. That is, no Doctrine distinct from the Scriptures; but
only the instrument or means of conveying that Doctrine unto us.

In short, it is the fidelity of the Church with whom the Canon of Scripture
was deposed: but is no more a Doctrine, not written in the Scripture; than the
Tradition or delivery of the Code, or Book of the Civil Law, is any opinion or
Law not written in that Code.

And we are more assured of the fidelity of the Church herein, than the
Civilians can be assured of the faithfulness of their predecessors in
preserving and delivering the Books of their Law to them: because these holy
Books were always kept with a greater care, than any other Books whatsoever;
and in the acceptance of them also, we find there was great caution used, that
they might not be deceived: all Christians looking upon them to be of such
importance, that all Religion, they thought, was concerned in them.

Of which this is an Argument, that they who sought to destroy the Christian
Religion, in the primitive times, sought nothing more than to destroy the
Bible. Which they were wont to demand, of those who were suspected to be
Christians, to be delivered up to them; that they might burn it. And according
as men behaved themselves in this trial, so they were reputed to be Christians,
or not Christians. And the Traditours, as they were called; that is, they who
delivered the holy Scriptures into the hands of the Pagans; were looked upon by
Christians as men that were content to part with their Religion. For which
there could be no reason; but that they thought Christian Religion to be
therein contained; and to be betrayed by those who delivered them to be burnt.

By which I have proved more than I intended, in this part of my Discourse;
that in the holy Scriptures, the whole will of God concerning our Salvation, is
contained. Which is the true Question between us and the Church of Rome: Not
whether the Scripture be delivered to us as the word of God, or no, (in this
our people ought to tell them we are all agreed) but whether they have been
delivered, as the whole will of God. And from that argument now mentioned and
many more, we conclude that Universal Tradition having directed us unto these
Books and no other: they direct us sufficiently, without any other Doctrines,
unto God, and to our everlasting rest.

And if they urge you farther, and say, that the very credit of the Scripture
depends upon Tradition: tell them that it is a speech not to be endured, if
they mean thereby that it gives the Scripture its authority (and if they mean
less, we are agreed, as has been already said) for it is to say, that Man
gives authority to God's Word. Whereas in truth, the holy Scriptures are not
therefore of Divine Authority; because the Church has delivered them so to be:
but the Church has delivered them so to be, because it knew them to be of such
authority. And if the Church should have conceived, or taught otherwise, of
these Writings, than as of the undoubted Oracles of God; she would have erred
damnably, in such a Tradition.

I shall sum up what has been said in this second particular, in a few words.
Christ and his Apostles at first taught the Church by word of mouth; but
afterward that which they preached was by the commandment of God committed to
writing, and delivered unto the Church, to be the ground of our Faith. Which is
no more than Irenaeus has said in express words. ( L. III. C. 1.) speaking of
them by whom the Gospel came into all Nations: which they then preached, but
afterward, by the will of God delivered unto us in the Scriptures; to be, in
time to come, the foundation and pillar of our Faith.

III. And farther we likewise acknowledge that the sum and substance of the
Christian Religion, contained in the Scriptures, has been delivered down to
us, even from the Apostles days, in other ways, or forms, besides the
Scriptures. For instance, in the Baptismal Vow; in the Creed; in the Prayers,
and Hymns of the Church. Which we may call Traditions, if we please: but they
bring down to us no new Doctrine; but only deliver, in an abridgment, the same
Christianity, which we find in the Scriptures.

Upon this there is no need that I should enlarge: but I proceed farther to
affirm,

IV. That we reverently receive also the unanimous Tradition or Doctrine of the
Church in all ages, which determines the meaning of the holy Scripture; and
makes it more clear and unquestionable in any point of Faith, wherein we can
find it has declared its sense. For we look upon this Tradition as nothing
else but the Scripture unfolded: not a new thing, which is not in the
Scripture; but the Scripture explained and made more evident.

And thus some part of the Nicene Creed may be called a Tradition; as it has
expressly delivered unto us the sense of the Church of God, concerning that
great Article of our Faith; that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Which they
teach us was always thus understood; the Son of God, begotten of his Father
before all worlds, and of the same substance with the Father.

But this Tradition supposes the Scripture for its ground; and delivers nothing
but what the Fathers, assembled at Nice, believed to be contained there; and
was first fetched from thence. For we find in Theodoret (L. I. C. 6.) that the
famous Emperor Constantine, admonished those Fathers, in all their questions
and debates to consult only with these heavenly inspired Writings: because the
Evangelical, and Apostolical Books, and the Oracles of the old Prophets, do
evidently instruct us what to think in Divine matters. This is so clear a
Testimony, that in those days, they made this the complete Rule of their Faith,
whereby they ended Controversies (which was the reason that in several other
Synods we find they were wont to lay the Bible before them) and that there is
nothing in the Nicene Creed, but what is to be found in the Bible; that
Cardinal Bellarmine has nothing to reply to it, but this: Constantine was
indeed a great Emperor, but no great Doctor. Which is rather a scoff, than an
Answer: and casts a scorn not only upon him, but upon that great Council, who,
as the same Theodoret, witnesses, assented unto that Speech of Constantine. So
it there follows in these words, the most of the Synod were obedient to what he
had discoursed; and embraced both mutual Concord, and sound Doctrine.

And accordingly S. Hilary a little after extols his Son Constantius for this,
that he adhered to the Scriptures; and blames him only for not attending to
the true Catholic sense of them. His words are these, (in his little Book,
which he delivered to Constantius) I truly admire thee, O Lord Constantius the
Emperor, who desire a Faith according to what is written. They pretended to
no other in those days; but, (as he speaks a little after) looked upon him that
refused this, as Antichrist. It was only required that they should receive
their Faith out of God's Books, not merely according to the words of them, but
according to their true meaning (because many spoke Scripture without
Scripture, and pretended to Faith without Faith, as his words are) and herein
Catholic and constant Tradition was to guide them. For whatsoever was
contrary, to what the whole Church had received and held from the beginning,
could not in reason be thought to be the meaning of that Scripture, which was
alleged to prove it. And, on the other side, the Church pretended to no more
than to be a Witness of the received sense of the Scriptures: which were the
bottom upon which they built this Faith.

Thus I observe Hegesippus says (in Eusebius. his History, L. IV. C. 22.) that
when he was at Rome he met with a great many Bishops, and that he received the
very same Doctrine from them all. And then, a little after, tells us what that
was, and whence they derived it, saying, that in every succession of Bishops,
and in every City, so they held; as the Law preached, and as the Prophets, and
as the Lord. That is, according to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament.

I shall conclude this particular, with a pregnant passage, which I remember in
a famous Divine of our Church (D. Jackson, in his Treatise of the Catholic
Church, Chap. 22.) who writes to this effect,

That Tradition, which was of so much use in the Primitive Church, was not
unwritten Traditions or customs, commended or ratified by the supposed
infalliblity of any visible Church, but did especially consist in the
Confessions, or Registers of particular Churches. And the unanimous consent of
so many several Churches, as exhibited their confessions to the Nicene Council,
out of such Forms as had been framed, and taught before this Controversy
arose, about the Divinity of Christ; and that voluntarily and freely (these
Churches being not dependent one upon another; nor overswayed by any Authority
over them; nor misled by faction to frame their confessions of Faith by
imitation, or according to some pattern set them) was a pregnant argument, that
this Faith wherein they all agreed, had been delivered to them by the Apostles
and their followers, and was the true meaning of the holy Writings, in this
great Article: and evidently proved, that Arius did obtrude such
interpretations of Scripture, as had not been heard of before; or were but the
sense of some private persons in the Church, and not of the generality of
Believers.

In short the unanimous consent of so many distinct visible Churches, as
exhibited their several Confessions, Catechisms, or Testimonies, of their own
or Forefathers Faith unto the Council of Nice, was an argument of the same
force and efficacy against Arius and his partakers, as the General consent and
practice of all Nations, in worshipping a Divine Power in all ages, is against
Atheists. Nothing but the ingrafted notion of a Deity, could have induced so
many several Nations, so much different in natural disposition, in civil
discipline and education, to affect or practice the duty of Adoration. And
nothing but the evidence of the ingrafted word (as Saint James calls the
Gospel) delivered by Christ and his Apostles in the holy Scriptures, could have
kept so many several Churches, as communicated their Confessions unto that
Council, in the unity of the same Faith.

The like may be said of the rest of the four first General Councils; whose
Decrees are a great confirmation of our belief: because they deliver to us, the
consent of the Churches of Christ, in those great Truths, which they assert out
of the holy Scriptures.

And could there any Traditive Interpretation of the whole Scripture be
produced, upon the Authority of such Original Tradition, as that now named; we
would most thankfully and joyfully receive it. But there never was any such
pretended; no, not by the Roman Church: whose Doctors differ among themselves,
about the meaning of hundreds of places in the Bible. Which they would not do
sure, nor spend their time unprofitably, in making the best conjectures they
are able; if they knew of any exposition of those places, in which all
Christian Doctors had agreed from the beginning.

V. But more than this, we allow that Tradition gives us a considerable
assistance, in such points as are not in so many letters and syllables
contained in the Scriptures, but may be gathered from thence, by good and
manifest reasoning. Or, in plainer words perhaps, whatsoever Tradition
justifies any Doctrine, that may be proved by the Scriptures, though not found
in express terms there, we acknowledge to be of great use, and readily receive
and follow it: as serving very much to establish us more firmly in that Truth,
when we see all Christians have adhered to it.

This may be called a confirming Tradition: of which we have an instance in the
Doctrine of Infant Baptism; which some ancient Fathers call an Apostolical
Tradition. Not, that it cannot be proved by any place of Scripture; no such
matter: for though we do not find it written in so many words that Infants are
to be baptized, or that the Apostles baptized Infants; yet it may be proved out
of the Scriptures, and the Fathers themselves who call it an Apostolical
Tradition do allege testimonies of the Scriptures to make it good. And
therefore we may be sure, they comprehend the Scriptures within the name of
Apostolical Tradition: and believed that this Doctrine was gathered out of the
Scriptures, though not expressly treated of there.

In like manner we, in this Church, assert the authority of Bishops above
Presbyters, by a Divine right: as appears by the Book of Consecration of
Bishops, where the person to be ordained to this Office, expresses his belief,
that he is truly called to this Ministration, according to the will of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Now this we are persuaded may be plainly enough proved to any man
that is ingenuous and will fairly consider things, out of the holy Scriptures
without the help of Tradition: but we also take in the assistance of this for
the conviction of gainsayers; and by the perpetual practice and Tradition of
the Church from the beginning confirm our Scripture proofs so strongly, that he
seems to us very obstinate, or extremely prejudiced, that yields not to them.
And therefore to make our Doctrine in this point the more Authentic, our
Church has put both these proofs together; in the Preface to the Form of
giving Orders: which begins in these words; It is evident unto all men
diligently reading holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles
time there have been three Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops,
Priests and Deacons.

I hope no body among us is so weak, as to imagine, when he reads this, that by
admitting Tradition to be of such use and force as I have mentioned, we yield
too much to the Popish Cause; which supports it self by this pretense. But if
any one shall suggest this to any of our people, let them reply; that it is but
the pretense, and only by the Name of Tradition, that the Romish Church
supports it self: For true Tradition is as great a proof against Popery, as it
is for Episcopacy. The very foundation of the Pope's Empire (which is, his
succession in Saint Peter's Supremacy) is utterly subverted by this: the
constant Tradition of the Church being evidently against it. And therefore let
us not lose this Advantage we have against them, by ignorantly refusing to
receive true and constant Tradition: which will be so far from leading us into
their Church; that it will never suffer us to think of being of it, while it
remains so opposite to that which is truly Apostolical.

I conclude this, with the direction, which our Church gives to Preachers in
the Book of Canons 1571. (in the Title Concionatores) that no man shall teach
the people any thing to be held and believed by them religiously, but what is
consentaneous to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament; and what the
Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops, have gathered out of that very Doctrine.
This is our Rule, whereby we are to guide our selves: which was set us on
purpose, to preserve our Preachers from broaching any idle, novel, or popish
Doctrines; as appears by the Conclusion of that Injunction, Vain, and old Wives
opinions, and heresies, and popish errors, abhorring from the Doctrine and
Faith of Christ, they shall not teach: nor any thing at all whereby the
unskilful multitude, may be inflamed either to the study of novelty, or to
contention.

VI. But though nothing may be taught as a piece of Religion, which has not
the forenamed Original; yet I must add that those things, which have been
universally believed, and not contrary to Scripture, though not written at all
there, nor to be proved from thence, we do receive as pious opinions. For
instance, the perpetual Virginity of the Mother of God our Savior: which is so
likely a thing, and so universally received; that I do not see why we should
not look upon it, as a genuine Apostolical Tradition.

VII. I have but one thing more to add, which is, that we allow also the
Traditions of the Church, about matters of Order, Rites and Ceremonies. Only
we do not take them to be parts of God's Worship; and if they be not appointed
in the holy Scriptures, we believe they may be altered by the same or the like
authority, with that which ordained them. So our Church has excellently and
fully resolved us, concerning such matters, in the XXXIV. Article of Religion:
where there are three things asserted concerning such Traditions as these.

First, It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies (they are the very
first words of the Article) be in all places, one or utterly alike: for at all
times they have been diverse, and may be changed according to the diversities of
Countries, times, and men's manners, so that nothing be ordained against God's
word. But then to prevent all disorders and confusions, that men might make in
the Church, by following their own private fancies and humors; the next thing
which is decreed is this,

Secondly, that whosoever through his own private judgment, willingly and
purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which
be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common
authority; ought to be rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the like) as
he that offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts the
Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences of the weak Brethren.

Lastly, it is there declared, that every particular or national Church, has
authority to ordain, change and abolish, Ceremonies or Rites of the Church,
ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done to edifying.

This is sufficient to show what we believe concerning Traditions, about
matters of Order and Decency.

VIII. As for what is delivered in matters of Doctrine, or Order, by any
private Doctor in the Church, or by any particular Church, it appears by what
has been said, that it cannot be taken to be more than the private opinion of
that man, or the particular decree of that Church; and can have no more
authority than they have: that is, cannot oblige all Christians, unless it be
contained in the holy Scripture.

Now such are the Traditions which the Roman Church would impose upon us; and
impose upon us after a strange fashion, as you shall see in the Second Part of
this Discourse: unto which I shall proceed presently, when I have left with you
this brief reflection on what has been said in this First Part.

Our people may hereby be admonished not to suffer themselves to be deceived
and abused by words and empty names, without their sense and meaning. Nothing
is more common than this: especially in the business of Traditions. About which
a great stir is raised; and it is commonly given out, that we refuse all
Traditions. Than which nothing is more false: for we refuse none truly so
called; that is Doctrines delivered by Christ, or his Apostles. No, we refuse
nothing at all, because it is unwritten: but merely because we are not sure, it
is delivered by that Authority, towhich we ought to submit.

Whatsoever is delivered to us by our Lord and his Apostles, we receive as the
very word of God: which we think is sufficiently declared in the holy
Scriptures. But if any can certainly prove, by any Authority equal to that
which brings the Scriptures to us, that there is any thing else delivered by
them, we receive that also. The Controversy will soon be at an end: for we are
ready to embrace it, when any such thing can be produced.

Nay, we have that reverence for those who succeeded the Apostles, that what
they have unanimously delivered to us, as the sense of any doubtful place, we
receive it, and seek no farther. There is no dispute, whether or no we should
entertain it.

To the Decrees of the Church also we submit in matters of Decency and Order:
yea, and acquiesce in its authority, when it determines doubtful opinions.

But we cannot receive that as a Doctrine of Christ, which we know is but the
Tradition of man: nor keep the Ordinances of the ancient Church in matters of
Decency, so unalterably as never to vary from them; because they themselves did
not intend them to be of everlasting obligation. As appears by the changes that
have been made in several times and places: even in some things which are
mentioned in the holy Scriptures; being but customs suited to those Ages and
Countries.

In short, Traditions we do receive; but not all that are called by that name.
Those which have sufficient Authority; but not those which are imposed upon us,
by the sole authority of one particular Church, assuming a power over all the
rest. And so I come to the Second Part.

PART II. What Traditions we do not receive.
I. AND in the first place we do not believe that there is any Tradition, which
contains another word of God: which is not in the Scripture, or cannot be
proved from thence. In this consists the main difference between us, and them
of the Romish persuasion: who affirm that Divine Truth which we are all bound
to receive, to be partly written; partly delivered by word of mouth without
writing. Which is not only the affirmation of the Council of Trent, but
delivered in more express terms, in the Preface to the Roman Catechism, drawn
up by their order: where we find these words (toward the conclusion of it) the
whole Doctrine to be delivered to the faithful, is contained in the word of
God: which (word of God) is distributed into Scripture, and Tradition.

This is a full and plain declaration of their mind; with which we can by no
means agree, for diverse unanswerable reasons.

1. Not only because the Scriptures testify to their own perfection; which
they affirm to be so great, as to be able to complete the divinest men in the
Church of Christ, in all points of heavenly wisdom, 2 Timothy III. 15, 16, 17. but

Secondly, Because the constant Tradition of the Church (even of the Roman
Church anciently) is, that in the Scriptures we may find all that is necessary
to be known and believed to Salvation. I must not fill up this Paper, with
Authorities to this purpose: but we avow this, unto the people of our Church,
for a certain Truth, which has been demonstrated by many of our Writers: who
have shown that the ancient Doctors universally, speak the language of Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. IV. 7. not to think above that which is written. I will mention
only these memorable words of Tertullian, who is as earnest an Advocate as any
for ritual Traditions, but having to deal with Hermogenes in a question of
Faith, whether all things in the beginning were made of nothing, urges him in
this manner. I have no where yet read, that all things were made out of a
subject matter. If it be written, let those of Hermogenes his shop show it; if
it be not written, let them fear that woe which is allotted to such, as add or
take away. The very same answer should our people make to those, that would
have them receive any thing as an Article of Faith, which is not delivered to
them by this truly Apostolical Church wherein we live. If it be written, let us
see it; if it be not, take heed how you add to the undoubted word of God. We
receive the holy Scriptures, as able to make us wise to Salvation. So they
themselves tell us; and so runs the True Tradition of the Church: which you of
the Romish persuasion have forsaken; but we adhere unto.

3. And we have this farther reason so to do, because if part of God's word
had been written, and part unwritten, we cannot but believe there would have
been some care taken, in the written Word, not only to let us know so much;
but also inform us whither we should resort to find it, and how we should know
it; if it be absolutely necessary for us to be acquainted with it. But there is
no such notice, nor any such directions left us; nor can any man give us any
certain rule to follow in this matter, but only this: to examine all
Traditions by the Scripture, as the supreme Rule of Faith; and to admit only
such, as are conformable thereunto.

4. For which we have still this farther reason, that no sooner were they that
first delivered and received the holy Scriptures gone out of the world, but we
find men began to add their own fancies unto the Catholic Truth: which made it
absolutely necessary to keep to the Tradition in the holy Scriptures; all other
growing uncertain. This is observed by Hegesippus himself (in Eusebius L. III.
C. 32.) that the Church remained a chaste Virgin, and the Spouse of Christ, till
the sacred Quire of the Apostles, and the next generation of them, who had had
the honor to be their Auditors, were extinct: and then there began a plain
conspiracy of impious, atheistical error; by the fraud of teachers, who
delivered other doctrine. Which was a thing Saint Paul feared even in his own
lifetime, about the Church of Corinth (2 Cor. XI. 3.) lest, the Devil, like a
wily Serpent, should beguile them, and corrupt their minds, from the original
simplicity of the Christian Doctrine wherein they were first instructed. And if
it were attempted then; it was less difficult, and therefore more endeavored
afterward: as shall appear anon by plain History; which tells how several
persons pretended they received, this and that from an Apostle. Some of which
Traditions were presently rejected; others received, and afterward found to be
impostures. Which shows there was so much false dealing in the case, that it
was hard for men to know what was truly Apostolical in those days, if it came
to them this way only; and therefore impossible to be discerned by us now, at
this great distance of time from the Apostles: who we know delivered the true
Faith; but we have no reason to rely upon mere Tradition, without Scripture,
for any part of that Faith; when we see what cheats were put upon men by that
means, even then when they had better helps to detect them than we have.

It is true, the Fathers sometime urge Tradition as a proof of what they say.
But we must know, that the Scriptures were not presently communicated, among
some Barbarous Nations; and there were some Heretics also who either denied
the Scriptures, or some part of them: and in these cases it was necessary, to
appeal to the Tradition that was in the Church; and to convince them by the
Doctrine taught every where by all the Bishops. But that (mark this, I pray
you) of which they convinced them by this argument, was nothing but what is
taught in the Scripture.

5. With which we cannot suffer any thing to be equalled in authority; unless
we would see it confirmed by the same or equal Testimony. This is the great
reason of all, why we cannot admit any unwritten Traditions to be a part of the
word of God, which we are bound to believe; because we cannot find any truths
so delivered to us, as those in the holy Scriptures. They come to us with as
full a testimony as can be desired, of their Divine Original: but so do none of
those things, which are now obtruded on us by the Romish Church under the name
of Traditions or unwritten word of God.

For the primitive Church had the very first Copies, and authentic Writings,
of those Books, called the New Testament, delivered by the Apostles own hands
to them. And those Books confirm the Scriptures of the Old Testament: and they
were both delivered to posterity, by that primitive Church; witnessing from
whom they received them: who carefully kept them as the most precious Treasure;
so that this written word has had the general approbation, and testimony of
the whole Church of Christ in every age, until this day; witnessing that it is
Divine. And it has been the constant business of the Doctors of the Church,
to expound this word of God to the people: and their Books are full of
citations out of the Scripture; all agreeing, in substance, with what we now
read in them. Nay, the very enemies of Christianity, such as Celsus, Porphyry,
Julian never questioned, but these are the writings of which the Apostles were
the Authors, and which they delivered. Besides, the Marks they have in
themselves, of a Divine Spirit, which indicted them: they all tending to breed
and preserve in men a sense of God, and to make them truly virtuous.

Not one word of which can be said for any of those unwritten Traditions, which
the Roman Church pretend to be a part of God's word. For we have no testimony
of them in the holy Scriptures. Nor does the primitive Church affirm she
received them from the Apostles, as she did the written word. Nor have they the
perpetual consent and general approbation of the whole Church ever since. Nor
are they frequently quoted, as the words of Scripture are upon all occasisions,
by the Doctors of the Church. Nor do we find them to be the Doctrine, which
was constantly taught the people. Nor is there any notice taken of them by the
enemies of our Faith; whose assaults are all against the Scriptures. In short,
they are so far from having any true authority; that counterfeit testimonies
and forged writings have been their great supporters. Besides the plain drift
of them, which is not to make all men better, but to make some richer: and the
manifest danger men are in, by many of them, to be drawn away from God, to put
their trust and confidence in Creatures. As might be shown, if this Paper would
contain it, in their Doctrines, of Papal Supremacy, Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, Image Worship, and diverse others.

Concerning which we say, as S. Cyprian does to Pompeius, about another matter.
If it be commanded in the Gospels, or in the Epistles of the Apostles, or in
their Acts, that they should not be baptized who return from any Heresy, but
only be received by imposition of hands, LET THIS DIVINE and HOLT TRADITION BE
OBSERVED. The same say we, if there be any thing in the Gospels, in the
Epistles, in the Acts, concerning Invocations of Saints, concerning the praying
Souls out of Purgatory, etc. let that divine, that holy Tradition be observed.
But if it be not there, what obstinacy is this (as it follows a little after in
that Epist. LXXIV.) what presumption, to prefer humane Tradition, before the
Divine disposition or ordinance?

A great deal more there is in that place, and in others of that holy Martyr,
to bring all to the source, the root, the original of the Divine Tradition; for
then humane error ceases: which original Tradition he affirms to be, what is
delivered in the holy Scriptures: which delivering to us the whole will of God
concerning us, we look after no other Tradition, but what explains, and
confirms, and is consonant to this. For we believe that what is delivered to us
by the Scriptures, and what is delivered by true Tradition, are but two several
ways of bringing us acquainted with the same Christian Truth; not with
different parts of that Truth.

And so I have done with the first thing; the sum of which is this. We do not
receive any Tradition, or Doctrine to supply the defect of the Scripture, in
some necessary Article of Faith: which Doctrines, they of Rome pretend to have
one and the same Author with the Scripture, viz. God; and therefore to be
received with the same pious affection and reverence: but cannot tell us where
we may find them, how we shall discern true from false, nor give us any
assurance of their Truth, but we must take them purely upon their word.

Now how little reason we have to trust to that, will appear in the second
thing I have to add: which is this, II. That we dare not receive any thing
whatsoever merely upon the Credit of the Roman Church: no not that divine, that
holy Tradition before spoken of, viz. the Scripture. Which we do not believe
only upon their testimony; both because they are but a part of the Church and
therefore not the sole keepers of Divine Truth; and they are a corrupted part
who have not approved themselves faithful in the keeping what was committed to
them.

Let our people diligently mark this, that Traditions never were, nor are now,
only in the keeping of the Roman Church: and that these things are widely
different; the Tradition of the whole Church, or of the greatest and best part
of it; and the Tradition of one part of the Church, and the least part of it;
and the worst part also and most depraved.

What is warranted by the Authority of the whole Church, I have shown before,
we reverently receive: but we cannot take that for current Tradition, which is
warranted only by a small part of the Church, and we give very little credit
to what is warranted only by that part of it which is Roman. Because,

1. First, This Church has not preserved so carefully as other Churches have
done, the first and original Tradition, which is in the Scriptures: but
suffered them to be shamefully corrupted. Every one knows that there is a
Latin Vulgar Edition of the Bible (which they of that Church prefer before the
Original) none of which they preserved heretofore from manifest depravations;
nor have been able, since they were told of the faults, to purge away; so as to
canonize any Edition without permitting great numbers in their newest and most
approved Bibles. Isidore Clarius in his Preface to his Edition, complains that
he found these holy Writings defaced with innumerable errors: Eight thousand
of which, that he thought most material, he says he amended; and yet left he
knew not how many lesser ones untouched: After which (the Council of Trent
having vouched this Vulgar Latin Edition, for the only authentic) Pope
Sixtus the Fifth, published, out of the several Copies that were abroad, one
which he straightly charged to be received, as the only true Vulgar; from which
none should dare to vary in a tittle. And yet two years were scarce passed,
before Clemens the Eighth, found many defects and corruptions still remaining
in that Edition: and therefore published another, with the very same charge,
that none else should be received.

Which evidently shows they have suffered the holy Books to be so foully abused,
that they know not how to amend the errors that are crept into them; nor can
tell which is the true Bible. For these two Bibles thus equally authorized, as
the only authentic ones, abound not only with manifest diversities; but with
contradictions, or contrarieties, one to the other. Whereby all Romanists are
reduced to this miserable necessity, either to make use of no Bible at all; or
to fall under the curse of Sixtus if he make use the Bible of Clement; or the
curse of Clement, if he use the Bible of Sixtus. For they are both of them
enjoined, with the exclusion of all other Editions; and with the penalty of a
curse upon them, who disobey the one or the other: and it is impossible to obey
both.

This might be sufficient to demonstrate how unfaithful that Church has been,
in the weightiest concerns. Whereby all the members of it are plunged, beyond
all power of redemption, into a dismal necessity, either of laving aside the
Scriptures; or of offending against the sacred decrees (as they account them)
of one or other of the heads of their Church (which some take to be infallible)
and being accursed of them.

2. But for every one's fuller satisfaction, it may be fit farther to
represent, how negligent they have been in preserving other Traditions, which
were certainly once in the Church, but now utterly lost. There is no question
to be made, but the Apostles taught the first Christians, the meaning of those
hard places which we find in their, and other holy, Writings. But who can tell
us where to find certainly so much as one of them? and therefore where is the
fidelity of this Church, which boasts so much to be the keeper of sacred
Traditions? For nothing is more desirable than those Apostolical
interpretations of Scripture; nothing could be more useful; and yet we have no
hope to meet with them either there, or indeed any where else. Which is no
reproach to other Churches, who do not pretend to more than is written; but
reflects much upon them, and discredits them, who challenge the power of the
whole Church entirely, and would pass not only for the sole keepers and
witnesses of Divine Truth; but for careful preservers of it. For of what
should they have been more careful than of these useful things; whereof they
can tell us nothing? when of unprofitable Ceremonies they have most devoutly
kept, if we could believe them, a very great number.

3. They tell us indeed of some doctrinal Traditions also which they have
religiously preserved: but mark I beseech you with what sincerity. For to
justify these, they have forged great numbers of Writings, and Books under the
name of such Authors, as it is evident had no hand in them: which is another
reason why we cannot give credit to their reports, if we have no other
authority. There are very sew persons now that are ignorant how many Decretal
Epistles of the ancient Bishops of Rome have been devised, to establish the
Papal Empire: and how shamefully a Donation of Constantine has been pretended,
wherein he gave away the Roman Empire and all its rights to the Pope. Which
puts me in mind (as a notorious proof of this) of the forgeries that are in the
Breviary it self: where we read of Constantine's Leprosy, and the cure of it
by Sylvester's baptizing him (which are egregious Fables) and of the Decrees of
the second Roman Synod under that Pope Sylvester; wherein the Breviary affirms
Photinus was condemned: when all the world knows, that Photinus his Heresy did
not spring up till diverse years after the death of Sylvester. And there are so
many other arguments which prove the Decrees of that Synod to be a vile
forgery, that we may see, by the way, what reason they have to keep their
Liturgy in an unknown Language: lest the people perceiving what untruths they
are taught, instead of God's word, should abhor that Divine Service, as justly
they might, which is stuffed with so many Fables.

It would be endless to show how many passages they have foisted into ancient
Writers to countenance their Traditions; particularly about the Papal
Supremacy: by which so great a man as Thomas Aquinas was deceived: who
frequently quotes authorities, which are mere forgeries; though not invented by
him, I verily think, but imposed upon him by the fraud which had been long
practiced in that Church. For we find that the Canons of so famous and
universally known Council as that of the first at Nice, have been falsely
alleged even by Popes themselves. Boniface for instance, and Zosimus alleged
a counterfeit Nicene Canon to the African Bishops in the Sixth Council of
Carthage: who to convince the false dealing of these Popes sought out with
great labor and diligence, the ancient and authentic Copies of the Nicene
Canons; and having obtained them both from Alexandria, and from Constantinople,
they found them for number and for sense to be the very same, which themselves
already had; but not one word in them, of what the Popes pretended. The same I
might say of Pope Innocent, and others; whom I purposely omit, because I study
brevity.

4. And have this farther to add, that as they have pretended Tradition where
there is none; so where there is, they have left that Tradition: and therefore
have no reason to expect that we should be governed by them in this matter; who
take the liberty to neglect, as they please, better Tradition than they would
impose upon us. None are to be charged, with this, if it be a guilt, more than
themselves. For instance the three immersions: i.e. dipping the persons three
times in Baptism, was certainly an ancient practice; and said by many Authors
to be an Apostolical Tradition; and to be ordained in signification of the
blessed Trinity, into whose name they were baptized. And yet there is no such
thing now in use, in their Church; no more than in ours: who justify our
selves, as I showed above, by a true opinion, that Rites and Ceremonies are not
unalterable: which it is impossible for them to do, unless they will cease to
press the necessity of other Traditions upon us, which never were so generally
received, as this which is now abolished. To which may be added the custom of
giving the Eucharist to Infants; which prevailed for several Ages; and is
called by S. Austin an Apostolical Tradition: the custom of administering
Baptism only at Easter and Whitsontide; with a great heap more, which it would
be too long to enumerate. Nor is it necessary I should trouble the Reader with
them; these being sufficient to show, the partiality of that Church in this
matter: and that we have no reason to be tied to that, merely upon their
Authority; which they will not observe, though having a far greater. Nay, all
discreet persons may easily see, what a wide difference there is, between them
who have abrogated such Traditions, as had long gone even in their Church,
under the name of Apostolical; and us who therefore do not follow pretended
Traditions now, because we believe them not to be Apostolical, but merely
Roman. He is strangely blind, who does not see how much more sincere this
Church is, than that; in this regard.

5. Besides this, we can demonstrate, that as in these things they have
forsaken Traditions, so in other cases they have perverted and abused them;
turning them into quite another thing. As appears to all that understand any
thing of ancient learning, in the business of Purgatory: which none of the most
ancient Writers so much as dreamt to be such a place, as they have now devised:
but only asserted a Purgatory Fire, through which all, both good and bad, even
the blessed Virgin her self, must pass; at the great and dreadful day of
Judgment. This was the old Tradition, as we may call it, which was among
Christians: which they have changed into such a Tradition as was among the
Pagans.

6. But it is time to have done with this: else I should have insisted upon
this a while, which I touched before and is of great moment: that the Tradition
which now runs in that Church is contrary to the certain Tradition of the
Apostles and the universal Church: particularly in the Canon of Scripture. In
which no more Books have been numbered by the Catholic Church in all Ages,
since the Apostles time, than are in the VI. Article of Religion in this Church
of England: till the late Council of Trent, took the boldness to thrust the
Apocryphal Books into the holy Canon; as nothing inferior to the acknowledged
Divine Writings. This has been so evidently demonstrated by a late Reverend
Prelate of our Church, in his Scholastical History of the Canon of the
Scriptures, out of undoubted Records; that no fair Answer can be made to it.

But I must leave a little room for other things that ought to be noted.

III. And the next is a consequence from what has been now said. That there
being so little credit to be given to the Roman Church only, we cannot receive
those Doctrines for Truth, which that Church now presses upon our belief, upon
the account of Tradition. For instance, that the Church of Rome, is the Mother
and Mistress of all other Churches; that the Pope of Rome is the Monarch or
Head of the universal visible Church; that all Scriptures must be expounded
according to the sense of this Church; that there are truly and properly seven
Sacraments, neither more nor less, instituted by our blessed Lord himself in
the New Testament; that there is a proper and propitiatory Sacrifice offered in
the Mass for the quick and dead, the same that Christ offered on the Cross; in
short, the half Communion, and all the rest of the Articles of their New Faith,
in the Creed published by Pope Pius IV. which are Traditions of the Roman
Church alone, not of the Universal: and rely solely upon their own Authority.
And therefore we refuse them; and in our disputes about Traditions, we mean
these things; which we reject because they have no foundation, either in the
holy Scripture, or in Universal Tradition: but depend, as I said, upon the sole
Authority of that Church, which witnesses in its own behalf.

For whatsoever is pretended, to make the better show, all resolves at last
into that; as I intimated in the beginning of this Discourse. Scripture and
Tradition can do nothing at all for them; without their Churches definition.
Though their whole infallible Rule of Faith seem to be made up of those three,
yet in truth, the last of these alone, the Churches definition, is the whole
Rule; and the very bottom upon which their Faith stands. For what is Tradition
is no more apparent, than, what is Scripture, according to their principles,
without the Authority of their Church: which pretends to an unlimited power to
supply the defect even of Tradition it self.

In short, as Tradition among them is taken in to supply the defect of
Scripture; so the Authority of their Church is taken in to supply the defect of
Tradition: but this Authority undermines them both; because neither Scripture
nor Tradition signify any thing, without their Churches Authority. Which
therefore, is the rule of their Faith: that is, they believe themselves.

To which absurdity they are driven; because it is made evident by us that
there have been great diversities of Traditions, and many changes and
alterations made, even in things called Apostolical, etc. and therefore they
have no other way, but to fly to the judgment of the present Roman Church, to
determine what are Traditions Apostolical, and what are not: by which judgment
all mankind must be governed; that is, we must believe them; and they believe
themselves: which they would have done well to have said in one word; without
putting us to the trouble of seeking for Traditions in Books, and in other
Churches. But they would willingly color their pretenses, by as many fair
words, as is possible, and so make mention of Scripture, Tradition, Antiquity:
which when we have examined, they will not stand to them; but take fanctuary in
their own Authority: saying they are the sole judges what is Scripture, and
what Tradition, and what Antiquity; nay have a power to declare any new point
of Faith, which the Church never heard of before. This is the Doctrine of
Salmeron and others of his fellows; that the Doctrine of Faith admits of
additions in essential things. For all things were not taught by the Apostles,
but such as were then necessary and fit for the Salvation of Believers.

By which means we can never know, when the Christian Religion will be
perfected: but their Church may bring in Traditions by its sole Authority,
without end.

Nay, some among them have been contented to resolve all their Faith into the
sole Authority of the present Roman Bishop: according to that famous saying of
Cornelius Mussus (promoted by Paul III. to a Bishopric) upon the XIV. Chapter
to the Romans; to confess the truth ingenuously, I would give greater credit to
one Pope, in those things which touch the mysteries of Faith; than to a
thousand Hierom's, Austin's, Gregory's: to say nothing of Richard's, Scotus's,
etc. for I believe and know that the Pope cannot err in matters of Faith. Which
contemptuous speech he would never have uttered, to the discredit of those
great men whom they pretend to reverence; if he had not known more certainly
that the Tradition which runs among the ancient Fathers, is against them; than
he could know the Pope to be infallible.

There is no Tradition, I am sure for that; nor for abundance of other things,
which rest merely upon their own credit; as is fairly acknowledged in two great
Articles of their present Creed by our Countryman Bishop Fisher with whose
words I conclude this particular. Many perhaps have the less confidence in
Indulgences because their use seems to have been newer in the Church, and very
lately found among Christians. To whom I answer, that it does not appear
certainly by whom they began to be first delivered. For the ancients make no
mention, or very rare of Purgatory: and the Greeks to this very day do not
believe it: nor was the belief either of Purgatory or of Indulgences, so
necessary in the Primitive Church, as it is now. And as long as there was no
care about Purgatory, no body sought for Indulgences: for all their esteem
depends upon that. If you take away Purgatory to what purpose are Indulgences?
Since therefore Purgatory was so lately known and received in the Catholic
Church, who can wonder that there was no use of Indulgences in the beginning of
our Religion?

Which is a full confession what kind of Traditions that Church commends unto
us: things lately invented; their own private opinions, of which the ancient
Christians knew nothing. In one word, their Tradition, is no Tradition; in that
sense wherein the Church always understood it.

IV. And what has been said of them, must be applied to other particular
Churches; though some have been more sincere than they. None of them has any
authority to commend any thing as an Article of Faith unto posterity; which
has not been commended to them by all foregoing Ages, derived from the
Apostles. For Vincentius his Rule is to guide us all in this, that is Catholic
(and consequently to be received) which has been held by all, and in all
Churches, and at all times.

V. Which puts me in mind of another thing to be briefly touched; that the
Ecclesiastical Tradition contained in the Confessions or Registers of
particular Churches in these days wherein we live; is not received by us, nor
allowed to have the same Authority which such Tradition had at the time of the
Nicene Council, for the conviction of Heresy. The joint consent I mean of so
many Bishops as were there assembled, and the unanimous Confessions of so many
several Churches of several Provinces as were there delivered, has not now
such a force to induce belief, as it had then. The reason of which is given by
the same Vincentius, who so highly commends that way which was then taken, of
reproving Heresy: but adds this most wise caution (in the last Chapter but one
of the first Part of his Commonitorium) but you must not think that all
Heresies, and always are thus to be opposed; but only new and fresh Heresies:
when they first rise up, that is; before they have falsified the rules of the
ancient Faith, etc. As for inveterate Heresies, which have spread themselves,
they are in no wise to be assaulted this way: because in a long tract of time
many opportunities may have presented themselves to Heretics, of stealing
Truth, out of ancient Records, and of corrupting the Volumes of our Ancestors.

Which if it be applied to the present state of things, it is evident the Roman
Church has had such opportunities of falsifying Antiquity ever since the first
acknowledgment of the Papal Supremacy that we cannot rely merely upon any
written testimonies, or unwritten Traditions, which never so great a number of
their Bishops met together shall produce: which amount not to so much as one
legal Testimony: but they are to be looked upon or suspected as a multitude of
false Witnesses, conspiring together in their own cause.

How then, may some say, can Heresies of long standing be confuted? The same
Vincentius resolves us in this, in the very next words, We may convince them,
if need be, by the sole authority of the Scriptures; or eschew them as already
convicted and condemned in ancient times, by the general Councils of Catholic
Priests.

The Tradition which is found there, must direct all future Councils; not the
opinions of their own present Churches.

VI. I will add but one thing more: which is, That the Tradition called Oral,
because it comes by word of mouth from one Age to another, without any written
record, is the most uncertain, and can be least relied upon, of all other. This
has been demonstrated so fully by the Writers of our Church, and there are
such pregnant instances of the errors into which men have been led by it, that
it needs no long discourse.

Two instances of it are very common, and I shall add a third.

1. The first is that which Papias, who lived presently after the Apostles
times, and conversed with those who had seen them, set on foot. His way was, as
Eusebius relates out of his Works, not so much to read, as to inquire of the
Elders, what Saint Andrew, or Saint Peter said; what was the saying of Saint
Thomas, Saint James, and the rest of the Disciples of our Lord. And he
pretended that some of them told him, among other things, that after the
resurrection of our Bodies, we shall reign a thousand years here upon Earth:
which he gathered, says Eusebius, from some saying of the Apostles wrong
understood. But this fancy was embraced very greedily, and was taught for two
whole Ages, as an Apostolical Tradition; no body opposing it: and yet having
nothing to say for it, but only the antiquity of the man (as Eusebius his
words are L. III. Cap. ult.) who delivered it to them: yet this Tradition has
been generally since taken for an imposture; and teaches us no more than this;
that if one man could set a going such a Doctrine, and make it pass so current
for so long a time, upon no other pretense, than that an Apostle said so in
private discourse; we have great reason to think that other Traditions have had
no better beginning, or not so good; especially since they never so universally
prevailed as that did.

2. A second instance is that famous contention about the observation of
Easter; which miserably afflicted the Church in the days of Victor Bishop of
Rome: by dividing the Eastern Christians from the Western. One pretending
Tradition from Saint John, and Saint Philip; the other from Saint Peter and
Saint Paul. Concerning which I will not say, as Rigaltius does (in his sharp
note upon the words of Firmilian; who pretended Tradition for the rebaptizing
of Heretics) that under the Names and Persons of great men, there were sottish
and sophistical things delivered for Apostolical Traditions, by fools and
sophisters. But this I affirm, that there are many more instances of men's
forwardness, and they neither fools nor sophisters, but only wedded to the
opinions of their own Churches, to obtrude things as Apostolical, for which
they had no proof at all. For when they knew not how to defend themselves,
presently they flew to Tradition Apostolical.

3. A third instance of whose uncertainty we have in Irenaeus ( L. II. C. 39.)
concerning the age of our blessed Savior when he died: which he confidently
affirms to have been forty, if not fifty years; and says the Elders which knew
Saint John and were his Scholars, received this relation from him. And yet all
agree, that he beginning to preach at thirty years of age, was crucified about
three years and an half after.

The like relation Clemens makes of his preaching but one year; which he calls
a secret Tradition from the Apostles: but has no more Truth in it, than the
other.

Now if in the first Ages, when they were so near the fountain and beginning of
Tradition men were deceived, nay such great men as these were deceived, and led
others into errors in these matters: we cannot with any safety trust to
Traditions, that have passed, men pretend, from one to another until now: but
we can find no mention of in any Writer, till some Ages after the Apostles; and
then were by somebody or other, who had authority in those days, called
Apostolical Traditions; merely to gain them the more credit. Thus Andreas
Caesariensis in his Commentaries upon the Book of Revelation, p. 743. says
that the coming of Enoch and Elias before the second coming of Christ (though
it be not found in Scripture) was a constant report received by Tradition
without any variation, from the teachers of the Church.

Which is sufficient to show how ready they were to father their own private
opinions, upon ancient universal Tradition: and how little reason we have to
trust to that, which was so uncertain, even in the first Ages; and therefore
must needs be more dubious now.

Thus I have endeavored to lay before the eyes of those, who will be pleased
to look over this short Treatise; what they are to think and speak about
Tradition. It is a calumny to affirm that the Church of England rejects all
Tradition; and I hope none of her true Children are so ignorant, as when they
hear that word to imagine they must rise up and oppose it. No, the Scripture it
self is a Tradition; and we admit all other Traditions which are subordinate,
and agreeable unto that; together with all those things which can be proved to
be Apostolical by the General Testimony of the Church in all Ages: nay, if any
thing not contained in Scripture, which the Roman Church now pretends to be a
part of God's word, were delivered to us, by as universal uncontrolled
Tradition as the Scripture is, we should receive it as we do the Scripture.

But it appears plainly that such things were at first but private Opinions;
which now are become the Doctrines of that particular Church: who would impose
her Decrees upon us under the Venerable Name of Apostolical Universal
Tradition: which I have shown you has been an ancient cheat; and that we ought
not to be so easy as to be deceived by it. But to be very wary, and afraid of
trusting the Traditions of such a Church, as has not only perverted some,
abolished others, and pretended them where there has been none: but been a
very unfaithful preserver of them and that in matters of great moment, where
there were some; and lastly warrants those which it pretends to have kept, by
nothing but its own infallibility. For which there is no Tradition: but much
against it; even in the Original Tradition, the holy Scriptures: which plainly
suppose the Roman Church may not only err, but utterly sail and be cut off
from the Body of Christ: As they that please may read, who will consult the
Eleventh Chapter to the Romans, v. 20, 21, 22. Of which they are in the greater
danger, because they proudly claim so high a prerogative as that now mentioned;
directly contrary to the Apostolical Admonition in that place: be not high
minded, but fear.

CONCLUSION.
I Shall end this Discourse with a brief Admonition, relating to our Christian
practice.

And what is there more proper or more seasonable than this? While we reject
all spurious Traditions, let us be sure to keep close to the genuine and true.
Let us hold them fast, and not let them go.

Let us not dispute our selves out of all Religion while we condemn that which
is false: Nor break all Christian Discipline and Order; because we cannot
submit to all humane impositions.

In plain words, let us not throw off Episcopacy, together with the Papal
Tyranny.

We ought to be the more careful in observing the Divine Tradition delivered
to us in the Scripture; and according to the Scripture; because we are not
bound to other.

While we contend against the half Communion; let us make a Conscience to
receive the whole frequently. It looks like Faction, rather than Religion, to
be earnest for that, which we mean not to use.

In like manner, while we look upon additions to the Scripture, as vain; let us
not neglect to read and ponder those holy Writings.

When we reject Purgatory as a fable; let us really dread Hell fire.

And while we do not tie our selves to all usages that have been in the Church,
let us be careful to observe, first all the substantial duties of
righteousness, charity, sobriety and godliness, which are unquestionably
delivered to us by our Lord himself and his holy Apostles: and secondly all the
Ordinances of the Church wherein we live, which are not contrary to the word of
God. For so has the fame Divine Authority delivered; that the people should
obey those that are their Guides and Governors; submitting themselves to their
authority; and avoiding all contention with them, as most undecent in it self,
and pernicious to Religion; which suffers extremely, when neither
Ecclesiastical Authority, nor Ecclesiastical Custom can end disputes about
Rites and Ceremonies.

Read 1 Thessalonians. V. 12. Heb. XIII. 17. 1 Cor. XI. 16. and read such places, as
you ought to do all the other Scriptures, till your hearts be deeply affected
with them.

For be admonished, in the last place, of this; which is of general use, and
must never be forgotten: because we shall lose the benefit of that celestial
Doctrine, which is delivered unto us, if we do not strictly observe it. That as
this Evangelical Doctrine is delivered down to us, so we must be delivered up
to it. Thus Saint Paul teaches us to speak in VI. Romans 17. where he thanks God
that they who formerly had been servants of sin, did now obey from the heart
that form of Doctrine, unto which they were delivered. So the words run in the
Greek (as the Margin of our Bibles inform you) (...).

This is the Tradition which we must be sure to retain, and hold fast above all
other; as that without which all our belief will be ineffectual.

This is the very end for which all Divine Truth is delivered unto us, that we
may be delivered and make a surrender of our selves unto it.

Observe the force of the Apostles words: which tell us first, that there was a
certain form of Christian Doctrine which the Apostles taught, compared here to
a mould (so the word (...), form, may be translated) into which metal or such
like matter is cast; that it may receive the figure and shape of that mould.

2. Now he compares the Roman Christians to such ductile, pliable matter: they
being so delivered or cast into this form or mould of Christian Doctrine, that
they were entirely framed and fashioned according to it: and had all the
lineaments, as I may say, of it expressed upon their souls.

3. And having so received it, they were obedient to it: for without this, all
the impressions, which by knowledge or faith were made upon their souls, were
but an imperfect draught of what was intended in the Christian Tradition.

4. And it was hearty obedience; sincere compliance with the Divine will: such
obedience as became those who understood their Religion to be a great
deliverance and liberty from the slavery of sin (before spoken of) into the
happy freedom of the service of God.

5. All which lastly he ascribes to the grace of God, which had both delivered
to them that Doctrine, and drawn them to deliver up themselves to it; made
their hearts soft and ductile to be cast into that mould; and quickened them to
Christian Obedience; and given them a willing mind to obey cheerfully. All this
was from God's grace, and not their merits; and therefore the thanks was to be
ascribed to him, who succeeds and blesses all pious endeavors.

Now according to this pattern, let us frame our selves: who, blessed be God,
have a form of Doctrine delivered to us in this Church, exactly agreeable to
the holy Scriptures: which lie open before us; and we are exhorted not only to
look into them, but we feel that grace which has brought them to us, clearly
demonstrating that we ought to be formed according to the holy Doctrine therein
delivered, by the delivery of our selves unto it. By the delivery of our mind,
that is, to think of God, and our selves, and of our duty in every point, just
as this instructs us. And by the delivery of our wills and affections, to be
governed and regulated, according to its directions. And when we have consented
to this, we find the Divine grace representing to us the necessity of an hearty
obedience, to what we know and believe and have embraced as the very Truth of
God. To this we are continually drawn and mightily moved; and if we would show
our thankfulness for it, let us follow these godly motions, and conform our
selves in all things to the heavenly prescriptions of this Book: being
confident that if we do, we need not trouble our selves about any other model
of Religion, which we find not here delivered.

For if you desire to know what form of Doctrine it is, to which the Apostle
would have us delivered; it is certain it is a Doctrine directly opposite to
all vice and wickedness. For herein the grace of God was manifested, he tells
the Romans, in that it had brought them, from being slaves of sin, heartily to
obey the Christian Doctrine: which taught, that is, virtue and piety.

Now to this the present Romanists can pretend to add nothing. All the parts of
a godly life are sufficiently taught us, in the holy Scriptures. And if we
would seriously practice and follow this Doctrine, from the very heart; we
should easily see there is no other but what is there delivered. For whatsoever
is pretended to be necessary besides, is not a Doctrine according unto
godliness (as the Apostle calls Christianity) but the very design of it is to
open an easier way to heaven, than that laid before us in the holy Scriptures;
by Masses for the dead, by Indulgences, by Satisfactions, and the merits of the
Saints, and several other such like inventions: which have no foundation in the
Scriptures; nor in true Antiquity.

That is a word indeed which is very much pretended. Antiquity they say is on
their side; but it is nothing different from what has been said about
Tradition. And if we will run up to the true Antiquity, there is nothing so
ancient as the holy Scriptures. They are the oldest Records of Religion: and by
them if we frame our lives, we are sure it is according to the most authentic
and ancient directions of piety, delivered in the holy Oracles of God. So both
sides confess them to be. And if the old Rule be safe, that is true, which is
first, we are safe-enough: for there is nothing before this to be our Guide;
and there can be nothing after this, but must be tried by it. According to
another Rule, as old as reason it self; the first in every kind, is the measure
of all the rest. And, as sure as that there is a Gospel of God's grace, they
that walk after this Rule (this Divine Canon) peace shall be upon them, and
mercy; they being the true Israel, or Church, of God.

THE END.
Books Printed for Fincham Gardener.
AContinuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion.

3. The Case of Indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and
Stated by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England 's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts.

8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether it be Lawful to separate from a Church
upon the Account of promiscuous Congregations, and Mixed Communions?

9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers, and some
other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of
England.

10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. The
first Part.

11. Certain Cases of Conscience, etc. The Second Part.

12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and of going to hear where Men think
they can profit most.

13. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? Printed for Robert Horn at the South Entrance of the Royal
Exchange.


