A Consolatory DISCOURSE To prevent Immoderate GRIEF For the Death of our
FRIENDS.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleet Street
near the Inner Temple gate, 1671.

A Consolatory Discourse to prevent Immoderate Grief for the Death of our
Friends.
SECT. I. Wherein is shown the need of a Consolatory Discourse against the lost
of our friends.
The need of this discourse.
IT is left upon record by St. Hierom concerning Paulina, that though she was a
Lady, whose passions were under admirable government in other things, yet when
any of her children dyed, she was oppressed with so great a sorrow, that he had
much ado to save her from being drowned in the floods of it. But it is not so
great a wonder that a person of the tenderer sex should feel such a tempest, as
that David a man of war, who had overcome so many enemies, should himself be
overcome with grief for a disobedient son. It is said that a Lacedaemonian
woman having sent five sons to a battle, stood at the Gates of Sparta to expect
the event: and when she met one coming from the Camp, she asked him what was
done. All thy five sons (said the man) are slain. Away thou fool (answered she
again) I enquired not of this, but of the issue of the fight. When he told her
that her Countrymen had got the better; then farewell my sons (said she) and
let us rejoice that Sparta is saved. But David it seems had not attained to
this faeminine courage, 2 Samuel 18.24.
for he sat between the gates waiting for news of the success, and when he
heard of the loss but of one son, and he a Traitor to his Country, he could
not contain himself till he came into the house, but went up to the chamber
over the gate to lament his son, V. 33.
as though he had lost the day by losing him. Nay he could not refrain so long
till he came into the chamber, but he watered the stairs with his tears, and
wept as he went up, saying; O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, Would God
I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my son, my son.

This lamentation of his cannot but call to mind the tears which Achilles,
another great warrior, shed over the grave of his friend Patroclus, where
(...), (as Homer speaks) he wept most horribly, as if he would have killed
himself.

This love is such a powerful thing, that if it has placed any object in our
heart, we can scarce suffer it to be taken from us, without rending and tearing
our hearts in pieces. Such a strange union does it make between two persons,
that we can scarce give that man any welcome that brings us the news of a
separation. And therefore some of the ancient Carthaginians (as I remember)
knowing how hard it is to love those who bring us the tidings of the death of
them that we love, would never send such a message but by the hand of some
condemned man, whom they were never like to see again. I am ready here to
interrupt my discourse, and in the very beginning to fall into a passion with
my self, when I think how patiently we can suffer our souls to be divided from
God whom we pretend to love. O Love! how great things should we do if we did
but Love! how angry should we be at the temptation which would draw him from us
whom our souls Love!

Antonius Guevara had a Niece who was so passionately in love with a little
Bitch, that at the death of it she fell into a Fever, Fpist. ad famil. pars 21.
and was fain to keep her bed. The good man did well rather to chide, than to
comfort her, and to write a Satyr, rather than a consolatory letter to her: but
yet in that strange passion of hers, we may clearly see how incident it is unto
us to take heavily the loss of what we love.

Now there is no greater love than that which is between near kindred and
friends, and no man that knows the pleasure of it, would dissuade any from such
love, and yet it is necessary that we should not mourn for them as if we loved
nothing else; which will render it perhaps an acceptable piece of service unto
some, if I endeavor to ease them of this kind of sorrow; and though I have
touched but lightly upon other maladies (in the foregoing Treatise) yet I apply
some particular plasters to this great and general sore.

SECT. 2. Wherein is shown that we may grant nature leave to ease it self by
moderate tears; and two Advices are given to keep us from making an ill use of
this Grant.
We may mourn moderately.
YOu must not think that it is in my design to take away your trouble, by taking
you off from all love and friendship; for that would be as ridiculous as the
device to cure drunkenness by cutting up all the Vines. I would not have a man
to love none but himself, out of a fear that he should be troubled at the loss
of them, as much as at the loss of himself. This would be to cure one evil by a
greater, and to ease men of a short trouble, by letting them want the constant
easement and sweetest comfort of our lives, which is our friends. Neither do I
intend to write like a Stoic, and stupifie all your passions, so that you
should not mourn at all, for that is an impossible thing, if we have any love.
Grace does not root out nature, nor quite dry up all our tears; but it rather
makes our hearts more moist and tender, and causes it to express it self in a
becoming affection unto others; as David and that Lady may teach us. They are
sturdy, not generous, that are void of all grief: they are rather hard than
constant, rather unexperienced than reasonable, that forbid all sadness. But it
is my design to bring you to a moderation both in love and in sorrow, that you
may do as much as becomes good friends, but no more than becomes good men. Not
to be sensible of evils, is not to be men; not to bear them patiently, is not
to be Christians. It is neither to be hoped nor to be desired that we should
shed no tears at all; but it is both necessary and attainable, that we should
let them flow In measures Lacrymandum est, Sencea Epist. 63
sed non plorandum. We may weep, but we must not mail and lament. We must be
natural, but we must be also reasonable: We must approve our selves both to men
and unto God; that they may see we are loving friends, and that he may see, we
are his dutiful children. Est enim quaedam and dolendi modestia. For there is a
dertain modesty even in mourning, and it is as unseemly to weep immoderately,
as it is not to weep at all.

And let none think that by this concession unto nature and decency, the wound
will be made incurable; and that it is easter not to mourn at all, than to
mourn moderately. These are but the dreams of heavy souls; that think that none
can stand still, but they that are resolved never to stir. It is said indeed,
that we may more easily abstain from a thing of which we never tasted, than
refrain from it after a little acquaintance. But this must be understood of
pleasure, and not of grief; When we have mourned a little, we shall soon see
that there is neither pleasure nor profit in our mourning. Or if any one shall
think it to be some pleasure, yet it will notwithstanding be easily moderated;
because it is only the pleasure of being eased of our loads that oppressed us,
not of being satisfied with the pressure of any delightful object. It is but
the letting out of sadness, not the bringing in of any pleasure; and therefore
when the heart is once eased of its burden, it will soon be persuaded to mourn
no more; for that will be the bringing upon us a new burden.

But then on the other side, as we may grant something unto nature, so we must
be sure not to let it work alone. That we may weep moderately, it will be
necessary to make resistance to our sorrows, and muster up all the consolatory
arguments that are reposited in our minds. Nature will do its part without our
help. We need not study how to weep enough, nor use any arguments to persuade
our selves into tears. It is a superfluous employment to strive to magnify our
loss; for Fancy is apt to make it bigger than it is. It is a foolish trouble to
be careful how to mourn, for tears will flow from us without any bidding. All
our work must be to stop their passage as fast as we can, and to make them flow
leisurely, not gush forth with too great a violence. Our Reason and Religion
must be called up in all haste, to make as strong a dam as we are able to our
sorrow, or else if it have its course, it may overflow us.

He is a base Pilot that leaves his tackling in a storm, and suffers his ship
to run along with the tempest; and no less ignoble and abject is his spirit,
that permits himself to the gusts and Haericans of his own passions, and lets
them drive him whither they, and not whither he himself pleases. But it is a
degree of madness to use reason it self to make the blasts more terrible, and
when the storm is too furious, by art and skill to conjure up more boisterous
passions. Who would pity him that sets his reason against himself, and studies
how to be as miserable as his mind can make him? We need not be so in love with
grief, as to create it to our selves. Nature as I said, knows how to mourn
without our teaching. We had need think rather how to bear our natural
troubles, than how to lay more upon our shoulders.

But if we will make any opposition, we must begin before our passions are too
strong. They are too powerful of themselves, and we must not let them gather
more strength by our negligence. If we do not at the very first set our selves
in a posture of defense against them, they will seize upon our whole soul, and
get every thing into their possesion. As soon therefore as our grief stirs, we
must strive to comfort our selves, and not either help forward or suffer our
grief. If we go and bewail our friends as much as we can, and think to cheer
our souls afterward; we shall soon find that our souls are drowned with a
flood, and that it will be a long time before it be soaked up. When we give the
least leave to these passions, they will ask no leave of us afterward; but the
soul will mourn like Rachel, and refuse to be comforted. As soon therefore as
thou hear of the death of thy friends, do not spend the time in bemoaning
thy self, saying, Alas! what a friend have I lost! did ever any man part with
such a person? where shall I find one comparable to him in wisdom, in love, in
faithfulness, in all manner of sufficiencies to make a friend? Do not, I say,
after this sort stand to aggravate thy grief; but instantly say, Why should a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? why should I trouble
and torment my self with my own thoughts; why should wind and tide run
together? how many reasons have I to be contented? and spread them all before
thine eyes, that they may dry up thy tears and cease thy sorrow. Labor, at
least, that these thoughts may tread upon the heels of the other: and, as soon
as may be, overake them, and get the mastery of them. And so doing, thou will
weep as much as is fit, but no more than thou ought. Nature will be
satisfied, and thou thy self not ashamed. None will think that thou art not
grieved, and thou will feel that thy heart is comforted.

SECT. III. Which shows rather what might be said, than what is said in this
present Treatise for moderating our sorrow. But yet those examples which we
have from others may move us to follow their rules, and so a brief touch is
made upon them.
The best and wisest persons have not mourned much.
BUt what comforts are these (may some say) which you bring us? with what
reasons will you assist us?

I suppose it will be of no great effect to answer, that the wisest persons
have made their mourning short, and moderate; because I have already named two
both good and wise that were excessive. And therefore I must endeavor to make
men thoroughly wise, and furnish them with such reasons as will not suffer them
to be oppressed with their sorrows. Yet me thinks it is observable, that the
Egyptians mourned ten times as long as the children of Israel. Seven days
ordinarily contented the people of God for their grief, (as you may see,
Eccles. 22.12. Job 2.13.) whereas they that were strangers to the God of
Israel, extended their mourning seventy days, as you may read, Genesis 50.3. yea
the greatest mourning that the Israelites used for their two famous leaders,
Numb. 20.29. Deuteronomy. 34.8.
Moses and Aaron, was prolonged but to thirty days, which is not half the time
that those Heathens allowed. I think not fit neither to pass by the shortness
of Abraham's grief for his dearest wife Sarah, who dyed as some of the Jews
conjecture, for very grief when he was at Mount Moriah, thinking that her son
was offered. This they gather from that expression, Genesis 23.2. Abraham came to
mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her. From whence it was that he came I have
nothing to affirm, yet this note of theirs is considerable, that in the word
(...) [to weep for her] there is a small Caph in the middle of great letters,
(...)
which may very well show they think, that his weeping was little and moderate,
and not of the greatest size. That expression is likewise taken notice of by
some, which follows in the next verse, He stood up from before his dead, as if
it signified, that he turned his dies from her, that so he might not be
overcome with grief. We must not love to look on our losses; nor think that it
becomes us to weep as long as we can. But we should learn by the manners of
Gods people, to do all we can to make our mourning short. Yea I might teach you
from Heathens themselves, if examples would do us any good. Plutarch. in Lycurg.
Lycurgus ordained that none should weep above eleven days, and that they
should make no Funeral solemnities. (...) Plut. in Solone.
Solon likewise took them away, that so he might ease men of those howlings and
lamentations, which they use to make at their friends Interment. Augustus as
Seneca observes, though he lost all his children and Nephews, and was fain to
adopt an heir, yet he was so little moved at their death, that he constantly
went to the Senate, and neglected no Public affairs. Pericles likewise having
lost two sons of great hope, within the compass of eight days, put on
notwithstanding a white garment, and with a great constancy of mind went to
deliberate about the necessities of the Commonwealth.

All stories are full of such great souls, that after they had conquered
others, at last conquered themselves also. I know it will cure no man to tell
him that his neighbor was cured, yet these examples do commend to us the
remedies which they used, and give us hopes that our griefs are not incurable.

SECT. IV. Which teaches us to consider what death is: First, Common; Secondly,
Necessary; Thirdly, Good. And if we thought more of it, we should not be
unwilling to part, neither does the manner of parting make any considerable
difference.
What it is that must ease us.
THE cure of this distemper does lie chiefly in a fullness of considerations,
wherewithal our minds must be stored. Nothing can resist grief but a great
mind; no mind can be great that is not big with truth; nothing can impregnate
us with truth but serious advice and consideration in our selves; and therefore
we must provide our selves with sufficient Antidotes that may be ready at hand
when we have need of them. Our souls must be as an Apothecary, and our hearts
must be the (...), or shop where all medicines are in a readiness against any
grief or malady that shall invade us. If we have our remedies to gather, and to
compound when our sickness comes, the mind will be so weak that it will not be
able to make them. We have least power to consider when we are full of sorrow;
our affections are ready to overlay our reasons, and therefore we must have our
medicines made before, that then we may have nothing else to do, but only to
take them. And we shall find that to have so much labor in it (our stomachs
being squeamish and nauseating) that we shall clearly see we need have nothing
else to do.

I. The first means is to consider what it is that we lament.
First then, Let us seriously consider, What is it that we grieve for? It is
soon answered, that we mourn for the Death of those that we love. For their
Death? What is that I beseech you? Is death such a strange and unusual thing
that we should take it heavily? Are your friends the first that ever dyed? Are
you the only persons that God has singled out to be left alone? Do you not see
that every thing in the world can cause death? Death is an usual thing.
The wind, the lightning, the fire, the smoke, the dust of the earth, the
water, our meat and drink, our own passions, our joy, our sorrow, and a
thousand other things can bring us to our graves. Why then should it be
lamented, as if it were some wonder at which all the world should be
astonished? Men fill the air with sighs, they beat the Heavens with their
groans, they cloth themselves with darkness, and they pour out floods as in a
tempest. Why what is the matter? Is the Sun fallen from its Orb? are all the
lights of Heaven extinguished? are they carrying out the worlds funeral? What
is it then that causes this moan? A friend is dead. There is one man less in
the world than there was. O wonderful! what a prodigy is this! One that was
born to die, is dead! It had been a wonder indeed, if he had not dyed. Then we
might have filled the earth with noises. Then there had been some cause for a
tumult. But now it is rather a wonder that men should make such a stir at an
ordinary and common thing, than that a thing so common should happen unto them.
One would rather look to see no tears, than no death; and we might more easily
excuse their not weeping at all, than we can these doleful lamentations.

Death is necessary.
Is it not necessary that our friends should dye? yea, it is so necessary, that
it is a thing past, and cannot be recalled, when men weep most for it. If you
can bring them back again with your tears, if there be any hopes that with the
noise you make they should revive to comfort you; then you have leave to weep
as much as you please. Is there any Elijah or Elisha that can stretch forth
themselves upon them, and recover them to their warmth? Is there any Paul or
Peter, or such great men that can raise them from the dead? Go then, and
entreat them for to pity you. Beat your breasts, tear your hair, break your
sleep with sorrow, macerate your selves with fasting, that they may take some
compassion upon you. But if all this pains be lost, never put your selves into
it; but say, Why should I have my labor for my pains? And did not all those
men die again that they raised? Were they made immortal here upon the earth?
what good would it do you to have them called to life again, if they must again
die? How would you be able to part with them then if not now? What an
uncomfortable life would you lead out of fear every day to fall into the same
sadness? How desolate would you be even in their company, unless you learnt not
to be troubled nor distracted? And if that must be learnt, then let us learn it
now when it is as necessary as it would be then. Do you take it ill that the
Apple rots, and your trees decay, and your clothes grow bear, and that any
thing in this world is according to its nature? Why then do you bewail it with
such passion that men die, which is as natural to them as it is to be born?
Would you have God make the world anew for your sakes? will you not be
contented unless he make a mortal thing immortal? Is it not sufficient that
you know it must die, and that he gave it to you that it may be returned to him
again? Did he ever promise you how long you should have it? may he not call for
his own when he thinks good? do not other men pay this debt to nature as well
as you?

Seeing then it is both a common and a necessary debt, do not repine as if you
did only pay it. He is an unworthy debtor, that returns what is lent with a
reproach to his creditor. And therefore give it up cheerfully, perhaps he may
entrust you with something better. While David saw that his child was alive, 2 Samuel 12.
he earnestly besought of God that it might not die; but when once it had given
up the ghost, he anoints his head, and puts on other garments, because he knew
God was not bound to work a miracle, though he might be inclined to show mercy.
While there was life, there was some hope of mercy: but when it was dead, there
was no hope of a miracle.

And yet there is one thing that may be pertinently observed in that story of
David, which exceedingly argues our folly. Though God had said by a Prophet,
that his child should die, yet he earnestly begged that it might live. Men are
not so earnest for that which they may be assured God will do if it concern
their souls, as they are for that which they have all reason to fear he will
not do if it concern their bodies. Men would have him recall his word, and
alter his decrees in temporal matters; but they little mind the obtaining of
his promises, and the fulfilling of his Word in spiritual concernments. They
would have life as long as they please, which they know he will not bestow, but
they seek not for contentment which they may be assured he has a mind to give.
They would have him willing to let them enjoy their friends always, which
cannot be, but they seek not to him, that they may be willing to part with
them, though they must part with them, and he would make them willing.

Death is not only necessary but good.
For shame let us not continue in this kind of folly, to be angry at things
necessary which we cannot avoid, and to neglect those necessaries which we
cannot want.

And since death is such a common thing, and so easy to be met with, that
every thing in the world may bring it to us; let us further consider, that it
cannot be very hurtful in it self, for all such things are more unusual and
rare. God is not so unkind unto the world as to let the most noxious and
poisonous things grow every where in the greatest plenty. Things of that nature
are but thinly scattered through the world; they lie hid, and dare not commonly
appear. Since death therefore is in every thing, since it lurks not for us like
a Serpent in the grass, but the smallest thing in this world may strike us with
it; let us verily persuade our selves, that there is no such great harm in it
as we imagine; especially considering that there is another life.

I am sure that some as wise as we that mourn so much, have thought that death
was the best thing that befalls the sons of men: And if we do not think so, it
is because we think not of death it self. It is a common story which Pindar was
first Author of, how that Agamedes and Trophonius, Plutarch. ad Apollon.
having built the Temple of Apollo, asked a reward of that God for their
service. He promised that after seven days he would pay them well for their
pains; at the end of which they both died in the midst of a sleep. This the
world believed was a lesson to them, that God could do men no greater favor
than to take them out of the miseries of life. Not long after this Pindar
himself exemplified the same truth that he had taught. For when by the
Ambassadors of Boeotia, he asked the Oracle, What was the very best thing that
could befall men? The answer was, that Pindar knew well enough, V. etiam Suidam
in voc. (...).
if he did not lie when he wrote the story of Agamedes: but if he doubted, he
should shortly know what it was. This he intrepreted to signify his death,
which within a few days after happened.

But perhaps we are not of this mind, and I need not go to an Oracle to know
the reason, which is plainly this; We are acquainted with no other life but
this. If the world had not so much of our hearts, we should not find any fault
with the necessity of death, because it would become desirable. We should not
then be so sorry for our friends departure, as for our own stay. We should be
glad that neither they nor we were necessitated to dwell there always, where
there are so many troubles, that he is happiest who is soonest freed from them.

But there were many that thought not much of the goodness of death, who yet
were comforted with the bare thoughts of necessity. How many Heathens might I
tell you of who fled to this one truth for refuge, and found protection under
it against the assaults of sorrow? Nothing is happened to me, but what happens to
all. The first minute that we began to live, we began to die. This is not the
first, but the last moment of death. It is now finished, but it was born when
we were born.

When one came and told Anaxagoras in the midst of a lecture that his child was
dead, Hold thy peace, said he, I knew that I begat a son that was mortal, and
so proceeded in his Discourse without any accents of grief, or a mournful tone.
And so another said to his friend when he saw him weeping for his wife; I
thought you had known that you married a woman and not a goddess. Do but
remember then what the thing is that thou love, and thou must be willing
either to leave, or not to love it. As they used to stand behind them that
triumphed, and to admonish them, You are but mortal men; so let us say to our
selves when Love is in its greatest flames, (...), Arrian. l. 3. cap. 24.
I love a dying person. What hurt is there while we embrace and kiss a child,
to say (...), to morrow it may dye? and so to discourse with our friends: To
morrow either you or I may go away, To think of their death, does not make our
lives uncomfortable.
and never thus embrace any more. Does it make our love the less? does it make
us avoid their presence? No, therefore we are so greedy of our friends society,
because we know not how long we may enjoy them. It makes love more fervently
desirous to have all of them now, because it knows that it may have none of
them ere it be long. It teaches us to use their friendship to the best
advantages we can, because we are not like to have the use of it as long as we
please. The knowledge of our departure, does not part friends now, but makes
them cleave the closer until they depart. Let us be willing they should die,
and that will not abate of our love; for we cannot be willing until we have
loved them as much as we can. We shall be loath they should go without the best
testimonies of our love, and that will make us only improve our time to have
the benefit of them, and they of us. Seneca tells in one of his Letters, Epist.
63.
that he who gave a great deal of good counsel to others not to grieve, was
himself almost made an example of one overcome with grief. But the truth of it
is (says he) there was no other cause of that mourning which I must now
condemn, but only this, I did not use to think that my friend might die before
me. I only had in my mind that he was younger, much younger than my self;
whereas I ought to have added, What is this to the purpose? Though he ought (I
imagine) to die after me, yet he may die before me. Because I did not thus
meditate, I received a stroke when I was unarmed, which went to my heart. But
now I think both that all things are mortal, and that there is no certain
order of mortality. That which may be at all, may be to day. And if you think
that your friend may die to day, then why do you not begin to mourn, since his
death is at hand, unless you mean to take it patiently when it comes? If you
will lament the death of your friends so sadly, why do you not prepare your
lamentations, seeing death may be so near? If you think it is not so near, then
it is likely your sorrow will be violent when it comes, because sudden: If you
think it is, and yet do not mourn, then why should you lament that so sadly at
night, which you did not weep for at all, at noon? There were some creatures
they say in Pontus, Plutarch.
whose life lasted but one day; They were born in the morning, and came to
their full growth at noon, and grew old in the evening, and at night dyed. If
these animals had been masters of the reason that we have, would they have
lamented after our fashion? would they have mourned for one that chanced to dye
at noon, when as it could not live longer than night? No, that which is
necessary, it is no great matter when it comes. And because we are of a longer
life, our trouble at death is not to be the greater, but the less; For it is a
greater wonder that we did not die many days agone, than that we die to day.

The kind of death is not so considerable as death it self.
But some will say, that it is not death it self, but the kind of death that so
troubles them. They could have been contented, if he had gone out of the world
another way. But I beseech you, do you know what will please your selves? Can
you tell what sort of death it is that would content you? are there any that do
not blame their hard fortune, and wail and mourn as if none were so miserable?
are not men equally troubled if one die of a Feavour, and another of a
Consumption, if their love be equal? It is very plain, that he that persuades
himself to part with his friends, will not grieve for the manner of the
parting. He that can overcome himself in the greater cause of grief, will not
suffer the less so easily to overcome him. And therefore you see that men have
always something to find fault withal. If a friend die in a far Country,
then they say, Alas! that we should not see him before he dyed! how sad is it
that we should not take our leave? If he die at home; then they say, who could
endure to hear his groans? how sad was it to see him in the agonies of death?
If he die and speak nothing, then they say, O if he might but have told us his
mind, if he had left us any remembrances, it would have been some comfort. If
he did speak, then they tell his speeches to every one, and say, O my sweet
child, or friend, I shall never forget thy words. Would you have me put out of
my mind his dying speeches? and so those sayings are a perpetual nourishment
and food to their grief. If he die on a sudden, then they lament, because he
was snatched, rather than went away. If he die of a lingering sickness, then
they say he was nothing but skin and bone, a mere Anatomy; never any creature
endured so much as he did. And so they complain they know not for what, for
they would not have had him gone away so soon, but spun out his life, till he
looked more ruefully. And indeed men never want some pretenses for these
complaints; but the true reason is, that they would not have had their Friends
to die at all. In what glass soever this potion had been presented, they would
have swallowed it with the same disgust. And I must confess it is very bitter,
yet we should not study to make it worse than it is: but by digesting such
considerations as these, receive it with a better countenance and take it down
more easily. For which end let us proceed further and weigh what follows.

SECT. V. Which contains comforts against the loss of Children, Parents,
Consorts, Friends, upon a due consideration what every one of them is.
We must consider who the persons are that die.
LEt us consider well who it is for whom we make our lamentations. Who is it I
say, that death has taken away from us? Perhaps it is an Infant, a poor little
weakling newly crept into the light. And this has the least of wonder in it of
all other things, that such a little spark of life should be blown out.
Comforts against the loss of children.
A greater wonder it is that it was not strangled in the gate of the womb. A
little while ago it had no life, and it is now but as it then was. We were once
content without it; why cannot we be content without it now; It never loved us,
nor was capable to show any affection to us, and therefore we may the better
part with it. It was scarce tied to our heart, and therefore it need not make
the strings crack. It was not unwilling to go out of the world, and if it had
lived longer, death would have been more against its will. It has lost no
great matter, for it knew not the benefits of life. It has cost us nothing, or
we have been but at a small charge about it, and therefore our loss is not so
great neither, as we make it. If it could have known the miseries of living,
and it had been put to its choice, very likely it would not have chosen to
live, but to be what now it is. It has not blotted its soul by any sin, nor
deflowred the Virgin purity wherein it was born. If it have any thing to
complain of, it is only this, that it was born. And therefore let us be
content; for it is better perhaps for it, and not much the worse for us. If we
weep so much for an Infant, what shall we do for a man? Either let us now let
down the sluice, or else expect that we shall then be drowned. If he had lived
to be a man, it might have done as we do, miserably bewail the death of its
children. And therefore either let us not thus bewail it; or else think it
happy, that it lived not to be so miserable as we think our selves:
Unreasonable to mourn for one when we have more.
and both ways our grief will be cured.

But suppose it be a child of a larger growth, whose death extorts these tears
from us. Yet it is but one, and we may have many more remaining. Shall we lose
all the content of a great many, because we suffer the want of one? If the life
of this one would have pleased us so much, then how joyful should we be in the
life of four or five? If it be such a grief to lose a child, then let us be
thankful that we lie not under the miserable grief of losing them all. But if
we cannot take this patiently, then I doubt we shall run mad with impatience,
if God should take them all away. We must learn to part with more, by parting
willingly with this one; for all must die too. Can he bear a stone weight, who
cannot endure the load of one pound? and yet how justly may we fear that all
the rest should shortly follow, seeing we fret so much at Gods hand in this?
Suppose that this was the most goodly child, yet not fairer sure than all the
rest put together. Or if he was most beautiful, yet some of the others may be
more wise. If this had all our love, then we may learn now how to divide our
love equally, and take pleasure in loving more. If he loved us most, then he
would have wished us (if he had thought of it) not to make our selves miserable
by mourning for him. Dion Christ. Orat 30.
So Charidemus said to his friends when he was a dying; It is Gods will that I
should die, and there can nothing that is hurtful come from him, I am very
willing to die, and I beseech you believe me in what I say, for I have a
greater care to speak truth now, than any of you can have. Grieve not for me,
for I grieve not; do not make your selves miserable, for I think not my self to
be so. (...), As much as ever you are able refrain from all sadness, for no sad
thing has befaln me. Thus we should say to our friends, if we love them; and
therefore their love to us should not make us sad, because they would have all
they love to be cheerful. If they could tell us their mind, they would
certainly bid us cease our mourning; and therefore let us end it of our own
accord. Let there be such an harmony still between us in our wills and desires,
that we may not be wailing and lamenting, when they are wishing we may be
comforted.

Or when we may have more.
But let it be supposed that it is an only child; yet are there not many hopes
that you may have more? who gave you this? cannot he give you another? has not
he that has the keys of the grave, the keys of the womb also? If one die,
then as long as the world lasts, another shall be born. And if we desire
children for the good of the world, then so they be born, it is no matter by
whom. But if for our sake, then we may have them as well as others; though
perpetual grief and sadness, you may be sure is not the way to procure them.
Or if God will give us none, then we may adopt one. Any child will love us, as
if it was our own, if it know not that it is any bodies else. Nay, any one will
love and serve us for what we have, and instead of one, we shall have many that
will thank us (more than he perhaps) to be our heirs: but if we have nothing,
then why should we desire children for to leave them miserable? but as I said,
why should we not hope for more, and those better than him we lost? with this
hope David comforted Bathsheba his wife (2. Sam. 12.24) who bare a Jedidiah, a
man beloved of the Lord. If we count it such a strange thing to die, then it
should seem it is an ordinary thing to live, and so why should we not expect
the new life of another? But if it be no strange thing to die, then (as I have
said already) we may well be comforted. Or if we should have no more, yet this
may be some comfort, that then we shall have no more to mourn thus sadly for.
Yea, suppose thou art the last of thy family and name, (as was the great
Scaliger, and Lipsius also another excellent Scholar) it is no great matter,
seeing the world is not to last long. If thy name must have an end, what
need thou to trouble thy self when it ends? And if men can think it no harm
to suffer their name to die of it self (as Scaliger did who would not marry)
why should thou be troubled if thine perish, after due care to preserve and
uphold it?

Or when it is uncertain whether they, or none at all be better.
But then if thou had never so many children, yet who knows how they may
prove? If they should be bad, then thou thy self wilt say, that it had been
better they had never been. They that thou mournest for, because they are dead,
might have given thee greater cause of mourning if they had lived. If the death
of a child be sad, his wickedness would have been far sadder; for that is a
worser death. He that dies does trouble his Parents but once; but he that is
bad, is a perpetual torment to them. He that is dead, cannot indeed help his
Parents, but then he does not hurt them, as many a bad one does. For those that
are dead we only grieve, we do not fear; but for those that are bad we fear
perpetually, and we grieve also: yea all the sorrow we now conceive at their
death, will not equal perhaps the mere fear which we should have had from
their infancy, lest their life should prove bad.

It is said in the life of John the Patriarch of Alexandria, that a Merchant
came to him to pray for a son of his that was at Sea, that he might be safe.
Within a month the child dyed, and his ship likewise was cast away. And when
he was much troubled at this double loss, he thought one night that he saw the
Patriarch standing by his bed, and saying to him, Thou desiredst me to pray
that thy son might be safe, and behold now he is safe, for he is dead. If he
had lived wickedly in his future course, then he could not have been safe. And
besides their badness, suppose our children should have died of some infamous
and base death, this would have troubled us more than death it self. Yea, some
there have been that have sought their Parents death, and what a trouble would
this have been? Some have slain their fathers, and others their mothers, and
who was there left to mourn then? If you be affrighted at these strange
supposals (which sometimes have had a real truth) yet consider once more, that
if they had not been bad, notwithstanding who knows what miseries they might
have endured, worse than death? Can you tell what misfortunes might have befaln
them, which might have made them wish they had died sooner? They are now dead,
perhaps they have that which afterward they might have desired, and not so
easily obtained. For how many and frequent occasions are there of sorrow here?
To find a life without Crosses, we must seek among them, that last but from
morn to night. And so great are the troubles and anguish which some endure,
that their life is nothing else but a long continued death. Which made one of
the Gymnosophists answer Alexander when he asked whether death or life was
stronger? Life sure, for that bears the most evils. And suppose he that is dead
should not have been miserable; yet now he is gone, if he might rise again, it
is likely he would not, lest he should know again the fear and the pains of
dying.

He is freed from the vanity and vexation of life, and from the terrors and
agonies of death. He has left the evils of this world, as well as the goods;
and is out of a capacity of suffering, as well as of enjoying any thing here.
This is one of the comforts I remember which that great Divine Greg. Nazianz.
gives his Parents against the loss of his dear Brother Caesarius Orat. 10. p.
172. edit. Paris.
We are sad to think, says he, that Caesarius shall rule and govern no more:
but let us consider withal that none shall hereafter domineer or tyrannize
over him. None shall fear or stand in awe of him more: but he shall not fear
neither the insolences of a grievous Master, who is not worthy, perhaps, to be
a servant. He shall heap up no more riches: No, nor shall he be envyed by
others, or tormented by his own desires of increasing wealth. Hippocrates,
Galen and all the rest he shall expound no more: but he shall not labor under
diseases neither; no, nor bear the burden of other men's miseries. He shall
demonstrate Euclid, Ptolomy, and Hero no more: but he shall not be vexed
neither with the proud Ignorance of empty people. Plato and Aristotle and
Pyrrho and all their fellows can do him no more credit: nor shall he cast in
his mind how to dissolve their little subtilties. What shall I remember more?
Those high prized things, which are so greedily sought by all, wife and
children, he shall have none: nor shall he mourn for them, or be lamented by
them; either by leaving them to others, or being left himself a monument of
calamity.

All this is true, may some say; my child is free from all the dangers and
miseries of this life, but if you knew what a rare Creature it was that I have
lost, you would allow my continued complaints. The Heir of an illustrious
House; the prop of his Family, the Hope of his Country; the child of a thousand
Prayers, and that in the Spring and flowr of his Age. What heart of Adamant
would not sympathize with one in this condition? Some letters of the Ancients
on this subject.
I Will answer you in the words of a great Friend of the Father now mentioned;
who is ready to comply, with your sorrows, if you will be but as forward to
receive his consolations? I confess says St. Basil (in a letter of his to
Nectarius Epist. 188.
on this subject) that it is impossible to be insensible of your loss. There
was no body but wished, when he was alive, that they had such a Son: and when he
was dead, they wept for him as if he had been their own. Nay, if we would
complain and abandon our selves to weeping for this accident, the whole time of
our life is not long enough for it. If all mankind would groan with us, they
could not make a lamentation equal to this loss: no, though they should make a
River with their tears. The Sun himself, if he were sensible, would shrink at
such a spectacle. But if we will let the gift of God, which he has put into
our hearts, interpose; that sober reason which sets a measure to our Souls in
prosperity; it will suggest many things which we have seen and heard to
moderate us in these sad circumstances. It will tell us that this life is full
of affliction; and that all places abound with examples of humane calamities.
But above all, that it is the command of God not to lament the dead in the
Faith of Christ, because of the hope of the Resurrection: and that there are
great crowns laid up for great patience. If we suffer Reason to sing these
things in our ears, we may find some moderate end of this evil. And therefore
I exhort thee as a generous Combatant to fortify thy self against the
heaviness of this stroke, and not lie down under the weight of sorrow. Being
persuaded, that though the reasons of Gods dispensations are out of our reach,
yet we ought entirely to accept that which is ordered by one so wise and
loving: although it be heavy and grievous to be born. For he knows how to
appoint to every one what is profitable, and why he has set unequal terms to
our life. The cause is incomprehensible by us, why some are carried away
sooner, and others tarry longer in this toilsome and miserable life: so that we
ought in all things to adore his loving kindness, and not to take any thing ill
at his hands. Remembering the great and famous voice of Job, who when he heard
that his ten children were all struck dead in one moment, said; The Lord gave,
the Lord has taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so it is come to pass. Let us
make this admirable language our own. They are rewarded with an equal
recompense by the just judge, who perform the same worthy actions. We are not
robbed of a child, but only have restored him to the lender; nor is his life
extinct, but only translated to a better. The earth does not cover our beloved,
but Heaven has received him: let us tarry a while and we shall be in his
company. The distance of time is but short between the arrival of several
travelers to their Inn: into which some are already turned, others are
entering, and the rest are making great have toward it: but they shall all come
to one end. For though some perform the journey sooner, yet all are in the same
rode, and the same lodging expects them all.

Thus that Holy man comforted Nectarius; and when he had done, he wrote the
like consolatory letter to his wife Epist. 189.
: which is so full of good counsels, that I shall transcribe some of it. Those
things, says he, which befell us are not without Providence, as the Gospel
teaches us. For there is not a Sparrow that falls to the ground without the
will of our Father. Why should we go about to resist his will; seeing by all
our strife we cannot repair what is already done, but we may lose and ruin our
selves. Let us not condemn the just sentence of God. We are not wise enough to
discern his secret judgments. Our Lord makes a trial of thee, how much thou
love him. Now is the time by patience to take thy portion with the Martyrs.
The Mother of the Maccabees saw seven of her children put to death, with
miserable torments; and neither sighed, nor shed ignoble tears: But she gave
God thanks, that she had any thing to offer to him. It is a great affliction I
confess, but there is a great reward for the Patience. When thou wast made a
Mother and broughtest forth a Son; thou gave God thanks: but did thou not
think then that, being mortal thy self, thou broughtest forth a mortal child?
What is there strange then in this, that he who was mortal, is now dead? He
dyed, perhaps thou will say, before his time. How know thou that? He dyed in
a very good time, for any thing thou can tell; for it is beyond the compass
of our understanding to choose that which is most profitable for souls; and set
the bounds of humane life.

Much more he adds to the same effect, which he repeats also in other Letters
on the like occasion. To Elpidius Epist. 348. and also 201.
But after this, which was last said, what need is there of any more? The most
solid comforts are those which are derived from this humble submission to
Almighty God; and entire resignation of our selves to his incomprehensible
wisdom. Concerning which a modern writer Mouns. Malherbe.
has spoken such excellent words, that I cannot forbear to translate them
hither. Our lives, says he, are not all alike: their length is measured by the
will of him that gives them. He gathers the fruit while it is green; he
stays till it be ripe; and He lets it hang till it be rotten: whatsoever he
does, we owe this submission to our Creator, to believe he does nothing
unjustly. He does no wrong, neither to them he takes away young; nor to them
whom he suffers to grow old. But to ask why he does things with such diversity,
is to question that which we shall not be resolved of, till we come to a place
where there is a greater light: Now we are in such a darkness as renders all
our curiosities unprofitable. There are plummets to sound the deep abysses of
the Sea, but none for Gods secrets. Believe me, and put this trouble out of
your mind; it cannot stay there without diminution to your honor; and which is
more (I must add) without disrespect to God. We wonder perhaps (to use the
words of one of our own Nation Dr. Done letter to a Lady in mourning.
, which is no less fruitful of good discourses than any other) To see a man,
who in a Wood were left at his liberty, to fell what Trees he would, take only
the crooked, and leave the streightest: But yet that man has, perhaps, a ship
to build and not an house, and so has use of that kind of Timber. Let not us,
who know that in our Fathers house are many Mansions, but yet have no model or
design of that Building, wonder at his taking in his Materials: why he takes
the young and leaves the old, or why the sickly over-live them who had better
health. Then is the Will of God done in Earth as it is in Heaven, when we
neither pretermit his actions, nor resist them, nor yet pass them over in an
inconsideration, as though God had no hand therein; nor go about to take them
out of his hands, as though we could direct him to do them better.

I shall conclude this, with some considerations of the same writer, in a
letter to a Friend of his that had lost her son. We do but borrow children of
God, to lend them to the world. And when I lend the world a Daughter in
Marriage, or a Son in any profession; the world does not always pay me well
again: my hopes are not always answered in that Daughter, or that Son. Of all
that I lend to, the Grave is my best play master. That shall restore me my
child, where he and I shall have but one Father; and pay me my Earth, when that
Earth shall be. Amber, a sweet perfume, in the nostrils of his and my Savior.
Since I am well content to send one son to the Church, the other to the Wars;
why should I be loath to send one part of either son to Heaven, and the other to
the Earth? Comfort your self in this, my Noble Sister; but above all in this,
that it is the declared Will of God. In sicknesses and other worldly crosses,
there are anxieties and perplexities; we wish one thing to day, in the behalf
of a distressed child or friend, and another to morrow; because God has not
yet declared his Will. But when he has done that by death, there is no room
for any anxiety, for any perplexity, no, not for a wish; for we may not so much
as pray for the dead. You know David made his child's sickness his Lent, but his
death his Easter: He fasted till it was dead, but then he returned to his
repast, because then he had a declaration of Gods Will. I am far from quenching
in you, or discharging natural affections: but I know your easy
apprehensions, and over-tenderness in this kind. And therefore since, in so
numerous a family as yours, every year is like to present you with some such
occasion of sorrow; I advise you in the office of a Friend, and a Brother, and
Priest of God, not only to take this Patiently, as a declaration of Gods
present Will; but Catechistically, as an instruction for the future: and that
God in this tells you, He will do so again, in some other of your Friends. For,
to take any one cross patiently, is but to forgive God for once; but, to
surrender one's self entirely to God, is to be ready for all that he shall be
pleased to do.

These General Antidotes being timely used, will preserve us from fainting
under any other evil of this nature; and I need not be sollicitous to prescribe
more particular remedies against them. But if any expect I should; and tell me
it is the death of their Parents which they bewail: they that brought them into
the world, are themselves gone out of it: I desire to know of them, what wonder
there is in this: If our Parents had not been to go out, Considerations about
the death of Parents.
what need would there have been of bringing us in? If they were designed to
stay always, then there had been no room for us. They might more easily
remember their mortality than we; for there is no act that puts us more in mind
of death, than that whereby we give another life. And it is but one of them it
is likely that we have lost, we may then love the other the more. Or if both,
yet we have least reason to complain about their death of all others; for both
Nature, and they themselves, and we also would have them die before us. We
complain that people die when they are young; and will we complain too when
they die of old age? Then it seems we will have none die, and cannot be
contented unless they live always. Would they have been willing to have been
left childless without you? If not; then they have their choice to go first. Or
are you so well in love with death, that it would have been more acceptable to
you to have gone before? or so much in love with them, that on that account you
had rather have died than they? Then know that your death would as much more
have troubled them, than theirs does you; as the love of Parents to their
children transcends the love of all children unto them. It is very well then as
it is. It is not handsome neither to complain when we are forty or fifty years
of age, that our Parents are dead, for they could live no longer, or if they
could, it would have been but a kind of death. If we will not cease to complain
when we are of age, neither shall we ever cease when we grow older. For as
Cardan tells us, A poor woman once came to his door to beg an alms, and though
she were seventy years of age, yet she used this argument in her complaints,
That she was a poor fatherless and motherless creature, and had none to take
any care of her. We need the less of their care, when we can take care of our
selves.

But perhaps they die before we are of age, and can take care of our selves.
Then we are least sensible of their loss, or if we are so considerate as to
know that, we may consider also such things as these; There is none fatherless
that has God for his Father: and he that has not, would be little better for
his earthly Parents. If they were good, let us follow their example, and
remember their Counsel: if they were bad, they would not have been true
Parents to us; and it is well perhaps that we had not such an example to
follow. They may live still in us, if they were good; if they were bad, we had
need live the better; and spend those tears for their sins (which may entail
curses on us) which we bestow upon them. But besides, it is observed by some,
that the most eminent persons that have been in the world did lose their
Parents when they were young, or else it is like they had not proved so
eminent. The great Caesar and his successor Augustus, Alexander the Monarch of
the World, Cicero the famous Orator, Galen the most excellent Physician,
Aristotle the great Philosopher, are all examples of this truth. If these had
enjoyed the support of their Parents to lean upon, they might not have tried
their own sufficiency, nor exercised their abilities; or else they might have
been wholly eclipsed by their luster, and done nothing to be taken notice of in
the World.

And of Husband of Wife.
But my loss, will some sorrowful Creature say, is greater than all this: no
loss than half my self is gone from me. Death has ravished an Husband out of
my bosom, and he the tenderest in the world. A sad case, I must confess; but
it is well, since Death is so common, that he has left one half and not taken
all.

Would he had, will that passionate soul reply: I cannot live in any joy, now
that the better part of me is dead and gone. O that I had never lived to see
this day; or not outlived it! Who can think of so wide a breach, and not be
ready to go out at it? But stay a little, I beseech you: did you never think of
this before now? Did you not take one another with this clause [Till Death us
do part?] Death and you ought to have been better acquainted before this time.
It sought your acquaintance long ago, and would have been as familiar with you
as your Husband. Who spoke of parting with you, when you first came together:
and now that you are parted, has set you free again as you were before. If you
like that State so well, you are at liberty to seek another self. If you do not
like to be tied in such a yoke; Why do you mourn thus, for the gaining of your
freedom? Or if you liked that person so well, as not to be able to think of any
other; then you may have the glory to stand among the rare and noble examples
of conjugall love and friendship: who have preserved the Image of their
deceased Husband or Wife, so lively engraven in their hearts, that nothing
could ever displace it, or blot it out.

Alas! may some of the tenderer sex say (whose hearts are commonly most deeply
wounded with this affliction) what a pitiful glory is this? and what a torment
will it prove to me, to have only the image of such a person ever in my sight?
It is not possible to keep my self from being in pain and anguish, when I feel
that he is torn from me. Since God has made Man and Wife not to be two but one
flesh; How can I take this separation otherways, than as if my body was cut in
sunder? In such language I remember St. Bafill represents the complaints of a
desolate Widow: And if you please hear his Answer, in a letter to the Wife of
Arinthaeus. Epist 186.
Some part or other of which may help, perhaps, to compose the spirits of such
persons, whom I cannot but pity above all other: and make them conceive some
joy, when they look upon the Image of what they have lost. And if you meet with
some things in it that have been said already; do not therefore skip it over
hastily: For second thoughts of a good thing are better than the first; and the
same thing in a new dress may meet with those affections, which it did not
excite before.

There is none, says he, that does not sigh for such a man. Who can be so
stony hearted as not to shed a tear for him? Yet let us not complain that we
are deprived of him, but give thanks to God who joined you together, that you
have lived so long with him. To be bereaved of an Husband, is common to you
with all other women: But to dwell with such an one, it may be questioned
whether any can glory in the like happiness. For to say the truth, God who made
us all, created this man as an example of humane nature: so that all eyes were
turned toward him, all tongues praised him; and many could not believe
Arinthaeus to be dead, when they heard the sad tidings of it. But he has
suffered only that, which shall one day befall the Heavens, the Earth, and the
Sun it self. He dyed also in his full splendour: and by his happiness in this
world, did not forfeit that of the next. Translate therefore thy mind from
things present, to the care of those that are to come: so that thou may be
worthy by good works to enter into the same place of rest and repose. Spare thy
aged Mother: Spare thy young Daughter: who have no other comforter left but thy
self. Be an example of courage to the rest of women kind: and so moderate thy
passions, that thine heart may not fail thee, nor thou may not be swallowed
up of grief. And above all things look to the great reward of patience, which
is promised by our Lord Jesus Christ; in recompense of what we do here. Do not
think (as he adds in another Epistle to her Epist. 202.
that any affliction idly befalls the servants of God, who are under his
special care; but for a proof of their sincere love to our Creator. For as
great labors bring the Athletae to their Crowns: So are Christians by these
trials brought to perfection, if they receive with a becoming patience and all
thanksgiving, whatsoever is ordered by our Lord. And there is nothing, I assure
you, but is administered by the goodness of our Master: and therefore ought not
to be received as grievous, though for the present it hurt our weakness. For
though we know not the reasons by which every thing is done, as good, by our
Master; yet this we ought to persuade our selves, that what has happened was
profitable, either for us, because of the reward of patience; or for the soul
departed, that it might not be farther engaged in a world so full of wickedness.

These were the arguments whereby he comforted other persons as well as her: as
appears by his letter to the Wife of Brison Epist. 347.
. To whom he adds these words: Let thy Children be as so many lively Pictures
of him to comfort thee in his absence. Let thy thoughtfulness and care about
their education, draw aside thy mind from these sad reflections. And by a
constant solicitude to please God, the rest of thy life, thou will get an
excellent ease and quiet to thy afflicted thoughts. For a preparation for our
defense before Jesus Christ, and a study to be found among those that love him;
will be sufficient to obliterate all our sorrow, so that we shall not be
swallowed up in it.

The same he writes to one that had lost an excellent Wife; Epist. 346.
A person so fit for him, that they might see themselves in each other, as in a
glass. But why should we contend with such a Law of God as is past so many Ages
ago. We are not the first, nor the only persons that suffer on this fashion. It
is a common thing for all to die, though to have a good wife is peculiar to
few, whom God blesses. The truth is, to grieve for a separation from a wife, is
one of the gifts of God: For I have known many that have parted with them, just
as if they had thrown off a burden.

The rest I shall not recite, because I would leave some room for a long
Discourse of another great Person St. Chrysostom upor 1 Thessalonians. Hom. 6.
, addressed to disconsolate Widows: the sense whereof is this. I have lost
(says some sad soul) not only my companion, but my guide, my stay, my shield,
my second self. I doubt not of the Resurrection, which St. Paul treates of: but
what shall I do in the mean time? Much business I have to manage, but I am
become only a fit prey for every Cormorant, who has a mind to be unjust. The
servants who before reverenced me, will now despise a silly Woman. If my
Husband ever obliged any body: Alas! It will be soon forgot, now that he can do
them no further kindness. But if he did them any wrong; they will be sure to
take a severe revenge on me; who am not able to resist them. This is the thing,
that breeds me all my anguish: set this aside, and his death would not give me
such a torment. What shall we answer (says St. Chrysostom) unto this? Truly I
could easily demonstrate, that not what they pretend, but an unreasonable
passion is the cause of words so sad and doleful. If this were the cause of
their lamentation, then they must never cease thus to bewail themselves. But if
after a years time all these tears are dried up; its certain the want of their
defense and comfort (which will then be most felt) is not the only cause of
them. But let it be supposed that this is the fountain of all their sorrow; yet
consider how much infidelity there is in it, that we should think it was They
who took the care and patronage of us; not God. It cannot choose but provoke his
displeasure, to see a Creature of his more beloved than himself: and therefore,
perhaps, he took away thy Husband, because he was more to thee, than thy God.
The only one of Israel is very Jealous; and cannot endure to be so slighted,
that other things should have so much of our affections, as his excellent
goodness: which is therefore to be beloved by us above all things, because it
expresses a love to us above all other Creatures. What was the reason, I
beseech you, that widdowhood and Orphanage were so rare in the old times among
good people? Why did Abraham and his Sarah, and Isaac live till a great old
age? Truly, I think it was because Abraham loved God more than cither of them:
And when God did but say to him, Kill thy Son; he went about it as readily, as
if he had been to Sacrifice a Lamb. But we are heavy and dull: we are carried
so headlong into the embraces of Creatures, that God is fain even against our
wills to draw our affections to himself, by drawing them away from us. Do but
love God more than thy Husband, and I will undertake that either thou shall not
fall into Widdowhood; or shall not feel it so great a mischief when thou
fallest into it. And I have a good ground for what I avouch: for thou have him
for thy Husband and thy Defense, that never dies; and that loves thee
infinitely more than any man can do. And if this reason be not sufficient to
convince thee, I have a comparison that will do the business. Tell me; if thou
had a Husband who loved thee so much, as if he had no soul but thine; one
that was as much beloved of others as be loved thee; one so wise and discreet,
that he was as much admired as loved; one so gentle and compliant, as if he was
but wax to thy impressions, one that made thee shine as the Moon does with the
rays of the Sun: And suppose thou had a child by this dear person, who dies
before be comes of age: Would thou be miserably tormented and overwhelmed
with sorrow and grief for the death of this child, while thou did enjoy such
a better love? No, in no wise. He that is so fair and beautiful in thine eyes,
would supply the want of it, as the Sun does the absence of the Stars. He that
is now loved and esteemed, would quite obscure and hide all the others
excellencies. Do but love God then more than this Husband, and his glory, which
puts out the luster of all other things; will make thee as little troubled at
his death, as in the other case thou would be for thy child's. Nay far less,
one would in reason think; in as much as God is infinitely more above that
Husband, than he above the Child.

Besides, what is it, which thou receivest from thy Husband, that is comparable
to what the love of God gives thee? Are they not pangs and labors, and, as the
world goes, unkind words perhaps, and angry chidings? Or if thou can tell me
of better things, what are they? What are fine clothes and Jewels, and honors,
and such like things, to the Son of God; to the Brotherhood and Adoption; to
the Kingdom and eternal Glory; to the life of God and coheirship with the only
begotten? Will thou after all this tell me thou can not but be passionately
troubled for thy Husbands loss? Me thinks thou should consider, that if thou
want him; thou have God. If thou want thy meniall servants, and
attendants; thou have the guard of spiritual powers: The Dominions and
Principalities of Heaven are thy Ministers. If thou say thy children want a
Father, that cannot be, seeing God is the Father to the Fatherless. If thou
fear they shall want necessaries, tell thy self who gave them to thee, and
whether the life be not more than meat, and the body than raiment. Or if thou
fear they shall not be so well provided for, as otherwise they might have
been; how many could I tell thee of, that have been bred by Widows and proved
famous? And, on the other side, how many that have had Fathers and been good
for nothing? Put the fear of God in their hearts, and this will preserve them
more than a Father. When the guard is set within, they will less need one
without. This will be better than riches, and glory and promotion to them: this
will make them famous both upon Earth and in Heaven.

Do not set thine Eyes then on the youth, who by reason of his Fathers
greatness is girded with a Golden Belt, and rides on a Prancing Horse, and is
taken into Kings Courts, and has many Tutors and Governors following him at
the heels: But cast thine eye above, open the gate of Heaven by thy thoughts,
look into that Stately Palace; behold the King of glory there sitting on his
Throne; and if He whom thou admirest on Earth can be sooner admitted thither,
than thy child: fetch a great sigh; fill the Heavens with noise and clamor; I
do not forbid thy lamentations. But seeing neither riches, nor birth, nor any
thing else is there preferred, but only Virtue and goodness, judge what reason
thou have to be content: and think how certain it is that nothing can make us
dismally sad, (...), if we will not be fools, but Philosophers.

And for thy self, if thou complainest of being desolate and solitary, remember
what the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 5. 5. that such an one, Trusts in God. This
is only an opportunity to enjoy more of the chiefest Good. Thou have more time
and liberty to please God, now that thou have none else to please. Thou art
freed from all other bonds, to be tied faster to him. There are no chains, no
restraints upon thee, to keep thee from doing what thou would. Thou art
separated from one Husband, to be united to a better. Thou have not the fellow
servant, but thou have the Master. Thou have not thy Husband to talk with thee,
but God is thy Husband. When thou prayest, do not Thou talk with God? When
thou read, does not God talk with thee? And what does he say to thee? Words
more desirable, more sweet than can drop from any Husbands lips. If he speak
never so kindly, the matter is not great; for he is but a fellow servant. When
the Lord himself will be pleased to embrace and speak lovingly to his
handmaid, (...), This is a strange piece of service. And observe, I beseech
you, how he serves and waits upon us: Hear in what words be bespeaks our
affections. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and you shall
find rest to your Souls. And again by the Prophet he cries, Can a woman forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb?
Yea she may forget, yet I will not forget thee. What charms are there in these
words? And what can have more of Honey in them, than those expressions in the
Song of Songs, My Love, my Dove, my fair one, my Paradise, etc. And yet this is
the language of God to men. If we will not rest satissted in so tender a
kindness, there is no Remedy, but we must be miserable.

To this purpose writes that excellent Person, with an Elegance, which, though
I could not imitate yet, I could not but follow; till I have run beyond the
bounds within which I intended to confine this discourse. And yet the minds of
such persons, as I am now treating withal, is many times so clouded by their
sorrow; that it will be charity to try all other means to brighten and clear
them. I shall recommend therefore to them, before I take leave of this
Argument, the advice of a great man in a neighboring Country not many years
ago Mouns. du Vair.
sent to a Lady oppressed with an obstinate grief for the loss of a dear
Husband. His words are to this sense. Come to your self again, Madam, and think
what you are a doing. You drive away and estrange from you that very thing,
which you love above all the world, and may enjoy continually, if you please.
For where I pray you, do you think that is which you so much cherished and
loved? You will Answer me, in Heaven: And so it is, I make no question, full of
Joy and content among the blessed. But withal you believe that things above
are so separated from us, that they can be no more re-joined to us, as long as
we live. Oh how much are you deceived! God himself who is the highest and
furthest from our Natures, is continually in us to give us unspeakable joy from
his presence; if our souls be fit to harbor and entertain him. The holy
Angels are continually about us, if we take care to draw them to us. And how
do we know, that blessed souls in whom the faith of a holy love could never
dye, would not come to visit us, if we made our selves fit to receive them, and
they found nothing in us contrary to their nature and happiness, which hindered
us from going toward them? And what greater obstacle can there be unto it,
than tears and sorrow? The wings that must carry us up thither, are our
thoughts; which animated by our desires and the ardors of an holy friendship,
must never cease beating till they raise us up to that which we look for. And
what do our tears but wet the wings of our thoughts, and hinder the flight of
them. Do you not see that among the vapors which arise from the Earth, those
which proceed from rivers and marshes and other moist places, stop in the
middle region of the air, and melting there return from whence they came?
whereas those which come from dryer matters, soar up higher, till being
inflamed they turn into Comets and other Celestial fires. Do you believe in
like manner, that your thoughts, though never so pious, can never mount high if
they be clogged and wet with abundant tears. Let them be beated by the sacred
flame of your holy friendship, and purified from worldly contagion; and taking
their flight through a calm and undisturbed spirit, as through a clear and
bright air: you will questionless overtake that which is fled from you; and
embrace that blessed soul, and grasp the splendour of that eternal light,
wherewith it is clothed. And you will find it as if it consented to your
desires, coming down again all along your thoughts as by a thread, giving you a
more perfect rejoicing therein than can be imagined. It will dwell in you (at
least by the lively image of your vehement thought) and seem as if it were your
self. For we find that in corporeal things, a violent imagination makes us
believe we see and touch that which is farthest from us. Try, Madam, that which
I say, and you will find it most true. Make use of this troublesome grief,
which you cannot be rid of, to spur your desires, to be re-joyned to that, at
the loss of which you so much repine. Thus He.

To which me thinks, I hear some that this way is too sublime for their
spirits. They cannot mount themselves on this fashion, but cleave fast to these
Terrestial objects. It may be so; and all that I can say to such is this; that
next to God and our blessed Savior, whom they apprehend, I hope, every where,
to take care of those that commit themselves to the Fatherly Providence of the
most supreme Reason; they should entertain themselves in the company and
embraces of their remaining friends: whose presence is most delightful, and
converse most comfortable. And all of them put together; may make a sensible
Image of a dead Husband.

I know they will say, but these Friends may die too, and then what shall I do?
I have told you already, and therefore have the less to add on this subject.
Yet I shall remember you of the words of Seneca Epist. 63.
concerning the death of a Friend which are to this purpose. If thou have other
friends besides this, Of the Death of Friends.
is it not a great reproach to them of their unworthiness, that all of them are
not able to comfort thee for the loss of one? If thou have no more, then thou
have done thy self a greater wrong than God has done thee; for he has taken
but one, and thou have made never an one. God makes men (as is said by some)
and we make friends. And if thou be desirous of more, and find such need
of them, thou have leisure now to go and seek them. He can never want friends,
that wants not Virtue. He loved not one well, that cannot love any more than
one. Is it not a ridiculous folly for a man to shrug and cry when he has lost
his coat, rather than go to fetch another garment to cover him from the cold?
If he be taken away whom thou did love, seek another whom to love. It is far
better to repair thy loss, than to mourn for it. And if thou can not find
another to thy mind, How could thou be a friend to him that is dead, if thou
have no power to help thy self? why should not a good man find enough in God
and himself? The want of nothing, can make thee want Virtue; and he that has
that, has enough. Nay, every good man is thy friend if thou be good: and
they that never saw thy face before, if they see thy goodness, will be good
unto thee. Ap leius de Philos. Mor.
Bonos omnes oportet inter se amicos esse, etsi sint minus noti: All good men
ought to be friends, though they be not much acquainted.

I have passed over this last particular (as you see) very swiftly, because I
observe my discourse swells to a greater bigness than I intended: And in some
of the following considerations you shall find satisfaction to every one of
these cases, if you will but concoct them.

SECT. VI. Which directs how to quiet our selves by comparing our selves, both
with our selves and with others; and there are five ways of comparison
insisted on.
III. To compare our selves with our selves and others, a way to be contented.
We were not so well once, or not better; and yet not so grieved.
COnsider so far as to make comparisons. And first of all compare thy self now
with what thou once wast, yea with what thou once wast not. There was a time
when thou thy self wast not so much as dead, for thou wast not at all, nor
had any capacity of joy or sorrow. Has God dealt unkindly with thee in
giving thee a being capable of both? Would thou have refused a being (if we
may suppose an offer to be made to nothing) unless he would have given thee
nothing but joy, and never taken away what he gave thee? unless thou have a
mind to be gave thee? unless thou have a mind to be nothing, be contented with
what thou art. Then thou had not these relations, for thou had not thy
self. Why should thou mourn now that thou have them not, since thou have thy
self? Is there not more reason to be thankful for a being, though capable of
mourning, than to be troubled at the occasion of it? Surely thou do not
desire to cease thy mourning, by ceasing to be. Ease thy self then of thy grief
by the being that God has given thee. If thou could not mourn then, Do not
mourn now. But then consider, that since thou had a being, there was a time
when thou had none of these relations, no wife, nor children, nor friends
which thou art deprived of. Yet thou did not then weep and lament, and
trouble thy self as now thou do. Seeing thou art what thou wast, be contented
as thou wast. What difference is there between that time and this? Thou wast as
much without them then, as now thou art; why should thou not be as much
contented now as then? All the difference between those that want a thing, and
those that lose it, is only this; that they who lose it once had that, which
they that want it never had. Now shall we be the more troubled because we once
had it? one would think that their trouble should be the greatest that neither
have it, nor ever had it. We have reason to be more pleased that we had it, if
there were any good in it: and if there was none, then we have no reason to be
displeased that we have it not. Say, had thou rather never have enjoyed thy
friends, than now be deprived of them? Was thy condition worse or better
heretofore? If it was but equal to thy present, then thou have reason to be
equally pleased: Remember how thou wast then, and be so now. If it was worse
then; why should thou be now worse troubled? If it was better then, why did
thou change it, seeing thou knew that all must die? No question it is better
to have enjoyed a good thing, than never to have known it. And therefore seeing
thou art no worse now than thou wast once, but have been better than once thou
wast, be not more troubled than thou wast once; yea, be less troubled.

We may be worse.
But secondly, compare thy present condition with what thou may be. This is
not the worst that may befall thee in such a world of miseries. Suppose then
that thou should lose all thy children as Job did, and then lose thy whole
estate; that the Sea should swallow one part, and the fire burn another, and
thieves rob thee of a third, and bad debtors quite undo thee. Suppose after all
this, that a fire should begin to burn in thy own bones, and that should break
into boils, and they should break into scabs, and thou should be poor, even
to a Proverb, as that holy man was. Must thou not be contented then? But how is
that possible, seeing thou can not be contented now? If such a shower of tears
fall from thine eyes for this little loss, then sure thou will make a flood or
a deluge. But what will thou do at last after all thy lamentations? Will thou
kill thy self? Then it seems thou take death to be the end of all troubles;
and I wonder thou should be so troubled at that which has eased thy friend
of them. Or what else will thou do? comfort thy self? Try how thou can do
that now, for if thy stomach refuse cordials in this distemper, never expect
that it will digest them, when thou will be far more sick and apt to vomit them
up again. If Job had cursed the day wherein he was born at the first breach
that God made upon his estate, what expressions of grief (below a great sin)
had he left for himself when he sat upon the dunghill? The good man took the
first losses so patiently, that all the rest which befell him could not move
him to greater impatience. Do thou remember him, and say to thy soul, Come, be
quiet, this is not the worst that may betide us; we have no such cause to cry
as we may have; Let us learn Patience against a time when we may have more need
of it.

And then if we should be brought to the very dust, and fall as low as the dung
of the earth, yet there is another way of considering what may be besides this.
We may be better.
We may be as happy again, as now we account our selves miserable. Our sorrow
may be turned into joy, as our joy has been turned into sorrow. Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy may come in the morning, according as I have said
in the former discourse; And so it was with Job whom God blessed in his latter
end, Job 42.12.
more than in his beginning. We have seen the end of the Lord (says the
Apostle James) that the Lord is very pitiful, Jam. 5.11.
and of tender mercy. But then this pity of his is to be obtained only by
Patience. If we cannot be contented, it is needful, we may think, that he
should teach us it still by greater losses.

We have more than we want.
Thirdly, Compare what thou have lost, with what thou have not lost. God leaves
commonly more than he takes. He takes away thy children perhaps, but thou have
thy Husband, and he is better than ten sons. Or if thou have lost thy Husband
also, yet thou have thy self; and why should a living man complain? And thou
have God himself, whom nothing can take away from thee. Or if thou have him
not, yet thou may have him; and who knows but that therefore thou have lost
thy friends, because thou have not him? God has taken them away, that thou
may seek after him. Would thou have been willing that all thou have should
have been lost rather than this one friend? Shall God raise him from the dead,
and all the rest go into his Tomb? Will thou have all, or else take comfort in
none? Then God may well take away all, and let thee have something to cry for.
Yea, who is there destitute of all friends and comforters? Job himself was not
so spoiled, that they had robbed him of his friends. Though they did add indeed
to his grief, yet it was their mistake, and not their want of love. And if we
should have no better, then we may give God thanks, that he lets us see more
than all our friends. Yea, it is a great mercy that God gives us time to cease
our grief and trouble. And perhaps we have riches, and a pleasant dwelling,
delightful walks, etc. Or if we have not; and can bear that patiently; then we
may soon learn how to bear this. Do the poor people of Norway weep when they
eat, Barthol. cent. 4. Hist. An. cap. 16.
because their bread is made of the barks of trees, and sometimes of chaff; not
of Corn as ours is? If there were no trees, nor chaff, nor no such thing to
fill their mouths, they might well cry; but as long as we have what is
needful, we should be content, for nothing is so needful as that. Let us not
then weep because we have not so many friends as we had, for we have more than
we deserve. Let us not mourn as though we were desolate, when we want but one;
no more than we complain of hunger when we have all variety of cheer, except
one dish that we love most. But

We have more than many others.
Fourthly, Let us compare our selves (if you please) with others. In other cases
this is a thing we love to do, though there be so much danger in it that it may
undo us. If we be guilty of any fault, then we comfort our selves in
comparisons, and think that we are not so bad as others. Now that which we are
apt to do when we do ill, we ought to do when we think we suffer ill. Is God
more unkind to us than to any of our neighbors? Do not we see that many of our
neighbors children are dead as well as ours? Many of them have lost four or
five, and we have lost but one. Nay, many of them never had any, and yet they
do not therefore mourn, and besmear their faces with tears, and break their
hearts with sighs. Our case is the very same now that we have none; but only
that it is a little better, because we had once some. And how thankful should
we be that we had them so long, if it be desirable to have them at all? But
then we may say further to our selves, How many of them have lost their friends
in the late Wars? How many has the sword made Widows, and the blood of how
many of their children has it drunk? Ours were taken away by the hand of God,
but theirs were taken away by the hands of men. Our friends dyed in their beds,
and theirs dyed in the field; Ours went, and theirs were driven out of the
world. Come, let us go comfort our neighbors that have lost more than we, for
they stand more in need of comfort. If they stand in need of none, then no more
do we.

It was very handsomely discoursed by Socrates (as Plutarch relates) That if we
could all agree to put all the troubles and calamities of men into one heap, De
Consol. ad Apollon.
on this condition, that after every man had brought his and thrown them there,
then they should all come again and take every man an equal portion of them,
there would be a great many that now complain, who would rather take up what
they brought, and go their ways contented with them.

And so Antimachus an Ancient Poet, when his Wife dyed whom he loved
exceedingly, he went and writ a Poem bearing her name, wherein he reckoned up
all the calamities that he could remember had befaln any in the world. By this
means he did deter himself from grief; for how can one suffer the miseries
which others endure, if he cannot bear this light one of his own?

It is better with us than with those of former times.
Fifthly, Let us compare our selves with the Ancient Christians. Their children
were snatched out of their arms by the hands of Tyrants. They see their brains
dashed out against the stones; their friends were buried in fires, or banished
into strange places, and they had no comforters left but God and themselves;
and their chiefest comfort was, that they must shortly die the same death. But
notwithstanding all this, and much more, they did not take it heavily, but
(...) (as Photius speaks) They bare it all thankfully, Epist. 234.
and blessed God who could tell how to govern the world beyond all the thoughts
of men. Let not us who suffer but common things, weep with an extraordinary
sorrow, when they who suffered most unnatural deaths did bear it with more
than natural courage. They might have been allowed to have wept blood, rather
than we to shed tears. And yet they rejoiced as if their friends had been
offered in Sacrifice to God; and we weep as if they had been put to some
shameful torments for their crimes. Shall we mourn more for the death of a
friend, than they for a butchery? What arguments had they to comfort them which
we have not? What Scripture had they before their eyes to stay their tears,
which we read not? If either of us have more to comfort us than the other, it
is we; for we have their most excellent example. And when I think of the Mother
of the seven Brethren mentioned in the Maccabees, Mac. 2.7.
she calls my thoughts back a little further than the times of Christ. Did she
wring her hands when she saw the skin of her son flead off from his head? Did
she cast any tears into the fire wherein another of them was fried? No, she
speaks as cheerfully as if they were not stripping them of their skins, but
clothing them with a royal robe: She looks upon them, not as if they lay upon
a pan of coals, but in a bridal bed. She exhorted them, being filled with a
courageous spirit, saying, V. 21, 22.
I cannot tell how you came into my Womb, for I neither gave you breath, nor
life, neither was it I that formed the members of every one of you. But
doubtless the Creator of the world, who formed the generation of man, and found
out the beginning of all things, will also of his own mercy give you breath and
life again, as you now regard not your own selves for his sake. This mavelous
woman (as she is called, v. 20.) knew very well that she did not give them
life, and therefore why should she take so heavily their death? She considered
they were none of hers, and why should not the owner take them? She knew that
she did not lose them, but only restore them. That life sometimes is not worth
the having. That unless God will have us live, no wise man would desire to
live. That none gives any thing unto God, though it be his own, but he gives
them something better. And therefore she said, Die my sons, for that is the way
to live.

What poorness of spirit then is it, that we cannot see a soul put off her
clothes without so much ado? That a Jewish woman could see seven souls torn out
of their body with more courage, than a Christian man can see one soul quietly
depart and leave its lodging? I would wish every one to save his tears till
some other time, when he may have some greater occasion for them. If he will
weep much, let it be when he sees the bodies of his children or friends so
mangled as theirs were. But if he would not weep out his eyes then, let him
weep soberly, and not as if he were drunk with sorrow now.

SECT. VII. Several reasons are given against immoderate sorrow, which are
comprised in 14. Questions which we should make to our selves. The reason and
spirit of them you may see in the Margin, at the beginning of every particular.
IV. We must think with what reason we weep.
AFter we have taken this course with our selves, we shall be the more prepared
to hearken unto reason. And let us proceed from making comparisons, to ask our
selves some Questions, and stay till they give a good answer. Let us know of
our selves why we are so sad and heavy? Let us speak to our souls, and say,
Tell me, what is the matter? What is the cause of all this grief? Thou art a
rational creature, what reason have thou for all this sorrow? Thou art not to
be pityed merely for thy tears, if thou can cry without any cause. Hideous
things appear sometimes before us to affright us; but they are the Chimera's of
a childish imagination, and not things really existent. Let us bid fancy then
to stand aside a while, and let reason speak what it is that so troubles us.
Children cry who cannot speak, and we are not much troubled at it, because they
cry for they know not what; Unless we therefore can tell why we weep, no body
will pity us, because it is not weeping that we are to mind, but the cause of
men's weeping. Let me then propose these questions to be answered, some of which
will discover that there is no cause of sad lamentations when our friends die.
And if there be no cause that the fountain of tears should run, that is cause
enough to stop it up.

1. For whose sake do thou weep? For the sake of him that is dead, or for thy
own? No cause of mourning immoderately for their sakes who are dead.
Not for him that is dead sure; for we suppose him to be happy. Is it
reasonable to say, Ah me! What shall I do? I have lost a dear friend that shall
eat and drink no more? Alas! He shall never hunger again; never be sick again,
never be vexed and troubled; and which is more, he shall never die again. Yet
this is the frantic language of our tears, if we weep for the sake of him that
is gone. Suppose thy friend should come to thee, and shake thee by the hand,
and say, My good friend, why do thou lament and afflict thy soul? I am gone
to the Paradise of God, a sight most beautiful to be beheld, and more rare to
be enjoyed. To that Paradise am I flown, where there is nothing but joy and
triumph, nothing but friendship and endless Love. There am I where the head of
us all is, and where we enjoy the light of his most blessed face. I would not
live if I might again, no not for the Love of thee. I have no such affection to
thy society (once most dear unto me) that I would exchange my present company
to hold commerce with thee. But do thou rather come hither as soon as thou
can. And bid thy friends that they mourn not for thee when thou dyest, unless
they would wish thee to be miserable again. If we should have such a short
converse with one of our acquaintance, what should we think? what should we
say? Should we fall a mourning and crying again? Would it open a new sluice for
our tears to flow out? Would we pray him to go to Heaven no more, but stay with
us? Would we entreat him to beg of God that he might come and comfort us? If
not, then let us be well content, unless we can give a better reason for our
immoderate tears, than our love to him. Holcoth reports of a learned man, Ia 4.
Sap. v. 7.
that was found dead in his Study with a Book before him: A friend of his was
exceedingly amazed at this fight when he first came into the room: But when he
looked a little further, he found his forefinger pointing at this place in the
book of Wisdom, c. 4. v. 7. (...). Though the just be prevented with death, yet
shall he be in rest. And when he observed this, he was as much comforted, as he
was before dejected. We have no reason to lament them who are made immortal,
and that live with God. If we respect them only, we should carry them forth as
the Egyptians did the great Prophet of Isis when he dyed, not with howlings
and sorrow, Heliod. l. 7. Aethiop.
but with hymns and joy, as being made an heir (...), with our Betters, and
gone to possess most glorious things.

The truth of it is, if it were rational Love to him that expresses these
tears, then we should not begin them so soon, nor make such a noise, and cry
when men are a dying. For the sad countenances and the miserable lamentations
wherewith we encompass sick men's beds, make death seem more frightfull to them,
than it is in it self. What misery am I falling into (may a man think) that
causes them to make such a moan? What is this death, that makes even them look
so ghastly who are not like to die? What a mischief is it to leave so many sad
hearts behind me, and to go my self (it should seem by them) to some sad and
dismal place also? I tell you, a dying man had need have a double courage, to
look both death and them in the faces, or else their indiscreet shriekes and
lamentations will make a poor soul fall into such dark and cloudy thoughts. Men
are fain therefore to say that it is indeed Love to themselves that forces them
thus to bemoan the death of their friends. Nor for our own sakes that are alive.
But what are you, that cannot be contented one should be made much better, by
making of you a little worse? Is this the great Love you pretend to your
friend, that you are extremely sorry he is gone to Heaven; are you a friend,
that look more at your own small benefit, than at his great gain? was he not
much beholden to you for your love, that would have had him lived till you were
dead, that he might have been as miserable in mourning for you, as you think
now your selves to be? But what is it I beseech you, that you thus bemoan your
selves for? Because that you are now miserable? No, it seems that you are not
miserable enough, and that makes you weep so much. If you had some greater
trouble befaln you, that would put the lesser out of your mind. If you were
sick or in pains, or had lost all your goods, these things could take your mind
off from this loss; Why then cannot the enjoyment of your health, and case, and
plenty do as much for you? 2. Sam. 19.7.
When Joab did but threaten David that they all would leave him, unless he
would be comforted, then he could wipe his face, and appear in public as a man
well pleased. Fear of losing his Kingdom, put away the grief for the loss of
his son. And therefore let us not speak of our being forlorn and miserable by
this loss; for at last we find it is not so. But how does it appear that mere
self-love is the original of these tears? Suppose this person to have been at
so wide a distance from us for a year or two, that no tideings of him could
come to us. Did we weep and lament all that while because he was not with us?
Did not the thoughts that he lived, and hopes to see him again comfort us? And
yet, was he not then in a manner dead, when we neither saw, nor felt nor heard
from him? What help did we receive from him at that distance; or wherein did he
pleasure us? If we did not account our selyes so miserable all that time as to
spend it in tears; we ought not to do it now. We are now as we were then: in
all things the very same; save only in the knowledge that he is dead. But was
he not dead as I said, to us before? Was he not like a man in another World?
What was there that he did for us, which we do not now receive at his hands?
Let us be as quiet now, as we would have been on such an occasion: Especially
since we know our Friend still lives, and we have hope to see him again.
Natural affection, I confess, in either case will make us big with sighs, and
burst forth often into tears. We feel we are not as we were before. There is
something wanting, which we formerly enjoyed. And it is an old acquaintance
perhaps, which Nature cannot but be loath to part withal. Get a new Nature
then; and that will mend all. Though the first motions be so free, that they
owe no tribute to reason: Yet when they come, we shall be careful not to
follow them. If we do, it will not be very far. Religion and reason, if we
hearken to them, will teach us to restrain our selves. Religion (as a great
person Joseph. Scalig. Epist. 139. ad Is. Casaub.
speaks) will not suffer us not to will what God wills: And Reason will teach
us to bear those things with an equal mind, which do not happen to us alone;
and which we cannot by all our tears make not to have happened. They will not let
us expect that time should take away this sickness from us. That is the Remedy
of vulgar spirits: Sapientis est, tempus ipsum antevenire, and dalori ipsi
nascenti occurrere. It is the part of a wise man to outstrip time and get
before it: To prevent a grief that is a growing and strangle it in the very
birth. And indeed from hence we conclude that it is not mere Natural affection
neither, to which We commonly owe our sadness and sorrows: but the freshness
and presence of the cause of them. For time, as was said, will make us forget
them; or if our parents had dyed a little after we were born, we should never
have wept when we came of age, to think that they were departed. It is no hard
matter then for a considerate person to cease his grief, seeing it depends upon
such small causes. And if any one shall say that it is Love to the good of the
world that makes him mourn for the loss of an useful person; He has reason to
rejoice that he loves the good of men so much. For then he will labor to do
much good in the world himself; and he will persuade all the friends he has
remaining, that they would do all the good they can, and repair that loss.

Our friends if Good, are not lost.
II. But let me further ask you, Was thy friend Gods friend also, or was he not?
If he was the friend of God, as well as a friend of thine, why should not he
have his company rather than thou? If he was not Gods friend, then he could not
be thine neither. No man can love us aright, that does not love God, and if he
do love God, why should we think much that he goes to God? But supposing he was
very dear to us; then I say, that if he was Bad, thou ought to have mourned
for him before this. For then thy tears might have done some good, which now
are altogether unprofitable. Seven days (says the son of Sirach. Eccles.
22.12.
) do men mourn for him that is dead; but for a fool, and an ungodly man, all
the days of his life. But if he were a Good man, then thou need not mourn
now, for thou may hope to see him again, if thou art Good. Thus thou may
comfort thy self, My friend is not gone, but gone before. He is separated from
us, but not lost. He is absent, but not dead. He has taken a journey into a
far Country, and there I may go to see him. What matter is it whether my
friend return to me, or I go to him? None but this, that if he be in a better
place, then it is better than I go to see him, than that he come to see me.
Should we not desire to be better our selves, and not to have him made worse?
then let us contentedly follow as fast as we can, hoping there where he is to
embrace again. We cannot expect him in our house, but he expects us in his. He
cannot come down to us, but we may go up to him. He cannot come back, but we
may follow after. And there is no diffrence (as I said*) between his visiting
of us at our home, and our going to see him at his, but only this, that it is a
great deal better for us to see him there where he is, and not where we are now
our selves. Let us not mourn therefore for that which cannot be, but rejoice
for that which may and will be. And let it comfort us that we shall come
together again, but in a better place than we would have it; we shall have our
desires fulfilled, but in a more excellent manner than we desire. And if in the
mean time he can do us any good, we may be sure we shall not want it.

As they are nor lost, so we have had them long.
III. Ask your selves again, Why should you mourn more for your loss, than be
glad for your enjoyment? If there be so much reason to lament the absence of
this friend, then it should seem his enjoyment was very valuable. Think
therefore of the sweetness thou had in that, which thou would purchase
again with so many tears. Is there no comfort but only in things present? Is it
not a piece of our folly to forget what we have enjoyed? Shall we only think
what delight we have lost, and not of what we have had? We do not know whether
we have lost any, but only that which we had; and that we may think of as much
as if he were alive. Of what we have enjoyed we are certain, but there is no
certainty of what we should have found in our friend for the time to come.
Think then of the time past, and rejoice that thou did find so sweet a
friend. Imagine not how long thou might have enjoyed him, but think how long
thou did. It was but natural to lose him; but it was supernatural to enjoy
him. All men are born to die, but all men are not born to live so long before
they die. All men have acquaintance, but all men have not friends. Therefore he
that has a friend, and has him so long; is to acknowledge that God is very
much his friend. He was not ours, but was given us by God; or rather he was not
given, but only lent. We had not the propriety, but only the use, We have not
lost any thing that was our own, but only restored that which was another. And
therefore now that he is taken away, we are not to be angry that God requires
his own, but to be thankful, that he has lent us so long that which was none
of our own. And assure your selves there is nothing more unreasonable than to
mourn that God gave us a thing no longer; and not to rejoice that he gave us
that which is so desirable, at all. Cease your tears I beseech you, unless you
will show that you deserved to have wept a little sooner. Either say that he
was not worth the having, and then you need not weep at all; or else give God
the thanks that you had a person so worthy, and that will stay your immoderate
weeping.

Nay, will some passionate person say, but this will rather augment our grief,
when we think that he was so much worth unto us, and yet is gone. But that is
our fault, if we will think more and oftener that he is not, than that he was.
How can any body help you, if you will needs look more upon his departure, than
upon his stay? Seeing there is more reason that you should please your self in
what is past, it is to be supposed that your thoughts will be more upon it; and
if they be, you cannot be sad: But if they be not, then you are not to be cured
by reason, but by something else. When you are apt to fetch a sigh, and say, Oh
my dear friend is gone! Call it in again, and say, Thanks be to God that I had
such an one to lose. Who would not be willing to spend some tears after so much
joy; But then the remembrance of the joy will command that the tears do not
overflow. It is an excellent saying of Seneca, Habui illos tanquam amissurus
amisi tanquam babeam. Epist. 63.
I ever think of my friends with joy; For I had them as if I should lose them,
and I have lost them as if I had them. If we could but think of them as dying
while they are alive, then we should more easily think of them as alive when
they are dead. If we could be willing to part with them when we have them, we
should think that we have them when we have parted with them. And the truth is,
we cannot please our selves long in the remembrance of them, unless it be
accompanied with some joy. I do not advise you to forget your friends, and put
them out of mind, but to remember them, and keep them in your thoughts. But how
short a remembrance (says the same Seneca) must that be, which is always
joined with grief and sorrow? If we would remember one always, we must
remember him with pleasure; For no man will return willingly to that which he
cannot think of without his torment. And if there be any little grief
intermixed with our thoughts, yet that grief has its pleasure. As the
sharpness of old Wine does make it more acceptable to men's palates, and as
Apples are more grateful for their sour sweetness; so Attalus was wont to
say, That the remembrance of our friends is the more pleasant, for that little
sorrow that is mingled with it.

And we have many more remaining.
IV. Ask your selves again, Why so many mourn for one? Could that one have
mourned more for you all, than every one of you do for him? If you will weep,
weep only your part, and do not weep as if there was none else to weep but your
selves. If a man that was not acquainted with the world, should see ten, or
twenty, or perhaps a greater number sitting in a room, and miserably bemoaning
of themselves, would he not ask what Town was burnt, or what Family was dead
that caused so many mourners? How much then would he be astonished when he
heard the Answer, that you had lost a friend, a child, or some one of your
other relations? What? Are there so many tears due (would he think) from every
man of these upon the score of one Creature only? Must so many be ready to die,
because one has taken his leave of them? Can there be no comfort found among
so many of you against the death of a single person? Me thinks you should all
of your together weep no more for the death of one, than that one would have
wept for you, if you had been dead altogether. Look therefore upon one another,
and say, You are still left behind, and I am left, and here are twenty more of
our friends alive; how is it then that we are discontented, as if we had not
lost one, amongst us all, but every one of us had lost one? If there had been
but one of us left, what could he have done more, than what every one of us
does? Could he shed more tears for the loss of us all, or make himself more sad
than we now are? Either let us say, that one and ten are equal, or let us not
shed as many tears for one as we would for ten; much less ten times as many
tears as there would be for that number. For but one would weep for ten, and
here are ten that weep for one. Divide your grief then, and let every one bear
a part, but not the whole; for that is, as if you had none to bear it with you.

Or if we have not, God is still ours, who rules the world, and not we.
V. Ask thy self, Who is it that governs the world? Is it the will of God, or
thy will that thou prayest may be done? Shall not he that made a thing have
leave to dipose of it as he thinks good? By what Law is it that he shall not do
what he pleases with his own? Must we have our wills in all things, and must
not he have his will also? Must not he be pleased as well as we? If we think it
so reasonable to have what we will; then it is more reasonable that he should
have what pleases him. Now if our will and his will cannot stand together,
which shall bend and submit themselves to the other? Is not his will most wise?
If he had considered better, would he have done otherwise? Could we have told
him what would be most fit for us? If we had been of his Counsel, should not
this friend have been taken away? Does he will things because he will? Perhaps
there is no reason at all for our wills, and we are in love with a thing, we we
know not why: shall we think that he is so in like manner? Or if we have any
reasons, are not his better? We would have the life of a child that he may be a
comfort unto us; God will have us to part with him, that he himself may be our
only comfort. We should choose his life, that he might enjoy the things that we
have got: But God thinks fit that he should die, that we may put our estates to
better uses, whereby we are assured he may be more glorified. Or perhaps we
desire our children may live for Gods glory sake, that they may honor and
serve him in the World: But cannot he tell what is best for his own glory? Is
he so careless of that as to take away the things without which he cannot be
served? Let us then cease our complaints unless we would have him to let us
govern the World. But he was taken away, will some say, before his time, else I
should be content. I shall answer this as Photius does (who accords with Basil
the great, Epist. 234.
before mentioned,) (...), Let me hear no such word I beseech you, a word too
bold to be spoken, and more bold to be thought. Before the time do you say?
Then why was he not thought to come before the time, when he came out of his
mothers Womb? There is no reason for it but this, that it was the will and
pleasure of God that he should be born at such a time. And must God appoint the
time of his birth, and we set the time of his death? Did the Workman give him a
being in good time, and take him to himself, not knowing the fittest season?
From a drop he made him to become a lump of flesh. He formed the flesh into
parts, he brought him into the light, and he kept him in his infancy and
childhood. Was any of these out of due time? Why then should it be out of
season when he translated him to another life? Let us do therefore as David
did, who prayed and wept as long as he could hope the decree of God was not
absolute concerning his child's death; but when he saw that it was irreversible,
he comforted himself. Let us always say as Job does, The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord. And let this be further
considered to the enforcing of this truth, that if the will of the Lord must be
born, then it must be done. And his will is, that we should take all things
patiently, yea, cheerfully from his hands. And therefore if we mourn
immoderately, what do we but only add sin unto our pain? As there is a time to
laugh, so there is a time to weep: But there is no more time to weep
superfluously, than there is to laugh idly and profusely. Both in the one and
in the other we must be wholly subject to the Will of God. But that Will of
God, as I said, is very wise in every thing, and therefore he intends to turn
our mourning into laughter, and by every sad thing that does befall us, to make
our hearts glad. He always gives something better than he takes away, if we
would but seek after it; and ofttimes he takes one thing away that we may seek
after the better. But alas, our blindness is so great, that we value not that
which brings us profit, unless it be sweet to our taste. We let our passion
judge, and not our reason; and therefore we think there is no good in a bitter
cup, and no danger in a pleasant draught. We lament and mourn when we ought to
think our selves great gainers; and we rejoice and leap, when perhaps a cross
of the greatest burden has befaln us. Let us stay a while therefore, and
expect the end of things before we mourn too much. And let us but desire to be
cured, rather than pleased; to have our souls amended, rather than our fancy
humoured; and we shall have great reason to thank God for every thing that
comes to us.

And he rules it better than we could do.
VI. And this will lead me to another consideration, concerning the Goodness of
God in all that he does. Ask thy self therefore, Does not God do all things for
our good? Do we wish better to our selves than God does? Has not He the
greatest care of all his creatures, to see that it be well with them? Did he
make them for any other end than that they might be happy? Is there the least
Sparrow as I said before, that falls to the ground without our Fathers
Providence? Then Mankind must needs be under a greater love, and none of them
can die by chance, but by his direction. And above all other men, He has a
singular care over the persons of good Christians, the very hairs of whose
heads are all numbered. If not so much as an hair can drop off without Him, much
less can any body of them fall into their graves, but He has a hand in it. But
still He has a more special Providence over such Christians as are Fatherless
and Widows, helpless and destitute of all succor. And therefore as it was his
goodness that took their friends away, so much more will his goodness take care
of them whom he has left none else to take care of. He considers us not only
as his children, but as children placed in the midst of such and such
circumstances, as desolate and sad, as left only to his Providence and tuition.
And therefore it is that the Psalmist says, Psa. 10 14.
Thou art the helper of the Fatherless. And in another place, A Father of the
fatherless, Psa. 68.5.
and a Judge of the widow, is God in his holy babitation. Psa. 69.23.
I am poor and sorrowful, let thy salvation set me up on high. Yea and all
good men are full of compassion to such persons: So that The blessing of those
that are ready to perish come upon them; Job 29 12, 14.
and they cause the widows heart to sing for Joy.

It is an excellent saying of the Royal Philosopher Antoninus, (...), etc. Lib.
2. Sect. 11.
worthy to be engraven upon our minds; If there be a God, then nothing can be
hurtful to us, for he will not involve us in evil. But if either there be
none, or he take no care of men's matters, what shall I live for in a World that
is without a God, or without a Providence? But there is a God, and he cares for
men also, and has put it into their power not to fall into those things which
are truly evil. And for the rest that befall us, if any thing of them had been
evil, he would have provided that we should have been able not to have fallen
into that neither. But if this great person had known also that God leaves us
not alone to our own power, when he sends any thing upon us, but that he has a
peculiar love to his servants when they are in trouble, and affords them his
assistance: He would have said on this sort, If we be not alone without God,
then nothing need discomfort us, for he is the God of all comfort. If we be
alone, then we had need to be most discomforted for that, and never endure in a
condition without God. But we are not alone, and we are least alone when we are
alone; and have him most, when we have other things least. Therefore he has
put it into our power not to be troubled, but to go to him for comfort in all
that befalls us; and if there were no comfort in him for us in such cases, then
they should not have befaln us. Let us not therefore mourn as long as we have a
God, and as long as all things make us seek for our comfort in him.

VII. Grief will end, let us end it.
Let us ask our selves, How long we intend to mourn? Does any man intend to
continue it all his life? Then he may fall into the follies of Augustus, who
made the image of his Nephew whom he dearly loved, be placed in his
Bedchamber, that he might Kiss it and Embrace it daily, Or the dotage of
Alexander will be a fit punishment for us, who built Temples, and commanded
sacred solemnities every year for his beloved Ephestion. Do you intend every
year to have a funeral Sermon? To go and weep over their graves at that time,
as you do when they are first put into them? If not, set some measures to your
mourning, for of it self it knows no measure. And if you intend not to weep
always, why can you not cease now? If it be not a thing to be lamented for
ever, why should it be so sadly lamented at all? Decency indeed does require
some mourning, and natural affection must be allowed its tears; but we must
stay them as soon as may be, and not mourn as if we thought we could never
mourn enough. For if we think so, then we must mourn always, or else we show
that we had no reason to mourn so much. But if any man be resolved to let the
sorrow take its course, and run as far as ever it can, let me tell him, that
either his sorrow will spend him, or else it will spend it self, and so be
cured without any thanks at all to him. It is a trite thing which I am going to
add, but (to speak with Seneca) I will not therefore forbear to speak it,
because it is spoken by all: So it falls out that he who will not put an end to
his own grief, time will end it for him. But this is most dishonorable as has
been already said, to expect, till it put an end to it self, when it can run no
longer, and not to end it our own selves by not permitting it to run at all
without our leave. To be weary of weeping is the basest remedy for grief. It is
far better for us to leave grief, than to let it leave us. It is a shame to let
time conquer that, which has conquered us. Seeing it must cease, let it cease
by our valor and strength, not by its own weakness. Let it die by our hands,
and not merely because it can live no longer.

We are weary of nothing sooner than of grief, and therefore let us cease that,
which if we would, we cannot long continue. It is well observed by Pliny the
second, Lib. 5. Epist. 16.
that as a crude wound is very angry under the Chirurgions hand, but in a short
time does both suffer it and require it; so a fresh grief does use to reject
and despise all comfort, but shortly after not only receives it most
courteously, but also desires and expects it. And seeing if it can find no
comfort, it will fairly cease it self; it is more like men, that we should
comfort our selves and put a period to it.

It may do us much harm before it end.
VIII. Ask thy self again, To what purpose is all my mourning? Every wise man
intends some good to himself in what he does; and therefore unless sorrow will
do us some good, it is a foolish thing to indulge unto it. But can any man that
has had his fill of it, tell us what satisfaction it has given him? May we
not put all our gains in our eyes (as the Proverb is) after they have wept so
immoderately? Does any man say he is glad that he mourned so much? Then he had
best mourn again if there be so much gladness and profit in it. Had we not
better say with David concerning his child when it was dead, I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me? I may bring my self in sorrow to my grave, but I
cannot bring him up from the dead. I cannot water him with my tears, as we do a
dry plant, that he may spring up again, but I may easily drown my self, and
learn others by my example not to weep so much for me. What I would not have
them do for me, why should I do for another? Why should I make my self
miserable, and make no body else the better? The truth is, if there were only
no good in it, it were the less matter; but it does us likewise not a little
harm. (...) etc. Pho. Epist. 234.
Though it will end of it self, yet it may breed us no small trouble before it
end. This is all the comfort that such a man has, and it is a very poor one;
that if his grief do not kill him, it will kill it self: But many an one has
grief destroyed; many a body has it distempered; and given most mortal wounds
also to the soul it self. Many affections move the soul most vehemently, but
none more than grief, which has been the cause of madness in some (as Plutarch
has observed) and in others has bred incurable diseases, and made others
destroy themselves. And this it may do either naturally, for nothing eats the
heart so much as grief; nothing casts such a damp on the vital spirits as
immoderate sorrows; or else providentially by Gods anger, who is displeased to
see us so angry and repining, and often inflicts worse things upon us than
those which we causlesly make the matter of so doleful complaints. Let us
therefore cease that which brings such troubles before it cease it self; and
when it is ceased, gives us a new sorrow, to think that we should be so
unreasonably sorrowful.

We must write upon this, as well as upon inordinate joys, Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity and vexation of Spirit. And therefore let us not be troubled now,
lest we be troubled more afterward, to consider how foolishly we were troubled.
The Fable of Niobe which tells how she turned her self with sorrow into a
stone, does but signify the stupidity and dullness that waits upon grief, and
the excessive melancholy into which it sometime casts us, which renders us as
insensible as a stone. Take heed how you grow in love with sadness, for it has
no profit wherewithal to recompense your affection to it; but pays your folly
only with it self, and such diseases as ordinarily use to accompany it. And we
should be the less in love with it, because there are so many occasions of it
in our lives. We need not weep so much for the loss of one thing, for we must
expect continual losses. The world is not such a place that we should take care
to spend all our tears at one time; we shall have occasion enough for them, if
we have ^^y mind to weeping. Let us bestow therefore the less upon one, because
there are so many objects to solicit our sorrows. And if our souls be tender,
and apt to receive the impressions of doleful things, we have the more need to
comfort our selves; for every grief will but make us still more apt to grieve.

And besides what a folly is it thus to die with continual grief for him, who
if he did grieve to die, his grief continued but a little while: He died but
once; why should we die always? It is certain we must die, but of all deaths
let us not die with grief; and much less for grief about that which we see we
cannot avoid our selves. But let us be furthest of all from making our life a
perpetual death; and grieving for that, which by grief we may so soon run our
selves into.

Weep no more for thy friend, than thou would have had him weep for thee.
IX. Ask thy self again, Whether two friends do not think that one of them must
die first? Do we not see that in the common course of things, one man goes
before another to his grave? Who then (if it had been permitted to thy choice)
would thou have appointed to be the leader unto the other: Would thou have
given thy self the pre-eminence, and resolved to have shown him the way? Then
death it seems is a good thing; for if it were evil, we can scarce believe thy
self-love is so little as to wish it might be thy portion before another. And
if it be good, then thou may soon satisfy the pretense of loving them
better than thy self, by being glad that they enjoy it before thy self. Or
would thou have had both gone together and been enclosed in the same Coffin,
and interred in the same grave? Then it seems it is no such great matter to die
as thou make it, seeing thou art so willing to die also. And if it be no
great matter for thee to live, then no more was it unto him. If the sorrow of
living without him, be greater than the sorrow of dying with him, why then was
not he desirous that thou should die? And why did he pray for thy life and
health when he died? And if he would not have thee to die also when he died,
why do thou then live in a kind of death, and enjoyest not thy self, nor the
pleasures of life? Either resolve to die also, or else to live as a man should
do.

If his death be, so sad, thou will not be able to bear thy own.
X. Ask thy self, How can I take my own death? Certain it is that thou must die
also; but if thou can not part with a friend, how can thou part with thy
self? How will thou endure that soul and body should be separated, if thou
can not shake hands with another body distinct from thine? Are not they the
most ancient friends? Is not their union most strict and close? Can two men
cleave so together as thy soul embraces its companion? What then will thou do
when their bonds shall be untied, if thou can not bear the rupture of lessr
cords of love? What will thou think when thy soul sits on thy lips, and give
thy body a farewell kiss, if thou can not close the eyes of thy friend
without so many tears? Will thy soul mourn after thy body is dead, as thou do
now lament the death of thy friend? Will it groan and sigh, to think of the
hole where its flesh lies? Will it sight to think that its old companion is
then become the companion of worms? If not; then let it not groan so heavily
for a less matter that is now befaln it. If it will; then why art thou troubled
for thy friend, and not for thy own self, to think how sad thou must one day
be? The fear of thy own death, must more than equal thy sorrow for the death
of another man. And how can thou have time to think of any thing else, if
thou do fear it? Or if thou do not fear it; how can thou fall under thy
sorrow, who have overcome so great a sear?

Do thou intend to go crying out of the World? If not, then be not now
dismayed at that which thou must bear so valiantly thy self. Then do not mourn
so much for the loss of another life, which will but put self-love into a most
piteous case, when thou come to yield up thy own. Death is no strange thing
(as I have said) for we must all die. But then why should we mourn so much, if
it be such an usual thing? If we mourn excessively, it is a sign we think not
of the commonness of it, and then how shall we take our own death, seeing it is
such a stranger to our thoughts? Let us but comfort our selves upon solid
grounds against our own departure, and I will warrant you that shall cure all
our other lamentations. Let us but dare to die our selves, and we shall not
dare to cry so much for any man's death.

Isidore of Pelusium thinks that our Savior, Lib. 23 Epist. 173.
did not mourn for his friend Lazarus because he was dead (for he knew that he
was going to raise him from the dead) but because he was to live again: And to
come from the haven where he was arrived, back again into the waves and storms;
from the crown which he enjoyed, to a new encounter with his enemies.

If thou do not believe his interpretation, yet do thou believe the thing?
Do thou seriously consider that the misery of this world is so great, that we
should rather weep that we are in it, than that others are gone out of it? Then
I ask thee again, whether when thou art dead and well, thou would willingly
live again? If not, then thou know what to say to thy self concernning thy
friends death. If thou would, then it seems thou can be contented with this
grief; and I will not go about to comfort thee, seeing thou love life with
all the miseries thou createst to thy self.

But the very truth is, we are so sensible of our bodies, and have so little
feeling of our souls or divine things, that it is ready to make us think we are
not, when our bodies are dead. This makes death such a terrible thing. this
makes both our own and others death so heavy, because it seems as if there were
an extinction of us. That which we feel not, nor have any sense of within us,
is as if it was not. And therefore if we feel not heavenly things, and perceive
not that we have a soul; we shall receive death as if it was the loss of our
selves, and then who can but be sad? Let us live therefore in a sense of such
things as may make us die willingly, and think that we our selves are not lost;
and then we shall not think that we have lost our good friends, nor lay their
death so much to heart.

Nor will thou be able to help others to bear their sorrows.
XI. Ask thy self likewise, How will thou be able to comfort others, if thou
can not comfort thy self? It should seem by thy tears that thou art very
ambitious of the name of a friend; but if thou be not able to comfort thy
friend, what is he the better for thee? And how did thou deserve to have the
friend which thou have lost? If thou art able, or have ever given any comfort
unto others, administer then the same cordials to thy self. Why should not that
satisfy thee, which thou expectedst with so much reason should satisfy them?
What thou would say to another if his friend was dead, that say to thy self.
And if thou would wonder that he should reject all comfort, then do not make
thy self a wonder. Did thou never tell any man that it is a shame to be
impatient, when we can cure our selves? That they suffer nothing but what God
and nature have appointed; that we must all expect such losses; that no body
knows whose turn is next? Take then thy own counsel, and be not such a
Physician as cannot cure himself at all. Is thy distemper different from
theirs? Are there not the same griefs and maladies in their minds? Then the
same medicine will cure thee that thou gave them. Or if it would not cure
them, then thou wast much too blame that did not seek a better both for them
and thee. Or is thine some strange loss, the like to which never any suffered?
Then this may comfort thee, that thou shall never suffer the like again. For it
would be more strange, if a thing that never came before should twice fall upon
one man. It it be so strange to thee, then thy courage will be as strange to
others. If thou art drawn into an example of sufferings, then thou may render
thy self an example to all of patience and contentedness. And so Seneca says
of the Brother of Drusus, that though Drusus dyed in the midst of his embraces,
and with his kisses warm upon his mouth; though he dyed in the very height of
his fortune, with the most warlike Nations dead at his feet; yet he not only
put a measure to his own grief, but taught all the Army how to be moderate
also. And indeed he could not have stopped the tears of others, unless he had
been of so brave a spirit as first to stop his own. If thou art a friend
therefore unto any, let them all learn of thee how to be well satisfied.
Comfort thy self as thou have comforted others, or else as thou do intend to
comfort them. And let it be seen by thy worthy behavior toward thy self, that
thou art worthy to be a friend to another person.

Death does sometime befriend us.
XII. Ask thy self again, Whether friends only be mortal? Do none die but they
that love us? Must not all our enemies and they that hate us die also? Death
then that makes thee sad, may give thee comfort. As it puts an end to some
comforts, so it is the common end of all miseries. Though we may not wish for
the death of any, yet it is no harm to think that they must die who hate us,
and their rage shall not last for ever. If nothing can cease their malignity,
yet death can. It has done us then no such wrong, but what it can repay us
with the same hand that did it. Though we have now no friend, yet shortly we
may have no enemy neither. This was one support to the Christians under their
persecutions, that though their enemies (like Saul) did breath out nothing but
threatenings and slaughters against them, yet their breath was but in their
nostrils, and might soon evaporate and vanish away. Julian, called the
Apostate, had done more hurt to the Christians than the ten Persecutions, if
death had not suddenly wounded him with one of his arrows.

The Marian flames had devoured in all likelihood a great many more bodies, if
death had not shortened her reign, and so extinguished the fires. We have no
reason then to look upon it as unkind, which may do us so many courtesies: not
to accuse that of cruelty to us, which destroys the cruelty of others toward
us.

XIII. And now may you not well make one question more to your selves,
Contentment has more to say for it self, than grief has.
and say, Is there not more reason to be comforted, than there is to be sad? If
there be (as certainly there is) what should hinder your comfort, if you live
by reason? If you do not live by it, then nothing that a man can say will
comfort you. Nothing will cheer us unless we think of it, and make it our own
by meditation: neither will any thing sadden us unless we think of it also.
Seeing then they are our own thoughts that make us either sad or merry, and we
have more comfortable thoughts than heavy, we cannot but be of good cheer, if
we will not be enemies to our selves. All that we can say for our sadness is,
that we have lost a friend, a very dear and perhaps only friend. But you have
heard that there are more in the world, and that you have not lost this; and
that you have more comforts remaining than are taken away; and that if you had
none but God, you had enough; and if you will read again what has been said,
twenty other reasons will offer themselves to cheer, for one that arises to
make you sad. If there was no reason at all to be sad, then none need spend any
time in giving comfort: But if they be very few in compare with others, and we
are made to follow the most and strongest reasons, then he is not to be pityed,
who notwithstanding the small reason of his sorrow, will not be of good comfort.

The greatest cause that I know of this sort of trouble, is when many that we
love die soon after one another. So it happened to that Prince (which the L.
Mountaigne speaks of) who received the news of his Elder Brothers death, L. 1.
Essay cap. 2.
whom he highly esteemed, with a great deal of constancy; and shortly after the
tidings of his younger Brothers decease, in whom he placed much hope, did not
alter the smoothness of his countenance. But when one of his servants dyed not
long after that, he suffered himself to be so far transported, that he quitted
his former resolution, and gave up himself to all grief and sorrow. The reason
of this was not from the love that he bare to his person more than the rest,
but (as he well faith) because being top full of sorrow before, the next flood
must needs break the banks, or overflow all the bounds of patience.

In Dialog. cui tit. Guilielmus.
And so Hier. Cardan tells us, that after he had partiently born many
reproaches, and the cruel infamous death of a son of great hopes; and the
dangerous sickness of another son, and the death of his Parents, and Wife, with
many other evils; yea and after he wrote a Book of Consolation against all
these evils; yet he was overcome with grief at the death of an English youth,
whom he brought from Dover with him, as he passed from Scotland, in the time of
Edward the sixth. And he gives the sam reason for it that the other does;
Fatigatum multis adversis, oppressit me haec extrema infaelicitas; being
wearied before with many griefs, this last unhappiness made me fall to the
ground. It was not its strength, but his own foregoing weakness that made him
fall. It was not heavy, but it came upon the back of many other loads, and so
oppressed him.

But something had been said to this also; For holy Job was in the same
condition and far worse; one messenger did tread upon the heels of an other to
bring him tidings of his misery, and yet he was patient, though he himself
likewise was in his own body most sadly afflicted. We have the same grounds of
comfort that he had, and abundance more than was known in those younger times.
And when one cause of trouble falls upon the neck of another, we can add one
reason likewise unto another, and so be comforted. For our troubles can never
be so many, as the causes of our consolation are. Yea, one single reason of
those that I have propounded will answer all. Do we not know very well that all
friends are mortal? Then it can be no new thing (if we well consider it) for
two or three to die after we have lost one: But the loss of one does rather
mind us of the mortality of all. And does not God govern the world in the death
of the last as well as of the first? Then there is no less wisdom and goodness
in it when many die, than when one. He that can solidly comfort himself in the
death of one, will not be immoderately troubled for the loss of more. If we let
our grief indeed work underground, while nothing of it appears: if our hearts
be loaded with it, though our eyes look not heavily before others, then it is
no wonder if it do at last break forth. When the heart is overcharged, and can
find no other way to ease it self. But if we take a course to comfort our
hearts at the very first, and make them truly contented; or if we let not the
grief settle it self, but labor to dislodge it, then we shall be the better
disposed to bear such another cross with the like patience. For then a new
trouble does not come upon the other, but only follows after it: it does not
add to the former, but only comes in its stead; it does not augment, but only
renew our grief.

We should not be the more troubled, because we understand our trouble.
XIV. And now is it not time to conclude these questions, and to say to your
selves, Why should not reason do that which little or no reason can do? The
more we are men, shall we be the less in peace, and cry like children? Nay,
children weep while they see their Parents put into the Grave, and within a day
or two they forget their sorrows; why cannot we do so also? Though they know
not their loss, yet they know not the reasons neither why they should not be
discontented for their loss. Though they have little understanding of their
sufferings, yet they have as little knowledge of our comforts and supports. And
as for brute creatures, you see that they make a doleful noise for the loss of
their young a very short while, and then they remember it no more. Some of the
people of Cous (if I forget not) used at the age of seventy years either to
kill their Parents, or pine them to death, and to rejoice much at it. They
though that they had lived long enough, and that it was both a misery to
themselves, and a great burden to their children to have them continue any
longer. The Caspians also and some of the people of old Spain had the like
custom, which we well call inhumane and barbarous. But why cannot understanding
teach us that, which want of understanding taught them? Why should Barbarism
make them rejoice at what they did themselves, and Christianity make us sad at
what is done by God and the order of things? St. Hierome reports that in his
time there was at Rome, a man who had had twenty Wives, married to a woman who
had had two and twenty Husbands. There was great expectations which of them
should die first; and when the man buried her, his neighbors crowned him with
Laurel, and caused him to bear a bough of Palm in his hand, in token of a
Victory, at his wives funerals. It seems that men can sport at death if they
list, and laugh at that which makes so many cry. Why then cannot reason make us
moderately sad to bear that, which humor and fancy can make men not to lament
at all? Why cannot our Religion do more with us, than the people or our
friends, who it is like can laugh us sometimes out of our sorrows?

If I have not said too much in this argument, I have some confidence, that I
have not said too little. And indeed I have said more than I first intended,
and so much that if any have the patience to read it through, me thinks the
very length of the discourse should make them forget their sorrows, and by
thinking so long upon another thing, they should not remember what they thought
upon before. One soul is scarce big enough to hold all these considerations,
and the thoughts of grief also. Here are so many that they are able to thrust
sorrow out of doors by their multitude, if not by their strength and force.

And yet notwithstanding I must detain you a little longer before I give your
thoughts leave to turn themselves to other things. For I am of the mind that
all these considerations will only assuage the grief, and pricking of the
wound; but will not quite heal it, and take away its putrefaction. I shall
therefore commend two or three things, for the pressing out all the filthy
matter, for the closing of the sore, and to make the soul perfectly whole and
sound.

SECT. VIII. Some other things are proposed for the perfect cure of the soul;
The first of which is deadness to the world; and the casting out false
opinions. The second is the changing of our sorrow into another kind. The third
is the Life of our Lord Jesus.
I. It is not their death, but the life of something else that troubles us.
BE dead to all things, and thou will not be offended that they die. Mortify
thy spirit to the world and all things that are in it, and when thou have left
them, it will seem no wonder that they leave thee. Think with thy self often
that thy friends are dead, that thou see them carried to the grave, that thou
beholdest worms crawling out of their eyes and mouth, and try how thou art able
to bear that thought. Think that he or she that lies in thy bed by thy side, is
as cold as a stone; think that thou embracest the carcass of thy dear friend,
and ask thy soul how it can brook it, Think thus often, and though thy soul may
start at the first, yet at last it will be patient. That little sadness will
banish and chase away all the greater, that else would seize on thee hereafter.
There will be little to do when death comes, if thou constantly do this. Thy
soul will be so loose from them, that thou will not give a shrike: none will
hear the strings crack when you are separated. Death will not be a breaking of
your society, but a fair and easy untying of it. Nothing will happen to you
but what you have looked for long before; and you shall be able to say, This is
not the first time that I have seen my dear friend dead. Yea, think with thy
self that thou see thy own body laid in the grave, and that thou feel thy
self as cold as a clod of Earth. Think that thou art turned into rottenness and
dirt; and that thou art forgotten by thy neighbors. If thy soul can endure
these thoughts, then why should it be troubled at the death of another? This is
a kind of death to be so separated from thy body in thy thoughts. It is all one
not to be in the body, and not to feel that thou art in it. Raise thy mind then
up toward heavenly things; fix thy thoughts on God and the life to come; think
that thou see thy self in heaven among the Saints of God; and while thy soul
is there, it is not in thy body here below. This kind of death differs from
that which will be hereafter, in this only; that then thou will be more
perfectly out of thy body. But if there be no trouble in this separation which
thou now make even whilst thou art in it, There will be far less trouble
(one would think) quite to part with it, and to get from it.

We must not let false opinions live.
And the way to be dead to these earthly things, is, to change our opinion of
them, and to see them to be what indeed they are, empty and unsatisfying,
changeable and unconstant. Of this I have spoken before in the former
discourse, but seeing in it a thing so great and fundamental to our
contentment, let me again present you with it. We are the cause of our own
grief, by magnifying the things of the world to such a value, that the loss of
them shall be worth so many tears. We think that they are happy who are rich
and honorable, though they be never so wicked and unskilful how to live.
(...), etc. L. 1 cap. 19.
We presently cry up a man for wise, and what not? Who (to use Arrianus his
phrase) is preferred by Caesar, though it be but to be Groom of his
close-stool. And on the contrary, we despise virtue if it be in a threadbare
coat, and count him a fool who is unfortunate. No wonder then, that we cry and
whine like children, when we lose any of these worldly things; seeing we think
our selves more happy than men in the enjoyment of them. We think that we are
undone when we part with that which we have such an high opinion of; and there
is no way to make us think that all is safe, but by altering of that foolish
opinion. We expect what cannot be, and will not be content with what may easily
be. We cannot make the things of this world to be still and quiet, but may make
our selves so, and the way to that quietness is well to consider their
inconstancy, and that our happiness is in something better.

It was a good rule which Pythagoras gave to all his Scholars, and is the same
that I would have you learn, (...), Do not walk in the high way, i. e. Do not
follow the common opinions, be not led by vulgar and popular apprehensions.
Rectify the ordinary conceits which you have carelessly entertained of things,
and judge of them as they are in themselves, and not as they are reputed of. If
we would do thus, then that which is the cause of our sorrow, would be the
cause of our tranquillity; because nothing has left us, but that which we knew
would not stay with us. We mourn now because things are so inconstant; but then
we should not mourn, because we knew them to be inconstant. If we could make it
good that any of these things are ours, then I might avouch it, that they would
never have left us: But if they were not ours, why are we offended, that God
does what he will with his own? And besides, shall we* who are so inconstant,
oblige all things besides our selves to constancy? Shall we whose desires are
so restless and uncertain, expect that all things but only we should be stable
and quiet? No, let us look into our selves, and we shall find so much
difficulty to settle them, that we shall not wonder that other things are
unsettled. And again, if things be so mutable, why should we not think (as I
have already said) that they will one day change to what we would have them?
But suppose they should, what are we the better? If our opinion be not turned
too, we shall be as much afraid to lose them again, seeing they are so
unconstant; as now we are desirous to have them by the benefit of their
inconstancy. We must therefore alter our esteem of things now, else we shall
only change our trouble, but not be rid of it, when things are changed. Adeo
nihil est miserum nisi cum putes, etc. So certain it is, that nothing is
miserable, but when we think it is so; and that nothing will make us happy
unless we think that we are happy. And we had better think so now, than stay to
be taught this lesson by the dear experience of a great many troubles. Let
thine estate be never so prosperous, yet if thine heart be unmortified, thou will never be the nearer, but rather the further off from settlement. For they
that have the greatest abundance, are the soonest disturbed by every trisle,
because they are not used to have any thing go contrary to their humor.

But if thou will take any comfort from the unconstancy of things, let it be
this; That if thou think thy self therefore unfortunate, because those
things are gone that were joyful, then thou may think thy self happy enough,
seeing the things that are unpleasant are going away also. And think I beseech
you once more, and be of this opinion, That there is nothing better in this
world to thee than thy self. As long therefore as thou have thy self, why
should thou be troubled, especially if thou thy self think never the worse
of thy self, because thou art poor and destitute of friends? For these take
away nothing of thy self, nor can any thing in the world deprive thee of thy
self. And as Boethius well says, This is the condition of humane nature, that
it then only excels all things here, when it knows it self, but when it does
not, it is below the very Beasts: For it is natural for them to be ignorant;
but for a man it is the basest vice, especially when he is ignorant of himself.

There was a Fable among the Heathens which wise men understood to contain in
it great Philosophy. In the midst of this sad discourse, it will please you
perhaps, if I relate it; and it will please you a great deal more for to learn
and live by it. After Jupiter had made the world, he thought that men would not
be restrained from sin without rewards and punishments; and so he made two
great barrels, the one full of good things, the other full of bad, to be sent
down among men as there was occasion. Pandora being very desirous to know what
was in these barrels, did one day broach them, and all the good things flew out
toward heaven, and all the bad toward hell. Hope only and Fear remained in
the bottom of these Casks; the former in that of Evil things, and the latter in
that of Good. When this was done, Jupiter threw down these empty Tubs to the
earth, and all mortals ran at the rareness of the sight to see what they could
find in them. Some looked into the one, and some into the other, and though
both of them were empty, yet they thought verily that the one was full of good,
and the other full of evil. And ever since it came to pass that here below we
have nothing but a fancy or conceit of Good mixed with fear and jealousy; and
a mere conceit of Evil, with some hope in the compound of it. The Morral of it
is this, That the things of this world are but empty Goods, and inconsiderable
Evils. They are our own opinions that trouble us with the shadow of evil, and
that flatter us on the other side with a fair show of Good. All substantial
Good is in heaven, and all dreadful misery is in hell. If we go to heaven, we
are well enough whatsoever we lose; if we fall into sin and so into hell, we
cannot be well, though we should enjoy all the world; and while we stay here
below, there is no good thing we enjoy but is accompanied with fear: and no
evil we suffer but is attended with Hope. And there is no hope like that which
is laid up in Heaven, of enjoying a bliss sincere and pure, without any allay
at all. Let us turn our minds then toward these heavenly things which they did
but dream of in the dark ages of the world. Let us heartily believe the Gospel
which has brought to light eternal life: And then we shall think our selves
happy enough if we lose not those things: and perhaps the death of our friends
and such like crosses befall us, that we may not lose them.

The Almighty Goodness draws our thoughts and affections, by these means, from
transitory comforts: and calls them up thither where we hope our Friends are
arrived. See, says he, here is your Home; here is your resting place; here is
the immortal Inheritance that never fades away. If you love your selves, mind
the way hither: and suffer nothing to turn you out of it. Whatsoever cross
befalls you, take it up and carry it along with you: Let it only spur you to
make the more have to Eternal joys. Where when we are once seated aloft,
amidst those glorious objects which then shall incompass us; with what contempt
(as an ingenious Person M. Malh. to the Princess of Conty.
speaks) shall we look down upon this Morsel of earth, which men have divided
into so many Kingdoms; or upon this drop of water, whereof so many Seas are
composed. How shall we smile to see men so busy about the necessities of a
Body, to which we no sooner give one thing, but it asks another: and so
disquieted through a weakness of spirit which daily troubles them, as to unwish
that to day, which the day before they wished for. Enter, if it be possible,
into these generous thoughts before hand. Begin to speak of the World, as you
will do when you have forsaken it. Acknowledge it to be a place, where you must
daily lose something, till you have lost all. And by these and the like
Meditations, let your soul assuredly conceive, that having had its Original
from Heaven, it is one of the number of those, which must one day return
thither.

In the mean time, when the days of Mourning come, and sorrow will not be
denied its place: let me recommend this advice to every man. As soon as it is
possible, II. Our tears should be kept for that which is the cause of death,
and all our tears.
Turn thy sorrow for thy friend into sorrow for thy sins. Remember that thy
tears may be due to some other thing, and the cure of that will cure all thy
other griefs. If thou art not a Christian, then it is thy duty to mourn neither
for one thing nor other, but only to bewail thy self. Let the dead bury the
dead (as our Savior said) do thou presently follow after thy Lord with tears.
Take no care of funerals, think of no earthly thing, but only how thou may
be a Christian. And if thou art so, then thou ought to rejoice that thy sins
are pardoned, and that thou have not the greatest cause of grief; and this joy
sure will swallow up all thy sorrows. There is scarce any thing so considerable
in our bodies that is seen, as our tears; for they are the most notable
expressions of what is in our hearts. The hands (as Ant. Guevara observes) do
work, the feet do walk, the tongue speaks, but it is the heart only that weeps.
The eyes are but the spunges of the heart, through which its affections are
drained and dried up. An afflicted heart has neither hands to labor, nor feet
to walk, nor can it find a tongue to speak, but tears are all that it has to
tell you what it wants. And therefore we ought to reserve these for some
greater thing than our dead friends, which our heart ought much to be affected
withal. As our Savior said to the women of Jerusalem when he was going to the
most cruel sufferings, so might our friends say to us when they are a dying,
Weep not for us, but weep for your selves, if you be dead while you are alive.
Mourn more than you do, if you have not yet mourned for your sins and amended
them: But if you have, then rejoice in the favor of God, and bless him for his
Son Jesus, who is better to thee than ten Sons, or all thy friends which thou
lamentest. Are our sins dead as well as our friends? have we buried them in the
grave of our Lord? are we risen again to an heavenly life? Let us go then to
God, and pray to him, and praise him, and this will give us ease. But if we be
troubled for sin; then sure we shall not add another sin by immoderate sorrow,
and forgetfulness of Gods goodness. If it be sin we hate; then bitter
complaints and discontents must all be hated. Would you indispose your self to
pray, to praise God and meditate in his sacred Word; Would you render your self
unfit to receive the Sacrament of his most blessed body and blood? If not; then
mourn but so much as will not hinder any of these, and you have leave to mourn
as much as you please. Stop but here; and there is no man will lay any
restraints upon you. But then how short your mourning must be, you will soon
guess, and the Sun must not go down upon your grief, no more than it must upon
your wrath. But if you take no great care whether you disturb your souls or no;
then you have most reason to mourn for that carelessness and neglect. Go then
and bewail your unkindness to God, your unthankfulness for his mercies, and
unbelief of his Gospel; for you can never take your hearts in a better time,
than when they are so sad, and inclined to be sorrowful. Tell them that now
they are very well disposed for a necessary business; and bid them look if
there be not something else to bewail that is more considerable. Ask thy self,
have thou not deserved this and ten times more? Will thou add another sin, when
thou should cease all sins? Have thou not been careless of seeking God? Have
thou not foolishly wasted thy precious time? And art thou not troubled at all
for that? Yea art thou now impatient, as if God dealt hardly with thee? And
will thou spend more time badly, when thou art taught by the death of thy dear
friend how short it is? It is most incongruous thus to bewail the death of a
child or acquaintance, when thou art like to die thy self both body and soul.
And when thou have mourned for thy sins, thou will be taught thereby how little
thou ought to mourn for thy losses. For even our tears for sin must not be
immoderate, and therefore much less must we dare to let them flow in abundance
for our losses. So you know the great Apostle commands the Corinthians to
comfort him that had been guilty of a great sin, and receive him again into the
Church now that he repented, left perhaps such an one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. I wish all those who are ready to destroy
themselves with grief, would seriously consider this, that we may not over-load
our hearts with grief, for our sins themselves, which are the causes of all
other sorrows.

We cannot please the Devil better than by discontent. He would fain oppress
every good man with some passion or other; let us take heed how we join with
him against our selves. If we have left his service, that is enough to provoke
him. If we have bid defiance to his pleasures, this does incense him, and we
must expect that he will endeavor to overcome us with griefs.

The Devil is mad against all good men; and therefore let all those who have
irritated him against them, beware how they now prove cowards, and execute his
vengeance for him with their own hands. Let us take heed (as Photius
excellently expresses it) lest we be good at stirring up and provoking the
envy and rage of our adversary; but naught at resisting and overcoming him by
patience and perseverance to the end. (...).

But if we must needs weep for the loss of something here, let it be for the
afflictions of the people of God. Let us mourn to see the Church sit like a
widow in her black garments. Let it pity us to see the blood of Gods servants
shed like water upon the ground. If our own sins do not trouble us, let us weep
to see the wickedness of the world, and let our eyes run down with tears, to
think that men do not keep Gods Law. Some such channel we should cut for our
tears, and not let them spend themselves on this fashion about our own personal
troubles. This is a method both to stop our tears, and likewise to make them
useful to us while they run. It is a way to ease us of our present grief, and
of all others also. We shall exchange that sorrow that would have troubled us,
for a great deal of joy and comfort. Whereas our worldly grief would have left
the heart sad, this will leave it light and merry. III. The life of our Lord
Jesus gives us the greatest comfort against death.


Believe thoroughly that the Lord Jesus lives, and so thou may both expect a
resurrection from the dead, and likewise hope for comfort from him when thou
art left sad and desolate. The body it self does not die any more than corn
does; which dies, that it may live and spring up again with large gain and
advantage. Are we loath to throw the corn into the ground, and do we not
patiently expect till the harvest comes? Why should we then bury our friends
with so many tears, seeing they are but laid in the Womb of their mother again,
that by the power of God they may have a better birth? The Heathen could say
much to comfort themselves, but they knew not this comfort; for indeed they
were rather contented, than comforted. Those that did think themselves most
wise, and judged that they had the best supports, did only dream that the soul
make take another body, and shift its place at several times: But we know that
there will be a time, when even our scattered ashes will fly into one another
embraces again; and a new life will breath into our dust, and make it stand
upon its feet. And then in the mean time, if our condition be never so sad, and
we be left at alone; why do we not solace our selves in the great compassion of
our High Priest, who has a feeling of all our miseries which we endure? Can we
expect that ever he should love us more than when we are like unto him in
sufferings? We should be so far from being sad at what befalls us, that we
should think, if our condition was a little worse, we should be more dear unto
him than now we are, when nothing extraordinary is happened to us. No man can be
alone as long as he lives who has said, I will not leave you comfortless like
fatherless children, I will come to you. Did not he bid his Disciples to be
well content, when he himself dyed? Did he not leave his peace with them, and
bid them that their hearts should not be troubled? And what is the death of one
of our friends, to the departure of the best friend to the world that ever was,
from his little flock of friends? Did not Christ know what he said, when he was
going to die? Did he advise them not to be troubled, when it was impossible
that they should be otherwise? And if they were not to be troubled then, I am
sure we have less reason to be troubled now; both because we have a less loss
to bewail, and we have a stronger and more excellent comfort against our loss.
Our friends are as much below him, as his state in the grave was beneath that
to which he is now advanced in the Heavens. Their hearts were not to be
troubled when He that is the Lover of the world was held in the chains of
death, because they knew that he would loose them; Why then should we be
disturbed for the death of one that loves us only, when we know that Christ is
risen, and that he is in the Heavens; Angels, Authorities, and Powers being
made subject to him. If an Angel was necessary for our comfort, we should not
want his Ministry. He is so full of Love and compassion toward us, that if he
did not think he had left Cordials enough to support us, he would come himself
to cheer us, and raise our friend, as he did Lazarus, from the dead. But now we
may well live in hope, and he has given us strong consolution and good hope
through grace. Let us have patience but a little, and we shall not be capable
of mourning any more; All tears shall be wiped off from our eyes, sighing and
sorrow shall fly away.

SECT. IX. The Conclusion. Which contains an advice to those that are in love
with sorrow. And an advice for the reaping profit by this Book. And a brief
recapitulation of the chief matters in it.
Let no man therefore be in Love with tears.
REmember then I beseech you, whosoever you are that cast your eyes on these
lines, what I said at the beginning. Take heed you do not indulge your selves
in your tears. Est enim and dolendi quaedam ambitio, for there is a certain
ambition even in mourning, and men think that they shall be the better thought
of for their grief. But assure your selves, that if we study to exceed one
another in grief, it is but just with God that we should never want misery
enough, seeing we are so ambitious of it. If we will mourn immoderately, when
he would have us to be patient; we shall not keep our selves patient, when
perhaps there is little or no cause to mourn. When the air is disposed to rain,
it is a long time before we can recover fair weather; and every little cloud
will fall a Weeping, which at another time would have been dry and barren. And
just so it is with those that strive to gather as many clouds as they can to
overcast them, and make them sad. It is so long before they can disperse them
all, that every little thing renews their grief; as if a cheerful day should
never shine upon them more.

It was a very handsome device that one of the Ancient Philosophers used to
comfort Arsinoe, when he observed her to Weep immoderately for her Sons death.
Let me entreat you said he, to lend me your patience till I tell you this
story: On a time Jupiter conferred honor upon all the lesser Gods or divine
Powers, and there was none of them wanting but only Sorrow. When all the rest
were gone away rejoicing, she came and begged some honor also with many tears
and entreaties. Jupiter having conferred all honors that were worth any thing
upon the other Heavenly Powers, He grand to her all that which men bestow upon
their dead friends ( viz. grief and tears) as best befitting her quality. Now
all these little Deities (said this wise man) do love those most that love and
honor them, and so does Sorrow also. They bestow most of their gifts on their
Votaries, and those that pay them constant services, and they care not for
those that observe none of their ceremonies. If you therefore bestow no honor
upon Sorrow, then she will not love you, nor come to you: But if you studiously
seek how to please her, and honor her by tears and lamentations, and all such
sad things that are the offices wherein she delights; she will be in Love with
you, and you shall never want her company, nor be without occasions of doing
continual honor to her. She will be continually supplying thee with tears to
pour upon her Altar, and filling thee with sighs, which are the incense which
she loves thou should evaporate toward Heaven. By this Art the wise man staid
her tears; for she knew that he meant, that if we give way to grief we shall
never want it: and much more if we seek for arguments to aggravate it, it will
stick so fast unto us, that it will never forsake us. Though love and respect
to our friends, and the natural affection which distinguishes us from beasts,
do allow and require moderate sorrow and sadness of our spirit; yet an
intemperate grief and afflicting of our souls is uncreasonable, for it does
them no good: and it is unnatural; for it does both our body and mind abundance
of harm, and let me add likewise, that it is unchristian, and argues that we
have little hope in God either for our selves or others. God has done us the
honor to make us Priests unto himself; and you know it was the Law for the
Priests, that none of them should mourn for a dead friend, unless he was of
their nearest kindred; And therefore let us take heed how we make our selves
unclean for the dead, by Weeping so, that we should unfit our selves for any
Christian service, which God has appointed us for our constant employment. Can
you mourn and praise God too? Can you pour our your souls to God, while you
pour out these tears of grief? Can you pray in faith for other things, and not
be able to believe that you can live without a friend? Can you read seriously,
when your eyes are sore with the sharpness of your sorrow? Can you meditate of
heavenly things, while your thoughts are filled with the images of such doleful
objects? If not; know that you defile your Priesthood, and that you must
instantly cleanse your selves, that you may be fit continually to offer up
spiritual sacrifices unto God.

And for a conclusion of this discourse, remember what I said in the former
Treatise, That you must lay these foundations and grounds of comfort within
your selves, He must write these things in his heart, who would find the
comfort of them.
or else you will always be troubled. It is something within us that must
satisfy our minds, and not the enjoyment of any outward good; and therefore we
must work these principles into our hearts, for even They if they be without
us, will not profit. We either think it is the thing we want which will cure
us, when as it is without us; or else that we have reasons enough to comfort
us, when as alas! we want them also, because we let them lie without us, and
have them not in our minds. We have more ways than one to abuse and deceive
our selves. At first we think that if we had what our hearts desire at this
present, we should never be disquieted: And when by reason and experience we
find it otherwise, then we make a great many good principles upon which to rest
our souls, but they are at a great distance also from our hearts; and when we
should use them, they are none of our own no more than any thing in this world.

Let these two things then settle themselves in our minds, which will lead us
into the right way of fortifying our souls both against this and all other
trouble. First, Never think that the things which thou want will cure thee;
for they will rather make the wound wider, and enlarge thy wants. The more we
have, the more we desire still to have; and the way to think we have enough, is
not to desire to have too much. It is very well observed by Plutarch, (...).
that it seems to us as if our clothes did give us heat, when as they are cold
of themselves, and in a great heat we shift our clothes to make us cool. Just
so do men think, that the things without them will afford them content; and
that if they had a sumptuous house, and had riches at command, and were
encompassed with servants, and had their friends to bear them company, they
should live most sweetly and deliciously; when as experience teaches us, that
we are still desirous of some change in one thing or other about us. It is the
heat of our own bodies that keeps us warm, which our clothes do only contain
and keep in, that it may not fly abroad, and disperse in the air: and so is it
the liveliness and strength of our own spirit that must make us live merrily,
and which gives all the pleasure and grace to these outward things which
minister to our comfort. They can only help to maintain and increase our
delights; but our delight must arise from a more certain cause within our
selves. Add one heap of riches to another, build great houses, invite to thy
self friends and lovers; unless thou do free thy self from thy own desires,
unless thou do put an end to thy fears and cares, and such like things, thou
do but like him that administers Wine to a man in a Feavour, or Honey to a
Choleric person, or meat to him that is troubled with the Colic; which do
not strengthen, but destroy them. The less we have, the better it is, unless we
desire but a little. And therefore it is of absolute necessity, that we form to
our selves such strong principles as will moderate our desires, and make them
reasonable. But then let me tell you in the second place, That a good Book, and
a Treatise of the Principles of Contentment may be without us as well as any
thing else. We think that we have good reasons of being quiet which will
comfort us upon all occasions. But where are they? In our Book? That is no more
ours, than our money that bought it, unless the Book be in our heart. We must
labor to write these truths on our souls, and turn them into the reason of our
minds. Things of faith we must make as if they were things of reason: and
things of reason we must make as sensible as if they beat continually upon our
eyes and ears. Let us color and die our souls with these notions, or else they
will do us but little good. If this Book lie by us, and not in us, it will be
little better than wast Paper. (...), Arrian. L 2. cap. 9.
etc. says Epictetus. For it is one thing to have Bread and Wine in a
Cup-board; and another thing to have them in our body. When they are eaten and
drunk, they turn into flesh and blood, and make us lusty and strong: but when
they lie by us, we think indeed we have them, but they afford us no nourishment
or refreshment at all. Even so it is in these things, If we inwardly digest
them, and turn them (as it were) into the substance of our souls, they will
make us of a lively complexion; but else we may be pale with fear, and pine
away with grief; and it is not their fault, but our own. And as he that does
not eat when he should, may have no stomach when he is weak, but presently
vomit up his food again: So he that minds not these things till he be sick of
his troubles, and in great need of comfort, will find his soul (it is most
likely) very impatient of the remedy, and it will be a trouble to him but to
read that which will quiet him.

Thus I observe it was with a very great man, a person endowed with an
extraordinary measure of wisdom: who rejected himself in a time of sorrow, all
those counsels that he had skilfully administered to others. Julius Scaliger I
mean, who writing to a friend of his to comfor her in her Mourning Epist. 67.
ad Marg. Vitelliam.
, beseeches her to remember, how far it is from common Prudence, Not to lay
down that grief for our own sake, which we have taken up for the sake of
another: and that it is not the part of a sound judgment to accuse the fates
as if they had done us wrong, and to take a severe punishment for it upon our
selves. Consider also, where is that person we Weep for? If in Heaven, what
need is there of our howlings? If in misery, why do we add loss to loss, evil
to evil, and because he is miserable against our will make our selves freely
and willingly miserable? But this above all things I would have you keep in
mind, that you have nothing, which you have not received; and therefore you owe
thanks, even now, for what you had, to him from whom you received it: and ought
not to reproach him for calling home his own. For all the benefits bestowed on
Mortals are like all things here, stand withering, and cannot last for ever:
nay unsteady, inconstant and never equal. If therefore we enjoy any of them, we
must place it among our felicities, that we were owners of it: And when by the
severe Laws of the Universe it is snatched from us, we must refresh our selves
with the remembrance of it, as if it were present, and not vex and torment our
selves, because of its absence. Many things like to these, and perhaps better,
he says he could suggest if he thought it needful. And yet this very
Counselour, I observe, when his turn came to weep, was strangely overcome with
sorrow, for the death of a little son of his; but a child of great hopes. He
cries out lamentably, and bewailes himself without measure, saying, In illo
vivebam, in illo interii Oration in luctu Audesti si ii.
, I lived in him, and in him I dyed. I know he is happy, and therefore I do not
bewail him in my self, but my self in him: by whose fall I am fallen also. I say
I bewail my self, who die a new kind of way, and am killed by another death.
And then reckoning up the arguments whereby his friends studied to comfort him
(the very same wherewith he thought he could comfort others) he despises them
all, as not worth a straw; telling them, that they expressed indeed a great
deal of humanity to him, but not much wisdom. For his loss was so
incomparable, that there was no hope he should ever cease to lament it. In this
I believe he found himself happily mistaken: For time which ends all things,
will end our grief, though we strive never so obstinately to hinder it. His
proceeding is slow (as one speaks) but the effect is infallible. But we may
learn by such examples as this the necessity of concocting our own thoughts,
and settling our selves upon our own rules and prescriptions. Otherwise we shall
be in danger (as he pathetically expresses his misery) to celebrate the
obsequies of our friends in a sadder manner than the Heathen did. For they
sacrificed to their Ghosts only with the blood of Beasts; but we shall offer up
to their memory, all our counsels, and be at the charge of losing our very
Reason.

A recapitulation of the chief things that have been said.
Meditate therefore seriously of what has been said. Think that you are not
losers by your friends gains, and that there is no reason to be sorrowful when
they are filled with joy. We love our selves indeed better than we do them, and
are troubled at our own loss, not at theirs; but then if the loss be our own,
we can tell better how to repair it. This is our comfort; that it is in our own
hands to ease our selves, if we be the cause of our own trouble. Consider often
that it is as natural to die as it is to be born, That God gives us every thing
upon this condition, that we should be content to give it up again when he
pleases to call for it. That God is a loving Father, and does every thing for
the best. That he would have us love him more, when he leaves us nothing else
to love. That nothing can be dismally sad, which by his grace and our care may
be turned into joy. That we ought to turn our sorrow into care, lest there be
something worse to sorrow for; even the sin of our immoderate sorrow. That we
ought to live so, that we may comfort our selves with hope we shall see our
friends again that die in the Lord. That seeing we must die too, and others
must weep for us; by our life we must leave them something to comfort them, in
hope that we are better, than if we were with them. We must often consider how
much of our grief depends on mere fancy, and not on things. We were perhaps at
a great distance from our friends while they lived, and did but seldom see
them. The case is not much altered now that they are dead. If we have sustained
a loss, we do but double it by losing our own quiet and comfort also. And yet
there is more cause of thankfullness than of repining; both that we had them so
long, and also that God has taken away only them. Our grief at last must
cease; and that which will end it then, may end it now. Or if it must end it
self by its own weariness, it is a shame that Religious reason cannot do more
than mere length of time can do. It is but as we our selves would have it, who
would have been loath to have died first. Or else it is as they would have it,
who would have been loath to have outlived us, and been so sad as we make it
necessary to be. They are not quite gone away, but only gone before. And by
sorrow we may tread too fast upon their heels. Let us henceforth place our
chiefest comfort in God; for if one be taken away, then so may another. There
will be every day new matter of trouble; and unless we be better provided
against it, we shall be every day miserable. This world is the place of sorrow;
and therefore seeing there are things enough to trouble us, let it not be our
work to create trouble to our selves. Trouble is a thing that will come without
our call; but true joy will not spring up without our selves. If any sorrow
should oppress us, it must be for our sins. And when we mourn for them, let us
be sorrowful we were no more thankful for such enjoyments as we have now lost.
Let these tears also teach us to take off our affections from worldly things;
all the pleasure of whose possession is scarce big enough to compensate the
trouble of parting with them. And above all, remember that Jesus dyed and
entered into the Grave, as well as we; and that by his Resurrection he has
opened the gate to immortal life; and is in glory at Gods right hand; and
expects your coming thither where he is, out of this calamitous place, and
that, in the mean time, you should not disparage your hope in him, by
impatience under the loss of any other thing. And then your wisdom to
distinguish the value of this world from the next; and your Religious fear to
offend our merciful Father, and lose his blessing, by repining at what he does:
will undoubtedly preserve you, from all inordinate and undutiful sorrow, be the
cause of it never so great.

FINIS.

