A COMMENTARY UPON THE Fourth Book of MOSES, CALLED NUMBERS.

BY The Right Reverend Father in GOD, SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

A COMMENTARY UPON NUMBERS.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE Fourth Book of MOSES, CALLED NUMBERS.
CHAP. I.
NVMBERS in our Language; because it begins with an Account of the Numbering of
the People in the beginning of the second Year after they came out of Egypt:
though it contain a great many things besides that; particularly, another
Numbering of them ( Chapter XXVI.) toward the conclusion of their Travels in
the Wilderness. For this Book comprehends an History of about thirty eight
Years; though the most of the things related in it fell out in the first, and
in the last of these Years: and it does not appear when those things were done,
which we read of about the middle of the Book, from the XVth to the XXth
Chapter.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses.] Who undertook nothing without order from God.

In the Wilderness of Sinai.] Where they had continued near a full Year, (as
appears by comparing XIX Exodus 1. with this place) and shortly after this
removed from it, X. 11.

In the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] From whence the LORD delivered those
Laws which we read in the foregoing Book, (See on I Lev. 1.) and now seems to
have admitted him into the Tabernacle; whereas before he only spoke to him out
of it.

On the first day of the second Month, in the second year after they were come
out of the Land of Egypt.] All that is related in the foregoing Book, seems to
have passed in the first Month of the second Year after their coming out of
Egypt. In the beginning of which the Tabernacle was set up, XL Exodus 2, 17. and
in the middle of it the Passover was kept, as appears by this Book, IX. 1, 2,
etc.

Take ye the sum.] There had been a Muster, as we may call it, of the People,
before the Tabernacle was erected, XXX Exodus 12. and consequently some Months
before this: for it was in order to a Contribution, which every one was to make
toward that holy work, XXXVIII Exodus 26. Whereas this was for the better
disposing of their Camps about the Tabernacle now that it was set up: and for
their more regular march when they removed from Mount Sinai; which they were to
do shortly.

Of all the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] Who alone were numbered;
all except the Levites: but none of the mixed Multitude, that came with them out
of Egypt, XII Exodus 38.

After their Families.] It appears by VII Joshua 16, 17, etc. that the several
Tribes of Israel were divided into Families; and those Families into Households;
and those Households had every one of them an Head or Chief; who is called the
Father of it. There were LXX. of these Families in all: but some Tribes had
more, others fewer; according to the number of Souls (as they are called) that
is, Persons who were in each when they went down into Egypt, XLVI Genesis 27.

By the House of their Fathers.] Every Family, as I said, being distributed
into Houses, (which we now call Families) these Houses were denominated from
their Chief, whom they called their Father: For no Houses were denominated from
the Mother, as the Jews say.

With the number of their Names.] The Names of every Person in the several
Houses, were set down and registered; that they might be the better known.

Every Male by their pole.] But no Women; for the reason which follows.

Ver. 3. From twenty years old and upward.] Which

All that are able to go forth to war in Israel.] One would think by this, they
were not to number very aged and decrepit People: because they were no more
able to go to war, than Women and Children, and those under twenty years old.
And if we may believe Josephus (L. II. Antiq. cap. 9.) after fifty Years old,
Men were not bound to pay the half Shekel which was due in such Musters: and
therefore we may reasonably think were excused from going to war; unless they
had a mind themselves.

Thou and Aaron.] Who had the highest Authority in the Nation.

Shall number them by their Armies.] This seems to import, that in taking the
account of them, they distributed them into certain Troops or Companies; out of
which were formed Regiments (as we now speak) and greater regular Bodies, which
composed several Armies: We do not read this was required in the former
numbering, (XXX Exodus.) that being for another end, as I now observed; not for
their more orderly march, in their remove from Mount Sinai. And here I cannot
but take notice what a vast difference there was between this method, and that
rude way which Cecrops the first King of Attica after the Ogygian Flood (which
happened about the time of Moses) took to know the number of his People: which
the Greek Writers say, was by requiring every one of them to bring a Stone,
(...), and throw it down before them; which he counting, found them Twenty
thousand. So the Scholiast upon Pindar. Od. IX. and others in Meursius de
Regibus Atheniens. L. I. cap. 7.

And there shall be with you a Man of every Tribe.] Whom they were to take for
their Assistants.

Every one Head of the House of his Fathers.] The LXX. and the Vulgar
understand this to signify the principal Persons in each Tribe; who were best
acquainted with every Family and Household in that Tribe. And so it is expounded
v. 6. And many think these were the Firstborn in their Tribe. But there is
this Objection against it, That Nahshan, who is named for the Tribe of Judah,
v. 7. was not descended from the Firstborn of that Tribe. For Pharez was not
Judah's eldest Son; Selah being before him: who had Children, as we find XXVI
of this Book, v. 20. Besides, when the Princes of the Tribes rre reckoned again
(XXXIV of this Book) in the last Year of their abode in the Wilderness; none of
them are derived from these Men here mentioned, but from others. And therefore
these were the most eminent Men in the several Tribes, upon a different
account; either for Wisdom, or Valor, or some other excellent quality.

Ver. 5. And these are the Names of the Men that shall Be Assistants.

With you.] i. e. With Moses and Aaron.

Of the Tribe of Reuben, Elizur the Son of Shedeur.] There is little to be
observed concerning these Tribes, but that they are here placed, not in the
order of their Birth; but of their Mothers who bare them. First, the Children
of Leah: who are all reckoned in the same order, wherein they were born of her,
ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. Then the Children of Rachel, v. 10, 11. And after them the
Children of the two Handmaids, in the four following Verses. Where, v. 12. Dan
is set first; he being the Firstborn of Bilhah; whom Rachel gave Jacob for his
Wife, XXX Genesis 5. But then, the next that follow are not reckoned according to
the order of their Birth: for Naphtali who was born next, is placed the last;
and the youngest Son of Zilpah placed before the eldest. For which we cannot
now discern the reason; though it is likely it was upon the account of some
Pre-eminence or other which they had gained; as Ephraim the youngest Son of
Joseph is mentioned before Manasseh the eldest, ( v. 10.) because Jacob had
given him the precedence, when he blessed them before his Death, XLVIII. 19.

Of Simeon, Shelumiel the Son of Zurishaddai.] There is less to be observed
concerning the Names of these great Men of each Tribe; for whatsoever the
import of them may be in the Hebrew Language, (which Chytraeus and others have
endeavored to make out) it signifies nothing to us: Only most of them show how
much God was in the Thoughts of those, who imposed these Names on their
Children: for Elizur signifies my God the Rock; and Shelumiel is as much, as
God my Peace, or God my Rewarder: and Zurishaddai, my Rock Omnipotent, or
All-sufficient, etc.

The Son of Deuel.] So he is called also VII. 42. and yet in the second
Chapter, v. 14. he is called the Son of Revel. For these two Letters, Daleth
and Resch, are very often changed, the one for the other: As Ripath, X Genesis 3.
is called Dipath, 1 Chronicles. I. 6. As on the other hand Dodanim, X Genesis 4. is
called Rodanim, 1 Chronicles. I. 7. And it is to no purpose to heap up more Examples
there are of this.

These were the renowned of the Congregation. The Hebrew word Keruim signifies
properly Men called or named; that is, who had the Honor to be named by God to
this Employment: which made them more noble than they were before. But, without
this respect to their Nomination by God, this word signifies in general famous
Men, as we translate it, XVI. 2. XXVI. 9. or renowned, XXIII Ezekiel. 23.
accordingly the vulgar translates it, most noble.

Princes of the Tribes of their Fathers.] As appears more plainly from the
noble Offerings, which each of them made, for the Dedication of the Altar,
Chap. VII.

Heads of thousands in Israel.] Men not only of great Authority; such as Jethro
advised Moses to take to his Aid in governing the People, XVIII Exodus 21. but
the highest of that Rank; being chief Commanders over all the Thousands, that
were in their several Tribes; under whom no doubt were many inferior Officers
of great account. For so all People have found it necessary, to submit
themselves to the Government of some Supreme Power; with several subordinate
Rulers under it. In which Israel excelled all other Nations, being under the
Government of God himself; who appointed Moses immediately under him, with
several others, as we here find, to assist him. For it is truly observed by
Xenophon, that (...): Nothing is either so profitable for Men, or so becoming,
as good Order: And on the contrary, nothing so mischievous, or unseemly, as
Confusion. Now Order is nothing else, but the apt Disposition of every thing,
in its proper place; for certain Ends and Uses. Accordingly among Men, nothing
is more necessary, than that every one should know and keep his place, in that
Degree and Rank that belongs to him: As was here ordered by God for the
Preservation and good Government of his People.

Ver. 17. And Moses and Aaron took these Men.] To

Which are expressed by their Names.] Whom God himself marked out by name, to
be joined with them. For as People cannot be preserved without Order; so that
cannot be preserved without Rulers and Governors: and they will signify
nothing if their Authority be not reverenced; and nothing can gain them such
Reverence, as a particular Designation by God to their Office.

And they assembled all the Congregation together on the first Day of the
second Month.] They immediately executed their Commission, on the same day they
received it, ( v. 1.) summoning all the People to appear before them.

And they declared their Pedigrees.] The People instantly obeyed; and every one
showed from whom he was descended; or it may refer to Moses and Aaron, and the
rest who set down every Man's Original, in the public Tables.

After their Families, by the house of their Fathers, etc.] First they showed
of what Family they were; and then of what House in that Family; and then the
Name of every Person in that House was given in. See v. 2. Such a kind of
Distinction Cecrops made in Attica, when he numbered the People; whom he
divided into four Tribes, (which in the days of Alcmaeon their last King, were
increased into ten;) every one of which had several People in it, which were
like the Families in Israel: there being no less than ten or eleven People in
that Tribe which was called after his own Name, (...). See Meursius, L. I. de
Reg. Athen. cap. 7. and Lib. II. cap. X. And every one knows how Rome at the
first had three Tribes instituted by Romulus, which were divided into ten
Courts, (if I may so call them) and those into certain Families: which in
aftertimes were increased into Five and thirty Tribes; according to the
Regions of the City.

Ver. 19. As the LORD commanded Moses, so he With the assistance of the
forenamed Persons.

In the Wilderness of Sinai.] Before they removed from Sinai: which being upon
the Twentieth Day of this Month, (X. 11.) they finished this Work in so many
Days, or less.

Ver. 20. And the Children of Reuben, Isreal's eldest etc.] The word Generations
seems to be larger than Families; as that is than Houses: comprehending every
Family in that Tribe; as Families comprehend every Household; and Household
comprehends every Person therein. So the meaning is, all that were descended
from Reuben, according to their several Families; and Houses in those Families;
and Persons in those Houses.

Ver. 21. Those that were numbered of them, etc. were Some have observed that
this Tribe was one of those who had the smallest number of Men in it: in which
they think was fulfilled the Prophecy of Jacob, who foretold that Reuben should
not excel, XLIX Genesis 4. But I do not look upon this as solid; for there were
several Tribes, who all this time had fewer Persons in it than this.
Particularly the Children of Joseph, (whom Jacob compared to a fruitful Bough,
XLIX Genesis 22.) were very much fewer. See below v. 33, 35. Gad also, Benjamin,
and Asher, were fewer in number than Reuben: who, in this regard, excelled Five
Tribes.

Ver. 23. Of the Tribe of Simeon were fifty and nine thousand, and three
hundred.] He had six Children when they went down into Egypt; and Reuben but

Of the Children of Gad, etc.] It is probable that this Tribe is therefore
mentioned next, though descended from an Handmaid, because they were to encamp
and march together with Simeon under the Standard of Reuben: as is ordered in
the next Chapter, v. 14.

Of the Tribe of Gad were forty and five thousand, six hundred and fifty.] He
had more Sons than Simeon, (XLVI Genesis 10, 16.) when they came out of Egypt: and
yet fewer descended from him, by many Thousands, than there did from Simeon: of
which the Reason does not appear.

Of the Tribe of Judah were threescore and fourteen thousand, and six hundred.]
It may be justly thought, that Jacob's Prophecy concerning the power and
strength of this Tribe, (XLIX Genesis 8, etc.) began already to be fulfilled: they
being far more numerous than any other.

Of the Tribe of Issachar, etc.] There is a plain account why this Tribe and
Zebulun are mentioned next to Judah; because they two marched under his
Standard, II. 4, 5, 7. It may be observed also, that these two Tribes were more
numerous, than many other; who had more Children when they came out of Egypt.

Of the Children of Ephraim.] He had the pre-eminence given him to Manasseh
long ago, (XLVIII Genesis 19.) and therefore is here placed before him.

Ver. 33. Of the Tribe of Ephraim were forty thousand and five hundred.] Though
they were hitherto but few in comparison with some other Tribes; yet in this
the Prophecy of Jacob was fulfilled, (XLVIII Genesis 19, 20.) that they were more
fruitful than Manasseh: there being above Eight thousand Persons more in this
Tribe, than in the other, v. 35.

Ver. 35. Of Manasseh were thirty and two thousand This was now the smallest
Tribe; but before they got to Canaan, they grew very numerous; being increased
above Twenty thousand, XXVI. 34.

Ver. 37. Of the Tribe of Benjamin were thirty five Though Benjamin had more
Children than any of the rest of his Brethren, when they went down into Egypt,
(XLVI Genesis 21. where it appears he had ten Sons) yet his Tribe had the fewest
Men in it of all other, except Manasseh.

Ver. 39. Of Dan were threescore and two thousand On the contrary Dan, who had
but one Son, when they went down into Egypt, (XLVI Genesis 23.) grew to a greater
Number than any other Tribe, except Judah. So variously did the Divine
Providence work, in fulfilling the Promise to Abraham, of multiplying his Seed.

Ver. 41. Of Asher were forty and one thousand and The growth of this Tribe was
not proportionable to that of some other, considering how many Children Asher
had, at their going down into Egypt. But they increased near Twelve thousand
more, before they got out of the Wilderness, XXVI. 47.

Ver. 43. Of Naphtali were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.] The
great increase of this Tribe is alleged by Bochartus, to justify his
Interpretation Genesis 21. by altering the punctation of the words. But I have
there observed, that Five other Tribes were more numerous than Naphtali, when
this account was taken of them.

These are those that were numbered.] This is the account that was taken of the
Number of Men in each Tribe.

Which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the Princes of Israel being twelve Men.] V.
3, 4, etc.

Each one was for the House of his Fathers.] Who could the better judge to what
Tribe every one belonged.

So were all those that were numbered, etc. Six hundred thousand and three
thousand and five hundred and fifty.] By which it appears there was not one Man
dead since their last Numeration, (Seven Months ago) when they were taxed for
the Tabernacle. For they were at that time, just so many as are here mentioned,
XXXVIII Exodus 26. As for Nadab and Abihu, they were of the Tribe of Levi; who
are not here reckoned: and the Man that was stoned for Blasphemy, (XXIV Lev.)
was not of Israel, by the side of his Father.

But the Levites, after the Tribe of their Fathers, were not numbered among
them.] There was no account taken of them among the other Tribes: as it is
likely they were not comprehended in the former Number, XXXVIII Exodus 26. being
the Persons who took the account, v. 21. and had before this consecrated
themselves to the LORD, XXXII. 29.

After the Tribe of their Fathers.] Is an Hebraism, for the Fathers of their
Tribe: Expressing in short, what is at large said of all the rest, by their
Generations, after their Families, by the House of their Fathers, v. 20, 22,
24, etc.

Ver. 48. For the LORD had spoken unto Moses, He had received an Order from
God, when he commanded him to number the People, not to number them. Which he
sets down, that it might not be thought he favored them, because he was of
their Tribe; and therefore exempted them from the Wars, unto which all others
were engaged.

Ver. 49. Only thou shall not number the Tribe of Levi, Exodus.) but God did not
design them for the Wars of Canaan; they having employment enough in carrying,
and guarding the Tabernacle.

And from this Example, the Heathen learnt to exempt all those who ministered to
their Gods, from all other Services; particularly from the War. Strabo notes
(Lib. IX. Geograph.) this Custom to have been as old as Homer's time. For in
all his Catalogue there is no mention of any Ship that went against Troy from
Alalcomenon; because that City was Sacred to Minerva: who is thence called by
Homer (...). The same is observed by Caesar (Lib. VI.) of the ancient Druids,
that they were freed from the Wars; and from Tribute also. Which Privilege St.
Basil challenges as belonging to the Clergy, (...), according to the ancient
Law, Epist. CCLXIX. and S. Greg. Nazianzen does the same in many places:
particularly by his Letter to Julianus, Epist. CLXVI.

But thou shall appoint the Levites over the Tabernacle.] This was their work
to attend continually upon the House of God.

Of Testimony.] So it is called, because the Ark of the Testimony was there:
for which it was principally made. See XXXVIII Exodus 21. and what I have noted
upon XXV Exodus 16. XL. 3.

And over all the Vessels thereof, and over all things that belong unto it.]
Not to use them in any Sacred Ministry, (which belonged to the Priests alone)
but to carry them, when they were to be removed; and to keep them in Safety at
all times. See VIII. ult. Where it is expressly said, they shall do no Service
there.

They shall bear the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels therefore.] As is
particularly directed in the fourth Chapter.

And they shall minister unto it.] Which Ministry is at large described in the
third Chapter.

And shall encamp round about the Tabernacle.] As a Guard unto it: They being
like to the Legions about the Palace of a great King, to secure and defend it
from Violence or Rudeness. Which was the reason that they did not march under
any of the Standards of the other Tribes: because they were to make a Camp by
themselves; the order of which is directed in the same third Chapter. And for
the same reason they were not to go to the Wars; because their Camp was to
attend upon the Tabernacle, the House of God.

Ver. 51. And when the Tabernacle sets forward, the Levites shall take it
down; and when it is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up.] When the
Israelites removed to a new station, the Tabernacle was fourth Chapter. Where
the manner of taking it down, and setting it up again is directed; and every
ones Office about it, whether Priests (for they had some hand in it) or
Levites, exactly appointed.

And the Stranger.] Who is not of this Tribe; though an Israelite.

That comes nigh.] To perform any of the forenamed Offices.

Shall be put to death.] As a presumptuous Person, in meddling with that which
does not belong unto him. The Author of Schebet Jehudah extends this to all
Strangers, who worshipped strange Gods: and says there was a Golden Sword hung
up in the Gate of the Temple, with this Inscription, The Stranger that comes
nigh, shall be put to death.

Ver. 52. And the Children of Israel.] The rest of the

Shall pitch their Tents every Man by his own Camp, etc.] In the order
prescribed, in the next Chapter.

Ver. 53. But the Levites shall pitch round about the As is directed Chap. III.
where they are ordered to make a Camp nearer the Tabernacle; within the other
Camp of the Israelites.

That there be no Wrath upon the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] To
prevent the other Camp of the Israelites, from coming too nigh the Tabernacle;
whereby they might have incurred God's Displeasure.

And the Levites shall keep the Charge of the Tabernacle of Testimony.] That
is, therefore they were to be a constant guard about it; that no Man might
approach nearer than God allowed; and so bring heavy Punishments upon himself,
and upon the Congregation.

And the Children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses,
so did they.] Consented to all that is here required, and did accordingly.

CHAP. II.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying.] The just number of Days that
were spent, in taking the forenamed Account of the People, is uncertain, (see
I. 19.) but that being finished, now order is given for their Encamping under
their several Standards. And it is directed to Aaron as well as Moses; though
the Order for numbering them was directed to Moses only, (Chap. I. 1.) Aaron
having by that first Order been joined with him, in taking the Account of them.

Every Man of the Children of Israel shall pitch by his own Standard.] By the
Banner of that Tribe; to which he was joined by the following Order.

With the Ensign of their Fathers House.] Every Family and Household had their
particular Ensigns, beside that great Banner under which they encamped and
marched: it being pitched and carried (as will appear) in the midst of them.
How these Banners and Ensigns were distinguished one from another, we have no
certain Knowledge. The later Jews say (particularly Aben Ezra upon this place)
that Judah carried in his Standard the Figure of a Lion; and Reuben the Figure
of a Man; Ephraim of an Ox; and Dan of an Eagle: for which I can see no ground.
For though Judah be compared to a Lion; yet the Reasons he gives for the other
are very absurd: with which I shall not trouble the Reader. But only observe
that there is not one word of any such thing in their ancient Writers; no not
in the whole body of the Talmud; as the famous Bochartus assures us. And it is
not likely that they who so lately smarted for making the Golden Calf, would
adventure to make any other Images, and expose them to the Eyes of all the
People. Nor is it impertinent to observe that when Vitellius in after-ages was
to march against the Arabians through Judaea, the great Men of the Nation met
him, and beseeched him to march another way: The Law of their Country not
allowing Images (such as were in the Roman Ensigns) to be brought into it. So
Josephus relates, L. XVIII. Antiq. cap. 7. for which one can see no reason, if
their Ancestors in the Wilderness, had by the Command or Allowance of Moses
carried an Eagle in any of their Standards. See Bochart in his Hieroz. P. I. L.
III. C. V. It is more probable, if there be room for Conjecture in this matter,
that the Name of Judah might be embroidered in great Letters, in his Standard,
and of Reuben in his; and so of the rest; or they were distinguished by their
Colors only, as now our Regiments are.

Far off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch.] At such a
distance as might show their Reverence to the Tabernacle; and that there might
be another Camp of the Levites within them: who made a nearer Enclosure about
it, in the same Form with the Camp of Israel, which was Quadrangular. This
Distance of the Camp of Israel from the Tabernacle, is reasonably judged (by
III Josh. 4.) to have been Two thousand Cubits: That is, a Mile.

And on the East Side toward the rising of the Sun.] These are two Expressions
(after the manner of the Hebrews) for the same thing. Or Kedma, which we here
translate on the East, may be translated on the fore part, viz. of the
Tabernacle: Which was toward the Sun's Rising.

Shall they of the Standard of the Camp of Judah pitch.] These had the most
honorable Post (as we now speak) of all others; pitching before the most holy
Place; where Moses and Aaron had their Station in the Camp of the Levites, III.
38. And therefore the LXX translate the first Words of this Verse thus, (...),
etc. they that encamp first toward the East, shall be, etc.

Throughout their Armies.] They being, as we read before, (and as the next
Verse tells us again) Threescore and fourteen thousand, and six hundred Men,
were divided into several bodies (such as we now call Companies, and Regiments,
and Brigades) under their several Officers: for which the Hebrews have no name
but that of Army, or Host.

And Nahshon the Son of Amminadab. He who was employed as the principal Person
in that Tribe, to help to take the number of them, I. 7.

Shall be the Captain of the Children of Judah.] Their Commander in Chief; or
General, as we now speak.

Ver. 4. And his Host, and those that were numbered of etc.] Hitherto Moses had
set down the Words that God spoke to him: But these are his own Words, which he
intermixes all along with those of God's.

Ver. 5. And those that do pitch next unto him.] These Judah.

Shall be the Tribe of Issachar.] He and Zebulun were two of the Sons of Leah,
as well as Judah: And therefore their Tribes are fitly placed under the
Standard of the Tribe of Judah; as likely to agree well together.

And Nethaneel the Son of Zur shall be Captain of the Children of Issachar.] It
may be noted, once for all, that the Commanders in Chief of the several Tribes,
were those very Persons who were chosen to take the number of them. Which shows
they were Men of Eminence among them, as I observed, I. 4.

Ver. 6. And his Host, and those that were numbered etc.] These are the Words of
Moses, which to the end of the Chapter (as I noted before) are interspersed
with the Orders that God gave for the forming of their Camp.

Ver. 9. And all that were numbered in the Camp of etc.] This was the greatest
Body of all other; which had the Honor to be placed just before the Oracle, as
the strongest Guard to it: The Tribe of Judah lying in the midst, and the
Tribes of Issachar and Zebulun on each side of his Standard; unto which all
their Ensigns were in some sort of Subjection.

Throughout their Armies.] This great Body, was divided into several smaller
Companies; for which they had no other name, (as I observed before) but that of
Armies.

These shall first set forth.] When they removed from one Station to another,
this Camp marched first. For they commonly went Eastward; in which Quarter this
Camp was pitched, v. 3.

And on the South side shall be the Standard of the Camp of Reuben, according
to their Armies, etc.] There is nothing to be observed concerning this Camp;
but that the Tribe of Reuben had the honor to pitch in the midst of it; and
the Tribes of Simeon and Gad lay on either side of him under his Standard or
Banner: just as Issachar and Zebulun did on either side of Judah. And there was
an evident congruity in it, Simeon being his next Brother; and Gad the eldest
Son of Zilpah, the Handmaid of their Mother Leah, XXX Genesis 10, 11.

Eliasaph the Son of Revel. See Note upon I. 14.

And they shall set forth in the second rank.] That is, when they removed, the
Three Tribes that were pitched on the East marched first, under the Banner of
Judah, (as was said before, v. 9.) and then followed these Three that lay on
the South, under the Banner of Reuben.

Then the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall set forward with the Camp of the
Levites.] After the forenamed Camps, the Tabernacle was to follow: between
those two that went before; and the Camp of Ephraim, and the Camp of Dan that
came after. So they did not march, as they lay pitched; for then there was a
Camp on each side of the Tabernacle: Whereas when they marched there was none
on the sides, but two Camps went before it, and two followed it.

In the midst of the Camp.] Not entirely in the midst: for it appears by the
tenth Chapter of this Book, v. 17. that after the first Camp under the Standard
of Judah was gone forward, the Tabernacle was taken down and carried by the
Sons of Gershom and Merari between the Camp of Judah and that of Reuben, which
next followed. And then the Sanctuary set forward, born by the Kohathites, (v.
21.) who marched exactly in the midst, between the Standards of Judah and
Reuben; and the Standards of Ephraim and Dan.

As they encamp so shall they set forward.] This may refer either to the
Levites, the Sons of Kohath; that as they lay encamped on the same side of the
Tabernacle, that the Standard of Reuben did, so they should immediately march
after them. Compare v. 10. of this Chapter with III. 29. Or to the two Camps
forenamed; that they should march in the same order wherein they lay encamped:
Judah, for instance, in the midst of Issachar and Zebulun; before and behind
him; or on each side of him.

Every Man in his place by their Standards.] Every Man keeping his place which
was assigned him, under the Standard to which he belonged; that there might be
no disorder among them.

Ver. 18. And on the West side shall be the Standard of the Camp of Ephraim,
etc.] There is little to be noted here, but that Ephraim is plainly preferred
before Jacob's Blessing, (XLVIII Genesis 19, 20.) and that the two Tribes which
encamped under his Standard, viz. Manasseh, v. 20. and Benjamin, v. 22. are
fitly joined with him: they being all descended from Rachel.

All that were numbered of the Camp of Ephraim were an hundred and eight
thousand, etc.] This was the smallest Body of all the Four.

And they shall go forward in the third rank.] And therefore, though they lay
on the West side, in their Encampment, yet when they marched, they did not go
in the Rear of all; but immediately behind the Tabernacle.

The Standard of the Camp of Dan shall be on the North side, etc.] This Tribe,
we may reasonably think, was advanced to this Dignity, of bearing one of the
four Standards, though they descended from an Handmaid: because Dan was the
eldest of Jacob's Sons of that sort, XXX Genesis 6. and this Tribe was the most
numerous of all others, except Judah, as the foregoing Chapter shows, v. 39.
With whom the Tribes of Asher and Naphtali are fitly joined; being descended
from Handmaids also.

All that were numbered in the Camp of Dan were an hundred and fifty seven
thousand, etc.] This was the greatest Body of Men, except that under the
Standard of Judah, who marched in the Front: and is the reason perhaps why
these are ordered here, in the next words, to bring up the Rear.

They shall go hindmost with their Standards.] Here the Standard comprehends
Ensigns: for there was but one Standard for this Camp, as there were no more
for the other three. Therefore the meaning is, they shall march hindermost
under their several Colors, as we now speak. Which was ordered for the greater
Security of the Sanctuary; by the two strongest Bodies marching before and
behind: where there was the greatest danger.

Ver. 32. These are those which were numbered of the etc.] That is, Thus were
all these Persons disposed under their several Standards; whose Number was
taken by Moses and Aaron, with their Associates, I. 44, 45.

Ver. 33. But the Levites were not numbered among And consequently did not
belong to any of these Standards; being to make another Camp by themselves, I.
47, etc.

Ver. 34. And the Children of Israel did according to As they gave in their
Names when they were to be numbered, I. 54. so they now joined together under
such Standards, as God appointed.

So they pitched by their Standards, and so they set forward, etc.] Each Tribe
encamped under the Standard that was assigned to them; and they also marched,
when they set forward, in such order as is here directed. Some order, no doubt,
had been observed before, both when they rested, and when they marched, (See
XIII Exodus 18.) but it was not so exact and regular as this form, into which
they were now cast by God himself: nor can we think it was so strictly observed.

The Jews say that this Camp made a Square of Twelve Miles in compass about the
Tabernacle; as Dr. Lightfoot has observed in his Centur. Chorogr. CXLVIII. and
J. Wagenseil more lately in his Annotations upon the Gemara of Sota, Cap. 1.
Sect. 51. where several of them say, that the Camp was three Parasots in
compass: and a Parasot was four Miles.

CHAP. III.
THese are the Generations of Aaron and Moses.] Being now to give an account of
the Levites, who had not been numbered with the rest of the Children of Israel,
he sets down the descendants of the principal Persons among them, viz. Aaron
(whom he puts in the first place, because he was the elder Brother, and his
Posterity were advanced to the Dignity of Priests) and Moses; whose Posterity
were only Ministers to the Priests, as all the common Levites were. It may seem
indeed at first fight, as if he gave an account only of Aaron's Posterity, v.
2. But if we look further to v. 27, 28. we shall find the Posterity of both
here numbered, in the Family of the Amramites; of which both Aaron and Moses
were: Amram being their Father; from whom the Genealogy of the Children of
Moses is derived, (1 Chronicles. XXIII. 13, 14, etc.) through their Generations; as
here those of Aaron.

Concerning the word Generations, See Dr. Hammond on the first of St. Matthew,
Not. a.

In the day that the LORD spoke unto Moses in Mount Sinai.] This Circumstance
seems to be particularly specified, because at that time Nadab and Abihu (who
are mentioned in the next Verse) were both alive, and very eminent Persons,
(XXIV Exodus 1, 9, 10.) though they were now dead, at this numbering of the
Levites.

Ver. 2. These are the Names of the Sons of Aaron, etc.] There seems no
necessity of setting down the Names of Aaron's Sons; they not being here to be
numbered. But it was of great Concernment to have the Distinction preserved
between the Priests and the Levites; their Offices being very different: and
therefore Moses here sets down who belonged to the one, and who to the other.

Ver. 3. These are the Names of the Sons of Aaron, See VIII Levit. 30.

Which he consecrated.] In the Hebrew, whose Hand he filled. See XXVIII Exodus
41. XXIX. 9.

To minister in the Priests Office.] He would have it noted, that Aaron's
Posterity were solemnly consecrated to an higher Office than the rest of the
Tribe of Levi; who were to be their Servants. The very name of Cohen carries
Dignity in it; signifying sometime a Prince, as well as a Priest. Accordingly,
the Priests had very little servile Work imposed upon them; but their chief
business was to draw near to God, to present him with the Blood, and the Fat,
and some part of the Sacrifices; which might be killed by other Persons. This
shows that they were God's Familiars; insomuch that some Sacrifices were
divided between him, and them: and it was the same thing, whether they were
consumed on the Alter, or eaten by the Priests: And those things are said to be
given to God, which were put into their hands; though they never came to the
Altar. Which is an Evidence of the near relation they had to the Divine
Majesty, which the Levites had not; for they could not come nigh to offer any
thing to him, no more than the rest of the Israelites: but were employed in
inferior Services about the Tabernacle, that the Priests might wholly attend to
the Service of God at the Altar.

And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, etc.] A little after their
Consecration, X Lev. 1, etc.

And they had no Children.] Which is here recorded, that all Posterity might
know there were none to be admitted to the Office of Priesthood, but such as
could derive their Genealogy from Eleazar or Ithamar. If the other had left any
Sons, they would have inherited their Father's Office, before Eleazar; as
Maimonides observes out of Siphre. See Schickard his Jus Regium, Cap. VI.
Theorem. XX.

And Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the Priests Office, in the sight of their
Father.] The LXX rightly translate it, together with their Father: Who was the
High Priest; and they Lower Priests under him. And so were all their Sons;
which it is likely they had in good number: For they are appointed, v. 38. for
the guard of the Tabernacle toward the East. And thus the Gemara Hieorosol. in
the Title concerning Fasting says, That Moses appointed VIII Classes of
Priests; four of the Family of Eleazar, and as many of Ithamar: which continued
till the time of Samuel the Prophet, and David, who admitted many more. See
Seldom de Success. in Pontif. Cap. I.

Ver. 5. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Now he gives order about the
rest of the Tribe of Levi; who had been omitted in the late Muster.

Ver. 6. Bring the Tribe of Levi near, and present They had consecrated
themselves to God, by a noble Act mentioned XXXII Exodus 29. Which procured them
this Blessing to be presented to God, and consecrated to him in a solemn
manner, for such Services as he should assign them. So this word bring near
signifies, to offer them unto God: As they were VIII. 10, 11.

Before Aaron the Priest.] In his presence.

That they may minister unto him.] Unto Aaron and the rest of the Priests; who
were the immediate Ministers of God; and the Levites were given to minister
unto them. Which they did many ways; especially while they remained in the
Wilderness; where they had a peculiar Charge, (which otherwise would have been
incumbent on the Priests) not only to guard the Tabernacle, and keep a Watch
night and day about it; but also to take it down, and to carry it, when they
removed; and to set it up again when they rested: as we read in the following
part of this Chapter, and in the next. When they came into the Land of Canaan,
and were settled there, they had less to do of this kind: But as the Charge of
the Tabernacle still lay upon them, as it had done before; so did other Works
in the Courts of the LORD'S House, and in the Chambers, where they waited on
the Priests; which are particularly mentioned in 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 28, 29, etc.
And in David's time their Work was still more increased; for he appointed them
to be Singers in the House of the LORD, and to play upon several sorts of
Instruments, 1 Chronicles. XXV. which they did Morning and Evening, 1 Chronicles. XXIII.
30. Porters perhaps there were before, who stood at the several Gates of the
Tabernacle, as afterward of the Temple; and are said therein to minister in the
House of the LORD, 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 12. as also Guards of the Treasury of God's
House, and of things dedicated to him, v. 20. But as he increased the number of
them, so he settled them in their Courses; that there might be a constant
Attendance with greater ease. As for those of them, that were made Judges and
Officers, not only in Matters concerning the LORD, but in the Service of the
King, (as we read there 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 29, 30.) it no more belongs to what is
said of them here, than what follows there, v. 31. that there were found among
them mighty Men of Valor. See upon v. 10.

And they shall keep his Charge, and the charge of the whole Congregation.] It
highly concerned Aaron in particular, and the whole Congregation in general;
that the Tabernacle should be well guarded: And this was the Levites great
business at present; who took this Charge from off their hands, by attending
that Service which all of them were bound to perform.

Before the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] This exactly expresses in what
their Ministry consisted: which was not performed in the Tabernacle, (where the
Priests only officiated in the Holy Place, as the High Priest in the most Holy)
but before it, in the External Part of it, where they assisted the Priests in
their Service.

To do the Service of the Tabernacle.] Such Service as I have mentioned before,
v. 6.

Ver. 8. And they shall keep.] By guarding them, and keeping a continual Watch
about them.

All the Instruments of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Every thing
belonging to it.

And the charge of the Children of Israel, to do the Service of the
Tabernacle.] By which Service at the Tabernacle, they took upon them the
Charge; which otherwise was incumbent on the whole Congregation: who were to
take care that the holy Things were kept both safe and secure, and also
separate to the Sacred Uses to which they were appointed.

These words, which are often repeated, [to do the Service of the Tabernacle,]
are to be carefully noted: because the Levites did not serve in the Tabernacle,
(which belonged only to the Priests) but served the Tabernacle, by guarding it,
and taking it down, and carrying it, etc. as was said before.

Ver. 9. And thou shall give the Levites unto Aaron They were first presented
unto God, v. 6. and God bestowed them as a Gift upon the Priests. See VIII. 19.

They are wholly given unto him out of the Children of Israel.] To attend upon
the Priests, and to obey their Orders; for which they paid them nothing, but
they were to do it freely: being given to them to be their Servants, by God who
paid them their Wages.

Ver. 10. And thou shall appoint Aaron and his Sons, Or, thou shall appoint
them to wait on their Priesthood. Which he had shown before was very different
from the Levitical Office; but to make them more mindful of their Dignity, he
repeats it again: that Aaron and his Sons alone should officiate as Priests;
viz. in offering Sacrifice; in setting the Bread upon the Holy Table; looking
after the Lights; and burning Incense: Which they were to perform in their own
Persons, and not appoint any others, as their Deputies, to do them; for none of
these things could be performed by the Levites. Whose business it was to look
after the fine Flour of which the Bread was made; to prepare it, and the
Frankincense which was to be burnt, and abundance of such like things; which
are particularly mentioned 1 Chronicles. IX. 27, 28, 29, 31, 32. But they could not
make the Anointing Oil, or the sweet Perfume mentioned XXX Exodus 23, 34. for
they were most holy: and therefore the Priests only could compound them.

And the Stranger that comes nigh.] By Stranger is meant any one (though a
Levite) that was not of the Sons of Aaron: who alone had the privilege, to
approach unto God.

Shall be put to death.] God himself sent out a Fire to consume Korah and his
Company, who presumed to offer Incense; being but bare Levites, and not
Priests, Chap. XVI.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] To make the Matter more clear, he
further tells Moses the reason why he took the Levites from among the the
Children of Israel, to be his after a peculiar manner.

And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the Children of Israel.]
Take notice of the Reason why I have taken the Levites from among the rest of
the Israelites, (v. 9.) for it is by my Order and Appointment.

Instead of all the Firstborn that opens the Matrix, etc.] To make an
exchange with them for all their Firstborn, which I have heretofore challenged
as my own: and now take the Levites in their stead.

Therefore the Levites shall be mine.] As all the Firstborn were: which now
shall be theirs, and the Levites be mine.

Ver. 13. Because all the Firstborn are mine.] By

For on the day that I smote all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt.] The
Title whereby he laid a Claim to all the Firstborn, was that great Miracle (as
R. Levi of Barcelona calls it) which he wrought, when he destroyed all the
Firstborn of their Neighbors in Egypt; and touched not one of theirs. By
which sparing Mercy he acquired a just Right to them; and by that solemn
Dedication which he then commanded to be made of them, unto his uses, XIII
Exodus 2, 12, 13.

I hallowed unto me all the Firstborn in Israel, etc.] He separated them unto
himself, by sparing them, when he killed all other Firstborn, but only theirs.

Mine they shall be.] Both by that Act of his own, and by the Act of the
Children of Israel, whom he commanded to Sanctify them to him, (XIII Exodus 2.
XXII. 29.) they became God's. By which it appears, that he had not a peculiar
Right in the Firstborn, more than in any other of their Children, till their
coming out of Egypt. And therefore the taking of the Levites to be his, instead
of the Firstborn, is no Argument that the Firstborn had hitherto been the
Priests who ministered unto God, till this Exchange of them for the Levites. So
our learned Dr. Lightfoot seems to infer, in his Notes upon this passage; The
Firstborn, says he, had been Priests till the Consecration of the Levites,
but now that Function must be confined to that Tribe. In which words (with due
respect be it spoken to that excellent Man's Labors) there are several
Mistakes. For, as the Priesthood was not now confined to this Tribe, but to one
Family in this Tribe, (that of Aaron) so it was not confined to it, upon this
occasion: but he and his Sons were Consecrated before this Exchange of the
Levites for the Firstborn: Who were now given to minister unto them, but had
nothing to do with the Priesthood; no more than the Firstborn had, for whom
they were exchanged: that peculiar Right which God had in the Firstborn, being
since their coming out of Egypt. Upon all which Considerations we may look upon
this Exchange, as an Argument rather that the Firstborn were not Priests in
former times, than that they were: as the Jews fancy, and as many have
suggested from this very taking of the Levites to be God's portion in their
stead. For so Menochius himself, L. II. de Repub. Jud. cap. 1. asserts from
this very place, Jus Sacerdotum in Levitas translatum, and eos loco
primogenitorum acceptos, quibus hoc jus debebatur, that the Right of Priests
was transferred to the Levites, and they were accepted in stead of the
Firstborn, to whom that Right belonged. In which there is not a word of truth,
but only that the Levites were accepted instead of the Firstborn: who had the
same Right to the Priesthood, that the Levites had; that is, none at all.

I am the LORD.] Who may take whom I please to be employed in my Service; and
think it reasonable that those whom I spared, when I slew the Egyptian
Firstborn, should be mine.

Ver. 14. And the LORD spoke unto Moses.] There was some reason, no doubt, why
Moses alone is commanded to take the number of the Levites upon this occasion,
(as he alone did, v. 16.) when Aaron Israelites, I. 3. and in numbering the
Levites themselves who were fit for service, IV. 2, 41, 45. (nay, the chief of
the Israelites assisted therein, v. 46.) And it is most probable he alone was
employed to take this account, because Aaron was a party in it; the Money that
was to be paid for so many of the firstborn, as exceeded the number of the
Levites, being given to him, and to his Sons, v. 48.

In the Wilderness of Sinai.] This Command immediately followed the other, in
the two preceding Chapters, before they departed from the Wilderness of Sinai;
where they had been ever since God delivered the Law to them, from that
Mountain.

Ver. 15. Number the Children of Levi after the House Just as they had numbered
the rest of the Children of Israel. See I. v. 2. Only those they numbered from
Twenty years old and upward; but the Levites from a Month old and upward.

Every Male from a month old and upward, shall thou number them.] The reason of
this difference was, that this was the Age, at which they were to redeem their
Firstborn, (XVIII. 16.) in whose stead the Levites were to be given unto God.
See v. 40. of this Chapter.

Ver. 16. And Moses numbered them according to the etc.] This Charge was
committed to him alone, v. 10. and he alone (as I there observed) performed it.

Ver. 17. And these were the Sons of Levi, by their names, Gershon. and Kohath,
and Merari.] The same account we had before, XLVI Genesis 11. VI Exodus 16.

And these are the Names of the Sons of Gershon, by their Families, Libni and
Shimei.] The same is said VI Exodus 17.

And the Names of the Sons of Kohath, etc.] They are mentioned in the same
order, in that VI Exodus 18, 19.

These are the Families of the Levites, according to the House of their
Fathers.] These were the principal Families in this Tribe; from whence the
several Households, and the Persons in them, were derived.

Of Gershon was the Family, etc.] From his two Sons sprung two Families: who
had in them Seven thousand and five hundred Male Children, from a Month old and
upward.

And the Families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the Tabernacle
westward.] Where the most holy place was; and where they under the Standard of
Ephraim lay, in the great Camp of Israel, (II. 18.) between whom and the
Tabernacle, this part of the Camp of Levi pitched.

And the Chief of the House of the Father of the Gershonites, etc.] The
Commander in Chief, as we may style him, or the principal Officer in this part
of the Camp of the Levites; was Eliasaph the Son of Lael: but of what Family he
was, whether of the Libnites, or Shimites, is not related.

And the Charge of the Sons of Gershon.] That which was committed peculiarly to
their care.

In the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] In the things belonging to the
Tabernacle: for none went into it, but the Priests alone.

Shall be the Tabernacle.] Not the Boards and Pillars, and Bases of it, (for
they belonged to the care of the Sons of Merari, v. 36.) but the Ten Curtains,
which were the inward Hangings of it; and are called the Mischcan or
Tabernacle, XXVI Exodus 1. and see the next Chapter of this Book, v. 25.

And the Tent.] The outward Curtains of Goats Hair, which are called Ohel, the
Tent, XXVI Exodus 7.12.

The Covering thereof.] The Michse, as the Hebrews call it, or the Covering of
the Tent, were the Rams Skins, and Badgers Skins; which lay outmost of all,
upon the Curtains of Goats Hair, XXVI Exodus 14.

And the hanging for the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] The
outward Vail, mentioned XXVI Exodus 36. for the inward Vail, which hung before
the most holy Place, was the Charge of the Kohathites.

Ver. 26. And the Hangings of the Court.] See Exodus 9.

And the Curtain for the Door of the Court, XXVI Exodus 16.

Which is by the Tabernacle, and by the Altar round about.] Or, as the Hebrew
particle al may be translated, is over, or upon the Tabernacle, etc. That is,
this Curtain at the Door, and the Hangings of the Court, compassed the
Tabernacle, and the Altar of Burnt-offerings (which stood at the Door of it, XL
Exodus 19.) round about; so that they were not exposed to common fight: For
these Gershonites had nothing to do with the Altar it self; which was the
Charge of the Kohathites, v. 31.

And the Cords of it.] This seems to refer not merely to the Curtain for the
Door of the Court, but to all that went before, viz. the Cords whereby those
Hangings were stretched out, and fastened by Pins to the Wood-work of the
Tabernacle. For the Cords of that belonged to the Custody of the Sons of
Merari, v. 37. and we find Pins and Cords as well for the Tabernacle, (that is,
the Hangings) as for the Court, i. e. the Boards, etc. XXXV Exodus 18.

For all the Service thereof.] Of this part of the House of God, as appears
from v. 31, and 36. where this is repeated with respect to the other parts of
it.

And of Kohath was the Family of the Amramites, etc.] He was the second Son of
Levi; and had as many more Families sprung from him as from the Eldest: among
which was the Family of the Amramites; of which were Moses and Aaron.

In the number of all the Males, etc.] Though there were four Families of the
Kohathites, and but two of the Gershonites; yet the latter were as numerous as
they, within Eleven hundred.

Keeping the Charge of the Sanctuary.] Of what belonged to the holy Place,
which was committed to their Charge, as it follows afterward; and they were
instructed in it betimes.

The Families of the Sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the Tabernacle
southward.] Between the Tabernacle, and the Standard of Reuben, II. 10.

And the Chief of the House of the Father of the Families of the Kohathites,
shall be Elizaphan the Son of Vzziel.] There was a Commander in Chief appointed
over this Body of the Levites: who was chosen out of the youngest Family of the
Kohathites. But it is observable there were no Standards belonging to any of
these Bodies; they being designed for other Service, and not for War.

Ver. 31. And their Charge shall be the Ark, and the The Sanctuary, as was said
before, v. 28. being committed to their Custody; the Particulars are here
mentioned: which were the most precious of all the holy Things. With which the
Kohathites had the honor to be entrusted, though a younger Family than those
descended from Gershon; because Moses and Aaron were of it, being of the Family
of the Amramites. Which is the reason why the Kohathites are reckoned* first in
the next Chapter, v. 2. and that of the XLVIII Cities given to the Levites by
Joshua, almost half of them fell to their Families, XXI Josh. 4, 5.

The Altars.] Both the Altar of Burnt-offerings; and the Altar of Incense.

And the Vessels of the Sanctuary wherewith they (i. e. the Priests) minister.
See XXV. Exodus 29. XXXVII. 16.

And the hanging.] That is, the Vail before the most Holy Place, (for all other
Hangings were under the care of the Gershonites, v. 25, 26.) wherein the Ark
was wrapped, when they carried it, IV. 5.

And all the Service thereof.] Whatsoever belonged to this part of God's House.
See v. 26. and the Particulars are mentioned in the next Chapter, v. 7, 9, 14.

Ver. 32. And Eleazar the Son of Aaron shall be chief There was one Officer in
chief, set over each of these great Families of the Gershonites, v. 24. of the
Kohathites, v. 30. and the Merarites, v. 35. And over all these Chiefs, there
is now appointed a supreme Chief, (who was to govern them, as they governed
those under them) and that was Eleazar, who was more than a Levite; being the
eldest Son of Aaron the High Priest.

And have the oversight of them that keep the charge of the Sanctuary.] But
more particularly Eleazar was to super-vise those that had the Sanctuary under
their care: That is, all the Rohathites and Elizaphan their chief, v. 20.

Of Merari was the Family of the Mahlites, and the Family of the Mushites,
etc.] Nothing is observable of these, but that they were the fewest in number;
being thirteen hundred less than the Children of Gershon, v. 22.

These shall pitch on the side of the Tabernacle Northward.] Opposite to the
Kohathites; between the Standard of Dan, and the Sanctuary, II. 25.

And under the Custody and Charge of the Sons of Merari, shall be the Boards of
the Tabernacle, etc.] Concerning all the things mentioned in this, and in the
next Verse. See XXVI. Exodus 15, 16, etc. XXVII. 10, 11, 12, etc. and the next
Chapter of this Book, v. 31, 32.

And their Cords.] These are different from those before mentioned, v. 27. as I
noted there.

But those that encamp before the Tabernacle toward the East.] Where the
Entrance into it was.

Even before the Tabernacle of the Congregation Eastward.] He would have this
Station observed, as much excelling the rest.

Shall be Moses and Aaron, and his Sons.] There were but three Bodies of the
Levites, descended from the three Sons of Levi, v. 1. and therefore none left
to guard this side of the Tabernacle, but Moses and Aaron, and their Families:
who lay between the Standard of Judah, and the Tabernacle, (see Chap. II. v.
3.) which was the most honorable Post, as I there noted: Where the Priests
were with great reason placed, together with the chief Governor of all, Moses;
because they were to guard the Holy Place, that none might go into it, but
themselves.

Keeping the charge of the Sanctuary.] Of the Entrance into it.

For the charge of the Children of Israel.] Which it concerned every one of the
Children of Israel, should be kept sacred. See v. 7.

And the Stranger that comes nigh shall be put to Death.] No Man that was not
of the House of Aaron (though a Levite) was upon the peril of his life, to
enter into the Sanctuary: Of which they had the charge. See v. 10.

Ver. 39. All that were numbered of the Levites, which This looks like a
Contradiction to the Observation, I made, v. 14.16. But Aaron's numbering here,
in all Probability, is only his agreeing that this was a true Account which
Moses took of the Tribe of Levi. For Moses still continues to be alone
concerned, in numbering the Firstborn of the Children of Israel, for whom they
were to be exchanged, v. 40.42.

Were twenty and two thousand.] If the particular Sums beforementioned, ( v.
22, 28, 34.) be put together, they amount to three hundred more, than twenty
two thousand. Therefore it is a reasonable Conjecture that the three hundred
are omitted in this account, because they were the firstborn of the Levites
themselves: and upon that score belonging to God already, (by the Law in XIII.
Exodus 2. XXXIV. 20.) could not be exchanged for the firstborn of other Tribes,
and substituted in their stead, as other Levites were. It is very observable
here also, that the Levites were the fewest in number of any Tribe; being but
Two and twenty thousand, three hundred, from a Month old and upward; when some
Tribes were twice, nay thrice as many, (See I. 27.) not reckoning Children, but
only Men from twenty years old and upward. In which the Divine Providence was
very conspicuous: Which so ordered it, that this whole Tribe might be dedicated
to him. Whereas, if it had grown proportionably to the rest, there would have
been more Levites by far than the firstborn of all the Tribes.

And the LORD said unto Moses.] To whom alone this Command is directed, as I
observed above.

Number all the firstborn of the Males of the Children of Israel from a month
old and upward.] The firstborn Males were to be a Month old, before their
Parents were bound to redeem them: If they died before, they were not to pay
any thing for them. Which depends upon another Law, XII Lev. 4.6. Where if a
Woman brought forth a Male; besides the seven days of her Separation, she was
to stay three and thirty days more before she went unto the Sanctuary. At which
time the Child being to be presented to God, it appears that he acknowledged
them for his when they were a Month old. Yet they distinguish between the time
when the Redemption-Money was due, and when it was offered. This latter was
deferred till the Mother was abroad again: but it was due, and the Father
obliged to pay it, as soon as the Child was a Month old. So Constable. L'Empereur
observes out of Maimonides, upon Bava kama, cap. VII. Sect. 6.

And take the number of their Names.] That their number, and that of the
Levites, might be compared one with the other; for the reason which here
follows.

Ver. 41. And thou shall take the Levites for me (I God had taken them before,
as we read, v. 12. by declaring his Will to Moses about it. And now he commands
Moses to declare his Will to the People, and actually to make this exchange;
after he had taken the Number, both of the Firstborn, and of the Levites. For
he had Authority to take which he pleased, being their LORD.

And the Cattle of the Levites, instead of all the Firstlings among the Cattle
of the Children of Israel.] Not that they should be sacrificed, or taken from
the Levites; but that they should be accounted God's Cattle: they being the
Cattle of the Levites; who were his entirely. And therefore were presented unto
him, as the Levites were; but still continued in their possession by his
Allowance, for their Encouragement in his Service. See v. 45.

Ver. 42. And Moses numbered, as the LORD commanded But we do not find that he
numbered the Firstlings of their Cattle, or the Cattle of the Levites; because
the exchange of them was not made in particular, by substituting one for one;
but generally, by substituting all the Cattle of the Levites, instead of all
the Firstlings of the Israelites Cattle.

Ver. 43. And all the firstborn Males, by the number etc. and were Twenty and
two thousand two hundred, and threescore and thirteen.] It may appear something
strange, that from above Six hundred thousand Men, (reckoning from twenty years
old and upward, I. 46.) there should not be more than this number of firstborn
Sons; till it be considered that thus many were born since the Slaughter of the
Egyptian Firstborn, (which was not much above a year ago) after which time all
the Firstborn of Israel became God's; but not those that were born before. For
so the Law is, XIII Exodus 2. Whatsoever opens the Womb, (i. e. hereafter)
both of Man and Beast, shall be mine.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Still he is the Person solely employed
in this business.

Take the Levites instead of all the Firstborn among the Children of Israel,
and the Cattle of the Levites instead of their Cattle.] Having numbered both the
Levites and the Firstborn; now he bids him take those Two and twenty thousand
Levites instead of so many Firstborn. As for the Cattle, they were not
numbered, as I observed before, but exchanged in the lump, as we speak.

And the Levites shall be mine.] I think it is remarkable, that he does not
add, and their Cattle shall be mine also. For he did not take their Cattle from
them, when they became his; but left them the use of them, who still enjoyed
them in his Right.

I am the LORD.] This exchange is made by my Authority; who am the LORD both of
them, and all they have.

Ver. 46. And for those that are to be redeemed of the etc.] There being Two
hundred threescore and thirteen Firstborn, more than there were Levites, they
are directed, in the next Verse, what to do about them. For there could be no
exchange of Levites for them; because there was not a sufficient number to be
taken in their stead.

Ver. 47. Thou shall even take five Shekels apiece by This was the Price of
Redemption ever after, as appears from XVIII. 16. For it had been lately
constituted the value of a Man-child, from a Month to five years old, in XXVII
Levit. 6.

After the Shekel of the Sanctuary, etc.] See XXX Exodus 13, etc. The only
difficulty in this matter, was to determine which of the Firstborn should be
redeemed, by paying this Money; and which should be exchanged for the Levites.
For every one of the Israelites, no doubt, was desirous rather to have his
Firstborn redeemed by a Levite, than by paying five Shekels; and yet some of
them must be put to this expense, there not being Levites enough to answer for
them all. The Jews think (particularly R. Solomon) that there was no way to
satisfy this doubt like that, by drawing of lots. Which was done in this
manner. Moses, says the forenamed Doctor, took Two and twenty thousand
Scrolls of Parchment, and wrote in them these words, a Son of Levi; and Two
hundred and seventy and three more, wherein he wrote, five Shekels: and then
putting them all together in an Urn, and shaking it to mingle them, he
commanded every one of the Firstborn to come, and put in his Hand, and draw
out a Schedule: And to him that drew out one of the former sort, he said, a
Levite has redeemed thee; but to him that drew out one of the latter, he said,
pay thy Price. And thus they tell the Story also in the Gemara Babylon. Tit.
Sanhedrin. Which is probable enough; unless we suppose the Congregation to have
redeemed the Two hundred seventy three Firstborn; out of a common Stock; which
was a shorter way, but not so Divine as the other.

And thou shall give the Money wherewith the odd number of them is to be
redeemed, unto Aaron, and to his Sons.] Which was but reasonable; because the
Levites being given to them by God, v. 6, 7. the Money that was paid to make up
what was wanting in their proportion to the Firstborn, belonged to them
likewise.

And Moses took the Redemption-Money of them that were over and above.] To whom
the Lot fell, having five Shekels written upon it.

Them that were redeemed by the Levites.] The Firstborn were redeemed by the
Levites as far as their number would reach; the rest, who were more than the
Levites, were redeemed by Money.

Of the Firstborn of the Children of Israel took he the Money, a thousand
three hundred, and threescore and five Shekels. Five times two hundred seventy
and three make just this number.

Ver. 51. And Moses gave the Money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron, and
to his Sons.] Which was a Rule observed in future Generations, XVIII 15, etc.

According to the Word of the LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses.] This is so
often repeated, to show how faithful a Servant Moses was: who did nothing but by
the Divine order; and omitted nothing that was commanded him.

CHAP. IV.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, and They being both of them concerned to see
this carefully executed, he speaks to both: and they took others to their
Assistance, v. 34, 46.

Ver. 2. Take the sum of the Sons of Kohath, etc.]

Ver. 3. From thirty years old and upward.] In this Thirty years of Age: But
they were admitted to attend at the Tabernacle, and do other Service, at the
Age of Five and twenty; as we read VIII. 25. Which place the Jews (in the
Gemara Babylonica upon the Title Cholin) reconcile with this, after this
manner. They were admitted to learn their Duty at Five and twenty, and to
minister at Thirty. And so Aben Ezra upon VIII Numb. They were probationers,
and might do some service at Five and twenty years old, but not do all. For
they might wait upon the Tabernacle; but not bear the Ark. And that is the exact
truth, they were admitted to minister to the Priests at Five and twenty: but
were not put upon this laborious work here mentioned, till they had sufficient
strength for it; which was at Thirty years of Age; when they were able to carry
Burdens: for by that word their work is described, v. 15, 19, 24, 31, 47. For
though some things, which they were charged withal, might be put into Wagons:
yet the Ark, and the most holy Things, were to be carried upon their Shoulders,
though they marched never so far, v. 15. and VII. 9. When the Ark indeed was
settled in the Temple, which was a fixed place, and therefore was no longer to
be carried up and down, then (as D. Kimchi observes upon 1 Chronicles. XXIII.) King
David appointed them to enter upon their Office, at Twenty years old: there
being also other great Work to be performed in his time; for which they were
fit at that Age. And so it continued even after their return from the Captivity
of Babylon, III Ezra 8. See Seldom. de Success. in Pontificat. L. II. cap. 4.
and Lightfoot in his Temple Service, Chap. VI. Sect. 1.

Even until fifty years old.] Beyond which Age they were not bound to do any
Service: but only to minister with their Brethren at the Tabernacle, VIII. 25,
26.

All that enter into the Host. Or, into the Warfare.] For their watching
continually, as a Guard, about the Tabernacle, (III. 7, etc.) made them a sort
of Militia: who were encamped, as appears by the foregoing Chapter, about the
Tabernacle, for its Security. Besides which, there was other Work, which might
make their Service as laborious, as a Soldier's Life is; and give it the name
of entering into the Host: which manner of speaking St. Paul uses unto Timothy,
I. 1, 18. where he exhorts him to war a good warfare.

To do the work of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] They did not perform
any Work in it, but about it, (such as here follows) unless we understand by
the Tabernacle, the outward Court: into which they went to minister unto the
Priests.

Ver. 4. This shall be the Service of the Sons of Kohath, The next Verses
explain what this Service was. Or if the word about (in the latter end of the
Verse) were quite left out, the sense would be more clear. This shall be the
Service of the Sons of Kohath, etc. the most holy Things: that is, the Ark, as
Aben Ezra expounds it. And his Interpretation may be justified from v. 19, and
20. in the latter of which it is called the holy, and in the former the holy of
holies, as it is here in the Hebrew. For it was the most holy of all other holy
things in the Tabernacle; and gave the Name to the place where it stood, of
holy of holies, or the most holy place. And this made the Service of the
Kohathites the most honorable of all other: and is the reason they are
mentioned first.

Ver. 5. When the Camp sets forward.] Which it Exodus 36, 37. X Numb. 11.

Aaron shall come, and his Sons.] While the Cloud rested upon the Tabernacle,
and the Glory of the LORD filled the House, none but Aaron might come into the
most Holy Place, where the Ark was; and that but on one day in the year; and
then, after he had filled it with Incense, which made a Cloud before the Mercy
Seat, (which was the Covering of the Ark) over which the SCHECHINAH was, But
that being removed in the Cloud, when it was taken up from the Tabernacle; not
only Aaron, but his Sons also might come into the most Holy Place, without any
Irreverence; that which made it so holy (viz. the Glory of the LORD) being gone
out of it, for the present; so that there was no danger in approaching to the
Ark, where it was wont to rest.

And they shall take down the covering Vail.] Whereby the Holy Place was parted
from the most Holy: which is always meant by the word Parocheth (as I showed
upon Exodus XXVI. 31.) which is here used. And though the word Masach be added
to it, which constantly signifies the outward Vail at the entrance of the
Sanctuary; yet it is plain that the inward Vail, which was at the entrance of
the most Holy Place, is here intended: for the other was committed to the care
of the Gershonites, v. 25.

And cover the Ark of the Testimony with it.] By this it is evident they went
into the Holy Place, unto the very Ark: over which they threw this Covering.

And shall put thereon the covering of Badgers Skins.] Not any of those
wherewith the Tabernacle was covered, (XXVI Exodus 14.) but a Covering made on
purpose for this use: to defend the Ark from the injury of the Weather, when
they carried it on their shoulders.

And shall spread over it a Cloth wholly of blue.] Or, of perfect blue. This
was the third Covering of the Ark: which till it was laid upon it, the Levites
might not approach it. And since the Tabernacle was the Image of Things in the
Heavens, (as not only the Apostle but the Jews themselves say) the Ark in
particular being a Figure of the Celestial Throne of God; it is not an
unreasonable Conceit of R. Bechai, that this blue colored Cloth was spread
over it, as an Emblem of the Skies, which are spread like a Curtain between us
and the Majesty on High.

And shall put in the Staves thereof.] It is not said they shall put them in
the Rings: for they were never to be taken out of them, XXV Exodus 15. Nor do
the Hebrew words signify that they should put them in: but it should be
translated, put the Staves thereof; that is, upon their shoulders. So Aben Ezra
interprets it: which seems to me the most simple Exposition: Or, fit and
dispose them, under the Covering, that they might be laid on their shoulders.
Or, order them so in the Rings, (which is Chaskun's Explication) that they
might fall into the two Notches; which were in the Staves, to keep the Ark from
sliding up and down.

Ver. 7. And upon the Table of Shewbread, they shall It is not said, wholly of
blue, as it is of the former: which shows it was of something a different
color.

And put thereon the dishes.] Upon which the Bread was set.

And the spoons and bowls, etc.] See XXV Exodus 29.

And the continual bread.] i. e. The Bread which stood continually in the
Presence of God.

Shall be thereon.] Even when the Table was carried from place to place. Which
shows that they provided this Bread, (according to the order XXV Exodus 30.) all
the time they were in the Wilderness. And it was not hard to procure so much
Corn from their Neighbors bordering upon the Wilderness, as would be
sufficient for this purpose; and for others, which I shall note in their proper
places: particularly from the Land of Midian, where Moses his Father in Law
lived; which was not far from Sinai, (as appears from III Exodus 1.) where they
were at present.

Ver. 8. And they shall spread upon them a Cloth of Scarlet, and cover the same
with a covering of Badgers skins.] These had a triple covering, as well as the
holy Thing, (that is, the Bread of the Presence, as it is called in the Hebrew,
because it stood before God continually) in the Dishes upon the Table.

And shall put in the staves thereof.] That it might be ready to be carried,
XXV Exodus 27, 28.

And they shall take a Cloth of blue.] Like that which covered the Table, v. 7.

And cover the Candlestick of the Light.] See XXV Exodus 31. and XXXVII. 17, etc.

And his Lamps, and his Tongs, etc.] XXV Exodus 37, 38. XXXVII. 23.

And all the Oil Vessels thereof.] For God commanded them to bring pure Oil to
feed the Lamps continually, (XXVII Exodus 20.) which was put, no doubt, in
Vessels to preserve it for daily use.

With which they minister unto you.] With which Oil they keep the Lamps
continually burning.

And they shall put it, and all the Vessels thereof within a covering of
Badgers skins.] There were but two Coverings for the Candlestick and its
Vessels; it being of lesser value than the Table of Shewbread, and what
belonged to it.

And shall put it upon a bar.] Rather upon a bier: for the word we here
translate bar, is different from that used before, v. 6, 8. which we translate
staves: and signifies any Instrument, whereby things are removed from one place
to another. We translate it indeed a Staff, XIII. 23. whereon two of them that
went to spy out the Land, carried the Cluster of Grapes they had cut down.
Which was laid, no doubt, upon something that was broad; as this Bar was
whereon they carried the Candlestick. Which had no Rings belonging to it, and
therefore, I take it, was carried upon some thing resembling a Bier, on which
Corpse are carried to their Grave in this Country. See v. 12. and so the LXX.
(...).

Ver. 11. And upon the golden Altar.] So called, Exodus 3.

They shall spread a Cloth of blue, etc.] As they did upon the Candlestick, v.
9.

And shall put to the Staves thereof.] Into the Rings; which were made on
purpose, that it might be carried upon the Staves, XXX Exodus 4, 5.

Ver. 12. And they shall take all the Instruments of I do not see what can be
meant by these, but the holy Garments which Aaron and his Sons put on in the
time of their Ministration. For all other Things have been already mentioned;
and these are called the Clothes of Service, XXXI Exodus 10. where they are
immediately mentioned after all the forenamed Furniture of the Tabernacle.

And shall put them in a Cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of
Badgers skins.] As they did the Candlestick, and the Altar of Incense, v. 9, 11.

And put them on a bar.] By this it appears, that the Hebrew word Mot, which we
translate a Bar, signifies a broad Instrument for Carriage; such as I have
described, v. 10.

Ver. 13. And they shall take away the Ashes from the Of Burnt-offering: which
was often cleansed from its Ashes, (VI Lev. 10, 11.) but then especially when
it was to be removed. What they did with the Fire, which was always to burn
upon it, (VI Lev. 12, 13.) is not here related: but we may suppose that it was
carried upon the Grate, which had Rings on purpose, that it might be carried
separate from the Altar. See XXVII Exodus 4.

And spread a purple Cloth thereon.] As being an holy thing; though not of such
Sanctity as those before-named.

And they shall put upon it all the Vessels thereof, etc.] That they might be
carried with it.

The Censers, the Flesh-hooks, and the Shovels and the Basins.] Here the
Censers are put first, which are mentioned last, in XXVII Exodus 3. where this
word is translated, Fire-pans. Others understand by it, Tongs.

All the Vessels of the Altar.] Immediately after these words, we find there
follows, in two places, the Laver and his foot, XXXV Exodus 16. XXXIX. 39. Where
in the very same verse, the Laver is mentioned with the Altar and its Vessels:
and immediately follows them, in two other, XXXVIII Exodus 7, 8. XL. 30. The
reason why it is not mentioned here, is perhaps, because he names only those
things upon which the Sons of Aaron were to put a Covering; and this, it is
likely, was carried without one.

And put to the staves of it.] XXVII Exodus 6, 7. XXXVIII. 6, 7.

And when Aaron and his Sons have made an end of covering the Sanctuary and all
the Vessels, etc.] This work was to be performed by them alone; and the Levites
were not to meddle with any of these things, till they had done.

After that the Sons of Kohath shall come to bear it.] For all the
forementioned things, belonging to the Sanctuary, were to be carried by them;
even the Ark it self: Which they carried so, that all the People might see it
went along with them. For the Rings being fastened to the bottom of the Ark,
(see XXV Exodus 12.) when the Staves were on their Shoulders, it appeared on
high: To represent, says R. Bechai, him that is most highly exalted over all.
The Priests indeed might carry the Ark, being more than Levites (XXXI Deuteronomy. 9.)
and accordingly we find, that upon extraordinary Occasions they did; as when
they went over Jordan, III Josh. 14. and when Jericho was besieged, VI. 6. Some
think also, when David, as he fled from Absalom, sent the Ark back, 2 Samuel XV.
29. But it appears from ver. 24. that there is no certainty of that; especially
since, when he brought it from the House of Obed-Edom, he not only employed the
Levites in it, but declared none else ought to bear it, 1 Chronicles. XV. 2, 15, 27.
He bid the Priests indeed, as well as the Levites, sanctify themselves for
this Work: For ye (says he to the Priests, v. 12.) are the chief of the
Fathers of the Levites: but they seem to have been present, only to see the
Levites perform their Charge; and to accompany the Ark, as David himself did.

But they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die.] Some imagine they
were not to touch these things, till they were covered by the Priests: But it
is more likely that even then they were not to touch them, but only the Staves,
or the Bar, wherein they were carried. Especially the Ark, which is here
principally meant by the holy thing, (the word any not being in the Hebrew)
whose Staves only they touched, and lifted it up by putting them upon their
Shoulders.

These things are the burden of the Sons of Kohath, in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] When it was removed; for at other times, they had nothing to do
with these things: Which are here called their Burden, as verse 4. they are
called their Service; to show the nature of their Service, which required the
Strength of grown Men, v. 3.

And to the Office of Eleazar the Son of Aaron the Priest, pertains the Oil
for the Light, etc.] It is commonly thought that he is required to carry this,
and the other things that follow in this Verse, himself: But if all things be
considered, it will appear more reasonable to think, that he who was the Chief
of all the Chiefs over the Levites, III. 32. is peculiarly required to see the
Kohathites did their Duty. For though they had a Chief over them, whose work it
was to inspect them, III. 30. yet God thought good to appoint Eleazar, to
supervise both him, and all under him, in these weighty Concerns. And so the
Words may be interpreted out of the Hebrew.

The oversight of Eleazar the Son of Aaron the Priest, shall be the Oil, etc.
the oversight of all the Tabernacle, and of all that is therein, etc.] And
there is the greater reason thus to understand it, because the Oyl-Vessels are
before committed to the Kohathites, v. 9. and consequently the Oil it self;
which could not be carried, but in the Vessels.

The sweet Incense.] Mentioned XXX Exodus 34.

And the daily Meat Offering. See XXIX Exodus 40, 41.

And the anointing Oil.] XXX Exodus 23, etc. These were not named before: but it
is here laid upon Eleazar, to see that they were as carefully carried by the
Kohathites, as any other things belonging to the Sanctuary.

Ver. 17. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and The things beforementioned,
especially the Ark, were so sacred, that he repeats the Admonition he had
given, about the danger of Irreverence to it: Which he here represents in a
frightful manner.

Ver. 18. Cut ye not off.] Do not by your Negligence

The Tribe of the Family of the Kohathites, from among the Levites.] A
considerable part of the Tribe of Levi, viz. the Family of the Kohathites; who
were near a third part of it.

Ver. 19. But do thus for them, that they may live and Proceed in this manner,
to prevent so great a Mischief, as their Destruction.

When they approach unto the most holy things.] Come to take up the Ark: Which
is meant by the Holy of Holies. See v. 4.

Aaron and his Sons shall go in.] And cover the Ark, and the rest of the things
within the Sanctuary; as is before-directed.

And appoint them every one to his Service, and to his Burden.] And then allot
to every one his share in this work: That is, to carry such particular things,
as they think most proper for them.

Ver. 20. But they shall not go in to see.] They might Mercy-Seat upon its
Removal, were covered by the Priests, (for then the Place where they lay
covered, was no longer holy) but they might not come in to see the Priests
cover them; which was to be done before they approached.

When the holy things are covered.] In the Hebrew it is in the singular Number,
when the holy, or holy thing is covered; i. e. the Ark: as the Jews generally
understand it. And that with great reason, as any one may be satisfied who will
take the pains to compare the 1 Kings VIII. 8. with 2 Chronicles. V. 9. Where that
which in the former place is called the Holy, in the latter is called the Ark.

Lest they die.] They might not, under pain of Death, either see it when it was
covered, or touch it afterward, v. 15. but only carry it, in the manner there
described.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] He was principally concerned in this,
but Aaron was also joined with him, to see the Execution of what is here
required, v. 1.19, 34.

Take also the Sum of the Sons of Gershon, etc.] The eldest Son of Levi, III.
17. who though they were employed in lower Services; were to account it an
Honor to serve about the Tabernacle.

All that enter in to perform the Service.] I do not understand why this should
not be translated as v. 2. into the Host. For it is the very same Phrase in the
Hebrew, both here and there; only here more emphatical by doubling the word for
Host: And therefore may very properly be translated in this place, that enter
in to war the Warfare. For the Service of the Gershonites was more burdensome
than the former; though they were fewer in number, ver. 36, 40.

Ver. 24. This is the Service of the Families of the Gershonites.]

To serve, and for Burdens.] To serve, when the Tabernacle rested; and to carry
Burdens, when it removed. See v. 47.

Ver. 25. And they shall bear the Curtains of the Tabernacle.] Exodus 1, 2, etc.
Which, I suppose, were taken down as well as carried by the Gershonites:
because nothing is said here of Aaron, or his Sons being employed, to make them
ready for carriage.

And the Tabernacle of the Congregation, his Covering.] Not the Boards of the
Tabernacle, which were the Charge of the Children of Merari, (v. 31.) but the
eleven Curtains of Goats-hair, which covered the Boards, XXVI Exodus 7, 8, etc.

And the Covering of Badgers Skins, which is upon it.] The outward Covering of
all, which was of Rams Skins dyed Red, and Badgers Skins, (as we translate it)
XXVI Exodus 14.

And the Hanging for the Door of the Tabernacle.] Which is described, in the
Conclusion of the same Chapter, XXVI Exodus 36.

Ver. 26. And the Hangings for the Court.] XXVII Exodus 9, etc.

And the Hanging for the Gate of the Door of the Court. See XXVII Exodus 16.

Which is by the Tabernacle, and the Altar round about.] The Sense would have
been more plain, if the Particle al, which we translate by, had been translated
upon, or over; for the Court encompassed both the Tabernacle, and the Altar, XL
Exodus 6, 7, 8.

And their Cords.] Which were employed in fastening these Hangings.

And all the Instruments for their service.] The brazen Pins, I suppose,
mentioned XXVII Exodus 19.

And all that is made for them.] And whatsoever else belonged to them. See III.
26.

So shall they serve.] Or, in that shall they serve.

At the appointment of Aaron and his Sons, shall be all the Service of the Sons
of the Gershonites, etc.] In the Hebrew it is, at the Mouth of Aaron, etc. i.
e. according to their Order every one of the Gershonites were to apply
themselves to such Services, as they directed. For God had given the Levites to
them to be their Ministers, and keep their Charge, III. 6, 7.

And ye shall appoint unto them in charge, all their Burdens.] The word here
for appoint seems to import, that the Priests gave them a Particular, as we
speak, of what they were to do; that they might neither forget, nor mistake.
For it is the same word that is used in the beginning of this Book (I. 3.) for
numbering the People; and so it is used here, v. 34, 47, 48. Therefore the
Vulgar translates these words, Et sciant singuli cui debeant operi mancipari;
and every Man may know, what is his proper business: Which is the Sense of the
LXX also. And affords an excellent Instruction to all Men, to follow diligently
the business of their own Callings; not to meddle with other Men's, nor to think
themselves fit to undertake every thing. (...), as Aristotle speaks in his
Politics, L. III. One work is best performed, by one Person.

Ver. 28. And their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the Son of Aaron
the Priest.] That is, under Ithamar. For though the Gershonites had a Chief of
their own, III. 24. yet Ithamar was to inspect both him and them; and see they
did not neglect their Duty. Thus Eleazar was set over the Kohathites, v. 16.

Ver. 29. As for the Sons of Merari, thou shall number etc.] Which were but
two, (III. 33.) as those of Gershon were.

Ver. 30. Every one that enters into the Service.] v. 3. which we translate
enter into the Host. See there.

Ver. 31. This is the charge of their Burden, etc.]

The Boards of the Tabernacle.] See XXVI Exodus 15, etc.

And the Bars thereof.] See there v. 26, etc.

And the Pillars thereof.] See in the same place, v. 32. and XXXVI. 36.

And Sockets thereof.] These belonged both to the Boards of the Tabernacle,
XXVI Exodus 19, 21, 25. and to the Pillars, XXVI Exodus 32. XXXVIII. 27.

Ver. 32. And the Pillars of the Court round about, Exodus 10, 11, 12.

And their Sockets.] See there.

And their Pins.] V. 19. and XXXVIII. 20.

And their Cords.] XXXV Exodus 18. XXXIX. 40.

By name ye shall reckon the Instruments of the charge of their Burden.] The
Priests (particularly Ithamar) were to give them an Inventory of these things:
Expressing by name, every Pin, for instance, and to what use, and in what place
it served. Because otherwise such small things might have been lost, if they
had not taken a special care of them; and they might not have been able to set
up the Tabernacle again, when they rested, for want of them.

This is the Service of the Families of the Sons of Merari, according to all
their Service in the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] In taking down, and
carrying the Tabernacle.

Under the hand of Ithamar, etc.] Who had the oversight both of the
Gershonites, and the Merarites: As Eleazar had of the Kohathites, v. 16, 28.

And Moses and Aaron, and the Chief of the Congregation.] They took to their
assistance the very same Men, I suppose, who were employed in the numbering all
the Children of Israel, Chap. I. 4. 16, 17.

Numbered the Sons of the Kohathites, etc.] Having assigned to them their
particular Charge, they now proceed to number them, as God commanded, v. 2, 3.

Every one that enters into the Service.] Or, as we translate it, v. 3.
enters into the Host.

And those that were numbered of them by their Families, were Two thousand seven
hundred and fifty.] Of the whole number of Males descended from Kohath,
(compare this with III. 28.) there was a fourth part and better, that were fit
for Service.

Ver. 37. These were they that were numbered of the Families of the Kohathites,
all that might do Service in the Tabernacle.] Such Service as is particularly
mentioned from v. 4. to v. 16.

Ver. 38. And these are they that were numbered of the etc.] He proceeds in the
same order to number them, which he observed in giving them their Charge:
beginning with the Children of the second Son of Levi, and then going back to
the eldest.

Ver. 39. From thirty years old and upward, etc.] Verse is the very same with
35.

Ver. 40. Two thousand and six hundred and thirty.]

Ver. 41. These are they that were numbered of the Families etc.] Such Service
as is described from v. 24. to v. 29.

Ver. 42, 43. These two Verses are the same with v. 38, 39.

Ver. 44. Even those that were numbered of them after It is very remarkable the
Descendants from the youngest Son of Levi, (III. 17.) which had the fewest
Males in it of a Month old and upward, had the most robust Men fit for Service.
For here are above half (compare this with III. 34.) of the whole number of
Males grown up to Thirty Years of Age. Which was a singular Providence, the
heaviest Burden lying upon them, who were to carry the Boards, etc. of the
Tabernacle. Not indeed upon their shoulders, but in Wagons; which they were to
load, after they had taken them down, and unload, when they were to set them up
again: and for that reason had more Wagons allowed them than their Brethren
the Gershonites, VII. 7, 8.

These are those, etc. whom Moses and Aaron numbered.] Who were principally
employed in this business.

According to the Word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.] To whom the Command
is expressly directed, v. 21.

All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the Chief
of Israel numbered.] For they took in others to their assistance, v. 34. which
is here repeated to show that there was no fraud in the business; there being
Witnesses of every Tribe that they proceeded impartially, and did not favor
the Levites, who were their Brethren.

Every one that came to do the Service of the Ministry, and the Service of the
Burden in the Tabernacle, etc.] The first of these [the Service of the
Ministry] one would think related to their serving the Priest when the
Tabernacle was standing; and the later [the Service of the Burden] to their
carrying the Tabernacle when it was taken down, and removed: and so I expounded
those words, v. 24. But he mentioning here only those that were numbered from
Thirty Years old, I think, upon further consideration, that there is no regard
in these Expressions to the Service they did to the Priests in the Tabernacle;
unto which they were admitted at Twenty five Years old, (See v. 3.) but only to
the Service mentioned here in this Chapter, which relates altogether to the
taking down and carrying the Tabernacle. And therefore these must be looked upon
as two Phrases, for the same thing: the former of which is not exactly
translated; for there is nothing of Ministry in the Hebrew; but the words are,
Every one that comes to serve the Service of the Service, and the Service of
the Burden, or Carriage. For it is the same word, which being joined with work,
we translate servile, XXIII Lev. 7. and other places.

Ver. 48. Eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.] v. 36, 40, 44. be put
together, they amount exactly to this Sum in the whole.

Ver. 49. According to the Commandment of the By the assistance of Aaron and
others, v. I, 34, 46.

Every one according to his Service, and according to his Burden.] I observed
before, v. 47. that Service and Burden are two Expressions of the same thing.
For though the Sons of Kohath had the noblest part of the Work, yet their
Employment is called both a Service and a Burden, v. 19. as that of the
Gershonites is v. 24. For which Service all the Tithes of the Country of Canaan
were given to them; and continued to be theirs when this kind of Service
ceased, as it did when the Temple was built. For then there were no Burdens to
be carried on their shoulders, (as Josiah speaks 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 3.) but their
Duty was changed, even by David before the Building of the Temple: who made
them Singers, and Keepers of the Treasury, as well as Porters at the Gates of
God's House; and likewise Judges and other Officers in the Country, as we read
in 1 Chronicles. XXVI. But the alteration in their Service, made no alteration in
the Wages allotted to them; for they still enjoyed all the Tithes.

Thus were they numbered of him, as the LORD commanded Moses.] This is so often
repeated, ( v. 37, 41, 45.) that all Posterity might reverence these
Ordinances, as Divine Institutions, and not merely Humane Appointments. And so
we are to look upon all these Laws, as wise Orders made by the Sovereign of the
World, for the better Government of that People, whom he had taken for his own
peculiar. And it argues a very profane Spirit in those (as Conr. Pellicanus
here observes) who can admire and praise Ovid de Fastis, and such like Books;
and have no regard at all (if they do not ridicule them) to these Sacred
Writings, which are of such venerable Antiquity.

CHAP. V.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] It is not said when this was spoken
which here follows: but it is likely immediately after the foregoing
Commandments, upon which it has some dependence.

Command the Children of Israel, that they put out of the Camp every Leper, and
every one that has an Issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead.] There were
three Camps (as Maimonides, and a great many other mentioned by Mr. Seldom,
observes, L. II. de Synedr. cap. I. n. 5.) the Camp of the SCHECHINAH, or of
the LORD, viz. the Sanctuary, with its Courts: which are called the Tents of
the LORD, 1 Chronicles. XXXI. 2. And next the Camp of the Levites, who with Aaron
and his Sons, made a Camp about the Tabernacle, (Chapter III. of this Book) and
then the Camp of Israel, Chapter II. which encompassed them all. Answerable to
these, when the Temple was built, they reckoned the Temple it self from the
Eastgate, to be the Camp of the LORD: and the Camp of the Levites, to be from
the entrance of the Mount of the House of the LORD, to that Eastgate of the
Temple. And the Camp of Israel they thought extended from the Entrance of
Jerusalem, to the Mount of the House of the LORD. Now Lepers were so unclean,
that they were not admitted into any of these three Camps, but shut out of them
all. See XIII Lev. 46. But he that had an Issue (XV Lev. 2.) was only shut out
of the two first Camps, the Camp of the LORD, and the Camp of the Levites; but
he might be in the Camp of Israel. And he that was defiled by the dead, (XXI
Lev. 1.) was only excluded from the first, the Sanctuary, but not from the
other two. See Drusius also upon IV. 25.

Ver. 3. Both Male and Female shall ye put out.] For Lev. 2, and 19, etc.

That they defile not their Camps.] The Camp of Israel consisted of four Camps,
(and therefore he speaks in the Plural Number) that of Judah; that of Reuben;
that of Ephraim; and that of Dan, II Numb. 3, 10, 18, 25. Which would have been
so defiled, if they had suffered these unclean Persons to stay among them; that
none would have been fit to go to the Sanctuary.

In the midst of which I dwell.] By his special Presence in the Sanctuary;
which was encompassed by these Camps: out of reverence to which, such unclean
Persons were to be kept at a greater distance than other Men and Women.

Ver. 4. And the Children of Israel did so, and put them without the Camp,
etc.] There was an order for this before; particularly for putting out the
Lepers, Lev. 46.) which could not be put in Execution, till the Camp was
formed; as now it was.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] It is uncertain when this was spoken;
but I see no reason why we should not think, it was at the same time with the
other things here mentioned.

When a Man or Woman shall commit any sin that Men commit.] In the Hebrew the
words are plainly these, shall commit any sin of Man: that is, against his
Neighbor. As in III Joel 19. Violence of the Children of Judah, is truly
translated Violence against the Children of Judah. For it is apparent from the
next Verses 7, 8. that Moses here speaks of Offenses against their Neighbors.

To do a Trespass against the LORD.] Such Offenses against their Neighbors, as
were also great Offenses against God. For the Chaldee understands these words
of Frauds and Cheats put upon Men, by a false Oath. And there is a good warrant
for this Interpretation from VI Lev. 2, 3. where Moses gives the same command:
which seems here to be repeated, only because he had something to add unto it,
v. 8.

And that person be guilty.] Or rather, be sensible of his guilt. See VI Lev. 4.

Then they shall confess the sin that they have done.] Or rather, If they shall
confess, etc. For so the Particle Vau sometimes signifies: particularly XII.
14. where we (as well as the LXX.) translate it, If her Father had spit in her
face. See what I have noted upon VI Lev. 4.

And he shall recompense, etc.] Rather, Then he shall recompense the Injury he
did to his Neighbor, in the manner here directed: which has been explained VI
Lev. 5. See there.

Ver. 8. But if a Man have no Kinsman to recompense By this it is apparent,
that if a Man to whom an Injury had been done, was dead, he that committed it,
was bound to make Satisfaction to his Heir, whosoever he was, by restoring the
Principal, and adding a fifth part to it. Now the Israelites never wanting some
of their Kindred to succeed to their Inheritances, the Hebrew Doctors expound
this of the Proselytes of Righteousness: who might possibly dye without any
heir; because they had no Kindred but such as were born after their
Regeneration. In which Case the Goods that had been illegally taken from such a
Proselyte by a Jew, did not become his own, unless he paid the Price of them,
with such an addition as is here required, etc. See Seldom L. VI. de Jure Not.
and Gent. cap. 4. p. 684, 685. Edit. Land.

Let the Trespass be recompensed unto the LORD.] By bringing to him the
Principal, and the fifth part.

Even unto the Priest.] Whom God deputed to receive it, as his Minister. And it
was (as the Jews rightly expound it) equally distributed among all the Priests,
who were then waiting in their Course. Which is a new addition to the Law in VI
Lev. and the reason, it is likely, why that Law is here repeated.

Besides the Ram of the Atonement, etc.] Mentioned VI Lev. 6, 7. where see what
I have noted.

Ver. 9. And every offering of all the holy things of the Children of Israel.]
Upon the occasion of the foregoing Laws concerning a Recompense to be made
Heave-offerings, as the word Trumoth (here used) signifies, XVIII. 8.

Which they bring unto the Priest.] To be offered unto God.

Shall be his.] Who offers it. For there being many Priests who waited in their
Courses, at the Tabernacle; all of which could not officiate at the same time,
but some at one time, some at another; this Law determines that the particular
Priest, who performed the Office of Sacrificing, should have to himself, that
part of the holy Things which fell to the Priests share; and it should not be
divided among them all. Thus L'Empereur (upon Bava kama, c. 9. sect. 12.)
expounds these words better than any I have met withal.

And every man's hallowed thing shall be his.] As the former Verse speaks of the
holy Things of the Children of Israel in general, so this of what any
particular Person offered: which still with greater reason was to belong to the
Priest that offered it. For the Labourer is worthy of his hire: and therefore
he that did the work of Sacrificing, had the Reward of it. R. Solomon applying
this to Tithes, has a gloss upon these words, which though not pertinent, is
very remarkable: He that does not duly pay his Tithe, in the end his Land shall
yield him but a tithe of what it was wont to yield. And so R. Bechai upon XIV
Deuteronomy. expounds these words, when a Man divides not as he ought, he shall have
nothing but the holy things; that is, the Tithe, of what he used to have,
according to V Isa. 10.

Whatsoever any Man gives the Priest, it shall be his.] These words are only a
fuller Explication of this Law, (as the same L'Empereur observes) that the rest
of the Priests might not take away those Holy things from him, that offered
them, under pretense that they belonged to the whole Sacerdotal Order. For
though they were delivered unto him, yet it was, they might say, that they
should be divided among the whole Classes then in attendance. So some things
were, v. 8. and therefore this Law is added to prevent their extending what was
done in some Cases unto all.

Ver. 11. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Moses having spoken
concerning Frauds, from the Suspicion of which Men were to purge themselves by
an Oath, ( v. 6.) he here takes occasion to mention the greatest Case that
could happen of this nature: Which was, when a Woman was suspected of Adultery.
Concerning which God gave him the following Order.

Ver. 12. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say Being private, for some
time, with another Man; whose Company her Husband had charged her not to keep
alone; and therefore is suspected by him to be an Adulteress. For it is certain
that by a Wife that goes aside, (whom the Hebrews from hence call Sota) is not
meant one that has certainly committed Adultery; but is, with some reason,
suspected of that Crime. And therefore it is a Rule among the Jews, the bitter
Waters never are used, but in a dubious Case.

And commit a Trespass against him.] And thereby has very much offended him.

And a Man lie with her carnally.] As her Husband has cause to suspect; he
having (as I said before) admonished her not to be with such a Man in private:
That is, to give him no cause of jealousy. So Abarbinel rightly expounds a
Man's lying with her carnally, of her Husband's Opinion and Suspicion: And the
next Verse justifies this Exposition.

And if it be hid from the Eyes of her Husband.] There being no clear evidence,
but only Conjectures, that she is actually defiled.

And be kept close.] The matter having been carried very secretly: Or, as it
may be interpreted, but she was shut up close with him.

And she be defiled.] In her Husband's Opinion.

And there be no witness against her.] For if there had, she must have been put
to Death, XX Levit. 10.

Neither she be taken with the manner.] She not being apprehended, in the very
Act.

And the Spirit of Jealousy come upon him.] He be possessed with a strong
Conceit, of which he cannot rid himself, that she has been unfaithful to him.
For so a Spirit of slumber (and the like) is used in Scripture; for such a
sluggish Temper, as a Man cannot shake off.

And he be jealous of his Wife, and she be defiled.] Whether it be really so.

And he be jealous, and she be not defiled.] Or whether it be only his
Suspicion.

Ver. 15. Then shall the Man bring his Wife unto the To the Magistrates of the
place where they lived (says the Mischna, Cap. 1. Sect. 3. of Sota) together
with his Witnesses both of the Praemonition he had given her, and of the
Privacy she had had with another Man after his Praemonition, so long that there
might be time enough for him to defile her: Otherwise this Action did not lie
against her, as Mr. Seldom observes, L. III. Vxor. Hebr. Cap. XIII. But having
these Witnesses ready, he was to speak to the Priest when he brought his Wife
before him, after this manner; Having a Jealousy of this my Wife, I admonished
her not to keep company with such an one; with whom she afterward was in
secret: and these are the Witnesses of it. She says she is innocent, but I
desire the Water may be given her, that the Truth may be tried. See Seldom, in
the place before-named, Cap. XV. and Wagenseil upon Sota, Cap. I. Sect. 3. Not.
2.

And he shall bring her Oblation for her.] That is, the Husband shall bring her
Oblation, (not the Priest, as some understand the words of the Mischna about
this matter:) Which Chaskuin fancies was offered, as his Oblation, not the
Woman's; to expiate his Fault in not reproving her sufficiently, when he first
observed her immodest Behavior: For it could not be a Sacrifice for her
Expiation, (says he) because the Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination.
But this is against the very words of Moses in this place; which say, he shall
bring her Oblation for her. And so Abarbinel expounds it, the Scripture
intimates that this Sacrifice was brought by the Husband for the sake of his
Wife; for he had done nothing that needed a Sacrifice. Nor is Chaskuni his
reason of any moment; for there is nothing said to make us look upon this, as
an expiatory Sacrifice; but the true Intention of it was (as Wagenseil well
observes, Annot. in Mischna Sota, Cap. II. p. 349.) to supplicate the Divine
Majesty, that he would be pleased to clear the Woman's Innocence if she were
causelessly suspected; or otherwise discover, and punish her Guilt.

By this it appears, that if the Process was began in some Court below, (as the
Jews affirm) the Cause was removed to Jerusalem, (where only they could
sacrifice, when the Ark of God's Presence was settled there) and brought before
the great Sanhedrin. Who putting her Husband out of the Court, (as they say in
the next Section of the forenamed Mischna) and having the Woman alone by her
self, endeavored first by striking a Terror into her, and then by giving her
good words, to persuade her to tell the Truth: Saying, Dear Daughter, perhaps
thou wast over-taken by drinking too Much Wine, or wast in a frolic Humor, or
carried away by the Heat of Youth, or by the Example of evil Neighbors: Come,
confess the Truth, for the sake of his great Name, which is described in the
most sacred Ceremony: and do not let it be blotted out, (v. 23.) with the
bitter Water. If after this, she confessed the Fact, saying, I am defiled; then
she was to tear the Instrument of her Dowry in pieces, and go whether she
pleased. For such an Adulteress was not put to Death, but only lost her Dowry,
without any other Punishment. If she said, I am pure; then she was brought to
the Door of the Tabernacle; and they did as follows. So the Mischna, cap. 1.
sect. 5. and see Wagenseil's Annotations on Sota. And now, that they have not
this way of Trial among them, if a Man's Wife give him suspicion, by keeping a
Man's Company in secret, which he forbad her; he may not use her any more as
his Wife, and she loses her Dowry, as Buxtorfius observes in his Book De
Sponsal. and Divort. Pars I. Sect. 92.

The tenth part of an Ephah of Barly-meal.] The common Offering of this sort,
was of fine Wheat-flour: only this, and the Sheaf, or handful mentioned XXIII
Lev. 10. were of Barley. But that was of fine Flour sifted from the Bran; this
of course Flour, that had nothing taken out of it: as the Mischna says in
Sota, cap. 2. Where the reason given for this Barly-offering is, because she
was supposed to have committed the Act of a Beast, (which is not confined to
one) therefore she was to Sacrifice the Food of a Beast: for so Barley was in
Judaea. Many such pretty, rather than solid Reasons, are collected out of their
Authors by Simeon de Muis in his Varia Sacra upon this place. The simplest
Reason seems to be, that a viler sort of Sacrifice, was most suitable to her
vile Condition: for which reason also there was no Oil nor Frankincense
permitted to be offered with it, as it here follows.

He shall pour no Oil upon it, nor put Frankincense thereon.] This Sacrifice
was different from all other of this kind, (See Lev. 11.) For though that
mentioned V Lev. 11. was to have no Oil nor Frankincense with it; yet it was of
fine Flour, and not Barley. And though the Sheaf mentioned XXIII Lev. 10. was of
Barley, yet it was sifted: and besides, Oil and Frankincense were used with it;
which are here forbidden. The reasons of which are given by the Jews, according
to their various Fancies. And some of them are ingenious enough; as that a good
Name being compared to Oil, (VII Eccles. 1.) it is here omitted, because the
Woman had lost her Reputation. Maimonides is a little more judicious: for
looking upon Oil and Frankincense as added unto Sacrifices for the Honor and
Dignity of them, he thinks God would have this Splendour (as his word is) to be
wanting to such a Woman's Sacrifice; because of the baseness of her behavior,
which was the occasion of it. As if she had been told (to stir her up to
repentance) because of the filthiness of thy actions, thy Oblation is more
imperfect than others, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 46. But none, I think, has
given a better account of this, than St. Chrysostom, Orat. V. ad v. Judaeos,
because the Woman was loaded with Sorrow, and heavy Accusations, and evil
Suspicions, (...), the form of the Sacrifice imitated the Domestic Calamity:
for every one knows that Oil and Frankincense, was signs of Joy and Gladness;
and therefore not used upon so sad an Occasion as this was.

For it is an Offering of Jealousy.] These, and the following words, give the
reason why Oil and Frankincense were to be omitted; because it was an Offering
for one suspected of Adultery. And in such Cases, God had before ordained,
there should be no Oil nor Frankincense used, V Lev. 11. Delicacies being
improper in Offerings for Sin.

An Offering of Memorial, bringing Iniquity to remembrance.] For she appeared
before God as a Sinner: and if she were not guilty, yet she was loaded with an
Accusation, and a just Suspicion of Guilt; to which, if she had given any
occasion, this Sacrifice reminded her of it, and awakened her Conscience to
reflect upon it.

Ver. 16. And the Priest.] It is the Opinion of P. Cunaeus (Lib. I. de Rep.
Hebr. cap. 12.) that the Priest here mentioned, was to be a Member of the Great
Sanhedrin; to whom the Judgment of the matter belonged. But another very
learned Person thinks with more reason, the Priest, whose Lot it was to attend
at that time in his Course, is here meant. See Mischna cap. 1. Sotae, Sect. 5.
Annot. 8. Wagenseil.

Shall bring her near.] Rather bring it (that is, her Offering) near to the
Altar at the Door of the Tabernacle.

And set her.] Rather set the Offering: for she is ordered to be set before the
LORD afterward, v. 18.

Before the LORD.] At the Altar, which was at the Door of the Tabernacle. See I
Lev. 3. At the Eastgate of the Temple, says the Mischna, which was called the
Gate of Nicanor: for there, Women also after Childbed were purified; and the
Lepers cleansed.

Ver. 17. And the Priest shall take holy Water.] From Jews say in Jalkut.
Therefore Onkelos instead of holy Water, has Water from the Laver.

In an Earthen Vessel.] Which had never been employed to any other use, (as the
Mischna says) and contained about a Pint of our Measure. This I take to have
been appointed, as a further Expression of the Vileness of her Condition: for
the reasons which the Jewish Doctors give of it are not to be regarded. The
best that I have observed is, to declare that she should be broken in pieces,
like that Earthen Vessel, if she was guilty of that which she denied.

And of the dust.] Another Token of her Vileness; this being the Serpent's Food.

That is in the Floor of the Tabernacle, etc.] To make her afraid of the
Judgment of God. For if there were no dust in the Tabernacle, they were to
fetch it from some other place, (as Maimonides relates their practice, Hilcoth
Sota, cap. 4.) and lay it upon the Floor of the Tabernacle; and then take it
and put it into the Water.

And put it into the Water.] Sprinkle a little of it upon the Water, (that it
might be more easily drunk) but so much, that it might be plainly seen. For
there were three things, the Jews say, of which a less quantity was not
admitted, than might be seen, viz. this Dust; and the Ashes of the red Heifer,
XIX. 17. and the Spittle in the Face of him that would not marry his Brother's
Wife, XXV Deuteronomy. 9. But if the Priest put the Dust into the Vessel first, and
then poured the Water upon it, he did not do amiss: as the Jews say in the
ancient Book Siphri. See Wagenseil upon Mischna Sotae, cap. 2. sect. 2. Annot.
11, 12.

It has been observed by some, that such ways of Trial were in use among the
Gentiles; which if they could be proved to have been as ancient as Moses his
days; it would make it probable, that this was ordered by God, to divert the
Jews from following the Superstitions of other Nations to make this Discovery,
and bring them to appear before him at his Tabernacle, and there use such Rites
as were of his appointment: See our Learned Dr. Spencer, L. III. Dissert I.
cap. 2. p. 539, etc.

Ver. 18. And the Priest shall set the Woman before the LORD.] At the Door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation: where a great many Women, who were called
together on purpose, stood about her; that (as the Prophet Ezekiel speaks,
XXIII. 48.) As many others also, as would, might be present; except only her
Maids and Domestic Servants; who were put out, lest they should disturb her
mind too much, as Mr. Seldom interprets the words of the Mischna, about this
matter, (Lib. III. Vxor. Hebr. cap. 15.) Which another very learned Man (J.
Wagenseil) interprets the quite contrary way, lest her Mind should place any
hope in them, cap. 1. sect. 6. Annot. 8. on Sota.

And uncover the Woman's head.] He was to strip her of all her Head-attire (as
the manner was, if we may believe Philo, in all Judicial Proceedings) to loose
her Hair, and tear her Garments down to her Breast: which he bound about her
(as the Jews say) with an Egyptian Cord. And if she had any Gold or Jewels, or
other Ornaments about her, they were all taken from her; and she was clothed
with a black Garment. All which were plain Tokens of her lamentable Condition.

And put the Offering of Memorial in her hands.] After he had put it into a
Drying Pan, under which he held his own hand, (II Lev. 7.) and at the same time
held in his other hand the bitter Water; which he showed her.

Which is the Jealousie-offering.] Offered purely upon the account of her
Husbands Jealousy; as he told her.

And the Priest shall have in his hand the bitter Water.] So called, because
they put Wormwood, or some such thing into it, to give it a bitter taste, as
Maimonides and the ancient Rabbis fancy. But the later Doctors say, Nothing
was mixed with this Water, but Dust; and yet it became bitter in the mouth. So
Nachman and others. But the most probable account of all others is, that this
Water was called bitter, from its direful Effects upon the Body of the Woman,
if she was guilty. To which Exposition Jacob Abendana inclines: See Wagenseil
upon the Mischna Sotae, cap. 3. sect. 5. Annot. 1.

Which causes the Curse.] Or rather, Which was given her with Curses, and
dreadful Imprecations: blotted out with the bitter Water, (v. 21, 23.) as R.
Bechai expounds it.

And the Priest shall charge her by an Oath.] Adjure her to tell Truth, in the
manner following.

And say unto the Woman, if no Man has lien with thee, etc.] If thou art
Innocent of that whereof thou art suspected.

Be thou free from the bitter Water, etc.] It shall have no ill effect upon
thee.

But if thou have gone aside, etc.] Art guilty of Adultery.

Then the Priest shall charge the Woman with an Oath of Cursing.] This is no
new Adjuration; but only another part of that which began v. 19. and is
continued in this and the foregoing. So that these three Verses contain the
entire form of Adjuration: which the Priest was to pronounce in a Language
which the Woman understood, as the Jewish Doctors observe; otherwise, how could
the Woman answer Amen, as R. Ismael says in Siphre? exactly according to the
Apostle's Doctrine, 1 Corinthians. XIV. 16. And the Priest was to signify to her,
that this proceeding was merely to satisfy her Husband's Jealousy, by
discovering the Truth. Thus this whole matter is related, by the Author of Ez
Hechajim, (an incomparable MS. as Wagenseil calls it, who has it in his
possession) The Priest pronounces this Curse in a Language which she
understands; and signifies to her in the Vulgar Tongue, that these things are
done purely because her Husband is jealous of her, she having been secretly
with one whose Company he forbad her to keep: and then says in a Tongue
familiar to her, IF NO OTHER MAN HAVE LAYN WITH THEE BUT THY HUSBAND, etc. BE
THOU FREE FROM THESE BITTER WATERS, etc. BUT IF THOU HAVE BEEN FALSE TO HIM,
etc. THE LORD MAKE THEE A CURSE, etc. Unto which the Woman was to answer, AMEN,
AMEN. By which words she not only consented to what the Priest said, but made
the same Imprecation upon her self.

The LORD make thee a Curse.] So that when Men would imprecate any evil to
another, they should say, Let that befall thee which befell such a Woman: as Rasi
expounds it.

And an Oath among thy People.] A form of Execration, as the aforesaid MS.
expounds it: or, as Rasi will have it, when Men called God to Witness, they
should say, If I swear falsely, let God punish me as he did such a Woman. These
Execrations were tacitly supposed in the Oaths among the Pagans, as our great
Seldom shows at large Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 11. page 461, etc. where he
observes out of Porphyry, that the ancient Indians had their (...), Lake of
Probation, or Trial: And in his Marmora Arundeliana, p. 28. there is this form
of Imprecation in the League between the City of Smyrna and Magnesia, (...).
Let it be well with me, if I swear truly: but if falsely, let destruction be
both to my self and to my Posterity. And at this day there is a Custom in the
Kingdom of Siam, to determine dubious Cases, by giving a Lump of Rice
impregnated (as my Author speaks) with Curses, to a Man to eat. Which if he can
swallow without vomiting he carries the Cause; and his Friends carry him home
in great Triumph, etc. So Jodocus Schoutenius (who was Director of the
East India Company there 1636.)

When the LORD does make thy Thigh to rot, and thy Belly to swell.] When they
see the dreadful effect of this Water, in the rotting of thy Thigh, after thy
Belly is swelled. For the swelling of the Belly, it appears by the next Verse,
preceded the rotting of the Thigh.

Such Imprecations were in use in Homer's time, it appears by Agamemnon's
Prayer; wherein he calls Jupiter, and all the rest of the Gods, to bear Witness
of his Sincerity: wishing them to send a Multitude of Pains and Griefs upon
him, if he forswore himself: Iliad. XIX. v. 264, 265.

-- (...)
(...).
And this Water that causes the Curse.] Or, For this Water, etc.

Shall go into thy Bowels, etc.] If thou art guilty it shall produce the
following Effects.

To make thy belly to swell.] By the Belly the Jews understand the Womb, and
the Bowels, which swelled till they burst.

And thy Thigh to rot.] By her Thigh is meant the Secret Parts of her Body, as
Chaskuni observes on this place. And both Bochartus and Heinsius have given
many Instances of the use of the word in this sense. The former in his
Hierozoic. P. II. L. V. cap. 15. and the latter in his Aristarch. Sac. cap. 1.
And thus we read in the Passion of SS. Perpetuana and Faelic. that when
Perpetuana was thrown to the Beasts, and lay on the Ground, she drew back her
Coat, which was torn from her side, ad velamentum femoris, to cover her Thigh
from being seen, pudoris magis memor quam doloris, having a greater sense of
Modesty than of Pain, page 32. Edit. Oxon.

The Mischna here observes, not impertinently, with what measure Men mete, it
shall be measured to them again: for in the very part that offended, she
suffered for her Crime. I noted before v. 17. that there were such ways of
Trial anciently among the Gentiles; but I am apt to think they were all later
than the times of Moses; who did not ordain these Rites to keep the Jews from
following their Customs; but they rather imitated what was practiced among the
Jews. Particularly Bochartus observes out of Philostratus, there were Waters in
Cappadocia, sacred to Jupiter: which were very sweet and pleasant to those who
were innocent and swore truly; but quite contrary to those who were perjured.
Whose Eyes, Hands, and Feet were presently seized, and infected with Blotches
and filthy Ulcers, (...), which is the very Disease here mentioned, if we
believe Josephus, who says the Woman's Belly swelled by the Dropsy till at
last it burst. And Philostratus adds, that the whole Body of such People grew
Consumptive; nor could they stir from those Waters, but there they lay
deploring their Misery. See Bochart. L. I. Canaan, cap. 28. p. 589, 590. Which
agrees so perfectly with what the Jews say of this bitter Water, that it is
most likely this Story of the Cappadocian Water, was derived from thence. For
they say, not only the Belly of the Woman swelled, and her Thigh rotted; but
every Member of her Body felt the Effects of this deadly Poison: which spread
to the very Hairs of her Head; as they tell us in Ratboth, quoted by Wagenseil
upon the Mischna, which says the same, cap. 1. Sotae, sect. 7. And therefore
Huetius justly thinks the Fable of the Stygian Lake, and several other Rites of
finding out the truth of secret Crimes, were invented by the Greeks from this
Example, Demonst. Evang. Propos. IV. cap. 11. n. 2. Many Authors have collected
several sorts of Trials of this kind: and lately Guil. Saldenus in his Otia
Theologica, Exercit. V. n. 24, 25. But above all see Huetius his Quaestiones
Alnetunae, L. II. cap. 12. n. 22. where he gives a large account how far this
Rite, of trying Women's Chastity by drinking this Water, was spread among the
most barbarous Nations.

And the Woman shall say, Amen, Amen.] The word Amen is doubled, to express her
full consent, and her earnest desire, that God would deal with her according to
her deserving. The Mischna will have the first Amen refer to those words, The
LORD make thee a Curse; and the second to the next words, and an Oath among thy
People: So that she prayed God, both might come upon her, if she were guilty.
We may as well say, that one of these Amens, relates to the first part of the
Adjuration, v. 19. and the other to the second part, v. 21. Or, as Abarbinel
does, that there being a double Curse, one that her Belly should swell, and
another that her Thigh should rot; she said a double Amen: praying both might
befall her, if she were guilty. And as the Talmudists understand it, they were
an Imprecation upon her self. For so they say in Schevnot; Whosoever says Amen
to an Oath (or Curse) seems to pronounce the Oath or Curse, with his own Mouth.
See Wagenseil upon Mischna Sotae, cap. 2. sect. 5. Annot. 3. Where he produces
a great deal more out of the Scripture it self, in confutation of the Opinion
of our Learned Fuller, who in his Miscellanies affirms, That Amen is only an
Asseveration; but never a Form of Swearing.

Ver. 23. And the Priest shall write these Curses.] Mischna, concerning the
words that were to be written. Which some would have to begin at v. 19. If no
Man have lien with thee, etc. and to continue to this Verse. But others think
they began at those words, v. 21. The LORD make thee a Curse and an Oath, etc.
and that the last words were omitted, The Woman shall say Amen, Amen. Which of
these Opinions is the true, neither the Gemara, nor Maimonides have determined.

In a Book.] Every Scroll of Parchment, wherein any thing was written, the Jews
call Sepher, a Book. In which, it has been commonly said, the Name of the
Woman was written, together with the Curse: but there is nothing, either in the
Scripture, or in Antiquity, to countenance this.

And he shall blot them out with the bitter Water.] Or rather, Into the bitter
Water: That is, he was to scrape out the words he had written into the Water;
and so make the Woman drink it. Or, as the Jews explain it, wash the words he
had written, with the bitter Water, till they were quite blotted out. See
Wagenseil in Mischna Sotae, cap. 3. sect. 3. Who observes a great many
Curiosities which the Jews have about the Parchment and the Ink, upon and with
which these Curses were written: and that they were not valid, if they were
written by a Layman; or by a Priest that was not of Age; or if they were
written before she was adjured; or if he blotted out one word before the rest
were written, etc. See there cap. 2. sect. 4. Hottinger forgot himself when he
said, The Scroll it self was thrown into the Water, (Thesaur. Philolog. L. II.
cap. 2.) for no such thing appears.

And he shall cause the Woman to drink, etc.] viz. After he had offered the
Jealousie-Offering upon the Altar, v. 26. And if she refused to drink the
Water, into which the Curses were scraped, they forced her to it, with this
preceding Admonition; My Daughter, if thou art confident of thine Innocence, do
not fear to drink this Water; which will do thee no more hurt, than dry Poison
laid upon the Flesh of a living Creature, etc. If hereupon she confessed that
she had been poluted, the Water was straightway poured out, because there was
no holiness in it, as Maimonides says. For it is called holy, v. 17. not
because it was sanctified to this use, but only because it was taken out of the
Laver, which was an holy Vessel. See Seldom L. III. Vxor. Hebr. cap. 15. who
observes also, in the foregoing Chapter, that if after a Man had brought his
Wife to this Trial, he chanced to die before this Adjuration; she was freed
from taking the Potion, but lost her Dowry.

And the Water that causes the Curse.] Or, that is loaded with Curses; which
have been scraped into it.

Shall enter into her, and become bitter.] Produce those direful Effects
beforementioned; if she be guilty.

Ver. 25. Then the Priest shall take the Jealousie-Offering Into which he had
put it, before he adjured her, v. 18.

And shall wave the Offering before the LORD.] How this Waving was performed,
has been shown before, upon Leviticus. Rasi here expresses it in four words,
he moved the Oblation, to and fro, up and down. Something like to which
Pythagoras seems to intimate in that Symbol of his, (...), Worship, turning
round. Which Plutarch ascribes to Numa; in whose Life, he says a great many
observable things, concerning turning round in their Sacred Offices. Which was
a Rite in use among the Gentiles; who when they saluted their Gods, standing
with their Heads uncovered, turned about their Bodies to the Right Hand. As
Christoph. Arnoldus observes out of Suetonius and others, in his Appendix to
Wagenseil's Annotations upon Sota, p. 1186.

And offer it upon the Altar.] At the South-Corner of it.

Ver. 26. And the Priest shall take an handful of the Sea upon the second
Chapter of Leviticus, v. 2.

And burn it upon the Altar.] The rest of it the Priests were to eat; unless
her Husband himself was a Priest: in which case, it was all thrown among the
Ashes. See Seldom in the place abovenamed. Where he also observes, that if she
confessed the Fact, or her Husband would not have her drink, or either of them
died before she drunk, or a Witness of the Adultery appeared, (which made the
Waters useless) the whole Sacrifice was burnt, and not only a Memorial thereof.
All which is in the Mischna, Sect. III. and IV.

And afterward shall cause the Woman to drink of the Water.] The Sacrifice
therefore was first offered; though the Mischna say, that if the Priest gave
her the Water to drink first, and then presented the Offering, he did not do
amiss.

And when he has made her to drink the Water.] By this it appears he might
force her to drink; if she would not do it by persuasion.

Then it shall come to pass, that if she be defiled, and have done Trespass
against her Husband, that the Water that causes the Curse shall enter into
her, and become bitter, etc.] These Effects here mentioned presently followed:
For she grew pale, and her Eyes were ready to start out of her Head, etc. so
that they cried out, Carry her forth, carry her forth; lest she defile the
Court of the Temple, by dying there; as the Mischna says, Cap. III. Sect. 4.
The Adulterer also, if we may believe the Jews, died the same day, and hour:
Nay his Belly swelled, as hers did, and his secret Parts rotted, as the Author
of Ez. Hechajim says in Wagenseil upon Sota, Cap. V. Sect. 1. Where he adds,
that all this came to pass, in case her Husband had never offended in the same
kind: For if he had at any time defiled the Marriage Bed, then this Water had
not these Effects upon his Wife, though she had been faulty. Which the Gemara
also affirms.

And if the Woman be not defiled, but be clean, then she shall be free.]
Receive no harm at all by drinking the Water.

And shall conceive Seed.] If she was barren before, she became fruitful after
this trial; and also bare a Man-child, (if we may believe the Jews) and had
easy labor. Her Beauty also increased; her Health was confirmed; and if she
had any Disease it was cured. They observe also, that if after she was thus
cleared, she kept company again with the same Man whom her Husband suspected,
and by his renewed Admonition had required her not to be in private with him;
this potion was not repeated; but she was dismissed from being his Wife,
without any Dowry. But if she kept company with any other Person privately,
after Admonition to the contrary; this potion might be repeated, as often as
she offended with new Lovers. Thus that MS. Ez. Hechajim, so highly commended
by Wagenseil. Who also adds, that in case her Husband put her away after her
Acquittal, and she married another Man, who had the same ground of Jealousy
that her former Husband had, because of her Familiarity with the same Person
whom he had forbidden her to keep company withal; her new Husband might bring
her to a new trial by this Water. And so might as many Husbands as she should
marry one after another; if she gave the like occasion of Jealousy.

Ver. 29. This is the Law of Jealousies.] Whereby out of dread of this
Punishment. Which was so terrible (as Maimonides well observes) even to
innocent Women, that they would have given all they had to avoid it; nay wished
rather to die than undergo such a public Infamy, of having their Head
uncovered, their Hair cut off, (as he represents it) their Garment torn to
their Breasts; and so to stand in the Sanctuary, before a great multitude of
Men and Women, and the whole Sanhedrin. More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLIX.

When a Wife goes aside.] If the Man went aside from her, she had not the same
Action against him; because the Family was not so much injured by his going
aside, as by hers; which brought a spurious Brood to inherit his Estate.

To another instead of her Husband.] Hence the Talmudists conclude such an
Action did not lie against a Woman who was only espoused; or that waited for
her former Husband's Brother to take her to Wife; if they gave Suspicion of
being defiled. So the Mischna, Cap. IV. Sect. I.

And is defiled.] By that other Man, with whom she went aside.

Or when the Spirit of Jealousy comes upon him, and he be jealous over his
Wife.] It appears by the first words of this Law, v. 13, 14. that whether she
was really defiled, or there was only a vehement Suspicion of it; which bred a
Jealousy in him: the Husband had liberty to bring her to this trial, for his
own Satisfaction. Which Law was rather permissive, than preceptive.

And shall set the Woman before the LORD.] That he might show, whether there
was cause for her Husband's Jealousy, or not. See v. 18.

And the Priest shall execute upon her all this Law.] Though the Man was not
bound to bring her to this Trial, but rather the contrary; if he could
otherwise get rid of his Jealousy: yet the Priest was bound to proceed against
her, according to the foregoing Rules; when she was set before the LORD to be
tried. And he might set her before him on any day, that was not a Festival, and
in any hour of the day: but not in the night; nor might he give the Drink to
two suspected Women at one and the same time.

Ver. 3. Then shall the Man be guiltless from iniquity, By Iniquity, here is to
be understood the Punishment due to Iniquity. For the Wife, or her Parents, if
she appeared to be innocent, could have no action against the Husband, upon the
Account of this Accusation: And if she was guilty, she was justly punished for
her Crime; and her Husband had no reason to say, (as the Jews speak in Pesikta)
Woe is me, that I have killed a Daughter of Israel, etc. for he is here
pronounced innocent in that matter, by the Eternal God. Who does not exercise a
Tyranny (as they there go on) over his Creatures, nor gives them Precepts, that
he may make them weary of their Lives, or destroy them. No, his Precepts are
right; the whole Law is Divine: and God does not bring any Man into Judgment,
but for the Violation of that which was expressly commanded, and which he might
have been able to fulfill.

But the Particle Vau in the beginning of this Verse, signifies sometimes as
much as if, as I observed upon v. 7. And so the Jews here commonly understand
it, If the Man be guiltless from iniquity. For thus the Rule is expressed in
the Gemara upon the fifth Chapter of SOTA: When the Husband is free from
Iniquity, (i. e. from Adultery) then the Water tries his Wife: but if he be not
free, (i. e. be himself also guilty of Adultery) then the Water has no power
to try her: that is, produces none of the Effects beforementioned. And so the
Author of Etz Hachajim in Wagenseil upon Sota, p. 595. concludes from these
very words, That the bitter Water then only had power, when the Man was free
from the Sin of which he suspected his Wife. And gives this as the reason, why
in the latter end of the Second Temple, this way of Trial ceased, and was quite
taken away by the Sanhedrim: because the Number of Adulterers was then so
great, that the Water had no effect; according to those words of the Prophet
Hosea, IV. 14. I will not punish your Daughters when they commit Whoredom, nor
your Spouses when they commit Adultery, etc. For that is another Rule of
theirs, When Adulterers were multiplied, the bitter Waters ceased; i. e. there
was no Trial by them. See Seldom, L. III. Vxor. Hebr. cap. 15. p. 408. Yet the
Jews seem to have continued in after Ages, since their Temple was destroyed,
some form of dreadful Imprecations, in their Synagogues; for the discovery of
Truth in doubtful Cases. For St. Chrysostom says he himself saw a very modest,
good Christian Woman, brought by a senseless Fellow (who also had the Name of a
Christian) into a Jewish Assembly: whom he would have compelled to take their
Oath, (...), concerning some things wherein he desired Satisfaction. From which
the Woman being rescued, by St. Chrysostom's Assistance, when he examined the
Man about it; How he came to forsake the Church, and resort to their Sanhedrim;
his Answer was, That he had been told by many, (...), that there were more
horrible Adjurations among them, then among Christians, Homil. I. adv. Judaeos.
Which, no doubt, arose from the direful Effects of this Adjuration here
prescribed, if the Woman was guilty of what she was suspected.

CHAP. VI.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Nazarite, and forbearing Wine, and the
Care of her Hair; and a Woman that loved Company, and was entangled in the Love
of other Men besides her Husband.

Ver. 2. Speak unto the Children of Israel.] Who

When either Man or Woman.] For Women as well as Men might make this Vow; if
they were at their own disposal: and not under the power of their Parents, or
Husbands, by whose Authority this Vow might be disanulled, XXX. 4, 5, etc.

Shall separate themselves.] The Hebrew word japhli signifies the doing
something extraordinary, beyond the common rate of other Men. And therefore
Forsterus has well translated it, when a Man or Woman shall vow a singular vow.

To vow a vow of a Nazarite.] The Hebrew word Nazar, which signifies in general
to separate, in the Conjugation Niphal (as they call it) signifies to separate
from others, by a Profession of some special Acts of Religion. Whence Nazir
signifies one that, beyond the common prescription of the Law, dedicates not
his Goods, but himself to God in a peculiar kind of Sanctimony. So Philo, who
calls this (...), the great Vow; because he that makes it, devotes not his
Corn, or Beasts, etc. but his own Self unto God; (...), for every Man is to
himself the greatest possession he has.

To separate themselves unto the LORD.] To separate themselves for some time,
to a higher Measure of Purity then other Men practiced; that they might attend
to the Service of God. From whence this Vow was called, Separation unto the
LORD. For they who observed it were holy, says Maimonides; yea, were placed,
for the present, in the Dignity of the High Priest, as to Sanctity: being
forbidden to pollute themselves, for their Father or Mother, as it follows
afterward, More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 48. The Jewish Doctors are wont to be so
curious in marking every word, and scrupulously adhering to it, that it is
something strange they should allow a Father the liberty to separate his Child
to be a Nazarite, without its consent: when the Text expressly speaks of those
who separate themselves. But so the Mischna determines, in Sota, cap. 3. sect.
8. and it allows this liberty to the Father, though not to the Mother: though
we find Hannah vowing Samuel to be a Nazarite before he was born, 1 Samuel I. 10,
11. See Wagenseil on that place, Annot. 2, 3.

Ver. 3. He shall separate himself from Wine.] In this consisted one part of
the special Sanctity of Nazarites;

And strong Drink.] As Wine was made of Grapes, so Shecar was a Liquor made of
other Fruit, as Dates, etc. See X. Lev. 9. To which add, that other Authors
call the Juice of Dates, as well as Grapes, by the name of Wine. Nay, Pliny
says that praecipua vina, the choicest Wines, were made of those Dates called
Caryotae, which grew about Jericho: though they were iniqua Capiti, hurtful to
the Head, from whence they had their Name, L. XIII. Not. Histor. cap. 4. With
great reason therefore such intoxicating Liquors were forbidden to those who
set themselves apart to attend upon God, during the time of their Separation.
Which justifies, in part, what Maimonides says, that Nazarites were advanced
to the Dignity of Priests, who might not drink any Wine, or strong Drink, in
the time of their Ministration to God in the Sanctuary.

And shall drink no Vinegar of Wine, etc.] For that had the same effect with
Wine, and strong Drink, of which it was made.

Neither shall he drink any Liquor of Grapes.] i. e. Secondary Wine; which was
made by maceration of Grapes in Water, after the Juice had been pressed out to
make Wine. Pliny speaks of various kinds of it, L. XIV. Not. Hist. cap. 10.

Nor eat moist Grapes, or dried.] Which might have stirred up their Appetite
after Wine, or heated their Blood; and indisposed them for the Service of God,
to which they had devoted themselves.

All the days of his Separation.] Or, Nazariteship, as it is in the Margin.
Which sort of Vow, either was for all their life, or only for a time. Samson
and John Baptist were made perpetual Nazarites, by the direction of God, from
their Mothers Womb. But here Moses speaks of such as were made Nazarites by
themselves, for a time only. Which the Jews say was at least for XXX days: But
it appears by St. Paul it might be for a Week only: Unto which he limited the
time of his (...), as it is called in XXII Acts 26, 27. For every one might
vow, for what time he pleased.

Shall he eat nothing that is made of the Vine-tree.] No Paste, nor Sauce, that
had any of the Juice, or Infusion of the Grapes in it.

From the Kernel even to the Husk.] Which might give the smallest Tincture, to
any thing into which they were put.

All this caution seems to be intended to instruct those, who give themselves
wholly unto God's Service; to be very sober and abstemious in the use of Wine,
and strong Drink; the excess of which is the bane of true Piety. For Amat
Spiritus Sanctus sicca corda, as Grotius admirably observes upon I St. Luke 15.
The Holy Ghost delights in dry Souls.

There shall no Rasor come upon his Head.] Nor was his Hair to be cut with
Scissers, or any other Instrument; but he was to let the Locks of his Hair
grow, as it is in the Conclusion of this Verse. This made such Persons look
Majestically and venerably; without any expense. For as Agesilaus speaks in
Stobaens, (...) to let ones Hair grow long, is the cheapest Ornament. Besides,
neglect of the Hair was proper to those, who renounced, for the present, all
manner of Pleasure (as the Nazarites did) and betook themselves to a severer
sort of life. Such Persons not only let their Beards, and their Hair grow, but
wore an hairy Garment, which the Hebrews called Addareth. Such an one John
Baptist wore, as Elijah did before him; whose Mantle is called by this name, 1
Kings XIX. 19. and who is said himself to have been an hairy Man, 2 Kings I. 8.
from whence Grotius concludes that either he was a Nazarite, or the Habit of a
Prophet, and a Nazarite was the same. See him on III Matthew. 4.

But Moses himself seems, in the next words, to give the plainest reason of
this matter.

Until the days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth himself unto the LORD,
he shall be holy.] It was a Token he had kept himself pure from all legal
Defilements: For if he had not, he must have shaved his Head, v. 9. as they did
who were cleansed from their Leprosy, XIV Levit. 8.9.

And shall let the Locks of the Hair of his Head grow.] This Law, in which
consists the second part of their Nazariteship, some fancy to have been
translated from the Egyptians, into the Religion of the Hebrews. Which was the
Opinion of S. Cyril of Alexandria, Lib. XVI. de Adorat. Where he says, that
Moses knowing how hard it would be to bring the Israelites from the ill Customs
they had learnt in Egypt, most wisely instituted the like Rites to those that
were in use there; to the intent they might not perform such Worship any longer
to Demons, but to the LORD of all. Procopius Gazaeus, upon this place, has
the same Notion, Graecorum liberi, si in Nymphas vel montanas vel aquentiles
incidissent, comas nutriebant. Lex itaque mala daemonum consuetudine dempta, ad
Deum hoc ipsum transfert. The sense of which is, that the Greeks let their Hair
grow, in honor of the Nymphs; and therefore the Law to abolish that wicked
Custom, transferred that to God, which was done to Demons. To which I should
readily subscribe, if there were any proof that this Rite of consecrating their
Hair to Demons, was so old among the Egyptians and Greeks, as the times of
Moses. It is far more probable, that the Original of this Custom among the
Gentiles, was from this Law of the Nazarites. So Hen. Lindenbrogius very well
observes upon those words of Censorinus, (de Die Natali, Cap. I.) Crinem Deo
sacrum pascebant, that they let their Hair grow in honor of their Gods.
Particularly of Apollo, who thence was called (...); of Bacchus, Minerva, and
others; yea, this Superstion grew so much, that they consecrated it to Rivers;
in which they thought there was some Divinity. But hujus moris origo (says
that Learned Annotator upon him) videtur fluxisse a Naziraeis Judaeorum. The
Original of this Custom seems to have slowed Nazirites. See more upon v. 18.

Ver. 6. All the days that he separateth himself unto the LORD, he shall come
at no dead body.] This was a third part of this Religion, not to touch a dead
body; nor be in the House where a dead body was; nor accompany it to the Grave,
(see XIX. 11, 12, 13.) For such Defilements by the dead made Men unclean seven
days; so that he might not approach to the House of God: And therefore that the
Nazarites might always be fit to attend upon his Service, he would have them
avoid this Defiement.

Ver. 7. He shall not make himself unclean for his etc.] In this he was
superior to the ordinary Priests, who might be defiled for such near kindred,
(XXI Levit. 2, etc.) and was equalled to the High Priest, (as I observed
before, v. 2. out of Maimonides) who might not, XXI Levit. 11.

Because the Consecration of his God is upon his Head.] His Hair upon his Head,
which was unshorn, showed him to be separated (as the word is in the Hebrew)
unto God. Which Hair also was consecrated to him, when the days of his
Separation were fulfilled. For in this unshorn Hair seems to have consisted the
principal part of Nazariteship.

Ver. 8. All the days of his Separation, he is holy to the By a peculiar Vow,
and therefore was not to come near a dead Body.

Ver. 9. And if any Man die very suddenly by him.]

And he has defiled the Head of his Consecration.] The Consecration of his
Head; that is, his Hair. For though he could not help his being so suddenly
surprised, yet he was defiled by being where a dead Body was: And consequently
the Hair of his Head which had been consecrated to God, was defiled also; and
therefore could not be offered to him, and burnt in his Honor.

Then he shall shave his Head in the day of his cleansing.] His Nazariteship
was interrupted by this Defilement, so that it could not proceed further; but,
after the usual Purification, was to be begun anew; by shaving off this
polluted Hair, and letting new Hair grow instead of it. By this it appears that
Moses here speaks only of such as made this Vow for a limited time: for
perpetual Nazarites, who were consecrated to God for all their life, were never
shaven whatsoever Defilement they contracted.

On the seventh day shall he shave it.] For so many days Uncleanness by the
dead lasted, XIX. 11. and the seventh day was the day of Cleansing from that
Uncleanness, v. 12. All other legal Uncleanness polluted a Nazarite so, as to
make him stand in need of such Purifications as other Men used in those cases:
but this alone polluted him, so as utterly to put him out of that state; which,
as it here follows, was to be begun again.

And on the eighth day he shall bring two Turtles, or two young Pigeons to the
Priest, etc.] The very same Sacrifice, which was offered for one that had been
defiled by a running-Issue, XV Levit. 14.

And the Priest shall offer the one, for a Sin-offering, and the other for a
Burnt-offering.] As in the forenamed case, XV Levit. 15.

To make an Atonement for him.] Which was to be done, before the Burnt-offering
would be accepted.

For that he sinned by the dead.] He had not properly sinned; but contracted a
legal Uncleanness, by touching a dead Body, or being where it was. Which,
though it was against his Will, yet was a Defilement in the account of the Law;
and a kind of Sin because it was a breach of a Ceremonial Law, and therefore
thus to be purged. The reason of which, and such like Precepts, Abarbinel
observes (in his Preface to the Book of Leviticus, Cap. IV.) was only this; to
make Men very cautious how they contracted any Defilement; as the Nazarite
might do in the time of his Separation, and put himself to much trouble. Which
is the foundation of a famous Saying among their wise Men: Diligence begets
Caution; and Caution Purity; and Purity Holiness, and Sanctity.

And shall hallow his Head the same day.] Consecrate his Hair afresh to the
LORD, after his Head has been shaved.

Ver. 12. And he shall consecrate unto the LORD the This is a further
Explication of what was said just before, in the end of the foregoing Verse:
That from the eighth day he shall begin to compute the time of his
Nazariteship; for so many days as he at first vowed unto the LORD.

And shall bring a Lamb of the first year, for a Trepass Offering.] Which was
to be offered even for ignorant Offenses, by the Law made before, V Levit. 15.

But the days that were before;] his Defilement by the dead.

Shall be lost.] Shall not be reckoned, as the LXX has it, but go for nothing
(as we speak) though they were so many that he had almost fulfilled his Vow.
If, for instance; he had vowed to be a Nazarite, for a whole Year; and in the
twelfth Month happened upon a dead Carcass: all the foregoing eleven Months were
lost; and he was to begin his Year's Vow again. And this as often as such an
Accident happened; if it were before the time that his Vow was completed. Which
may seem very hard, if we do not seriously consider the Intention of it: Which
was to oblige them to the strictest care to preserve themselves holy and pure
in all things; as they were plainly taught to be, by the watchful Diligence
they were bound to use, to avoid this legal Defilement here mentioned. For none
could absolve them from this Vow, till it was fulfilled in the Exactness that
is here required. For as they tell the Story in the Talmud, Queen Hellen having
taken a Vow upon her for seven Years, by coming into the Holy Land was engaged
for seven Years more; and being defiled toward the later end of them, was
obliged for another seven Years: which was Twenty and one Years in all. See Dr.
Lightfoot of the Temple, Chap. XVIII.

Because his Separation was defiled.] His first Separation was defiled by a
dead Body; which made it necessary he should begin a new one. It might happen
also that he might die, before he had fulfilled the time he vowed to be a
Nazarite. In which case Maimonides says any of his Sons might go on where he
left, and at the end of the days which his Father had vowed, offer the
Sacrifices here appointed, and be shaved in his stead. So the Mischna Sotae,
Cap. III. Sect. VIII. But Maimonides acknowledges there is no foundation for
this in Scripture; but it relyes wholly upon Tradition. See Wagenseil on that
place, Annot. 4.

And this is the Law of the Nazarite.] Of putting an end to his Nazariteship.

When the days of his Separation are fulfilled.] At the end of the time he
vowed, to continue in this state.

He shall be brought.] By the Priest.

Unto the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] That the Sacrifices here
prescribed might be offered for him.

Ver. 14. And he shall offer his Offering unto the The Nazarite was to present
these following Offerings unto the LORD: For the Priests offering them, is not
mentioned till v. 16.

One He-lamb of the first Year without blemish for a Burnt-offering, and one
Ewe-Lamb, etc.] Here are all sorts of Offerings; which he was obliged to make
in the conclusion of his Nazariteship. A Burnt-offering, as an Acknowledgment
of God's Sovereign Dominion. A Sin-offering, imploring Pardon for any
Omissions, of which he might have been guilty during this Vow: And a
Peace Offering, in Thankfulness to God, who had given him Grace both to make,
and to keep, and to fulfill this Vow.

Ver. 15. And a Basket of unleavened Bread, Cakes Besides the forementioned
Sacrifices here are three Oblations more prescribed, to complete his
Thankfulness. Of which see XXIX Exodus 2.

And their Meats-offering, and their Drink Offerings.] This seems to relate to
the Burnt-offering, and Peace Offering, beforementioned, ( v. 14.) which were
to have their proper Meat Offering and Drink Offering; besides the Basket of
unleavened Bread, with the Cakes, and the Wafers. See VII Levit. 12. XV Numb.
2, 3, etc. Where these accessory Offerings are ordered to accompany the
Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings; though Sin Offerings had none.

And the Priest shall bring them before the LORD.] Unto the Altar of
Burnt-Offerings; as the Nazarite had already brought them to the Door of the
Tabernacle, v. 14.

And shall offer his Sin-offering, and his Burnt-offering.] Though the
Burnt-offering be first named, ( v. 14.) as the principal Sacrifice of all
other; yet the Sin-offering was first offered: by which his Peace being made
with God, the two other Offerings, which followed, were acceptable to him.

And he shall offer the Ram for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings unto the LORD,
with the basket of unleavened Bread.] And the Cakes and Wafers; which
accompanied the Peace Offering, that nothing might be wanting to complete the
Feast which was to be made upon them.

The Priest shall offer also his Meat Offering, and his Drink Offering.] By
this it appears, that these were distinct from the Basket of Unleavened Bread,
etc. as I observed v. 15.

And the Nazarite shall shave the Head of his Separation.] i. e. The Hair of
his Head, which was consecrated to God, shall be shaved off; that it may be
presented unto him. For having now fulfilled his Vow, this Hair was holy: it
not having been defiled as that Hair was, which he shaved off before, v. 9.

At the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] That it might be publicly
known he had ended his Vow.

And shall take the Hair of the Head of his Separation.] His Hair, which was
consecrated to the LORD.

And put it in the fire.] Where it was burnt.

Which is under the Sacrifice of the Peace Offerings.] In the Court of the
Women, (as they tell us in Middoth, cap. 2. sect. 5.) where there were four
Rooms; and that in the North-east corner, was the Room of the Nazarites. In
which they boiled their Peace Offerings; and having polled their Hair, put it
under the Pot where the Sacrifice was boiling: which, as L'Empereur there
observes out of Abarbinel, was offered out of Joy, that their Vow was
fulfilled: and therefore they put their Hair to be there burnt, as a Testimony
that their Nazariteship was at an end; and that they had no further Obligation
to let their Hair grow in observance of this Law. And according to this
account, that Question is resolved which many have made; Whether the Nazarites
Hair was to be burnt with holy Fire, ( viz. that on the Altar) or with common.
For it was burnt with that which was under the Pot, or Cauldron, in which the
Peace Offerings were boiled: which was common Fire. And indeed it had been
unseemly to burn Hair upon the Altar; it being God's Table, where his Meat was
set before him: for it would not have been grateful at one of our Feasts. Yet
the Fire under the Peace Offerings may in some sort be called holy; as it was
employed to boil holy Meat: and in that regard more Sacred than other Vulgar
Fire.

There are those who think no account can be given of such Ordinances as these,
but only this; that it was so general a Custom, and so very ancient among
Mankind, to let their Hair grow on purpose, and to plait it in Locks, that they
might at a certain time cut it off, and devote it to some of their Gods: that
in all likelihood the Israelites would have followed their Superstition, if
God, to prevent it, had not instituted a way of doing what the rest of the
World did, without their Idolatry. For the Directions which God here gives
about it, are manifestly opposite to the way of the Gentiles. For the Nazarites
are here directed to cut their Hair (when the time of their Separation was
completed) at the Door of the Tabernacle; where it was also to be burnt:
whereas the Gentiles hung their Hair, when they had cut it, upon Trees; or
Consecrated it to Rivers, (as I observed v. 5.) or laid it up in their Temples,
there to be preserved. The Hebrew Nazarites also are required to offer various
sorts of Sacrifices, when they cut their Hair; of which we rarely read any
thing among the Gentiles. And all the time of their Separation were to drink no
Wine, nor eat Grapes, etc. which was not known among the Heathen. From whence
it is, one may think, that they are so often put in mind of the LORD, in this
Law of the Nazarites. Who are said to be Separated unto the LORD, v. 1, 5, 6.
and the Consecration of his God is said to be upon his Head, v. 7. and all the
days of his Separation he was holy to the LORD, v. 8. unto whom he consecrated
the days of his Separation, v. 12. To put them in mind, that though they used
this Rite, which was common to other Nations, yet it was in honor of the LORD
only; whom they acknowledged to be the Author of Health, and Strength, and
Growth. For the Devil also had his Nazarites, as appears from IX Hosea 10. All
this is said, and much more, with a specious show of Truth, by a most ingenious
and learned Friend of mine, now with God, in his excellent Book de Legibus
Hebraeorum Ritualibus, etc. Lib. III. Dissert. 1. cap. 6.

But there are two things wanting to make this Opinion probable. First, None
can tell how the World came by such a Custom of letting their Hair grow for
Sacred uses; unless they had it from Moses. Who tells us whence he derived it,
viz. from God: who appointed this Rite for such Reasons, as then were plain,
but now, perhaps do not appear to us. Besides, Secondly, there is not the least
Evidence that this Custom was so old as Moses his time: which to me seems not
likely, but rather that it was derived, among the Gentiles, from an imperfect
Knowledge of what is here ordained by Moses. For the chief part of this
Nazariteship, consisting in letting their Hair grow, and consecrating it unto
God, the Gentiles took it to be a piece of great Devotion, (...), etc. as
Theodoret speaks, Quaest. XXVIII. in Levit. not to cut off their Childrens
Hair, but let it grow, and after a certain time dedicate it to their Demons.
Many Authors have written much of this Custom; for which there was a certain
day appointed at Athens, viz. the third day of the Feast called (...). Which
day was called (...), because then the Hair of their grown Children was shorn
off, and sacrificed to Diana. See Petr. Castellanus in his Syntagma de Festis
Graecorum. Where he quotes a passage out of Hesychius (p. 28.) who says, That
before they cut off their Hair, they brought a Measure of Wine, which they
offered to Hercules, and then all that were present drunk of it. Which is some
imitation of the Drink Offering here mentioned by Moses, which was offered at
the Completion of their Nazariteship. And Grotius, and Huetius have made it so
plain that the Attick Laws were derived from Moses; that I cannot doubt but
this Custom also flowed from the same Fountain.

And if we must give an account of the reason of this Institution among the
Hebrews, I think that of Maimonides is better then this against which I have
excepted, viz. that this Law about their Hair was made in opposition to the
opinion of the ancient Idolaters, called Zabij; who held all things which were
separated from the Body to be impure; as the Hair, the Nails, and the Blood.
From whence, all Barbers among them were accounted impure Persons, because they
cut Men's Hair, and let Blood. And whosoever suffered a Rasor to pass upon his
Flesh, was required to wash himself in pure Fountain Water; as he shows, More
Nevochim, P. III. cap. 47.

And the Priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the Ram.] The left Shoulder,
which he was to take out of the Pot, as it was boiling: for the right Shoulder,
(which is called the Heave-shoulder in the next Verse) was the Priest's
Portion, by a Law made before this, VII Lev. 32, 33.

And one unleavened Cake out of the Basket, and one unleavened Wafer.] The
Basket of unleavened Bread was ordered to be offered before, v. 17. and now he
orders one of the Cakes, and one of the Wafers (mentioned with the Bread, v.
15.) to be put into the Hands of the Nazarite: the rest being burnt, I suppose,
upon the Altar.

And shall put them into the hands of the Nazarite.] That he might give them to
the Priest, in token of his Thankfulness to him for his pains.

After the Hair of his Separation is shaved.] And his Vow, in a manner,
completed: as it was immediately after these things were presented unto God.

Ver. 20. And the Priest shall wave them.] Both

For a Wave-offering before the LORD.] See VII Lev. 30, 31.

This is holy for the Priest, with the Wave-Breast, and Heave-shoulder.] These
two were the Priests Portion out of all Peace Offerings, as I observed before
from VII Lev. 34. but in this Peace Offering he had moreover, the other
Soulder; as a special Token of the Nazarite's Gratitude for his Cleansing.

And after that the Nazarite may drink Wine.] He was restored to his former
Freedom, to live as other Men did.

Ver. 21. This is the Law of the Nazarite, who has All these things he was
bound to perform, betore he could be freed from his Vow; though he was never so
poor.

Besides that that his hand shall get.] Besides which he might add if he
pleased, according to his Ability.

According to the Vow which he vowed, so must he do, after the Law of his
Separation.] There was a necessity that he should perform what his Vow obliged
him unto, according to the Law of Nazariteship: though he might voluntarily
offer what he thought good, over and above his Oblation; now that he was
executing his Vow. His Friends also might join with him, in the Expense he was
at for so many Sacrifices as he was enjoined to offer: or in providing
voluntary Offerings, beyond his Oblation. Thus we read in XXI Acts 23, 24. that
St. Paul, by the advice of St. James, and the Elders Jerusalem, was at charges
with certain Men that had this Vow upon them, and purified himself with them:
Which was agreeable to the Custom among the Jews, as Petitus and others have
observed out of Maimonides; who says others might help the Nazarites to fulfill
their Vow, and partake with them in it, by abstaining from Wine, etc. for some
time, as they did.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] The Tabernacle having been lately
erected, to which the People were all to resort; they are invited to it by the
Directions here given, how they should be dismissed, when they came to Worship.
Which was in such a manner, that they might not doubt (as R. Menachem glosses)
but the Divine Benediction would come down upon them from his Celestial
Habitation; when they devoutly frequented his House here on Earth.

Speak unto Aaron and unto his Sons, saying.] Whose proper Office it was to
bless the People; as it was to offer their Sacrifices, and burn Incense, XXI
Deuteronomy. 5.

On this wise he shall bless the Children of Israel, saying unto them.]
Standing so that they might be seen; with their Hands lifted up and spread;
speaking with a loud voice, with their Faces toward the People. See IX Lev. 22.

The LORD bless thee, and keep thee.] Give thee all good things, and preserve
thee from all evil.

Ver. 25. The LORD make his Face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee.] Be favorable unto thee, and pardon all thy Sins

Ver. 26. The LORD lift up his Countanance upon Be always with thee to

When this Benediction was said in the Sanctuary, (if we may believe the Jews)
it was but one, and pronounced without any Pause: The People keeping a profound
Silence; but out of the Sanctuary (in their Synagogues) they made three of it,
the Priest pausing at the end of every Verse, and the People saying Amen to
each of them. In the Sanctuary also they pronounced the name JEHOVAH, which is
here thrice repeated; but in their Synagogues they used some other name instead
of it. So the Mischna Sotae, Cap. VII. Sect. 6.

The Repetition of this Name three times, in these three Verses, and that with
a different Accent in each of them, (as R. Menachem observes) has made the
Jews themselves think there is some Mystery in it: Which we understand, though
they do not. For it may well be looked upon by us as having respect to the three
Persons in the Blessed Trinity; who are one God: from whom all Blessings slow
unto us, 2 Corinthians. XIII. 14. This Mystery, as Luther wisely expresses it,
(upon Psalm V.) is here occulte insinuatum, secretly insinuated, though not
plainly revealed. And it is not hard to show, if this were a place for it, how
properly God the Father may be said to bless and keep us; and God the Son, to
be gracious unto us; and God the Holy Ghost to give us Peace.

Ver. 27. And they shall put my Name upon the Children of Israel.] To put God's
Name upon them, was to commend them to his Almighty Goodness; or, to bless them
by calling upon the LORD, and beseeching him to bestow all that they desired
upon them.

And I will bless them.] The Jews from hence observe that God's Blessing, in
some sort, depends upon the Blessing of the Priest: Which they thought so
necessary, that such Priests as were admitted to no other Service, might
perform this; for fear the People should at any time want it. So Chaskuin upon
XXI Deuteronomy. 5. and Jalkut, (as Wagenseil observes upon the Gemara Sotae, Cap.
VII. Sect. 26.) whose words are these, The Blessing pronounced by a Priest, who
has some blemish in his Body, ought to be accounted legitimate.

Jonathan here paraphrases these words in this manner, I will bless them in my
WORD, or by my WORD: Which is the Apostolical Doctrine, that God the Father
has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, in or by, Christ, 1 Ephesians. 3. Who
with the Holy Ghost, is most high in the Glory of God the Father. And it is
observable, that the Jews think it utterly unlawful to add a fourth Benediction
to these three; though they find one in the 1 Deuteronomy. II. The LORD God of your
Fathers, make you a thousand times so many mo as you are; and bless you, as he
has promised you.

CHAP. VII.
AND it came to pass on the day that Moses Which he did upon the first Day of
the first Month of the second Year, after they came out of Egypt, XL Exodus 17,
18.

And had anointed it, and sanctified it, etc.] See VIII Levit. 10, 11. where it
is said he anointed also (as it here likewise follows) all belonging to it.
Which being seven days in doing, as appears from v. 35. of that Chapter, it is
evident that the word Day does not here precisely denote the very Day on which
the Tabernacle was erected: but more largely, at or about that time, (as it
must necessarily signify, v. 84. of this Chapter) after he had set up the
Tabernacle; and not only sanctified and anointed it, but received Orders about
Sacrifices, and anointed the Priests, (with the rest mentioned in the Book of
Leviticus) and also had numbered the People; ordered their Encampment, and the
Encampment of the Levites; and given them their Charge about the Tabernacle. In
short, when Moses had done all the things mentioned hitherto in this Book, then
followed this Dedication of the Altar. And whosoever will compare this Chapter,
with the second, may easily be convinced, that this Offering of the Princes,
was not made till the Camp was formed, and the Tribes ranged under their
several Standards. For the Princes Offer held in the same Order and Method,
that they are disposed there.

Ver. 2. That the Princes of Israel, heads of the House of their Fathers.]
Mentioned Chap. I. 5, 16.

And were over them that were numbered.] This evidently

Offered.] In the Order that is set down in this Chapter.

And they brought their Offering.] The LXX translate the Hebrew word Korbanam,
(...), their Gift, or their Present, which they made to God: Which consisted of
several things, for diverse uses.

Before the LORD.] i. e. At the Door of the Tabernacle; as it is explained in
the end of the Verse.

Six covered Wagons, and twelve Oxen.] In the first place they made a Present,
for the Service of the Tabernacle it self. That such parts of it as were most
cumbersome might be more conveniently carried; and that they might be free from
Dust, Rain, or Hail. The Wagons were covered; being not ordinary Carriages, but
such as were used by great Persons. So the LXX understood it; who translate the
Hebrew word Tzabbim, by (...) in the LXVI Isa. 20. and here (...). Now as
Pollux reckons (...) among the Wagons and Chariots then used: So Hesychius
tells us (as Learned Men have observed) it signifies such Wagons as illustrious
Men and Women used; and that they were covered above.

A Wagon for two of the Princes.] This shows plainly enough, that they were
sumptuous, and had, perhaps, rich Coverings; in that two of the great Men
joined in the Present of one Wagon.

And for each one an Ox.] That there might be a Pair of Oxen to draw each
Wagon. And it is probable, those Oxen were yoked together, which were offered
by those two Princes, who joined in offering one Wagon.

And they brought them before the Tabernacle.] Set them before the entrance of
it.

Ver. 4. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Moses did not accept these
Presents, till he had Orders from the LORD, in the next words.

Ver. 5. Take it of them.] Receive their Present, as

That they may be to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] He
directs their use; which was to carry the Tabernacle, when they removed from
one place to another.

And thou shall give them to the Levites.] In order to which, he directs him to
bestow them upon the Levites; who had the charge of that Carriage.

To every Man according to his Service.] In such Proportions, as the things
they had to carry required.

Ver. 6. And Moses took the Wagons and Oxen, and In such Proportions as follow
in the next two Verses.

Ver. 7. Two Wagons and four Oxen to the Sons of As they were fewest in number
that could do Service, so they had less burdensome things to carry than the
Sons of Merari, IV. 25, 40. and therefore had fewer Carriages allowed them.

Ver. 8. And four Wagons and eight Oxen he gave unto the Sons of Merari,
according to their Service.] They were the most numerous, but had the greatest

Under the hand of Ithamar the Son of Aaron the Priest.] Who had the Inspection
and Care both of the Gershonites and Merarites, IV. 28, 33.

But unto the Sons of Kohath he gave none.] For the reason that follows.

Because the Service of the Sanctuary belonging unto them, was that they should
bear upon their Shoulders.] The LXX translate it more exactly, because they had
the Service of the holy thing, ((...), as the Ark is called, IV. 4.) they shall
carry it on their Shoulders. Which was for the greater Honor and Dignity of
the Ark, and of the Law contained in it, as Maimonides, R. Levi ben Gersem, and
others observe. And that the Form and Structure of the Ark might not be
discomposed, (as Maimonides adds, More Nevochim, P. III. Cap. XLV.) nor the
Ephod, and the Breastplate rufled, as they might have been, by the shaking of a
Wagon. Yet they all observe this was not so peculiar to the Sons of Kohath, but
that the Priests the Sons of Aaron, upon some special occasion carried the Ark;
particularly when they went over Jordan, III Josh. 3. and at the Siege of
Jericho; at both which times a great Miracle was to be wrought. And when Zadok
and Abiathar carried it back to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel XV. 29. (though that, I
observed before, may be otherways interpreted, and there seems no reason why
they should carry it back, when the Levites brought it, ver. 24.) and when
Solomon's Temple was built, 1 Kings VIII. 6. for the Levites might not go into
the Holy Place, and therefore it was then carried by the Priests.

Ver. 10. And the Princes offered.] They brought the Offerings, which they
desired might be presented

For the dedicating of the Altar.] The Hebrew word Chanac, which in one place
of the Pentateuch signifies simply to begin, to use, or enjoy an House, XX
Deuteronomy. 6. here, and several other places signifies the first Application and
Addiction of any thing to Sacred Uses, or to the Divine Service; to which it
had been designed and consecrated. And this was done with some certain solemn
Words and Actions; as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. III. de Synedr. Cap. XIII. n.
1. and Cap. XV. n. 3. And so among the Latins the word inchoare, when applied
to Sacred things, signifies, to perfect or consummate, as Servius observes upon
the VI Aenead. And both Civil and Sacred Initiations, were accompanied with
great Joy and Gladness. But this is not to be understood, as if the Dedication
of the Altar was the setting of it apart, and sanctifying it for the Service of
God, (which had been done before, and VII days spent therein, XXIX Exodus 27.
VIII Lev. 11.) but, as the word properly signifies, the beginning to use it,
after it had been so sanctified.

In the day that it was anointed.] At the time that it was set apart; and all
other things ordered for the Safeguard of the Tabernacle. See v. 1.

Even the Princes offered their Offering.] Presented their Gifts, (as the LXX
translate it) which they desired God would accept upon this great occasion.

Before the Altar.] At the Door of the Tabernacle, near unto which the Altar
stood, XL Exodus 6. for he speaks of the Altar of Burnt-offerings.

And the LORD said unto Moses, they shall offer their Offering.] Here again
Rasi observes, that Moses would not receive their Offering, till he knew the
Mind of God: Who directed in what manner and order their Gifts should be
offered to him.

Each Prince on his day, for the dedication of the Altar.] This made the
Dedication a very long Solemnity, which continued twelve days. When these XII
days began, it is not easy to determine; but it seems to me a very reasonable
Computation, which Fortunatus Scacchus has made of this whole business,
Myrothec. Sacr. Elaeochrism. Lib. 2. Cap. LXXIV. Where he supposes that the
Tabernacle being erected the first Day of the first Month of the second Year,
after they came out of Egypt, seven days were spent in the Consecration of it,
and of the Altar, etc. And on the eighth day Moses began to consecrate Aaron,
and his Sons, which lasted VII days longer. Then the fifteenth day of that
Month was the first day of Unleavened Bread: Which God commanded (as we read
here Chap. IX.) to be observed in the first Month; and lasted till the Two and
twentieth. The rest of the Month we may well suppose was spent in giving,
receiving, and delivering the Laws mentioned in the Book of Leviticus. After
which on the first day of the second Month, he began to number the People,
according to the Command in the beginning of this Book: Which may be supposed
to have lasted three days. And then on the fourth the Levites were numbered: On
the next day we may suppose they were offered to God, and given unto the
Priests; on the sixth Day they were expiated and consecrated (as we read in the
next Chapter.) And on the seventh Day their several Charges were parted among
them, (of which we read Chapter IV.) After which the Princes, he supposes,
began to offer upon the eighth Day of the second Month, for the Dedication of
the Altar: which lasted till the nineteenth Day inclusively: and on the
twentieth Day of this Month they removed (as we read X. 11, 12.) from Sinai to
the Wilderness of Paran.

Ver. 12. And he that offered his Offering the first By God's order, no doubt.

Was Nahshon the Son of Amminadab, of the Tribe of Judah.] He held the
principal place among the Israelites, being the NASI, the Prince or Captain (as
we translate it, II Numb. 3.) of the Children of Judah; who had the first
Standard. And yet he alone of all the Twelve great Men here mentioned, is not
called NASI, Prince of Judah, as all the rest are called Princes of their
Tribe, v. 18, 24, 30, etc. but simply Nahshon of the Tribe of Judah. The Jews
give several reasons of it: but perhaps it was, because he offered first; which
was honor enough: and there needed no more to be said of him.

Ver. 13. And his Offering was one silver Charger, etc.] It appears by the
Metal that this Charger and Bowl were of, that they were for the use of the
Altar of Burnt-offerings, in the outward Court: for all the Vessels of the
Sanctuary were of Gold. And I take this Charger (or broad Dish, or Platter) to
have been offered, for receiving the Flesh which was offered at the Altar, or
the fine Flour for the Meat Offerings. And the Bowl received the Blood; or was
used for pouring out Wine.

Both of them were full of fine Flour mingled with Oil, for a Meat Offering.]
Which was to attend upon the Burnt-offering and the Peace Offering mentioned v.
15, 17. See IV. 7. where I observed, it was not difficult to procure this fine
Flour, in the Wilderness.

One Spoon of ten Shekels of Gold, full of Incense.] Both the Metal of which it
was made, and that which was in it, shows this Spoon was for the use of the
Golden Altar, in the Sanctuary. Which may incline one to think, that both
Altars were now dedicated: that is, first began to be used, for the Service of
the whole Congregation. See v. 88.

One young Bullock, one Ram, one Lamb of the first Year.] There are so many
Sacrifices mentioned here, and in the two following Verses, (no less than XXI.
in all) that, together with the silver and gold Plate, they look like too great
a Present, to be made out of one Man's private estate. And therefore some have
thought, that the rest of the great Men of the Tribe of Judah joined with
Nahshon in their Contributions toward it: and that it was offered in his own,
and their Names.

For a Burnt-offering.] This is first mentioned; as being the most ancient sort
of Sacrifice; long before we read of any other: and being an Acknowledgment of
God's Sovereign Dominion over all.

One Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering.] This in all likelihood was first
offered, though the other be first mentioned. For in the next Chapter we find
the Burnt-offering enjoined in the first place; but the Sin-offering offered
before it, VIII. 8, 12. The like I observed before VI. 16. See there.

Ver. 17. And for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings, two Oxen, five Rams, five
He-goats, five Lambs of the first year.] These Sacrifices were more numerous,
than the Burnt-offering or the Sin-offering; because the Seldom observes,
flowed from hence to the Gentiles, who dedicated their Altars, and Temples, and
Statues, etc. with much ceremony: and the ancient Greeks, (...), with more
sumptuous Sacrifices. See L. III. de Synedriis, cap. 14. number. 111. Where he
also shows how they were dedicated among the Romans with Plays, and Feasting,
and Public Largesses: and at last, their Feasts became Anniversary, as the
Feast of Dedication among the Jews was, after the times of Antiochus, number. 6,
7. In which Feast there was (...), Illuminations, (as we now speak) by setting
up of Candles or Lamps, in token of Joy, cap. 13. number. 9.

This was the Offering of Nahshon, the Son of Amminadab.] And was the pattern,
which all the rest followed.

Ver. 18. On the second Day.] Their Offerings twelve Days. For which reason the
Feast of Dedication, after Mattathias had purged the Temple and the Altar,
after the profanation of them by Antiochus, was kept eight days, by the Jews,
in following times; And this Parascha (as they call it) of the Law from VI. 22.
to VIII. 4. of this Book, was wont to be read at that Feast, as the same Mr.
Seldom observes, cap. 13. n. 7. As among the Romans he observes (cap. 14. n.
7.) there was a Feast of like nature kept six Days.

Nathaniel the Son of Zuar, Prince of Issachar, did offer.] This Tribe, and
Zebulun, being under the Standard of Judah, are the next that offer. And so
they proceed in the same order, Reuben, and those under his Standard offer
next; because they encamped next to them, v. 30, 36, 42, etc.

He offered for his Offering, one silver Charger, the weight whereof, was an
hundred and thirty Shekels, etc.] It may be observed, once for all, that there
is no difference in the Offerings of these Princes: but all offered Plate of
equal weight; and an equal number of Sacrifices, without the least variation.
Either by common Agreement, or by the Divine Appointment: that the Vanity of
vying one with another might be prevented; and none might brag of their
out-doing their Brethren; and all might be confident, that they were equally
interested in the Altar, and accepted by the Divine Majesty.

On the third day Eliab the Son of Helon, etc.] Here it may be observed, that
Moses thought fit to set down distinctly, and at length, the Offerings of the
Princes of every Tribe, (as he does here, and in the following part of this
Chapter) though they were the very same, without any difference; that an
honorable mention being made of every one apart, none might think themselves,
in the least neglected.

Ver. 30. On the fourth day Elizur, etc.] There is nothing new to be noted of
him, or any of the rest; because the same thing is repeated, for the reason
forementioned.

Ver. 48. On the seventh day Elishama, etc. offered.]

Ver. 84. This was the Dedication of the Altar.] By Gentiles were not content,
but used sometimes barbarous Rites in their Dedications, as appears by their
TAUROBOLIA and CRIOBOLIA in honor of the Mother of the Gods, etc. See Seldom
in the forenamed Book, cap. 14. n. 8, 9.

In the day when it was anointed.] The Dedication lasting twelve Days, it is
apparent the word day in this place, necessarily signifies the Time (were it
more or less) wherein a Thing was done; as I observed v. 1. and see v. 88.

By the Princes of Israel.] From whose Examples Princes and great Men should
learn (as Conradus Pellicanus well applies all this) to be devoutly Religious;
and to possess the Fear and Reverence of the LORD God in their Breasts: to be
strong in Faith: far from Covetousness; unanimous in their endeavors to do
Honor to God: to give a good Example of Faith and Good Works to others; to
seek the Profit of their Subjects; assist the Servants of God; lend their
helping Hand to the Proficiency of true Piety; provide the Ministers of the
Church with all things necessary, that Religion be not neglected and contemned
by their Poverty: for the sake of God whom they serve, to do them honor by
word and deed; and follow their godly Admonitions, etc. This is a profitable
Allegory, says he, of this History: and we need not seek for one more
ingenious. As for those who highly value the allegorical Sense of all these
things, Habent alios qui gustui suo consulent and curiositati. They may find
other Commentators to please their Taste, and satisfy their Curiosity.

Twelve Chargers of Silver, twelve silver Bowls, etc.] In these, and the
following words, the whole Sum of the Oblations and Sacrifices is set down by
Moses; that every Reader, in all future Times, might see (without the trouble
of casting up the account) how devout, and generous their Ancestors were.

All the Oxen for the Burnt-offering were twelve Bullocks, etc.] Whether there
were any Prayers made for a gracious acceptance of the Sacrifices, which should
be hereafter made on this Altar, we are not told. But the Sacrifices themselves
were in the nature of Supplications; and its likely they that offered them,
made their humble Petitions with them. And so the Gentiles always did at the
Dedication of their Temples or Altars. An instance of which is observed out of
Gruter by Fort. Scacchus and by Seldom, in these words; HANC TIBI ARAM JUPPITER
OPT. MAX. DICO DEDICOQUE UTI SIS VOLENS PROPITIUS MIHI COLLEGISQUE MEIS, etc.
Which is a Dedication of an Altar to Jupiter, with a Prayer that he would be
gracious to him that dedicated it, and to his Friends and Neighbors. The like
Dedication there is of a Temple to PRIAPUS near Padua, with this Prayer that he
would constantly guard their Fields, etc. Myroth. Sacr. Elaeochris. 2. c. 28.
L. III. de Synedr. c. 14. p. 290, 309.

With their Meat Offering.] Which was brought in the twelve Chargers and Bowls,
as a necessary Appendix to the Burnt-offerings and the Peace Offerings: as is
fully explained XV. 8, 9.

Ver. 88. This was the Dedication of the Altar.] Which Dedication: because this
was the first solemn Sacrifice which was offered for the Tribes, or particular
Persons among them; and therefore was the more sumptuous.

After that it was anointed.] Here the word day is omitted, (which is used v.
1. and v. 84.) Moses intending only to let Posterity know that this Dedication
followed not long after the anointing of the Tabernacle and the Altar; whereby
it was sanctified to God's Service.

Ver. 89. And when Moses was gone into the Tabernacle That is, with God. This
seems to be here mentioned, because he had lately had a special occasion to go
and enquire particularly of God, about a matter of great Concernment, as will
appear from IX. 8, 9. And it is likely he had gone in twice upon this occasion,
to consult him about the Offering of the Princes, v. 4, 5, 10, 11. And now, it
is possible, went in again to know if the LORD would give him any further
Directions.

Then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the Mercy-seat,
etc.] There God promised to meet him, and to commune with him, etc. XXV Exodus
22. Which supposes he would be always present there. And so he was; for the
Cloud of Glory filled the House after it was set up, LX Exodus 33, 34. from
whence God spoke unto him, I Lev. 1. and told him he would appear (i. e. reside
constantly) in the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat, XVI Lev. 2. Now here he relates,
how God appeared and communed with him from thence, which was by a voice, that
he heard of one speaking to him, as he stood in the outward part of the
Sanctuary. So the Jews understand it; particularly R. Solomon, who thinks that
Moses only entered into the Sanctuary, and standing, in the very entrance of it,
heard the voice speaking to him from between the two Cherubims: which was very
clear and strong; but went no farther than into the Sanctuary, where Moses
alone at that time was. So they observe in Siphra, as Butxtorf notes in his
Histor. Arca Foederis, cap. 15.

And he spoke unto him.] With an audible voice; and so distinctly, that he
perceived and understood every word. Which Abarbinel thinks God vouchsafed for
this reason; That as he visibly represented to him in the Mount the pattern of
the Tabernacle, and of every thing belonging to it, whereby the form and figure
of every particular was imprinted on his Mind, and he was the better able to
give directions how to make them exactly: So he being to write in his Law all
that God required them to do, he delivered every thing to him in an audible
voice; that he might set down in these Books the very Words and Phrases which
he heard with his Ears from the Mouth of God, as plainly as if he had described
them from some ancient Volume.

To which I cannot but add, That this audible articulate voice from God, which
was perceived by Humane Ears, represented God as if he was incorporate: and may
well be looked upon as an earnest of that great Mystery, God manifested in the
flesh; who in the Fullness of Time became a Man, and spoke to all the Jews
familiarly in their own Language.

CHAP. VIII.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Moses went into the Tabernacle
immediately after the Princes had offered, ( v. 89. of the foregoing Chapter)
it may be thought he then spoke these things to him. But both this, and what
follows concerning the Levites, seem rather to have been delivered, after the
order for giving them to the Priests, and settling their several Charges, (
Chap. III. and IV.) But some other things intervening which depended upon what
had been ordered concerning their Camp, and that of the Israelites, (see v. 4.)
Moses omits this, till he had set down them, and some other matters, which he
had received from God. See VII. 11.

Ver. 2. Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, when At the same time, the Public
Service of God began at the Altar of Burnt-offerings, (of which he speaks in
the foregoing Chapter) the setting on the Shewbread, offering Incense, and
lighting the Lamps, was begun in the Sanctuary. The last of these is only here
mentioned; but it supposes the other.

The seven Lamps shall give light over against the Candlestick.] Unto the
Table, which was over against the Candlestick; as the vulgar Latin very well
explains it: Which is rather a Paraphrase upon these words, than a Translation
of them, in this manner. When thou lightest the seven Lamps, let the
Candlestick be set up on the South Side, (for so it was ordered, XXVI Exodus 35.
and so Moses set it, XL. 24.) and let the Lamps look toward the North, over
against the Table of Shewbread. See XXV Exodus 37. where there is the like
obscure Expression, but to this Sense. And thus this Verse may be translated,
exactly out of the Hebrew, When thou set up the Lamps, the seven Lamps
shall shine before the face of the Candlestick: i. e. enlighten all the room,
that is opposite to it; for there were no Windows in the Sanctuary; and
therefore these Lamps were lighted.

And Aaron did so, he lighted the Lamps thereof, etc.] For God's Table being
placed over against the Lamps, where he was represented as Feasting with his
People, (which no body does in the dark) it was but sit, that there should be
continual light in that Place. And this, as I take it, is the first time that
the Lamps were lighted; when the Altar was dedicated, and the Public Service
of God began, which continued ever after.

And this work of the Candlestick was of beaten Gold, etc.] Upon this occasion
he briefly repeats, what is more largely said concerning the Structure of this
Candlestick, XXV Exodus 31, etc. and XXXVII. 17, etc.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] That which follows plainly belongs to
what was said, Chap. III. 7.

Take the Levites from among the Children of Israel.] In that place (III. 7.)
he bad Moses give them to Aaron and his Sons, out of the Children of Israel;
and now he executes it.

And cleanse them.] He had given them their Charge, ( Chap. IV.) and now he
prepares them for the performance of it. For they could not be fit to attend in
the Tabernacle till they were purified; and, in some sort, consecrated to that
Service.

Ver. 7. And thus shall thou do unto them, to cleanse them.] Here he directs
how they were to be purified; v. 9, 10, etc.) how they were to be consecrated
or dedicated to God.

Sprinkle the Water of purifying upon them.] The manner of making this Water is
not described, till XIX. 9. but in all likelihood had been ordered, and made
before; because the Levites were sprinkled with it; as those also were who had
been defiled by the dead, XIX. 13.

And let them shave all their Flesh.] The greatest Purity was required in them;
for they are here ordered to be cleansed, according to the cleansing of a
Leper, XIV Levit. 8, 9. and of a Nazarite, when he was defiled by the dead, VI
Numb. 9. R. Levi ben Gersom thinks there was this moral Signification in this
shaving; that they were hereby admonished, To cast away all worldly Cares, as
much as might be, and wholly give themselves to their sacred Ministry.

And wash their Cloths.] That their Bodies being cleansed, might not be defiled
by foul Apparel.

Ver. 8. Then let them take a young Bullock.] For a v. 12.

With his Meat Offering.] Which always attended upon Burnt-offerings, XV. 9.

And another young Bullock shall thou take for a Sin-offering.] This being
offered for the whole body of the Levites, is the same Sacrifice that is
ordered when the whole Congregation of Israel sinned through Ignorance, IV
Levit. 13, 14.

Ver. 9. And thou shall bring the Levites before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] To the Door of it, where the Altar of Burnt-offerings stood, XL
Exodus 6.

And thou shall gather the whole Assembly of the Children of Israel together.]
The Hebrew words COL ADATH, which we translate the whole Assembly, frequently
signifies all the Elders of Israel: As in XV. 4. XXV. 7. XXXV. 12. And it
cannot well have any other sense in this place, as appears from the next Verse.

And thou shall bring the Levites before the LORD.] Present them to him, at the
Altar.

And the Children of Israel.] The Elders of the People mentioned in the
foregoing Verse. For all the Children of Israel could not possibly do what is
here enjoined; but some of them in the name of the rest; and none so proper, as
their Rulers and Governors, who were their Representatives.

Shall put their hands upon the Levites.] As Men used to do upon their
Sacrifices. Which signified the devoting of that Beast to God, by him who laid
his Hand on it at the Altar; for such Purposes as he brought it. And this was
done by private Men in their Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings, as well as
in their Sin Offerings, (see I Levit. 4. III. 2. VIII. 13.) but the Jews
observe, that the whole Congregation laid their Hands only upon the
Sin-offering that was offered for them, IV Lev. 15. Therefore the Levites are
here to be considered under that notion; as is manifest from v. 19. where God
is said to have given them to Aaron, etc. to make an Atonement for the Children
of Israel. For the Levites being given to God instead of the Firstborn, by the
Sanctification of which Firstborn to God, (as it is called, XIII Exodus 1.) the
whole Family was sanctified, and their Sin after a sort expiated; the Offering
of the Levites after this manner to God, was to have the same effect, that the
Offering of the Firstborn had, viz. the Sanctification, and Atonement of the
Children of Israel.

Ver. 11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the The Hebrew words are
more significant; Aaron shall wave the Levites before the LORD, for a
Wave-offering, etc. I have often observed before, that this Waving, or
Agitation too and fro before the Altar, (of which see XXIX Exodus 24.) was a
solemn Consecration of a thing to God, as a Sacrifice: And therefore the
Levites were presented unto him, under the same Consideration, as the
Firstborn were. But it was impossible for Aaron to wave them, as he did some
parts of a Sacrifice; and therefore it is probable that he lifting up his
Hands, and turning about to all sides (as he did when he offered a
Wave-offering) they, at his Command, imitated the same motion; and so were
offered up to God, and became wholly his. See ver. 21.

That they may execute the Service of the LORD.] Or, as it is more
significantly in the Margin, that they may be to execute, etc. Which expresses
the Intention of this waving them before the LORD; that being wholly given up
to him, they might become meet to execute that Service, to which he appointed
them at his House.

Ver. 12. And the Levites shall lay their Hands upon the Heads of the
Bullocks.] It being evident from v. 19. that the Levites were considered, as an
expiatory Sacrifice; Israel laid upon them, ( v. 10.) might be transferred to
these Beasts; by laying their Hands upon them to be actually sacrificed unto
God by shedding their Blood.

The one for a Sin-offering, and the other for a Burnt-offering unto the LORD.]
The Burnt-offering was mentioned first, ( v. 8.) being the most ancient of all
Offerings, from the beginning of the World: But the Sin-offering is offered
first to make the other acceptable. And so it was when Aaron was consecrated,
VIII Levit. 14.18. and when he offered for himself, IX Levit. 8, 12. and for
the People, v. 15, 16. and (to name no more) in the Cleansing of a Leper, XIV.
19.

To make an Atonement for the Levites.] The Sin-offering properly made the
Atonement; and the Burnt-offering declared its acceptance.

And thou shall set the Levites before Aaron, and his Sons.] As they were
brought before the LORD, because they were to be given unto him, v. 9. So now
they were set before Aaron and his Sons, because they were given by God to
them, v. 19.

And offer them for an Offering unto the LORD.] Or, as it is in the Hebrew, and
wave them for a Wave-offering unto the LORD. Some imagine, that as Aaron waved
them before, v. 11. so now they were in like manner waved by Moses. But it
seems to me more probable, that the meaning is; they being waved, etc. should
be set before Aaron and his Sons, and presented to them as God's Gift,
according to his order, III. 9. And so these words ought to be translated,
after thou have waved them, for a Wave-offering. That is, after Aaron by his
Order had waved them. And thus, the like words must be understood, v. 15. See
there.

Ver. 14. Thus shall thou separate the Levites from among By the forementioned
Purification, v. 7. and Oblation, v. 10, 11.

And the Levites shall be mine.] They became his, by this solemn Oblation of
them to him, v. 11.

Ver. 15. And after that shall the Levites go in.] To

To do the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] In the Court of the
Priests where the Altar of Burnt-offering stood. For into the Sanctuary it self
none but the Priests entered; and there was no Ministry there, in which the
Levites were to assist.

And thou shall cleanse them, and offer them for an Offering.] Or rather, after
thou have cleansed them, and offered, etc. according as was directed, v. 7, 11.

Ver. 16. For they are wholly given unto me, etc.] Israel, III. 45. and now
they are given to him. The word is repeated twice in the Hebrew, given, given,
(which we translate wholly given) because the Children of Israel had devoted
them to him, by laying their Hands on them, v. 10. and Aaron had waved them as
a Wave-offering to the LORD, v. 11.

Instead of such as open every Womb, etc.] See III. 12, 13.

For all the Firstborn of the Children of Israel are mine, both Man and Beast,
etc.] XIII Exodus 2.

And I have taken the Levites for all the Firstborn of the Children of
Israel.] By the exchange, mentioned III. 2, 13, 45.

And I have given the Levites as a Gift to Aaron, and to his Sons, etc.] In the
Hebrew the words are more emphatical, I have given the Levites given, etc. That
is, the Levites which are given unto me, v. 16. I have given unto Aaron, and
his Sons, III. 9.

To do the Service of the Children of Israel.] See III. 7. The Vulgar Latin
translates it, to serve me for the Children of Israel; i. e. to do them
Service, by assisting the Priests in offering Sacrifice for the People.

In the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] See v. 15.

And to make an Atonement for the Children of Israel.] Not by offering
Sacrifice, for that was the work of the Priests alone; but by being offered
themselves, in the nature of an expiatory Sacrifice unto God, as I observed
before, v. 10, and 12. For though they were not slain at the Altar, as
Sacrifices were, yet they might expiate, as the Scapegoat did: Which was sent
away alive into the Wilderness, after it had been presented unto the LORD, as
these Levites were, XVI Levit. 7, 10.

That there be no Plague among the Children of Israel.] As there would have
been, if any Man had presumed to officiate in the House of God; but such as
were, in this manner, taken by himself to minister there.

When the Children of Israel come nigh unto the Sanctuary.] To worship God; and
to bring their Sacrifices to be offered at his Altar.

Ver. 20. And Moses and all the Congregation of Israel.] The Elders of the
People, v. 9, 10.

Did to the Levites according unto all that the LORD commanded Moses concerning
the Levites, etc.] Separated them to God from the rest of the Israelites, as he
had directed, v. 14.

Ver. 21. And the Levites were purified, and they According to the order given
v. 7.

And Aaron offered them an Offering before the LORD.] Or rather, Waved them a
Wave-offering, etc. As I observed v. 11. To which may be added, That it is
likely some of the Levites were thus waved in the name of all the rest: for
there being Two and twenty thousand of them, (III. 39.) one cannot well
conceive how they should be every one thus offered.

And Aaron made an Atonement for them to cleanse them.] See v. 12.

Ver. 22. And after that the Levites went in to do According to the Directions
given v. 15.

Before Aaron and before his Sons.] In their presence, and by their direction.

Ver. 23. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.]

Ver. 24. This it is that belongs unto the Levites.] Add this, to what has
been said about them.

From twenty and five years old and upward they shall Then they might begin to
take the Custody of the Tabernacle upon them; and to be Door-keepers, to keep
out Strangers, and such as were unclean: but not to load the Wagons, and do
such like work of burden till they were thirty years of Age. See IV. 3.

To wait upon the Service of the Tabernacle, etc.] In the Hebrew the words are,
To war the warfare of the Tabernacle. Which is a Phrase often used before, IV.
3, 23, etc. and there applied to those that carried the Tabernacle. Which they
might not do till thirty years of Age: but might go in to learn at five and
twenty, as some reconcile these two. But Abarbinel notes, That there is nothing
said of their learning, but of their Service, or Ministry: and therefore at
twenty five years old they began that part of the Service; which consisted in
the Custody of the Tabernacle.

And from the Age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the Service
thereof.] In the Hebrew, Shall return from the warfare of their Service: i. e.
be discharged from their Function; and no longer burdened with any laborious
work; as that of carrying the Tabernacle was.

And shall serve no more.] In such manner of work.

But shall minister with their Brethren.] This Ministry is explained in the
following words, To keep the charge: that is, to take care of the Tabernacle;
unto which they were to be a Guard.

In the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] See IV. 3.

And shall do no Service.] In the Hebrew, Serve no Service: that is, do no
laborious work, (as was said before) their Age beginning to require ease and
rest: and therefore no Ministry was required of them, but what they might well
perform without pains and labor.

Thus shall thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.] Appoint them their
Ministries, according to these Rules: which were observed after the Ark of God
was settled, and there was no occasion to remove it any more. When David
therefore, instead of carrying the Ark and the Tabernacle, (for which there was
then no further occasion) appointed them to be Singers in the Temple, and
Porters, etc. For which they were fit at twenty years of Age: but continued
their Employment no longer than till fifty, (as the Jews tell us) when their
Voice began to decay. Whence that Observation of Abarbinel upon this very
Chapter: Age makes Levites unfit for Service, not Blemishes in their Bodies:
but Priests are unfit by Blemishes in their Bodies, not by Age. For Priests
continued their Service as long as they lived: and though they did not begin it
till twenty years of Age; yet no Law of God forbad them to begin sooner.

CHAP. IX.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses in the Wilderness of Sinai.] Or, the LORD had
spoken: for he relates now what was done a Month ago; but not recorded till
now, for a special reason. Which was, that God having commanded them in the
Month before this, to keep the Passover, some Persons were unprepared for it:
and thereupon a question arose, What Course they should take? for they were
much troubled they could not do as their Brethren did. Which produced a new
Command from God, that they should keep the Passover in this second Month of
the first Year after they came out of Egypt. This Moses being to give an
account of, as a matter of great importance, he does it in the proper place for
it, when he was relating what things were done in this Month, (I. 1.) and
deferred the mention of keeping the Passover in the first Month; till he could
speak of them both together.

In the first Month of the second year, after they were come out of the Land of
Egypt.] In which Month they were commanded to keep the Passover, in memory of
their wonderful Deliverance from the Land of Egypt.

Let the Children of Israel also keep the Passover at his appointed season.]
Aaron having been lately consecrated, and having offered all sorts of
Sacrifices for himself and for the People; and God having declared his
acceptance by Fire from Heaven (VIII and IX Lev.) God commanded the People
should keep the Passover; which he had lately admonished them was one of the
Feasts of the LORD, XXIII Lev. 5. But the first order for the observation of
it, being that they should keep this Service, when they came to the promised
Land, XII Exodus 25. they might thence conclude, there lay no Obligation upon
them, to keep it here in the Wilderness. And therefore by a Special Precept
they are required to keep it, (when the year was come about to the time of its
first Observation) that the memory of so singular a Benefit, might not
presently slip out of their mind. See XIII Exodus 5.

Ver. 3. In the fourteenth day of this Month at Even, So it was ordained XII
Exodus 6. XXIII Lev. 5.

According to all the Rites of it.] With unleavened Bread, and bitter Herbs,
and the other Rites mentioned XII Exodus 9, 10.

And according to all the Ceremonies thereof.] If there be any difference
between Ceremonies and Rites, I should think this belongs to their Eating it in
haste, with their Loins girt, Shoes on their Feet, and Staves in their hands,
XII Exodus 11. Unto which they were not bound, when they came into the Land of
Canaan, when they were no longer Travelers; but, it is likely, were observed
here in the Wilderness, when they were in an unsettled Condition.

Ver. 4. And Moses spoke unto the Children of Israel, According to all the
Rites and Ceremonies belonging to it.

Ver. 5. And they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first Month at
Even.] It was not hard to procure so much Flour, as would serve to make

In the Wilderness of Sinai.] Where they rested almost a whole Year. But after
they removed from thence, were so uncertain in their Motions from place to
place, that they did not Circumcise their Children: who consequently could not
eat of the Passover. And therefore we never read of its being kept after this,
during their forty Years stay in the Wilderness: nor would they have been
obliged, as I said, to keep it now, without this Special Command. Yet their
Doctors say, That this is written by Moses as a reproach to the Israelites,
that they observed no Passover in the Wilderness, but this one alone. Yet there
are Christian Writers, who deliver it as the Opinion of the Hebrews themselves,
that they kept another Passover, a little before they ended their Wanderings in
the Wilderness, viz. in the first Month of the Year wherein Miriam died. See
Seldom de Synedr. Lib. II. cap. 2. n. 1.

According to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did the Children of
Israel.] They kept the Passover on the fourteenth Day at Even: but perhaps did
not keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread, for seven Days following. For here is
no mention of that; and it had not been easy to provide so much Bread, the
want of which was supplied by Manna.

And there were certain Men who were defiled by the dead Body of a Man.] And by
a late Law, (for there is Nothing about this, in the Original Law of the
Passover, XII Exodus.) no Unclean Person might eat of Holy Things, VII Lev. 20.

That they could not keep the Passover on that day.] On the fourteenth Day of
the first Month at Even; when the rest kept the Passover, who were not defiled.

And they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day.] On the very Day that
the Passover was kept.

Ver. 7. And these Men said unto him.] Though Moses only, as the Supreme Judge
in such singular Cases. For the Judges which were constituted by the Advice of
Jethro, could not resolve this hard question: and therefore they resorted to
Moses, unto whose Judgment all difficult Causes were reserved, XVIII Exodus 22,
26. See Seldom, L. II. de Synedriis, cap. 1. n. 3.

We are defiled by the dead Body of a Man.] And therefore some may think should
have been excluded out of the Camp, (according to what was ordained V. 2.) and
consequently kept from coming with such Questions, or about any other Business
to Moses. But it must be considered, that when this happened, the Law now
mentioned was not given: for this was in the first Month of the second Year;
and that Law was not given till the second Month, when the Camps were formed.

Wherefore are we kept back.] It was against their will that they were defiled
by the dead Body of a Man, (which perhaps they were bound to bury) and
therefore they expostulate with Moses, about their being denied the Liberty
which others had: pleading, in effect, it was not their Fault that they were
defiled by the Dead, but rather their Unhappiness; and therefore why might they
not challenge a Right in this Sacrifice, as well as others, seeing they had not
forfeited it by any voluntary Guilt.

That we may not offer an Offering of the LORD.] The Passover is called the
KORBAN of the LORD; because it was to be killed, and its Blood sprinkled,
(which shows it to be properly a Sacrifice) and then eaten by God's
Commandment, in a grateful remembrance of an exceeding great Benefit: which
shows it to be an Eucharistical Sacrifice. For though the first Sacrifice in
Egypt was to procure Deliverance to them, and to avert the Evil which fell on
the Egyptians by the destroying Angel: Yet ever after it was a Thanksgiving for
Deliverance then wrought, by God's special favor to them. Of which there was a
compendious Commemoration made, in their Paschal Rites, XII Exodus 25, 26, 27.

In his appointed season among the Children of Israel.] For if they did not
perform this Service now, they knew it was not lawful to be done at any other
time.

And Moses said unto them, stand still.] Or wait here a while. In which words
Moses himself acknowledges the difficulty of the case; which he could not
resolve, till he had first consulted the Divine Majesty about it. Which teach
Judges not to be ashamed to confess their Ignorance, and take advice in Matters
dubious, as the Jerusalem Targum here observes. But I see no such good ground
for the other part of his Observation on this Verse; that there being four
difficult Causes brought before Moses, in two of them he made haste to
determine; but in the other two he was slow. Those of the first sort were this,
and that of the Daughters of Zelophehad, Chap. XX. these he judged presently,
because they were pecuniary Matters; but the other two (viz. about him that
blasphemed, XXIV Levit. and him that gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day, XV
Numb.) being capital Causes, he took longer time to judge, for he put them in
Ward till the Mind of the LORD was known. To teach those that succeeded him in
the Office of Judges, to make quick dispatch in Money Matters, but to proceed
slowly in Capital Causes. But as this was no pecuniary Cause; so it does not
appear but he took as much time to understand the Mind of God in it, as in the
other two about Blasphemy, and Sabbath-breaking: For he went in to consult with
him, as he did also in the case of Zelophehad's Daughters, whose Cause he
brought before the LORD, XXVII. 5.

I will hear what the LORD will command concerning you.] These words seem to
signify that Moses might go into the Holy Place when he pleased, to enquire of
God; where God spoke with him in an audible Voice, VII. 89. whenever he
desired Satisfaction about any Doubt. So Abarbinel, who in this forsakes the
Talmudists: For they fancy, that because God called to Moses, and then spoke to
him out of the Tabernacle, (I Levit. 1.) he could never go into the Holy Place,
but when he was called. Which was true only at that time when the Glory of the
LORD had newly filled the Tabernacle; so that he durst not come into it, till
he was invited: But was not a general Rule to be observed in all his Colloquies
with the Divine Majesty, (that he should wait till he had a singular Call to
come to him) for it is plain by this place, that he went in to speak with him,
whenever he had occasion.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] He brought this Case before the LORD,
as his manner was in such Doubts, and the LORD gave him the following Answer:
Which was to be a Rule not only to these present Enquirers, but to all
Posterity.

If any Man of you, or of your Posterity, shall be unclean.] From hence the
Jews observe, that this is a Law concerning particular Persons only; not
concerning all the People, or the major part of them. For, as the Mischna says
in the Title Pesachim, Cap. 7. if all the People, or the greater part, or the
Priests had contracted any Defilement, they ought notwithstanding to keep the
Passover, even in that Defilement. But if the lesser part only were defiled,
then they that were clean ought to keep it in the first Month, and they that
were defiled in the second. This they ground upon the very first words of this
Law, v. 6. There were certain Men; and upon these, if any Man of you, etc. From
whence, says Maimonides, this Doctrine follows, out of ancient Tradition, that
there were some private Persons, who were adjourned to the second Passover; but
if the generality should be defiled by the dead, they were not to be so
adjourned, but to sacrifice in that Uncleanness. A great deal more to the same
purpose may be seen in the forenamed Mr. Seldom, Lib. 2. de Synedr. Cap. I. n.
3.

By reason of a dead body.] This Case is mentioned instead of all other, of
like nature. For there was the same reason for those who were unclean by a
Leprosy; for Women in Childbed, or that were menstruous, or those that had a
Running-issue, or had touched a dead Carcass. And this some of them ground upon
v. 13. Where speaking of those who should keep the Passoever, it is said in
general, the Man that is clean, etc. therefore he that was any way unclean,
might not keep it.

Or be in a Journey afar off.] Out of his own Country, (for it could not be
kept any where but in Judaea, XVI Deuteronomy. 2.) or at such a distance, that he
could not reach the Tabernacle upon the Day appointed. In the Mischna indeed
this dereck rechokah, as it is in the Hebrew, (a long way off) is defined to be
fifteen Miles from Jerusalem, or the place where the Tabernacle was. Whence
Maimonides says, If any Man on the fourteenth Day of the Month Nisan, at Sun
rising was fifteen Mile, or more from Jerusalem; this was a remote way: but if
he was not so far from it, he was not comprehended in this remote way; for he
might be at Jerusalem time enough in the Afternoon, to keep the Passover that
Evening; though he went but a slow pace, and that on foot. But I do not take
this to be a reasonable Explication. Philo has determined the distance a great
deal better, according to the Interpretation I mentioned at first, (L. III. de
Vita Mosis.) Where he says, the second Passover was permitted, (...), etc. To
such who were hindered by their Travels into Countries a great way off, from
sacrificing with the rest of their Nation. For it was not their fault that they
were deprived of this honor; especially considering that so small a Country as
Judaea could not contain such a populous Nation, but sent out Colonies into
many places. As for those who were only XV Mile from Jerusalem, they might
easily have come to the Feast, if not on the Fourteenth day, yet the day
before; and if this distance had been a good reason to excuse their absence,
most of the Nation might have staid away without any danger.

Yet he shall keep the Passover unto the LORD.] When that Uncleanness is gone;
and he is returned to his own Country again.

The fourteenth day of the second Month at Even, they shall keep it.] They had
a whole Month's time given them, to dispose themselves and their Affairs so,
that they might be able to keep it.

And eat it with unleavened Bread, and bitter Herbs.] Those Jews who are called
Karaites, as Mr. Seldom observes in the place before-named, n. 7. expressly say,
that they were not bound in the second Month Passover, unto more than this; to
eat the Lamb with unleavened Bread, and bitter Herbs: but they were not obliged
to keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven days; because they might do that in
the Passover of the first Month. For the Unclean are only prohibited to eat the
Passover; but not to keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

If the same Persons that could keep it in the first Month, happened again to be
unclean in the second, they could not keep it in the third, or the fourth
Months: For this had been to confound one Feast with another; and there is no
order for it.

Ver. 12. They shall leave none of it till the morning, nor break any bone of
it.] This belongs to the eating of the Paschal Lamb, XII Exodus 10, 46.

According to all the Ordinances of the Passover, they See v. 3. This is to be
understood of all the Rites that were proper to the Offering, and to the eating
of the Paschal Lamb: but not to the keeping of the Seven Days of Unleavened
Bread.

Ver. 13. But the Man that is clean, and is not in a In the first Month, which
was the time appointed for it.

Even the same shall be cut off from his People.] By the hand of the Judges; or
of God.

Because he brought not the Offering of the LORD in his appointed season.] See
v. 7.

That Man shall bear his sin.] The Punishment of it.

Ver. 14. And if a Stranger shall sojourn among you.]

And will keep the Passover unto the LORD.] Has a desire to join with you in
this Solemnity.

According to the Ordinance of the Passover, and according to the manner
thereof, so shall he do.] He was to be Circumcised, and his whole Family; or
otherwise he could not be permitted to keep it. See XII Exodus 44. If he was
made an entire Proselyte after the Passover in the first Month, and before that
in the second; it was a question whether he might keep it then, or no.

Ye shall have one Ordinance both for the Stranger, and for him that was born
in the Land. See XII Exodus 49.

Ver. 15. And on the day that the Tabernacle was reared up.] This is here
mentioned again by Moses; because he is going to speak of their removal from
Sinai: which was by the direction and guidance of this Cloud; which settled
upon the Tabernacle when it was first erected, XL Exodus 34.

The Cloud covered the Tabernacle, namely the Tent of the Testimony.] The words
may be exactly rendered out of the Hebrew, The Cloud covered the (Mischan, or)
dwelling place of God, upon (or over) the Tent of the Testimony: that is, over
that part of the Tabernacle where the Ark was, the Cloud appeared visible to
all, viz. over the most holy Place; where the LORD appeared in a glorious Cloud
upon the Mercy Seat, XVI Lev. 2.

And at Even.] When it grew dark.

There was upon the Tabernacle.] Upon that part of it now mentioned.

As it were the appearance of fire.] The same Cloud which was outwardly dark,
was bright within: and turned that light side toward them in the Night; when
the cloudy part could not be seen, nor be useful to them.

Till the morning.] Till it was day, when the Cloud was more serviceable to
them than the Light.

So it was always.] All the time of their continuance in the Wilderness. See
XIII Exodus 21.

The Cloud covered it by day.] The word by day is not in the Original: it being
the manner of the Hebrew Language to omit a word sometime in one part of a
Sentence; which the other part necessarily supplies: As in LXXXIV Psalm. 11. One
day in thy Courts is better than a thousand; i. e. in any other place. And XCI
Psalm. 7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, (i. e. on thy left hand) and ten
thousand at thy right hand.

And the appearance of fire by night.] As the dark side of the Cloud appeared
by Day over the holy Place, when they had need of no other Light but that of
the Sun; so the bright part appeared every Night, and that like Fire; when the
Cloud, by reason of darkness, could not be seen, nor be serviceable to them for
their direction. See XL Exodus 38.

Ver. 17. And when the Cloud was taken up.] Or Moses gives an account of their
removal from Mount Sinai: and the reason of their staying a longer or shorter
time in those places to which they removed, all the time of their Travels in
the Wilderness.

Then after that the Children of Israel journeyed.] They took down the
Tabernacle, when the Cloud was gone up from it, (as had been directed IV. 5,
etc.] and followed the Cloud, which went before them, and led them to the place
where they were to rest, XIII Exodus 21.

And in the place where the Cloud abode.] Where it stopped its motion, and stood
still.

There the Children of Israel pitched their Tents.] Set up the Tabernacle; and
encamped round about it.

Ver. 18. At the commandment of the LORD the The motion of the Cloud was an
indication of the Divine Pleasure, that they should move also, and go toward
another Station: which they did, and went on, as long as the Cloud moved.

And at the commandment of the LORD they pitched.] For when the Cloud stood
still, that was a Divine Direction to them to stand still also, and there to
six their station where the Cloud stood. Which, as soon as the Tabernacle was
set up again, came down and settled upon it, in its wonted place, over the Tent
of the Testimony, v. 15.

As long as the Cloud abode upon the Tabernacle, they rested in the Tents.] And
as long as the Cloud rested immovable, in that new place to which it had
conducted them; they likewise rested in Tents round about it.

And when the Cloud tarried long upon the Tabernacle many days.] As it
sometimes did: for Maimonides reckons that they staid eighteen years in one
place.

Then the Children of Israel kept the Charge of the LORD.] This Phrase is used
here something differently from the sense it has III. 25, 28, etc. signifying
their Obedience to God in fixing their abode there where the Cloud rested, till
it moved again; though it rested never so long.

And journed not.] This is the Explication of the foregoing words, they kept
the charge of the LORD: Not daring to stir without the Conduct of God, though
sometimes they staid so long in a place, that, no doubt, it was very irksome to
those, who were very desirous, if not impatient, to be in the Land of Promise.
This is an Instance of some regard they had to the Divine Majesty; though they
did not fear and reverence him so much as they ought to have done: Which
appeared by their frequent Mutinies and Disobedience, mentioned in the
following Story.

Ver. 20. And so it was, when the Cloud was a few days upon the Tabernacle,
according to the commandment,

Ver. 21. And so it was when the Cloud abode from That is, if it did not stay a
whole Day in a place, but settling in the Even upon the Tabernacle, it was
taken up again the next Morning; yet they followed its motion. This is a great
Instance of their Obedience in this Particular: for having rested but one
Night, they might be weary; and very unwilling to take down their Tents and the
Tabernacle, and Travel again the next Morning.

Whether it was by Day or by Night that the Cloud was taken up, they
journeyed.] This is a further Instance of their being perfectly guided by God
in this Matter; that though they were at rest in their Beds, yet if notice was
given of the motion of the Cloud, they rose up and went after it. For they were
sensible their safety depended upon the Protection and Guidance of this Cloud.

Ver. 22. Or whether it were two Days, or a Month, etc.] These words may seem
superfluous (says Maimonides, P. III. More Nevochim, cap. 50.) unto those who
do not consider the intention of Moses in this Relation: Which was to confute
the conceit of profane People, who imagined the reason of the Israelites
staying so long in the Wilderness, was because they lost their way. For the
Arabians, he says, in his days, still called the Wilderness, in which they
traveled, the wandering Desert; fancying the Israelites here bewildred, (as we
speak) and could not find their way out; but wandered like Men in the dark,
backward and forward; not knowing which way to turn themselves: Therefore the
Scripture punctually shows, that all their Removals (which were irregular) and
the Time they rested in any Place, (which was very unequal, being sometimes for
eighteen Years, some only for one Day, or one Night) were all ordered by a
special direction of God. For which Cause all the Circumstances of their Motion
are recited so particularly by Moses. Which shows also that the way from Horeb
to Kadesh-barnea (on the Borders of the Land of Canaan, was a plain, known and
beaten Road, of about eleven days Journey; which it was not easy for them to
miss. And therefore the Cause of their going about, and of their staying forty
years in the Wilderness, is that which Moses relates.

At the commandment of the LORD they rested in the Tents, etc.] This is the
usual recapitulation of what goes before. See Chapt. II. 34. IV. 49. VI. 21.
And here was the more necessary, because it gives an account of a most material
thing, their long stay in the Desert, through which God thought fit to lead
them, XIII Exodus 17, 18.

They kept the charge of the LORD.] Moved or rested according to the Direction
which God gave them.

At the commandment of the LORD.] See v. 18.

By the hand of Moses.] By his Ministry, who told them they were to be guided
in their Motions by the Cloud. And therefore they expected no other Commandment
but that: the LORD being in that Cloud, and telling them by its Motion or Rest
what they should do. And when it did move, no question, it was so leisurely, as
that they, their Children, and Cattle might follow it with ease, and be able to
take their necessary Refreshment.

It is observable, that in all these verses, 18, 20, 23. where it is said they
journeyed or rested al pi, (at the Mouth) which we well translate at the
Commandment of the LORD. Onkelos renders it at the Mouth (or Commandment) of
the WORD of the LORD: Which WORD he takes to have given to Moses all the
Commandments he received: For so he translates those words XXV Exodus 22. And
there will I meet thee, by these; and I will prepare, (or appoint) my WORD to
thee there: to deliver, that is, the Divine Oracles and Answers to him.

CHAP. X.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] viz. the removal of their Camp, v. 11.

Ver. 2. Make thee two Trumpets.] There were several Eustathius shows upon
Homer's Iliad E p. 1138. where he mentions six. The second of which was (...),
turned up round like a Ram's horn; which, he says, the Egyptians used (it
being found out by Osiris) when they called the People to their Sacrifices;
(...). It was called in their Language (...). Now in this Moses opposed the
Egyptians, (which they would do well to take notice of, who make their Customs
to be of the greatest Antiquity) for those which he here ordered to be made
were long, such as we use at present. So Josephus tells us, in whom there is a
large description of them, Lib. III. Antiq. cap. 11. where he says they were a
Cubit long, and narrow like a Pipe; but wider, as ours are, at the bottom.

Though only two be now ordered for present use, it did not hinder their making
more hereafter; when both Priests, and People also were multiplied. See 2 Chronicles. V. 12. where in Solomon's time there were an hundred and twenty Priests
sounding with Trumpets. And Josephus mentions a vast number more, Lib. VIII.
Antiq. cap. 2.

Of silver.] These being Sacred Trumpets, as Josephus frequently calls them, it
was fit they should be made of this pure Metal: which gave them also a shriller
sound.

Of one whole piece shall thou make them.] As he did the Candlestick, XXV Exodus
31. which made them the more firm; and apter to give a certain and distinct
sound.

That thou may use them for the calling of the Assembly, and for the
journeying of the Camps.] These are the two great uses for which they were
designed. Unto which some think a third is added, v. 9. See there. It is
certain that in v. 10. another use of them is assigned.

Ver. 3. And when they.] i. e. The Priests, v. 8.

Shall blow.] With an equal and continued sound.

With them.] With both the Trumpets; as appears from v. 4.

All the Assembly shall assemble themselves to thee.] By this kind of sound,
with both the Trumpets, the People understood that the whole Congregation was
called to meet together.

At the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Which seems to have been
the usual place where they assembled; and made their meeting the more solemn,
because it was before the LORD.

Ver. 4. And if they blow but with one Trumpet, then etc.] If only one Trumpet
made the sound beforementioned, it was intended to summon only the Princes of
Israel to attend Moses.

Shall gather themselves to thee.] At the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, as was said before.

Ver. 5. When ye blow an alarm.] When they did Tara-tan-tara: but, that word,
(as Dr. Lightfoot observes) signifies a blast, which put the quavering Sound
before and after, and the plain Note in the midst; which is contrary to the
Jewish description of it. See Temple Service, chap. 7. sect. 2. Hottinger makes
no other distinction between the foregoing Sound, v. 3. called Tekiah, and this
called Teruah: but that the former was equal, and this was quick and concise,
Analect. Dissert. III. p. 152.

Then the Camps that lie on the East parts shall go forward.] viz. If this
Alarm was blown only once, (as appears from Verse 6.) then the Hosts that were
under the Standard of Judah began to march. See Chapt. II. 3.

When ye blow an Alarm the second time, etc.] Having ceased for a while, if the
Alarm was blown again, then those Tribes which were under the Standard of
Reuben (Chapt. II. v. 10, 11, etc.) began to move, who lay on the South Side.

They shall blow an Alarm for their Journeys.] That is, they shall blow a third
and fourth Alarm, for the moving of the other two Standards. So the LXX.
rightly explain it, in so many words at length; Ye shall blow an Alarm the
third time, and the Camps that lie toward the Sea (i. e. on the West Side)
shall take their Journey; and ye shall blow the fourth Alarm, and they shall
lie toward the North, etc. In what order the Camp of the Levites moved, is
related afterward, v. 17, 21.

And when the Congregation is to be gathered together, you shall blow, but you
shall not sound an Alarm.] Here is a manifest distinction between plain blowing
and sounding an Alarm: which were for different purposes; and accordingly to be
used, v. 3, 5.

And the Sons of Aaron the Priests shall blow with the Trumpets.] None else was
permitted to use them, either for calling the Assembly together; or for their
March, or at their Feasts: because God would have the greater regard paid to
the Sound which was made by his Ministers; as if he himself called upon them to
attend his Summons.

And they shall be to you for an Ordinance for ever throughout your
Generations.] These Trumpets shall be used by you, not only while you stay in
the Wilderness; but in future Ages, as long as you are a Nation.

Ver. 9. And if you go to war in your Land, against etc.] This is thought to be
a third use of the Trumpets; when they were going to give Battle to their
Enemies. Which may be confirmed from XXXI. 6. and from 2 Chronicles. XIII. 12. But
this does not exclude another meaning; which is, that they called the People
together to Fast, and pray to God, before they went out to Battle. For it is
certain that a Fast was proclaimed by blowing of the Trumpet, II Joel 15, etc.
Which justifies what Maimonides says in Taanioth, cap. 1. that they blow with
the Trumpet, not only when they were in danger from their Enemies; but in all
other Distresses, by Famine, or Pestilence, etc. For he makes this blowing with
the Trumpets in this place, to be the same with that Precept, L Psalm. 14. Call
upon me in the day of Trouble, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 36. The only Objection
that I can find against this Exposition (which is very ancient) is, that Moses
speaks here of blowing an Alarm with the Trumpets: which was not used ( v. 7.)
for calling the Assembly together; but for the motion of the Camps, v. 5. yet
one cannot conceive how they should be gathered together to make an Army to
sight with their Enemies, but by some sort of Sound with the Trumpet, (See III
Judge. 27. VI. 34.) and being met, it is highly probable they called upon God by
Prayer and Fasting for good Success; as the latter part of this Verse
intimates. Besides, these silver Trumpets seem to have been used only at the
Sanctuary; and other Trumpets were used when they went to War. For at the Siege
of Jericho, the Priests blew with Horns, not with these silver Trumpets.
Therefore they may well be thought here to have called them to the Sanctuary to
pray to God, before they went to War; and that by blowing an Alarm; whereby
they understood the meaning of the Summons. And if we may believe the Jews,
they used, when the Temple was built, to blow an Alarm every Morning, at the
opening of the Gates of it; particularly at the opening of the East Gate,
called the Gate of Nicanor, (as Dr. Lightfoot observes in the place
abovenamed) For which, though there was no express Command, yet it was
grounded on this Reason, That the Levites, who were God's Host, (as they are
often called in this Book, IV. 3, etc. VIII. 24.) might be awakened to come and
attend their Service in the House of God.

And ye shall be remembered before the LORD your God.] He will be merciful to
you, and grant your Request; as the next words explain it.

And ye shall be saved from your Enemies.] Which is to be understood with this
Condition, That they turned to him with unfeigned Repentance; which was the
proper intention of their Prayer and Fasting.

Also in the days of your gladness.] Here is a fourth use of these Trumpets,
which were blown when they rejoiced for the good Success, suppose, of their
Arms, or any other great Deliverance; like that mentioned IX Esther 19. when
they feasted upon the Peace Offerings, which were then offered. And thus it was
when Solomon built the Temple, 2 Chronicles. V. 12. VII. 6. and at the laying the
Foundation of the second Temple after the Captivity, III Ezra 10. and at the
Dedication of the Walls of Jerusalem, XII Nehem. 27, 35.

And in your solemn Days.] Mentioned in XXIII Levit. which were proclaimed by
Sound of Trumpet, (See there v. 2.) and there were great Feasts upon many of
them, at which the Levites, the Poor, and the Widows were entertained, XVI
Deuteronomy. 11. VIII Nehem. 10, 12. But they were not all Feasts which are there
mentioned, for one of those Solemn Days was a Fast, viz. the great Day of
Atonement. And therefore the Hebrew word MOED should rather be translated Days
of Assemblies, as our Mr. Thorndike observes; who (in his Book concerning the
Service of God at Religious Assemblies) notes, that Moses here distinguishes
three sorts of Solemnities. First, The Days of your Gladness, which signify
Solemnities to be celebrated with cheerfulness of heart, i. e. Feasts. Then,
The Solemn Days of Assemblies, (as he translates it) containing besides those,
Assemblies for Humiliation, as the Day of Atonement. And lastly, The beginnings
of your Months, to which there was a peculiar Service appointed, XXVIII. 11.

And in the beginning of your Months.] On the New Moons, which the Jews
observed, not like those other Festivities and Days of Assemblies, upon which
they abstained from all Servile Work; but with special Sacrifices, which God
appointed to be offered to him upon them, XXVIII Numb. 11, 14. and with the
Solemnity of Blowing with Trumpets, LXXXI Psalm. 3. And they were the more
careful to observe the New Moons, because their great Festivals depended upon
it; though they are not reckoned among their Festivals or Solemn Assemblies,
XXIII Levit. but only the first Day of the seventh Month, was a memorial of
Blowing of Trumpets, v. 24. which gave occasion perhaps for observing all the
New Moons in the Year. And there being no express Command for observing the
first Day of the Month, but only for peculiar Sacrifices upon it, and Blowing
of Trumpets, some argue from thence, that in the most ancient Times before the
Law of Moses, New Moons were observed with Festival Joy, (it being plain that
they were so in the Days of Hesiod) of which, though we can have no certainty,
yet it is very probable, that the Idolatry of worshipping the Sun, Moon and
Stars, being then in the World, they were wont at the appearance of every Moon,
to express much Joy, and offer Sacrifices to it. From which God intended to
preserve his People, by appointing special Sacrifices (with blowing of
Trumpets) to be offered unto himself at that time. And it is manifest, the Jews
were so observant of the New Moons, that they seem to have regarded them next
to their Sabbath, as Times of Religious Worship of the Divine Majesty, 2 Kings
IV. 23. and LXVI Isai. 23. VIII Amos 5.

And thus I find that among the Athenians (whose Laws are observed by many to
have been derived from Moses) the first day of the Month was (...), as Plutach
speaks, a most holy day; and yet it was not a Festival: nor was it consecrated
to any particular God, but unto all. And there was a Law, (...), that they
offer Sacrifices upon the first Day of the Month; when they went up to the
Acropohi (as Demisthenes tells us) to pray for the Public Welfare of the City*
and for their own Private Happiness. See Sam. Petit^ in his Comment. in Leges
Atticas, Lib. I. Tit. 1. p. 85.

Over the Burnt-offerings.] Especially the Morning Sacrifice; at the offering
of which the Trumpets began to Sound, 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 27.

And over the Sacrifice of your Peace Offerings.] Which being Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving, it was very proper to have them attended with the Sound of the
Trumpets.

That they may be to you for a memorial before your God.] i. e. That he may
graciously accept your Offerings, and bless you, (as the Phrase signifies in
the foregoing Verse) when he sees his Service to be your Delight and Joy.

I am the LORD your God.] By whose Sovereign Authority these Commands were
given; and in the observance of which they might be assured of his Blessing.

Ver. 11. And it came to pass on the twentieth Day of After their coming out of
Egypt, as appears from Chapt. I. 1.

That the Cloud was taken up.] In token that they were to begin to move, as the
Cloud did, IX. 17.

From off the Tabernacle of the Testimony.] i. e. The most holy Place, over
which it resided, IX. 15.

Ver. 12. And the Children of Israel took their Journeys.] etc.

Out of the Wilderness of Sinai.] Where they had stayed near a Year.

And the Cloud rested.] After three Days motion, v. 33.

In the Wilderness of Paran.] Where they had several Stations, besides this;
which was the Midway between the Red Sea and the Land of Canaan: and from the
Graves of those that lusted, was called Ribroth-hattaavah, XI. 33. XXXIII. 16.
where they stayed a Month; and from thence went to Hazeroth: and were still in
the Wilderness of Paran, XII. 16.

And they first took their Journey.] In the Hebrew the words are, They
journeyed at the first; i. e. at their first Removal; which was this.

According to the Commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.] Not whether
they pleased themselves, but according as God had before directed, when the
Cloud was taken up; and in such order as he appointed. See IX. 18. And there
seems to have been a special Direction, by an express Command, for this first
Removal, I Deuteronomy. 6, 7.

In the first place went the Standard of the Children of Judah, etc.] By this
it appears that the foregoing words, concerning their Removal according to the
Commandment of the LORD, relates to the order o their M^rch, as well as to the
way they went. See concerning those that marched under his Standard, and their
Commanders (which are here mentioned, and in the woe next verses*) Chapt. II. 1,
3, 5, 7.

And the Tabernacle was taken down.] By the Levites (I. 51.) who went about
this work, as (...) as the Cloud went up from the Tabernacle; while (...) three
Tribes under the Standard of Judah were sitting themselves to move.

And the Sons of Gershon, and the Sons of Merari set forward.] They immediately
followed the three Tribes, which encamped on the East of it, under the Standard
of Judah.

Bearing the Tabernacle.] Such parts of it, as were committed to each of their
Charge, IV. 24, etc. 31, etc.

Ver. 18. And the Standard of the Camp of Reuben etc.] Of this, and the two
following Verses, see II. 10, 12, 14.

Ver. 21. And the Kohathites set forward, bearing That is, the Ark, the Holy
Table, the Candlestick, etc. and other things belonging to the Sanctuary, (IV.
15, 16, etc.) which the Kohathites carried in the middle of the four Camps for
their greater Security.

And the other.] i. e. The Gershonites and the Merarites beforementioned, v.
17.

Did set up the Tabernacle against they came.] When the Cloud rested, the two
foregoing Camps under the Standards of Judah and Reuben rested also; and
settled themselves in their Tents. Which while they were doing, the Gershonites
and Merarites, (who marched between them) set up the Tabernacle that it might
be ready to receive the Ark, and the other Holy things, which followed
immediately, under the care of the Kohathites. This shows the excellent Order
wherein they always moved; not only without any tumult or confusion, but with
such a Discipline, as signified they were under the Conduct of a most skilful
Leader.

Ver. 22. And the Standard of the Children of Ephraim set forward, according to
their Armies.] After the Kohathites followed three other Tribes, who were under
this Standard. See Chap. II. 18, 20, 22, 24. Where

And the Standard of the Children of Dan set forward, etc.] See concerning him,
and those mentioned in the two next Verses, Chap. II. v. 25, 27, 29.

Which was the rereward of all the Camps, throughout their Hosts.] The Hebrew
word Measseph (which we translate was the rereward) comes from a word, which
every where signifies to gather together, or collect. And therefore is here to
be so understood; and the whole Sentence thus rendered: Then set forward the
Standard of the Camp of Dan, gathering to it all the Camps, throughout their
Hosts: Or, according to their Armies, as we here translate the last part of
these words, v. 14, 18, 22. So Forsterus translates it; the meaning being, that
all the rest of the People, who were not a part of the four beforementioned
Camps, all under XX Years old, (who were not able to go forth to War) together
with the mixed multitude that came with them out of Egypt, (XII Exodus 38.) and
all the unclean Persons, who were shut out of the Camp, (V. 2.) came after this
hindermost Standard of the Children of Dan.

Thus were the Journeyings of the Children of Israel, etc.] In this order they
marched, when they removed from one station to another.

And Moses said unto Hobab.] His Wives Brother, as Theodoret understands it.

The Son of Raguel the Midianite.] The Son of Jethro Priest of Midian: For
Raguel and he, are thought by many to be the same Person; (II Exodus 18. III.
1.) or one was the Father, and the other the Son; and then Hobab was the
Grandson of Raguel.

Moses his father-in-law.] These words may either refer to Raguel, who is
supposed to be Jethro; and then it is rightly translated Father-in-law; or they
may as well refer to Hobab, and be translated Brother-in-law. For so the Hebrew
word Choters sometimes signifies, a very near Kinsman. It cannot without great
staining, be otherwise expounded in the I Judge. 16. and IV. 11. After Jethro
therefore was gone back to his own Country, XVIII Exodus 27. Hobab, his Son,
stayed still with his Sister Zipporah; and accompanied Moses all the time he
stayed near Sinai: Which was not far from Midian. Whether he thought to return,
now the Isrelites were marching away from that Neighborhood; but Moses was
desirous to have his company further, even to the Land of Promise.

We are journeying unto the place, of which the LORD said, I will give it you.]
i. e. To the Land of Canaan; for thither God intended to have brought them,
shortly after this removal; as appears from I Deuteronomy. 6, 7.

Come thou with us, and we will do thee good.] See verse 32.

For the LORD has spoken good concerning Israel.] Promised to bestow a noble
Country upon us, for our Inheritance.

Ver. 30. And he said, I will not go.] This was his Moses had further persuaded
him.

But I will depart to my own Land.] Which he was loath to leave; merely in hope
of what the Israelites had not yet in possession.

And to my Kindred.] With whom all Men love to live and die.

And he said.] i. e. Moses replied.

Leave us not, I pray thee.] Do not persist in that Resolution; but be
persuaded to go along with us.

Forasmuch as thou know, how we are to encamp in the Wilderness.] He being a
Borderer upon this Wilderness, was well acquainted with every part of it; and
the better able to advise them, how to secure their Camp, (for the Cloud only
served to direct them, where it should be pitched) and defend themselves from
the People, on all sides, that might be injurious to them. Which made Moses so
earnest with him to stay with them; while they had such need of his assistance.

And thou may be to us instead of Eyes.] To give them Advice and Counsel in
any difficulty they might meet withal, in the places where they stayed; or to
direct them how to provide themselves with such things, as they wanted. For he
having lived long thereabouts, could not but understand the Neighboring
Countries. The LXX understand this Passage, as if he desired him to continue to
be what he had been hitherto in the Wilderness, ( viz. a good Adviser, like his
Father Jethro) assuring him, they would look upon him as an Elder: That is,
have him in great honor.

And it shall be, if thou go with us.] Not only stay with us, while we are here
in the Wilderness; but go along with us into Canaan.

Yea, it shall be.] Depend upon it.

That what Goodness the LORD shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.]
Give thee some part of the Possession which God shall bestow upon us.
Accordingly it appears, that as Moses prevailed with him to accompany them, so
he and his Posterity were settled among the Israelites, I Judge. 16. IV. 11.
(where either he or his Father is called the Kenite) who lived in Tents, not in
Houses, after the manner of their Forefathers in Midian.

Ver. 33. And they departed from the Mount of the in the Wilderness of Sinai,
where they had stayed a long time, I Deuteronomy. 6.

Three days journey.] They traveled three Days before the Cloud settled again
upon the Tabernacle: though it stood still some times (but did not descend) to
give them time for necessary Refreshment, and for Sleep. See XI. 1.

And the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD went before them, in the three days
journey.] It is said v. 21. that the Sanctuary was carried between the two
first Standards, and the two last; i. e. in the midst of the Camp, as we
expressly read II. 17. Which Abarbinel thinks is to be understood not of all
their Journeys, but only this. That was the constant order of their March;
first went the Standard of Judah; next that of Reuben: after this, the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; then followed the Standard of Ephraim; and last
of all that of Dan. But now, in their first Removal, God did them the honor to
appoint the Ark to go before them, in the front of all the Camps; as he did
when they passed over Jordan, III Josh. 6. That is, in their first and last
Journeys, this extraordinary Favor was shown them: but in all the rest the Ark
went in the midst of them. And thus Aben Ezra upon this place; This first
Removal was not like the rest of their Removals. But I see no good ground for
this Exposition. The plain meaning seems to be, That the LORD, as their King
and Governor, led them by the Cloud, which was always over the Ark: just as a
General leads his Army; though he be not in the front of it, but in the midst,
from whence he Issues out his Orders.

To search out a resting place for them.] There was no need of enquiry after a
fitting Station for them: but he speaks after the manner of Generals, who send
Officers before them, to take up the most convenient Quarters for their Army.
See I Deuteronomy. 33.

And the Cloud of the LORD was upon them by day, when they went out of the
Camp.] It seems this Removal of their Camp from Sinai, was in the day time (as
some times they removed in the night, IX. 21.) and the Cloud being taken up
from off the Tabernacle, so moved over the Ark, as to overspread them all by
day: As the Pillar of Fire was over them by night; to give them assurance of
the Divine Protection. See Note upon XIII Exodus 21. and CV Psalm. 39.

And when the Ark set forward.] There being the letter Nun turned the wrong way
in the Hebrew word for set forward; as there is in the word for complained, in
the first verse of the next Chapter: the Jewish Doctors fancy it denotes here
God's gracious converting his Face toward them, at the Prayer of Moses; and in
this following Story, the Peoples aversion to God, and ungrateful turning away
their hearts from him.

Moses said.] It was his Custom to pray in this manner upon such occasions; as
R. Levi ben Gersom expounds it.

Rose up.] This is an expression (says Abarbinel) like that in XXXIII Isa. 10.
Now will I rise, says the LORD, and will be exalted, etc.] Where his taking
vengeance upon his Enemies, is called his rising. According to XXXI Job 14.
What shall I do, when God rises up, etc. The next words, Let thy Enemies be
scattered, etc. justify this sense.

LORD.] It seems very strange to me, that any should allege this place, as a
proof, that the Ark is called JEHOVAH: when the Prayer of Moses is so plainly
directed to the LORD himself, (who was there in a glorious Symbol of his
Presence) and not to the Ark. Considering also, that in other places where this
very form of Speech is used, the LORD and the Ark are most manifestly
distinguished, the one from the other. See 2 Chronicles. VI. 41. and CXXXII Psalm. 8.
And yet an Anonymus Anti-Trinitarian Writer (confuted by Joseph de Voisin fifty
Years ago) observing that the Chaldee here instead of the LORD, has the WORD
of the LORD, is so absurd as to say, that the Ark is called the WORD, Because
God, says he ( p. 234.) ante illam responsa vel oracula sua dabat, etc. before
the Ark gave his Answers or Oracles, when the Priest in dubious Matters
consulted the Mouth of the LORD. Which Exposition carries its own Confutation
in it; for if the High Priest consulted the Mouth of the LORD (as he speaks)
then by the WORD which gave the Answer, must be meant the LORD himself. To whom
Moses here directs his Prayer, as the Jerusalem Targum excellently Paraphrases
this verse; And it came to pass, when the Ark was taken up, that Moses lifted
up his hands in prayer, and said, Rise now, O WORD of the LORD, in the strength
of thy Power, and scatter the Enemies of thy People, etc.

And let thine Enemies be scattered.] This is a Prayer, that God would put all
those to flight (as he had done the Amalekites, Exodus XVII.) who opposed their
passage to the promised Land. As after they came thither, they used this Prayer
(LXVIII Psalm. 1.) for his Aid against all those, who sought to disposess them
of it.

And let them that hate thee, flee before thee.] This is a Repetition of the
same Prayer, as is usual: For thy Enemies, and those that hate thee, signify
the very same, XXI Psalm. 8. IV Daniel 19. I Luke 71.

And when it rested.] As it did wheresoever the Cloud staid, and moved no
further.

He said.] He prayed again. So the Jerusalem Targum understands both this and
the former verse, Moses lifted up his hand in Prayer, and said, etc. and
Jonathan Vzielides, Moses stood in Prayer, and begged Mercy of God, saying, etc.

Return, O LORD, unto the many Thousands of Israel.] Which Onkelos thus
Paraphrases, Come again, and dwell with thy Glory in the midst of us. And so he
did; the Cloud, wherein the Divine Majesty resided, settling upon the
Tabernacle, over the Ark of the Testimony, as soon as it was again pitched.
Others translate it, Give rest, O LORD, (which the Hebrew words will bear)
secure us, that is, in Peace, against the Incursions of our Enemies, and all
other Dangers. R. Levi ben Gersom expounds it, bring back the Israelites into
the Land of Promise, where their Forefathers dwelt when they were few in
number; whose Posterity was now increased to ten thousand thousands, as the
last words are in the Hebrew. And there are those, who will have this to be a
Prayer, for their Increase and Multiplication, into many more Thousands than
they were already. And thus the Jerusalem Targum (who still by the LORD
understands his WORD) Return now, O WORD of the LORD, from the vehemence of thy
Anger, and come back to us in thy merciful Goodness: bless the Myriads, and
multiply the Thousands of Israelites.

CHAP. XI.
AND when the People complained.] Or, as were as it were Complainers, or
Mutterers. Which words, D. Kimchi in his Michol, brings as an Instance to prove
that the Particle Caph (which we translate as) does sometimes serve only to
signify the truth of a thing, and to confirm it, and imports nothing of
likeness. For the Discontent of the People did not rest in their Minds, but
broke out into open Murmurings and undutiful Complaints. The like he observes
XXV Genesis 31, 33. and V Hosea 10. The Princes of Judah were like them that
remove the bound. Where we make it to signify a Similitude, but should only
have taken it as a strong Affirmation of the truth of the thing. See Theod.
Hackspan Disput. IV. de Locutionibus Sacris, n. 4.

Complained.] Of their long March for three Days together, with their little
Children, Cattle, and all their Baggage. So it is commonly thought; but I can
see no good ground for it. For, no doubt, the Cloud stood still, (though it did
not come down and settle, as I said, X. 33.) that they might make some
convenient Rests in their Journey: else how should they gather the Manna that
fell every Night about their Tents, and would keep but one Day, as we read XVI
Exodus I conclude therefore that this Muttering, was the beginning of those loud
Complaints, which were made a little after, v. 4, 5, etc. because they were not
brought by this Removal to a place, where they might have had other Food than
Manna: of which they now grew weary, having lived upon it near a whole Year.

It displeased the LORD.] In the Hebrew, It was Evil in the Ears of the LORD:
That is, though it was only a Muttering, which did not come to the Ears of
Moses, (as this Complaint shortly after did) yet the LORD took notice of it,
and was much offended at it; as it here follows.

And the LORD heard it, and his Anger was kindled.] Or, When the LORD heard it,
he demonstrated he was highly offended, by sending a Fire among them.

And the Fire of the LORD burnt among them.] Some take this Phrase, Fire of the
LORD, to signify a great Fire; as Mountains of the LORD, are high Mountains.
Which came either from Heaven, like Lightning, (as in 2 Kings I. 12.) or from
the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, over the Tabernacle; where the Glory of the LORD
appeared some times like unto Fire.

And consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the Camps.] Where the
mixed Multitude were (as I observed, X. 25.) who came out of Egypt; and may well
be supposed to have stirred up the Israelites to complain of their tedious
Journey, which had not yet brought them near to the Land of Cannan. And perhaps
some of them lagged behind on purpose, that they might complain of Weariness,
(as some take it) or rather of want of stronger Food. But Bochartus has
demonstrated that this word which we translate the uttermost parts, signifies
in all, or throughout. Of which he gives many Instances out of Lud. de Dieu
upon XXXIII Ezekiel. 1. See XIX Genesis 4. XLVII. 2, etc. Hierozoicon. P. I. L. II.
cap. 34. And therefore so it should be here rendered, Consumed some in every
part of the Camp; where they began to make Complaints one to another, of their
being still in a Wilderness.

Ver. 2. And the People cried unto Moses.] Of whose Moses, who before
complained, v. 1.

And when Moses prayed unto the LORD.] As they begged he would.

The Fire was quenched.] Went out; and no signs of it appeared. So the Hebrew
Phrase signifies, it sunk. What number of them was burnt, we are not told: it
is likely nor many, because the terror of it, instantly made them deprecate
God's Displeasure, by Moses their Intercessor; which put a stop to it.

Ver. 3. And he called the name of the place Taberah.] Which, for another
reason, was also called Kibrothhattaavah, v. 34. They are mentioned indeed in
IX Deuteronomy. 22. as if they were two distinct places: but Kibrothhattaavah to have
been the name of that particular piece of Ground in that place, where the
Lusters were buried.

Because the Fire of the LORD burnt am^ng them.] This is the reason of the Name
of Taberah (which signifies a burning) which was imposed on this place, to
preserve the Memory, both of God's Judgments, and of his Mercy.

And the mixed Multitude that was among them.] The Hebrew word hasaphsuph, is
well translated by Bochartus, Populi colluvies undecunque col^cta, the Dregs or
Scum of the People gathered together from all parts. For the doubling of words
increases their sense, in the Hebrew Language; and makes the same with the
Superlative Degree in other Tongues. Of which he gives many Instances in his
Hierozoicon, P. II. Lib. V. cap. 6. See XIII Lev. 19. where Adamdameth
signifies exceeding red: as hasaphsuph here does a very great collection of all
sorts of People; both Egyptians and other Neighboring Nations: who were
invited by their wonderful Deliverance out of Egypt, to join themselves to the
Israelites, as Proselytes to their Religion. See XII Exodus 38. The Jews, in
Tanchuma, say, there were Forty thousand of them; and Jannes and Jambres at the
Head of them.

Fell a lusting.] He does not say for what; and the Jews have taken the liberty
to fancy what they please. Some of them say that they lusted after such Women,
as Moses had lately forbidden them to marry. So the Paraphrase of Vzielides,
Moses heard the People weeping, because those that were near of kin to them
were forbidden in Marriage. And he makes as if these Proselytes petitioned
Moses to abrogate those Laws about Incest. Such Conceits others have indulged
to themselves, (as Mr. Seldom shows, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. IV. p. 202.) when
the words (in the end of this Verse, and v. 13, 18.) plainly show they lusted
for Flesh to eat.

And the Children of Israel also.] Though the mixed multitude were the first
Fomentors of this Discontent, yet it run among the Children of Israel,
throughout the whole Camp: And rose so high, that they fell into a great
Passion.

Wept again.] They had shed some Tears, it seems, before, (when they
complained, verse 1.) but now they wept aloud, out of Anger, Vexation, and
Grief. Or else this weeping again, refers to their first Murmuring a Year ago,
like unto this, XVI Exodus 3.

And said.] They could not refrain from bursting out into such discontented
Language; as argued they were extremely angry, or rather enraged.

Who shall give us flesh to eat?] It is an Expression of a vehement, impatient
Desire (mixed with Despair) after flesh-Meat. Which they needed not to have
wanted, if they would have killed their Cattle, which they brought with them
out of Egypt in great abundance, (XII Exodus 38.) but they preserved them for
breed, when they came to Canaan: and if they killed them daily, they would not
have lasted long to suffice Six hundred thousand People, besides Women and
Children. (See v. 21, 22.) Besides this, while they continued in the
Wilderness, they were not permitted to eat any Flesh but only their share of
the Peace Offerings, that were offered at the Altar, XVII Levit. 3, 4, 5. Which
lasted, the Jews think, till they came to the Land of Canaan, when this
Restraint was taken off, XII Deuteronomy. 15, 16. And indeed the Wilderness was so
barren a place, that they could there have no great increase of Cattle; scarce
sufficient for Sacrifice. They were angry therefore, that they were not yet
brought to a Country where they might have had all sorts of Flesh, without
killing their own Cattle; and have taken their fill of that and all other Food,
(as appears by the next Verse) at as easy rates as they had done in Egypt.
Whereas now, they despaired, as I said, of getting any such Food; for so such
Questions as this signify, CXIII Psalm. 5. LIII Isa. 8. VIII Joh. 16.

We remember the fish.] This shows that all kind of Food is comprehended under
Flesh, for which they longed; particularly this, which is one sort of Flesh, 1 Corinthians. XV. 39.

Which we did eat in Egypt freely.] Or, for nothing. For they could easily
catch them in the River of Egypt, which abounded with them, (XIX Isa. 8.) and
in the Sea also, which was not far from them; wherein was exceeding great
plenty of excellent Fish.

The Cucumbers, and the Melons, etc.] None of which grew here in the
Wilderness, but were there in such Plenty and Perfection, that they were the
common Food of the Egyptians. Who were noted anciently for the Meanness of
their Diet, as Casaubon observes in Lib. IX. Athenaei Deipnos. Cap. XI. p. 674.
Some fancy these things were the cheaper there, because the Egyptians durst not
eat either Fish, or Leeks, or Onions; as is said by Juvenal, Sat. XV. Pliny,
Lib. XIX. Cap. 6. and Herodotus, Lib. II. C. 37. where he says it was not
lawful for the Egyptians to taste of Fish. But, in my opinion, these words of
the People, demonstrate rather, that they were not so superstitious in the days
of Moses; for they were not the words merely of the Israelites, but of the mixed
multitude; who were the Beginners of this Mutiny, and of this sort of undutiful
Language. Which one would think they put into the Mouths of the Israelites; who
could not otherwise have had the Impudence to magnify their Condition in
Egypt, where they groaned under the sorest Slavery.

It is a strange fancy of one of the Doctors in the Tulmud, (in the Title Jona)
who by Fishes understands Harlots; whom these Crew of mixed People lusted after.

The Onions.] The Hebrew word Chatzir properly signifies Grass; Which being no
part of Humane Food, the LXX here render the word Onions; as agreeable to the
other words that accompany it. But the learned Ludolphus thinks they had no
other reason for it; and therefore, out of the Arabian Language, rather
interprets it Lettice or Sellets, in general, which were most excellent in
Egypt. Dissert. de Locustis, P. II. Cap. 14.

Ver. 6. But now our Soul is dried away.] They speak that are advanced from a
poor to a plentiful Condition, contemn their present Enjoyments, and praise
their former wretched state.

There is nothing at all, besides this Manna, before our Eyes.] They were angry
that they were come to a place, where they found nothing but that of which they
were now grown weary; and therefore speak of it with disdain.

And the Manna.] Upon this occasion he describes more fully, what kind of thing
it was which they despised: That it might appear how justly God was displeased
with them, for their Ingratitude.

Was as Coriander-seed.] Not in Color, (for that was like Bdellium, as it here
follows) but in its Shape and Form; being round, XVI Exodus 14.

And the Color of it as the Color of Bdellium.] Of a pure White Color, and
bright like Pearl: So that it was very grateful to the Eye, as well as pleasant
to the Taste. See XVI Exodus 31.

And the People went about.] Round their Camp. XVI Exodus 13.

And gathered it.] Fresh every Morning; which made it still more acceptable.
XVI Exodus 18, 19.

And ground it in Mills.] Into Flour, with an Handmill.

Or beat it in a Mortar.] Bruised it with a Pestle in a wooden, or stone Mortar.

And baked it in Pans.] Or else boiled it (as R. Bechai expounds it) in a Pot.

And made Cakes of it.] Or made Cakes of it in an Oven, or in a Pan. That is,
says the same R. Bechai, it was of such an excellent Composition, that it
might be dressed diverse ways, or eaten as it fell. For, if they would they
might use it, says he, for Food immediately, as they gathered it; or they
might grind it; or bruise it, and then either boil it, or bake it; and it was
agreeable, in what way soever it was prepared. Which Moses mentions to show how
ungrateful they were to God; who by one thing entertained them with great
variety.

And the taste of it was as the taste of fresh Oil.] When it was newly fallen, it
tasted like Honey; but when it was prepared by Boiling, or Baking, it tasted
like fresh Oil: See XVI Exodus 31. Or to some it had the taste of Honey; to
others of fresh Oil. The Jews indeed say it had all sorts of Tastes, according
to every Man's desire. So the Author of the Book of Wisdom speaks, XVI. 20, 21.
from the ancient Tradition of the Hebrews. Whereby I suppose they meant no
more, but that it pleased every Man's Palate; and had in it all that could be
desired in any Meat; being grateful to the taste of young and old; and
refreshed the Spirits; and kept up the Flesh of their Bodies in good plight.
For it is not unreasonably observed by the aforesaid R. Bechai; that it is
compared by Moses to fresh Oil, which is fat as well as sweet; to show how
unjust their Complaint was, that they had no Moisture left in them, but were
dried away, v. 6.

Ver. 9. And when the dew fell upon the Camp in the There was a great
Providence of God in this, says the same Bechai, which sent it in the Night,
while they slept quietly in their Beds; that when they rose in the Morning they
might find their Food ready for them. And thus, says he, it was when they came
to Canaan; the Rains were wont to fall in the Night-season, and not in the
Daytime: that they might not be hindered from their work in the Fields, and in
their Plantations.

The Manna fell upon it.] That is, upon the Dew; for it did not fall upon the
Camp, but round about it. See XVI Exodus 14. This is a further Aggravation of
their Ingratitude, that they despised this rare Food; which came not out of the
Earth, or the Waters, but from above out of the Air: And therefore was more
pure and spiritous than Cucumbers and Leeks, etc. Which crude and gross sort of
Food, their depraved Minds preferred before this Celestial Nourishment: Which
by Falling on the Dew was kept clean and pure for their use.

Huetius observes that several Authors, both ancient and modern, mention Manna
as a thing which sometimes falls in those Countries (particularly in Arabia,
and upon Libanus) which they call aerial Honey; or dewy Honey, and Syrian Dew:
which was fit for Food. But it never fell in such quantity, nor so constantly;
every day, for the space of XL years; and so delicious and hearty. All this was
miraculous; as was also its melting when the Sun shone upon it; and that it
putrified before the next day, except on the Sabbath; and yet kept in an Urn
many years. See Alnetanae Quaest. L. II. Cap. XII. N. XVII.

And Moses heard the People weep, throughout their Families.] Or, for their
Families: or, about the State and Condition of their Families as some of the
Jews understand it; though to a foolish sense. See Seldom, L. II. de Synedr.
Cap. IV. p. 203.) who they pretended could not live any longer upon Manna.

Every Man in the door of his Tent.] It may be understood of Moses his Tent;
about which the heads of the several Families were gathered; as mutinous
Soldiers are wont to be, about the Door of their Chief Commander.

And the Anger of the LORD was kindled greatly.] Which brake forth shortly
after, in a great plague upon them, v. 34.

And Moses also was displeased.] The same Phrase with that v. 1.

It was evil in the Eyes of Moses.] i. e. Grieved him so, that it made him wish
himself rid of the burden of their Government.

Ver. 11. And Moses said unto the LORD.] I suppose v. 24.

Wherefore have thou afflicted thy Servant?] By committing this People to his
charge.

And wherefore have I not sound favor in thy sight.] By granting the Prayer
which he made, at his first Call to this Office, III Exodus 2. IV. 10.

That thou layest the burden of this People upon me?] i. e. The principal Care
of such an untractable Multitude, upon one Man; to whom they resorted in all
difficulties. XVIII Exodus 22, 26.

Ver. 12. Have I conceived all this People, have I begotten Are they my
Children; that I should make provision, for the Satisfaction of all their
desires?

That thou have said unto me, carry them in thy Bosom (as a nursing Father
bears the sucking Child) unto the Land, etc.] Take a tender Care of them, as
a Parent does of a little Infant; and conduct them into Canaan, etc. Nothing
can more lively express the Affection that Princes ought to have for their
People (if they have any regard to the Will of God) than this Divine Command to
Moses.

Whence should I have Flesh to give unto all this People?] It is impossible for
me to do, what they desire.

For they weep unto me, saying, Give us Flesh that we may eat.] And yet they
will not be satisfied without it. He seems to be affected with their weeping,
as the most loving Parents are with the Tears of a sucking Child; when it cries
for that, which they have not for it.

I am not able to bear all this People alone; because it is too heavy for me.]
Let me have some joined to me, to take part of this trouble with me; and help
to manage them in such Mutinies: For it is beyond my strength to undergo the
toil of hearing all their Complaints; and appeasing their Tumults. Some may
imagine there was no reason for this request; he having several Persons already
appointed to assist him by the advice of Jethro, (XVIII Exodus.) But Rasi thinks
those Men were burnt in the late fire; because they did not suppress the
beginning of this Mutiny, ( v. 1.) but perhaps join in it: And so Bechai. But
the true account is rather this, that they were set only to hear and judge
smaller Causes; all the weighty and difficult Causes being still brought before
Moses; to whom also the last Appeal was made in every Cause. Which was so great
a burden that he complained for want of help in those great things, which lay
wholly upon him. See XVIII Exodus 22.

Ver. 15. And if thou deal thus with me.] If thou leavest me still alone in
this Office.

Kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in thy sight.] I
shall take it for the greatest

And let me not see my wretchedness.] Live to be a most miserable Creature For
to see wretchedness, is to be wretched; as to see death is to dye, LXXXIX Psalm.
48. And what could make such a tender Parent as he was more miserable, than
their perpetual untowardness: together with the intolerable trouble it would
give him; to see heavy Punishments continually befall them for their Wickedness,
and the Enemies of God rejoice in their Ruin.

Ver. 16. And the LORD said unto Moses.] Here Moses with God; which seems not
very dutiful: because the Vexation this stubborn People gave him, was really so
great, that he had reason to desire to be eased of it. Which, though he begged
with much earnestness, yet, no doubt, with no less submission to God's holy
Will and Pleasure.

Gather unto me.] These words are interpreted by the Talmudists, as if the
meaning was, that they may be a Sanhedrim to my Land; i. e. a holy, perpetual,
standing Council, to endure throughout all Generations. For wheresoever we meet
with this word li unto me, they think it signifies a thing to be established by
God to all Generations. The Examples they allege of it, are these; of Aaron
and his Sons he says, they shall Minister unto me in the Priests Office,
XXVIII Exodus 41. and of the Levites, he says, III Numb. 12. they shall be
mine, or unto me; and of the Israelites, XXV Lev. 55. unto me the Children of
Israel are Servants. The like is said of the Firstborn, III Numb. 13. of the
Sanctuary, XXV Exodus 18. of the Altar, XX Exodus 24. of the holy Ointment, XXX
Exodus 31. of the Kingdom of David, 1 Samuel XVI. 1. and of the Sacrifices, XXVIII
Numb. 2. See Mr. Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 4. n. 2.

Seventy Men of the Elders of Israel.] This Number is generally thought, both
by the Jewish and Christian Writers, to be derived from the number of Persons,
that came down into Egypt with Jacob, XLVI Genesis 27. Who, says R. Bechai, were
a kind of Prototype of this Number in future Ages. For hence they were governed
by so many Elders when they were in Egypt, III Exodus 16. (where there is no
mention indeed made of Seventy, but he gathers it from what followed) and those
were the Seventy whom we find at the giving of the Law, a little after they
came out of Egypt, XXIV Exodus 1, 9. who are called Nobles, or Great Men, v. 11.
So that this number was not now first constituted; but rather continued and
confirmed.

Whom thou know to be the Elders of the People.] For there were many Elders,
out of whom Seventy were chosen. See XXIV Exodus 1.

And Officers over them.] That is, says R. Bechai, whom thou know to be of
the number of those, who when they were Officers in Egypt over the People, were
beaten by Pharaoh's Taskmasters, V Exodus 14. Which word Officers does not
signify Men that had any Judicial Authority; but only such as had an
inspection over others, to see they did their Work, and to give an account of
them. But it is very likely, they were Persons of note, who had more than
ordinary Understanding and Breeding, which advanced them to be Inspectors of
others. And therefore the Talmudists rightly observe, that the Elders and
Officers here mentioned, were, no doubt, Men of Wisdom and Judgment; who knew
how to use the Authority that was committed to them. And it is not improbable
(as some of them affirm) that they were chosen out of those lesser Courts,
which were erected by the Advice of Jethro. See Seldom in the same place, sect.
5. who at large confutes Baronius and others; who say that the number of the
great Sanhedrim (which derived its Original from hence) was Seventy two: and
makes it appear they were only Seventy; and with Moses their Head Seventy one,
sect. 8. And it is not unworthy our notice, that about the same time (as he
observes sect. 12.) that this number of Seventy Judges was here constituted in
the Wilderness; the great Judicature in Areopagus was constituted among the
Greeks, viz. in the Reign of Cecrops, the first King of Athens, after the
Ogygian Flood: when, according to Eusebius, the People of Israel were brought
out of Egypt. The Marmora Arundeliana indeed say, this Court was erected in the
time of Cranaus; but that makes no great difference, for he was the Successor
of Cecrops. We do not find of what number it consisted, but it is certain it
was the highest (...), of all the Courts among the Greeks. And it is no less
observable, that as that Court began about the same time with the Constitution
of this among the Hebrews; so they both ended in the Reign of the Emperor
Vespasian, as the said Mr. Seldom shows in that Book, cap. 16. sect. 10.

And bring them unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] That there they might
be, as it were, consecrated unto God: and that the People might know, they
received their Authority from him.

That they may stand there with thee.] As those Men who were to be sharers with
him in his Authority: and were like to him in Wisdom, Piety, and Descent. So
Maimonides glosses upon these words in Hilk. Sanhedr. cap. 2. where he says,
none were made Members of the Sanhedrim, but Priests and Levites, and such of
the Israelites, as were descended from the noblest Families: and quotes these
words to prove it.

And I will come down.] In a visible manner, verse 25.

And talk with thee there.] To declare (perhaps in their Audience) that he
appointed them to the Office of being the Assistants of Moses, in the
Government.

And I will take of the Spirit, which is upon thee, and put it upon them.] He
did not take away from Moses any of the Gifts which he had bestowed upon him;
nor did he diminish them: but conferred upon these Men some of the Gifts (which
are here meant by Spirit) viz. of Wisdom, and Judgment, and Courage; with all
others that were needful in a Governor. This R. Solomon Jarchi illustrates by
the comparison of a great Lamp set up in a room; at which many others are
lighted, without the least diminution of its Light. See further verse 25.

And they shall bear the burden of the People with thee.] By this it appears it
was the Spirit of Government, which God intended to give them: that they might
ease Moses by assisting him, with the same Authority that he had, to hinder, or
to appease such Mutinies, as now the People were fallen into.

That thou bear it not thy self alone.] That all the Murmurings of the People
might not be only against him; but some of their Complaints might be diverted
unto others. Who might also help him in the judging of such Causes, as had
hitherto been reserved to him alone. For it is plain that these Seventy Persons
made an higher Court, than any of those constituted by the advice of Jethro.

Cornelius Bertram indeed fancies, that these Rulers of Thousands, Hundreds,
Fifties, and Tens, not being sufficient for the business committed to them,
(though he likewise conceives they had some of their several Families joined
with them) God appointed these Seventy for their assistance: to whom they were
to bring all Causes which they could not determine, before they troubled Moses
with them, Lib. de Repub. Jud. cap. 6. But our learned Mr. Thorndike in his
Rights of the Church, chap. 2. has well observed, that those Captains were to
be in place, only during the Pilgrimage of the Wilderness: For when they came
to the Land of Promise, the Law provided that Judges and Ministers should be
ordained in every City, XVI Deuteronomy. 18. who, if there fell any difference about
the Law, were to repair to the place where God dwelt, to the Successors of
Moses, and these Seventy, for Resolution in it, XVII Deuteronomy. 11, 12. For as he
judiciously notes in his Review, p. 69. (suitable to what is here delivered)
they were assumed to assist Moses in his great Office of judging the hardest
Causes; and by that Law, XVII Deuteronomy. 8, etc. were afterward made a standing
Court, resident at the Place of the Tabernacle; to judge the last Result of all
Causes concerning the Law, and to determine all Matter of Right not determined
by the Letter of the same.

Ver. 18. And say thou unto the People.] All that he said hitherto concerned
Moses himself; in answer to his Request. Now he tells him what he should

Sanctify your selves.] Here the word Sanctify seems to signify no more, but
to prepare and make themselves ready to receive what they desired. So the
Chaldee expounds it: and so the word is translated by us, several times in the
Book of Jeremiah, VI. 4. XII. 3. LI. 28.

Against to morrow.] He seems at the same time to gratify Moses and satisfy
them: for his setting the Seventy Elders before the LORD, and their eating
Flesh, succeed one another. Or else, he immediately gathered the Elders; and
the next day the Quails came for their Food.

And ye shall eat Flesh, for ye have wept in the Ears of the LORD, etc.] You
shall have, what you long for with such vehemence; that it has made you utter
Complaints against the LORD.

Ye shall eat not one day.] As they did about a Year ago, XVI Exodus 12, 13.

Nor two days, nor five days, etc.] Not for a short time only.

But even a whole Month.] So long (the Hebrews gather from hence) they staid in
this part of the Wilderness of Paran: Or rather, a little longer. For they came
hither on the twenty third Day of the second Month, in the Even: on which, if
we suppose the Fire to have burnt among them, v. 1. and that the next Morning
(which is scarce credible) they lusted after Flesh; and in a tumultuous manner,
demanded it of Moses; who promised they should have it: we must allow a little
time for the constituting of the Seventy Elders. And suppose it was done on the
twenty fifth Day, and that the next Day the Quails came, (as we translate it)
they were two Days in gathering them. From whence if we begin this Month, it
will appear they stayed here longer than that space.

Until it come out at your Nostrils.] Till you be glutted with it; and vomit it
up so violently, that it come not only out at your Mouth, but at your Nostrils.

And it be loathsome to you.] Which was both the Cause and the Effect of
Vomiting.

Because that ye have despised the LORD.] Forgetting all that he had done for
them, as if it had been nothing; and slighting his Servant Moses.

Which is among you.] By a visible Token of his glorious Presence in the
Sanctuary: where he dwelt among them, XXV Exodus v. 8.

And have wept before him, saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt.] As if he
had undone them, by their Deliverance from thence.

Both Onkelos and Jonathan translate this verse in such a manner, that one
cannot but think they had a Notion in their Days of more Persons than one in
the Godhead. For these are the words of the latter of them, Because you have
despised (or rejected, as Onkelos) the WORD of the LORD, for glorious is his
Majesty which dwells among us. For I cannot see how the word MEMRA can
signify any thing in this place (whatsoever it may do in some others) but a
Person equal to JEHOVAH. And yet the Anonymus Writer against the Trinity
(confuted by de Voisin) has the strange unaccountable boldness to pass it by
with this silly gloss, Proprie de Lege accipi potest, etc. it may be properly
understood of the Law, which may be contemned or transgressed: as if this could
be called the glorious Majesty of the LORD, which dwelt among them. What will
not Men say, or do, to serve a Cause?

And Moses said, the People among whom I am.] Over whom I preside, as their
Governor.

Are six hundred thousand Footmen.] Who were able to carry Arms; besides Women,
and Children, and Slaves, and the mixed Multitude; who in all may well be
supposed to have made Thirty hundred thousand.

And thou have said, I will give them Flesh, that they may eat an whole month.]
i. e. How can this be? Which is a downright distrust of God's Promise, if we
regard merely the words; and do not consider that they were spoken hastily, and
something inconsiderately, while his Mind was very much disturbed by the Tumult
which the People made. For which reason, a severe notice is not taken of it;
but he only put in mind of God's Eternal Power, v. 23. Which may make it
probable, that they were only words of Admiration, how such a Provision should
be made for such a vast number; and those uttered on a sudden.

Shall the Flocks and the Herds be slain for them, to suffice them?] In the
Hebrew the words are, If the Flocks and the Herds be slain for them, will they
be sufficient for them? That is, there will not be enough for a whole Month.
And so the next Passage is to be translated, If all the Fish of the Sea be
gathered for them, will they be sufficient for them?

Ver. 23. And the LORD said unto Moses, is the LORD's Hand waxed short?] i. e.
I need not tell thee, that my Power is as great as ever.

Thou shall see now whether my Word shall come to pass For thou shall be
convinced of it by the speedy performance of my Promise.

Ver. 24. And Moses went out.] I supposed, v. 11. Moses went into the Sanctuary
to make his Addresses to God for relief; and if that be true, then that is the
place from whence he now went out. But there is this Objection against it, That
if he had gone to consult God in the Sanctuary, (as he did on some occasions,
VII. 89.) it would not have been said that he went out; but that he came out.
For that is the usual Expression in this matter. Therefore we may rather think
he now went out of his own Tent, where the People stood murmuring, v. 10.

And told the People the Words of the LORD.] Both concerning them, and
concerning himself.

And gathered the seventy Men of the Elders of the People.] That is, sent out
his Summons to them to attend him; though two of them, it appears afterward,
did not come, v. 26.

And set them round about the Tabernacle.] That is, required them to come
thither, and there place themselves; that the People might understand they
received their Authority from God; and that from thence he might send his Holy
Spirit upon them. For God alone, who was their King, could appoint, who should
bear Rule among them. There also were the great Assemblies held. See XXVII. 2.

Ver. 25. And the LORD came down in a Cloud.] The SCHECHINAH, or Divine
Majesty, appeared from Heaven in a Cloud; or, in the Pillar of the as it is in
XII. 5.

And spoke unto him.] As he had promised, v. 17. declaring, it is likely, the
Reason and Intention of his appearing, on this occasion.

And took of the Spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy Elders.
See there v. 17.

And it came to pass that when the Spirit rested upon them.] i. e. As soon as
they received it.

They prophesied.] Either, by setting forth the Promises of God in such a
strain, as none else could imitate; or giving such admirable Instructions to
the People, as manifested they were raised above themselves; or perhaps by
declaring things to come (particularly that they should have Quails (as we
render the word) in great abundance very shortly, as some of the Jews take it)
though that could not gain them just credit, as the other Gifts, till their
Predictions were fulfilled. And these the Jews call the second degree of
Prophecy: Concerning which Maimonides speaks in his Preface to his More
Nevochim. but more fully in his second Part of it, Cap. XLV. Where he says the
first degree was, that which moved and enabled Men to some heroic Undertaking,
with assurance they were put upon it from God; as to deliver Men from Tyranny
and Oppression. Which was the Spirit of the LORD, that came upon GIDEON and
SAMSON, and the rest of the Judges of Israel: who were carried by an
extraordinary Power to perform such things, as otherwise they thought not
themselves fit to undertake. And the second degree was, when a Man found a
Power upon him, exciting him to speak either Psalms, or Hymns; or wholesome
Precepts of living; or about Political Affairs, and Civil Government, far
beyond his Natural Capacities; and all this waking, and in the full vigor of
his Senses. This is also called the Holy Spirit; and in this number he places
these LXX Elders. Who were endued with the Spirit of Moses, for the Government
of the People with him; in such measure that they attained to be Prophets. Just
as in the New Testament, the Prophets are placed next to the Apostles; so these
Men were next to Moses.

And ceased not.] In which Translation we follow the Chaldee Paraphrasts, as
several others do: But the LXX translate it, and they added no further, (which
the Hebrew words will well bear) taking the meaning to be; that they prophesied
that day, but not after. And this is the sense of the Talmudists; particularly
of Jarchi. Who in his Gloss upon this place, says: All these Elders prophesied
only this first time, that the Spirit rested on them, as they stood about the
Tabernable; but they did not prophecy after that. The like say several others
mentioned by Mr. Seldom, L. II. de Synedr. Cap. IV. Sect. 2. And indeed the
Spirit was not sent upon them, to make them Prophets; but to make them
Governors and Judges. And therefore the Gift of Prophecy, which God gave them
for the present, was only to procure them Reverence from the People; as an
evident Sign that they were chosen by God to be Co-adjutors to Moses, in the
exercise of his Supreme Authority over them. And thus I find Theodoret
understood it, ( Quaest. XX. in Number.) The LXX did not prophecy beyond this
day, (...), etc. because God promoted them, not to prophecy, but to govern:
Which St. Paul also reckons among other Gifts bestowed upon Christians, 1 Corinthians. XII. 26. Now that it might appear God had conferred this Divine Gift
of Government upon them; they also prophesied, the first day that they received
it. And I do not see, why our Translation [did not cease] may not be
interpreted to this sense; that is, they did not cease all that day, while they
stood about the Tabernacle.

And there remained two of the Men.] Of the LXX Elders; whom Moses ordered to
appear, and set themselves about the Tabernacle. So the Jerusalem Targum,
these were of the number of the LXX wise Men, neither did the LXX wise Men go
from the Tabernacle while Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Camp. And so R.
Levi ben Gersom notes, It seems to be plain out of the Text, that these two
were of the LXX Elders. Which our Translators thought necessary to express by
adding those words of the: For in the Hebrew there is no more said, but only
there remained two Men.

In the Camp.] Among the rest of the People; from whom they would not come: Out
of Modesty, saying, They were not equal to such a dignity; as the words are in
the Gemara Babylonica. Tit. Sanhedrin. Or perhaps they loved a private life;
and were afraid of being envied by the People: Whom they saw to be so unruly,
that it made them decline the burden; as Saul did, when he hid himself among
the stuff.

The name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad.] We do not
find the names of any other of the LXX Elders, but only these two; who,
Jonathan says, were Moses his Brothers by the Mother's side. And St. Hierom
himself mentions such a Tradition, that they were his Brethren. But there is no
certainty of this; nor of what others of the Jews say concerning them. See
Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. Cap. 4. Sect. 3.

It may be they are mentioned in honor of their virtuous Modesty; which made
them think themselves unworthy of so high a dignity.

And the Spirit rested upon them.] As it did upon those who were about the
Tabernacle, v. 25. Whereby God marked them out to be in the number of those,
whom he had chosen to be Assistants unto Moses.

And they were of them that were written, etc.] Whose Names Moses put into the
Summons, which he sent to those whom he judged fit to be advanced to this
Authority. The Jews (particularly Solomon Jarchi) say they were chosen by the
way of casting Lots; and according to their manner they tell the Story thus, in
the place mentioned before in the Gemara. Moses, say they, was in doubt how he
should execute God's Command, v. 16. because if he did not choose an equal
number out of every Tribe, it might be ill taken. And if he chose Six out of
each of the XII Tribes, they would exceed the number of LXX; if but five, they
would fall short of it. He resolved therefore at last to choose VI out of each
Tribe, which in all were LXXII Persons: And in LXX Schedules he wrote the Name
of Elder; but the other two were Blanks. Then mixing all these in an Urn, he
bad them come and draw: And to every one who drew a Schedule, that had the Name
of Elder in it, he said, God has sanctified thee; but to him that drew a
Blank, he said, God has not chosen thee. And those two Blanks, some of the
Jewish Doctors say, came into the hands of Eldad and Medad: who therefore were
left behind in the Camp. And this Conceit our very learned Dr. Lightfoot
himself entertained, saying (in his short account of this Chapter) That six of
a Tribe, made up the number of the Sanhedrim, (which was chosen) and two over.
And those two were Eldad and Medad; who were written for Elders, but the Lot
cast them out; that there might be but LXX. Yet did the LORD honor them with
the Spirit of Prophecy.

But as this whole Story, of the manner of Choosing the Elders, is very dubious;
so other Jews of great Authority, say, that Eldad and Medad were of the number
of the LXX that were chosen. Particularly Jonathan says expressly, they were of
the number of those, whose Schedules came up, with the Name of Elder in them:
But they did not go to the Tabernacle, because they had no mind to be
Governors. Nay the Talmudical Gloss upon the forenamed place of the Gemara,
says, that when LXX of the LXXII had drawn, two of them had Blanks; whereby
Eldad and Medad knew that the two remaining Schedules had the Name of Elder in
them: and therefore would not draw them, because they were sure not to have
Blanks. The very same Mr. Seldom shows, is in other noted Books of theirs. So
that it is generally received, they were in the number of those LXX which were
chosen to be joined with Moses in the Government. See L. II. de Synedr. Cap. 4.
Sect. 7.

And they prophesied in the Camp.] Which was a greater thing, than if they had
prophesied at the Tabernacle: Denoting them to be Men so highly in the Favor
of God, that he would distinguish them from other Men wheresoever they were,
and not want their Service. The Jerusalem Targum relates what each of them
foretold, (for to that he restrains their Prophesying) and what they both
foretold; but it is not worth the mentioning.

Ver. 27. And there ran a young Man, and told Moses The Jews, who will seem
ignorant of nothing, say it was Gershom the Son of Moses; who carried these
Tidings to his Father.

Ver. 28. And Joshua the Son of Nun.] From Moses, and so to become the Head of
them.

The Servant of Moses.] Who ministered to him, as a constant Attendant on his
Person, XXIV Exodus 13.

One of his young Men.] The word one is not in the Hebrew, which may be
translated from among his young Men: i. e. The rest of those that waited on him.

My Lord Moses forbid them.] Perhaps he thought they could have no Authority;
not being at the Tabernacle. Or rather, that their Prophesying too much
lessened the Authority of Moses; by whose Consent, and in whose Presences the
rest were joined to him; but these two without his Knowledge, and being absent
from him, became his Consorts in Spiritual Gifts. This he thought tended to the
Diminution of his Master; for whom he expressed a great Honor. The two Targums
say that they prophesied of the Death of Moses, and the Advancement of Joshua
to be the Leader of God's People; which made Joshua the more concerned to have
them suppressed. But this is like the rest of their Conceits; several of which
are mentioned by Mr. Seldom in the place before-named, Sect. 3.

And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake?] This shows that Joshua
thought it a Disparagement unto Moses, that they should have the Gift of
Prophecy bestowed on them; and be no way indebted to Moses for it. As the other
were; who were brought by him to the Tabernacle, where he presented them to
God, as Men fit to partake of it: But these two seemed to have no dependence on
him, for what they received.

Would God that all the LORD's People were Prophets.] This shows also that the
Gift of Prophecy, was a distinct thing from the Gift of Government: For he did
not wish they might all be made Rulers; than which nothing could have been more
absurd.

And that the LORD would put his Spirit upon them.] That they might all break
forth, by his Inspiration, into his Praises. Which is an high Demonstration of
that most excellent Spirit that dwelt in Moses; which had nothing of Envy,
Pride, or Vainglory in it: For he sought not himself in the least, but purely
the Glory of God, and the Good of his People. Which admirable Temper of Mind
St. James from hence, commends to all Christians, when he says, IV. 5. Do ye
think, that the Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in us lusts
to Envy? But he gives more Grace. Where does the Scripture (by which word the
Apostles commonly mean the Old Testament) say any thing like this; unless it be
in this place? the Sense of which is fully expressed by St. James, as Hermannus
Witzius well explains his meaning, Does that Spirit whereby we are regenerated
and governed, move us to Envy, or any such like vicious Desire? No, far from
that; it gives greater Grace, and makes us rejoice in the good of our
Neighbors, etc. as Moses did, when he said, Do thou envy for my sake? and
thereby excitest me to the like Envy? Is that suitable to the Spirit that is in
us? which I wish God would bestow upon all his People. This agrees with what
St. James says, But he gives more Grace. Miscell. Sacr. L. I. cap. 18. n. 27.

Ver. 30. And Moses gat him into the Camp.] From

He and the Elders of Israel.] That they might exercise their Authority jointly
with him. And there, I suppose, Eldad and Medad were assumed into the same
Authority; for we do not read that they were brought to the Tabernacle; being
sufficiently approved by God in the Camp.

Ver. 31. And there went forth a Wind from the At the Prayer (it is likely) of
Moses and the Elders, who promised the People Flesh enough; a mighty Wind, of
an extraordinary force, was raised beyond the common Course of Nature. The
Psalmist informs us from what Quarter this Wind blew, when he says LXXVIII
Psalm. 26. He caused the East Wind to blow in the Heaven, and by his power he
brought in the South Wind. Which some understand as if sometimes an East Wind
blew, and sometimes a South; that these Quails (as we call them) might be
brought from several Coasts. But the Hebrews wanting compound words, make use
of these two words, to express that which we call a South-east Wind. Or, as
Bochartus will have it, the Hebrew word Kadni, which properly signifies the
East, does sometimes signify the South; and is by the LXX. often so
translated: of which he gives a great many Instances. And therefore the
Psalmist (as the manner of the Hebrew Language is) repeats the same thing in
other words. See Hierozoic. P. II. L. I. cap. 15. And so the famous Ludolphus,
both in his Commentary upon his Aethiopick History, and in his Dissertation de
Locustis, says they were brought in by a South Wind; blowing from all Points
of that Quarter.

And brought Quails.] No Body, that I have met withal, has labored so much to
give a clear Explication of this whole following Discourse, as Job Ludolphus in
his most learned Commentary upon his Aethiopick History, Lib. I. cap. 13. n.
96. Where he has a long Discourse (to which I refer the Reader) to show that
the Hebrews do not take the word Selau (here used) to signify Quails: but we
take that translation of it only from Josephus. See what I have noted on XVI
Exodus 13. The no less learned Bochartus, indeed, has said a great deal to
justify Josephus: and has shown that Egypt, and the Neighboring Regions
abound still with Quails; from whence this Wind blew fair to bring them to the
Hebrews. And every one knows, that there are certain Winds called Ornithia's;
from their bringing great Flights of Birds along with them. Quails also he
observes are wont to fly from the Southern Countries to the Northern, in the
Spring time, (as it now was) and to fall sometimes in such vast quantities, as
to sink a Ship. Notwithstanding all which, and a great deal more, which he
alleges, with great learning, there are several things said in the following
Relation, which by no means can be brought to agree to Quails: and therefore
Ludolphus rather takes Selau to signify Locusts; by which it is easy to give
a plain Explication of all that is said of them. It is certain, they were not
only used for Food, in those Parts of the World: but that some of them were
very delicious Meat in several Countries: for they that have eaten them, (See
XI Lev. 22.) compare them to young Pigeons; or to a fresh Herring; or to a
Crab, or Lobster, (like to which they are in Shape and Figure) and they are
several ways prepared, and accounted very wholesome Food; when they have thrown
away the Heads, and Wings and Legs. Pliny says, that some Parts of Ethiopia
lived upon them; and that they were preserved, fumo and sale, by being dried in
the Smoke and salted, for their nourishment, throughout the whole Year. Now all
that is said in this, and in the following verses, will have a plain and easy
meaning, (as I said) if we follow this Interpretation: but not, if we take them
for Quails, or Pheasants, or Sea-fowl. As for example, what was said before,
concerning God's sending a mighty Wind, is not hard to understand, if we
suppose him to speak of Locusts; which all Authors say are brought with a Wind:
But it was never heard to bring Quails, which cannot fly high, nor far; much
less so far, as from the Sea to the middle of Arabia Petraea. Nor would the
Locusts have come this way, had not this Wind brought them from their ordinary
Course.

From the Sea.] Viz. From the Red Sea; yet not excluding the Persian Gulf.
Which must not be understood, as if they came out of the Sea; but from the
Seacoast: And it is very probable out of Africa, where they abound. So the
aforesaid Ludolphus expounds it, in his late Dissertatio de Locustis, Pars II.
cap. 39, etc.

And let them fall by the Camp.] Or poured them down upon the Camp; as Dust or
Rain falls thick upon the Ground. For both these Comparisons the Psalmist uses
in the place before-named, LXXVIII. 27. And this is expressed in Exodus XVI.
13. by covering their Camp.

As it were a days journey on this side, and as it were a days journey on the
other side.] A days Journey, as Bochartus makes account, is at least Twenty
Miles. See the place before-named, Hierozoic. P. II. Lib. I. cap. 15. p. 105.
Or, as Ludolphus makes the Computation, Sixteen Miles, in his Dissertation de
Locustis, P. II. cap. 44, etc. Take it either way, it shows there was a vast
number of them: For he adds,

Round about the Camp.] So that which way soever they went for sixteen or
twenty Miles together, there lay heaps of them upon the Ground: which, if we
understand this of Quails, cannot be conceived without a heap of Miracles. And
if we resort to that, what need was there of a Wind to bring them, when God
must be supposed miraculously to have created them, as he did Manna. And yet
such a quantity of Quails was not to be found any where, without a Miracle, as
would cover the Heavens forty Miles (according to Bochartus) on all sides. But
that which would have been, on many accounts miraculous, if we understand it of
Quails, will be found less wonderful, or rather natural, if it be understood of
Locusts: who come in very great, and thick Clouds, which darken the Sky; as all
Authors tell us. See Ludolphus Comment. in Histor. Aethiop. p. 188.

And as it were two Cubits high, upon the face of the Earth.] This Interpreters
look upon as impossible: for then the Quails would have been choked and
stifled; if they had been heaped so deep one upon another. And therefore they
have devised the addition of a new word; and refer this not to their falling
upon the Ground, but to their flying in the Air, two Cubits high above the
Earth: that so they might the more easily be taken by their Hands. So the Jews,
and so Val. Schindler in his Lexicon upon the word Selau. But, besides that,
there is nothing of this in the Text; and is contrary to what the Psalmist
says, that they fell in the midst of their Camp, verse 28. and that they came
down like Rain, which always falls upon the Ground: there are many other
Difficulties in this Interpretation, (as he shows p. 189. and defends what he
there asserts in his Dissertation de Locustis, P. II. cap. 49, 50.) And
therefore it is better to expound it of Locusts; who though they fall one upon
another, to a great depth, are not thereby suffocated: by reason of the length
of their Feet, and the thinness of their Wings.

Ver. 32. And the People stood up, (or rather, rose They were intent upon the
gathering of them for thirty six hours.

And they gathered the Quails.] By this it is evident that they gathered
something lying upon the Ground, and not flying in the Air: for we do not
gather things there, but take or catch them.

He that gathered least.] Viz. The Master of every Family for himself, and for
those belonging to him. For we are not to suppose, that every Man in Israel
gathered so many as follows.

Gathered ten homers.] A vast quantity, if they were Quails; which would have
served them, not for a Month, but for a Year or two: as Ludolphus observes, p.
190. of his Commentary on his Aethiopic. Hist. Besides, we do not use to
measure Fowl, but to number them. And therefore Bochart, being sensible of this
impropriety, takes the word homer here to signify an heap. Which is confuted
by Ludolphus in his Dissertatio de Locustis, P. II. cap. 54, 55, etc.

And they spread them all abroad for themselves, round about the Camp.] This is
another plain indication that they were Locusts; which they spread to be dried
in the Sun: but if they had been Quails would have been very preposterous; for
it would have made them the sooner stink. Interpreters therefore commonly pass
by this, and give no account why they spread them abroad: and the Vulgar Latin
omits this word spread. Whereas all Authors tell us, this is the principal way
of preparing Locusts; and preserving them for a Month or more. Which they
boiled, or other ways made fit to eat, when they had occasion. See Ludolphus in
his forementioned Commentary; and in his Defense of it lately, in his
Dissertatio de Locustis, P. II. cap. 97, 98, etc.

And while the flesh was yet between their teeth.] While they were eating; and
therefore were in good health, and had a good Stomach.

Ere it was chewed.] Before they had swallowed it.

The Wrath of the LORD was kindled against the People.] They felt unexpected
effects of God's displeasure; being taken perhaps with a sudden vomiting, of
which they died, v. 20. This was in the Conclusion of the Month; for so long
(he there says) they should eat flesh.

And the LORD smote the People with a very great Plague.] He sent a Pestilence
among them as Aben Ezra supposes. Or, as others think, they wasted away in a
Consumption: the Vomiting perhaps continuing so, that they could never retain
any Meat, till they died. This they gather from CVI Psalm. 15. where the
Psalmist says, He sent Leanness into their Soul. But Bochartus and Menochius
think he burnt them up with a Fire from his Presence, as at the beginning of
this Murmuring, verse 1. where it is said, as it is here, The Anger of the LORD
was kindled. But Bochartus grounds this chiefly upon LXXVIII Psalm. 21. where it
is said, A Fire was kindled in Jacob; which he refers to this Story.

It may seem strange to some, that now they should be punished so heavily, when
about a Year ago they murmured for Flesh, as they did now; and he gave it them
in the Even, together with Manna in the Morning; without any Punishment at all.
But it is to be considered, that as it was a greater Fault to fall into the
same Sin again, after God had been so good to them; so they were not in such
Necessity now, as they were then; when they were really pinched with hunger:
whereas now they were fed with Bread from Heaven; and therefore cried for Meat,
not out of need, but wantonness. And it may be added, That they were not then
so well taught, as they had been since; by the giving of the Law to them at
Mount Sinai, and many other Instructions from the House of God.

Ver. 34. And he called the name of that place Kibroth-hattaavah.] That is, the
Graves of Lust: because their Wanton Appetites threw them into those

For there they buried the People that lusted.] Not all that lusted, for then
all the People, who were guilty of this Sin, would have been buried: but all
that died of the Plague, which was inflicted for this Sin. Who, perhaps, were
those that began and headed this Mutiny; or were most violent in it.

And the People journeyed.] When the Cloud was taken up again, IX. 17.

From Kibroth-hattaavah.] From whence they departed about the beginning of the
fourth Month, called Tammuz.

Unto Hazeroth.] Another place in the Wilderness of Paran: but how far from the
former Station, whether a days Journey, or more, we do not find.

And abode at Hazeroth.] There the Cloud rested, and accordingly there they
encamped. But we do not read how long: only we are sure they stayed there at
least a Week, XII. 15.

CHAP. XII.
AND Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses.] Miriam is put here before Aaron;
but because she, it is highly probable, was the Beginner of this Sedition, and
drew her Brother Aaron into it.

Because of the Ethiopian Woman.] Or rather Arabian Woman. See X Genesis 6.

Whom he had married.] Whom most both of the Jewish and Christian Writers take
to have been Zipporah; though some few fancy, he speaks of another Woman, whom
he had lately married; Zipporah being either dead, or divorced. The only
difficulty is, why they should quarrel with him, about Zipporah: Who, if she
had been dead, or divorced, it is not likely he would have married a Cushite,
but a Jewish Woman. The Hebrew Doctors have devised strange Stories about his
forbearing her Company; which may be read in many Authors; particularly in
Seldom, L. III. Vxor. Hebr. cap. 26. where he recites many of their Opinions
about this matter. The most common is, that they were angry at his Marriage
with a Woman of another Nation; whom they would have had him put away, and
taken another Wife. So they interpret the following words; for he had married
an Ethiopian Woman: as if his mere Marriage with her, was the thing they spoke
against. Which is not at all probable, if this be meant of Zipporah; for he had
been married to her forty Years; which if they had disliked, one would think
should have, long before now, been charged upon him as a Fault. I rather think
that they were jealous, of his being ruled too much by her, and by her
Relations. For it was by her Father's Advice, that he made the Judges,
mentioned XVIII Exodus 21, 22. and perhaps they imagined she and Hobab had a
hand in choosing the LXX Elders lately made, as we read in the foregoing
Chapter. With which, this Story being immediately connected; it makes me think
it has some relation to that. For those Elders were nominated, it is evident,
by Moses alone; without consulting Aaron, or Miriam: Who taking themselves to
be neglected, in so great an Alteration made of the Government, without their
Advice, were very angry. And not daring to charge Moses directly with this
Neglect of them, they fall upon his Wife; whom in Scorn, they call a Cushite,
or Arabian Woman: Which in aftertimes, were accounted a vile People, as
appears from IX Amos 7. For that Country was inhabited by diverse Nations,
mingled together, viz. Ishmaelites, Midianites, Amalekites, and such like. Who
from thence, some think, were called by the general name of Arabians; because
of their mixture. For Ereb in Hebrew, signifies a Miscellaneous Company, or
mixture of many People. See XXV Jerem. 20, 24. where he calls these very
People, by this name.

And they said, Has the LORD indeed spoken only by Moses?] Here it appears
that it was really Moses, with whom they were offended; who alone had called
what Men he thought good to be presented unto God, to be constituted by him,
his Assistants in the Government, XI. 24.

Has he not also spoken by us?] Are not we also acquainted with God's Mind;
being Prophets? For so Aaron was made, IV Exodus 14, 15. and Miriam so
acknowledged, XV Exodus 20. And moreover the Prophet Micah, VI. 4. mentions
them, as Conductors of the People, while they were in the Wilderness together
with Moses. Which might make them stomach it, that he took no notice of them,
when he chose the LXX Elders, who were to be his Co-adjutors; but did it of
himself.

And the LORD heard it.] Observed their Ill-behaviour toward him; though he
himself took no notice of it.

Ver. 3. Now the Man Moses was very meek, above all This is added as the
Reason, why he passed by the Affront they put upon him, and why God avenged it;
because he was so exceeding meek and patient, (or as others translate it, so
humble and lowly) that he would have been exposed to further Affronts, if God
had not chastised their Insolence. Moses also might think fit to set this down,
as a Confutation of their Charge against him; being so far from that Pride
which they imputed to him, that he did not resent (though he was so very much
above them) their undutiful Behavior toward him. Who had conversed
immediately with God himself, and been with him in the Holy Mount many days
together; who sent several Commands to Aaron, as well as to the People by him
alone: Which made such a Difference between him and all others, that as it was
an unaccountable Arrogance in them to equal themselves unto him; so he
demonstrated how far he was from being proud of his Superiority, by meekly
bearing their haughty Behavior toward him.

So little cause there is for their Cavils, who from hence argue, that Moses
was not the Author of these Books; because he commends himself in them. For
this is not so much a Commendation, as a necessary Account, of himself; to show
how causless their Charge against him was. To such Vindications of themselves
the humblest Souls may be constrained, by the Calumnies of wicked Men: As we
see not only in St. Paul, but our blessed Savior, who were put upon Glorying,
and Magnifying themselves, by the Malignity of their Enemies. See X Joh. 36. 2 Corinthians. XI. 10, 23, etc. And this is the more allowable; when Men know not
only that they write the Truth, but that it is notorious to all that are
acquainted with them, and cannot be contradicted. The holy Writers also are not
to be confined to our Rules; being moved by the Holy Ghost to set down such
things, which if they had been left to themselves, they would not have
mentioned. And Men who have a due Reverence to the Holy Scriptures, will look
upon this rather as the Holy Ghost's Testimony concerning Moses, than Moses his
Testimony concerning himself. But we have to do now with a Generation of Men,
that write upon these Books, not as of a Divine Original, but as they do upon
common Authors.

And the LORD spoke suddenly unto Moses.] The LORD thought fit immediately to
stifle their Insurrection; which might have proved dangerous, if it had spread
among the People. And perhaps the word suddenly may relate to the manner of his
calling to them; with a quick and hasty Speech, as one provoked and highly
displeased.

And unto Aaron, and unto Miriam.] It is uncertain whether God spoke to these
two by himself, or by Moses. It is likely he spoke to them all together, (while
Aaron and Miriam were expostulating with Moses) with such a Voice, as he was
wont to use when he communicated his Mind to the Prophets.

Come out ye three.] It is likely they were all in Moses his Tent; whether his
Brother and Sister were come to utter their Complaint.

Unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Which was God's Tent, wherein he
dwelt among them; and from whence he declared his Will to them.

And they came out.] To attend the Pleasure of the Divine Majesty.

Ver. 5. And the LORD came down in the Pillar The Pillar of the Cloud, which
was wont to be over the most Holy Place, where the LORD dwelt; came down from
thence, and the SCHECHINAH in it; and stood, as it here follows, at the Door of
the Tabernacle.

And stood in the Door of the Tabernacle.] As if it would leave them; as it
did, v. 9.

And called Aaron and Miriam.] Who were at some distance, I suppose; and are
commanded to come nearer.

And they came forth.] From the place where they were, when he called them: Or,
from Moses, with whom they came from his Tent; and now are required to stand by
themselves.

Ver. 6. And he said, hear now my Words.] Mark

If there be a Prophet among you.] This does not make a doubt of it, but
supposes that they, and others among the People, were Prophets; as they
alleged, v. 2. But God would have them to understand, that he did not
communicate his Mind to all alike; nor, in the same way and manner; but so
differently, as to make a remarkable Distinction between Moses and others.

Whether there were, in those days, Men brought up and trained, to be made fit
to receive this Gift bestowed upon them; we do not know: But in aftertimes, it
is evident there were certain Colleges of Prophets, wherein Disciples of
Prophets were bred. Such was that 1 Samuel X. 5. and XIX. 18, etc. Where the Sons
of the Prophets, i. e. their Scholars or Disciples, (as Jonathan always
translates that Phrase) were brought up. And for the most part, such only were
endued with this Gift, who were so educated in those Schools, in the Study of
the Law, and in Piety. Though God did not tie himself to dispense it to such
Persons alone; but bestowed it upon whom he pleased, though they had spent no
time in those Schools of the Prophets. This is apparent from that Proverbial
Speech, Is Saul also among the Prophets? 1 Samuel X. 11. XIX. 24. This had been
no wonder (as this Saying imports) if it had been usual for Persons to be
endowed with this Gift, on a sudden; who was never bred up in such a course, as
led to it. But to show how this came to pass, one of that place answered and
said, (as it there follows, v. 12.) but who is their Father? That is, this is
no such wonder, if it be considered, who makes Men Prophets; viz. God, who is
the Father of all the Children of the Prophets; and therefore may inspire whom
he pleases. As he now might have imparted this Gift, to meaner Persons than the
LXX Elders presented to him by Moses; and made them equal, if he had thought
fit, with Aaron and Miriam. For this was the case of Amos, in after-ages; who
was no Prophet, nor a Prophet's Son, (as he himself relates, VII. 14.) but an
Herds-man; and yet the LORD took him, as he followed the Flock, and bad him go
and prophecy, unto his People Israel.

I the LORD.] Here is the Original of Prophecy; will make my self known unto
him, communicate to him my Mind and Will.

In a Vision.] This was one way of discovering his Mind to the Prophets; by
representing things to them, when they were awake, as if they had perceived
them by their Senses; which at that time were locked up, and all transacted by a
Divine Operation upon their Mind and Imagination. See XV Genesis 1. and VIII Dan.
1, 15. Abarbinel mentions one, who observes that the word Marah (the Plural of
which Maroth signifies Looking-Glasses, in XXXVIII Exodus 8.) is a different
word from Mareh, which is commonly used for Vision. And teaches us, that all
the Representations made in this way to the Prophets, were only as the Images
of things represented in a Glass; in which we behold the outward Shape, or
Shadow, as we may call it; but not the thing it self. And so St. Paul seems to
have understood this word (if he alludes to this place, as Grotius thinks he
does) when he says, now we see, (...), through a Glass, darkly; 1 Corinthians.
XIII. 12.

And I will speak unto him in a Dream.] This was another way of God's revealing
his Mind unto the Prophets, in their sleep; when they not only saw things
represented them, but also heard a voice. And both these seem some times to
have been mixed together, or to have followed one another; as in XVI Genesis 12.
VII Dan. 1. VIII. 16, 17, 18. And it is a Maxim among the Jews, that there is
no degree of Prophecy, but it is comprehended under one of these, Visions or
Dreams. So Maimonides in his More Nevochim, P. II. cap. 32. and 41. and again
cap. 43. where he says, There is no third degree of Prophecy besides these
two. For as for that Divine Spirit, which moved Men to speak of things
appertaining to the Knowledge of God and his Praises, beyond their natural or
acquired Abilities, without seeing any Figures, asleep or awake, though with
Assurance that it was from God, they will not have it called Prophecy: though
they acknowledge those Parts of Scripture which they call Cetuvim, and the LXX.
(...), i. e. written by the Holy Ghost, were indicted by that Divine Spirit; and
therefore we cannot reasonably deny those that were inspired by it, the Name of
Prophets.

My Servant Moses is not so.] Does not receive my Mind, in either of those
ways; and therefore is more than a Prophet; having it communicated to him in a
far more noble and clearer manner, which placed him in a higher rank than any
other inspired Person.

Who is faithful in all my House.] Because he was entrusted (so the word may be
understood) with God's whole Family: that is, with all the Children of Israel:
and faithfully discharged the Trust reposed in him, by acquainting them with
all God's Will; and executing all his Commands; and doing nothing of himself
(as now he was fasly accused) but only what God required. This is a high
Testimony to him; and the Jews, when they are in the humor of exalting Moses,
say he was more faithful than the Angels of the Ministry: They are the words of
R. Jose in Siphri: and if he had said, As faithful as the Angels of the
Ministry, it might have passed for a good Explication.

Ver. 8. With him will I speak, mouth to mouth.] Exodus 11. From whence
Abarbinel, in his Rosch Amana, gathers, That Moses his Prophecy differed from
others, in these four things: First, That God spoke to others by a Mediator,
(that is, as he explains it, by some Angel) but to him by himself; without the
intervention of any other. Secondly, That they never prophesied, but their
Senses were all bound up, either in Visions or in Dreams; whereas he was as
perfectly awake, as we are when we discourse one with another. Thirdly, That
after the Vision was over, they were often left so weak and feeble, that they
could scarce stand upon their feet; as appears from X Dan. 8, 11. but Moses
spoke with the Divine Majesty without any consternation or alteration; his
conversation with him being like that of one Friend with another. And lastly,
No Prophet but he could understand the Mind of God when they pleased; for he
communicated himself to them only when he thought good: whereas Moses might at
any time resort to God, to enquire of him, and receive an answer. See IX. 8. To
the same purpose also Maimonides writes in his Book de Fundamentis Legis, cap.
7.

Even apparently.] Plainly, clearly, and distinctly; so that there was no
difficulty to apprehend his meaning; nor need of an Explication. Thus he
proclaimed his Name to Moses, XXXIV Exodus 6, 7.

And not in dark Speeches.] Or, in Parables, and Enigmatical Representations.
Such as the Ladder, which Jacob saw in a Dream; the Boiling-pot which was shown
to Jeremiah; the Wall, the Plumb-line, and the Basket of Summer-fruits, which
Amos saw; the Beasts which were represented to Daniel; the Lamps, Mountain,
Horses and Chariots, to Zachariah; the Roll of the Book which Ezekiel was to
eat. By all which the Prophet (as Maimonides observes, whose Illustrations
these are of these words) was given to understand some other thing, which was
intended to be made known to him by these Figures. More Nevoch. P. II. c. 43.
who in his Book, concerning the Foundations of the Law, further observes; that
some of these Prophets had both the Parable, (as he calls it) and its
Interpretation represented to them; others the Parable only without any
Exposition; and to some was only delivered the Explication.

And the Similitude of the LORD shall he behold.] I am apt to think the word
not should be here again repeated (as it must be in some places to make out the
Sense, as XXV Prove. 27.) which will make the meaning plainly this, he shall not
behold the LORD in Similitudes and Resemblances, as other Prophets did. For the
Hebrew word Temunah signifies the Shape of a thing represented either to the
outward Senses, or to the Imagination, not the thing it self. Therefore it
would be to equal Moses with the rest of the Prophets to say, he should see the
Similitude of the LORD; for so did they. Amos, for instance, says he, saw the
LORD standing upon the Altar, IX. 1. that is, some Angelical Appearance in a
glorious shape. And Eliphaz says, That a Spirit passed before him, the form
(or aspect) whereof he could not discern: only the Temunah (we render it an
Image) was before his Eyes, IV Job 15, 16. But God did not thus reveal himself
to Moses by Images, and Similitudes of Things; but spoke to him himself, as it
goes before, mouth to mouth. Which led Maimonides into the opinion (which he
often repeats) that when God is said to speak to any other Man, it was by an
Angel; and that he never spoke to any one himself, but only to Moses. Nor did
any Man before him say, that God spoke to him; or that he sent him on a Message
unto others: but Moses was the first that had this honor; More Nevoch. P. I.
c. 63. and P. II. cap. 39.

But if we follow our Translation, which should run thus, But the Similitude of
the LORD shall he behold, it relates to that wonderful Apparition of God to him
in the Bush, III Exodus 6. as Maimonides thinks, More Nevochim, P. I. cap. 5.
(where he says, God poured upon him as much as he could contain) but
especially to that Revelation which God made of himself to him, when he told
him that he could not see his Face, but should behold his back Parts, XXXIII
Exodus 20, 23. Which was a Privilege granted to none but him. And thus the
Similitude of the LORD, or his Likeness, signifies the LORD himself, XVII Psalm.
ult. When thy Likeness shall awake, (that is, thou thy self appear for me) I
shall be satisfied.

Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses?] Who is
my prime Minister; employed by me in the highest Services.

Ver. 9. And the Anger of the LORD was kindled against them.] As appeared by
what follows.

And he departed.] He withdrew his Presence from

And the Cloud departed from the Tabernacle.] It was not merely taken up from
it, (as it was wont to be, when they were to remove their Camp) but quite
disappeared for a time; or stood at a great distance from them: till Miriam was
removed from the Tabernacle, and carried out of the Camp. For that was one
reason of its departure; the Divine Majesty not designing to stay where so
impure a Creature was. And this was also a manifest token of God's high
Displeasure against them; which moved him to forsake them.

And behold Miriam became leprous.] Or, was become leprous. A proper Punishment
for pride, and evil speaking. Which was not inflicted upon Aaron, because he
was to judge of Leprosy; and was not the first in the Transgression. And
besides, it is likely, God would not have one, that was but newly made his
High Priest, become vile and contemptible.

White as Snow.] Which was a mark of an incurable Leprosy; when all the Body
was overspread with it, IV Exodus 6. 2 Kings V. 27.

And Aaron looked upon Miriam.] As the Priest was bound to do; whose Office it
was to inspect it, and judge whether it was a Leprosy or no, XIII Lev. 2, etc.

And behold, she was leprous.] He could not but judge her to have a Leprosy;
and consequently pronounce her unclean.

Ver. 11. And Aaron said unto Moses.] He was Moses had greater interest in God
than himself; and therefore desires his intercession for them.

Alas my Lord! Have pity upon us, miserable Wretches.

I beseech thee, lay not the Sin upon us.] He supplicates him as his Superior,
and humbly begs his pardon; and that he would obtain remission of the
Punishment which they had justly deserved by their Sin. For he was afraid he
himself might suffer, as he saw she did.

Wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.] He prays him to
look upon their Offense, as proceeding from Folly and Weakness; though in it
self a great Sin.

Ver. 12. Let her not be as one dead, etc.] For so

Ver. 13. And Moses cried unto the LORD.] Most crying, perhaps, supposes the
Divine Majesty to be gone afar off, if not out of sight.

Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee.] For it was beyond any other power but
his, to recover her.

Ver. 14. And the LORD said unto Moses, if her An expression of extreme Anger,
abhorrence and contempt, XXX Job 10. LII Isa. 6.

Should she not be ashamed seven days?] She could not have had the confidence
to come presently into his Presence: but be ashamed, for a great while, to look
him in the Face.

Let her be shut out of the Camp.] Much more is it fit, that Miriam should
avoid my Presence, and not presume to come before me: who have set a greater
Mark of my Indignation and Detestation upon her. For Spittle might soon be
wiped off: but the Leprosy stuck to her, and made her unfit for all
Conversation, with God or Man.

Seven days.] Which was the time for legal Cleansing from such great
Impurities, XIV Lev. 8. VI Numb. 9. XXXI. 19.

And after that let her be received in again.] I suppose she was presently
freed from her Leprosy: but kept out from the Camp so long, to declare God's
Displeasure against her; and to humble her, by exposing her to shame.

And Miriam was shut out of the Camp seven days.] That her Offense might be
known to all, by her open Punishment.

And the People journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.] For the Cloud
was gone which should have directed them in their Motions. And besides, this
respect perhaps was shown unto her, because she was a Prophetess: and hereby
she had time given her to humble her self before God, and to beg his Pardon for
her Sin.

Brought in again.] When one would have expected that such Sacrifices should
have been offered for her Cleansing, as are required in XIV Lev. But this was
an extraordinary Case; she being on a sudden miraculously struck, with the
highest Degree of the Plague of Leprosy; and as suddenly cured by the same
Hand that struck her.

Ver. 16. And afterward the People removed.] Which v. 10. returned again to it,
together with Miriam: that it might guide them in their removal to another
Station. For till it was taken up from the Tabernacle, they stirred not from
the place where they were, IX. 17, 18.

From Hazeroth.] After they had abode there seven days at the least.

And pitched in the Wilderness of Paran.] Where they were before, (See X. 12.)
but now were brought into another part of it, called Rithmah, XXXIII. 18. which
was called also by another name, Kadesh-barnea, XIII. 26 I Deuteronomy. 19. Or else we
must suppose, these two Places, to have been so very near together, that they
might be said to have pitched, either in the one or the other. This Station was
at the foot of the Mountain on the South part of Canaan, I Deuteronomy. 20. so that
their next removal was to have been into the Land promised to them, if they
themselves had not hindered, by their renewed Rebellion. This removal was in the
fourth Month of the second Year after they came out of the Land of Egypt. See
XI. 20, 35.

CHAP. XIII.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] They being now come to the Borders of
Canaan, the LORD ordered Moses to exhort them to go up, and take possession of
it; and not to fear nor be discouraged; as we read in I Deuteronomy. 21. But the
People (out of a distrust of God's Power, as Moses seems to intimate, IX Deuteronomy.
23.) desired they might first send some to search out the Land, before they
attempted its Conquest, I Deuteronomy. 22. About which it is likely Moses consulted
the Divine Majesty; who gave them leave so to do.

Send thou Men.] For their greater satisfaction, God ordered them to have their
desire. For there seems to have been a general Fear upon them ( every one of
them coming to Moses with this request, I Deuteronomy. 22.) which could not be
removed, but by sending some to bring them intelligence, what kind of Country
it was, and what People they had to deal withal, v. 18, 19, 20.

That they may search the Land of Canaan.] To make a discovery, both of the
Country, and of the Inhabitants; and the best way to invade it, I Deuteronomy. 22.

Which I give unto the Children of Israel.] To the possession of which God now
intended to introduce them. For he had already brought them to the Confines of
it, and bidden them go up and possess it, (I Deuteronomy. 20, 21.) but they would
needs make this delay, for a discovery of the condition of the Country: which
was their own contrivance at the first, and not a Divine Counsel.

Of every Tribe of their Fathers shall ye send a Man.] That there might be no
suspicion of Partiality in their Report.

Every one a Ruler among them.] Men of Authority, and Prudence; who might be
the more believed: Yet not of the highest Rank, (for such are called by the
name of Princes, I. 16.) but Rulers perhaps of Thousands, who were very
considerable in their Tribes. For they are called by the same name in the
Hebrew; every one being said to be a NASI and a ROSCH, a Leader and a Head in
their Tribes; which may incline one to think, that there were higher and lower
Persons of this sort, who had the same Title, in every Tribe.

Ver. 3. And Moses by the Commandment of the Which was given him in the fifth
Month (called Ab, as St. Hierom notes from the Jews) of the second Year after
they came out of Egypt: It is not certain upon what day; but it is likely in
the beginning of the Month, which answers to the nineteenth of our July, sent
them from the Wilderness of Paran. From Radesh-Barnea. XXXII. 8. I Deuteronomy. 19,
20. IX. 23. XIV Josh. 7.

All those Men were heads of the Children of Israel.] So the Rulers of
Thousands and Hundreds are called, XVIII Exodus 25. as well as the Princes, I
Numb. 16. But these were a lower sort of Heads, or great Men, in the several
Tribes of Israel.

Ver. 4. And these are their Names: Of the Tribe of There is little to be
observed concerning this Verse, and those that follow, to the XVIth. but that
it is evident these were not the same Men, who in the first Chapter of this
Book are called the Heads and Princes of the Tribes; being inferior Persons,
who ruled over some part, not over a whole Tribe. The three first Tribes also
that are here mentioned, sprang from the three eldest Sons (for Levi did not
make a Tribe in Israel) of Jacob: But in the Enumeration of the rest, there is
not any Order observed, of which I can give an account. Perhaps they being to
disperse themselves, when they entered the Country they were to search, (see
verse 22.) and thinking it not prudent to go above two (at the most) in
company, cast Lots who should be associated: And the first Lot fell to those of
the Tribe of Reuben and Simeon; the next to those of Judah and Issachar; and so
to the rest.

Of the Tribe of Joseph.] i. e. Of the other Branch of Joseph's Family, viz. of
the Tribe of Manasseh, as it here follows.

These are the Names of the Men that Moses sent to spy out the Land.] He would
have their Names remembered (which is the reason of this Remark) for the sake of
those two worthy Men, Caleb and Joshua, whose Virtue was very illustrious, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation.

And Moses called Oshea the Son of Nun.] So he is called, v. 8. being named for
the Tribe of Ephraim.

Jehoshua.] He was called by this name presently after they came out of Egypt,
(XVII Exodus 9.) when he went to fight with Amalek. Whom he having overcome,
Moses looked upon it as a Token that he should save and deliver the People of
Israel; and then called him by this Name. Which imports some thing more than
Oshea; for that denotes only a Prayer for Salvation, (as Menochius observes)
but this carries in it a Promise of it. And some think the addition of the
first Letter in the name Jehoshua, was from the name of JEHOVAH: Implying that
the LORD would employ him, in leading and conducting his People into the Land
of Promise. Wherein he was a Type of the Savior of the World, the LORD JESUS,
(whose Name is the same with this) who conducts those that believe on him, to
an Heavenly Inheritance.

If I could find the like comfortable Signification in the rest of the Names of
these Men, I should think there might be some ground for their Opinion, who
fancy Moses chose Joshua because there was a good Omen in his very Name. For
all Nations took great care that no Man should be employed in Affairs of
moment, whose Names carry any unlucky Signification in them. So Cicero observes
in his first Book of Divination, that the Generals of Armies, and the Censors,
took care that none should so much as lead the Sacrifices to the Altar, but who
were bonis Nominibus, of Names that signified Good. Of which the Consuls also
were very observant, ut primus miles fiat bono nomine, that the first Soldier
whom they listed, should be of a good Name; such as Valerius, Salvius,
Statorius, or the like. On the contrary, the Name of Naevius was deemed so bad,
that in his Oration pro Quinct. Sext. he says, having named the Man, methinks
I have said enough.

Ver. 17. And Moses sent them to spy out the Land, and That is, when he sent
them to spy out the Land, (as was said in the foregoing Verse) he gave them the
following Directions.

Get ye up this way Southward.] This South-part of Canaan fell afterward to be
part of the Lot of the Tribe of Judah, XV Josh. 1, 2, 3. and was very dry, and
consequently barren, I Judge. 15. and therefore fittest for their entrance to
spy out the Land unobserved; being less inhabited, than the better parts of the
Country. Besides, it was nearest to the place where they now were encamped.

And go up into the Mountain.] Where the Amorites dwelt, I Deuteronomy. 19. together
with some Amalekites, and other People, XIV. 43, 45. From whence they were to
go down into the Valleys.

And see the Land what it is, and the People that dwell therein.] These are the
general Directions which he gave them, to inform themselves, both of the
Country, and of its Inhabitants.

Whether they be strong or weak, few or many.] In particular, with respect to
the latter, he directs them to inform themselves whether the Inhabitants were
strong bodied, or feeble; and whether their number was great or small.

And what the Land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad.] And with
respect to the former, he would have them bring an account first, what sort of
Country it was, whether healthful and delightful, or unwholesome and unpleasant.

And what Cities there be, that they dwell in.] And then how large their Cities
were, and of what strength.

Whether in Tents, or in strong Holds.] Whether they lived in Tents, as the
Arabians did, (and the Israelites while they were in the Wilderness) or in
Houses; and whether they were fortified. Or rather (as we would say in our
Language) whether in open Villages, or in walled Cities: For so the word
Mahanaim signifies, not Tents (as we here translate it) but Hosts or Camps,
XXXII Genesis 1. and here Towns without Walls, as the LXX. interprets it: And the
Vulgar whether in walled Towns, or without walls.

Ver. 20. And what the Land is, etc.] And last of all, what is the Soil of the
Country; whether rich and fertile, or poor and barren: and also whether it be a
woody Country, or otherwise?

And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the Land.] In which
Discoveries, there being some hazard, he bids them be confident God would
preserve them: so that they might venture to bring away with them, some of the
Fruit which the Country produced.

Now the time, was the time of the first ripe Grapes.] Toward the Vintage.

Ver. 21. So they went up, and searched the Land Which was on the South of the
Land of Canaan, XXXIV. 3. XV Josh. 1, 3. being different from the Wilderness of
Sin; which lay near to Egypt, XVI Exodus 1.

Unto Rehob, as Men come to Hamath.] The City of Rehob lay in the North of the
Land of Canaan; and fell to the Lot of the Tribe of Asher, XIX Josh. 28. And it
lay not far from Hamath (which, in after times, was called Ephiphania) a City
which we very often read of afterward, as the bounds of Judaea Northward;
which Moses says was unto the entrance of Hamath, XXXIV. 8. So that they took
a Survey of the whole Country, from one end of it to the other, South and
North: and also, as they passed along, observed those Parts that lay East and
West. For they gave an account of the Canaanites, as dwelling by the Sea,
(which was Westward) and by the Coast of Jordan, which was on the East, v. 29.
Or, if by the Sea we understand, not the Western Ocean, but the dead Sea, (as
some do) yet it appears by these very words, that they bent their Course, as
they passed from South to North, unto the Western and Eastern Parts also. For
Rehob and Hamath both lay at the foot of Libanus: one to the North-west
(toward Sidon) and the other to the North-east.

And they ascended by the South.] In their return from searching the Country.

And came unto Hebron.] That is, Some of them. For the words in the Hebrew is
not they came, (as it is they ascended) but he came. Which demonstrates that
they did not go all of them together in a Company, (for that had been
dangerous, and might have made them taken notice of) but dispersed themselves;
some going to discover one place, some another. And it is a probable Conjecture
of some of the Hebrew Doctors, that Caleb was the Man that went to take a view
of Hebron; and was so little affrighted at the sight of the Giants there, that
he was the very Person that afterward drove them out; and had this place given
him for his Portion: For it was in the South part of the Lot of the Tribe of
Judah; being formerly called Kirjath-Arba, XIV Josh. 9, 12, 14.

Where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the Children of Anak were.] These were the
Grandchildren of Arba (from whom Hebron had the name of Kirjath-Arba, i. e.
the City of Arba) who was the Father of Anak. Whose Family was more eminent
than any other in Canaan: these three Sons of his, being Men not only of great
Bulk, but Prowess and Valor. Bochartus thinks ( Lib. I. Canaan, cap. 1.) that
Anak signifies as much as the Roman name Toropiatus; being like to that Gaul
whom Manlius vanquished. And Ahiman signifies as much as, Who is my Brother?
importing there was none to be compared with him. Sesai he takes to be as much
as Sixtius, viz. Six Cubits high, as Goliath was. And Talmai he derives from
Talam, a Furrow: as if he seemed in length to equal a Furrow in the Field.
These were the People that made the Israelites tremble: for it is likely their
whole Family were of a very large Stature, though not so big as these. And
indeed, they were so very terrible to all their Neighbors, that it became a
Proverbial saying in those Countries, Who can stand before the Children of
Anak? IX Deuteronomy. 2.

Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.] The Egyptians boasted
of the great Antiquity of their Nation and Cities: But Moses shows that Hebron
was built before the Capital City of their Country. For so Zoan was; and called
in after Ages Tanis: lying not far from that Mouth of the River Nile, which
from thence was called by Plutarch (...). R. Solomon will have it, that Hebron
was built by Cham, one of the three Sons of Noah, and the Father of Mizraim;
from whom the Egyptians descended. But of this there is no certainty: and the
Gemara upon Sota, cap. 7. says, It is not likely that a Man would build a
House for his younger Son, before he had built one for his elder; for Canaan
was the youngest of all the Sons of Cham, X Genesis 6. Yet those Doctors are
willing to suppose that Cham built both these Cities; and therefore interpret
the word banah, which is rightly translated built, as if it signified fruitful,
(according to XVI Genesis 2.) and make the Sense to be, That Hebron was seven
times more fruitful than Zoan. Which is very foolish; as upon other accounts,
so on this, that Hebron was a strong place, and therefore not fertile.

And they came unto the Brook Eshchol.] A place which lay in a Valley, at the
foot of the Mountain, I Deuteronomy. 24.

And cut down from thence a Branch with one Cluster of Grapes.] This was done,
no doubt, in some private place, upon the Southern Borders of Canaan; just as
they were returning to the Camp of Israel again. For it would have given the
Country too great an Alarm, if they had marched in the Highway, with this
Bunch upon their Shoulders.

And they bare it between two.] A great many Authors mention Vines and Grapes
of an extraordinary bigness in those Eastern and Southern Countries. I need
only refer to Strabo, who says the Vines in Margiana, and other places, were so
big that two Men could scarce compass them with their Arms; and that they
produced (...), a Bunch of Grapes of two Cubits, Lib. II. Geograph. p. 73. and
Lib. XI. p. 516. Which is in part justified by Olearius in his late Travels
into Persia, Book III. where he says, not far from Astracan, he saw Vines,
whose Trunks were so thick, that a Man could do no more than grasp them about
with both his Arms. And Forsterus in his Dictionarium Hebraicum, p. 862. says
there was a Preacher at Norimberg, called Achacius, who lived as a Monk eight
Years in the Holy Land, (as they call it) who told him upon his Sickbed, That
in his time there were Clusters of Grapes at Hebron, of such bigness, that one
single Kernel was sufficient to quench his Thirst a whole day; when he was sick
there of a Tympany. J. Conradus Dieterius has collected a great deal more to
this purpose out of Leo Africanus and Nic. Radzivillius, and other Authors, in
his Antiq. Biblicae, p. 249. And since him the most learned Huetius in his
Quaestiones Alnetanae, Lib. II. cap. 12. n. 24. where, among other things, he
observes that Crete, Chios, and other Islands in the Archipelago, afford
Bunches of Grapes of ten pound weight; sometimes of thirty six, yea, of forty.
And he mentions Grapes of a prodigious bigness in the Island of Madera.

Upon a Staff.] See IV. 10.

And they brought of the Pomegranates and Figs.] Which grew in the parts
nearest to the place where the Israelites were encamped.

Ver. 24. The place was called the Brook Eshcol, because That is, when the
Israelites got possession of the Land, they called this Brook (or Valley) by
the name of Eshcol, in memory of this Bunch of Grapes: for so Eshcol signifies.

Ver. 25. And they returned from searching of the Came back to the Camp of
Israel.

After forty days.] This shows that they did not take a cursory view of the
Country; but took time enough to make their Observations. And the ripe Fruit
which they brought with them, after they had been forty Days from the Camp,
demonstrates that their return was in the latter end of the sixth Month, very
near to the seventh; that is, in the end of the Year, according to the old
Style of that Nation. For on the fifteenth Day of the seventh Month God ordered
the Feast of Tabernacles to be celebrated: a little before which they gathered
both their Harvest and their Vintage, XXIII Exodus 16. XXIII Lev. 39. XVI Deuteronomy.
13.

And they went and came to Moses and to Aaron, etc.] They went up the Mountain
from Eshcol; and came down on the other side of it, to Moses and Aaron, and all
the Congregation, I Deuteronomy. 24, 25.

Unto the Wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh.] Unto the place from whence they were
sent; which was Kadesh-barnea, (See v. 3. and IX Deuteronomy. 23.) which is here in
short called Kadesh; but is quite different from that Kadesh we read of
afterward, XXI. 1. For that was in the Wilderness of Sin; and they did not come
to it till the fortieth Year after they came out of Egypt, XXXIII. 37, 38.
whereas they were at this Kadesh in the second Year; before they were doomed to
wander forty Years in the Wilderness.

And brought back word unto them, and unto all the Congregation.] Gave a
public Account, before Moses and Aaron, of what they had discovered.

And showed them the Fruit of the Land.] And at the same time presented to them
the Cluster of Grapes, the Pomegranates and Figs which they had brought with
them.

And they told him, and said.] They address their Relation to Moses; because he
sent them, v. 2.

We came unto the Land whether thou sentest us.] I suppose they chose some of
their number, to speak in the name of the rest: and first they give an account
of the Land, as he required, v. 19, 20.

And surely it flows with Milk and Honey.] Their report of the Condition of
the Land, was as honest as could be desired: for they testify it to be such as
God promised to bestow upon them, XXXIII Exodus 3.

And this is the Fruit of it.] They prove what they say, by a Sample of the
Product of it. Which was so large, that some of the Jews fancy there were eight
Men employed to carry this one Cluster, as they say in the Gemara Sotae, cap.
7. Of which the Spies made this wicked use, as from thence to tell their
Brethren, You see this goodly Fruit, how vast it is: but believe us, the
Inhabitants of the Country exceed us, and all other Men in stature, as much as
this Fruit exceeds all other of the same kind, throughout the World. So
Wagenseil explains the sense of their Discourse in that place, Sect. 4.

Ver. 28. Nevertheless the People be strong that dwell This is an account of
the other part of the Enquiry Moses commanded them to make, concerning the
Inhabitants, and their Cities, v. 18.

And moreover, we saw the Children of the Anakims there.] See v. 22. All this
was true; but spoken in such a manner as to represent the Conquest of the
Country exceeding difficult, if not impossible. So they explain their meaning
in downright words, v. 31. and so the People understood them, I Deuteronomy. 28.
where these frightful People are called the Sons of the Anakims. For they saw
not only those three mentioned before, v. 22. but others also that were
descended from them; who, as I there noted, were gigantick Persons. So the LXX.
translate these words (...), and so the Chaldee; and so the Jews use the word
Anakim to signify Giants: particularly Benjamin Tud^lensis, p. 3. of his
Itinerary. Where L'Empereur thinks it probable they were called Anakims, a
torque quo colla superbe cingebant, from a Collar or Chain, which they proudly
wore about their Necks: for the word Anak properly signifies collum torque
cingere, (p. 136.) to wreath a Chain about the Neck. But it is evident they had
their Name from their Progenitor, Anak the Son of Arba: whence he was so
called, we do not know.

The Amalekites dwell in the Land of the South.] They do not represent the
Amalekites as Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan; but they observe that they lay
on the South border of it. Where, if they went about to enter, in all
probability, that Nation (which were their early Enemies when they came out of
Egypt) would help to oppose them in their Attempt, as much as the People of
Canaan. For that is their intention, in the following report, to show what a
stout People they must encounter, which way soever they endeavored to enter
into Canaan.

And the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites.] An account of all
these, see XV Genesis 20, 21.

Dwell in the Mountains.] Which were in the entrance of the Land of Canaan on
the South-east part of it. Particularly the Amorites, it is evident, were
planted there, upon the Mountains of the Borders of Canaan, I Deuteronomy. 27.44. And
many of them had made an expedition into the Country beyond Jordan, where they
had possessed themselves of Bashan and Heshbon, and all the Land between the
Rivers Jabbok and Arnon. For they were a very warlike People, and of great
stature, II Amos 9. which made these Searchers of their Land afraid of them;
and bid their Brethren consider whether they thought they should be able to
dispute their passage with them: which they plainly suggest, in their Opinion,
they could not. For the Jebusites were another mighty People, whom after the
Conquest of Canaan, they could not of a long time dispossess of Mount Sion. I
need not say how terrible the Hittites were; for it is probable from thence
came the word hittha, which signifies a Fright and sudden Consternation, as
Bochartus has observed in his Phalag. Lib. IV. cap. 36.

And the Canaanites.] Those who were particularly called by this Name. See XV
Genesis 21.

Dwelt by the Sea.] It is certain that the Canaanites dwelt by the Ocean,
called the Midland-Sea; for they seem to have had their Names from
Merchandising; for which that situation was most proper; and for that reason
others of them were seated near Jordan. This, I think, is plain from I Deuteronomy. 7.
And besides, the word Sea alone, commonly signifies that great Ocean. But it
being plain that they were also seated, as it here follows, upon the River
Jordan, it is possible that by Sea, may be meant in this place, the dead Sea,
or the Lake of Genesereth, or both of them; because they were near Jordan,
which ran into them.

And by the Coast of Jordan.] Where the Canaanites were also seated, as is
evident from XI Deuteronomy. 30. For there were both Western and Eastern Canaanites,
as appears from XI Josh. 3. and they are frequently joined with the Perizzites
(particularly I Judge. 4.) who were a fierce sort of rough People, that dwelt in
the woody part of the Mountains. So that the Intentions of the Men, who made
this Report, was, to represent to the People, that whether they invaded the
Land by the Southern Parts, or the Eastern, they would find both strongly
guarded by a mighty People, much superior to them in force. Which account, the
following verse shows, put the People into a Tumult.

Ver. 30. And Caleb stilled the People.] It is plain by this, that the People
understood by their way of speaking, Countenances and Gestures, that the
meaning of these Men who made this Report (which was not false in it self) was,
that though the Country indeed was very rich and desirable, yet it was
impossible for them to drive the Inhabitants out of it. Which put them into a
mutinous Disposition, as Caleb perceived by their Looks and their Muttering;
and therefore stepped forth, before it brake out, to quiet their Spirits with his
Account of the Country and Inhabitants, in which Joshua, no question, joined
with him. It is not indeed here mentioned, because Caleb perhaps stood next to
those who began to make a Commotion, and therefore spoke first: but he was
seconded by Joshua, we may be sure; because we find him mentioned in the next
Chapter, and in the first place, together with Caleb, as endeavoring to
appease the Tumult. And he is not only exempted from the Punishment inflicted
upon the People for their Rebellion, XIV. 30, 38. but is expressly said to have
followed the LORD fully, as well as Caleb, XXXII. 12.

Before Moses.] The Hebrew Phrase El Moscheh, may signify that he stilled
them, as they were coming toward Moses in a Seditious manner; or, quieted them
so far, as to make them hearken to Moses; or, as we render it, in his Presence,
when they were ready to fly in his Face. One of the Doctors in the Gemara
beforementioned, cap. 9. says, That Joshua being about to speak, they
bitterly reproached him, and would not suffer him to proceed. And therefore
Caleb thought good to give them a great many blandishing words, and to call
Moses this Son of Amram, which looked like Contempt of him; whereby he stilled
them, and disposed them to listen to him. And then he said, Is not he the
Person that brought us out of Egypt, that divided the Red Sea, for us to pass
through it; that gave us Manna from Heaven? What if he should bid us make
Ladders and climb up into the Skies, should we not obey him?

And said, Let us go up at once?] Or, go up immediately, without a stop.

And possess it.] He speaks as if it were already their own, (as indeed it was,
by God's gift) and they need only enter and take possession of it.

For we are able to overcome it.] There will be no such difficulty, as these
Men represent, in the Conquest of it.

Ver. 31. But the Men that went up with him.] The Caleb and Joshua.

Said, We be not able.] Now they open their Minds more plainly, in their Reply
to Caleb. Whom they oppose directly; and declare their Opinion downright, that
they were not an equal Match for their Enemies.

To go up against the People.] To beat them out of the Mountains, which they
inhabited.

For they are stronger than we.] These Men had no confidence in the Promise and
Power of God, on which Caleb and Joshua relied; but measured all things by
Human strength.

Ver. 32. And they brought up an evil report of the In the heat of their
Opposition, they now disparage the Country, which they had before praised, v.
27. and also stretch their Report of the Inhabitants beyond the Truth.

Saying, The Land through which we have gone to search, is a Land that eats
up the Inhabitants thereof.] Unless we suppose that there was a great Plague at
this time in the Country, as the Hebrews do (who love to excuse their
Forefathers sins) this was a gross lie. But take it as they suppose, yet this
was a very malignant Report. For if they saw the People of the Country every
where, as they passed along, carrying their Neighbors to their Graves, (as the
Jews tell the Tale) this which they should have ascribed to the Providence of
God, who sent this Mortality that they might have fewer Enemies to oppose them,
and that these Spies might pass more freely, and less observed; they most
wickedly ascribe to the badness of the Air: which being very unhealthful to the
Natives, might well be thought would be much more so to Strangers. Thus bad
Minds (as the aforesaid Gemara glosses well enough upon this Story) turn that
which God intends for their Benefit, into their Hurt. And if we had any better
Authority for this Story, the word achal (which we translate eat up) would well
enough agree with it. For, as Maimonides observes in the first part of his More
Nevoch. cap. 30. it is used in the Holy Scriptures, concerning any kind of
Consumption, Destruction, or Desolation: As here in this Book, XI. 1. XXVI Lev.
38. 2 Samuel II. 26, etc.

And all the People that we saw in it were Men of great Stature.] The Hebrew
Phrase is, Men of Measures, (...), as the LXX. translate it, Men of larger size
than the rest of Mankind. Which we have no reason to think was true: But having
seen the Sons of Anak in one part of the Country, they imagined all the rest of
the People to be near unto their Stature. For this is the Description of that
Giant of Gath, mentioned 1 Chronicles. XX. 6. where he is called a Man of Measure;
and 2 Samuel XXI. 20. where he is called in the Plural Number, (as they are here)
a Man of Measures, (...), a Man above the common bigness. And thus very great
Houses are called Houses of Measure, XXII Jerem. 24.

Ver. 33. And there we saw the Giants.] Men of Genesis 4.) which they spoke of in
the foregoing words.

The Sons of Anak.] They had mentioned this once before, v. 28. and now repeat
it again; because they were struck with such a Terror at the sight of them,
that they were always at their Tongues end. Just, as Homer mentions, (...), as
Bochartus makes the Comparison, Lib. I. Canaan, cap. 1.

Which came of the Giants.] Who were descended from a Gigantick Race of Men;
particularly from Arba, who was their Grandfather, as Joshua tells us, XIV.
15. XV. 13, 14, etc. Where he shows how Caleb drove these Anakims out of their
Cities, and made them fly to the Philistims; where there were some Remainders
of them, till the days of David. And others of them, perhaps, fled into Greece;
for there was a Race of Men among the Greeks called (...); who Vossius thinks
it probable might descend from these Children of Anak. Lib. I. de Orig. and
Progressu Idolol. cap. XIII.

And we were in our own sight as Grasshoppers.] Their Fear magnified them above
measure; though no doubt they were Men of such an extraordinary height, Job
Ludolphus observes in his Commentary upon his Histor. Aethiopica, Lib. I. cap.
2. n. 22.

And so we were in their fight.] One of the Jewish Doctors makes bold to call
these Men Liars: For though their Fear might make them seem in their own sight
as Grasshoppers, yet how could they tell, says he, that they were so in the
sight of the Children of Anak? Here the Gemarists (in the place I mentioned
above, cap. 10.) endeavor to help them out, by continuing the Tale of the
great Mortality, which was then in those Countries. Where a Funeral-Feast (as
the manner was) being one day made under certain Cedar-trees, which are very
shady; the Spies got up to the top of them, to hide themselves among the thick
Boughs. But the People below happening to look up, the Spies heard them say,
there are Men got up into the Trees, who look like Grasshoppers. But there needs
no such Inventions to defend them, when an Hyperbole will do it: Their plain
meaning being this, that the Anakims looked down upon them with the utmost
Contempt.

By all which it appears, that they had not only a sight of the Anakims, but
the Anakims also saw them; and looked upon them, it is likely, as they did upon
other Travelers; who were wont to come thither, either for their Pleasure, or
to traffic in their Country; or in their way to other places. Whom it was not
their Custom to examine strictly, whence they came, and what their business
was; but let pass to and fro among them freely.

CHAP. XIV.
AND all the Congregation.] By all the Congregation Caleb and Joshua, and
perhaps some few others.

Lift up their Voice and cried.] Shrieked, and made loud Lamentations.

And the People wept.] Which put all the People into Tears.

That night.] Which followed after the Report made by the Spies.

Ver. 2. And all the Children of Israel murmured against As they had frequently
done before; but now in a more tumultuous manner.

And the whole Congregation said unto them.] The great Men spoke in the name of
the whole body of the People.

Would God that we had died in the Land of Egypt.] In a Fit of Fury and
Despair, they quite forgot how miraculously God had brought them from thence;
and consequently could as easily bring them into Canaan.

Or would God we had died in this Wilderness.] When several of their Brethren
were burnt, and smote with a very great Plague; in this very Wilderness of
Paran, XI. 1, 33.

Ver. 3. Wherefore has the LORD brought us into this Land?] Having vented
their Passion against God's Ministers; they most undutifully accuse him, as if
he

To fall by the Sword.] Of the Children of Anak, who they fancied were
irresistible.

That our Wives and Children should be a prey?] To the People of Canaan, after
all the Men of Israel were killed.

Were it not better for us to return into Egypt?] Their Rage deprived them of
the use of their Reason.

And they said one to another, let us make a Captain, and let us return into
Egypt.] They knew that Moses would not conduct them thither; and therefore they
thought of choosing another Leader. But though they might in a Raging Fit speak
of returning to Egypt, yet it is an amazing thing that they should continue in
this Madness, and deliberate about it; nay actually appoint them a Captain, as
Nehemiah says they did, IX. 17. For how could they get thither without Food?
which they could not expect God would send them from Heaven, when they had
forsaken him. Or how could they hope to find their way, when his Cloud, which
directed them, was withdrawn from them? Or hope to deal with those, that might
oppose their Passage, if they hit upon the right way? And after all, if they
came into Egypt, what Entertainment could they look for there, among a People,
whose King, and Princes, and Firstborn, had lately perished on their account?
Nothing can be said in answer to these things; but that outrageous Discontent
will not suffer Men to consider any thing, but that which grieves them; and
that foul Ingratitude and Forgetfulness of God's Benefits, and that throws them
into such Discontents.

Ver. 5. And Moses and Aaron fell on their faces.] To deprecate God's
Displeasure; which lately arose against Josephus explains it.

Before all the Assembly of the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] Some
fancy that their falling down before them, was to beseech them to desist from
their Murmuring; and to trust in God, who would go before them, and sight for
them; as he says he told them, I Deuteronomy. 29, 30. But falling on their Faces
being the Posture of the most humble Supplicants to God, and not to Men, (as
all understand it in other places, particularly XVI. 4. XX. 6.) their falling
down before the Assembly signifies no more, but that in their presence Moses
and Aaron humbled themselves deeply before the Divine Majesty; and prayed to
him with the greatest Earnestness, to forgive them, and to bestow a better Mind
upon them. Which they did in their presence, to awaken them to consider the
danger they were in by their heinous Sin; that they themselves might cry to him
for Mercy. For the usual Posture of Prayer in that Nation was standing; but in
very great Distress, and Anxiety of Mind, when they were exceeding solicitous
to obtain their Petition, they kneeled down, and sometimes fell on their Faces;
which was still a sign of greater Ardor, and Concernment, as appears from our
Blessed Savior, XXVI Matthew. 39. XXII Luke 41.

Ver. 6. And Joshua the Son of Nun, and Caleb the Son of Jephunneh, which were
of them that searched the Land, rent their Clothes.] As the manner was, on any
Jerem. 24. Where the Stupidity of Jehojakim, and his Servants, is represented
by this, that when they heard the words which the Prophet declared in God's
Name against Judah, they were not afraid, nor rent their Garments.

And they spoke unto all the Company of the Children of Israel, saying.] This
showed great Courage, that they durst declare their Opinion, contrary to the
Sense of so great a multitude.

The Land which we passed thorough to search it, is an exceeding good Land.]
This is opposed to what their Fellows had said, that it was a Land, which eat
up its Inhabitants, XIII. 32. Quite contrary they assure them it was very, very
good; as the words are in the Hebrew: And so expressed by the Chaldee, and the
LXX, exceeding, exceeding good. That is, every way desirable; for thus the
Hebrews express the Superlative Degree.

If the LORD delight in us, then he will bring us into this Land, and give it
us.] If we do not forfeit his Favor, he will make us so happy, as to drive out
the Canaanites, and settle us in the Possession of this Land.

A Land which flows with Milk and Honey.] As their Companions themselves had
confessed, XIII. 27.

Ver. 9. Only rebel ye not against the LORD.] By slighting his Goodness, by
Murmuring, and discontented Speeches, and talking of going back to Egypt, v. 2,
3, 4.

Neither fear ye the People of the Land.] This is opposed to what the rest of
the Spies had said, concerning the mighty Power and Strength of the Inhabitants
of Canaan, XIII. 28, 29, 31, etc.

For they are Bread for us.] We shall as easily vanquish them, as we eat our
Meat.

Their Defense is departed from them.] In the Hebrew the words are, their
Shadow; whereby Men being defended from Heat in those Countries, it signifies
the Protection which God gives Men from those things that might hurt them.
Which Divine Protection they tell the People, was now withdrawn from the
Canaanites, who had filled up the measure of their Iniquities, (XV Genesis 16.)
and now were exposed as a Prey to the Israelites.

And the LORD is with us.] For on the contrary, they entreat the People to
consider, that God who was departed from the Canaanites, was with them to aid
and assist them in the Conquest of the Country. And for both these reasons,
they needed not to fear them. So they conclude their Speech, like Men of an
undaunted Spirit, in these words; fear them not.

Ver. 10. But all the Congregation.] The Hebrew Col Ha Edah, as I observed, v.
1. signifies all the great Men; the Rulers of the rest.

Bad stone them with stones.] Ordered the People to stone them to Death; as
they had done, it is likely, if they had not been deterred from the Attempt, by
the Appearance of the Divine Majesty. For the Hebrew word amar (as Maimonides
observes in his More Nevochim. P. I. cap. 65.) is used not only concerning that
which is spoken or thought, but of what is decreed and resolved. And he
produces these words as an instance of it, together with II Exodus 14. 2 Samuel
XXI. 16.

And the Glory of the LORD appeared.] The SCHECHINAH which resided within the
Tabernacle, upon the Mercy-Seat, now openly appeared, in a bright flaming
Light, like Fire: And, in all probability, after such an amazing manner as
terrified them from their Design. Thus it appeared on Mount Sinai, to fright
them from approaching near unto it, XXIV Exodus 17. (from whence Moses says the
LORD thy God is a consuming fire, IV Deuteronomy. 24.) and thus it appeared afterward,
XVI Numb. 19, 42.

In the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Or rather upon the Tabernacle, (for in
the Tabernacle the People could not have seen it, as now they did) over the
most Holy place; which the Cloud constantly covered, over the Mercy-Seat, where
the Divine Glory dwelt. See IX. 15.

Before all the Children of Israel.] Both to fright them, as I said, from their
purpose of stoning Joshua and Caleb; and to show his Anger and Displeasure at
their Rebellion, which it is likely, appeared by the Flashes that came from the
glorious Flame.

And the LORD said unto Moses.] In answer, I suppose, unto his Prayer, v. 5.

How long will this People provoke me?] Shall I always bear with their most
undutiful Behavior; which will provoke the greatest Patience unto Anger?

How long will it be ere they believe me.] Do thou not see that their belief
is incurable?

For all the Signs which I have showed among them?] Since they continue in it,
notwithstanding all the Wonders I have done, to convince them of my Power and
Faithfulness.

Ver. 12. I will smite them with a Pestilence.] Send fifteenth Verse interprets
it. See XXXII Exodus 10.

And disinherit them.] And so deprive them and theirs of the Country which I
promised to their Fathers for an Inheritance, XV Genesis 7. This was not an
irrevocable Decree, but a Threatening: which God changed into another severe
Punishment.

And will make of thee a greater Nation, and mightier than they.] Fulfill my
Promise to Abraham, by making thee the Father of a more numerous People, and
more powerful, than they whom I reject.

Ver. 13. And Moses said unto the LORD, then It is an abrupt kind of Speech,
proceeding from the great disturbance which this Threatening made in his Mind:
being as much as if he had said, If thou thus destroy them, the Egyptians, when
they hear of it will Triumph: and thou will lose all the Honor thou have got,
by the wonderful Deliverance thou did work for thy People from their Bondage.

Ver. 14. And they will tell it to the Inhabitants of Or rather, they will say
to the Inhabitants of this Land, i. e. the Canaanites; with whom the Egyptians
had frequent Commerce.

For they have heard, etc.] The word for is not in the Hebrew: and the Sense
will be more plain if we omit it, and translate the whole thus; They will say
to the Inhabitants of this Land, they have heard that thou LORD art among this
People. That is, that there was a glorious Token of thy Presence among us.

That thou LORD art seen face to face.] And spakest to us from Mount Sinai out
of that glorious Cloud; which there appeared unto all the People, XIX Exodus 18.
XX. 1. XXIV. 16, 17. IV Deuteronomy. 12.

And that thy Cloud stands over them.] X Numb. 34.

And that thou go before them, by day time in a Pillar of a Cloud, and in a
Pillar of Fire by Night.] XIII Exodus 21.

Now if thou shall kill all this People.] Or rather, But thou have killed all
this People.

As one Man.] On a sudden, with one stroke: as if they had all but one Life.

Then the Nations which have heard the fame of thee, will speak, saying.] Of
which the Nations that have heard the forenamed Report of thy Majesty, will
make this Construction.

Because the LORD was not able to bring this People into the Land.] Because he
whom they called Omnipotent, was indeed defective in his Power: which at last
failed him, so that he could not complete what he had undertaken.

Which he swear unto them.] XV Genesis 17, 18. XXIV. 7.

Therefore he has slain them in the Wilderness.] Killed them all, before they
came to the Land he had solemnly promised to them: for that was an easier work,
than to make good his word.

The sum of this Argument is, That it would be a great disparagement to the
Divine Majesty, if he now destroyed this Nation, because his Enemies would
conclude, he had deluded them with false Promises, which he wanted Power to
effect.

Ver. 17. And now, I beseech thee, let the Power of That is, let it appear to
be unlimited, by bringing them into the Land which he swear to give them, ( v.
16.) or by pardoning their Sin, which had provoked his high displeasure against
them, v. 11. For by Power may be meant, either that which is properly called by
that Name, viz. his Omnipotence, which can conquer all Opposition: Or, his
Mercy and Clemency, in overcoming his Anger, and bearing with an ungrateful
People. Which agrees very well with what follows: but both tend to the same
meaning, that he would not destroy them; but bestow the Land of Canaan upon
them, according to his Intentions.

According as thou have spoken, saying.] Which will be suitable to thy blessed
Nature; which thou did proclaim to me, when thy Glory passed by me, XXXI
Exodus 22. XXXIV. 5, 6.

Ver. 18. The LORD is long-suffering, and of great etc.] In these very words
(though something more largely) God proclaimed his Name to Moses, when he
showed him his Glory, XXXIV Exodus 6, 7. where they are explained.

And by no means clearing the guilty.] Even these words (according to the
Interpretation I have there given of them) are a plain Argument to move the
Divine Goodness to pardon their Sin. But the next words [ visiting the iniquity
of the Fathers upon the Children, etc.] seem to be directly contrary to the
intention of his Petition, till it be considered, that they had not now
committed Idolatry, against which Sin, God, in these words, particularly
declares his Severity; and that Moses did not now plead for an absolute Pardon,
without any Punishment at all: but only that he would not destroy the whole
Nation, as one Man, and utterly disinherit them; as he seemed resolved to do,
v. 12, 15. This Threatening he hoped his gracious Nature would incline him to
revoke; notwithstanding which he might visit the Sin of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the third and fourth Generation. That is, punish them and their
Posterity a long time. And so this latter part of the verse is to be
interpreted (according to what I observed, XXXIV Exodus 7.) in making desolate
he will not make quite desolate, though he visit the iniquity of the Fathers
upon the Children, etc.

Pardon, I beseech thee, the Iniquity of this People.] So far as not to destroy
them utterly.

According to the greatness of thy Mercy.] Which God himself had proclaimed, v.
18.

As thou have forgiven this People, from Egypt, even until now.] This looks
like an Argument against them: for they having provoked him so often, as they
had done since they came out of Egypt in the space of one Year and a little
more, (See v. 22.) and been as often forgiven; it might seem more reasonable
that he should now punish them, and not forgive them any more. But he appeals
to that long-suffering Goodness which he mentions as the prime Character of the
Divine Nature, v. 18. which though it had been exercised by them many ways, yet
he hoped would still bear longer with them.

Ver. 20. And the LORD said, I have pardoned according to thy word.] Granted
thy desire, not to destroy them utterly, and altogether, v. 12, 15.

Ver. 21. But as truly as I live, all the Earth shall be In the Hebrew As true
as I live, and that all the Earth shall be (or, has been) filled with the
Glory of the LORD. For so the Egyptians themselves confessed, ( v. 14.) that
the fame of it was come to them: and afterward he did many more wonderful
things, when he brought them into Canaan. Unto which (if these words be taken
in the Future Tense) he has respect, when he says, As true as that he would
in a most glorious manner subdue the Canaanites, not one of these murmuring
Israelites should come into that good Land.

Ver. 22. Because all these Men, etc.] The sense because, as we might have
done, the Hebrew Particle ki being sometimes only an expletive: or if we had
translated it that, as it signifies in XXII Genesis 17. and many other places. For
the meaning plainly is, though the words be something intricate, That all the
Men, of whom he is speaking, should perish; and not one of them come into
Canaan.

Which have seen my Glory.] Which appeared to them in the Cloud upon Mount
Sinai, and resided in the Tabernacle.

And my Miracles which I did in Egypt.] Mentioned in the IV, VII, VIIIth, and
following Chapters of the Book of Exodus.

And in the Wilderness.] Where he divided the Red Sea for them to pass through
on dry Land; and gave them Manna constantly from Heaven; with Water out of a
Rock, which followed them whithersoever they went, etc.

And have tempted me now these ten times.] That is, very often, as this Phrase
ten times signifies, XXXI Genesis 7, 41. IV Nehem. 12. XIX Job 3. But some of the
Hebrews will not be satisfied with this Explication; but endeavor to find out
precisely just ten Provocations of which they were guilty. Though to do this,
they are forced to begin with one which fell out before they came to the Red
Sea, (XIV Exodus 11, 12.) and all the other Nine they find in the Wilderness.
See Pirke Avoth, cap. 5. and Paulus Fagius his Scholia upon it; with Genebrard
upon the LXXVIII Psalm. v. 46. Mr. Mede has observed, that to tempt God in
Scripture Language, is to provoke him by some presumptuous Fact to anger; as it
were, to try whether he will punish, or not: or in fewer words, to dare God.
Book I. Discourse 26. p. 153. And the following words in the next verse,
justify this Notion in this place.

And have not hearkened to my Voice.] This seems particularly to refer to their
Disobedience, when he bad them go up, and possess the Land of Canaan;
notwithstanding, they would not go up, but rebelled against the Commandment of
the LORD their God, I Deuteronomy. 21, 26, etc.

Surely they shall not see the Land, etc.] The Hebrew Particle im, when it
follows an Oath, is to be simply translated not. And so the words run clearly
here, They shall not see the Land which I swear unto their Fathers.

Neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it.] This is but an
Explication of the foregoing words, and might have been better translated, Even
all that provoked me (by their Discontent and Murmuring, etc. v. 1, 2, 3.) they
shall not see it. This heavy doom was passed upon them on the ninth Day of the
Month Ab, (which answers to our July) as Moses Kotzensis reports the Opinion of
their Doctors. On which day, they say, both the first and second Temple were
levelled with the Ground; and Pritter likewise, a great City, was taken on the
same day, in which were many thousand Jews; who, with their King (as they
called him) ben Cosiba, and his whole Army, were cut in pieces. And to make
this Day still more dismal, Turnus Rufus, one of the Roman Captains, ploughed
up the Ground on which the Temple and Buildings about it stood, upon this very
Day. See Wagenseil upon Gemara Sotae, cap. 7. sect. 10. Annot. 8.

Ver. 24. But my Servant Caleb.] He alone is here Joshua is as much concerned
in this Character and Promise; whose Faith and Courage were tried, as soon as
they came out of Egypt, by fighting with the Amalekites. And therefore there
was no need to speak here of his Integrity: though afterward it is expressly
remembered in the very same words used in this place concerning Caleb, XXXII.
12. And here below in this Chapter, v. 30. he is assured of coming into the
Land of Promise as well as Caleb: with whom he joined in opposing the mutinous
Multitude, v. 6. where he is named first in that Heroic Action.

Because he had another Spirit with them.] Was otherways affected (as we now
speak) trusting in the Power and Promise of God: and not at all afraid of the
Strength of their Enemies.

And has followed me fully.] The Hebrew Phrase is, has fulfilled after me; i.
e. completed his Obedience to me; or fulfilled my will and commands in every
thing: being not only full of Courage himself, but endeavoring to put it into
others, I Deuteronomy. 36.

Him will I bring into the Land, whereunto he went.] Into Canaan; particularly
to Hebron and the Parts about it: which were bestowed upon him by the order of
Moses himself, XIV Josh. 9, 13, etc. See XIII. of this Book, v. 22.

And his Seed shall possess it.] Or, as some translate it, shall expel it; i.
e. drive out the Inhabitants of that place, and the parts adjacent; as we read
he and his Brother did, XV Josh. 13, 14, 15, etc.

Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the Valley.] These words being
read without a Parenthesis, in conjunction with those that follow, are very
plain, being thus translated; Both the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwell in
the Valley. That is, at present lie in wait for you, at the bottom of the other
side of the Mountain. For they were not far from one another, XIII. 29. and the
Hebrews use the word Jashab for any abode in any place; though it be not a
Settlement, but for a short Time. See v. 43.

To morrow turn you.] Therefore do not go forward, as I formerly commanded you,
least you fall into their Ambushes; but face about, and return from whence you
came, etc. This he bid them do to morrow, i. e. hereafter; at their next
removal: for they did remain some days in Kadesh before they turned about, (I
Deuteronomy. ult.) And so the word to morrow is used in XIII Exodus 14. for the time to
come.

And get ye into the Wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea.] Into that
Wilderness which led to the Red Sea, and so to Egypt, whether they desired to
return, v. 3, 4. This Command was so grievous to them, that it set them, as I
take it, into a new fit of Murmuring: which is the occasion of what follows in
the next verses, 26, 27.

Ver. 26. And the LORD spoke unto Moses and He now speaks unto Aaron, what he
only spoke to Moses before, v. 11.

Ver. 27. How long shall I bear with this evil Congregation.] Hebrew, such as
Men use when they are very angry; how long to this evil Congregation, i. e.
shall I show Mercy. Which is the same with bear with them, as we translate it,
to supply the Sense.

Which murmur against me?] Whom nothing will please, unless they have their own
will in every thing.

I have heard the murmurings of the Children of Israel, which they murmur
against me.] This seems to signify that there was a new Discontent; which, in
all likelihood, arose, because God would not conduct them forward to Canaan;
but bad them go back from whence they came. Which order he tells them in the
following words, he would never revoke.

Ver. 28. Say unto them, as truly as I live, says the This Oath made what he
had resolved, unalterable.

As ye have spoken in mine Ears.] V. 2.

So will I do unto you.] Give you your own wishes, to die in the Wilderness:
which was exactly fulfilled, XXVI. 65.

Ver. 29. Your Carcases shall fall in this Wilderness.] He repeats their own
desire.

And all that were numbered of you.] Which number Chapter of this Book, v. 3,
18, etc.

According to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward.] Which
amounted in all to Six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty, v.
46. besides the Levites, who were not numbered at this time, as we read in the
next verse, 47. And when they were numbered, their number was not taken from
twenty years old; but from a month old and upward, III. 15. And therefore the
Levites are not comprehended in the heavy Sentence here denounced, no more than
the Children under twenty years old, or the Wives of the Men that murmured; but
only the Men of War, who were above twenty Years old. And accordingly we find
Eleazar, who is mentioned at the numbering of the Levites, III. 32. alive at
the dividing of the Land of Canaan, XIV Josh. 1.

Doubtless ye shall not come into the Land.] He would not have them retain the
least hope of having this Sentence reversed; being established by God's Oath.

Concerning which I swear to make you dwell in.] Not to make these particular
Men, but the Seed of Abraham inhabit it; as Grotius rightly observes, Lib. II.
de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 13. sect. 3. The Land was promised by Oath, non
personis, sed populo, nor to Persons, but to the People, viz. to the Posterity
of those unto whom God swear to give it, v. 23. Now such a Promise, as he
observes, may be performed at any time; because it is not tied to certain
Persons.

Save Caleb the Son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the Son of Nun.] They are
excepted, because they had distinguished themselves from the rest, by their
eminent Faith and Courage, in the midst of a perverse Generation.

Ver. 31. But your little Ones.] All under twenty

Which ye said should be a prey.] He upbraids them with their discontented and
distrustful Language, v. 3.

Them will I bring in, and they shall know the Land.] That is, enjoy it.

Which ye have despised.] XIII. 32.

Ver. 32. But as for you, your Carcases they shall fall He repeats it again, to
make them sensible of the certainty of it; and in their own words ( v. 2.) to
humble and put them to confusion.

Ver. 33. And your Children shall wander.] So the Chaldee interpret what in the
Hebrew is shall feed, or graze, as Sheep do in the Deserts. Or rather, after
the manner of the Arabian Shepherds, who could not stay long in one place, but
were forced to remove their Tents to another, that they might find Pasture for
their Flocks. So R. Solomon interprets it.

Forty Years.] Reckoning from their first coming out of Egypt; from whence they
were brought into the Wilderness a Year and a half ago; and now are condemned
to make up their time of wandering in it, full forty Years.

And bear your Whoredoms.] That is, the Punishment of their Whoredoms; as
Idolatry is peculiarly called, XV. 39. XXXIV Exodus 15. III Jerem. 14. Of which
they had been guilty presently after they came out of Egypt, when they made the
golden Calf and worshipped it; and continued other Idolatrous Practices, XVII.
Lev. 5, 7. Which God punishes now that he visits their present Rebellion. For
it was not that alone to which he threatens this Punishment; but he reckons
with them for all the rest of their Iniquities, (IX Deuteronomy. 18, 24.) especially
for the greatest of them all; which he declared he would not forget to punish
upon any new occasion, (See XXXII Exodus 34.) which they now gave him. It must
be acknowledged also, that other heinous Sins are called by this Name of
Whoredoms in Scripture, as well as Idolatry, LXXIII Psalm 26. See Mr. Seldom,
L. III. Vxor. Hebr. cap. 23. p. 489.

Until your Carcases be wasted in the Wilderness.] This is the third time he
reflects upon their foolish wish, v. 29, 32.

After the number of the days in which ye searched the Land, even forty days.]
XIII. 25.

(Each day for a year) shall ye bear your Iniquities, even forty years.]
Reckoning the time past, since they came into the Wilderness, which was a Year
and an half. So that the meaning is, they should wander forty Years in the
Wilderness, before they got out of it. Which is not to be understood so
precisely, as to want nothing at all of it: For they came out of Egypt on the
fifteenth Day of the first Month, on the morrow after the Passover, XXXIII. 3.
and they came into Canaan and pitched in Gilgal, upon the tenth Day of the
first Month, of the one and fortieth Year after their departure from Egypt, IV
Josh. 19. and consequently there wanted five Days of full forty Years.

And ye shall know my breach of Promise.] In the Hebrew the words are no more
then these, Ye shall know my breach. Which the Ancients understand of Gods
breaking in upon them, to take vengeance of them for their Sin. So the LXX.
(...), Ye shall know the fury of my Anger: and the Vulgar translates it,
ultionem meam, my Vengeance. That is, you shall find that I am the Avenger of
Iniquity. And it is the same, if we understand my breach to signify, God's
departure from them, who had so shamefully departed from him. Or, according to
our Translation, it signifies, a Revocation of the Blessing promised to them.
Which was so nullified, that they were left without any hope of having the like
Promise of entering into Canaan, renewed to them.

Ver. 35. I the LORD have said.] Decreed and

I will surely do it to all this evil Congregation.] Break from them: or break
in upon them; to consume them, and utterly disinherit this untoward Generation.

That are gathered together against me.] Whom they accused, as well as Moses
and Aaron, v. 2, 3.

In this Wilderness they shall be consumed, and there shall they die.] The
repetition of this so frequently ( v. 29, 32, 33.) was to convince them, the
Decree was peremptory and irreversible.

Ver. 36. And the Men which Moses sent to search the That is, Ten of them.

Who returned.] XIII. 25, 26.

And made all the Congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a slander
upon the Land.] XIII. 31, 32. XIV. 2.

Ver. 37. Even those Men, etc. died by the Plague.] Either by the Pestilence,
threatened v. 12. or by Lightning; or some other sudden Death. About Hebrew
Doctors, in the Gemara on Sota, cap. 7. sect. 11. where some of them say, they
died of a Quinsey, which choked them; or, as others, their Tongues swelled,
and hung out of their Mouths down to their Navels, and were full of Worms, etc.
So that their Punishment was suitable to their Sin, (as they conclude) with
their Tongues they offended, and in their Tongues they suffered.

Before the LORD.] Whose Glory appeared upon the Tabernacle, before them all,
v. 10. unto which I take these words to relate: signifying that they died in
his Presence (and perhaps by a flash of Fire from thence) on that very Day,
upon which this Murmuring was raised by their false Report.

But Joshua the Son of Nun, and Caleb the Son of Jephunneh, which were of the
Men that went to search the Land.] Here Joshua is mentioned with Caleb; and
placed first, (as in the 6th verse) as Caleb was in verse 30. Which shows there
was no difference made between them.

Lived still.] This is set down, to show God's faithfulness, in his promise to
them. Who, I suppose, were now in the Company of the rest of the Searchers of
the Land, before the LORD, and had no hurt, when all the other Ten fell down
dead on a sudden; which made their Preservation the more remarkable.

And Moses told all these sayings unto all the Children of Israel.] Acquainted
them with the Doom which God had passed upon them.

And the People mourned greatly.] Were extremely afflicted at the news: but did
not beseech him to pray for them, (as at other times, XI. 2.) because he had
told them the Doom was irreversible.

Ver. 40. And they rose up early.] Or, But they rose etc.

In the Morning.] The next Morning after they were told, what God had decreed
against them.

And gat them up into the top of the Mountain.] They resolved they would go up;
or they prepared themselves for it: for they did not yet actually go up; as
appears by the following words.

Saying, Lo, we be here.] We are ready to do as Joshua and Caleb exhorted us,
XIII. 30. XIV. 9. They seem now to be as forward, as before they were backward,
to go to possess the Land: which their rising early signified.

And we will go up to the place which the LORD has promised.] They pretend now
to depend upon his Promise, and to trust he will make it good.

For we have sinned.] Are sensible of our Sin, and repent of it. Or, though we
have sinned, yet we hope he will make good his Promise.

Ver. 41. And Moses said, wherefore now do you Why do you still continue in
your Disobedience to God; who commands you to return, and not to go forward? v.
25.

But it shall not prosper.] You shall not succeed in your Enterprise: which
these words show they stood ready to take in hand.

Ver. 42. Go not up.] Though they sought the v. 39.) and now were ready to
testify their Repentance with the hazard of their Lives, he would not recall
the Sentence passed upon them.

For the LORD is not among you.] The Cloud did not stir to conduct them; by
which they might have understood, that their Attempt was presumptuous.

That ye be not smitten before your Enemies.] Who, without God's help, would be
too strong for them.

For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you.] Either they were
removed out of the Valley where they were before, v. 25. Or, their main Body
being there below, they sent a strong Party to possess themselves of the top of
the Mountain, and to make good the Pass against the Israelites.

And ye shall fall by the Sword.] Lose your Lives in the Attempt.

Because ye are turned away from the LORD, therefore the LORD will not be with
you.] This was a powerful Reason to check their Motion, and to restrain them
from their Attempt: But, after the manner of obstinate Sinners, they go on
still in their Unbelief; as the next words inform us.

But they presumed to go up to the Hill top.] They audaciously endeavored to
ascend the Mountain, against the Divine Command: Which is a strange instance of
hardened Infidelity.

Nevertheless the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD, and Moses departed not out
of the Camp.] The Cloud stood still over the Tabernacle; and therefore Moses
and the Levites and the Ark (which went before them, when they first removed
from Sinai, X. 33.) did not stir out of the place where they were encamped, to
conduct them. But this seems to signify that all the other Camps, except that
of the Levites, i. e. the whole Body of armed Men, moved without the guidance
of God; who would not favor them, because they moved against his express
Command.

Ver. 45. Then the Amalekites came down and the With whom the Amorites also
joined, I Deuteronomy. 44.

Which dwelt in that Hill.] Who had posted themselves there, and possessed
themselves of the top of the Mountain, v. 43. and see v. 25.

And smote them.] Having a great advantage of them that were climbing up the
Hill: from whence they came pouring down upon them.

And discomfited them.] It is not said how great a slaughter they made of them;
but it is likely it was not small, because they chased them a good way. Thus
began God's threatening to be immediately fulfilled (that their Carcases should
fall in that Wilderness, v. 29.) by their own wilfulness.

Even unto Hormah.] A place in the Confines of Canaan near the dead Sea: So
called from the destruction that was here made of the Israelites, and afterward
of the Canaanites, XXI. 3. I Judge. 17. And upon the occasion of this Calamity
which befell the Israelites, and the great Mortality which followed, while they
stayed in the Wilderness, Moses is thought to have penned the XC Psalm. In
which he signifies the Life of Man was now shortened, and reduced to Seventy or
Eighty Years: that is, made but half as long as the Lives of their Forefathers.

CHAP. XV.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] We read in I Deuteronomy. ult. that they
abode in Kadesh (where the foregoing murmuring was) many days. During which
time (and in the latter part of this second Year after they came out of Egypt)
it is very probable all that we read in this Chapter, and in the four
following, was transacted.

Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them.] These words were not
directed to the whole Congregation, but to the younger sort; who had not
forfeited the favor of God, as their Fathers had done. Several of which, it is
likely, were already dead, according to the Doom God had passed upon them; and
the rest looked upon themselves as disinherited, (XIV. 12.) and therefore these
Precepts were not delivered to them.

When ye come into the Land of your Habitations, which I give unto you.] This
shows he speaks to the Children of the Murmurers, whom he promised to bring
into the Land of Canaan, XIV. 31. and would therefore have well instructed in
the manner of Sacrificing: wherein God's Worship and Service very much
consisted; which is the reason why he further explains, what he had heretofore
said about this matter. But hence it appears that they were not bound to
observe these Laws till they came to Canaan.

Ver. 3. And will make an offering by fire unto the LORD.] This comprehends all
the Sacrifices, which were burnt upon the Altar: either in whole or in part.

A Burnt-offering.] This was the principal, and most ancient Sacrifice of all
other: which was wholly burnt upon the Altar, every Morning and every Evening,
(XXIX Exodus 40.) of which he treats in the first of Leviticus.

Or a Sacrifice.] This undoubtedly signifies Peace Offerings, as appears from
v. 8. and from the words here following: and likewise from the use of the word
Sacrifice in other places, XVIII Exodus 12. XVII Levit. 5, 8. And from this
consideration also, that Sin Offerings had no Meat Offerings attending on them;
but only in the Case of a Leper, XIV Lev. 10.

In performing a Vow, or in a Free-will-offering.] These words explain what he
means by a Sacrifice, viz. Peace Offerings: which were offered in performance
of some Vow, or freely of their own accord, (VII Lev. 16. XXII. 21.) or by
God's command upon their Solemn Feasts; as it here follows.

And in your solemn Feasts.] Mentioned XXIII Levit. See there v. 37. and XXIX
Numb. 39.

To make a sweet savor unto the LORD.] I Levit. 9.

Of the Herd or of the Flock.] Under the word Flock is comprehended both Kids
and Lambs. For the Hebrew words tson and seh signify both; as many have
observed; particularly Bochart in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. cap. 42.

Ver. 4. Then shall he that offers his Offering unto Of any of the forenamed
sorts.

Bring a Meat Offering.] As a necessary Appurtenance to such Sacrifices.

Of a tenth deal of flour.] That is, the tenth part of an Ephah, (as is
expressly declared, XXVIII. 5.) which was an Omer. See XVI Exodus 36.

Mingled with the fourth part of an hin of Oil.] See XXIX Exodus 40. In this,
such Meat Offerings as were Accessories to other Offerings, and a part of the
Sacrifice which went before, differed from those Meat Offerings which were not
dependant upon a foregoing Sacrifice; but offered alone by themselves. For in
these latter the Oil was only poured upon the Meat Offering, (II Lev. 1, etc.)
and not mingled and macerated with the flour; as it is here ordered. And there
was this further difference between them, that those Meat Offerings which were
accessory to other Sacrifices, were all burnt on the Altar, in honor of God,
as Josephus observes, Lib. III. cap. 10. but when a Meat Offering was solitary,
(as we may call it) as the principal Offering which a Man then made, a little
part of it only was burnt upon the Altar, and the Priest had the rest; as
appears from the second Chapter of Leviticus.

And a fourth of a hin of Wine for a Drink Offering shall thou prepare.] See
XXIX Exodus 40.

With the Burnt-offering or Sacrifice.] Whether it were a whole Burnt-offering,
or a Peace Offering, v. 3. This Wine was wholly poured upon the Altar; and the
Priest had none of it.

For one Lamb.] It was the same for one Kid. If there were more than one, the
Drink Offering, as well as the Meat Offering, was increased; particularly upon
the Sabbath, XXVIII. 9. And the true reason why Meat Offerings and
Drink Offerings are required to attend upon the Burnt-offerings and
Peace Offerings, was, because these Sacrifices were a Feast, and are called the
Bread or Food of God, XXVIII. 2. And therefore as Bread and Wine, as well as
Flesh, are our Refection, so God required them at his Table. And Salt, though
not here named, was also added, (because it was to be omitted in no Sacrifice,
II Lev. 13.) as also Frankincense; because it is said both v. 7. and v. 10.
this Drink Offering was for a sweet savor unto the LORD: which seems to alude
to the fragrancy of Frankincense.

This was a thing so well known, that the Heathen imitated this practice, in
all their Sacrifices, which were ever accompanied with a Meat Offering.
Insomuch that Pliny says, without this mola salsa, no Sacrifice was thought to
be good: Nullum Sacrificium ratum fieri existimant, Lib. XXX. cap. 5. And long
before him we meet with it in Homer, in those known words of his, -- (...). And
as for Wine Brentius in his Preface to Leviticus, takes notice of that Phrase
in him, no less obvious, -- (...)
(...) --
Which they not only poured upon the Sacrifice, as it stood at the Altar ready
to be offered, but upon its Flesh when it was burning there: as we find in
Virgil. Georg. IV. Ter liquido ardentem perfudit Nectare flammam. and in many
other places. See Dilherrus in his Dissert. Specialis de Cacozelia Gentilium,
cap. 10.

Or for a Ram, thou shall prepare for a Meat Offering, two tenth deals, etc.]
This being a nobler Sacrifice than a Lamb, a larger Meat Offering (and
Drink Offering also, as appears by the next verse) is required to attend it.

And for a Drink Offering thou shall offer a third part of a hin of Wine, etc.]
Whereas for a Lamb a fourth part was sufficient, v. 5.

And when thou preparest a Bullock.] This is a Sacrifice of the Herd, as the
former of the Flock; mentioned v. 3.

For a Burnt-offering, or for a Sacrifice in performing a Vow, or
Peace Offerings unto the LORD.] That is, Free-will-offerings: which were one
sort of Peace Offerings; as those for performance of a Vow were the other. See
v. 3. But Free-will-offerings are peculiarly called by the name of
Peace Offerings, because they were the most acceptable of this sort: being
offered purely out of Love and Affection to God; and not as a Payment which was
due upon a Vow.

Then he shall bring with the Bullock, a Meat Offering of three tenth deals of
Flour, etc.] The Meat Offerings increased proportionably to the Sacrifices upon
which they attended: one tenth Deal, with a fourth part of a Hin of Oil, being
sufficient for a Lamb, v. 4. and two tenth Deals, with a third part of a Hin of
Oil, for a Ram, v. 6. but three tenth Deals of Flour, and half a Hin of Oil, is
here required to accompany the Sacrifice of a Bullock.

Ver. 10. And thou shall bring for a Drink Offering half a hin of Wine, etc.]
The same was to be observed in the Drink Offering; which is larger, in this
Sacrifice, than in the two former, v. 5, 7.

Ver. 11. Thus shall it be done for one Bullock, or for He repeats what he had
said more distinctly, proceeding from the Sacrifice last mentioned, unto the
first: which v. 5. is said to be one Lamb; but here explained to comprehend
also a Kid. For so the last part of this verse runs in the Hebrew; for a young
one (which he calls Seh) either of the Sheep, or of the Goats.

Ver. 12. According to the number that ye shall prepare, This I take to be a
general Rule, by which these Offerings were to be governed; that proportionable
to the number of Bullocks, Rams, Sheep, or Goats that were offered, should be
the quantity of the Meat Offering and Drink Offering: for Bread and Wine must
bear proportion to the Meat set on the Table.

Ver. 13. All that are born in the Country, shall do i. e. all Israelites.

In offering an Offering made by fire, etc.] When they offer any of the
forenamed Sacrifices, v. 3.

Ver. 14. And if a Stranger sojourn with you.] There Israelites. Some that
entirely embraced and professed the Jewish Religion, into which they were
admitted by Circumcision, etc. Others that were permitted to live among them,
having renounced all Idolatry, but did not submit to their whole Religion. The
Talmudists expound this place of the former sort.

Or whosoever he be among you in your Generations.] One would think this should
signify the other sort of Strangers; but they make it only an Explication of
the former: Whether he was a Proselyte that sojourned for a time, or were
settled among them.

And will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the LORD.] Any
of the forementioned Offerings; which could be offered, as is here directed,
by none but one that was subject to their Law. For though another Proselyte,
who worshipped the true God, but was not Circumcised, might bring a
Burnt-offering, yet they say it was without a Meat Offering and Drink Offering;
and no Peace Offerings were accepted from him.

As ye do, so he shall do.] Offer according to the Rules above given: which is
farther explained in the following Verses.

One Ordinance.] Viz. About Sacrifices.

Shall be both for you of the Congregation.] i. e. For you Israelites.

And also for the Stranger that sojourneth with you.] Here the LXX. translate
it, (...), Proselytes that are added, or joined to you; or are juris vestri
participes, as Mr. Seldom expounds it, L. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 2. p.
147.

An Ordinance for ever, etc.] Never to be repealed as long as your Religion
lasts.

As ye are, so shall the Stranger be before the LORD.] in Matters of Religion
and Divine Worship; though not in all Civil Things. For no Proselyte, they
think, could be chosen a Member of the Sanhedrim, or great Council at
Jerusalem. The Jews extend these words to the way and manner of being made
Proselytes, by Circumcision, Baptism, and Sprinkling of Blood: as the Jews were
originally, they say, initiated into their Religion. Seldom, Lib. I. de
Synedriis, cap. 3. p. 34.

Ver. 16. One Law, and one manner shall be for you, This general Rule was made,
to invite and encourage Strangers to become Proselytes to the Jewish Religion;
and to engage the Jews to be kind to them: they being admitted to an (...), as
Philo calls it, an equal Privilege with those who were born Jews. Yet this,
the Jews say, is to be received with some distinctions. For the Laws of Moses,
either concerning the Duties they owed to God, and one to another; or
concerning Magistracy and Marriages, they say, those of the first sort belonged
to Proselytes, as much as to original Jews; yet with some temperament, (as Mr.
Seldom observes, Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 4.) But in those of the
second sort, they had not an equal privilege: for they were not to have any
sort of Command, either Civil or Military; and though they might marry with the
Jews, yet not with the Priests; and some Marriages were permitted to them,
which were forbidden to the Israelites. See there p. 167.

Ver. 17. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.]

Ver. 18. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say See v. 2.

When ye come into the Land, whither I bring you.] See there also; only add
this, That the Jews acknowledge, such kind of Offerings, as here follow, and
First Fruits, were due by the Law, only from the Corn, etc. that grew in the
Land of Canaan: but by the Decree of their wise Men, they were to bring them
out of Syria, and out of the Land of Og, and Sihon; as Maimonides says in his
Treatise called Biccurim, cap. 2.

When ye eat.] i. e. When it is ready to be eaten: for they offered it, before
they ate of it.

Of the Bread of the Land.] So Corn is called, CIV Psalm 14. and the meaning
seems to be, that when they made Bread of the new Corn of the Land, they should
out of the Dough first make a Cake, and offer it to the LORD, before they baked
Bread for their own use.

Ye shall offer up an Heave Offering unto the LORD.] This is explained in the
next verse, of offering a Cake out of the first Dough; whether it were of
Wheat, or Barley, or Rye, or Oats, or that which they call Cusemim, (which they
describe to be a kind of Wheat, or Barley, different from that which is
commonly known by those names) For of these five kinds of Grain, the Talmudists
say, this Cake was to be offered; and that out of the Gleanings, and the Sheaf
left in the Field, and out of the Corners of the Field.

Ye shall offer up a Cake of the first of your Dough, for an Heave Offering.]
Not upon the Altar, but it was given to the Priests; on whom God bestowed all
their Heave-offerings, XVIII. 8. yet they are said to be offered unto the LORD,
because they were heaved, or lifted up to him, as the Creator of Heaven and of
Earth; and then given to his Ministers, who had it in his right.

As ye do the Heave Offering of the Threshing-floor, so shall ye heave it.]
That is, as the First Fruits of the Harvest were given to the Priests, and not
offered upon the Altar, so should this be given them, XXIII Lev. 16, 17. And so
was the First Fruits of their Oil and their Wine, etc. XVIII Numb. 12, 13. All
which the Jews call the great Terumah, or Heave Offering.

Ver. 21. Of the first of your Dough shall ye give unto This being a new Law,
not given before, he repeats it, that they might be the more observant of it.
As we may see they were by this; that it was one of the things which rendered a
Woman infamous, (though not so, as to give her the bitter Water) if she did not
separate this Cake from the first Dough of the new Corn, to be presented to
God: but either made her Husband believe she had done it, when she had not; or
ate it her self; as Mr. Seldom observes, L. III. Vxor. Hebr. cap. 17. And
therefore at this very day the Jews are so nice in this point, that they take
enough to make a Cake, as soon as the Meal is mingled with Water. The
proportion is not mentioned in the Law; but their wise Men say, it was to be
the forty fourth part of the whole Dough. See Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. cap. 34.
The Cabbalists observing that this verse begins with the Letter Mem, and ends
with Mem, conclude (after their way) that therefore they were to give the
fortieth part; because Mem is the numeral Letter for forty.

Ver. 22. And if ye have erred, and not observed all Which have been now given
concerning Sacrifices: for to such Commandments these words seem to have
respect. Maimonides in his Treatise of the Worship of the Planets, (and the
Jews generally) says this concerns Idolatry.

Ver. 23. Even all that the LORD has commanded you by the hand of Moses.] That
is, all the Commandments in the Book of Leviticus, about such Matters

From the day that the LORD commanded Moses.] The word Moses is not in the
Hebrew, and the Sense is plainer without it; as the Vulgar has translated
these words, from the day he began to command.

And hence forward.] Or rather, thence forward, until now: or until he made an
end of commanding. So this Phrase is used in XXII Lev. 27. From the eighth day,
and thence forth, Creatures were clean, to be offered. See XXXIX Ezekiel. 22.

Among your Generations.] In the Hebrew, to your Generations. And so LXX.
(...), to be observed throughout all Generations.

Then it shall be, that if ought be committed by ignorance, without the
knowledge of the Congregation.] It is commonly said, that Moses here speaks
concerning Sins of Omission, (as we call them) as in IV Lev. 13. he does of
Sins of Commission: or doing that which ought not to be done; as here not doing
that which ought to be done: for which different sorts of Sacrifices are
appointed. But others think that he speaks in both places of the same Errors:
only in that Law, IV Lev. 14. concerning those committed by the whole
Congregation; here of such as were committed by some lesser number of them,
called, the Congregation: suppose the LXX. Elders, or the Rulers of Thousands,
and Hundreds, etc. who are some times called by this Name, XXV. 7. XXXII. 12.
XXIV Josh. 4. But the Jews generally think Moses here speaks of strange
Worship, which was to be expiated by this Sacrifice of a Goat for a
Sin-offering. And therefore an excellent Person of our own, after long
consideration of this matter, comes to this conclusion, That in Leviticus he
requires a young Bullock to be slain for a Sin-offering, when the whole
Congregation, though adhering to the true Worship of God in every thing, were
led ignorantly to do something against some Negative Precept (as they call it)
to practice, that is, what God had forbidden, (so those words seem to import,
IV Lev. 13, 14.) but this Kid of the Goats here mentioned for a Sin-offering,
together with a young Bullock for a Burnt-offering, was to be sacrificed, when
all the People forgetting the holy Rites prescribed by Moses (which often
happened under bad Kings) fell by a common Error into Idolatrous Worship: which
agrees very well with what is said in the two verses before-going: where he
speaks, as I noted, of not observing these holy Rites about Sacrifices. See Dr.
Owtram, Lib. I. de Sacrificiis, cap. 14. sect. 2.

Then all the Congregation shall offer one young Bullock for a Burnt-offering.]
Having neglected these Laws ordained by Moses, and worshipped God in a wrong
manner, according to the Rites used in other Countries, (or at least mistaking
the proper Sacrifices and Rites belonging to them, which they ought to have
offered) this Burnt-offering, I suppose, is commanded to be offered, when they
saw their Error, in token that they returned to God's true Religion, and that
way of Worship which he had prescribed.

With his Meat Offering, and his Drink Offering.] prescribed above, v. 8, 9,
10. Which perhaps they had neglected to offer formerly with the Burnt-offering.

It is well observed by Mr. Thorndike out of Maimonides, That all the
Congregation (if we understand thereby the whole Body of the People) could not
possibly offer these Sacrifices: but the great Consistory offered them as often
as they occasioned the Breach of the Law, by interpreting it erroniously;
Rights of the Church in a Christian State, p. 159.

And one Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering.] To expiate for what had been
done after the manner of the Heathen, contrary to the Laws of God's Worship
here delivered by Moses; or otherwise then he directed. From whence it was
(which adds much probability to this) that when Hezekiah restored the true
Worship of God, after the Temple had been shut up, and the daily Sacrifice
omitted, and many Idolatrous Rites there used, by the Ignorance of the People,
in the days of his Father, (2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 24. XXIX. 3.) he caused seven
Bullocks to be offered for a Burnt-offering; and as many Goats for a
Sin-offering. And so Ezra did at the Restoration of the Divine Service after
they came out of Babylon, VIII Ezra 35. And it makes no difference, that Moses
here requires only one of a sort to be offered, whereas Hezekiah offered seven,
and Ezra twelve: for this only proves that one was absolutely necessary; but
more than one was acceptable: especially when exceeding great Errors had been
committed in God's Worship.

And the Priest shall make an atonement for all the Congregation.] Who had thus
committed an Error, in the Worship of God, out of Ignorance: being misled by
the great Interpreters of the Law; who therefore were to bring this Sacrifice
in the name of them all. For it is apparent by this, as well as the former
verse, that all the Congregation were concerned in this Sacrifice, as much as
in that IV Lev. 13. And the same appears from the next verse, where he says,
All the People were in ignorance.

And it shall be forgiven them, for it is ignorance.] Proceeding from an
erroneous Interpretation of the Law, or some other mistake: not from contempt
of God and of his Laws; for then they were to be utterly cut off, v. 30, 31.

And they shall bring their Offering, a Sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.]
That is, a Burnt-offering: which is not prescribed in Leviticus, (as I observed
before) and therefore was a different sort of Offering, for a different Offense.

And their Sin-offering before the LORD.] Prescribed in the foregoing verse.

For their ignorance.] Which made them capable of a Pardon; though not without
these Sacrifices.

Ver. 26. And it shall be forgiven all the Congregation He repeats it again,
that they might not doubt of Reconciliation to him, when they repented as soon
as they understood their Error, and acknowledged it, and begged his pardon by
these Sacrifices.

And the Stranger that sojourneth among them.] Who were obliged to the same
Laws with the Israelites, and had the same privileges, v. 14, 15, 16.

Seeing all the People were in ignorance.] It was a common Error; and therefore
no wonder Strangers were carried away with it.

Ver. 27. And if any Soul.] i. e. Any particular Person.

Sin through ignorance.] Offend in Matters of Religion; by not observing the
Rites here prescribed, or by doing contrary to them, through mere ignorance. To
this, I think, these words are to be limited: wherein they differ from that
Law, IV Lev. 27. which speaks of all manner of Offenses, through ignorance.

Then he shall bring a She-goat of the first year, for a Sin-offering.] This
Sin-offering differs from that in Leviticus (IV. 28.) which was only a Female
Kid of the Goats.

And the Priest shall make an Atonement for the Soul that sins ignorantly.]
As he was to do for the whole Congregation, v. 25.

When he sins by ignorance before the LORD.] These words, before the LORD,
seem to me to import, that he speaks of Sins committed about the Worship of
God; and confirms what I have said upon v. 24. For in IV Levit. both v. 13. and
v. 27. he speaks in general of Sins committed, either by the Congregation, or
by particular Persons, against any of the Commandments of the LORD; not before
the LORD, i. e. (as I understand it) in his Worship and Service.

To make an atonement for him, etc.] He repeats it again, to show them that he
would no more have a particular Person suffer for his Error, than the whole
Body of the People.

You shall have one Law for him that sins through ignorance, both for him
that is among the Children of Israel, and for the Stranger that sojourneth
among them.] See v. 15. This must necessarily be meant of a Proselyte of
Justice, as they called him, that was Circumcised, and undertook to keep the
whole Law; for he speaks of such, whether Natives or others, as erred in not
observing all his Commandments, v. 22, 23.

Ver. 30. But the Soul that does ought presumptuously.] Not merely knowingly,
but wilfully and audaciously; in contempt of the Divine Majesty and his
Authority: For so the Hebrew Phrase, with an high hand, Maimonides observes in
his More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 41. where he says, it imports a Sin, not only
publicly and openly committed, but with Pride and Insolence: it proceeding not
merely from an ill custom a Man has got of doing amiss, but from an express
intention to contradict the Law of God, and to set himself in defiance of it.
Which is the reason of what follows, the same reproacheth the LORD.

Whether he be born in the Land, or a Stranger.] Here the word Stranger is
simply used, without the addition of, that sojourneth among them, (as in the
preceding verse) and therefore Mr. Seldom well concludes, that even the
Proselytes of the Gate were concerned in this Law, (as it related to Idolatry
and Blasphemy) though not in the foregoing; and that they were liable to be cut
off by the Hand of Heaven; but whether to be punished by the Judges or no, it
does not appear, Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 11.

The same reproacheth the LORD.] No Man sinned thus (says Maimonides in the
place forenamed) but he who had a settled Opinion in his Mind, contrary to the
Law of God; in which he dissented from it. And the common received Exposition
of this place is, that it speaks of an Idolater; because he opposed the chief
and principal Foundation of the Law. For no Man worshipped a Star, or a Planet,
but he that believed its Eternity: which is the most repugnant of all other
things to the Law of God; which in the very first words of it declares, that
all the World had a beginning, and was made by him whom the Jews worshipped.
Thus he. But doing any thing with an high hand, does not signify any one
certain kind of Sin, as the Jews generally fancy (who think he speaks here only
of an Idolater or Blasphemer; See Seldom, Lib. I. de Synedr. cap. 6. p. 101.)
but a certain manner of sinning; with despite to the Commands of God, and
Contempt of his Authority, in any kind of Sin whatsoever. And this Maimonides
himself afterward acknowledges, in the words following. There seems to me to be
the same reason in all other Transgressions, which are committed contemptuously
against any Law of God, as if an Israelite seethed a Kid in its Mother's Milk;
or wore heterogeneous Garments, or rounded the Corners of his Head, or his
Beard, in contempt of the Law. For the consequence of this is, that he believes
this Law not to be true: which in my judgment, says he, is the meaning of
these words, He reproacheth the LORD.

And that Soul shall be cut off from among his People.] No Sacrifice could make
an Atonement for such a Man; but he was to die, either by the Hand of Heaven,
or of the Judges. Sometimes God, says he, will cut off Idolaters, and such as
consulted Familiar Spirits, XX Lev. 5, 6. Sometimes he only says certain
Offenders shall be cut off; as here in this, and many other places. Of which
Phrase I have given an account XVII Genesis 14. where the Reader may see the
several Opinions that have been about it; and that its meaning must be
determined by the matter in hand. Accordingly Maimonides has judiciously
resolved, that in this place it signifies cutting off by the Hand of the
Magistrates, as in the Case of Apostasy to Idolatry, XIII Deuteronomy. 13, etc. Not
that all their Goods were to be destroyed, and nothing left to their Heirs, (as
when they served other Gods) but, though a whole Tribe had, with an high hand,
transgressed any Precept of the Law, that is, denied it to be God's Law, he
thinks they were only to be all killed. Just as all the People thought in the
Case of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, who only building
an Altar on the other side of Jordan, contrary to God's Law, as was imagined,
all the rest of the Tribes of Israel gathered together to go up to War against
them, and cut them off, XXII Josh. 11, 12, etc. 22, 23. where they acknowledge
they deserved to perish, if they had built an Altar for Worship, as their
Brethren thought they had done.

Ver. 31. Because he has despised the Word of the This shows the Nature of the
offense; which was setting at naught God's Laws, and denying them to be of
Divine Authority.

And has broken his Commandment.] Not only by doing contrary to it, but, in
effect, disannulling it; by rejecting its Authority, and affirming he is not
bound to observe that Precept.

That Soul shall be utterly cut off.] They shall have no Mercy upon him.

His Iniquity shall be upon him.] Not upon those who put him to death; but upon
himself.

Ver. 32. And while the Children of Israel were in the In this part of the
Wilderness, at Kadesh-Barnea, it is very probable. See v. 1.

They found a Man.] The Jews, who would not be thought ignorant of any thing,
say this Man was one of those that presumed to go up to the Mountain, when
Moses forbad them, XIV. 44. And some of them say expressly, his name was
Zelophehad; about the dividing of whose Estate a question afterward arose,
XXVII. 1, etc. So the Chaldee Paraphrase ascribed to Jonathan and others. See
Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr, cap. 1. n. 9.

That gathered sticks.] Or was binding up sticks, which he had gathered, and
plucked up by the Roots out of the Earth; as some of the Jews understand the
Hebrew word, (Mr. Seldom there observes) from V Exodus 7.

On the Sabbath Day.] This the Jewish Doctors would have to be the very next
Sabbath after its first Institution in the Wilderness; which is to make this
History misplaced, and the foregoing also, without any necessity.

And they that found him gathering sticks.] Admonished him (as the Jews also
say) of the unlawfulness of it, and wished him to desist. But he would not
hearken to them; and therefore (as it here follows) they brought him unto
Moses, etc. as one that contemptuously, and with an high hand, had offended
God. For they make this an instance, of such a presumptuous Sin, as is
mentioned before v. 30, 31. which is not improbable. And it appears from hence,
that they observed the Sabbath while they were in the Wilderness; and therefore
did not bring him before Moses on that day, but the next after; or at least he
was not judged till the next day.

Brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the Congregation.] Who were
now, they fancy, hearing a Sacred Lecture, when they brought the Man before
Moses. For he was the chief Judge, who was to determine such Cases: though we
may conceive the LXX. Elders (who were constituted before this happened, XI. 24,
etc.) to have been now sitting, and Moses at the Head of them. But he being not
deprived of any Authority by their Creation, who were added only to give him
ease, it is more likely this Man was set before Moses, as the sole Judge of
this Case. For God speaks to him alone, v. 35. when he directs what should be
done with him. Yet Aaron, and the Elders, it appears by these words, were
present (and called here all the Congregation) when this Offender was brought
before him.

Ver. 34. And they put him in ward.] By the order Moses (as they did the Man
that blasphemed, XXIV Lev. 12.) to secure him, till the Mind of God was known,
how he should be punished.

Because it was not declared what should be done to him.] They knew very well,
that he was to dye; for it had been declared, XXXI Exodus 14. XXXV. 2. but they
questioned what kind of death he should suffer, as the Jews interpret it. For
they observe this difference between that Case, of the Blasphemer in Leviticus,
and this here of the Sabbath-breaker, that there they doubted whether he should
be punished by them, or by the Hand of Heaven: but here, what kind of Death
they should inflict upon him. Though there are some (as Mr. Seldom there
observes, n. 8.) who imagine, the question here also was, Whether the sense of
the Law was, that they should expect his Punishment from God, or he be put to
Death by the Court of Judgment?

Ver. 35. And the LORD said unto Moses.] Who Numb. 8.

The Man be surely put to death.] By this Answer, it seems to me, the question
was not at first, What Death he should dye? but whether he should be put to
Death or no? That is, Whether the gathering and binding up Sticks into a
Faggot, was such a work as is forbidden in the Law, (XX Exodus.) unto which Death
was afterward threatened in the places beforementioned. And the Resolution
was, that he should be put to Death, as a Man that denied God, the Creator of
the World; though not in words, yet in fact. For he who did any Work on the
Sabbath, (as Aben-Ezra notes upon XX Exodus.) denied the Work of Creation: though
he did not in downright terms deny God himself. For the Sabbath being a Sign
(as God calls it) that they were the Worshippers of him, who made all things;
the Contempt of that was a renouncing of their Religion, and therefore deserved
to be punished with Death; the Belief of the Creation of the World being the
very Foundation of the Jewish Religion; as the belief of its Eternity was the
Foundation of the Pagan. This made the breach of this Precept, of keeping the
Sabbath strictly, (which is more frequently repeated than any other, for the
reason forementioned) so heinous a Crime, and so severely punished: for by
this a true Worshipper of God was distinguished from a profane Person and an
Idolater.

All the Congregation shall stone him with stones, without the Camp.] This was
a Punishment inflicted for very enormous Crimes. See XX Lev. 2. XXIV. 12. And
this Man was condemned to suffer it, because he was the first breaker of this
Sacred Law. And he doing it presumptuously (as is supposed from the connection
of this Story, with v. 30, 31.) in contempt of the Law; and not desisting from
his Impiety, when he was admonished to forbear, (as I said v. 33.) it highly
aggravated his guilt; being no less than a reproaching of the LORD, and a
despising of his Word. Whence the Vulgar saying of the Talmudists, He that
denies the Sabbath, is like to him that denies the whole Law.

Ver. 36. And all the Congregation brought him without etc.] Not on the
Sabbath Day, as I said before; for that was unlawful, (as Philo observes) but
the next day after; or as soon as Moses had passed Sentence upon him.

Ver. 37. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Chapter, were delivered. For
this that follows, is a direction for the better observance of all the rest of
God's Commandments.

Ver. 38. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and bid This is the best word we
have in our Language, to express the Hebrew word Tzitzith, which imports
something of an Ornament resembling a Flower, as the word tzitz signifies. Of
how many threads they consist, and after what fashion they are made by the Jews
at this day, see Buxtorf's Synagoga Judaica, cap. 9.

In the Borders of their Garments.] Or, (as it is in the Hebrew) in the Wings
of their Garments: which had four Skirts, it appears by XXII Deuteronomy. 12. At the
bottom of each of which, they were to have a Fringe. Which seem to have been
only Threads left at the end of the Web unwoven; at the top whereof they put a
Lace, as it here follows.

Throughout their Generations.] To be a perpetual Mark of their Religion, and
put them in mind of their Duty.

And that they put upon the Fringe of the Borders a Riband.] Or a Lace: which
both bound the Fringe fast at the top, and also made it more conspicuous and
observable: which was the intention of it. For by this they were distinguished
from all other People who were not Jews; as well as put in mind of the Precepts
of God, as it follows in the next verse.

Of blue.] Or as some would have it translated, of Purple. But the Hebrew
Writers say Theceleth signifies that color which we now call Vltramarine; as
Braunius has observed, Lib. I. de Vestitu Sacerd. Hebr. cap. 13. and Bochart
Hierozoic. P. II. Lib. V. cap. 10, 11.

There is another very learned Person also, who has more lately shown, out of
an excellent MS. in his possession, what the Jews deliver concerning the way
and manner of dying this Color. Which being not easy to compass, the Jews at
this day, instead of this Color, are contented to use White. See J. Wagenseil
upon the Gemara Sotae, cap. 2. Annot. 8.

And it shall be to you for a Fringe.] Or rather, it (that is the Riband) shall
be unto you upon the Fringe; or, to the Fringe: added to it, to make it the
more noted; being of a distinct Color from the Fringe, which was of the same
Color with the Garment. The Jews say, in the Selvedge of which these Fringes
were, was their upper Garments called Talish, being a kind of Cloak.

That ye may look upon it, and remember all the Commandments of the LORD.] i.
e. When they looked down, this Fringe and Lace which they saw there, might put
them in mind of the Duty they owed to God; who commanded this, not for it self,
but to remember them that they were a holy People, bound to God by peculiar
Laws, which they should be as careful to observe, as to wear these Fringes.
Hence it was that they, who pretended to greater Sanctity than others, enlarged
these Fringes (as our Savior observes, XXIII Matthew. 5.) i. e. extended them to
a greater length, so that they swept the Ground, which made them more
observable, as Braunius notes out of the Gemara of Gittim, Lib. I. de Vest.
Sacerd. Hebr. cap. 3. n. 16. Where he also observes, That their Superstition
grew so much, as with great Subtilty to contrive, that these Fringes might be
so wrought, as to denote the DCXIII. Precepts contained in the Law of Moses;
and so they might be put in mind of ALL the Commandments of the LORD. See
Buxtorf also in the place before-named; and Bishop Montagu in his Apparatus,
cap. 7. n. 32.

And do them.] Which was the end of remembering them, as that was of their
wearing them: though the Jews proved so foolish, as to pride themselves in the
bare use of these Ornaments; i. e. in their being a select People, which ought
to have made them more careful to do the whole Will of God.

And that ye seek not after your own heart.] Follow not your own Thoughts and
Imaginations, (as Maimonides expounds it, More Nevoch. P. I. cap. 39.) or
rather, your own desires. Or the word seek may import, inventing other ways of
serving God, according to their own fancies.

And your own eyes.] Nor follow the Example of others; as they were prone to
do, it appears by their making the Golden Calf; that they might have such a
visible Representation of God, as other Nations were wont to have.

After which ye use to go a whoring.] It appears by this, that the foregoing
words have a peculiar regard to the Worship of God, (which he speaks of in the
beginning of this Chapter) from which, when they departed, they are said to go
a whoring from God, unto whom they were espoused.

That ye may remember, and do all my Commandments.] He would not have them
think there was any Sanctity to be placed merely in wearing these Fringes: but
they were to be considered only as Instruments, to call their Duty to
remembrance, and excite them to the performance of it. And so the Jews
themselves sometimes call them, as Buxtorf observes in the place before-named,
Means and Instruments of observing the Precepts.

And be holy unto your God.] By observing all his Commandments: especially
keeping themselves from Idols.

I am the LORD your God.] Their Sovereign and Benefactor.

Which brought you out of the Land of Egypt.] He remembers them of the most
peculiar Obligation they had upon them, to observe this Law, and all the rest
of his Precepts.

To be your God.] They were Redeemed by him on purpose, when none else could
deliver them, that they might acknowledge no other God, but only him, to whom
they owed their Liberty, to serve him.

I am the LORD your God.] This seems to be repeated, to encourage them to hope
that he would still continue good to them, notwithstanding the Rebellion of
their Fathers; for which he had condemned them to die in the Wilderness. Where
he would preserve them, (their Children) and at last bring them into Canaan, if
they would follow his Directions.

CHAP. XVI.
Egypt, before they removed from Kadesh-Barnea.

Ver. 1. Now Korah the Son of Izhar, the Son of By this it is evident that
Korah was Cousin German (as we speak) to Moses and Aaron; for Izhar (Korah's
Father) was the second Son of Kohath, as Amram (the Father of Moses and Aaron)
was his eldest Son, VI Exodus 18. 1 Chronicles. VI. 2.

And Dathan and Abiram the Sons of Eliab.] This Eliab was the Son of Pallu, the
second Son of Reuben, as appears from XXVI. 5, 8, 9.

And On the Son of Peleth.] He also was descended from Reuben, as well as
Dathan and Abiram, (as the next words tell us, Sons of Reuben) but of what
Family it does not appear. Nor is this Man any where again mentioned, no not in
the progress of this Conspiracy: which inclines me to think, that though he
entered into it, yet he afterward withdrew himself, or was so inconsiderable,
that no notice was taken of him.

Took. Men.] The word Men is not in the Hebrew; but simply Korah took. Which
word took being the first word in the Hebrew Text, the whole verse may be thus
translated, Korah the Son of Izhar, etc. took both Dathan and Abiram the Sons
of Eliab, and On the Son of Peleth, etc.] That is, he drew these into a
Conspiracy with him. Or, he betook himself to a Party, as the Chaldee
understands it, he divided himself; with an intention, that is, to make a
Sedition. But the Sense is the same, if we follow our Translation, he took Men;
that is, Accomplices or Associates with him, in his Rebellion. By which we may
understand the Two hundred and fifty, mentioned in the next verse.

And they rose up.] Made an Insurrection: in which Korah seems to have been the
Ringleader; having drawn the rest into it. Which he might the more easily do,
because the Kohathites and Reubenites lay encamped on the very same side of the
Tabernacle, (II Numb. 10. compared with III. 29.) by which means they had
opportunity often to Conspire together. Whence R. Solomon makes this
Reflection, Woe to the Wicked, and woe to his Neighbor. The cause of the
Insurrection is generally thought, both by Jews and Christians, to have been,
that Korah could not brook the Preferment of Aaron and his Family, so high
above the rest of the Levites, who were made only their Ministers, III. 6, 9.
VIII. 19. For he thought this was too great a difference between the Children
of two Brothers, who were of equal Deserts. Nay, Aben-Ezra thinks, that he
wholly disliked the late Exchange of the Firstborn for the Levites. And
besides, it may be thought that he stomacht the late Preferment of Elizaphan
the Son of Vzziel, who was the youngest Son of Kohath, to be chief of the
Family of the Kohathites, (III. 30.) which he thought rather belonged to
himself, who was the Son of the second Son of Kohath. And finding himself too
weak to make an Insurrection alone, he persuaded Dathan and Abiram, (of the
Tribe of Reuben) and those in whom they had an interest to join with him, upon
another pretense; that they were descended from the eldest Son of Israel, to
whom the chief Authority in the Nation belonged, which Moses had taken upon
himself; and likewise preferred the Tribe of Judah to the principal place in
their encampment, (II. 3.) and also the LXX. Elders to be his Assistants,
without their Advice, and leaving them out of the number.

Such as these may be thought to be the grounds upon which they proceeded:
Korah seeking the Priesthood, and the Sons of Reuben the Civil Dignity. But it
seems to me that the ground of the Quarrel was wholly upon the account of the
Priesthood, (as I shall show upon the next verse) and that they struck at Moses
only as advancing his Brother, and his Family, by his own Authority, and not
(as they pretended) by God's direction. For as Dathan and Abiram did not appear
openly, when they had formed this Faction, (for we find them in their Tents, v.
12. and refusing to come to Moses when he sent for them) so in the next verse,
they seem to speak of nothing but the Priesthood: And so Moses understood their
meaning, v. 5, 10, 15.

Before Moses.] In an open defiance of his Authority; who, they pretended had
no power to make such Alterations as he had done.

With certain of the Children of Israel.] It is not said out of what Tribe; but
it is likely out of several; if not some out of every Tribe, in whom they had
any interest.

Two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly, etc.] The LXX. divide their
Character into three parts. First, That they were Princes of the Assembly,
(...), Rulers of Thousands, and Rulers of Hundreds, etc. And Secondly,

Famous in the Congregation.] Which they translate (...), who used to be called
to Public Consultations, when they were to deliberate about weighty Affairs.
And so several, both ancient and modern Translations, as Mr. Seldom has shown,
L. II. de Synedriis, cap. 4. n. 10. where he says, they were called maxim
puto, si non solum, deliberandi causa, chiefly, if not only, to have their
Advice. And then lastly,

Men of renown.] Such who had got a great Name (that is, Fame and Credit) among
the People, upon these, or other accounts. This made the Insurrection the more
dangerous, that such great Persons were engaged and appeared in it.

And they gathered themselves together.] The forenamed Company came in a Body.

Against Moses.] As an arbitrary Disposer of all Preferment.

And against Aaron.] Who was promoted by Moses to the Office of High Priest;
which he himself had discharged before Aaron's Consecration: which, perhaps,
they made a ground of their Quarrel.

And said unto them, Ye take too much upon you.] In the Hebrew the words are
Rab-lachem, it is sufficient for you. That is, you have domineered long enough;
resign your Places to others: for all of us, nay, every Man in Israel, is as
good as you.

Seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them.] Here seems to be the
Root of the Quarrel. Before Moses's time every one might offer Sacrifice in his
own Family, (as I have often observed) which Custom these Men would have had
still continued: being angry that this high Office was confined to one Family
alone, who were to enjoy all the Benefits of it; which were exceeding great.
For the Priests had a large share in most Offerings; and some things wholly to
themselves. This is the more probable, because it was so very hard to convince
the People, that God had settled this Dignity, and all the Profits belonging to
it, in Aaron's Family. For though God did a new thing never heard of before, to
demonstrate these People that rose against Moses and Aaron, to be Seditious,
yet it was necessary still to do more. For after the Earth had swallowed up
Dathan and Abiram, and Fire consumed Korah and his Company, and a Plague
destroyed many more of them; the LORD did another Miracle, XVII. 8. in making
Aaron's Rod blossom, and bud, and bring forth Almonds in one Nights time; when
all the rest of the Rods remained dry Sticks. Which makes it probable, as I
said before, there were some in all the Tribes, who were engaged in this
Sedition; and were so deeply infected with the false Notions of Korah, that it
was necessary to give them all this Satisfaction.

And the LORD is among them.] The People need no other Governor but him, who
dwells among them in his Tabernacle; where they can present their Sacrifices to
him themselves, without your Assistance.

Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the LORD.]
Since God owns us all for his special and peculiar People, why do you take upon
you such high Places and Dignity above us all? For Moses disposed and ordered
all things: and Aaron, by his order, took upon him to be solely God's chief
Minister in his Sanctuary.

And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face.] With Aaron also, it is
likely; as they did lately, XIV. 5. And for the same end, (See there) to
deprecate God's displeasure, (which they might justly think would now rise
higher than ever) and to beg his direction, what to do, in such a dangerous
state of things.

And he spoke unto Korah, and unto all his Company.] This shows that Korah was
the Head of this Faction, and Dathan and Abiram did not at the first (I guess
from hence) appear with him.

Saying.] Being risen up from Prayer, he made this Answer to the Seditious
People, by order from God; who, no doubt, directed him to this way of
suppressing them.

Even to morrow the LORD will show, etc.] In the Hebrew the words are, To
morrow (or, in the Morning) and the LORD will show, etc. That is, stay but till
to Morrow, and it shall appear, without any further delay, whether you or we be
in the right. He would keep them in suspense no longer; and yet gave them so
much time to consider better, and repent. Some observe that the Morning was the
time of executing Justice, and therefore here appointed.

Will the LORD show.] By some visible Token.

Who are his.] Or, Who appertain to him: viz. As his Ministers.

And who is holy.] Separated and solemnly Consecrated, by his appointment, to
the Sacred Office of Priesthood.

And will cause him to come near unto him.] Make it appear that they are the
Persons who ought to burn Incense, and to offer Sacrifice. For to come near, is
to perform these Offices, as may be learnt from XIX Levit. 22. but especially
from X Levit. 3. And the very word Cohen denotes it; for it signifies a
Minister next to the King.

And him whom he has chosen, will he cause to come near unto him.] They shall
discharge the Office of Priesthood, whom God himself has chosen to it; and no
Body else.

Ver. 6. This do.] I put you to this Trial.

Take your Censers.] Perform the Office of Priests, unto which you pretend a
right.

Korah, and all his Company.] All the Two hundred and fifty Men, and whosoever
else were in the Faction of Korah. Whom he orders, no doubt, by God's
direction, to execute the Office to which they aspired.

Ver. 7. Put Fire therein, and put Incense in them.]

Before the LORD to morrow.] At the Altar of Incense, as some conceive, before
the most Holy Place. So Menochius. But this is contrary to v. 18. where we
read, they stood in the door of the Tabernacle, with their Censers, Fire, and
Incense. Nor would the Sanctuary contain such a Company: or, if it had been
large enough, the People could not have seen, either their Offering, or their
Punishment from the LORD for their Sin. Therefore these words before the LORD
signify, with their Faces toward the Sanctuary, at the Gate of which they
stood: for what was done there, is said to be before the LORD, XXIX Exodus 42.

And it shall be, that the Man whom the LORD does choose, he shall be holy.]
This comprehends both the Man and all his Family; so the meaning is, the LORD
would declare whether Aaron and his Sons should execute the Priesthood alone;
or Korah and his Company be admitted to it.

Ye take too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi.] It is the same Phrase which we
had before, v. 3. Rablachem; you are high enough already; let the station
wherein you are suffice you, and aspire not after greater Dignity. The
following words justify this Interpretation.

And Moses said unto Korah, hear I pray you, ye Sons of Levi.] By this, and by
the foregoing verse, it appears, not only that there were some of the Levites
in this Sedition, together with Korah, at the Head of them: but that they were
the chief Incendiaries, (though others, as I said before, were drawn in to join
with them) because Moses addresses himself only to them.

Seems it a small thing unto you.] Do you take it to be no honor to you.

That the God of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of Israel.]
Made choice of you above all other Israelites, to wait upon him in his Family,
as his Domestic Servants, III Numb. 12. VIII. 6, 14.

To bring you near to himself.] Though not so near as the Priests; yet nearer
than all other Men: being the sole Attendants upon the Priests, III. 6. VIII.
10, 11.

To do the Service of the Tabernacle of the LORD.] III. 7, 8. particularly the
Kohathites were chosen to do the Service of the Tabernacle, about the most holy
things, IV. 4, 19.

And to stand before the Congregation, to minister unto them, VIII. 11, 19.

Ver. 10. And he has brought thee near to him, and Or, Though he has brought
thee (speaking unto Korah) thus near to him; and all the rest of the Levites
thy Brethren. See VIII. 10, 11, 15, 19.

And seek ye the Priesthood also?] Will it not content you, that you alone are
chosen to minister unto the Priests, III. 6. but you must be advanced to
minister unto God in their Office?

Ver. 11. For which cause both thou, and all thy Company, By whose order Aaron
and his Sons were appointed to serve him in the Office of Priests; as was
declared when the Levites were taken to minister unto them, III. 3. IV. 15, 19,
20. And therefore to rise up against them, was to rise up against the LORD, and
oppose his Authority, who made them his Priests.

And what is Aaron.] Or, And Aaron, what has he done? Wherein is he faulty?

That ye murmur against him?] For taking upon him the Office of Priesthood;
into which he did not intrude himself, but was chosen and appointed by God to
do him that Service: who would have been angry with him, if he had refused it.

Ver. 12. And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram To Summon them to the place
where Moses now was; which the Jews say was the Court of Judgment. This shows
that either these Men (as I said v. 2.) did not openly appear with Korah and
his Company against Moses, v. 3. Or, if they did, they retired to their Tents,
before he rose up from his Prayer, to give them an Answer.

What became of On, we are not informed: for he is neither mentioned here, nor
in the following part of this Narrative, concerning their Sedition; nor any
where else in the Holy Scripture.

Which said, We will not come up.] They bad the Messenger, who summoned them to
appear before Moses, to tell him plainly that they denied his Authority. For
that is the meaning of this Language, He has no Authority to command us, who
are none of his Subjects; and therefore will not obey him.

Is it a small thing with thee, that thou have brought us up out of a Land
flowing with Milk, and Honey, to kill us in the Wilderness?] Though they would
not come to him, yet they returned him this Message; Have we not suffered
enough, by being brought out of a rich and plentiful Country, abounding with
all good things, into a barren Wilderness, where we are ready to starve?
Nothing could be more insolentand ungrateful, than to describe Egypt in the
very same Language wherein God himself had often spoken of the Land of Promise:
particularly when he sent Moses to tell them, he would bring them up out of the
Affliction of Egypt, under which they groaned, III Exodus 16, 17.

Except thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us?] Unless we allow thee
to make what Laws thou think good, and impose what thou please upon us? A
most rude and insolent Speech; signifying that they had not shaken off the Yoke
of Bondage, but only exchanged it: and instead of the Rich and Wealthy
Oppression of Pharaoh, were come under the Poor and Hungry Tyranny of Moses.
For so the next verse imports.

Ver. 14. Moreover, thou have not brought us into a etc.] Or, Certainly, this
is not the good Land into which thou did promise to conduct us. It seems to
be a Sarcastical Speech; Upbraiding him, as if he had put a Cheat upon them,
and fed them only with good Words; to which they would no longer trust.

Or given us Inheritence of Fields and Vineyards.] But told us it shall be
bestowed forty years hence, when we are all dead. This still shows they took
him for a Deluder of them with deceitful Promises.

Will thou put out the Eyes of these Men?] Some of them spoke this in the name
of the rest, who were now with Dathan and Abiram: and the meaning is, Do thou
think to blind us so, that none of us shall discern this Imposture? Or, shall
we suffer thee to lead us about like blind Men, whither thou please;
sometimes toward Canaan, and now back again toward the Red Sea, and Egypt?

We will not come up.] A peremptory Resolution, not to own his Authority; which
they denied at the first, v. 12.

Ver. 15. And Moses was very wroth.] For such behavior XII. 3. Yet the LXX.
translate the words, as if he only took it very heavily, (...), it made him
exceeding sad.

And said unto the LORD, respect not their Offering.] He calls the Incense,
which they were about to offer by the Name of Mincha, which commonly signifies
a Meat Offering; but sometimes any inanimate thing that was consumed in honor
of God, as Incense was; and must so signify in this place, for they offered
nothing else. And when Moses desires it may not be accepted, he means a great
deal more; that God would give some Sign of his dislike to it. Hence it seems
plain to me, That Dathan and Abiram, as well as Korah, quarrelled at the
confining the Priestood unto Aaron's Family; for Moses calls this their
Offering; by the Acceptance or Rejection of which, this Controversy was to be
decided.

I have not taken one Ass from them.] This seems to be an Appeal to God,
against their unjust Charge, that he acted Arbitrarily, and did with them what
he list, v. 13. From which he was so far, that he declares before God he had
not taken, i. e. received by way of Gift or Reward, (So the LXX. and the Vulgar
understand it) the smallest thing, (for such a single Ass was) much less
extorted any thing from them.

Nor have I hurt any one of them.] None can say that I have done any kind of
Evil to them; but contrarily, all good Offices. For that he did not seek
himself, appeared in this, That he had not advanced his own Family to the
Priestood, but left them in the number of the other Levites, upon the same
level with Korah and his Company.

Ver. 16. And Moses said unto Korah, be thou and all thy Company before the
LORD, etc.] He repeats what he had said to him before, v. 6, 7. only adding,
that he would have Aaron also there, together with Thou and they, and Aaron to
morrow.

Before the LORD.] i. e. In the Court of the Tabernacle, (See v. 7.) where, by
an extraordinary Commission from the Divine Majesty, this Trial was to be made.
And therefore Aaron himself did not now go into the Sanctuary to offer Incense
(which was the proper and only place allowed by the Law) but stood with them
without. As in another great necessity he offered Incense in the midst of the
Congregation, v. 46, 47. Both which was done by a Dispensation from him that
made the Law.

Ver. 17. Take every Man his Censer, and put Incense Let every Man of them
stand before the LORD, at the Door of the Tabernacle, to do the Office of
Priests; to which they pretended as good a right as Aaron and his Sons.

Two hundred and fifty Censers.] This shows that the Incense being offered by
so great a number (as it appears it was, v. 35.) they did not offer it in the
Sanctuary; which would not contain so many Persons.

Thou also and Aaron, each of you his Censer.] This seems to signify, as if
Korah was commanded to stand by Aaron, since he pretended to be his equal;
which made the Hand of God the more remarkable upon him, when he was struck
with Lightning, and no harm came to Aaron, who stood by him. But it may be
doubted, what way Korah perished.

Ver. 18. And they took every Man his Censer.] That is, the Two hundred and
fifty Men did as they were commanded: but Korah went first to muster up as
Moses, v. 19. and then seems to have gone to his Tent, v. 24. Herein these Men
submitted to the way of decision which Moses propounded, though they had so
boldly denied his Authority. For they could not but think, that God, whom they
owned to be among them, v. 3. would approve of them, if they were in the right;
and make good their Allegation, That all the Congregation were holy, by
accepting their Incense, as much as Aaron's. To whom they did not deny an
equality with themselves; but only a Superiority.

And put fire in them.] From the Altar of Burnt-offering, which stood in the
Court, at the Door of which they were placed, (I Lev. 5.) for Aaron durst not
take it from any other place: his Sons having lost their Lives for offering
with strange Fire. The remembrance of which, it is likely, deterred these Men
from doing other wise; who did not as yet put in the Fire, but only took their
Censers, and put Incense in them, (which is all that is ordered in the
preceding Verse) and put Fire in afterward.

And stood in the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation with Moses and
Aaron.] As if they were nothing inferior to them.

And Korah gathered all the Congregation against them.] The LXX. translates it,
Korah gathered all his Congregation, i. e. all the Men of his Faction. But the
Hebrew words import that he gathered all the Congregation of Israel, at least
all the great Men; who are sometimes called by the Name of all the
Congregation, XIV. 1. whom he got together, that they might be Witnesses, at
least, of the issue of this Trial: though their coming together with Korah and
his Company, rather than with Moses and Aaron, is too plain an Indication that
they were inclined, if not to throw off, yet to doubt of their Authority.

Unto the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Where they themselves
stood, v. 18. And so did Moses and Aaron: but the Israelites, that Korah had
gathered together, stood on his side, as appears from the foregoing words, and
from v. 24.

And the Glory of the LORD.] The SCHECHINAH, or Divine Majesty, came forth out
of the most Holy Place, where it usually resided.

Appeared unto all the Congregation.] Openly showed it self in the sight of all
the People: and, it is likely, in such an amazing manner, as it had done
before, XIV. 10. But where it appeared, we are not told: I suppose in the
Cloud, which was just over the Ark of the Testimony, IX. 15. not in the Door of
the Tabernacle, for there Korah and his Company stood. See XVI Exodus 10. And
the end of the LORD's appearing was to to give Sentence in this case; and to
declare, by a visible Token, whom he accepted as his Priests. Thus the Glory of
the LORD appeared the first time that Aaron and his Sons offered Sacrifice, IX
Lev. 6, 23.

Ver. 20. And the LORD spoke unto Moses and A little before they put Fire in
their Censers.

Ver. 21. Separate your selves from this Congregation.] From Korah and his
Company, and the People they brought along with them; who seemed to favor
them, v. 19.

That I may consume them in a moment.] As he did Korah and his Companions.

Ver. 22. And they fell on their faces.] To pray to v. 4.

O God.] The most mighty.

The God of the Spirits of all Flesh.] Who have created the Souls of all
Mankind, (so Flesh often signifies all Men, VI Genesis 13.) and therefore
searchest into their most secret Thoughts and Inclinations. So these words
signify, XXVII. 16.

Shall one Man sin.] Korah, who was the chief Incendiary and Contriver of this
Sedition.

And will thou be wroth with all the Congregation?] Many of which he thought
might, through weakness, be seduced into this Faction: having no Malice at all
in their hearts. Which God knew perfectly; and therefore he begs of him that he
would make a distinction, between such as these, and the Men that misled them.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] He bad him rise up, having granted his
Petition.

Speak unto the Congregation.] Whom Korah had gathered together, and brought
along with him to the Door of the Tabernacle, v. 19.

Get ye up from about the Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.] Which, it
seems, was not far off; or wheresoever it was, there a great number of People
was gathered together, to see what would be the Conclusion of this Contest. The
word Tabernacle is in the Singular Number; but includes all the Tents belonging
to these Men, as appears from v. 26. Or, perhaps, they had set up one great
Tabernacle, (for the word here is Mischean, which may be thought to signify
more than Ohel, a Tent, v. 26.) unto which abundance of People resorted, as the
place that Korah and the rest had appointed for the general Rendevouz (as we
now speak) of all their Party. For here Dathan and Abiram, it is evident, ( v.
27.) were with him: but there is no mention at all of On; which makes it
probable he had forsaken them, as Moses wished all the People to do; on which
Condition God promised to pardon them.

Ver. 25. And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and To try, I suppose, if he
could reduce them to their Obedience, and prevent their ruin. He seems to have
had no hopes of Korah; but looked upon him as incorrigible.

And the Elders of Israel followed him.] Either the LXX. Elders, who were
lately chosen out of the rest, (XI. 16.) or the whole Body of those who were
called by that Name, and were Men of Authority, attended upon him, to make this
Action more solemn; and to let Dathan and Abiram see how much Moses was
reverenced by better Men than themselves, who refused to come to him, v. 12, 14.

Ver. 20. And spoke unto the Congregation, saying.] Dathan and Abiram refused
to hear him, as they did to come to him: for here is no mention of any thing he
spoke to them; but only to the Congregation, who were gathered about their
Tents.

Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked Men.] I suppose now they
were gone to their own Tents, where their Families were; from which, he
beseeches the People to remove with all speed. And he does not mean merely that
they should remove their Persons from them, but their Tents, and their Goods,
and Cattle.

And touch nothing of theirs.] Because all belonging unto them was under an
Anathema, which God had passed upon them. That is, was devoted to destruction,
and therefore not to be touched, XIII Deuteronomy. 17.

Lest ye be consumed in all their sins.] Destroyed with them; who had sinned so
grievously, as to fall under the Curse beforementioned.

So they gat up from the Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.] Where the
greatest number of People were gathered together, as I observed, v. 24. For
here is the same word Mischean again, in the Singular Number; denoting some
spacious Habitation, where perhaps they held their Consultations; and unto
which there was the greatest resort.

On every side.] From which we may conclude, that the People had come from all
quarters of the Camp, to these Rebels; either to join with them, or out of
Curiosity to see how things would go.

And Dathan and Abiram.] With Korah also, it may be thought, because he is
mentioned in the beginning of the Verse. Yet this Conclusion cannot be drawn
from thence, for it is not said he was now there; but that it was the
Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and Abiram; where they used, I suppose, to meet.

Came out.] From the Tabernacle beforementioned.

And stood in the door of their Tents.] Of their own Tents; where they commonly
dwelt.

And their Wives, and their Sons, and their Children.] With their whole
Families. This was the highest degree of audacious and hardened Infidelity;
whereby they declared that they feared not what Moses (who had given the
greatest proof he was a Man of God) could do unto them.

Ver. 28. And Moses said.] Unto all the People of Israel; or to the Elders, and
as many as could

Hereby you shall know.] I will now give you an evident Demonstration.

That the LORD has sent me to do all these works.] That I have been
commissioned by God to do all the things with which those Men find fault:
particularly to take upon me the Government of them; and to put Aaron and his
Family into the Priesthood; and make the Levites only their Ministers, etc. See
v. 2, 3, 13, 14.

For I have not done them of my own mind.] In the Hebrew the words are, And
that not out of my heart. It was none of my own device or contrivance. I did it
not out of an ambitious desire to be great myself, or out of private affection
to my Brother.

Ver. 29. If these Men die the common death of all In the Hebrew it is, As die
all Mankind: that is, a Natural Death, as we now speak.

Or they be visited after the visitation of all Men.] i. e. Such Judgments of
God come upon them, as are usual and common in the World, viz. a Pestilence,
the Sword, or Famine.

The LORD has not sent me.] Then look upon me as an Impostor.

Ver. 30. But if the LORD make a new thing.] Hebrew the words are, If the LORD
create a Creature; i. e. do something that was never seen, nor heard of in the
World before. The Jews, in several of their Books, (particularly in Pirke
Avoth) say, there are ten things which God created after the World was
perfected: and they mention the mouth of the Earth for one of them; that is,
the gaping of the Ground, to swallow up these wicked People. Which is said to
be created, as Aben-Ezra well observes, because by this Miracle God altered the
Course of Nature, and did a thing extraordinary.

And the Earth open her mouth, and swallow them up with all that appertain unto
them.] i. e. On a sudden; when there is no Earthquake, but all is calm and
still; and it swallow up none but them alone.

And they go down quick into the Pit.] Be buried alive; when they are in
perfect health. By this place it is apparent that the Hebrew word Sheol does
often signify the Grave: which Bellermine (and others) most earnestly contend
never signifies so, but Hell; which from hence he asserts to be in the Center
of the Earth, Lib. IV. de Christo, cap. 10. not observing, that if it signify
Hell in this verse, and v. 33. then the Houses of these Men, and their
Household Stuff, and all that appertained to them, went down thither; which is
very absurd. It is hard also to think that all their little Children went down
into Hell for their Father's sin, though they did into the Grave.

Then ye shall understand that these Men have provoked the LORD.] You shall be
sufficiently convinced, that they have unjustly accused me, and brought this
destruction upon themselves.

And it came to pass, that as he had made an end of speaking all the words,
that the Ground clave asunder that was under them.] He had no sooner done
speaking, but immediately what he said was verified; which made it the more
remarkable.

Ver. 32. And the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up.] Viz. Dathan
and Abiram beforementioned, v. 27.) who stood in the Door of their Tents,
outfacing Moses.

And their Houses.] i. e. All their Family; or, as Moses himself has explained
it, XI Deuteronomy. 6. Their Households, and their Tents, and all the Substance that
was in their possession.

And all the Men that appertained unto Korah.] We are not told what became of
Korah himself; for it is not said he was swallowed up; but all that appertained
to him; i. e. all that were at that time in his Tent: His whole Family, except
his Sons, who escaped, XXVI. 11. taking warning, I suppose, from what Moses
said, v. 26. Which has made some think that Korah was at the Head of his Two
hundred and fifty Men, who were the great Abetters of his Faction: who, if he
had forsaken them at this Trial that was made who were in the right, we may
well think would have withdrawn themselves also, and not have stood to it
without their Chieftain, as we find they did, v. 35. Yet he is not mentioned
there, as perishing with them, by Fire from the LORD: and Moses seems to say,
XXVI. 10. that Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up together with Korah: who had
as much reason, or more perhaps, to think it necessary to be with that other
Company which he had gathered against Moses, (v. 19.) and to encourage them to
persist in their Resolution, than to be with the Two hundred and fifty Men, who
were Men of such Authority, ( v. 2.) that they may be thought to have needed
none to support them. It may be added also, that the word appertains is not
here in the Hebrew, (which makes these words sound as if the meaning were only
those that were of Korah's Family) but simply, all the Men that were to Korah,
i. e. were gathered to him, and were at that time with him. Which seems to be
an Indication that they and he were swallowed up together. How many there were
that staid with him there, is not certain: but the generality left him, v. 27.
where it is expressly said they gat up from the Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, as Moses had commanded v. 24. Which may be taken for a further
Indication, that he was swallowed up in the Tabernacle where he was; or in his
own Tent after he came out of that Tabernacle. But those places, I observed
before, may be otherwise understood: that place also, which is the main
foundation of this Opinion, XXVI. 10. may likewise receive another
Interpretation, as I shall show when I come thither. And they that are of the
other Opinion, think his Tabernacle, and his Family, and all his Household Stuff
might be swallowed up, though he himself was not with them; but was burnt by
Fire, with the Two hundred and fifty Men that offered Incense; for Moses bad
him take his Censer, as well as they, v. 17. Which since they did, and put Fire
and Incense therein, why should it be thought he did not do the same? It seems
to me highly probable that he did, otherwise he would have seemed to distrust
his Cause: but it must be confessed that it is obscure which way he perished;
and therefore it is not fit to contend about it.

And all their Goods.] All their Household Stuff, and Cattle; and whatsoever was
in, or about their Tents.

Ver. 33. They and all that appertained to them.] See XI Deuteronomy. 6.

Went down alive into the Pit.] As Moses had foretold, v. 30.

And the Earth closed upon them.] This made it the more wonderful, that the
Earth, having swallowed them all up, had no Cleft remaining in it; but closed
up again, and was as firm as before.

And they perished from among the Congregation.] Were never more seen.

Ver. 34. And all Israel that were round about them, Though they were at a
distance from their Tents, (whence they had removed on all sides, v. 27.) yet
they heard them shriek so loudly, as they sunk down into the Ground, that it
put them into a great fright, and made them fly still further off.

For they said, lest the Earth swallow us up also.] Some of them were conscious
to themselves, that they had favored this wicked Faction; and all of them knew
how highly they had lately offended God, by their unbelief and murmuring, (
Chapt. XIV.) which might make them justly fear the same Fate with their
Brethren.

Ver. 35. And there came out a Fire from the LORD.] v. 19.) as ready to decide
the Controversy: This fell out either at the same time the Earth swallowed up
Dathan and Abiram, or immediately after it.

And consumed the two hundred and fifty Men that offered Incense.] Which was a
plain declaration that they usurped the Office of Priests; and therefore were
thus punished by God himself for their presumption. It is not certain whether
they were devoured by the Fire, or only struck dead, as Men are sometimes on a
sudden by Lightning, and perhaps scorched, as they likewise sometimes are. The
latter seems most probable from what follows, v. 37. and from the like
punishment by Fire from the LORD, which is said to devour Nadab and Abihu, and
yet their Bodies remained entire, X Lev. 2, 4. This was the more astonishing,
because Moses and Aaron, who stood with them at the Door of the Tabernacle ( v.
18. had no hurt.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Immediately after the Death of those
Men.

Ver. 37. Speak unto Eleazar the Son of Aaron the Priest.] Who it is likely
stood by them, as next Successor to Aaron, in the Office which was disputed:
And therefore perhaps employed in what follows rather than Aaron, that his
Succession might be confirmed. Though others will have it, that it was below
the Dignity of Aaron to perform such a mean Office: and besides, he might have
been in danger to be polluted by the dead Bodies of the Men that were burnt.

That he take the Censers out of the Burning.] Out of the place where the Men
were burnt, as some understand it. Or (which differs not much) from among the
dead Bodies, which were burnt; Burning being put for Bodies burnt; as
Captivity, XXI. 1. for those that were carried Captive, or made Prisoners, as
we there translate it. But there is no need of either of these Additions;
burning signifying the Fire which burnt in them: which he orders Eleazar to
throw out, that the Censers might be brought away.

And scatter thou the Fire yonder.] The Men were burnt as soon as ever they put
fire to the Incense in their Censers, ( v. 18.) which flaming at the Door of
the Tabernacle where they stood, (near the Altar from whence they took the
Fire) God commanded to be thrown away without the Camp: into that place, I
suppose, where they were wont to throw the Ashes (VI Lev. 11.) or rather, into
some unclean place, where they threw the Dust scraped from the Walls of Leprous
Houses, XIV Lev. 41. For it was to show that God abhorred their Offering.

For they are hollowed.] Or had Fire from the Altar put into them; which some
think sanctified them. But the plain reason is given in the next verse, because
they offered them before the LORD; i. e. they had been employed to an holy use,
and that by God's command, ( v. 6, 17.) and therefore God would not have them
hereafter serve for any other.

Ver. 39. The Censers of these Sinners against their Who have brought
destruction upon themselves, by their Presumption.

Let them make of them.] Either Aaron, or Eleazar were to cause them to be
beaten into such Plates as here follow.

Broad Plates for a covering of the Altar.] Of Burnt-offering; which was
covered with Brass, (XXVII Exodus 12.) but these Plates were to be laid upon
that Covering which it had already, for the end mentioned in the Conclusion of
this verse. And hereby also the proper Covering of the Altar lasted the longer.

For they offered them before the LORD.] Presented them before the LORD, when
they offered Incense in them, v. 35.

Therefore they are hallowed.] Or holy: That is, I will have them separated,
for this reason, to my use alone, and no other. It is a thing worthy to be
taken special notice of, that the Impiety of the Men that offered Incense, did
not discharge their Censers of the discriminative Respect (as our famous Mr.
Mede speaks) due unto things sacred. As these in some sort were, by being
presented to the LORD, which made it unlawful to employ them to common uses.
For as the LORD himself is that singular, incommunicable, and absolutely Holy
One, and his Service and Worship therefore incommunicable to any other; so
should that also which is consecrated to his Service, be in some proportion
incommunicably used; and not promiscuously and commonly, as other things are.
See Book I. Discourse 2. p. 18.

And they shall be a Sign unto the Children of Israel.] That God accepts no
Sacrifice, which is not presented by the Hands of the Sons of Aaron. This the
Levites were to remember who attended upon the Priest, when they saw these
Plates laid upon the Altar of Burnt-offering every day.

And Eleazar the Priest took the brazen Censers, etc.] By this it appears these
Censers were made of the same Metal (though it was not said before) that
Aaron's Censer was of, and wherewith the Altar was overlaid. He took them up
out of the burning, no doubt, immediately upon the foregoing Commands: and as
soon as the Mutiny was quite quelled, they were employed as Moses had directed.

Ver. 40. To be a Memorial unto the Children of Israel.] This explains what is
meant by a Sign, v. 38. viz. to put them in mind; or rather, to keep in their
memory.

That no Stranger.] Though he were an Israelite, nay a Levite, if he were not
(as it here follows) of the Seed of Aaron, he was reputed a Stranger to this
Office.

Come near to offer Incense before the LORD.] Presume to execute the Office of
a Priest in the Sanctuary.

That he be not as Korah and his Company.] Destroyed in a dreadful manner. By
this it appears that Korah perished as well as the Two hundred and fifty Men;
and it is likely, as they did, by Fire from the LORD.

As the LORD said unto him.] i. e. To Eleazar.

By the hand of Moses.] Ver. 36, 37.

Ver. 41. But on the morrow.] An astonishing Instance

All the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] Not merely the Rulers of the
People, (as this Phrase sometimes signifies) but all the People in general, (
v. 47.) who were incited, it is probable, by that lewd Rout which Korah had
gathered together against Moses and Aaron, v. 19. Some of which were swallowed
up, but most of them remained still alive, to do more Mischief.

Murmured against Moses and against Aaron.] In such a mutinous and threatening
manner, as demonstrated the contagious Nature of a Seditious Humor, beyond all
example. For from a discontented Party, who grumbled that they were not
preferred, suitably to the opinion they had of themselves, it spread it self
into the whole Body of the People. And so infected them, as to kindle a new
Flame, as soon as the former had been extinguished, by such a terrible
Vengeance, as one would have expected should not have left the smallest Spark
of this mutinous Humor in them.

Saying, Ye have killed the People of the LORD.] So they impudently call those
Men, whom God himself had declared, by a visible Token, to be presumptuous
Sinners against their own Souls. Some imagine they quarrelled with Moses and
Aaron, because they had not prevailed with God to pardon them; which they could
as well have done, as procured this Judgment upon them. But the displeasure
which God here expresses against this new Murmuring, shows this not to be a
true Excuse for them.

And it came to pass when the Congregation was gathered against Moses and
against Aaron.] Their Murmuring presently proceeded to an Insurrection.

That they looked toward the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] i. e. Moses and
Aaron implored help from God: which is employed in their looking toward his
Dewlling Place.

And behold, the Cloud covered it.] One would think by this, that it had, for
some time, withdrawn it self from the Tabernacle, when the dead Bodies of
Korah's Company lay dead at the Door of it.

And the Glory of the LORD appeared.] To comfort them in this Distress; and to
show he was ready to support and vindicate them.

And Moses and Aaron came before the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Perhaps
for Safety and Security: or, to hear what Directions God would give them.

Ver. 44. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Out of the Tabernacle; before
which he stood, waiting for the LORD's Orders.

Ver. 45. Get ye up from among this Congregation.] Aaron and Eleazar, I
suppose, as well as Moses.

That I may consume them as in a moment.] As he was inclined to do before, ( v.
21.) and now had a greater reason.

And they fell on their faces.] To beseech God not to punish the People as they
deserved, v. 22.

Ver. 46. And Moses said unto Aaron.] By God's

Take a Censer, and put Fire therein from off the Altar.] Near to which they
now were, v. 43.

And put on Incense.] Upon the Fire; but not till he came into the midst of the
Congregation, v. 47.

And go quickly unto the Congregation.] With the Incense; which regularly was
to be offered only at the golden Altar, within the Sanctuary: but now in this
extraordinary Case, by God's special Order, Aaron is sent with it into the
Camp; that they might all be Witnesses of his Power with God, and that, by his
Authority, he was settled in the Priesthood.

And make an Atonement for them.] Which was usually performed by the Blood of a
Sacrifice: but there was not time for that: and therefore now it was made by
the Incense, wherewith their daily Sacrifices, Morning and Evening, were
concluded; and was accompanied by the Prayers of the People, while the Priest,
as he offered it, made Intercession for them, CXLI Psalm 2. Thus as St. Hierom
glosses, Currens ira Dei, Sacerdotij voce prohibebatur; the Divine Anger,
coming with full speed upon them, was stopped by the Voice of the Priest. Which
was a notable Type of the Power of our great High Priest and Intercessor with
God, the LORD Jesus.

For there is Wrath gone out from the LORD.] Who would not wholly grant their
Prayer for a Pardon, ( v. 45.) but inflicted some Punishment upon them.

The Plague is begun.] A Pestilence, in all probability; of which several
immediately died.

And Aaron took as Moses commanded.] A Censer, and Fire from the Altar; with
Incense ready to be put upon it, v. 46.

And ran.] According to the Command of Moses, (v. 46.) who bad him go quickly.

Into the midst of the Congregation.] Perhaps into the midst of each of the
four Camps, of Judah, Reuben, Ephraim, and Dan (mentioned in the second
Chapter) being broke out every where.

And behold, the Plague was begun among the People.] He saw People die on all
sides of him.

And he put on Incense.] Whereupon he put Incense upon the Fire, which he
brought along with him from the Altar, v. 46.

And made an Atonement for the People.] Interceded with God for them; and
obtained what he desired.

And he stood between the dead and the living.] This seems to intimate that the
Plague began in the Skirts of their Camps, and was proceeding into the heart of
them; where Aaron stood, as a Mediator for those who were not yet smitten.

And the Plague was stayed.] A stop was put to its progress. Which was a
further Evidence of Aaron's right to the Priesthood, by God's appointment: who
not only preserved him when he offered Incense together with Korah's Company, (
v. 17.) but now makes him an Instrument of preserving others from destrustion.

Ver. 49. Now they that died in the Plague were Fourteen Who it is likely, were
of the forwardest Men, to associate themselves with Korah, v. 19.

Besides them that died about the matter of Korah.] Whose just number is not
known; for besides the Two hundred and fifty Men, mentioned v. 25. the whole
Families of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up.

Ver. 50. And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the To carry back his Censer.

And the Plague was stayed.] Or rather, For the Plague was stayed: and so,
having done his business, he returned to the Tabernacle.

CHAP. XVII.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Aaron was advanced to the Priesthood
by God's appointment, and not by Moses his Affection to his Kindred; yet their
Minds had been so poisoned by Korah and his Accomplices, with the contrary
Opinion, that it was necessary to do still more to root it out. Which was the
occasion of what follows.

Speak unto the Children of Israel.] Order them to bring what I require thee to
take of them.

And take of every one of them.] i. e. Of every Tribe.

A Rod.] Or a Staff, as the Hebrew word Matteh is often translated. Which some
take for an ordinary Walking-staff; or for the Staff which was the Badge of
their Authority, as Princes of the several Tribes; neither of which seems to me
to be true. For what reason have we to think that every Man's Staff, which he
commonly used, was made of the Wood of an Almond Tree? as these were, one may
probably conclude from the 8th verse. And therefore, I take it, they were all
now cut off from some Tree of that kind, and it is likely from one and the same
Tree, that none might fancy there was any difference between them. For the
Miracle was great enough (which here follows) without supposing, as some do,
that these Rods were all of some other common Wood; and yet Aaron's Rod
produced Almonds; which were not the proper Fruit of it: Though it must be
confessed, that if they were not of the wood of an Almond Tree, the wonder was
greater that his Rod should bring forth Almonds; and struck their Minds more
strongly.

According to the House of their Fathers.] In the Hebrew it is Father, in the
Singular Number; denoting the principal Person or Patriarch (as we call them)
of whose House or Family he was to take one Rod.

Of all their Princes, according to the House of their Fathers.]. This explains
the meaning more fully, that the Prince of every Tribe, who was the Head of the
House of their Fathers, should bring these Rods. Their Names we have in the
first Chapter of this Book, v. 5, 6. and VII. 2, 12, etc.

Twelve Rods.] Besides Aaron's: for so many Tribes there were besides that of
Levi. And too great a number of every Tribe, in all likelihood, had joined with
Korah in their discontended Murmurings, at the confinement of the Priesthood
unto Aaron's Family alone; to which they all fansied they had as much right as
he. Which is the reason of taking a Rod from every Tribe; that they might all
be convinced, that none of them but he and his Family alone, were owned by God
for his Priests. See XVI. 3.

Write thou every Man's name upon his Rod.] Either by an Incision into the very
Wood; or with such Ink as they wrote withal in those days, V. 22. This he did
in the Presence of the Princes; that they might not afterward suspect any
Fraud, when they came to take their Rods again; but be satisfied they were the
very same which they saw noted with their Names.

Ver. 3. And thou shall write Aaron's name upon the Because God had made him
the Prince of that Tribe, by giving him the High Priesthood. And he would have
them see, that as no other Person in any of the Twelve Tribes, so no other
Levite ought to pretend unto that high Office, which he had invested him
withal, and him alone.

For one Rod shall be for the Head of the House of their Fathers.] One Rod was
sufficient, because the Head of the Tribe comprehended the whole Tribe. Who
were all excluded from the Priesthood, by the Exclusion of him who represented
them.

And thou shall lay them up in the Tabernacle.] In the most Holy Place.

Before the Testimony.] i. e. Before the Ark; called in many Places the Ark of
the Testimony, XL Exodus 3. because therein Moses put the Testimony, (or, two
Tables of Stone, and the Mercy Seat above it, v. 20, 21.) where the Divine
Glory resided. Therefore to lay the Rods before the Testimony, was to lay them
before the Divine Majesty: who intended by them finally to determine the
present Controversy.

Where I will meet with you.] There he promised to meet with Moses, XXV Exodus
22. by whom he communicated his Mind unto the People. For he neither met with
them, nor with Aaron there, any other way, but by Moses. And therefore the
Vulgar Latin here translates it, minding the sense rather than the words, Where
I will speak to them. And so the LXX. By which I will be made known to thee
there. And indeed meeting with them here, is nothing but declaring, or making
known his Mind to them all, by what was done there upon Aaron's Rod. So it
follows in the next verse. And for this reason the Tabernacle of the LORD is
called OHEL MOED, the Tabernacle of Meeting: not of Men's meeting there (as is
commonly supposed, by our translating it, The Tabernacle of the Congregation)
but of God's meeting there with Men. For so the LORD himself gives the reason
of the Name, both here and in XXIX Exodus 42. XXX. 36. where I have noted the
same out of Mr. Mede.

Ver. 5. And it shall come to pass, that the Man's Rod whom I shall choose,
shall blossom.] The Rods being laid before me, I will tell you whom I have
chosen to minister to me in the Priesthood, by making the Aaron to be
High Priest.

And I will make to cease from me the Murmurings of the Children of Israel,
whereby they murmur against you.] And hereby stop all their Mouths from
murmuring any more about this matter: unless they will oppose me directly, who
declare beforehand, how I intend to give Judgment in this Case, and put an end
to this Dispute.

Ver. 6. And Moses spoke unto the Children of Israel.]

And every one of their Princes gave him a Rod apiece.] For they could not
refuse such a fair Proposal.

For each Prince one, according to their Fathers Houses, even twelve Rods.]
Observing herein the Commands of Moses; who wrote, no doubt, every Man's Name
upon his Rod, as he was also commanded, v. 2.

And the Rod of Aaron was among their Rods.] Not one of the twelve, as the Jews
fancy; but besides the twelve Rods for the twelve Tribes, (as was directed v.
2. and obeyed by them, as the foregoing words tell us) his Rod was put among
them, with his Name upon it, as their Names were upon their Rods. And therefore
the Vulgar translates it, having regard to the sense only, There were twelve
Rods besides the Rod of Aaron. Which the LXX. intended in their Translation,
(...), and the Rod of Aaron in the midst of their Rods. And if it were cut from
the very same Tree with theirs, the Miracle became the more remarkable.

And Moses laid up the Rods before the LORD.] Who was by them to declare his
choice, v. 5.

In the Tabernacle of Witness.] In that part of the Tabernacle where the Ark
was, which had in it the Witness or Testimony which God gave Moses, (XXV Exodus
21.) who alone could go into that place.

And it came to pass that on the morrow.] It is likely God told him, he would
^orthwith show whom he had chosen.

Moses went into the Tabernacle of Witness.] The most Holy Place, where the
Rods were laid up by God's order.

And behold, the Rod of Aaron.] Which had his Name written on it.

For the House of Levi.] Or, To the House of Levi: i. e. whom God had made Head
of the Levites.

Was budded, and brought forth Buds, and blossomed Blossoms, and yielded
Almonds.] In some places of the Rod, I suppose, there was an appearance of Buds
coming forth; in others the Buds were fully thrust out; and in others they were
opened and shot forth into Blossoms; and those Blossoms in other parts, knotted
and grown into Almonds. (...), etc. as Gregory Nyssen speaks in the Life of
Moses, p. 185. The greatest Miracle, even in the judgment of Unbelievers; who
now acknowledged, that which before they opposed, v. 12, 13. For that in one
Night, a dry Stick (as some suppose them all to have been) should produce Buds,
and Flowers, and Fruit, when all the rest, which perhaps were cut from the same
Tree, were as dry as they were before, could not but be very amazing: and,
unless they would shut their eyes, make them see the distinction which the LORD
made between Aaron whose Name that Rod bare, and all the rest of the Children
of Israel, whom the other Rods represented.

The Heathen did not think such things incredible, as Huetius has shown in his
Quaestiones Alnetanae, L. I. cap. 12. n. 24.

Ver. 9. And Moses brought out all the Rods from before Before whom they were
exposed to open view, that they might see the difference God had made.

And they looked and took every Man his Rod.] Viewed them, and taking them into
their Hands, examined them; and found they were the very same Rods, which they
had delivered unto Moses with their Names on them, without any alteration.

Ver. 10. And the LORD said unto Moses, bring Which either Moses held in his
Hand, or delivered it to Aaron (as he did the rest to the several Princes of
the Tribes) who showed it to the Children of Israel, with the Buds, Blossoms,
and Almonds upon it. After which God commanded it to be returned unto him.

Before the Testimony.] To be laid up in the place, where it was before it was
thus changed, v. 4, 7.

To be kept for a Token against the Rebels.] That it might be produced as a
sufficient Conviction of their Impiety, if any presumed hereafter to rebel
against Aaron's Authority. Or rather, that it might prevent all Insurrections
against it for the future. For it remained, we find, in the most Holy Place for
some time; as appears both from the Apostle, IX Hebr. 4. and from the reason of
its being put here, that it might be preserved as a Sign or Proof of Aaron's
Authority, and Suppress all opposition to it. But how long it continued, we
cannot tell, (for it is not mentioned, when the Ark was brought into the Temple
of Solomon, 1 Kings VIII. 9.) nor is it certain whether it continued in that
verdure wherein it now appeared, with the Buds, Blossoms, and Fruit; though it
is highly probable it did: because it was to be a Testimony that the Honor of
the Priesthood should continue to Aaron's Family alone, through all Generations.

There are those who take this Rod which blossomed, and was laid up in the most
Holy Place, to have been the Rod of Moses, wherewith he wrought so many
Miracles in Egypt, and at the Red Sea. Concerning which the Jews tell very many
incredible things: as that it came from a Branch of the Tree of Life, which an
Angel gave to Seth, who planted it in the Wilderness, where Moses found it
grown to a Tree, and cut this Rod from it. For when they came to Marah, and
could not drink the Waters, because they were bitter, God showed them this
Tree, that with it he might make them sweet. Upon which Tree he afterward
placed the brazen Serpent, by looking on which the People were healed, etc.
Thus the Cabbalists generally tell this Tale; but some of them much otherwise;
who say it was given to Adam, and by him to Enoch, and so on till it came to
Joseph, in whose House the Egyptians found it when he died, and brought it to
Pharaoh; from whom Jethro stole it, etc. with a great deal of such like stuff:
Which Abarbinel says is to be understood mystically. But all the ground they
have for this Fancy, of the Rod here laid up being Moses's Rod, is from XX. 8,
9. where it is said, That Moses took the Rod from before the LORD, wherewith he
brought Water out of the Rock, and this Rod is said v. 11. to be Moses his Rod.
Dr. Owen, upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, follows this Conceit, and endeavors
to find many Mysteries in it. But it is evidently false: for as there is not
the least intimation here that it was the Rod of Moses, but quite contrary, it
is called the Rod of Aaron, v. 6. so it had not been a sufficient Argument to
convince the Infidelity of the Israelites, if Aaron's Rod had not been of the
same kind with all the rest. For they might have ascribed what came to pass to
the singular quality or virtue of that Rod, especially if it were Moses his
Rod, (wherewith Wonders used to be wrought) and not to a special Hand of God
appearing to establish the Authority of Aaron. And besides, a Rod full of
Blossoms and Fruit, had been very unfit to be used to smite the Rock withal:
for which purpose that Rod (which seems to have been his Pastoral Staff)
wherewith he smote the Rock in Horeb was most proper, XVII Exodus 5, 6.

And thou shall quite take away their Murmurings from me.] i. e. Silence all
their Cavils against Aaron and his Family; which the LORD here declares he
would no longer bear, if they continued in them after this demonstration of his
Will and Pleasure. For here were a great many miraculous things concurred
together to convince them, that to oppose Aaron, was to oppose God himself. The
Jews reckon up eight. First, That Aaron's Rod should bring forth Buds,
Blossoms, and Fruit, all in one Night, when the other Rods, which were of the
same nature, brought forth nothing. And then secondly, That the Buds brought
forth Leaves; for so they interpret those words, v. 8. the Rod of Aaron was
budded; i. e. brought forth Leaves; for the next words speaks of its budding,
which followed after. And thirdly, That it thrust out Leaves before the
Blossoms, which is contrary to the Nature of the Almond Tree. And next, that it
put forth Blossoms all the Rod over; as they interpret those words, bloomed
Blossoms. And then that a dry Stick (as they understand it) should produce
Fruit, and this Fruit Almonds, which such Trees (they think) as that Rod was
taken from, did not bear. And further, That it produced ripe Almonds, as the
Hebrew word Schekedim imports. And lastly, That Moses showed the People all
these at one view, the Leaves, Buds, Blossoms, and Fruit in perfection. By
which multiplicity of Miracles the Dignity of Aaron was so demonstrated, that
we do not find they at any time hereafter adventured to rise up against him.
For besides all those Wonders now mentioned, it may be, that it was not the
Season of the Year for Almonds, nor so much as for the budding of that Tree:
which made it the more astonishing. But the greatest thing of all was, the
continuing of this Miracle to future Ages; which might well make them afraid to
open their Mouths again in Murmurings against Aaron.

That they die not.] Be not consumed in a moment, as God had more than once
formerly threatened (XVI. 21, 45.) and now declared, if they did not mend their
Manners, and cease their Murmurings about this matter, he would instantly
execute.

Ver. 11. And Moses did so: as the LORD commanded so did he.] Both brought the
Rod again to him, and laid it up before him; and told the Children of Israel
the reason of it: which occasioned what

Ver. 12. And the Children of Israel spoke unto Moses, etc.] Moses having told
them that he laid up the Rod for this end, to be a Witness against them, that
(if they murmured any more) they deserved to be all cut off, as they should
certainly be; it moved them to make this doleful Complaint: Wherein they seem
to be convinced of their Guilt, and to bewail their miserable state. For the
sense of these two verses is, Some of us died before, and now lately more have
perished, and we are all in the same danger: surely, we shall never have done
dying, till we be all consumed.

Behold, we die.] This seems to relate to those Judgments which had passed upon
them heretofore.

We perish.] And this to what had very lately happened to Korah, Dathan and
Abiram, with their Company: and to those that murmured the next day after, XVI.
49.

We all perish.] This will be the Fate of the whole Congregation.

Ver. 13. Whosoever comes any thing near unto the Who was not a Priest; and
yet approached nearer than God allowed.

Shall die.] So Moses had threatened; and they now believed him. And were afraid
withal, they should some time or other incur God's Displeasure by their
Rashness.

Shall we be consumed with dying?] They seem to be afraid, lest for their late
Murmurings and Insurrection, after such a heavy Punishment for that Sin (XVI.
41, 42.) God should further plague them, as by this new Sign he convinced them,
they justly deserved. And therefore beg of Moses to entreat God to spare them,
and not to go on utterly to destroy them.

CHAP. XVIII.
AND the LORD said unto Aaron.] By the hand of Moses, it is most likely; unto
whom God was wont to Communicate all that he would have delivered, either to
Aaron, or to the People, XVII. 4. And having done more Miracles than one, to
establish Aaron in the Priesthood; he now lets him know that the Honor he had
done him, was an Office of great Weight and Burden; wherein he was to behave
himself, with great Care and Circumspection. And withal, he again declares what
the Duty of the Levites was, together with the Priests; from v. 1. unto v. 8.
And from thence he proceeds to tell them, what Maintenance he had settled upon
both; for their encouragement in doing their Duty: as I shall observe in the
proper places.

Thou and thy Sons, and thy Father's House with thee.] You and the Levites,
(whom he calls his Father's House) who had the Charge of the Sanctuary.

Shall bear the Iniquity of the Sanctuary.] If the Sanctuary were profaned,
through the Negligence of the Levites, who were to keep Strangers, and People
in their Uncleanness, from entering into it; and if the Priests were remiss, and
did not take care to see the Levites do their Duty; the Punishment of such
Profanation, he tells them, should fall upon them.

And thou and thy Sons with thee.] i. e. Aaron and the Priests alone.

Shall bear the Iniquity of the Priesthood.] Suffer the Punishment of it; if
they permitted any Person, who was not of the Line of Aaron to offer Incense,
or perform any part of the Priest's Office: or if they themselves should
minister in their Uncleanness, or having any Blemish, or did any thing contrary
to the Rules of their Office.

This was some comfort to the People, who were afraid they should die, for
every Error committed in their Approaches to the Sanctuary, (XVII. 12, 13.) for
which he assures them he would punish the Priests and the Levites, and not
them. And it also served to remove the Peoples Envy to the Priest, whose
Dignity they saw accompanined with such great Danger.

Ver. 2. And thy Brethren also of the Tribe of Levi, This also was a Comfort to
the Levites, and designed to make them more contented than they had been, in
their Inferior Offices, that the Priests were to look upon them as their
Brethren.

Bring thou with thee.] Into the Tabernacle.

That they may be joined with thee.] As Assistants to thee there.

And minister unto thee.] In such things as I have mentioned; See upon III. 6.

But thou and thy Sons with thee shall minister before the Tabernacle of
Witness.] The words, shall minister, not being in the Hebrew, some think he
still speaks of the Levites, and translate the words thus, Both to thee and to
thy Sons with thee (they shall minister, as was said before) before the
Tabernacle of Witness. But they that are of this Opinion, do not consider what
is meant by the Tabernacle of Witness, which signifies the most Holy Place,
(See IX. 15. X. 11.) before which the Levites did not minister; but before the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, as Moses expressly speaks, III. 7. (See there)
where they attended upon the Priests in the Court of the Sanctuary; in which
the Priests only could minister; as Aaron alone did, upon one certain day only,
in the most Holy Place.

And they shall keep thy Charge, and the Charge of all the Tabernacle.] Of the
outward part of it. See III. 7, 8. and carry the Vessels belonging to the
inward part, viz. the Sanctuary, IV. 15.

Only they shall not come nigh the Vessels of the Sanctuary.] They were not to
touch them when they carried them, IV. 15. nor to see, when they were covered
by the Priests, IV. 19, 20.

And the Altar.] I take this to be meant, not only of the Altar of Incense, but
also of the Burnt-offering: unto which they were not to approach, nor touch it,
while they attended upon the Priests; who only could minister there. This is
justified from XXIX Exodus 37. where this Altar is said to be most holy, and
whosoever touched it, is required to be holy.

That neither they nor you also die.] They for presuming to go beyond the
Bounds of their Office; and the Priest for permitting them.

Ver. 4. And they shall be joined unto thee.] He would Levites, as part of that
sacred Body of Men, that waited upon God in the Tabernacle, though in an
inferior Office. And indeed, the very Name of Levi imported as much; and
denoted them to be Adjuncts to some other Persons. Accordingly we find, in
after times, that as the Levites were a guard on the outside of the Temple, so
the Priests watched within it.

And keep the charge of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, for all the Service
of the Tabernacle.] See III. 7, 8. The heaviest part of their Service, which is
called their Burden, is mentioned particularly IV. 3, 4. and the rest of that
Chapter.

A Stranger shall not come nigh unto you.] This seems to relate both to the
Priests, and to the inferior Ministers; that none should presume to perform
the Office of the former, but only the Family of Aaron; nor of the latter, who
were not of the Tribe of Levi. But the Hebrew Doctors, particularly Maimonides
by Zar (a Stranger) understand in this place, every one that was not of the
Seed-male of Aaron. So that the Sons of his Daughters should not minister. For
the Sons of Aaron, says he, ( Riath Hammikdash, cap. 9.) are appointed, and
none other, to lay things in order for Sacrifice, I Lev. 5. and to burn the Fat
of the Peace Offerings upon the Altar, III Lev. 8. His Daughters were incapable
of it; and so were all those that descended from them. The same may be said of
the Levites.

Ver. 5. And ye shall keep.] That is, the Priests were bound to do what follows.

The charge of the Sanctuary.] Whereas they alone etc.) and to cover them when
they were to be removed, IV. 5, 6, etc.

And the charge of the Altar.] Of Burnt-offering; where they only were to offer
Sacrifice, and to take care of every thing belonging to it, IV. 3, 14.

That there be no wrath any more upon the Children of Israel.] That you may by
your care and constant Admonitions, prevent the Children of Israel from running
into such Prophanations, much more from such Intrusions into the Sacred
Offices, as may bring God's most high Displeasure again upon them.

And I, behold, I have taken your Brethren the Levites, from among the Children
of Israel.] III. 12, 41, 45. VIII. 6, 16, 18. The Levites are again called
their Brethren, that the Priests might not despise them, because they served in
a lower Condition; but treat them with Kindness and Brotherly Affection.

To you are they given as a gift.] See III. 9. but especially VIII. 19.

For the LORD.] To assist you in your ministry to the LORD.

To do the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] This has been
repeated very often, III. 7, 8. IV. 3, 4, 23, etc. VIII. 19, 22, 24. and here
is mentioned again, that the Levites might be possessed with this opinion, that
they were but Ministers to the Priests; and therefore ought not to presume
hereafter, to aspire, as Korah did, to the Office of Priesthood.

Ver. 7. Therefore thou and thy Sons with thee shall keep your Priests Office.]
Preserve it to your selves, and suffer no other Person to invade it.

For every thing of the Altar.] These words, and First, To offer Sacrifice at
the Altar of Burnt-offering, and sprinkle the Blood, etc.

And within the Veil.] Next to perform all the Service of God within the
Sanctuary. For in the Hebrew the words are, and for within the Veil: which is a
short form of Speech, importing both all that was to be done in the Sanctuary,
by the Sons of Aaron, (as burning Incense, putting on the Shrew-bread, and
lighting the Lamps) and likewise all that was to be done in the most Holy
Place, by Aaron himself on the Day of Atonement. For the word Paroceth always
signifies the inner Veil before the most Holy Place; the outward Veil being
constantly called Masack. And therefore the exactest Translation of the Hebrew
words lemibbeth laparoceth is this, for within the House (i. e. the Holy Place)
for the Veil; i. e. with the Veil, in the most Holy Place.

And ye shall serve.] In these Places ye alone shall serve; and employ no Body
else.

I have given your Priests Office unto you, as a Service of gift.] He would
have the Levites to know, that Aaron and his Sons had not arrogantly usurped
this Office of ministering alone at both the Altars; but he had freely bestowed
it upon them, and appropriated it unto them.

And the Stranger.] Though a Levite, if he be not of the Family of Aaron.

That comes nigh.] Presumes to offer Sacrifices at the Altar of
Burnt-offering; or Incense at the golden Altar.

Shall be put to death.] This is repeated by reason of the late Rebellion of
Korah and his Accomplices; who, aspiring to the Priesthood, came to a fearful
end. See III. 10.

And the LORD spoke unto Aaron, saying.] Having told him, in the foregoing part
of the Chapter (particularly in the foregoing verse) what should be the Work of
him and his Sons, he proceeds to tell him what recompense he should have for
his Service at the Altar of Burnt-offerings, and in the Sanctuary. Of which he
gives him a large account, (from this verse to the 20th) that he might want no
encouragement to Care and Diligence in his Employment.

Behold, I also, I have given thee the charge.] He bids him observe the large
Grant which he now makes him, as well as the Work he had laid upon him. For by
giving him the charge of what follows, he means bestowing them upon him for his
own use; with a Charge to let none have them but himself.

Of my Heave-offerings, of all the hallowed things of the Children of Israel.
See VII Lev. 34. and below v. 11. of this Chapter.

Unto thee have I given them, by reason of the anointing.] Because thou art
Consecrated, by being anointed with the Holy Oil to the Office of a Priest,
VIII Lev. 12.

And to thy Sons by an Ordinance for ever.] See VII Lev. 34.

Ver. 9. This shall be thine of the most holy things.] He begins with those
things which might be eaten only by the Priests themselves.

Reserved from the fire.] From the Altar of Burnt-offering: most holy, which
were their Portion, that came not from thence, but out of the Sanctuary; viz.
the twelve Cakes, which were taken off the Table, and given to Aaron and his
Sons every Sabbath Day, XXIV Lev. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Every Oblation of theirs.] In the Hebrew, all their Korbans: which is a larger
word than Sebach; comprehending not only such Sacrifices as were killed at the
Altar, (which are properly called Zebachim) but all the Mincha's or
Meat Offerings (as we translate it) which were of things inanimate. And the
Sacrifices of Birds also, whose Blood was never poured out at the Altar. And
therefore Korban seems here to be a general word, comprehending all the
Particulars which follow: especially if all be translated exactly as the words
are in the Hebrew.

Every Meat Offering of theirs, etc.] In the Hebrew the words are, For all
their Meat Offerings. Which makes the sense plainer, if the whole be thus
translated, All their Korbans (or Oblations) for all their Meat Offerings, and
for all their Sin Offerings, and for all their Trespass-offerings: of all which
the Priest had a part. Concerning the Meat Offerings, or rather the
Bread-offerings, (for so Mincha may most fitly be translated, the Sacrifices
being Flesh, which were not eaten without Bread and Drink, that were their
Concomitants) See II Lev. 3, 10. VI. 15, 16. Wh^^e the Flesh of the
Sin Offerings, except those (...) was brought into the most Holy Place, is
(...) unto them, v. 26. And so are the Trespass (...) so, in the next Chapter,
VII Lev. 6, 7. As for Burnt-offerings, they were wholly the LORD's; and
Peace Offerings were not accounted things most holy; but reckoned among the
less holy, as appears from v. 11. of this present Chapter.

Which they shall render unto me.] These words relate only to the
Trespass-offerings, immediately beforenamed: which were attended with a
recompense of the Wrongs done, either unto the LORD, V Lev. 15, 16. or unto
their Neighbors, VI Lev. 5. V Numb. 8, 9.

Shall be most holy for thee, and for thy Sons.] To be used by none else; as it
follows in the next verse.

In the most holy place shall thou eat it.] i. e. In the place where they
performed their Sacred Office, (in that part of the Tabernacle next the
Sanctuary) which is called most holy, in comparison with the rest, which were
further off: because none might enter into it but the Priests alone. See Note
upon VI Lev. 16. where it is said expressly, It shall be eaten in the holy
place; in the Court of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And see v. 26. and
X. 12, 13.

Every Male shall eat it.] And none else, as the places forementioned expressly
limit it, II Lev. 3, 10. VI. 18, 29. VII. 6.

It shall be holy unto thee.] Peculiarly separated from the use of all other
Persons, but only Aaron and his Sons.

And this is thine.] Now he mentions the less holy things, as before the most
holy: which he bestowed upon him and his whole Family.

The Heave-offerings of their Gift, with all the Wave-offerings of the Children
of Israel.] That is, the Breast of their Peace Offerings, (which are here
called their Gift) which was waved before the LORD; and the right Shoulder
heaved; and then given to the Priest for his Portion, VII Lev. 30, 31, 32, 33,
34. And so was the right Shoulder of the Ram, which was offered for the
Nazarite, VI Numb. 19, 20.

I have given them unto thee, and unto thy Sons, and to thy Daughters with
thee, etc.] These were not confined to the Males only, but might be eaten by
their Daughters also, X Lev. 14.

Every one that is clean in thy House, shall eat of it.] Not only their Wives,
and their Daughters that were not married, but those who were Divorced, or
Widows, and returned to their Fathers House, without Children; or had Children
begotten by a Priest, (See XXII Lev. 13.) together with their Servants also,
whether bought with their Money, or born in their House; though not hired
Servants, or mere Sojourners, XXII Lev. 10, 11. But these things were to be
eaten in a clean place, (X Lev. 14.) somewhere within the Camp, as afterward in
Jerusalem, (XII Deuteronomy. 6, 7, 17, 18.) And no unclean Person permitted to eat of
them, VII Lev. 20, 21. XXII. 4. And besides, when any Israelite killed an Ox, a
Sheep, or a Goat for his own use, he was bound to give the Priest the Shoulder,
the two Cheeks, and the Maw; as the Jews understand, XVIII Deuteronomy. 3.

Ver. 12. All the best of the Oil, and all the best of etc.] The Greek
translate the Hebrew word Cheleb (fat) by (...), marrow, XLV Genesis 18. but here
(...), the First Fruits of the Oil, etc. signifying these First Fruits were to
be of the very best of all the things here mentioned; which were to be brought
in the beginning of the Vintage, and of the Harvest. The precise quantity of
which is no where determined; but, they say it was at least the sixtieth part
of the whole, See XXII Exodus 29. XXIII. 19. XVIII Deuteronomy. 4. where he speaks of
the First Fruits, which every private Man was to offer; beside which there was
a First Fruits offered in the Name of the whole Congregation, XXIII Lev. 10,
17. All which belonged to the Priests as a Reward of their Service.

The First Fruits of them, which they shall offer unto the LORD, them have I
given thee.] Our Mr. Thorndike thus distinguishes the two sorts of
First Fruits, mentioned here, and in other places. The one was to be taken by
the Priests at the Barn and Wine Press, as he thinks that here spoken of was.
The other was to be brought to the Sanctuary, viz. those mentioned XXII and
XXIII Exodus and XXVI Deuteronomy. 1, 2. The quantity of either of them being in the
moderate account, a fiftieth part, as S. Hierom determines upon XLV Ezekiel. which
is agreeable to the Jewish Constitutions in Maimonides of First Fruits, cap. 2.
and of Separations, cap. 3. But the Scripture, XLV Ezekiel. 13. requires only the
sixtieth part. See Rights of the Church in a Christian State, p. 210.

And whatsoever is first ripe in the Land which they shall bring unto the LORD,
shall be thine.] Some take this to signify the First Fruits of all other
things, besides Corn, Wine and Oil mentioned in the foregoing Verse. But it
being a different word from that which we translate First Fruits, (viz.
Biccurim, not Reshith) it is most likely he here intends, either the things
first ripe (as we translate it) before the rest of the Harvest and Vintage; or
those voluntary Offerings of this sort, which any one pleased to make: which
seem to be intended in these words, which they shall bring unto the LORD; i. e.
of their own good will; over and above the ordinary First Fruits.

The Jews generally understand by Biccurim such things as are ripe before the
rest, either in the Field as elsewhere; whether they were Wheat, Barley, or any
other sort of Grain; or Figs, Grapes, Pomegranets, Olives or Dates, which they
bound about with a Rush, and said, Let this be for the First Fruits. Which
every Man might bring in what measure he pleased, none being appointed by the
Law.

Every one that is clean in thy House shall eat of it.] The whole Family of the
Priests, if they were under no pollution. See v. 11.

Ver. 14. Every thing devoted in Israel, shall be thine.] Hebrews call Cherem
(a thing devoted) Moses speaks in XXVII Lev. 21, 28. And they were either
simply devoted, in such words as these, Let this thing be a Cherem: Or with an
addition (determining it to a certain use) Let this be a Cherem offered by me,
for holy uses. The first sort were wholly the Priests: but the latter were
employed about the Temple, or the Vessels of it, or the Priests Garments. And
these devoted things, which became the Priests Portion, differed in this from
Free-will-offerings, that every thing which was offered as a Cherem, might be
eaten only by the Priests in the Holy Place; but other Free-will-offerings by
the whole Family, in any clean place.

Ver. 15. Every thing that opens the Matrix in all Men or Beasts, shall be
thine.] That which first came out of the Womb of any Creature was to be the
Priests, if it were a Male. If a Female were the Firstborn, and a Male
followed next, that was not the Priests, because it did not open the Womb, as
the Hebrews expound it. See XIII Exodus 2.

Nevertheless the Firstborn of Man shall thou surely redeem, and the Firstling
of unclean Beasts shall thou redeem.] See XIII Exodus 13. XXXIV. 20.

And those that are to be redeemed.] Viz. Of the Firstborn of Men mentioned
before, (not of unclean Creatures which were to be redeemed by a Lamb, XIII
Exodus 13.) and that after they were eight Days old, XXII Exodus 30.

From a Month old shall thou redeem.] Then the Money was due, but they commonly
staid till the fortieth Day, when the Woman was purified.

According to thy estimation.] Some think this relates not to what follows,
that the Priest should set a value upon them, (for that was a set rate, five
Shekels for every one) but to what goes before, that after a Child was a Month
old, the Priest should appoint a day for the payment of the Redemption-money:
either immediately after the Women had lain in a Month, or on the fortieth Day,
that she might be Purified, and the Child redeemed, both together. But it
rather refers to what follows; for though the price be determined, yet so it is
in another case, XXVII Lev. 3, 4. and notwithstanding is said to be by the
estimation of the Priest; because he was to take this Money, not according to
the quality of the Person, but as much of a poor Man as of a rich, and not more
of a rich Man than of a poor.

For the Money of five Shekels, etc.] Which was the price set upon the
Firstborn, when they were exchanged for the Levites, III. 46, 47. This
Redemption of every Firstborn, was a matter of great Importance, and therefore
so often mentioned, as a very learned Friend of mine, Dr. Alix, observes in his
Reflections on the four last Books of Moses, Chap. 3. For as the Separation of
the Tribe of Levi to God's Service instead of the Firstborn, whom God spared
and preserved in Egypt, (of which we read in the third Chapter of this Book)
made every Levite become a living Memorial of that great Miracle wrought at the
Israelites going out of Egypt; so this Law concerning the Redemption of the
Firstborn, made a further impression upon their Minds, of that mighty Hand of
God which compelled Pharaoh to let the Isaelites depart out of his Country.

Ver. 17. But the firstling of a Cow, or of a Sheep, or For they were clean
Creatures: and only unclean Beasts were to be Redeemed, v. 15.

They are holy.] Separated by my appointment for an holy use; viz. to be
offered in Sacrifice; not redeemed, or put to any other use.

Thou shall sprinkle their Blood upon the Altar, and burn their fat, etc.] Just
as they did with their Peace Offerings, VII Lev. 31, 33.

Ver. 18. And the flesh of them shall be thine.] The

As the Wave-breast and the Heave-right-shoulder are thine.] As these parts of
the Peace Offerings were the Priests, (See v. 11.) so that all their Family,
who were clean, might eat of the Flesh of these Firstlings, as they did of
those parts of the Peace Offerings.

All the Heave-offerings of the holy things, which the Children of Israel offer
unto the LORD.] He repeats what he had said in the beginning of this Discourse,
v. 8. that he had given him all the Heave-offerings; which comprehend those
mentioned VI. 19, 20.

Have I given thee, and thy Sons and thy Daughters with thee, by a Statute for
ever.] Settled upon the Priests and their whole Family for their Support, by an
unalterable Law. See v. 11.

It is a Covenant of Salt for ever before the LORD, unto thee, etc.] i. e. An
everlasting Covenant, never to be revoked. See upon II Lev. 13. And these
things being to be eaten before the LORD, there was a place in the Court of the
Women, where they feasted upon them, as L'Empereur observes upon Middoth, cap.
2. sect. 6.

And the LORD spoke unto Aaron, saying.] See v. 1.

Thou shall have no Inheritance in their Land.] i. e. In the Land of the
Children of Israel, whom he speaks of in the foregoing verse. Where having told
him what reward he and his Family should have for his Service, he bids them be
satisfied therewith, and not expect any more. And indeed it was so very liberal
a Provision, that their desires could not reasonably extend any further. For as
they had two sorts of First Fruits (as I observed v. 12.) so after a Tithe of
that which was given to the Levites, there was another Tithe of what remained
to be spent in sacrificing at Jerusalem: that is, for the most part, upon the
Priests and Levites, unto whom, and unto the Poor, it wholly belonged every
third Year, XIV Deuteronomy. 22, 28. XXIII Exodus 19. XXXIV. 20. Add hereunto the
Firstborn, all the Sin Offerings, and their share in the Peace Offerings, and
the Skins of the Sacrifices (which alone, as Philo observes, was a great
Revenue) and it will appear, it could not be so little as a fifth part of the
Fruit of the Country that came to the Priests for their Maintenance, as Mr.
Thorndike observes in the Rights of the Church in a Christian State, p. 211.

Neither shall thou have any part among them.] When the Land was divided, no
fields, or Vine-yards, etc. were to be given to the Priests, or to any of the
Tribe of Levi. And as the Jewish Doctors say, they were to have no part among
their Brethren in the Spoil. So Jarchi upon this place, and Maimonides, and
others, who endeavor to answer the Objection which may be raised against this
from the XXXIst Chapter of this very Book, v. 28, 29. Where a Tribute was taken
of the Prey they got from the Midianites, and given to Eleazar and the Levites.
This Tribute, say they, was offered because the Spoil came by executing God's
Vengeance upon a Land that was not theirs, XXV. 17. But of the Land of Sihon
and Og, (which God bestowed upon them, as he did the Land of Canaan) nothing
was given to the Priests and Levites; for they were admonished to the contrary
(as they understand them) by these words, Neither shall thou have any part
among them; no not of the Spoil.

Certain it is, that of the Land of the Country they were to have no part, God
having otherwise provided for them; that they might attend wholly to his
Service, and not spend their time in Tilling the Ground, or feeding Cattle:
which would have taken up their Thoughts very much from their Sacred
Employment. Yet the Levites had certain Cities and their Suburbs assigned to
them, XXXV. 2, etc. (which was executed by Joshua, as God commanded, XXI Josh.
2, 3.) whereby they were dispersed among the Tribes of Israel, that they might
the better instruct the People in the Divine Law, XXXIII Deuteronomy. 10. 2. Chron.
XXX. 22. II Malachi 4, 5, etc. By accident also the Priests came to have some
Land. See XXVII Lev. 20, etc. and my Notes there.

I am thy part and thine inheritance among the Children of Israel.] For they
were maintained in his House, and lived upon his Altar, and fed from his Table;
as it is explained in XIII Josh. 14. The Sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel
made by fire, are their inheritance, as he said unto them. Which is given as
the reason why Joshua gave them no Inheritance. And see v. 33. of that Chapter,
where the LORD God of Israel is said to be their Inheritance. Who, it appears
by the foregoing part of this Chapter, and other places, made such an ample
Provision for them, that if he had given them any part of the Land of Canaan
together with it, there had been too great an inequality between them, and the
rest of the Tribes of Israel. For without any share in the Land, their Portion
was far richer than that of any other Persons whatsoever. I have said enough to
prove this already, but it may not be amiss to set it before the Reader again,
a little more distinstly. As they had yearly the First Fruits of the whole
Country, which was at least the sixtieth part of the Fruits it produced; and
the tenth part of the Tithe given to the Levites, (as it follows below v. 26.)
and all Free-will-offerings; together with the Money which arose out of Persons
and Things devoted unto God; and all the Firstlings, of Cows, Sheep and Goats;
and the Redemption-Money for the Firstlings of such Creatures as were unclean:
So they had all the Meat Offerings, Offerings for Sin and Trespass-offerings;
together with the Breast and Shoulder of all Peace Offerings, and the Skins of
all Burnt-offerings; and the Loaves made of the first Dough, and the
Shewbread, and (as Josephus and others expound XVIII Deuteronomy. 3.) a considerable
part of every beast that was killed for private use; besides the Cities and
Land about them which were assigned to the Levites. Which if well weighed,
there will appear a vast difference between the Priests and the rest of the
People. For the First Fruits alone, if they were not less than the sixtieth
part of the product of the Country might seem sufficient, especially if the
Firstlings be added; the Priests not being the sixtieth part of the People; no,
nor the hundred part, as learned Men have computed. See Bonfrerius.

Ver. 21. And behold.] Now he gives the Levites Aaron has the delivery of this
Grant made to them from God, that they might see he did not mind himself, and
the Interest of his own Family only.

I have given the Children of Levi all the tenth in Israel.] See XXVII Lev. 30.
and 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 5, 6. where they are distinctly mentioned. Aben-Ezra thinks
the tenth rather than any other part was assigned, because it was a perfect
Number: Ten being in simple Numbers the highest to which we can arise, without
repeating the Numbers under it. For it is (as he speaks) the beginning of the
second Combination, and the end of the first; whereupon all Numbers do depend.
Which our Mr. Mede has expressed, in my judgment, far better; who looks upon
it as God's favorable dealing with men, in requiring but the Tenth; which is
in truth the least part of their Goods, according to the first Division. For
when we proceed beyond Ten, we begin to make a new Division, as Eleven is ten
and one, etc. But we need not have recourse to such Niceties. See upon Genesis
XXVIII. 22.

For an Inheritance.] Instead of a share in the Land of Canaan, which other
Tribes had divided among them. And a larger Inheritance this was than any other
Tribe possessed: for this was the smallest Tribe of all, as appears by
comparing the account which is given of them, in the beginning of this Book.
For all the Males of this Tribe, from a Month old and upward, were but Two and
twenty thousand, III. 29. Whereas in the Tribe of Judah alone there were above
Threescore and fourteen thousand Men of War, I. 26, 27. And yet the Levites had
a tenth part of the product of the whole Country; and the twelve Tribes had
only the other nine parts among them. Such a care had God of those who were
peculiarly devoted to his Service.

For the Service which they serve, etc.] As a Reward of their Service; of which
see Chapter IV.

Neither must the Children of Israel henceforth come nigh the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.] Or rather, Therefore the Children of Israel must not come nigh,
so as to perform any of the Offices belonging to the Priests and Levites; who
were appointed to do every thing belonging to the Service of God there; and had
their Reward for it also appointed.

Lest they bear sin, and die.] Be punished with Death: which is often threatened
to such Presumption.

Ver. 23. But the Levites shall do the Service of the It was their work and no
Bodies else: and therefore no other Persons were to meddle with it. That is,
they alone guarded the Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple; opened the Gates
of it; kept out all Strangers, ( i. e. all but Priests and Levites) carried the
Tabernacle, and its Vessels when they were to be removed, etc.

And they shall bear their Iniquity.] They shall die for it; if they permit any
one else to come there and do their work. See v. 1.

It shall be a Statute for ever throughout their Generations, that among the
Children of Israel they have no Inheritance.] As all other Persons were
excluded from serving in the Tabernacle; so they who served there were shut out
from having any Inheritance among their Brethren. This was made an unalterable
Law, which provided another separate Maintenance for them, by the Tithes of all
the Land; as here it again follows.

Ver. 24. But the Tithes of the Children of Israel, which That the People might
not grudge to pay them the Tithes for their Service, he represents them as an
Heave Offering which they offered to God, in Gratitude to him, of whom, as the
Supreme Landlord, they held that Land. Not that they were heaved up or waved
before the LORD; but they were of the same Nature with those things that were
so offered to him, i. e. Holy Things, separate to his uses: all which are
called by this Name of Terumah, v. 8. And particularly all the Offerings which
God required to be freely brought, for the building him a Sanctuary, are called
by this Name of Terumah, or Heave Offering, XXV Exodus 2. See there.

I have given to the Levites to inherit.] The Israelites gave them to God; and
he gave them to the Levites for their Inheritance; who had as much right to
them, as the other Tribes had to their Land. Which was the reason he ordered
they should have no Portion of the Land of Canaan with the other Tribes, as it
here follows; therefore have I said unto them, among the Children of Israel
shall they have no Inheritance: For he had given them the Tithes to inherit.
But R. Solomon Jarchi observes also, that the Levites themselves had no right
to them, till they had taken out the tenth part from their Tenth, and given it
to the Priests; as is here immediately directed.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] In all the foregoing part of the
Chapter, ( v. 1, 8, 20.) the LORD spoke unto Aaron (though by Moses) but here
his Order is particularly directed to Moses; because that which follows would
better come from him, than from Aaron: Who was employed in acquainting the
Levites with the Donation God had made of the Tithes to them, v. 21. but it
would not have been so proper for him to tell them, what was to be given out of
the Tithes to himself, and to the Priests.

Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the Children
of Israel the Tithes, which I have given you from them for your Inheritance.]
In these words Moses confirms the report which Aaron had made to them, that the
Tithes of the Land should be theirs, and their Brethren the Children of Israel
have no right to them.

Then shall ye offer up an Heave Offering for the LORD.] As the Israelites made
their grateful Acknowledgments to God by offering their Tithes to him, for the
use of his Servants the Levites, (v. 24.) so it was but fit that the Levites
should be so grateful as to offer to him the Tithe of their Tithes (as it here
follows) for such uses as he should appoint.

Even a tenth part of the Tithe.] For the tenth part which God reserved to
himself out of the Land which he gave the Children of Israel, was a kind of
Rent paid to him their Supreme LORD: And he assigning this Rent over to the
Levites for their Maintenance, thought good notwithstanding to reserve a Tithe
of this tenth part to himself; that thereby he might, as it were, hold his
Possession, and keep Seisin (as the Lawyers speak) of his own Inheritance.

Ver. 27. And this your Heave Offering shall be reckoned Be accepted by God, as
the Offerings heaved up to him in the Sanctuary are, ( v. 24.) though it be but
the hundredth part of the whole Fruit of the Land.

As though it were the Corn of the Threshing-floor, and as the fullness of the
Wine Press.] As if you paid such a Tithe, as the Israelites do to you, out of
all their own Fields and Vineyards. That is, they were to believe their
Offering of this small part to be as acceptable to God, as that of all the
Tribes of Israel: and that they should have the same right to what remained,
when they had done this, as the People had to all the rest of the Fruits of the
Earth, when they had paid the tenth part to the Levites.

Ver. 28. Thus you also shall offer an Heave Offering He would have them know
that he ordered this, because he would not have the Levites alone offer nothing
to him, from whom they received so much; but they also should make him a
grateful Acknowledgment as well as others.

And ye shall give thereof the LORD's Heave Offering.] It is called so often
the LORD's Heave Offering, that they might the more willingly pay it; out of a
thankful sense of what they owed to him, the Donor of all.

To Aaron the Priest.] This Tithe is thought by some to have been designed for
the High Priest alone. Two great Men in their time were of this Opinion, viz.
Nicolaus Lyra, and the famous Alphonsus Tostatus. And another very learned
Person of our own (Bishop R. Montagu) thinks it not altogether improbable, that
such a Provision as this, might be made for the High Priest and his Family,
State and Dignity; he being a Man of great Power and Might, only less than the
Kings of Israel; and the inferior Priests having a noble Maintenance, without
this, from the First Fruits and Offerings of the People.

But there is nothing to support this, but the mere Letter of the Text; for
Josephus expressly says the contrary, Lib. VI. Archaeolog. cap. 4.) and so do
the generality of the Jewish Writers, and St. Hierom also: that all the Priests
had their share in this Tenth paid by the Levites. Which till it was paid, the
Levites might not spend, to their own use, any part of their Tithe. And to
secure this, the Priest was to be with the Levites, when they took Tithes, (as
we read X Nehem. 37, 38*) to take care that they set out a tenth part of them
for the Priests. Whereby the Priest the Son of Aaron, I cannot think is meant
the High Priest himself, (for that had been below his Dignity) but some Priest,
I suppose, appointed by him, who took care of the Concerns of the whole Order
of Priesthood, and particularly of the High-Priest's interest; who, it is
probable, had a principal share among the rest in this Revenue; perhaps a tenth
part out of their Tenth. But for this I have no Authority: though I take it for
certain, that when he says this Tenth should be given to Aaron the Priest, the
meaning is, that, as it was not for himself alone, but all his Sons had a share
in it, so he himself was not excluded from an honorable portion of it.

It may seem strange perhaps that there is no particular portion set out for
the High Priest by himself, if this be not it. But it is to be considered, that
all the forenamed Provision (From v. 8. to v. 20.) was made for him, in the
first place; and for the Priests together with him. For so the words runs, Unto
thee have I given them, and to thy Sons, v. 8, 9, etc. And he had this
privilege also, that he did not Minister by Lot, as the other Priests did in
their several Courses, but when he pleased; and might take to himself what
Sacrifices he thought good to offer, (V. 9, 10.) as Maimonides tells us, in
Cele Mikdasch, cap. 5. where he speaks concerning the High-Priest's
Prerogatives.

Ver. 29. Out of all your Gifts.] Not only out of God gave them; their Fields,
for instance, which were in the Suburbs of their Cities.

Ye shall offer.] Make a Present to the Priests.

Every Heave Offering.] Some portion of every thing God gives you to possess.

Of the LORD.] As a thankful acknowledgment of the Divine Bounty to you, upon
whom he has bestowed so many good things. See v. 28.

Of all the best thereof.] And that not of the refuse, but of the best of the
Tithe, and other things that were given them. By which is not to be understood,
that they were bound to pick out the very best, Wheat suppose, and separate it
from the worse (which would have been to have given them more than a tenth
part) but they were to give the Priests, as good as they left for themselves.
For that was the Rule, XXVII. Lev. 32, 33. And it was but reason the Priests
should have this honorable provision made for them above the Levites, their
Vocations being more honorable, and their Service more noble, in the very
Sanctuary it self. For which cause this tenth of the Tithe of the Land was
assigned them; which, they being but few in comparison with the Levites, made
the allowance to every one of them, much greater than to any of the Levites.
And yet, as an augmentation to it, they had the First Fruits, and their Fees,
as I said before, out of the Sacrifices, and other things, wholly to their own
use.

Even the hallowed part thereof, out of it.] The sacred part was the tenth
part, which they might not use; it being taken by God for his part, XXVII Lev.
30. By which all the rest was sanctified to the use of the owner, when this
part was taken out of it; which may possibly be here also intended.

Ver. 30. Therefore thou shall say unto them.] Tell them the reason why this
tenth part must be separated from the rest.

When ye have heaved the best thereof from it.] Taken

Then it shall be counted to the Levites, as the increase of the
Threshing-floor, and as the increase of the Wine Press.] Then the remainder may
be as freely used by them, as the Corn or the Wine of any Man's Land in Israel,
when he had paid his Tithe. But till then, it was unlawful for him to enjoy it,
because God was first to be served. This is made more plain in the next verse.

Ver. 31. And ye shall eat it.] After the hallowed v. 29.) all the rest was
theirs; to be enjoyed as Men do that which is their own.

In every place.] This seems to be said, to distinguish these from the holy
things given by God to the Priests. Which being offered at the Altar, were to
be eaten only in the Holy Place; but the Tithes, though they were a kind of
Offering to the LORD, yet not being presented at the Altar, might be eaten any
where, after the tenth part was given to the Priests.

And your households.] All their Family, Servants as well as others, might eat
of them; whether they were clean or no. And more than this, they might sell
them to Strangers, to buy other Necessaries with the Money they yielded, or
exchange them for other Commodities.

For it is your reward for your Service in the Tabernacle of the Congregation.]
See v. 21.

Ver. 32. And ye shall bear no sin.] Suffer no punishment.

By reason of it.] For eating it, with your Households.

When ye have heaved from it the best of it.] When they had taken out the tenth
part, as sacred to God's uses, ( v. 28.) they might safely use the rest
themselves, as they pleased: For God had given it to them for their support,
and therefore would not punish them for eating it, as he did those that did eat
holy Things which did not belong to them.

Neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the Children of Israel.] Nor would
there be any danger of polluting the holy Things (which God had reserved to
himself) by turning them to a common use; as there would have been if they had
eaten the Tithes, or other Gifts, before the tenth part, which was God's, was
taken out of them.

Lest ye die.] In the Hebrew it is, Nor shall ye die; as those did, who meddled
with the holy Things, which God reserved for his Ministers alone.

CHAP. XIX.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying.] They were both
concerned in what follows; Moses to deliver the Command, and Aaron to see it
executed.

This is the Ordinance.] Or, the Constitution.

Of the Law which the LORD has commanded.] Which is now passed into a Law by
God's command; who had ordered this Water of Purification to be made some time
before, as appears from VIII. 7. But now sets down a Rule for all Posterity to
observe, in the making of it. It is the rather mentioned now after the
foregoing History, to free the People from that great fear they were in of
perishing in their Uncleanness, (XVII. 12, 13.) by showing them a way, how to
be purified from the greatest Pollution, before they approached to the
Tabernacle.

Speak unto the Children of Israel that they bring thee.] At the common Charge
of the People, because it was for their common benefit.

A red Heifer.] The Hebrew word Parah, which we translate Heifer, signifies a
young Cow; as Par signifies a young Bullock, not above two or three years old
at most, as Kimchi and others observe,

Without spot.] This the Jews refer to the word red, which goes before, and
take it to signify perfectly red, without the mixture of any other color: for
as to any other Imperfections, they are provided against in the next words,
without blemish. Insomuch that Maimonides, in his Treatise on this Subject,
says, That if this Cow had two Hairs black or white, it was unfit for this
use. From whence other Nations, particularly the Egyptians, derived the custom
of sacrificing red Oxen, as Plutarch tells us in his Book de Iside and Osiride,
(...), etc. And he says they searched them so very narrowly, that if they found
one hair black or white, they counted it (...), unfit to be sacrificed. See
Bochartus P. I. Hierozoic. Lib. II. cap. 39. where he shows, this was the most
common color, among that sort of Creatures, in some Countries.

Wherein is no blemish.] See XXII Lev. 20, 21, 22.

And upon which never came yoke.] Had never been employed in ploughing the
Ground, or any other Work: for according to the common sense of all Mankind,
those Creatures which had been made to serve other uses, became unfit to be
offered to God. Whence Diomedes promises Pallas a Cow of a year old. -- (...).
Which no Man hitherto had brought under the yoke. Iliad. K. And so does Nestor
Odyss. T. and the like Bochartus observes out of Virgil, Ovid, and others, in
his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. cap. 33.

All this is very plain; but why a young Cow rather then a Bullock, (which is
commonly appointed in Sacrifices) and why one perfectly red, is not so easy to
understand. If we had any reason to believe that those Superstitions were among
the Egyptians in the days of Moses, which were when Plutarch or Herodotus
lived, we might very probably say, (as some Men of Learning have) that this
Precept was given to preserve the Israelites from their Religion. For they
abhorred to offer a Cow, whom they honored, as sacred to Isis. So Herodotus;
they sacrificed Males, both old and young, (...), but it is not lawful for them
to offer Females, Lib. II. cap. 41. And therefore God, it might be thought,
ordered a Cow to be burnt, rather than a Bullock. And for the same cause one
perfectly red, because that was a Color odious and abominable to the
Egyptians; who fancied Typhon (the Author of all Evil in their account) to be
of that Color; and therefore offered him red Oxen, as hateful to them, as red
Men and Asses were. Thus Plutarch and Diodorus Siculus. In opposition to which,
it may be thought that a Cow of this color was acceptable to God, because
hated and abhorred by those Idolaters. But I look upon what such late Writers
say, as of no Authority in this matter. And as there is no proof of any such
Customs among the Egyptians in Moses his time, so there is an high probability
that the whole Fable of Typhon was framed out of the story of Moses; as
Bochartus has most ingeniously endeavored to make out, by many Observations
out of that Book of Plutarch and other Authors, Hierozoic. P. I. Lib. II. cap.
34. p. 340, 341, etc.

But supposing the Antiquity of those Superstitions among the Egyptians, to
have been as great as some fancy them, I cannot think that if Moses had had any
respect to them, he would have ordered such a great number of Sacrifices, as we
read of in his Law, without the least consideration of the color of any one of
them, and only mention the color of this Cow, which was no Sacrifice. I rather
think this perfect red color was chosen, because of its rarity; it being hard
to find a Cow without any the least mixture of other hair. And though it were
not a Sacrifice, yet being designed to the same end, there was a respect herein
to that great Expiation which was made by the Sacrifice of Christ. With whose
Blood, though the Apostle does not compare the Blood of this Heifer (because it
was not offered) yet he does compare it with the Ashes of this burnt Heifer,
put into the Water of Purification. See IX Hebr. 13. Where after the Blood of
Bulls and Goats, he mentions the Ashes of this Heifer sprinkling the unclean.
For they were a more extraordinary sort of Purification than any under the Law;
of which we no where read, but in this place; nor of any Command for the
repeated burning of such an Heifer to Ashes, (as there is for the Anniversary
Sacrifice on the Day of Atonement) but only of the use of the Water made of
these Ashes, as often as there was occasion. But of this it will be more to treat
in the following part of the Chapter.

And ye shall give her.] They who brought her in the Name of the whole
Congregation, were to bring her to Moses, as the foregoing verse directs: and
he and Aaron were to deliver her to Eleazar.

Unto Eleazar the Priest.] It is commonly thought that Aaron might not be
employed in the following Work, because it would have defiled him, and made him
unfit to minister before God for a season. Which he was bound to avoid, even
when natural Affection seemed to require it, XXI Lev. 11, 12. yet a vulgar
Priest was not entrusted with this Service, but it was committed unto the very
next Person to Aaron, who was to be his Successor; because it was of very great
weight and importance.

That he may bring her forth without the Camp.] As a thing exceeding unclean;
more impure than any common offering for Sin. For the greater the Impurity was,
that was laid upon any Sacrifice, the further still off from the Sanctuary it
was carried. The Bullock, for instance, which was offered for a Sin committed
by the Priest, or the whole Congregation, was in part offered at the Altar; but
the far greater part was to be burnt without the Camp, IV Lev. 12, 20. And so
was the Bullock and Goat, offered for all the Sins of the People, on the great
Day of Expiation, XVI Lev. 27. And the Scapegoat, which was designed for the
same purpose, was not so much as burnt, but banished into a Land not inhabited,
no Body knows whether. All which more particularly represented Christ in his
Sufferings, as the Apostle observes, XIII Hebr. 11, 12. and so did this in
part; having something of the nature of a Sacrifice in it. For though it was
not a Sacrifice brought to be slain at the Altar, yet it was intended to be
used to the same purpose, for the cleansing of the People from the greatest
Legal defilement.

And one shall slay her before his face.] Some Person appointed by Eleazar (for
it was not necessary a Priest should do it) was to kill her without the Camp.
Where it is plain from v. 5, 8, 9. there were more than one concerned in this
Office. But it could not be slain unless Eleazar was there; and it was to be
done in his presence, who was the chief of the Priests: to show that it was
intended for God's Service, though not offered as Sacrifices were at the
Tabernacle, before the LORD. And this is the reason perhaps, why the care of
this Heifer is committed to Eleazar, and not to Aaron; because he officiated
only at the Tabernacle.

Ver. 4. And Eleazar the Priest shall take of her As they did in Expiatory
Sacrifices, IV Lev. 6.

And sprinkle of her Blood.] In the sprinkling of the Blood, as the Jews
observe, consisted the very Essence of an Expiatory Sacrifice. Therefore though
this was not a Sacrifice, yet it had something of that nature in it, and may be
called a Piaculum, an Expiatory Thing: though nothing was called KORBAN, a
Sacrifice, but what was offered at the Altar, as our Dr. Owtram has most
judiciously observed against Abarbinel, who calls this red Cow an Offering for
Sin.

Directly before the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] This Rite of sprinkling
the Blood was never used, but in Sacrifices slain at the Altar, in the presence
of God; and in this red Cow, which was slain, in the prospect of the Sanctuary.
Toward which the Priest was to look steadfastly while he sprinkled it:
otherwise, the Jews say, it was in vain. Which shows that the validity of this
Act, and of the Purification to be made by it, was to be expected from the
Sanctuary. For the Blood of that Heifer, whose Head was cut off to cleanse a
City, near to which a Man was found slain by an unknown Person, was not
sprinkled; being slain, not in sight of the Sanctuary, but in a Valley, near
the City, XXI Deuteronomy. 3, 4, etc. And in this the Jews were so curious, that after
the Temple was built, this Blood being to be sprinkled directly before the
Porch of it, they took care the Gate Shushan, which was before it, should have
lower Battlements than any other Gate of the Temple had, that the Priest might
see the Face of the Porch of the House of God.

Seven times.] This signifies the perfection of the Expiation that was to be
made by this red Cow; on whose Ashes the Jews thought so much depended, that
they took care the Priest, who was to see her burnt, should be put apart in a
Chamber of the Temple (called the House of Stone) that they might be certain he
was free from all pollution by a Grave, or a dead Corpse. For the Ashes of this
burnt Cow, being the great and only cleanser for that Defilement, they took
suitable care that he should not be defiled who went to burn her. See Dr.
Lightfoot's Temple Service, chap. 17. sect. 2. where he describes out of
Maimonides and others, how solemnly the Priest was attended, when he went about
this work. And the Apostle had reason to mention the Ashes of this Heifer,
wherewith the Water was made for sprinkling the Unclean, as the Principal Thing
that sanctified to the purifying of the Flesh, i. e. taking away bodily
Defilements. With which he compares the Blood of Christ as infinitely more
powerful, for the purifying of the Conscience from dead works, IX Hebr. 13, 14.
In which words, dead works, there is a respect (as our Dr. Jackson observes) to
the main intention of these Ashes, which were for the Purification of those
defiled by dead Bodies. And he seems to me also, not to be led by Fancy, but by
a solid Judgment, when he considered these Ashes also as a notable Figure of
the everlasting Efficacy of Christ's Blood, of which the Apostle there
discourses. For if the frequent occasion for the use of the Water of
Purification, had not spent all the Ashes of this Heifer now slain and burnt by
Eleazar, they might have been preserved for this purpose without any danger of
Putrefaction, for a longer time than the Law of Ceremonies lasted. For Ashes
being well kept, never perish; and therefore are an Emblem of Immortality. But
it must be considered that the frequent use of these Ashes might exhaust the
whole stock of them made at this time, and make it necessary the Priests should
burn another Heifer for the same end; as the Jews say they did, though so
rarely (as I shall note below) that this burning of a red Heifer was not
reiterated, if we may believe them, till the destruction of Solomon's Temple.
Which makes them a more notable Figure, though not a perfect one (for no such
can be found) of the Power of Christ's Blood to purify us for ever, without
the repetition of it continually; which was the imperfection of the Legal
Sacrifices, that they must be often offered.

And one shall burn the Heifer in his sight, her Skin, and her Flesh, and her
Blood, with her Dung, shall he burn.] There was a great Pile of Wood (to which
they set fire immediately after he had done Sprinkling) in which this Heifer
was more entirely burnt than any public Expiatory Sacrifice beforementioned,
v. 2. (for here the remainder of the Blood is ordered to be burnt) because this
was of all other things the most unclean; and to be utterly consumed at a
distance from the Sanctuary.

And the Priest shall take Cedar-wood, and Hysop, and Scarlet.] These three
things composed that Instrument which the Priest made use of for sprinkling of
leprous Persons, or Houses, when they were to be cleansed, XIV Lev. 6, 7, 49,
50, etc. (where see what I have noted) And the Apostle mentions two of them, as
used by Moses himself, when he sprinkled the Book of the Covenant, and all the
People, with the Blood of the Sacrifice, IX Hebr. 19. Which though not
mentioned in Exodus, yet the Apostle knew was the ancient way of Sprinkling.
And therefore these things which were used of old as Cleansers, either of
inward or outward Filth, are ordered here to be thrown into the fire, while the
Heifer was burning in it, whose Ashes were to be the great Means of Men's
Purification from the highest Pollutions.

And cast it.] He speaks as if these three things, being bound together, became
one.

Into the midst of the burning of the Heifer.] To denote the great virtue which
the Water made of the Ashes of all these things should have, to cleanse those
who were sprinkled with it: one of these things (viz. Hysop) being ordered to
be dipped into the Water for that purpose, v. 18.

Ver. 7. The Priest shall wash his Clothes, and shall Though we do not find
that Eleazar was employed, either in killing or in burning this Heifer; which
were only to be done in his presence; yet having touched her Blood, he became
unclean. And therefore was to use these Ceremonies for his Cleansing, before he
returned to the Camp: as Aaron did when he had offered the great Sacrifice of
Expiation, on the Day of General Atonement, XVI Lev. 24.

And shall be unclean until the Even.] So as not to come into the Camp, I
suppose, much less to the Sanctuary until Sunset: Which was but a short time,
considering the greatness of this Heifers impurity; this being the common time
of remaining Unclean, for the smallest Defilements, XI Lev. 24, 25, 27, etc.

Ver. 8. And he that burns her shall wash his Clothes etc.] This was a
general Maxim among the Jews, that the Bodies of those Beasts, whose Blood was
carried into the Holy Place, polluted those that touched them. Which is
justified by XVI Lev. 28 And therefore he that burnt this Heifer, whose Blood
was sprinkled toward it, was to do the same, as he that carried the Scapegoat
into the Wilderness, was also bound to do, XVI Lev. 26.

Ver. 9. And a Man that is clean.] Free from any Legal Defilement.

Shall gather up the Ashes of the Heifer.] They were Jews tell us.

And lay them up without the Camp in a clean place.] The Jews say that the
Heifer, in after times, being burnt on the pitch of Mount Olivet, which was
over against the Temple, they laid up some part of the Ashes in a place near
that Mount, for the Sprinkling of the People; and another part was delivered to
the XXIV. Courses, for the Sprinkling of the Priests; and another third part
laid up for a Memorial in the Enclosure of the Court of the Temple. See Dr.
Lightfoot in the place before-named. But there is no certainty of this, and it
contradicts in part, what is here commanded, that they should be laid up,
without the Camp. See v. 12.

And it shall be kept.] Laid up, (...), as the LXX. translate it, to be
reserved and kept, for the use of those who had defiled themselves by the Dead;
unto whom it was delivered when they had occasion for it. And this word
reserved, or kept, imports, that these Ashes were not for the use of that
Generation only, but for all Posterity. And as Manna (which was commanded in
the same form of Speech to be kept or reserved in the Ark) was a Type of
Christ, as he was the Food of Life, or the Bread that came down from Heaven: So
were these Ashes kept, as an Emblem of the everlasting Efficacy of his
Sacrifice. For there is no bodily Substance under Heaven (as Dr. Jackson
speaks, Book X. chap. 55.) which can be so true an Emblem or Model of
Incorruption, as Ashes are: for being the remainder of Bodies perfectly
dissolved or corrupted, they are not capable of a second Corruption.

For the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] This one Heifer, being slain,
and its Blood sprinkled, and Body burnt, afforded Ashes enough to season as
many Vessels of Water, as the whole People of Israel should need. Wherein it
was a notable Representation of Christ's Blood, shed for the whole World, to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Yea, they were sufficient for all the
People, for many Generations; though they had frequent occasion to use them for
Legal Purification. Wherein still they more lively represented the Virtue of
Christ's one Sacrifice; which continues for ever. For the Jews say, this red
Heifer was killed but nine times, while their State lasted. First, By Eleazar
here in the Wilderness; which was not repeated till after the Destruction of
Solomon's Temple, i. e. not during the space of more than a Thousand Years. The
second time it was burnt by Ezra, after their return from the Captivity of
Babylon: and but seven times more, till the Destruction of the second Temple.
Since which they have not adventured to make these Ashes, but expect it to be
done the tenth time by the King Messiah. Who indeed came to put an end to this,
and all other Legal Rites: not after the Legal manner, but by offering himself
once for all, instead of all other Sacrifices or ways of Purification.

For a Water of Separation.] To be put into Spring Water, (which was always
accounted more pure than other) by which those Persons were to be cleansed, who
for their Pollutions were separated from the Congregation; and those things
also which had been defiled, were restored to their common use. Ashes, all
know, are of great use in scouring things polluted: and the ancient Gentiles
used them much in their Lustrations, as appears from Virgil, Ovid, and many
other Authors. But the Water into which they put them was prepared with Magical
Rites; and, for the most part, was drawn out of some pretended Sacred Fountain;
and sometimes it had a burning Torch taken from the Altar, quenched in it; and
in some places they put Sulphur, and Spittle, and other cleansing things into
it. In which, I suppose, at first they imitated this Rite prescribed by Moses;
but in process of time added many Superstitions of their own to it.

It is a purification for sin.] In the Hebrew the words are, It is sin: and we
add a purification, to explain the sense. For it was not a proper Sacrifice for
Sin, (as this Phrase for sin sometimes imports, IV Lev. 24.) but had something
of that Nature in it, (as I observed before) and may be properly said to
Purify, or Cleanse Men from their Sin; i. e. from such Legal Defilements as
are mentioned afterward. And it may, in a less proper sense, have the Name of
a Sin-offering, inasmuch as the Body of it was burnt without the Camp, (as the
great Sin-offering was on the Day of Atonement) and its Blood sprinkled seven
times toward the Sanctuary; though not shed at the Altar: Whereby it became a
more complete Representation of the Sacrifice of Christ. Especially if we
consider that this Purification here mentioned, does not signify only one, or
a few Acts of Purification, but a continued Purification: the Ashes being to be
laid up as a Treasure or Storehouse (to use Dr. Jackson's words) for making as
many Purifications, or Waters of Sprinkling, as the Israelites should have
occasion to use. For therein consisted the Excellence of this Purification,
that the Ashes were not to be made by burning a Heifer, every time the People
had occasion for them; but the Ashes of this one Sacrifice (as we call it) was
sufficient for the use of many Generations. Accordingly the Apostle says our
LORD Christ, (...), having made a purification of our sins, I Hebr. 3.) sat
down at God's right hand. Which word purification in that place, does not
signify one Act or Operation, but implies that by this one act of Sacrificing
himself, he was consecrated to be a perpetual Fountain of Purification; being
still the propitiation for our sins.

Ver. 10. And he that gathers the Ashes of the Heifer, This is one of the
strange things, which the Jews say Solomon himself did not understand, (and
Maimonides professes he could find no reason of, More Nevochim, P. III. cap.
47. and the Author of Sepher Cosri also ascribes purely to the Will and
pleasure of God, of which he could give no account, P. III. sect. 53.) that the
same thing should both cleanse and pollute; as these Ashes did, which polluted
him that gathered them, and made those that used them clean from the highest
Legal Pollutions. But this is not strange to those who consider, that all those
great Sacrifices which were offered for Sin, (which I mentioned v. 7.) though
they purified those for whom they were offered, were very impure themselves,
because the Sins of Men were laid upon them; as all our Sins were upon Christ;
who therefore is said to be made sin for us (2 Corinthians. V. 21.) that we might
be made the Righteousness of God, i. e. freed from all Sin.

And it shall be unto the Children of Israel, and unto the Stranger, etc.] All
Proselytes to their Religion were to have the benefit of this Purification, as
well as the Jews, by an unalterable Law. By which was figured the Propitiation
Christ made for the Sins of the whole World.

He that touches the Body of any dead Man shall be unclean seven days.] This
long Uncleanness by touching a dead Body, was the ground of those strict
Injunctions to the Priest, about mourning for their dead Relations: which is
forbidden, lest they should be hindered too long in their Ministration. See XXI
Lev. He that touched the Carcass of any unclean Creature, was defiled only till
the Even, XI Lev. 24. nor was he longer who touched the Bed of him that had an
Issue, or his Seat, etc. XV Lev. 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.

He shall purify himself with it.] With the Water of Separation mentioned v.
9. Which seems here to be designed chiefly, if not only, for the purging of
this great Impurity, by touching any Man's dead Body.

On the third day.] Then he was to begin his Purification, by being sprinkled
with it. Which makes it probable that these Ashes were kept in more places than
the Jews mention without the Camp, (as afterward near Jerusalem) and it is
most likely, in all the Cities of the Country. For it had been too hard for all
the People, nay impossible for those who were remote, to go to Jerusalem the
third Day after they were defiled, to fetch these Ashes: which therefore were
kept in several clean places, where every Body might easily have them to put
into Water, and be sprinkled with it. For as there was no Sacrifice, so no
Priest required to make this Purification; but any clean Person might sprinkle
the Water, v. 18, 19.

And on the seventh day he shall be clean.] Then his Purification was
perfected; but not without a new sprinkling on this Day, v. 19.

But if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not
be clean.] If he did not begin his Purification on the third day, his
sprinkling on the seventh would not make him clean. But it is very probable,
that though he omitted it on the third day, yet if he purified himself on the
fourth or fifth, or any day following, that being reckoned as if it had been
the third; when he had made up the number seven, his cleansing might be
completed.

Ver. 13. Whosoever touches the dead Body of any With the Water of Separation,
in the manner before prescribed, v. 12.

Defiles the Tabernacle of the LORD.] If he approach unto it, without this
Purification.

And that Soul shall be cut off from Israel.] He was to die for it, if he did
it presumptuously.

Because the Water of Separation was not sprinkled upon him.] Because he
neglected the Means of his Purification.

He shall be unclean.] Remain in his Uncleanness.

His uncleanness is yet upon him.] Not to be purified now by this Water of
Separation, but cut off from the Body of the People. This still concerns those
that came to the Tabernacle presumptuously, being unpurified. If they did it
ignorantly, a Sacrifice was admitted for their Atonement, V Lev. 3, 6, 17, 18.

This is the Law.] Concerning such Defilements as these, by the dead Bodies of
Men.

When a Man dies in a Tent.] Wherein they now lived during their stay in the
Wilderness: and the same Law obliged them, when they came to dwell in Houses,
in the Land of Canaan.

All that come into the Tent, and all that is in the Tent, shall be unclean
seven days.] The meaning seems to be, that every Person who came into the Tent
while the dead body lay there, (or before the Tent was purified) as well as
they who were in it when the Person died, should be unclean. For all the Goods
of the House were not made unclean; but only all open Vessels.

And every open Vessel which has no covering bound upon it, is unclean.]
Because the Air in the House, which was supposed to be tainted by the dead
Body, came as freely into such Vessels as it did to the dead Body. Tho. Aquinas
fancies that this Law was made to prevent Idolatry; for the ancient Idolaters
thought that if a Mouse or a Lizzard, or such like thing, which was dedicated
unto their Idols, fell into a Vessel, or into Water, they became thereby very
acceptable to their Gods. And he says this Superstition continued till his
days; in which some Women were wont to leave their Vessels uncovered on
purpose, in observance of the Nocturnal Deities, whom they called Janas, See
1ma 2de Quaest. 102. Artic. 5.) To abolish which Superstition God required, he
thinks, all Vessels left uncovered, where the dead lay, should be polluted; i.
e. not acceptable unto God, nor employed to holy, no nor common uses. If such
Customs had been in Moses his days, this might be better applied to what we
read in XI Lev. 32, 33.

Ver. 16. Whosoever touches one that is slain with the Or killed any other
way; it appears by the words following.

Or a dead Body.] Of a Man that falls down dead of a sudden, or is executed for
his Crimes.

Or a Bone of a Man.] Taken out of a Grave, or the Grave it self where the dead
Body lies; as the next words are.

Shall be unclean seven days.] As long as if he had touched the dead Body it
self.

Ver. 17. And for an unclean person.] i. e. For the

They shall take of the Ashes of the burnt Heifer of Purification for Sin.] It
is not said what quantity, therefore I suppose, whether it were little or
great, it would serve the turn. It is observable that the Ashes of the burnt
Heifer are here called Chattah (Sin) which shows they had the Virtue of a
Sin-offering in them. See v. 9.

And running Water shall be put thereto in a Vessel.] The Ashes being put into
a Vessel, they were to put pure Spring, or at least River-water, upon them:
which became the Water of Separation.

Ver. 18. And a clean person.] It is not said a v. 3, 5. But in this the Jews
were so curious, that their Tradition made this extend, not only to a Person
that was at present clean, but that never had been defiled by a dead Corpse in
all his Life. And therefore tell us, what devices they had to keep Persons thus
clean, for this very end and purpose. See Dr. Lightfoot in his Temple Service,
chap. 17. sect. 2.

Shall take Hysop.] When the Priest sprinkled the Lepers or their Houses, with
the Blood of a Bird killed over running Water, he dipped Hysop, Cedar-wood, and
Scarlet-wooll in them, XIV Lev. 4, 6, 7, 49, 50, etc. But here, the sprinkling
being made by some Neighbor, Hysop alone sufficed: which every one knows was a
cleansing Herb, and easily procured. Instead of which the Gentiles, in their
Superstition, used Branches of Laurel, or of Olive; as we learn from Juvenal
and Virgil.

And sprinkle it upon the Tent, and upon all the Vessels, and upon the persons
that were there, etc.] For the purifying of all the Things, and all the Persons
abovementioned, v. 14, 15, 16.

And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean, on the third day, and on
the seventh day.] Here he explains what was not so distinctly delivered, v. 12.
And I suppose both Persons and Things were to be sprinkled on both days,
because he says in general, upon the unclean; which seems to relate to all
that is mentioned in the foregoing verse.

And on the seventh day he shall purify himself, etc.] This seems to be meant
of the clean Person who sprinkled the unclean; and by coming near them, was in
some sort defiled. But he was not to be purified by the Water of Separation;
but only by washing his Clothes, and bathing himself in Water; and his
uncleanness lasted but till the Even, as it here follows in the rest of this
verse. See v. 21.

Ver. 20. But the Man that shall be unclean.] By a dead Body, a Bone, or a
Grave, etc.

And shall not purify himself.] By the Water of Separation, appointed for that
purpose.

That Soul shall be cut off from among the Congregation.] As a Contemner of
this Law of God.

Because he has defiled the Sanctuary of the LORD, etc.] This and the
following words are only a Repetition of what was said v. 13. for the greater
confirmation of it.

Ver. 21. And it shall be a perpetual Statute unto them, Be reputed unclean,
until he has washed his Clothes; which I suppose comprehends his Body also, v.
19.

And he that touches the Water of Separation.] As a Man might chance to do,
when he mingled the Water and Ashes together, v. 17.

Shall be unclean until Even.] And wash his Clothes, it must be supposed from
the foregoing words. For mere staying till Even purified no Body, without some
Rite of Cleansing. And there was more reason for him that touched the Water,
immediately to wash his Clothes, than for him who only sprinkled with it.

Ver. 22. And whatsoever.] Or whomsoever.

The unclean person touches, shall be unclean.] He does not mean by the
unclean Person, him who was made unclean by touching the Water of Separation,
(for his Uncleanness was so slight, that any one would think he should make no
Body unclean by his touch) but the unclean Person spoken of all along in this
Chapter; who was defiled by touching a dead Body. He whom such a Person touched
was made unclean, and therefore was to wash his Clothes, and not be thought
clean until the Even.

And the Soul that touches it.] Or touches him.

Shall be unclean until Even.] Not only he whom the unclean Person touched, but
he who touched the unclean Person, or any unclean thing, was to be unclean till
the Even, and wash his Clothes (as I said before) for his Cleansing. No other
Cleansing was necessary for such kinds of Uncleanness as these. For Sacrifices
were required only for the uncleanness of Lepers, and of a Childbed-woman; and
of a Flux of Blood, or Seed: all others were purged without Sacrifice.

By this nice care, which is here taken, about the smallest bodily Defilements,
God intended (I make no doubt) to make them sensible how necessary it was to
preserve inward Purity; without which they could not be acceptable to God,
though they approached to his Sanctuary. For these Laws extending to what was
done at home, as well as abroad, were a plain Instruction, both that it was not
sufficient to be pure in the Eyes of Men, and that nothing could be concealed
from the Divine Majesty, who sees what passes in secret.

CHAP. XX.
THEN came the Children of Israel, even From Rithmah, or Kadesh-barnea, they
came at last into this Wilderness, after many Removals to other Stations, of
which Moses gives an account in the XXXIIId Chapter, from v. 19. to v. 36. For
God led them, by the Cloud, quite back again to the Red Sea, (XIV. 25.) and
from thence brought them into this Wilderness of Tzin. Which is quite different
from that mentioned XVI Exodus called Sin: for this lay on the Confines of
Idumaea, as appears from v. 14, 15.

In the first Month.] Of the fortieth Year after they came out of the Land of
Egypt. For Moses gives an account of the Transactions only of the two first
Years after they came from thence, and of the last: the rest he passes over in
silence, being spent in tiresome Journeys; whereby all above Twenty years old
were consumed, by one Disease or other. In those Travels he shows how, at
several Removals (mentioned Chapter XXXIII.) they were led back from
Kadesh-barnea unto Ezion-Geber, (that is, from the North to the South of the
Shore of the Red Sea) in which Journey they compassed the Land of Edom many
Days, (II Deuteronomy. 1.) that is, many Years. For from the time they left
Kadesh-barnea till they returned back again, was thirty eight Years, II Deuteronomy.
14.

And the People abode in Kadesh.] Not in Kadesh-barnea, which was their
fifteenth Station, and in the Confines of the South part of Canaan, XXXIV. 4.
XV Josh. 3. But another Kadesh on the Confines of the Land of Edom, toward the
Red Sea, XXXIII. 36. II Deuteronomy. 3. XI Judges 17.

And Miriam died there.] Four Months before her Brother Aaron, (XXXIII. 38.)
and eleven Months before Moses; being elder than either of them. For she was
near an Hundred and thirty Years old, as may be gathered from II Exodus 4, 7.
where it appears she was not a Child, when Moses was born.

And was buried there.] In Kadesh, where she died. But we read of no mourning
for her, as there was for Aaron a little after, v. 29.

And there was no Water for the Congregation.] The Water that hitherto followed
them, from the Rock in Horeb, now failed. Which happening just at the Death of
Miriam, the Jews have a foolish conceit, that as her Piety procured it for
them, so she being dead, it was taken from them, and was restored again for the
Piety of Moses and Aaron. It is more reasonable to think, that God suffered the
Water to be discontinued for a time, that he might try the Faith of this new
Generation, whether they were any better than their rebellious Fathers, and
withal, to convince them that the Water out of the former Rock, was not
contained in it, if he had not produced it; who could bring forth Water out of
any other place, as well as that. Or, they being now going toward Canaan, and
near a Country where Water might be had for Money, (or they might have found it
by digging for it) God thought fit to let the Miracle cease; that they might
see he would shortly provide for them otherways. For it is very likely, that in
their last Station, where they were before this, at Ezion-Geber, (XXXIII. 36.)
the Water that had followed them in all their Journeys thither, fell there into
the Red Sea, and so was swallowed up: they being, as I said, to return toward
Canaan, by places where Water might be procured without a Miracle. For being
upon the edge of the Land of Edom, when Aaron died in their next Removal, ( v.
28. XXXIII. 37.) we read expressly that they presently after came to a Land of
Rivers of Water, X Deuteronomy. 7. And indeed not long after they removed from Mount
Hor, where Aaron died, we find in the next Chapter to this, that they came to
Oboth, XXI. 10. which signifying Bottles, it is no unreasonable Conjecture,
that here they met with Water, with which they filled their empty Bottles. And
next to that Station, they came to Jie-Abarim, v. 11. heaps of Fords; or, as
the Chaldee expounds it, The Ford of those that pass over. And then to the
Valley of Zared, v. 12. or to the Brook Zered, as it is in II Deuteronomy. 13, 14. And
then to the River Arnon, v. 13. and thence to Beer, where they dug a famous
Well, XXI. 16, 17, 18. which, perhaps, they might have done before in other
places, if they had made Experiment: for Kadesh, where they now were, was in
the Border of a Country inhabited.

And they gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron.] Just
as their Fathers had many times done; particularly upon such an occasion as
this, XVII Exodus 2, 3.

Ver. 3. And the People chode with Moses.] Instead his Sister and their
Prophetess, (as Abarbinel observes) they came in a rude manner to scold at him.

And spoke, saying, Would God that we had died, when our Brethren died before
the LORD.] By a sudden Death, rather than linger away by Thirst. They allude to
the strokes of God upon their Brethren, XI. 1, 33. XIV. 37. XVI. 32, 35, 46.
Which one would have thought should have affrighted them from uttering such
very discontented Language, XIX. 2. But nothing will alter those, who will not
lay to heart, and preserve in mind God's Mercies and Judgments.

And why have ye brought the Congregation of the LORD into this Wildernoss,
that we and our Cattle should die there?] The very words of their Fathers,
presently after they came out of Egypt, XVII Exodus 3.

And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt.] They speak as if it
had not been their own desire; but that they were persuaded to it by Moses to
leave Egypt; who was sent to tell them God heard their sighing, groans and
cries, and would deliver them, II Exodus 23, 24. III. 17. But in a discontented
fit nothing of this was remembered.

To bring us unto this evil place?] They do not speak of returning to Egypt, as
their Fathers did, XIV. 3, 4. but they repented that they were come out of it.
So shamefully forgetful they were of all God's benefits, who had in a wonderful
manner redeemed them from the heaviest Slavery, and hitherto provided for them
miraculously in the Wilderness, which was a better place than such an
ungrateful People deserved.

It is no place of Seed.] i. e. of Corn.

Or of Figs, or of Vines, or Pomegranates, etc.] Now they complain for want of
other things, as well as Water: wherein they still imitate their unbelieving
Fathers, XVI. 14.

Ver. 6. And Moses and Aaron went from the presence To pray to God to pardon
their Sin, and to supply their Wants.

And they fell upon their Faces.] As they had often done before, on other such
like occasions; particularly XIV. 5.

And the Glory of the LORD appeared unto them.] Unto all the People, it is
likely: as it had done several times to silence their Murmurings. See XIV. 10.
XVI. 19, 42.

Ver. 7. And the LORD spoke unto Moses.] From

Ver. 8. Take the Rod.] That famous Rod wherewith Moses had wrought so many
Miracles in Egypt, and at the Red Sea, etc.

And gather thou the Assembly together.] This word Edah signifying sometimes
only the Assembly of the Elders, not of the whole People, it would be uncertain
which of them he is bid to gather together, (for it is a different word from
that which we translate Assembly, v. 6.) if the tenth verse had not determined,
that it was the Kahal, or Congregation of the People, as the word Edah also
signifies just before, v. 8.

Thou and Aaron thy Brother.] For the People were gathered together against
Aaron, in a mutinous manner, as well as against Moses, v. 2.

And speak ye unto the Rock before their eyes.] To the first Rock you meet
withal, (says Nachmanides) and, that is within their sight. For this is not
the same Jews fancy; but quite different. Their very Names are different, that
being called Tzur; this Selah. That was in Rephidim; this is Kadesh: two very
distant places. Thus Chaskuni; some think this the same with that in Exodus;
but it is not the same History. For the former was in Horeb, this in Kadesh:
which is in the Extremity of the Land of Edom. But whether God pointed him to a
Rock, which was then in their sight (as he did at Horeb, XVII Exodus 5, 6.) or
left him to choose any stony place, is not certain. But it is a mere fancy of
some of the Jews, that because God here bad them speak to the Rock, Moses
offended God in smiting it. For to what purpose should he take the Rod, if he
was not to smite the Rock with it, as he had done formerly. Just such another
conceit there is in Schalschelet Hakkabala, where R. Gedaliah says, That he
had given an account of this Sin in another Book, which he gathered out of
various Writers, and found there were XXVIII. different Opinions about it. But
he preferred this before any of them; that whereas God bad Moses gather the
Edah together, that is, the Assembly of the People, v. 8. he gathered the
Kahal, i. e. the Congregation of the Princes and Elders (as he will have it)
whose Faith needed no Confirmation. See Hottinger in his Smegma Orientale, cap.
8. p. 451.

And it shall give forth his Water.] The Jews puzzle themselves about this
Expression: which sounds, they think, as if the Water was contained in the
Rock; and Moses only made a Gap for it to gush out. But it seems to be spoken
in opposition to the Waters issuing out of the former Rock, which had supplied
them hitherto, but now ceased to flow. It being as much as if he had said, This
shall give forth Water, as that did before: now it shall be called the Water of
this Rock; not that of Horeb.

And thou shall bring forth to them Water out of the Rock.] Renew the former
Miracle.

So thou shall give the Congregation and their Beasts drink.] So that they and
their Cattle (which they fear will perish, v. 4.) shall be as plentifully
provided for, as ever.

Ver. 9. And Moses took the Rod from before the From hence some conclude, that
this was the Rod of Aaron which blossomed; because he is said to take it from
before the LORD; where Aaron's Rod was laid up, XVII. 10. But this Rod is so
expressly called Moses his Rod, V. 11. which was the Instrument of bringing the
former Water out of the Rock in Horeb, that I cannot but think this was the
very same Rod. Which being there called the Rod of God, (XVII Exodus 9.) as it
is at the first mention of it, IV Exodus 20. it is very probable, that by God's
order it was laid up somewhere before him in the Sanctuary; though not before
the Ark of the Testimony. For having been employed in doing so many Wonders, it
was not seemly it should lie in his own Tent, as a common Staff; but in the
House of God, as a Sacred Wand. This indeed is no where mentioned, no more than
many other things, which notwithstanding are plainly intimated.

Ver. 10. And Moses and Aaron gathered the Congregation before the Rock.] As
God had commanded, v. 8.

And he said unto them.] Moses, who was the chief Actor, said unto them.

Hear ye now, ye Rebels.] The Talmudists fancy that this is the great Sin for
which Moses and Aaron were denied to go into Canaan, because he called God's
People Rebels. From whence they have framed this Maxim, He that treats the
Church contemptuously, which ought to be honored, is as if he blasphemed the
Name of God. But they subvert the Truth, who build it upon no better
Foundations. For Moses the great Minister of God, only uses God's own Language
to their Fathers, XVII. 10. where he bids him lay up Aaron's Rod, as a Token
against the Rebels. And if this were a Sin, Moses committed it again, not long
after this, and in an higher strain, (which no Body can think he would have
done, if it had cost him so dear) when he says, IX Deuteronomy. 24. Ye have been
rebellious against the LORD ever since I knew you.

Must we fetch you Water out of this Rock?] In these words also some of the
Jews (particularly Nachman) think they find the Sin of Moses and Aaron; who
here (they fancy) ascribe to themselves that which they ought to have
acknowledged the Work of God alone. But this is without any ground; for the
plain meaning of the words is quite contrary; Is it in our power to bring Water
out of a Rock? So the Vulgar Latin translates it; it being a Speech of those
that wonder, like that 1 Kings XXI. 19. Have thou killed, and also taken
possession? As if Moses had said, Strange! that you should think it possible
for us to bring you Water out of a Rock, which is the work only of an
Omnipotent Power.

Ver. 11. And Moses lift up his hand, and with his Rod he smote the Rock
twice.] It seems the Water did not gush out at the first stroke; which made him
repeat it.

And the Water came out abundantly, and the Congregation drank, and their
Beasts also.] So that their present Necessity was supplied; and they also
filled their Vessels when they left this place, to serve them till they met
with the convenience of Water, as they did I showed upon v. 2.

Ver. 12. And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Here Interpreters have been much
troubled to find what it was for which God was offended at Moses and Aaron: for
though the Text tells us expressly it was for their Unbelief, (whereby they gave
great Scandal, and did not sanctify him as they did formerly, before the
Israelites) yet it does not clearly appear wherein this Unbelief declared it
self. Abarbinel has collected several Opinions of the Jewish Doctors about
this matter, which are no less than ten; after which he delivers his own, which
seems to me as unsatisfactory as the rest were to him; for it is far fetched,
with too much nicety and subtilty, and relies also upon Uncertainties. The
plainest account of it, I think, is this, which none of them take notice of;
That the Water now ceasing at the same time that Miriam died, Moses was very
sad both for her Death, and perhaps for the Ceasing of the Water: And being
unexpectedly assaulted by the People, who ought to have had a greater Reverence
for him, in a time of Mourning especially, it was the occasion of a greater
Commotion of Anger and Indignation, than was usually in him. Which gave him
such a Disturbance in his Mind, and so disordered his Thoughts, that when God
bad him take his Rod, and go and speak to the Rock, he fell into some doubt,
whether God would grant them the Favor he had done before; either, because
they were so wretched a People, that it was not fit God should do any thing for
them; or because he thought perhaps, Water might be otherways procured for
them. And because of this doubting, I suppose, it might be that upon the first
striking of the Rock, no Water came forth; (God also perhaps so ordering it,
that he might try him) and hereupon his Diffidence increased into Unbelief, and
a settled Persuasion they should have no Water. His Anger also at such a
rebellious Generation, it is likely, made him the more distrustful, that God
would do nothing for them. For both these are mentioned by the Divine Writers
that touch upon this History, that he did not believe; and that his Spirit was
so provoked, that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, (CVI Psalm 32, 33.) which
was when he spoke those words v. 10. Must we fetch you Water out of this Rock?
i. e. is that a likely matter? They being words of the same sort with those of
Sarah, XVIII Genesis 13. Shall I of a surety have a Child, who am old? that is, I
cannot believe it. And when he saw the Water did not come out at the first
stroke, he might be so rash as to say, Now it is plain God will give you none,
but let you perish: or words to that effect.

I know nothing more probable than this; unless the Reader likes the Opinion of
Joseph Albo better, which is the ninth Opinion mentioned by Abarbinel: That
Moses and Aaron having had such long Experience of God's goodness to this
People, and of his readiness to help them, ought not to have gone and made
their Complaints to God about the want of Water, ( v. 6.) but immediately, of
themselves, gone to the Rock, (being confident of God's Power and Mercy which
had never failed them) and called for Water to come out of it. For now the
Tabernacle was built, and they had God dwelling among them, (which they had not
when he smote the Rock at first) which ought to have bred in them the highest
Assurance that God would supply them. Dr. Lightfoot has another Conjecture,
(which I shall propound that the Reader may judge which is most likely) That
Moses and Aaron began to distrust God's Promise of entering into the promised
Land, at the end of forty Years; imagining that if they brought Water again out
of the Rock, it must follow them, as long as the other had done. For this he
makes the sense of their words, What ye Rebels! must we bring Water out of a
Rock, as we did at Horeb? Are all our Hopes and Expectations of getting out of
the Wilderness come to this? We never fetched you Water out of a Rock but once;
and that was because ye were to stay a long time in the Wilderness, etc. Now
that is gone, must we fetch Water out of another Rock? O ye Rebels, have ye
brought it to this pass by your Murmurings, that we must have a new stay in the
Wilderness? Are we to begin our abode here again, when we thought we had been
at the end of our Travels? At this rate we shall never get out. Whereupon he
presently smote the Rock twice, in a fume; whereas God bad him only speak to
it, v. 8.

To sanctify me in the Eyes of the Children of Israel.] i. e. Openly to assert
me to be the holy One of Israel; faithful to my Promises, (as well as infinite
in Power) of which they had given the Israelites occasion to doubt, by
declaring some distrust of what God said to them, v. 8. For these words plainly
show that their Sin did not consist only in an inward Diffidence, but in such
outward Expressions of it in their Anger and Impatience, as might be apt to
breed Unbelief in the Israelites; who were already too prone thereunto. And it
is no improbable Conjecture of a Jewish Doctor, (in his Book of the Death of
Moses) that the Divine Glory not appearing now upon this Rock, as it did at
Horeb, (XVII Exodus 6.) which perhaps they expected; it gave some occasion to
their Unbelief. Which, he thinks, was not so great a Sin in it self, as to have
deserved the following Punishment; had not God, in passing this Sentence, had a
respect to the Excellency and Dignity of their Persons: in whom a Fault of this
Nature, was far more grievous than in an ordinary Man.

Therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the Land which I have
given them.] They brought them into the Land of Sihon, and of Og: but not into
Canaan, which was properly the Land promised to them.

This is the Water of Meribah.] Called Meribah-kadesh, XXXII Deuteronomy. 51. to
distinguish it from that Meribah mentioned XVII Exodus 7. where the Israelites
were guilty of the same Crime.

Because the Children of Israel strove with the LORD.] Expostulated with him
most undutifully; and accused him of unkindness to them, v. 3, 4.

And he was sanctified in them.] The Hebrew Doctors differ very much in their
Opinions about this also, Whether he was sanctified in the Waters, or in the
People of Israel, or in Moses and Aaron. Some fancy it is meant of the Waters,
viz. that God did himself great honor in bringing Waters again out of a Rock;
and therefore the Name of the place was called Kadesh, from his being
sanctified there. Thus Chaskuni. But it seems to have been called so before
this; being a place well known to the Edomites, v. 16. The common Opinion is
that he speaks of Moses and Aaron: for God's Name, says R. Solomon, is much
revered, when he does not spare even his holy Ones, X Lev. 3. But Nachmanides
expounds it of the Israelites, before whose face (as he expounds sanctified in
them) God's Power, and Faithfulness, and Goodness appeared: and who alone are
mentioned in this verse; not Moses and Aaron. But all three Opinions in the
Issue concur in this one; that God made his Power, etc. appear in the Eyes of
all the Israelites, by bringing Water out of a Rock: and at the same time
demonstrated his Holiness and impartial Justice, in punishing his greatest
Friends for their Unbelief.

Ver. 14. And Moses sent Messengers.] By God's Deuteronomy. 2, 3, 4.

From Kadesh.] On the Confines of the King of Edom's Country.

Unto the King of Edom.] When the Israelites came out of Egypt, Moses speaks of
Edom as governed by Dukes, XV Exodus 17. for the Sons of Esau at first had no
higher Title, XXXVI Genesis 15, etc. Not long after, it seems, their Posterity
became Kings: and now (Nine and thirty Years after the Israelites coming out of
Egypt) they were still under Kingly Government. And this King, to whom Moses
now sends Messengers, the great Primate of Ireland, takes to have been Hadar,
the last of those that Moses mentions, XXXVI Genesis 39. who for his Inhumanity to
the Children of Israel, was shortly after punished with Death; and the Kingdom
turned again into the Government by Dukes. For Moses (as he thinks) writing the
Book of Genesis in the latter end of his Life, (or then adding what was
necessary to what he had written before) reckons, immediately after Hadar,
several Dukes reigning all at one time, in several parts of the Country, which
they had shared among them. See Vsser. Chronolog. Sacra, cap. 11.

Thus says thy Brother Israel.] In the Language of those times, all that were
near of Kin called one another Brethren: and these two Nations descended from
two twin Brothers.

Thou know.] For they could not but have received Intelligence before this
time of such public things.

All the Travel that has befaln us.] How we, and our Fathers before us, have
traveled from place to place, without any certain Habitation. See CV Psalm 13.

How our Fathers.] After several Removals from one part of Canaan to another.

Went down into Egypt.] Which was so public a thing (they being invited by
Pharaoh, who sent Carriages for them) that the Edomites could not be ignorant
of it.

And we have dwelt in Egypt a long time.] See XII Exodus 40, 41. and what I have
observed there.

And the Egyptians vexed us and our Fathers.] See I Exodus 11, 12, 13, etc.

And when we cried unto the LORD, he heard our voice.] II Exodus 23, 24, 25.
III. 7, 8.

And sent an Angel.] See III Exodus 2, etc. Maimonides here by Angel understands
Moses himself; for the Prophets are sometimes called Angels, i. e. Messengers
sent from God, II Judge. 1. This he asserts in the first part, and more than
once in the second part of More Nevochim: but it is very unreasonable to think,
that Moses would thus magnify himself to the King of Edom, who understood not
such Language; and could not but be more moved to hearken to his Embassy, if he
believed the Israelites were under the Conduct of a heavenly Minister: who, as
other Jews think, was Michael the Prince of the heavenly Host; whom they
commonly understand by the Angel here mentioned. But many great Men,
particularly Masius, think this is short of the Truth, unless we understand by
Michael, the Eternal Son of God; who was, as he speaks, the perpetual Prince
and Director of the People of God. For though he was then properly made the
Messenger of the Father, when he took on him our Flesh, and dwelt here among
us; yet from the beginning it was his constant care to reconcile Men to God,
and preserve Religion among them. So that he might be called the Angel of God
before he became a Man, because God the Father by him communicated with Men
about all things necessary for their Good. And the Jews seem to have had some
obscure Notion of this: For what else could Moses Gerundensis mean, when he
says the Angel whom Moses saw in the Bush, was the same whom Jacob calls the
God of Bethel, and whom he calls the Angel Redeemer: of whom Moses, he says,
speaks in this place, and in VI Deuteronomy. 21. The LORD brought us out of Egypt.
Certain it is, that thus the ancient Christians understood such places, taking
the Angel here spoken of to be the Eternal LOGOS, or WORD, as St. John calls
the Eternal Son of God. Whose sense no Man, I think, has better explained than
our Mr. Thorndike: who, though he confesses it to be plain by the Scriptures,
that it was always an Angel that appeared under the Old Testament, who is
sometimes called by the proper Name of God (JEHOVAH) yet this is no prejudice
to what the Fathers of the Church teach, concerning the Appearing of the
Eternal WORD. Who was that LORD who then assumed some Angelical Nature, wherein
he might appear to deal with Men for a short time: after which he dismissed it,
when he had done that Business for which he assumed it.

And has brought us forth out of Egypt.] XIII Exodus 22. XIV. 19.

And behold, we are in Kadesh.] Near to Kadesh; for it is not likely they were
admitted into the City it self; which gave its Name to the adjacent Country.

A City.] Or Town: for it does not seem to have been a walled place.

In the uttermost of thy Borders.] In the Confines of the King of Edom's
Country; and belonging, it is likely, to his Dominion.

Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy Country.] In our way to the Land of
Canaan; which God has promised to give us.

We will not pass through the Fields, or through the Vineyards.] They engaged
not to turn aside, as they went along, into any private Man's Grounds. See XXI.
22.

Neither will we drink of the Water of the Wells.] Which any private Person had
dug for his own use: but only of the Rivers, which are common to all
Creatures.

We will go by the King's Highway.] Keep in the common Rode, which is made for
all Passengers, by the King's allowance.

We will not turn to the right hand, or to the left.] Out of the Rode; but go
strait on.

Until we have passed thy Borders.] Got to the other side of the Country of
Edom.

Ver. 18. And Edom said unto him.] This sounds

Thou shall not pass by me.] Go through our Country, v. 20.

Lest I come out against thee with the Sword.] The King bids them not attempt
it; for he would oppose their passage with all his Forces. He was afraid, no
doubt, lest they should seize his Country, or spoil it; and therefore would not
trust their Declarations which they made to the contrary.

Ver. 19. And the Children of Israel.] Who were v. 14. Or else some new
Ambassadors, whom Moses dispatched with new Entreaties, after he understood his
Denial.

Said unto him.] Gave him new Assurances of their honest Intentions.

We will go by the Highway.] Believe us, we will not step out of the common
Rode.

And if I and my Cattle drink of thy Water.] Out of the Wells beforementioned,
v. 17. which private Men had dug; and therefore had a Propriety in them.

Then I will pay for it.] For Water was commonly sold in those dry Countries;
where it was very scarce.

I will only, without doing any thing else.] The Hebrew words ein dahar (which
we translate, without doing any thing else) literally signifies in our
Language, it is no word, i. e. not mere fair Promises: but we will perform what
we say.

Go through on my feet.] Go through, as fast as we can travel on foot.

And he said, thou shall not go through.] He persisted in his Resolution; and
would not rely on their most solemn Asseverations. Yet he consented (as appears
by II Deuteronomy. 28, 29.) to furnish them with necessary Provisions, both of Meat
and Drink, for their Money.

And Edom came out against him with much People, and with a strong hand.] For
fear they should press into his Country, he raised a great and powerful Army to
oppose them; and showed himself ready to fight them if they moved that way.

Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his Border.] Which Grotius
censures in his second Book de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 2. sect. 13. as
contrary to the Law of Nations: by which the Highways, as well as the Sea, and
the Rivers of all Countries, ought to be free for all that have a mind to pass
through them, upon just occasions. And he gives many Examples of such
permission, out of Heathen Story: and therefore looks upon the denial of this,
as a just ground of War with Sihon and Og, (mentioned in the next Chapter,
where I shall consider it) as it might have been with Edom and Moab, had not
God prohibited it. Nor does the fear, he thinks, which the Edomites, it is
likely, had of letting such a vast number of People pass through their Country,
alter the case; for no Man's fear, is to take away another Man's right. And
there might have been Means contrived to remove this fear, by letting them pass
through in small Companies at a time, or unarmed. He had better have said, in
my opinion, by giving Hostages on both sides, for the performance of
Conditions: For it might have put the Israelites in as great fear, to have gone
through in small Parties; or if they should have disarmed themselves. But when
all is said, it seems not clear, that all Men have such a right, as that great
Man thinks they may claim. For no Man can challenge a passage through a private
Man's Ground, without his leave: and every Prince has the same dominion in all
his Territories, that a private Man has in his Land. There are many Examples
also, as Gronovius has observed, of Countries which have suffered extremely by
granting this Liberty, (which show that Princes have reason to deny it, for
their Peoples Security) and the Examples of those who have granted it, are
Examples of Fact, rather than of Right; and of such as were not in a Condition
to refuse what was demanded. See Selden's Mare Clausum, Lib. I. cap. 20.

Wherefore Israel turned away from him.] By God's command: who ordered them
also to buy what they wanted of the Edomites, II Deuteronomy. 5, 6. For they stayed
some time in Kadesh, by their consent, before they removed; that they might
furnish themselves, as they offered, with Necessaries, XI Judges 17.

Ver. 22. And the Children of Israel, even the whole For they might not divide
into several Bodies, lying in several places; but all march together, when the
Cloud moved, in the order God appointed, X. 13, 14, etc.

Journeyed from Kadesh, and came to Mount Hor.] Another place upon the edge of
the Edomites Country, XXXIII. 37. where they pitched in a part of that Mountain
which was called Mosera, X Deuteronomy. 6. Whether Mount Hor gave the Name of Hori to
him, who was the Ancestor of Seir, and the first Planter of the Country, which
was afterward conquered by Esau, (XXXVI Genesis 20, 30. II Deuteronomy. 12.) or had its
name from him, cannot be determined. But Hori we are sure was the first
Possessor (of whom there is any memory) of this Mountain Hor; which was
afterward called Seir (from one descended from him) and afterward Edom.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron in Mount Hor.] At the foot of the
Mount, as appears from v. 25.

By the Coast of the Land of Edom.] XXXIII. 37.

Aaron shall be gathered unto his People.] Shall die, v. 26.

For he shall not enter into the Land which I have given unto the Children of
Israel.] v. 12. A manifest Token that the earthly Canaan was not the utmost
Felicity at which God's Promises aimed; because the best Men among them were
shut out of it.

Because ye rebelled against my Word, at the Water of Meribah.] By this word
rebelled, it appears there was something of Obstinacy in their Unbelief,
mentioned v. 12.

Take Aaron and Eleazar his Son.] Speak to them in my Name. For it is expressly
said XXXIII. 38. that they went up at the Commandment of the LORD.

And bring them up unto Mount Hor.] This shows that they pitched their Tents at
the bottom of it, in a place called Mosera. See X Deuteronomy. 6. where this seems
also to have been the Name of the whole Hill, as well as Hor.

Ver. 26. And strip Aaron of his Garments.] i. e. Of Josephus rightly expounds
it, (...)) mentioned XXVIII Exodus 2, 3, etc. wherewith he was clothed when he
was anointed to the Office of High Priest, VIII Lev. 7, 8, 9. which he put on,
I suppose, in the Camp, and went up in them to Mount Hor; that he might die
gloriously; not in his Robes, but immediately after he put them off, to be put
upon his Son. For this stripping him of his Robes was in effect, the divesting
Aaron of his Office, that it might be conferred upon his Son; which was done as
follows.

And put them upon Eleazar his Son.] Which was the investing him with the
Office of High Priest, into which he now succeeded, in his Fathers stead; and
was by this Ceremony admitted to it. The Talmudists say, the manner was, first
to put on the Breeches, then the Coat; which being bound about with the Girdle,
then the Robe, upon which was the Ephod, and then the Miter and golden Crown.
See Seldom de Succession. in Pontif. Lib. II. cap. 8.

And Aaron shall be gathered unto his People, and die there.] This was said
before, in short, v. 24. but now the time of his Death is expressly declared,
(immediately after he laid down his Office, and had the satisfaction to see his
Son inaugurated in his Room) and the place of it, upon Mount Hor. Of this
Phrase, Gathered to his People, see XXV Genesis 8, 17.

Ver. 27. And Moses did as the LORD commanded; and they went up into Mount Hor,
in the sight of all the Congregation.] That they might all be Witnesses Eleazar
to the Office of his Father.

And Moses stripped Aaron of his Garments, and put them upon Eleazar his Son.]
This Moses did as the Minister of God; who now translated the Priesthood to
another.

And Aaron died there in the top of the Mount.] And was buried also there, X
Deuteronomy. 6. For great and heroic Persons were in ancient days usually buried in
high Places. So Joshua was, XXIV. 30, 33. and Eleazar, II Judges 9. and Cadmus
and Harmonia; who lived near the time of Joshua, as Bochartus observes in his
Canaan, Lib. I. cap 23.

And Moses and Eleazar came down from the Mount.] After they had seen him laid
in his Grave, by those that attended them.

This fell out in the fortieth Year after they came out of Egypt, on the first
day of the fifth Month; when Aaron was an Hundred and three and twenty Years
old, as we read XXXIII. 38, 39. In the new Moon of the Month, which the
Athenians called Hecatombaeon, the Macedonians, I ous, and the Hebrews called
Sabba, as Josephus glosses. But that last word should be Ab, not Sabba, as
Jacobus Capellus observes (in his Histor. Sacra and Exotica ad An. 2542.) which
answers, he thinks, to the nineteenth of our July. And so the Hebrews say in
Seder Olam, Aaron died on the first day of the Month Ab: upon which there is a
Fast, in their Rituals, in memory of it.

Ver. 29. And when all the Congregation saw that Aaron was dead.] i. e.
Understood (as the word See is used XLII Genesis 1.) that God had taken him out of
the World, as Moses and Eleazar told them; who

They mourned for Aaron thirty days.] Till the end of the Month. For so long
their Mourning seems, in those days, to have been continued for great Persons,
(as it was for Moses, XXXIV Deuteronomy. 8.) though a Week sufficed for private
Persons.

Even all the House of Israel.] Both Men and Women.

CHAP. XXI.
AND when King Arad the Canaanite.] In Hebrew the words are thus placed, When
the Canaanite King Arad: And so they are in the LXX. and the Vulgar: And Arad
may as well signify a Place, as a Person: nay, there seems more reason to
translate the words thus, The Canaanitish King of Arad: because there was such
a City in Canaan, mentioned XII Josh. 14. and I Judges 16. One of the Sons of
Canaan being called Arad, (as both the LXX. and the Vulgar translate the Hebrew
word Arvad, X Genesis 18.) who it is likely gave his Name to this part of the
Country; the chief City of which was also called after him.

Which dwelt in the South.] In the South part of the Land of Canaan, toward
the Eastern Angle of it, near the Dead Sea. See XXXIII. 40.

Heard that Israel came by the way of the Spies.] Which were sent by the King
Arad (as many suppose) to bring him Intelligence which way the Israelites
marched. For it being Eight and thirty Years since the Spies sent by Moses went
that way; or rather, they going so secretly, that it was not known which way
they went, it is thought, not probable that Moses speaks of them in this place.
But there is no necessity of taking the Hebrew word Atharim to signify Spies;
but it may as well be the Name of a Place, as the LXX. understood it, by whom
it is translated (...). And, if the situation would agree to it, one might
probably conjecture, the place was so called from the Spies that went from
thence by Moses his order to survey the Country. For that was a thing so
memorable, that as it could not well slip out of the Minds of the People of
Canaan, so they found, I make no question, after they were gone, which way they
came into their Country, (though for the present they passed unobserved) and
everafter called it the way of the Spies.

Then he fought against Israel.] He marched out of his Country with an Army;
and fell upon the Israelites as they passed that way.

And took some of them Prisoners.] He attacked, it is likely, at first only the
Skirts of their Camp, where he surprised some of them, and carried them away
captive, as the words are in the Hebrew.

And Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD.] It was resolved, it seems, that they
should engage them; but the Israelites being afraid of them, because they were
unexperienced in War, implored the Divine Aid by this Solemn Vow.

If thou will indeed deliver this People into my hand.] Give us the Victory
over them.

Then will I utterly destroy their Cities.] They vow to reserve none of the
Spoil to their own use; but devote it all to destruction. For such was the
Nature of this Vow, called Cherem. See XXVII Lev. 29.

Ver. 3. And the LORD hearkened to the voice of He approved their Vow.

And delivered up the Canaanites.] The Israelites vanquished their Army.

And they utterly destroyed them and their Cities.] Utterly devoted them to
destruction, according to their Vow. For they did not now actually destroy
them, they remaining when Joshua came to Canaan, who executed this Cherem, or
Curse upon them, XII. 14. Which, if it had been executed now, they must have
entered into the Land of Canaan at this time; from whence we cannot imagine they
would have returned, to march further about before they got into it; but have
gone on to prosecute their Victory, by subduing the Country, as they had begun.

And he called the name of the place Hormah.] From the Cherem (or Herem as some
write it) which was pronounced against it. Which when it was put in execution,
this Name became more proper to it, I Judges 17.

Ver. 4. And they journeyed from Mount Hor.] Where Arad assaulted them; and
whither they returned, after they had overthrown him.

By the way of the Red Sea.] Toward Ezion-Gaber, as we read II Deuteronomy. 8.

To compass the Land of Edom.] Which extended it self unto the Red Sea.

And the Soul of the People was much discouraged because of the way.] The word
we translate discouraged, signifies two things; to faint, and to breathe short,
through the anguish and bitterness of ones Spirit, VI Exodus 9. And secondly, to
be angry at, or at least impatient, by reason of some Trouble. And so it may be
best taken in this place, (as Buxtorfius observes in Histor. Serp. Aenei, cap.
1.) not simply for their being tired, with a tedious, long, and troublesome
March; but that accompanied with no small Indignation and Wrath. Which did not
only burn within, but broke out into words of great Impatience, as appears by
what follows. Whence the Hebrew words Ketzar-Ruach (short of Spirit) signifies
Angry or Hasty, XIV Prove. 29. and in XXI Job 4. we translate it troubled, and
in XI Zach. 8. loathed: where it had better been translated, I was angry with
them. Now that which made the People thus fret, or faint, (if we will have it
so interpreted) was the way wherein they were now led; which was about the Land
of Edom. For when they were come toward Canaan, in the middle of the fortieth
Year, (at the end of which they were promised to enter in and possess it) they
are carried back again toward the Red Sea, whether God had sent their Fathers,
after they had brought a false Report upon the Land, XIV. 25. This made them
think, perhaps, that they should never come to Canaan; or, at least, it was
tedious to march such a great way about, after they had been kept so long from
their Inheritance, and were lately in such hopes of it, when Moses demanded a
passage into it through the Country of Edom.

Ver. 5. And the People spoke against God, and against Moses.] This shows they
were in a very great rage; which made them so forgetful of their Duty, as to
charge God himself with ill Conduct. Whereas Moses and Aaron.

Wherefore have ye brought us out of Egypt.] The Hebrew word heelithunu (made
us to go up) is a strange word, (as Dr. Lightfoot calls it) in this Language:
declaring the great fume they were in when they uttered it.

To die in the Wilderness?] As if they had said (so Abarbinel explains it) what
can we expect or hope for but Death, from this long stay in the Wilderness?

For there is no Bread, neither is there any Water.] For we want the most
necessary things for the support of Life (as he also well explains it) which
they spoke in a rage: for they had both, by a miraculous Providence over them.
They themselves immediately confess they had Manna; and they had lately
received Water out of a Rock. But nothing would satisfy, unless they were
brought to a Country, where Bread and Water was to be had without a Miracle.
For the meaning of their Complaint was, that God did not deal with them as he
did with other People, who (to speak in our Phrase) do not live from hand to
mouth: As the Israelites did, who had Bread given them only to suffice for one
day, and no more; and that such Bread as they despised. It is likely also they
began now to want Water again, which did not follow them, as formerly, out of
the Rock: and what they had in their Vessels, perhaps was near spent.

And our Soul loatheth this light Bread.] As for the Bread God bestowed upon
them, they were so far from being satisfied with it, that they loath it, and
call it by the scornful Name of Light Bread. So we translate the Hebrew word
Hakkilkel: which, being the doubling of a word which signifies light or vile in
that Language, imports as much as very despicable, exceeding vile; or, as the
LXX. translate it, very empty; having no Substance in it to fill their
Stomachs. So Abarbinel expounds this passage, We are tired with long Journeys,
which require more solid Bread than this to support us.

And the LORD sent fiery Serpents among the People.] So most of the Jews
translates this place; taking Seraphim for an Adjective (as Grammarians speak)
and consequently rightly translated fiery. But there are those who take it to
signify a peculiar sort of Serpents; being added to Nechashim (Serpents) by
way of opposition (as they speak) and signifying such Serpents as the Greeks
call (...) and (...), whom Pliny reckons among the Sceleratissimi Serpents,
most pernicious Serpents, Lib. XXIV. cap. 13. Or, as others will have it, those
called (...), because they made great Inflammations in Men's Bodies, and an
unquenchable thirst; being also of a flame color. But the famous Bochartus
has alleged a great many Arguments to prove, that they were a sort of
Serpents, called Hydrus, because in Winter they lived in Fens and Marshes;
which being dried up in Summer, they were called Chersydrus, because then they
lived in dry places, and in the hot Season had a most sharp, stinging Poison.
Which, as Nicander says, made such Inflammations, as brought upon him that was
stung by them, (...), innumerable griefs. See Hierozoicon P. II. Lib. III. cap.
13. where he shows also they were flying Serpents, of which the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, XIX. 29. XXX. 6. and that now was a hot Season, wherein they were wont
to be most venomous. For Aaron dying the first day of the fifth Month, (which
answers to the nineteenth of our July) and they mourning for him thirty days;
after which followed their encounter with the Canaanites, and then this
murmuring, and this punishment; it must fall out in the latter end of August,
when the Dog Days were going out. See Vossius de Orig. and Progressu Idolol.
Lib. IV. cap. 56.

And they bit the People.] This Aben-Ezra, and others, think was a Punishment
suitable to their Sin; which was evil speaking against the LORD, by
calumniating his Providence. For Solomon compares a Calumniator to a Serpent,
which bites if it be not charmed, X Eccles. 11.

It is a strange fancy of Fortunatus Licetus, that Moses here speaks of a
Disease bred in the Body, which in Children is called Dracunculus; and not of
the biting of Serpents from without, Lib. de Ortu Spontaneo Viventium, cap. 51.
For which there is no ground at all; and on the contrary, nothing more certain
than that in Arabia, and Egypt, and other Countries of Africa, there are such
Serpents as are here described. Yet Bartholinus seems to think that his Opinion
may be defended against Ezekiel de Castro who confuted it. See Epistol. Medic.
Centur. I. Epist. 32.

And much People of Israel died.] The whole Wilderness through which the
Israelites marched so many years, was full of fiery Serpents and Scorpions, as
Moses his words import, VIII Deuteronomy. 15. which makes it the more wonderful, that
we never hear of their being bitten and killed by them, until now. But it is to
be considered, that they were protected by the Cloud from this, and from all
other dangers, (as the Hebrews well observe) which now withdrew its shadow from
them, and let in the Serpents upon them. Or rather (as Moses here expressly
says) God who had hitherto kept them off, now sent them; and perhaps brought
them from remote parts of the Wilderness, to infest the whole Congregation.

Wherefore the People came to Moses, and said, we have sinned.] It does not
appear, whether they were immediately sensible of their Sin, and confessed it,
upon the biting of the Serpents, and the direful effects of it; or staid till
there (...) ^reat Mortality among them. It is likely they (...) made their
Addresses to him: but before a Remedy was found out, by erecting the brazen
Serpent, many of them perished.

For we have sinned against the LORD, and against thee.] They make a particular
Acknowledgment of their Guilt, as a Token of the Sincerity of their Repentance.

Pray unto the LORD, that he take away the Serpents from us.] In the Hebrew the
words, take away the Serpent, in the singular Number, about which the Jews make
a great many curious Observations, as if there was one evil Angel that governed
them all. And if there be any truth in this Observation, we Christians cannot
but think these words point to the old Serpent, the Devil, who lost Sting by
the lifting up Christ on the Cross, as the brazen Serpent, it here follows, was
lifted up for the Cure of the biting of those Serpents. But the simple truth
is, that in this Language the Singular Number is often used collectively for
the Plural. As in VIII Exodus 6. The Frog came up and covered the Land, i. e. a
vast multitude of Frogs. And so Moses speaks in the place just now named, VIII
Deuteronomy. 15. where he calls this Wilderness wherein they traveled, a place of a
fiery Serpent and Scorpion, i. e. says Jonathan, full of such Creatures.

And Moses prayed for the People.] Here R. Becai and others observe the great
Meekness and Charity of M ses; and thence draw this Instruction, That he of
whom any one asks pardon for an Offense, ought not to be hard-hearted, but
ready to forgive. Thus Abraham prayed for Abimelech, XX Genesis 17. Job for his
Friends, XLII. 10. It would be a sin to do otherwise, 1 Samuel XII. 19, 20, 23.

Ver. 8. And the LORD said unto Moses.] In answer to his Prayer.

Make thee a fiery Serpent.] The Figure of one of those Serpents which bite the
People. Abarbinel thinks that upon Moses his Prayer the Serpents were removed;
but still there remained many among the People sorely afflicted by the venomous
effects of their biting; for whose Cure God graciously gave this direction.

It is something strange that any learned Christian, should so much admire the
Egyptian Learning, as not to forbear the mention of their incantations of
Serpents, when they speak of this relation which Moses makes, concerning the
brazen Serpent which God ordered him to set up. Yet Sir John Marsham (in his
Chronicon, sect. 9.) when he comes to treat of this Station of the Israelites
at Tsalmona, has a long discourse to show how famous the Egyptians, and other
Nations were in this sort of Magic: and thus concludes it, that Moses putting
this brazen Serpent upon a Perch, non tam Serpents igneos incantabat ne
nocerent, quam eorum venenum extinguebant, did not so much charm these Serpents
that they should not hurt, as extinguish their Venom. This seems to me a Scurvy
intimation, that Moses had their Practices in his Mind; but went beyond them.
He should have said Moses abominated their wicked Arts, (if they had any such
in those days) and directed the Israelites to look up to God for healing. So
the Jews themselves, particularly Aben-Ezra; who takes notice that some
Superstitious People fancied that this Serpent was a Talisman, made to receive
I know not what Influence from the Stars. But God forbid, says he, God forbid,
we should have any such thought. This was made by the Divine order; the reason
of which let us not scrupulously search. They thought, that is, there was
something extraordinary in it, as Jonathan plainly declares in his Paraphrase
of the last words of this verse; he shall be healed if he direct his heart to
the Name of the WORD of the LORD. Where no Christian can forbear to think of
our Blessed Savior, the Eternal WORD, who was prefigured (as I shall show in
the following verse) by the erecting of this Serpent here mentioned, upon a
Pole, that all might look upon him, and live.

And set it upon a Pole.] So high, that every one in the Camp might see it. For
the word signifies such a Pole as made their Ensign or Banner, to which all the
Army was to resort. Concerning this word Nes, See Booetius, Lib. II. cap. 4.

And it shall come to pass that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon
it.] The Jews generally have so much understanding as to say, that the mere
beholding of it did not cure them; but that they were to look up to God (as the
Scripture speaks) when they beheld it, and expect a Cure from him. So the
Author of the Book of Wisdom, XVI. 7. He that turned himself toward it, was not
healed by the thing which he saw, but by thee that art the Savior of all. And
therefore he calls it, in the foregoing Verse, A Sign of Salvation, to put them
in remembrance of the Commandment of the Law.

Shall live.] Be cured, and restored to perfect health. Which the Jews think
the greater Miracle, because naturally it would have made the Inflammation
greater. So Nachmanides; this rather would have increased the Disease; for they
who are bit by venomous Beasts (according to the Prescriptions of Physicians)
must not see the Image of the Beast by whom they are bitten: But this was
commanded by God, that the Israelites might know, both their Disease and their
Medicine came from God, who made that whose Aspect was hurtful, to be the Means
of their Cure.

Ver. 9. And Moses made a Serpent.] Whence this Zalmonah, XXXIII. 41. which
imports an Image, Similitude, or Resemblance of a Thing represented by it. And
another place thereabouts, as Dr. Lightfoot observes, called Maaleh Akrabbim,
seems to have had its name from the same thing, it signifying the going up of
Scorpions, XV Josh. 3.

Of Brass.] Pollished; that it might resemble a Serpent of a flaming Color;
and being very glittering, might be the better seen far and near. So several of
the Hebrew Writers, particularly Nachmanides and Abarbinel, who observe that
God did not bid him make a Serpent of Brass, but only a Saraph, v. 8. i. e. a
Resemblance of a Flaming Serpent: which could not be made so well of any other
Metal as of Brass; those Saraphs (which we render fiery Serpents) being fiery
Red, like Copper or Brass. Of which there was good store not far off from this
place: for the next Station to Zalmonah, where they now were, was Punon, or
Pinon, as Moses tells us, XXXIII. 42. a place belonging to the Edomites, (who
had an ancient Duke of this Name, XXXVI Genesis 41. 1. Chron. I. 52.) famous for
Mines of Brass, as Bochartus shows out of several of the Fathers; who speak of
(...). From whence Moses perhaps had this Brass, Hierozoicon, P. II. L. III.
cap. 13.

And put it upon a Pole.] As he had been directed in the foregoing verse.

And it came to pass, that if a Serpent had bitten any Man.] Which was not
present Death, but made an Inflammation, and such Ulcers (as some conceive) as
were incurable.

When he beheld the Serpent of Brass, he lived.] Though Naturalists say the
sight of Brass was hurtful to those who were bitten; yet hence they received
their Cure: as the sight of Christ crucified naturally filled his Crucifiers
only with Anguish, when they beheld him whom they had pierced, and were
convinced he was their Messiah; but by the Grace of God, became their only
Salvation through Faith in him.

The Hebrews cannot but acknowledge a Mystery in this brazen Serpent, as Moses
Gerundensis calls it: which our LORD Christ himself has explained in his
Discourse with Nicodemus, III John 14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, etc. Where he does not compare himself to the Brazen
Serpent, (for what likeness can there be found between the Serpent and the Seed
of the Woman; or how should Light, before-shadowed by Darkness, as Dr. Jackson
speaks) but he compares the lifting up of this Serpent on the Pole, with his
Lifting up, or Crucifixion on the Cross. For so he himself expresses his Death,
and the manner of it, XII John 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth,
will draw all Men unto me. And their looking on the Serpent in the Wilderness,
as evidently represented Men's believing on Christ; and their Cure, the powerful
Virtue of Christ's Death to preserve all those that believe on him from
perishing, (as he speaks in the place named before) and procuring for them
everlasting Life. For by his Death, our Savior destroyed him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil, (as the Apostle's words are, II Hebr. 14.)
which was notably represented in this Brazen Serpent put upon a Pole: which was
not a Figure of Christ, but of the old Serpent himself (the Devil) as wounded,
bruised, and dead, by the Lifting up of Christ upon the Cross; where he
entirely disarmed him of all his Power to hurt us.

I cannot tell whence Justin Martyr concluded, this Brazen Serpent to have been
made in the form of a Cross, as he says it was in his Second Apology; unless
we conceive it to have been made with Wings at the bottom of its Neck, which
might give it that Figure. But his observation in his Book against Trypho (p.
322, 338.) seems very considerable; that there must be some Mystery in it, that
God, who forbad all manner of Images, should now command one to be made: of
which, he says, one of the Jews confessed he could never hear a Reason from
their Doctors. Who cannot understand it, till they believe in Christ and him
crucified; whose Victory over the Devil, by his Cross and Passion, was herein
most lively represented. I shall only add, that this Lifting up the Brazen
Serpent, was a thing so public, and so well known to all Neighboring Nations,
that the fame of it, in all likelihood, went into India. Where they still set
up an Idol in form of a wreathed Serpent, upon a Perch six or seven Foot high,
which they solemnly worship. And carrying it along with them in their Travels,
set it up every Morning for the Company to pay their Adorations to it. So
Taverneir relates in his Travels to that Country, p. 28. And see the present
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's excellent Treatise of Idolatry, p. 351, etc.
with Huetius his Demonstr. Evang. p. 96. and his Quaestiones Alnetanae, cap.
12. n. 25. where he shows the Talismans, in all likelihood, were an imitation
of this Serpent. Of which the Jews were so fond, that they burnt Incense to it
in the days of Hezekiah, and had done so we know not how long, 2 Kings XVIII.
4. Which may make it the less wonder, that the poor Indians should worship a
Serpent upon a Pole, when they that should have understood better, committed
such a foul Idolatry, as to do Divine Honor to the Figure of the greatest
Enemy of God and of Mankind.

And the Children of Israel set forward.] After they had been at two other
places; which Moses now omits for brevitys sake, because he intended hereafter
to give an exact account of all their Removals, at one view: Which he does in
the XXXIIId Chapter of this Book. See v. 41, 42.

And pitched in Oboth.] Where, it is probable, they found Water; of the want of
which they complained. See XX. 2.

Ver. 11. And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched Not that Mount Abarim
where Moses died, (XXVII. 12.) but another place in the Confines of Moab, as it
here follows. See what I have observed XX. 2.

In the Wilderness which is before Moab.] Called the Wilderness of Moab, II
Deuteronomy. 8.

Toward the Sunrising.] On the East part of it, as Jephthah observes a great
many Years after this, That they came by the East side of the Land of Moab, XI
Judges 18.

Ver. 12. And from thence they removed.] As they Moab, II Deuteronomy. 9. Which is the
reason (as Abarbinel observes) that Moses here sets down briefly, whence and
whether they went, and where they pitched; that it might appear they did not
transgress that Command.

And pitched in the Valley of Zared.] Or, as some translate it, in
Nachal-Zared: which is called Dibon-Gad, XXXIII. 45. For this place had two
Names, (as the same Author observes) and it was just eight and thirty Years
since the Spies went up to Survey the Country, from Kadesh-barnea till their
passing this Brook, as we translate it, II Deuteronomy. 14. But I take Dibon-Gad
rather to have been a place which lay upon the Brook Zered.

Ver. 13. And from thence they removed, and pitched The Hebrew word meheber,
may be translated on this side, or on the other side. And some think they were
now on this side of the River, and not yet gone over it. Nor did they
immediately come hither from their former Station; but first to
Almon-Diblathaim, XXXIII. 46. which is also called Beth-Diblathaim in the
Wilderness of Moab, XLVIII. Jerem. 22. and Diblah, VI Ezekiel. 13. And then,
passing by Ar in the Confines of Moab, and approaching to the Country of the
Children of Ammon, God commanded them not to invade the Ammonites, being
Descendants from Lot, as well as the Moabites, II Deuteronomy. 18, 19, 37. but to pass
over the River Arnon, (II Deuteronomy. 24.) to that side of it which belonged to the
Amorites. For this River, at that time, divided the Moabites from the Amorites,
as it here follows.

Which is in the Wilderness, that comes out of the Coasts of the Amorites.]
Runs by the Wilderness of Kedemoth, unto which the Amorites extended their
Dominion, II Deuteronomy. 26.

For Arnon is the Border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.] This River
flowed from the Mountains of Arabia, where it had its rise, and fell into the
Dead Sea, (as Josephus says, Lib. IV. Antiq.) (...), bounding the Country of
the Moabites, and of the Amorites; the Country of Moab lying on one side of it,
and that of the Amorites on the other. For though the Moabites formerly
possessed the Country on both sides of Arnon, as far as Heshbon, yet the
Amorites had driven them out of that part of it which lay next to them; and
made the River the Boundary of their two Kingdoms, v. 26, 27. This Moses
recites the more exactly, that it might appear the Israelites invaded none of
the Moabites Possessions, but what was now possessed by the Amorites. By which
Jephthah defended the Right of the Children of Israel, in future times, against
the Ammonites, who pretended this Country belonged to them, XI Judges 13, 14,
15, etc.

Ver. 14. Wherefore it is said in the Book of the Wars A proof of this Moses
thought good to allege out of an Authentic Record in those Countries,
containing the History of all the Wars that had been in those Parts: which are
here called the Wars of the LORD, because he is the great Governor of the
World, (as Abarbinel interprets it) from whom and by whom are all things, who
puts down one, and sets up another (as the Psalmist speaks) at his good
pleasure. This Book, he thinks, was written by some of the Wise men of those
Naons, (and so thinks Nachmanides) who looking upon this Conquest made by
Sihon, as a very memorable thing, put it down in their Annals; which, after the
way of those Countries, were written, he thinks, in a Poetical manner. There
are those who are of opinion, that this Book was written by Moses himself; who
left in it directions to Joshua, how to proceed in the Wars of the LORD, when
he conquered Canaan. So Dr. Lightfoot conjectures; and Bonfrerius does not much
differ from him. But I take the former account to be the more probable, that
Moses justifies what he writes concerning this Conquest, out of their own
Books; which he quotes, just as St. Paul in the New Testament, does one of the
Greek Poets.

What he did in the Red Sea.] These are the words of the Book, out of which he
quotes a small Fragment. And the Marginal Translation of them is most proper,
Vaheb in Supheh, only the word eth is omitted, which makes the Sense to be
this, against Vaheb in Supheh. That is, he came (some such word must be
understood) against Vaheb (a King of the Moabites) and overthrew him in Suphah,
a place in the Frontiers of Moab. See I Deuteronomy. 1. Others understand by Vaheb the
place where Sihon gave the Moabites this blow; which he did by falling upon
them on a sudden, with a terrible Fury. So Nachmanides understands these words
besuphah; he stormed the City, and made a furious Assault, when they thought
not of it. For Suphah signifies a Whirlwind, or stormy Tempest, V Isai. 28.

And in the Brooks of Arnon.] The same Nachmanides takes the word veeth, which
we translate and in, to signify rather and with: and, these being still the
words of the Book beforementioned, the sense is this: In the same manner he
smote the Brooks or Torrents of Arnon; upon which he fell like a Tempest, and
carried all before him.

And at the Streams of the Brook.] None, I think, has given a better account
of these words, than the same Nachman, who by Esched hannechalim, (which we
translate the Streams of the Brooks) understands either a Cliff from whence the
Torrents flowed, (as Aschdod and Happisgah, III Deuteronomy. 17. are the Hills from
whence the Springs gushed) or the Valley through which the Torrents ran; where
they made a great broad Water, which is here called an Effusion of Torrents, as
R. Levi ben Gershom interprets the Hebrew words, Esched hannechabim.

That goes down to the dwelling of Ar.] Which extends it self as far as Ar, a
City of Moab, v. 28. R. Levi ben Gersom takes the word Schebet (which we
translate dwelling) to signify a Place as well as Ar; toward which these
Torrents bent their Course.

And lies upon the Borders of Moab.] Which leans or belongs unto Moab,
being in the Border of that Country.

Thus far are the words of the Book of the Wars of the Lord: And the meaning of
them is, That the King of the Amorites took all these Places by a sudden,
furious Invasion: which Moses therefore punctually recites, to show that the
Country of the Moabites now reached no further than Arnon: All the Brooks, or
Torrents, and all the Effusions of Water as far as Arnon, (i. e. all the
Country about them) being taken from them by the Amorites, in whose possession
it now was, and perhaps had been a long time. And therefore the Israelites took
nothing from the Moabites when they conquered this Country, (as was said
before) nor from the Ammonites neither; part of whose Country the Amorites also
had got from them, (III Deuteronomy. 11.) and the Israelites took from the Amorites,
when they conquered Sihon and Og; and it fell to the share of the Gadites, XIII
Josh. 25.

Ver. 16. And from thence they went to Beer.] A Pit or Well, which was here
dug by God's order, as the next words tell us.

That is the Well whereof the LORD spoke unto Moses.] That is, says Abarbinel,
that Place was remarkable for the Well that God gave us, of his own accord,
without our Petition; which he prevented by bidding Moses dig it for us.

Gather the People together, and I will give them Water.] Which they now again
wanted, being removed from the River Arnon; but did not murmur about it, as
they had done formerly: and therefore God most graciously, when he saw their
Distress, provided it for them.

Then Israel sang this Song.] This extraordinary Kindness of God, which
prevented their Prayers, and gave them Water out of his own good Pleasure
alone, (as Abarbinel speaks) transported them with such Joy, that it made them
express their Thankfulness in this Song.

Spring up, O Well.] As soon as they saw Moses, and the Princes, thrust their
Staves into the Earth, and the Water began to bubble up, they said with a loud
voice, Come up, O Well; that is, let Waters flow abundantly to satisfy us all.

Sing ye unto it.] Or, as it is in the Margin, Answer unto it. The manner of
the Hebrews was anciently to sing their Songs of Praise alternately, as appears
from XV Exodus 20. And so one Company having said, Spring up, O Well, (which
it is likely they repeated often) they called to the rest to answer to them;
which they did, I suppose, in the following words.

The Princes.] i. e. The LXX. Elders, and Heads of the Tribes.

Dug the Well.] Very easily, only turning up the Earth with their Staves.

The Nobles of the People dug it.] The other side of the Quire, perhaps,
took up the Song again, repeating the Sense of what the former Company had said.

By the direction of the Lawgiver.] Or, Together with the Lawgivers, who
began the Work, and whose Example they followed.

With their Staves.] With no more labor but only thrusting their Staves into
the Ground, and turning up the Earth. For, as R. Levi ben Gersom takes it, the
Ground here being Sandy and very soft, was easily penetrated; though they were
not likely to find Water in it. But they believing Moses, and following his
direction, God sent it copiously unto them; and with no more pains, than a
Scribe takes when he writes with his Pen. For so he translates the Hebrew word
Mechokek (which we render Lawgiver) a Scribe, or Doctor of the Law.

And from the Wilderness.] Mentioned v. 13.

They went to Mattanah.] This, and the place following, are otherwise named in
the XXXIIIth Chapter, as the forenamed ben Gersom understands it. But others
think these were not Stations (which alone Moses gives an account of in the
XXXIIIth Chapter) where the Israelites pitched their Tents, but Places through
which they passed, till they came to the Station, from whence they sent to
Sihon for leave to pass through his Country.

Ver. 19. And from Mattanah to Nahahel, etc.] This, verse, seems to have been
on the Borders of Moab.

Ver. 20. And from Bamoth in the Valley.] Rather, From Bamoth (which signifies
a very high place) to the Valley. Or, it may be translated from Bamoth a Valley
(that is, there is a Valley) in the Field of Moab, etc. unto which they came
next; for some such thing must be understood.

That is in the Country of Moab.] Or, near to it.

To the top of Pisgah.] Or, To the beginning (as the Hebrew word Rosch may be
interpreted) of the high Mount Pisgah. That is, they pitched at the foot of it,
where the Mountain began: which Mountain was a part of the Mountains of Abarim,
as appears from XXXII Deuteronomy. 49. XXXIV. 1.

Which looks toward Jeshimon.] Or, Toward the Wilderness. For so R. Levi ben
Gersom interprets it; to a Land that was shemumah, untilled and desolate, viz.
to the Wilderness of Kedemoth: where they pitched and settled their Camp; and
from thence sent Messengers to Sihon.

And Israel sent Messengers to Sihon King of the Amorites.] These Messengers
were sent from the Wilderness of Kedemoth, which was in the Skirts of his
Country, (II Deuteronomy. 26.) or lay just upon it: For there was a City of this Name
in that Country, which was given to Reuben, in the Division of the Land, XIII
Josh. 18.

Let me pass through thy Land.] They do not seem to desire a Passage through
the midst of his Country, but only the extreme Parts of it; which would have
much shortened their Journey to the Fords of Jordan.

We will not turn into the Fields, or into the Vineyards, we will not drink of
the Waters of the Well, etc.] This is the very same civil Message which they
sent to Edom, XX. 17. By whose Example they pressed Sihon to grant them, at
least, as much as the Edomites and Moabites had done. See II Deuteronomy. 28, 29.

And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his Border.] This shows that
they asked only to pass through the Skirts of his Country. See II Deuteronomy. 30.

But Sihon gathered all his People together.] He not only refused to grant
their Request; but came in an Hostile manner, with all the Forces he could
raise, to oppose their passage over Arnon.

And went out against Israel into the Wilderness.] From whence they sent their
friendly Message to him, v. 21. which Moses in II Deuteronomy. 26. calls, Words of
Peace.

And he came to Jahaz.] A City, it is probable, belonging to the Moabites;
whether the Israelites, perhaps, retreated when Sihon denied them a Passage
through his Country. For Isaiah plainly mentions Jahaz, as a place either in
the Country of Moab, or near it, XV. 4. and Jeremiah also, calling it Jahazah,
XLVIII. 21.

And fought against Israel.] Who had orders from God, not to decline the Battle
(as they did with the Edomites and the Moabites) and assured them of Victory,
II Deuteronomy. 31. For they were Amorites, whose Country God promised to Abraham, (XV
Genesis 21.) being part of the Canaanites, whom they were commanded to destroy;
for they were descended from one of the Sons of Canaan, X Genesis 16. Which made
this War with them to have a just ground; not because they denied the
Israelites a Passage through their Country, against the right of Nations, as
Grotius thinks, (which was but the occasion, not the ground of the War) but
because they were one of the Seven Nations condemned by God to destruction,
(whose Land he bestowed upon the Israelites, III Josh. 10.) and because Sihon
came out armed against them, beyond the Bounds of his own Dominions; and fell
upon them, when they had given him no provocation.

Ver. 24. And Israel smote him with the edge of the Utterly overthrew his Army;
and, putting them all to the Sword, made themselves Masters of his Country.

And possessed his Land.] For they destroyed all the Inhabitants, Men, Women
and Children, II Deuteronomy. 33, 34.

From Ammon unto Jabbok, even unto the Children of Ammon.] This is a brief
Description of the Extent of Sihon's Country; which reached from the River
Arnon, the bound of the Moabites Country on the South (XXII. 36.) unto Jabbok,
which was the bound of the Ammonites Country on the North, III Deuteronomy. 16. XII
Josh. 2. XIII. 10. But they meddled with no place that lay upon the River
Jabbok, which belonged to the Ammonites; for that God had forbidden, II Deuteronomy.
37. By which Jephthah (as I observed before) Two hundred and sixty Years after
this, justified the Title of the Israelites to all the Country here mentioned;
which they took not from the Ammonites, or Moabites, but from the Amorites, who
were the Owners of it, when they conquered it, XI Judges 13, 15, 22, 23. For
Sihon had got half of their Country, as well as part of the Country of Moab, as
appears from III Deuteronomy. 11. and from XIII Josh. 25. Where it is plain, Joshua
gave the Gadites half of the Country of the Children of Ammon, which was now
taken from the Amorites, who had dispossessed them. Josephus describes it as
lying between three Rivers, like an Island; for the Banks of Arnon were the
Bounds of this Region on the South side; and Jabbok on the North, which running
into Jordan, lost its Name; and the Western Tract of it was washed by Jordan it
self: and on the East part it was surrounded with the Mountains of Arabia.

For the Border of the Children of Ammon was strong.] This is not mentioned
here as a Reason why the Israelites did not set upon their Country, (for they
were expressly forbidden to do it, II Deuteronomy. 19.) but why Sihon conquered none of
the Ammonites Country beyond Jabbok, (as he did all from Arnon thither) because
their Frontiers on that side of their Country were very strong, by the
Fortifications, which it is likely, they had made upon the River.

Ver. 25. And Israel took all these Cities.] All the Arnon and Jabbok: Some of
which are named v. 30.

And Israel dwelt in all the Cities of the Amorites.] Having destroyed the
former Inhabitants, as I noted before, II Deuteronomy. 34.

In Heshbon.] Even in their Royal City.

And in all the Villages thereof.] In Hebrew the Daughters; as Villages and
Castles are called, which depend upon the Metropolis, as Daughters on their
Mother.

Ver. 26. For Heshbon was the City of Sihon the King He had made this the Seat
of his Kingdom, after his Conquest of this Country. Which Moses observes
(together with what follows) that it might appear to Posterity, they Invaded no
part of the Moabites Territories, or of the Ammonites, but what was in the
quiet possession of the Amorites, who had taken this Country from them, and
perhaps in a just War, and long enjoyed it.

Who had fought against the former King of Moab, etc.] It is not certain that
this Sihon, whom the Israelites now vanquished, had dispossessed the Moabites
of this Country; but more likely some of his Ancestors, who were all called by
the Name of Sihon, (as the Kings of Palestine were all called Abimelech, XX
Genesis 2. XXVI. 1. and the Kings of Egypt called Pharaoh) who had fought, not
with the present King of Moab, but with one of his Predecessors, and conquered
him and his Country.

The former King of Moab.] These words are not to be understood, as if he
fought with the King of Moab, who immediately reigned before Balak: but, as I
said, with some of his Predecessors. So the LXX. (...), that heretofore was
King of Moab: and in the Hebrew the words are literally, The King of Moab, the
first: perhaps, of the present race.

Wherefore they that speak in Proverbs.] In the Hebrew the words are, wherefore
the Proverbialists: that is, the Poets, whose Composures, in those days, were
very Sententious.

Say.] Have this Song in their Mouths: which seems to have been composed by
some of the Amorites, upon the Victory which Sihon got over the Moabites;
particularly upon the taking of Heshbon; which, I suppose, he besieged
immediately upon the Routing of their Army. This Moses thought good to insert
in his History, as an Evidence that this Country belonged to the Amorites, when
the Israelites subdued it. Thus he quotes a common Saying about Nimrod, to
justify what he writes of his Greatness. See X Genesis 9.

Come into Heshbon.] The words either of Sihon calling to his People; or of the
Amorites exhorting one another, to go to Heshbon, and help to repair the Ruins
that had been in it by the War, that it might become the Royal City of their
Country. For that is the meaning of the following words.

Let the City of Sihon be built and prepared.] Let that Place which Sihon has
chose for his Seat, be built up again, and made fit for his Reception.

Ver. 28. For there is a Fire gone out of Heshbon.] Sihon marching out of
Heshbon. For in the Prophetical Language, the Desolations made by War, are
compared to the Fire, and to Flames, which consume all they come near, I Amos
7, 10, 12, 14. II. 2, 5.

A Flame from the City of Sihon.] This is but a Repetition (as the manner is)
of what was now said in other words; expressing the certainty of this Presage.

It has consumed Ar of Moab.] He speaks as if he already saw the thing done
which he foretold: though it never came to pass. For they did not conquer Ar,
which remained in the possession of Moab in Moses his time, as appears from II
Deuteronomy. 9, 18, 29. But in his Poetical heat, (or fury, as they speak) he insults
as if they had actually taken the Capital City of Moab. For so Ar was; and
afterward called Rabbath, and Rabbath-moba, i. e. the great City of Moab; to
distinguish it from Rabbah-Ammon, i. e. the great City of the Ammonites. For so
we find in Stephanus (de Vrbibus) (...) (it should be (...) as Bochartus has
truly corrected it, in his Preface to his Phaleg.) which he calls (...). For
Ar, as I said, was the old Name of it, II Deuteronomy. 29. XVI Isa. 1. from whence
came the name of (...), which it retained in later Ages.

And the Lords of the High Places of Arnon.] The Masters, or Owners (as the
word Baale may be translated) of the High Places, etc. i. e. those that dwell
in the strongest Forts of the Country. Or, as some fancy, the Priests of the
Places are here meant; or, rather their Temple where Baal was worshipped. For
we find a place in this Country called Bamoth-Baal, XIII Josh. 17. The
High Places of Baal. And it is evident, this Poet triumphs in this (...) over
their Gods and their Religion, as well as over them.

Woe unto thee, Moab.] He goes on to foretell the Calamity of the whole Country.

Thou art undone, O People of Chemosh.] So he calls the Moabites, who served
(as the Chaldee translates it) or, worshipped Chemosh as their God: For so we
read he was, XLVIII Jerem. 7, 13. 1 Kings XI. 7. XI Judges 24. which St. Hierom
thinks differs from Baal-Peor only in Name. See Vossius de Orig. and Progr.
Idolol. Lib. II. cap. 8. Some take Chemosh to be Saturn; particularly
Scharastanius: the manner of whose Worship see in Dr. Pocock's excellent
Annotations in Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 316. I shall only add, That as the
Moabites are called the People of Chemosh, because they worshipped him as their
God, so the Israelites are called the People of the LORD, and the People of
God, because they worshipped the LORD alone, V Judges 11. 2 Samuel XIV. 13. For in
the Days of Paganism, as Mr. Mede observes, every Country, nay every City, had
their proper and peculiar Gods, which were deemed as their Guardians and
Protectors: From whence the Nations themselves are expressed by the Name of
their Gods. That is evident from this place; but it is not so plain, that when
God threatens to deliver up Israel to serve other Gods, he means giving them up
into the Hands of the People of strange Countries; which he takes to be
intended in IV Deuteronomy. 28. XXVIII. 64. XVI Jerem. 16, etc. See Book IV. p. 977.
And so he thinks the words of David may be expounded, 1 Samuel XXVI. 19. They
have driven me out this day from abiding in the Inheritance of the LORD,
saying, Go serve other Gods; i. e. banished me into the Country of Idolaters.
See Book III. p. 823. where this is more largely explained.

He has given his Sons that escaped, and his Daughters into Captivity, unto
Sihon King of the Amorites.]

This is a manifest triumph over their god Chemosh, who was not able to save
his Worshippers (whom he calls his Sons and his Daughters, i. e. his Children)
who were under his Protection. No, he could not so much as preserve those that
escaped the fury of the Sword, but they were afterward taken Captive; to make
up part of the Triumph of Sihon King of the Amorites.

Ver. 30. We have shot at them, Heshbon is perished The Hebrew words, vanniram
abad Heshbon ath Dibon, may as well, if not better, be translated their Light
is perished (or taken away) from Heshbon unto Dibon. So Forsterus in his
Lexicon, and the Tigurin Version, and others. That is, their Glory is gone,
from one end of the Country to the other. For Heshbon and Dibon were two famous
places in this Territory, XIII Josh. 17. And some think this is the place
called Dibon-Gad, XXXIII. 45. Which was the more noted, because there Nebo, one
of their Gods, was worshipped. For in XV Isai. 2. Dibon is mentioned as one of
their High Places; and there Nebo is lamented, i. e. their God which was there
worshipped. When Hesychius says, (...) (which no doubt is this Dibon) (...), a
Place where the Moabites had a Temple. See Seldom de diis Syris, Syntagm. 2.
cap. 12.

We have laid them waste even unto Nophah.] Another place in that Country, as
appears by the words following.

Which reaches unto Medeba.] That is, the Territories of Nophah extended as
far as Medeba, which was certainly a place in the Country of Moab, XV Isai. 2.
But the word reaches is not in the Hebrew, and the words without it may be
thus truly translated, and as far as Medeba. For so the Hebrew Particle ascher
is sometimes used to signify simply and, as VI Eccles. 12. ascher mi, and who
can tell, etc. So here ascher ad, and unto, etc.

And here I think fit to note, That it is likely these Verses were some part of
the History of those Countries: For a Poetical way of writing was in use before
Prose, as Strabo tells us, Lib. I. Geograph. p. 18. where he says, (...), etc.
All set or artificial Speech, (whether Historical or Rhetorical) was but an
imitation of Poetical Compositions; the Ancients knowing no other: Cadmus, and
Pherecydes, and Hecataeus, being the first who brought in this form of writing
now in use. See Salmasius in Solinum, p. 841. and Cuperus in his Apotheosis
Homeri, p. 55. However, this is certain, that they who would instruct the
People, put their Lessons into Verse, as Strabo there shows: where he says, p.
15. (...), etc. The Ancients call Poetry the first Philosophy, forming our
Lives from tender years, teaching good manners, governing the passions and
actions with pleasure. For which cause the Greeks instituted their Children in
their Cities by Poety, (...), not merely for the sake of bare delectation, but
to form them to sobriety.

Ver. 31. Thus Israel dwelt in the Land of the Amorites.] Amorites, into which
the Children of Israel entered, not of the Moabites; who had been expelled out
of it, as was notoriously known; there being a Song in every Bodies mouth,
which continued the memory of it.

Ver. 32. And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer.] Another Moab, but now in the
possession of the Amorites. Which the Israelites did not take at the first; but
after they had conquered all the Country beforementioned, they sent some Men
to bring them Intelligence, which way it was best to attack that City also, and
the Country about it. It was not far from Mount Gilead, 2 Samuel XXIV. 5, 6. 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 31. and both of them were famous for good Pasture, and therefore
given to the Tribe of Reuben and Gad, who had much Cattle, XXXII of this Book,
1, 3, 4, 35, 36. After the ten Tribes were carried Captive from their own Land,
it fell into the Hands of the Moabites again; as may be gathered from XLVIII
Jerem. 32.

And they took the Villages thereof.] As well as the City it self.

And drove out the Amorites that dwelt there.] If it had not been possessed by
them, they would not have meddled with it.

Ver. 33. And they turned.] Or, returned (as the LXX. have it) from Jaazer.

And went up by the way of Bashan.] A famous Psalm. 15.) lying more Northerly
than the Country of Sihon, and belonging also to the Amorites; where was very
rich Pasture, and an excellent Breed of Cattle, XXXII Deuteronomy. 14. XXII Psalm. 12.
and stately Oaks, XXVII Ezekiel. 6.

And Og the King of Bashan.] The whole Country of which he was King, had its
Name from that Mountain, and was called the Kingdom of Og in Bashan, III Deuteronomy.
10. where he is said, as well as Sihon, to be a King of the Amorites, v. 8. and
v. 11. that he was of the Remnant of the Giants, or of the Rephaim; who were a
mighty People in that Country of Bashan, (See XIV Genesis 5.) which in after Ages
was called Batanaea.

Went out against them.] To oppose their Passage.

He, and all his People.] With all the Men of War in his Country.

To the Battle at Edrei.] A City near that Country, afterward called Adara, as
St. Hierom tells us in his Book de Locis Hebraicis. He offered the Israelites
Battle; which, by God's order, they accepted.

And the LORD said unto Moses.] That he might report it to the People.

Fear him not.] They had reason to be courageous, (and not affrighted, because
he was a Giant) having lately overcome a mightier King than he; of which God
puts them in mind in the end of this verse.

For I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his People, etc.] For their
greater encouragement, he adds his Promise, on which he bids them rely, as if
they saw it already done, that he would give them the Victory over Og, and all
his Forces, and bestow upon them his Country. This History Moses reports more
at large, III Deuteronomy. 1, 2, 3, etc.

Ver. 35. So they smote him, and his Sons, and all his After they had
overthrown him and his Army, they pursued the Victory, till they had destroyed
all the People of the Country. Some part of which held out longer than the
rest, (as appears from XXXII. 39, etc.) but at length was wholly subdued by
Jair the Son of Manasseh, who had all the Region of Argob given him for his
pains, XXXII. 41. III Deuteronomy. 14.

And they possessed his Land.] Wherein were sixty walled Cities, besides a
great many small Towns, III Deuteronomy. 4, 5. XIII. Josh. 30. All which was given to
the half Tribe of Manasseh, III Deuteronomy. 13. XIII Josh. 29, 30. 1 Kings IV. 13.

CHAP. XXII.
AND the Children of Israel set forward.] fortieth Year this which follows fell
out, we cannot tell, but it is likely in the seventh; when they removed from
the Mountains of Abarim, XXI. 20. XXXIII. 48.

And pithed in the plains of Moab.] Which had formerly belonged to the
Moabites, from whom it took its name: but had been taken from them by the
Amorites; and now was in the possession of the Israelites.

On this side Jordan.] Unto which River this Plain extended: and they pitched
near to it, from Beth-Jesimoth unto Abel-Shittim, XXXIII. 49. where they
stayed, till under the Conduct of Joshua they came to Jordan, and passed over
it, III Josh. 1.

By Jericho.] Rather against Jericho, as the LXX. translate it: For Jericho was
on the other side of Jordan, directly opposite to the place where they now
pitched. And therefore the Vulgar Latin translates, or rather paraphrases it,
Where Jericho is situated beyond Jordan: i. e. passing the Ford, they came
directly to Jericho.

And Balak the Son of Zippor.] Who was King of the Moabites at this time; and
descended, it is likely, from the ancient Kings of that Country, XXI. 26.

Saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.] To Sihon and Og, the two Kings
of the Amorites, (as they are called III Deuteronomy. 8.) who were such near
Neighbors to Balak, that he not only saw, but considered (as the word implies)
what a speedy Conquest the Israelites had made of their Country.

And Moab was sore afraid of the People.] Lest they should expel them out of
their Country, as they had done the Amorites: for they knew nothing of God's
Command to the Israelites, not to disturb them in their Possessions. Some
imagine, but I see no good ground for it, that they were afraid the Israelites
should get possession of the Land of Canaan, unto which they thought themselves
perhaps to have a better Title; being descended from the eldest Daughter of
Lot, who was the Son of Abraham's elder Brother; for Abraham was the youngest
Son of Terah. But no Body can see any Right that this Descent gave Lot or his
Children; there being no Promise made of it by God to any Person, but Abraham
and his Posterity.

Because they were many.] Too strong for the Moabites to deal withal; having
conquered those who had been too hard for them, and taken a great Territory
from them, XXI. 26.

And Moab was distressed because of the Children of Israel.] As Moses in his
Song, after they had passed the Red Sea, foretold they would be, XV Exodus 15.

Ver. 4. And Moab said.] By Messengers, which

Unto the Elders of Midian.] Who were their Neighbors and Confederates. The
Title of Elders, it appears by this, was given in other Nations, as well as
among the Israelites, to the greatest Persons in their Countries: or the
Israelites, after their manner, so called Men every where, who were in high
Authority. For these Persons who are here called Elders, are called Kings,
XXXI. 8. and Princes, XIII Josh. 21. In like manner they who in the seventh
verse of this Chapter, are called the Elders of Moab, are in the next verse
called the Princes of Moab. Which, it is evident, was the ancient Language
among the Egyptians, L Genesis 7. (unless we suppose Moses, as I said, to have
spoken in the Language of the Jews) and, it is very likely, was also the
ancient Language of Phoenicia, and the Countries thereabouts; and perhaps in
much remote parts. For it is a known Story, That when the Phoenicians fled
before Joshua, and forsook the Land of Canaan, they fixed in Asrick; where they
left this name of Elders among the Carthaginians. See Mr. Seldom Lib. I. de
Synedr. cap. 14. p. 587, etc.

Midian.] This is not the Country wherein Jethro was a Prince; for that was not
far from Mount Sinai, as appears from III Exodus 1. whereas this was remote from
that place, adjoining to the Moabites, and near to Palestine. Though it is very
probable, the People of both these Countries were descended from Abraham, by
one of the Sons he had by Keturah, XXV Genesis 2.

Now shall this Company.] The Army of Israel encamped in the Plains of Moab, v.
1.

Lick up all round about us.] i. e. Devour us, and all our Neighbors, (or, our
whole Country) unless we join together to oppose them.

As the Ox licketh up the Grass of the Field.] They use this Metaphor, to
signify how easily the Israelites would conquer them, without a timely,
resolute, and unanimous Opposition: and likewise, what an Universal Desolation
they would make. For the words are in the Hebrew, the green of the Field, i. e.
not only the Grass, but the Leaves of Trees, which Oxen eat, as Bochartus
observes out of the Scripture, as well as other Authors, XXVII Isai. 20. And to
lick up is not lightly to touch with the Tongue, but to eat and consume. See
Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. cap. 31.

And Balak the Son of Zippor was King of the Moabites at that time.] He was
mentioned before, ( v. 2.) but here recorded to have been King of the Country;
who endeavored to secure himself, by the assistance of his Neighbors and
Allies. Unto whom he sent this Embassy, to advise with them what Course it was
best for them to take for their common Safety.

Ver. 5. He sent Messengers therefore.] The Result of the Treaty with Midian
was, That with joint Consent they should send Ambassadors, of each Nation, and
of the same Quality, on the following Message, v. 7. And this Counsel, it is
likely, was given by the Midianites; for Balak says nothing of it by his
Messengers: but it was resolved on when they came there, as the most effectual
Means for their Security. This, I think, the word therefore imports.

Unto Balaam.] A famous South-sayer, or Diviner, as he is called in XIII Josh.
22. That is, one who pretended to foretell Future Things, and discover Secrets,
etc. though not by good and allowable Arts, but such as were absolutely
prohibited to God's People, XVIII Deuteronomy. 10. He had been formerly a good Man,
and a true Prophet, till loving the wages of Unrighteousness, he apostatised
from God, and became a Rosem, which we translate a Diviner. That is, says
Aben-Ezra, an Astrologer; who observing when Men were under a bad Aspect of the
Stars, pronounced a Curse upon them; which sometimes coming to pass, gained him
a great Reputation. But this is not the import of that word, as I shall show in
its proper place. Let it suffice now to observe, that the Jews are so much of
this Opinion that he had been a better Man than he was now, that they take him,
as St. Hierom observes, to be the same Person, who in the Book of Job is called
Elihu. But Origin, and some others, think he was no Prophet, but only one of
the Devils Sorcerers, of whom he went to Enquire; but God was pleased to put
the Devil by, and give what Answer he thought fit: which Balaam himself plainly
discerned, and therefore calls himself, He who heard the words of God, etc. On
which side the Truth lies, we shall be able to judge, when we come to consider
what passed between God and him, in the following History.

The Son of Beor.] Who was also called Bosor, as some gather from 2 Pet. II.
15. though that place may have another Interpretation.

To Pethor.] A City in Aram, or Mesopotamia, XXIII. 7. XXIII Deuteronomy. 4. This was
the ancient Name of the place; which in after times the Syrians called Bosor,
by an easy change of two Letters, which is very usual. So Grotius understands
those words, 2 Pet. II. 15. (...), Balaam (not the Son, but) of the City of
Bosor.

Which is by the River of the Land of the Children of his People.] i. e. Near
to Euphrates; which is commonly in these Books called by the Name of the River,
XV Genesis 18. and many other places. This determines Aram (which was the Name of
several Countries thereabouts) to signify that which is called in Scripture
Aram Naharaim; that is, the Aram which lay between the two famous Rivers of
Euphrates and Tygris. The former of which was called, by way of Eminence, the
River, (though the other also was eminent) because it was nearest, and best
known to the Israelites. And Ptolemy mentions a City called Pachoria in his
time, upon this River, which some take to be Pethor. And it is very probable
that Abraham, before he came into Canaan, lived here about, XXIV Genesis 4, 10.
XXIV Josh. 2. And here Jacob also served for his Wife, and begat all the
Patriarchs, except Benjamin, (whence the Israelites acknowledged their Father
to have been a poor Aramite, or Syrian, as we translate it, XXVI Deuteronomy. 5.) By
which means some Relics of true Religion still remained in this Country,
though mixed with a great deal of Superstition.

To call him.] To invite him to come to them.

Saying, There is a People come out of Egypt.] Which all the Power of Pharaoh
could not hinder.

They cover the face of the Earth.] Are exceeding numerous.

And they abide over against me.] Lie encamped not far from me, and are ready
to invade my Country.

Ver. 6. Come now therefore, I pray thee.] They Moab, (whose words these are
said to be, v. 7.) there being no King, perhaps, at this time in Midian; but
several little Princes, who are called Kings, XXXI. 8.

And Curse me this People.] It seems they had an Opinion in those days, which
prevailed much in after times, That some Men had a power, by the help of their
Gods, to blast, not only particular Persons, but whole Armies; so that they
should not be able to effect their Designs. This they are said to have done,
sometimes only by bare words of Imprecation: of which there was a Set-form
among some People, which Aeschines calls (...), the determinate Curse.
Sometimes they also offered Sacrifices, and used certain Rites and Ceremonies,
with Solemn Charms: a famous instance of which we find in the Life of Crassus.
Where Plutarch tells us, That Attejus Tribune of the People, made a Fire at the
Gate, out of which Crassus was to march unto the War against the Parthians;
into which he threw certain Things to make a Fume, and offered Sacrifices to
the most angry Gods, with horrid Imprecations upon him: which, he says,
according to ancient Tradition, had such a power, that no Man, who was loaded
with them, could avoid being undone.

For they are too mighty for me.] I am not able to deal with them without thy
help.

Peradventure.] But I hope, etc. For the Hebrew word (...) is not a Particle of
Doubting, but of Hoping: Non est particula dubitantis, sed been ominantis and
sperantis, as Forsterus observes, XXXVII. Isai. 4. II Zephan. 3.

I shall prevail, that I may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the
Land.] I hope, by the conjunction of thy Curses with my Sword, I may be able to
destroy them; or at least to drive them out of this Country.

For I wot that him whom thou blessest, is blessed; and he whom thou cursest,
is cursed.] The ancient Prophets had such power with God to obtain great
Blessings from him, for others; as appears by the story of Abraham and
Abimelech, XX Genesis 10. and of Jacob, who blessed Pharaoh, XLVII Genesis 7. and
afterward all his own Sons. And no doubt their Imprecations were as powerful,
when there was a just cause for them; according to what we read 2 Kings II. 24.
And it is likely, while Balaam (who was a Prophet, as appears by what follows,
and is so called by St. Peter) continued a good Man, he blessed and cursed no
other way, but by Prayer to God, and by Imprecations in his Name. Which was
imitated by other great Men; particularly by King Cambyses in his Speech to the
Persians, recorded by Herodotus in Thalia, cap. 65. where he says, If you do
what I require, then let your Land bring forth plentifully; and your Wives and
your Flocks be fruitful, and your selves enjoy your liberty; but if you do not,
(...), I imprecate the quite contrary things to these, to fall upon you. But
when Balaam degenerated into a false Prophet, and became a Diviner, then he
used Spells and Enchantments (as is plain by this History) and such Rites and
Ceremonies as were the Invention of wicked Spirits; which Pharaoh's Magicians,
the Jews fancy, made use of to stop the Israelites at the Red Sea. See XIV
Exodus 2.

Ver. 7. And the Elders of Moab and the Elders of I take these two Nations to
have been ancient Confederates; but the Jewish Tradition is, that they had been
always at Enmity, and now reconciled by a common Danger. Just as two Mastiffs
(so they explain it) who are continually fighting, when they see the Wolf set
upon one of them, join together for their Defense, because if he devour the
one, the other will not long survive him.

Departed with the rewards of divination in their hand.] It was the Custom
among God's People, when they came to consult with a Prophet, to bring him a
Present; as appears from 1 Samuel IX. 7, 8. And indeed, from ancient time, Men
were not wont to approach great Persons without one. See XLIII Genesis 11, 25, 26.

And they came unto Balaam, and spoke unto him the words of Balak.] Delivered
their Message; having first, as the manner was, made him the Present.

Ver. 8. And he said unto them, Lodge with me this That was the time, it seems,
wherein he was wont to receive Answers to his Enquiries; either in a Dream, or
by Apparitions, or some other way. There are those, who think he now began to
betray the naughtiness of his heart, in taking time to advise about this
Matter: which, if he had been a faithful Servant of God, he would instantly
have rejected with Disdain. And it is likely enough, by what follows, that he
was as desirous of their Money, as they were of his Imprecations.

And I will bring you word again, as the LORD shall speak unto me.] You shall
have my Answer, according to the Directions which the LORD shall give me. By
this I take it to be evident, that he was not a Stranger to the true God, with
whose Name it is certain he was acquainted; and, it is probable, had received
Revelations from him, till he became a covetous mercenary Prophet, and addicted
himself to Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies. Making use of Teraphim perhaps,
which had been of ancient practice in his Country, and worshipping God,
perhaps, by other Images. See XXXI Genesis 19, 24, 30, 49. where, it is evident
that Laban had still communication with the LORD, though he used Teraphim, and
calls them his Gods. Which perhaps put that idle conceit into the Head of some
of the Jews, that it was one and the same Person, who is there called Laban,
and here Balaam. Who falling, as I said, unto Idolatrous Practices, was
forsaken by God, and delivered up to the impostures of Evil Spirits: though he
still continued to enquire of the LORD. Who was pleased, at this time, to make
his Mind known to him, for the Preservation of his People Israel.

And the Princes of Moab abode with Balaam.] As did those of Midian also; who
are mentioned in the foregoing verse. Though some of the Jews have a fancy that
the Elders of Midian went away (which they give as the reason that they are not
here mentioned) as soon as they heard Balaam say, he would address himself for
Advice unto the LORD; who they knew would be favorable to Israel. And on the
other side, some Christians have been of Opinion, that he addressed himself to
the LORD, only to try if he could draw him by his Charms, to take part with the
Moabites: Just as the Romans, when they laid Siege to a City, endeavored by
all means they could invent, to persuade the Tutelar Gods of that place to
forsake it, and come over to their side. Which Rite is described by Macrobius.

Ver. 9. And God came unto Balaam.] As he is said Abimelech in a Dream, XX Genesis
3. Where I observed that Maimonides makes a distinction between God's coming to
a Person, and his speaking to him. But that cannot be made use of here; for God
did both come and speak to Balaam, as appears from v. 32, 35. where we read,
the Angel of the LORD spoke to him. And here it will be fit to note, That all
Nations, of whom we have any knowledge, have been possessed with this Opinion,
that God was wont to appear frequently unto Men; especially, cum recentes a Deo
essent, (as Seneca speaks in Epist. XC.) when they were newly come out of his
hand: and that he also was pleased to reveal his Mind and Will unto them, by
some means or other; particularly by his Angels, whom he sent on Messages to
them, as long as there was any Goodness left among them. This is most admirably
expressed by Catullus, Praesentes namque ante domos invisere castas
Saepius, and sese mortali ostendere caetu
Coelicolae, nondum spreta pietate, solebant.
See Huetius in his Quaestiones Alnetanae, Lib. II. cap. 12. n. 1, 2. And
indeed no account can be given how it came into the Head of Homer, and other
Poets, to bring in the Gods appearing so often, as they do, upon every occasion,
if God had not been wont, in ancient time, to manifest himself, not only to the
Israelites, but to other Nations also, especially before the distinction of
this People from them. So he did to Abimelech, Laban, etc. as well as to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. For, as Dr. Jackson has well observed (in his first
Book upon the Creed, chap. 11.) if they had never heard nor read of any such
thing, all the Wits in the World, had they beat their Brains never so much,
could not have thought of bringing the Gods in a visible shape upon the Stage;
or interlacing their Poems with their frequent Apparitions. Nor can any other
account be given, how this came to be the common Belief of the World, from one
end of it to the other, that the Gods revealed their Mind to Men: the
Philosophers, as well as ordinary People, in the East, West, North and South,
making no doubt of it. For Abaris Hyperboreus, and Zamolxis Geta, were no less
famous in the North, than the Egyptian Prophets were in the South.

But when Mankind degenerated, and corrupted themselves by all manner of
Wickedness, then God forsook them, and permitted evil Angels to take the place
of the good, and plunge Mankind further into all manner of Filthiness;
especially into abominable Idolatries. So that Balaam, who, I question not, had
at first familiarity with God, and his holy Angels, abusing this Honor God had
done him, in making him a Prophet, by employing it to serve his vile
Covetousness, God gave him up to the Delusion of evil Spirits; of whom he
learnt Enchantments. But at this time God was pleased again to appear to him
himself, for the good of his People Israel, and to overruled all his bad
Inclinations: Insomuch that Moses says at last he did not go, as he had done,
to seek Enchantments, (XXIV. 1.) but gave up himself wholly, for the present,
to the Conduct of God's Spirit, as I shall there observe.

And said unto him.] By an Angel, as Maimonides interprets it, More Nevoch. P.
II. cap. 41.

What Men are these with thee?] He asks this question, partly to prove Balaam,
whether he would tell him the truth of their Business; and partly to make way
for the following Direction.

Ver. 10. And Balaam said unto God.] To whom

Balak the Son of Zippor, King of Moab, has sent unto me, saying.] This shows
the Embassy was sent principally in his Name; the Midianites only joining in
it, v. 5.

Ver. 11. Behold, there is a People come out of Egypt, verse contains only a
brief Report of the Message that was sent him: to which he desired God would
tell him, what Answer he should return.

Ver. 12. And God said unto Balaam.] By an Angel, v. 9. and v. 35.

Thou shall not go with them; thou shall not curse this People, for they are
blessed.] He not only forbids him to comply with Balak's desire, but gives him
such a reason as was likely to prevail with him, if his Prohibition was not
sufficient; that it was impossible, with all his Enchantments, to reverse the
Blessing which God had bestowed upon this People.

Ver. 13. And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said to the Princes of Balak,
get ye to your own Land.] He seems resolved to obey God, rather than comply

For the LORD refuses to give me leave to go with you.] He acquaints them only
with half of God's Answer: for he omits the reason, which was the principal
thing. Though it may be thought to be employed; that, if the LORD, on whose
Pleasure he pretended to depend, refused to let him go, it was in vain to
attempt to Curse them.

And the Princes of Moab rose up.] They did not stand to dispute the Matter
with him, or to importune him: which shows, that he had given them a peremptory
Denial.

And they went unto Balak, and said, Balaam refuses to come with us.] They
report his Answer as imperfectly, as he did God's: saying not a word, that the
LORD refused to let him come. They were loath perhaps (as the manner of such
Persons is) to deliver unwelcome News to their Master.

And Balak sent yet again Princes more, and more honorable than they.] He being
ignorant of the true Cause of his Refusal, imagined that Balaam thought himself
slighted; and expected a greater number of Persons, and of greater quality,
should have been sent to him. For Prophets, in ancient time, were Men highly
esteemed; as not only Sacred Persons, but who had a great Interest in God: of
whom they could obtain whatsoever they desired. God himself thought this
sufficient to keep Abimelech from injuring Abraham, to acquaint him that he was
a Prophet, XX Genesis 3. And therefore they were called Men of God: being thought,
by the very Gentiles, to be full of some Numen or other; whereby they became
Interpreters of the Gods, (as they called them) who ministered (...), between
the Gods and Men. Insomuch that Women, when they became Prophetesses, had very
great Authority; as we find in Deborah, who calls her self a Mother in Israel,
V Judges 7. And therefore all such Persons were under the special Protection of
Heaven, CV Psalm. 15.

Ver. 16. And they came unto Balaam, and said, Thus They seem to speak of their
Master in an higher style than the former Ambassadors did, v. 7. where it is
only said, they spoke unto him the words of Balak.

Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming to me.] Yet they
submissively beseech him, in their Master's name, not to suffer any thing to
keep him from coming to him: for he thought, perhaps, that Balaam might be
detained by other more profitable Employments.

Ver. 17. For I will promote thee to very great honor.] Balaam looked upon the
Rewards of Divination, which he sent him, as not sufficient Encouragement: and
therefore he promises him to advance him to some high Preferment in his Court.

And I will do whatsoever thou say unto me.] And moreover, he promises to
bestow an Estate, as great as he would desire, to support his new Dignity.

Come therefore, I pray thee.] They add Importunity to their earnest Request.

Curse me this People.] Having heard (as David Chytraeus understands this) that
the Israelites conquered their Opposers by Prayers, rather than by Arms, (as
they had done Pharaoh and the Amalekites) the King of Moab thought he might
prevail against them by the same means.

And Balaam answered, and said to the Servants of Balak.] To the Messengers
whom he had sent, who, it appears by this, were principal Officers in his
Court, v. 15. For the Servants of Pharaoh are called the Elders of his House, L
Genesis 7.

If Balak would give me his House full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond
the word of the LORD my God, to do more or less.] This is not the Language of
one that was a Stranger to the true God; for no Prophet in Israel ever spoke of
him in more familiar terms than these, the LORD my God. And for the present,
the Command of God seems to have suppressed his Covetous and Ambitious Desires,
so that he durst not yield to them; though it appears, by what follows, he was
strongly inclined to follow them.

Now therefore, I pray you, tarry you also here this night.] Take a Lodging
with me, as your Predecessors did, v. 8.

That I may know what the LORD will say unto me now.] Whether the LORD will
alter his Mind, as he hoped he might; otherwise he would have rested in the
first Answer he received from God, and not tried again if he could prevail by
his Importunity to get leave to go; as these great Promises of Riches and
Honor made him desire.

Ver. 20. And God came unto Balaam at night.] Notwithstanding which God was
pleased again to visit him with his Presence: at least by one of his Angelical
Ministers.

And said unto him, If the Men come to call thee.] Press thee again to comply
with them.

Rise up, and go with them.] Since thou have such a Mind to go, follow thy
Inclinations. These words seem, to be spoken angrily, though not sarcastically;
as some would have them like those 1 Kings XXII. 15.

But yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shall thou do.] Some take
these words to be not so much a Command, as a Prediction: that he should not be
able to say a word but what he was ordered by God.

Ver. 21. And Balaam rose up in the morning, and Commanded his Ass to be made
ready; for he had Servants to wait upon him, v. 22. And great Persons, in those
Countries, were wont to ride upon Asses: of which we find Examples before, this
in Abraham, XXII Genesis 1. and in Moses, IV Exodus 20. and, in after times, the
Judges of Israel were thus mounted, V Judges 10. and their Children, X. 4. XII.
14.

And went with the Princes of Moab.] They set out, perhaps together; or he
desired them to go a little before, and he would follow them. For it appears by
the following part of this Relation, that he did not make a part of their
Train; but traveled, at least some part of the way, with his two Servants
alone.

Ver. 22. And God's anger was kindled because he went.] This may seem strange,
since he had a permission to go along with them: But the meaning is Israel; and
with hopes that he might, by some means or other, compass that wicked end. This
is plainly signified by the Angel's words, v. 35. where he permits him still to
go on, but with a Caution, not to attempt to speak a word, otherwise than he
bad him. This is more plainly evident from XXIII Deuteronomy. 5.

And the Angel of the LORD.] The same Angel, which is thought to have spoken to
him, v. 12, 20.

Stood in the way.] In the very path wherein his Ass was going.

For an Adversary against him.] To stop his proceedings, that he might not go
on in his sin, and perish; as R. Solomon glosses.

Now he was riding upon his Ass, and his two Servants were with him.] He was in
his Journey upon the Rode, but separated from the rest of the Company; having
only his own two Servants with him, who waited on him.

And the Ass saw the Angel of the LORD standing in the way.] The LORD, says
the same R. Solomon, let the Ass see what his Master could not; his Mind being
blinded by his Converse with Demons; or rather, God deprived him, for the
present, of the power of seeing what stood just before him.

And his Sword drawn in his hand.] Threatening to kill him, if he went forward.

And the Ass turned aside out of the way.] Out of the Rode, wherein they were
traveling.

And went into the Field.] Which lay on the side of the Highway.

And Balaam smote the Ass to turn her into the way.] As the manner is still,
when such Creatures are unruly.

Ver. 24. And the Angel of the LORD stood in the It is uncertain whether the
Ass turned into the way again, or went on in the Field, till they came to these
Vineyards.

A Wall being on this side, and a Wall on that side.] In a very narrow Passage.

Ver. 25. And when the Ass saw the Angel of the Which opposed him here again,
as he had done in the broad Highway.

She thrust her self unto the Wall.] To avoid the Angel.

And crushed Balaam's, foot against the Wall.] The Angel and his drawn Sword,
which it is likely he brandished, took up so much of the way on both sides,
that there was not room for the Ass to pass, without going too close to Wall.

And he smote her again.] Being very angry at her untowardness.

Ver. 26. And the Angel of the LORD went further, Through which Balaam was to
pass.

Where there was no way to turn, either to the right hand, or to the left.]
Where the Angel took up the whole Passage, and left no space, on either side,
for the Ass to go.

And when the Ass saw the Angel of the LORD.] And no way to avoid him.

She fell down under Balaam.] Being unable either to turn back, the way was so
narrow; or to go forward, because the Angel filled up all the Passage.

And Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the Ass with a Staff.] Harder
than he had done before.

And the LORD.] By his Angel, as Bochart interprets it.

Opened the Mouth of the Ass.] Which naturally is a dumb Creature, having no
Organs of Speech: but, by an extraordinary power of God, who made Man's mouth,
had her Tongue so moved to the Palate, Teeth and Lips, and the Air was so
compressed within her Mouth, as to form words as plain as we speak.

And she said unto Balaam.] That an Ass should, by the power of God, be made to
speak, one would think should not seem incredible to Christians, when Heathens
did not disbelieve such things, but received them as undoubted Truths. Witness
what they say of the Ass upon which Bacchus rode; and the Ram of Phryxus; and
the Horses of Achilles and Adrastus; and the Bull of Europa; and the Lamb in
Egypt when Bocchoris reigned there; and the Elephant of Porus in India: All
which are reported to have spoken; and vast numbers of other Instances are
heaped up by two eminently learned Frenchmen, Bochartus in his Hierozoicon, P.
I. Lib. II. cap. 14. and Huetius in his Alnetanae Quaestiones, Lib. II cap. 12.
n. 26. which things are alleged out of their Books, not to prove all such
Stories to be true; but that they thought them true, thought it did not exceed
the power of their Gods to effect such things. Nor could they except against
the Bible, because of the strange things there reported, the like Wonders being
commonly believed among themselves. Which if they were devised by the Gentile
Writers, it was, in all likelihood, out of this Sacred History; that they might
not seem to come behind the Jews in any thing, which might give credit to their
own Religion.

If Maimonides had been acquainted with such things as these, he would not have
said, that all this which happened to Balaam in the way to Balak, was done in a
Prophetical Vision, P. II. More Nevochim, cap. 42. which is the Conceit of R.
Levi ben Gersom also, who compares this with what we read I Hos. 3, etc.
concerning the Prophets taking a Wife of Whoredoms, etc. and denies the literal
sense merely, because he could not imagine how an Ass should be made to speak.
No, nor could he, or any Man else tell, how such a Representation could be made
to the Prophet's imagination in a Vision, but by the power of God; to whom the
one was as easy as the other.

What have I done unto thee, that thou have smote me these three times?] There
was some cause; for his Foot was crushed, and he fell with her: but the Ass
could not help it.

Ver. 29. And Balaam said unto the Ass.] One would Peter observes so much, when
he says the dumb Ass rebuked the madness of the Prophet. Where the word (...)
is unusual in the Greek Language, signifying that he was beside himself, not
knowing what he said or did: partly out of Anger; and partly because he was
possessed with an eager desire and hope, to serve Balak, and get the Riches and
honor he promised him, now that he had got leave of God to go to him.

Because thou have mocked me.] Or, as the Arabic Version, printed at Paris,
translates it, thrown me in the dirt. But they seem to have read the word other
ways than it is in the Hebrew: where it signifies either mocking, or exposing
to Scorn and Laughter.

I would there were a Sword in my hand, for now would I kill thee.] This shows
the height of his Rage, to be thus crossed in his Designs; and, as the Jewish
Doctors take it, the height of his folly also: that he should pretend to be
able to destroy the whole Congregation of Israel with his Enchantments, who
needed a Sword to kill a poor Ass.

And the Ass said unto Balaam, am not I thine Ass.] This does not prove that
the Ass understood what Balaam said, and thereupon returned this pertinent
Answer; but that the same power which made the Ass speak at first, continued to
form such an Answer as might convince Balaam of his Error.

Upon which thou have ridden ever since I was thine, unto this day?] The Hebrew
words will not bear this sense; but are exactly rendered in the Margin of our
Bibles, ever since thou wast, that is, a Rider: ever since thou beganst to
ride, as Aben-Ezra expounds it. Whence many render it, from thy youth; which
may be supposed to be a long time; Balaam, in all likelihood, being now no
young Man, but for many years a famous Prophet.

Was I ever wont to do so unto thee?] Have thou not had sufficient Experience,
in so many years as I have served thee, of my sure going? As much as to say,
thou should have thought some unwonted Cause had forced me to do three times
what I dever did before.

And he said, Nay.] He could not but allow the truth of what was spoken by the
Ass.

Ver. 31. Then the LORD opened the Eyes of Balaam.] Sodom were, who could not
see Lot's door, though they found their way to their own home, XIX Genesis 1.

And he saw the Angel of the LORD standing in the way, and his Sword drawn in
his hand.] He understood the true Cause of the Asses turning aside, and falling
under him.

And he bowed down his head, and fell flat upon his face.] He first bowed his
Head, and then his whole Body, in token of his most profound Reverence.

Ver. 32. And the Angel of the LORD said unto This serves to teach us, says
Maimonides, not to use Cruelty toward Beasts, but to treat them gently and
mercifully, More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 17. or rather, as another of them makes
the Angel say to Balaam; If I am commanded to reprove thee for thy Injustice to
thy Ass, how much more for thy wicked Intention to destroy a whole Nation. But
the drift of this Speech seems to be, to reprehend the brutish stupidity of the
Prophet, in not apprehending some extraordinary Hand of God, which turned his
Ass aside so often, and at last made her speak.

Behold, I went out to withstand thee.] I was the cause of thy Asses turning
out of the way, and falling down, by my standing in the Path to oppose thee,
and stop thy proceedings, v. 22.

Because thy way is perverse before me.] His Intentions and Purposes were not
sincere and honest: for pretending to obey God, he designed, if he could, to
serve Balak. The word we translate perverse, signifies perplexed and intricate
in the Arabian Language: and so Bochartus thinks it should be translated here.

And the Ass saw me, and turned away from me these three times.] I was merciful
unto thee, in letting the Ass see me; which saved thy Life: as it here follows.

Unless the Ass had turned from me, surely now I had slain thee, and saved her
alive.] It had cost thee thy life, if the Ass had gone forward; and thy Life
alone: for I would not have done any hurt to her.

Ver. 34. And Balaam said unto the Angel of the LORD, I have sinned.] It is not
certain that this refers to any sense he had of the perverse disposition of his
Heart; for it may have respect only to his outrageousness against his Ass,
which he confesses was without cause.

For I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me.] Or rather, But I
knew not, etc. for this seems to be said in excuse of himself; from his
ignorance, that the Ass was turned out of the way by the Angel.

Now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get me back again.] He would not
understand the Angel right; who did not find fault with his going to Balak, but
with his going with such bad Intentions.

Ver. 35. And the Angel of the LORD said unto Balaam, Go with the Men.] As God
had before bidden him, v. 20. and did not send the Angel to forbid what he had
allowed.

But the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shall speak.] These words
are something different from those in v. 20. importing both, that he should not
presume to speak a word but what he ordered, and that he should not forbear to
speak what he bad him.

And Balaam went with the Princes of Balak.] Whom he overtook after this stop,
either at the place where they lodged, or where they staid for him: but he did
not tell them what he met withal in the way.

Ver. 36. And when Balak heard that Balaam was By some Messenger sent before,
to acquaint him with his coming.

He went out to meet him.] Partly out of joy; and partly out of respect to him.

Unto a City of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon.] This City seems to have
been Ar, XXI. 15.

Which is in the utmost Coast.] He did him the honor to meet him, at the very
entrance of his Country; and did not think it sufficient to send some of his
Court to receive him.

Ver. 37. And Balak said unto Balaam, did not I After this Complement was paid
to Balaam, the King could not forbear to let him know, he did not think himself
well used by him; whom he had earnestly entreated to come to him, and at the
first he would not.

Wherefore came thou not unto me?] As soon as I sent for thee.

Am I not able indeed to promote thee to honor?] Do thou doubt of my power
to make thee a great Man, if thou gratifiest me in my desire? And his readiness
he showed by this honorable Reception of him.

And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee.] Say no more of that; but
be satisfied that I am now come.

Have I now any power at all to say any thing?] Yet he would not have him
expect, that he should do all that Balak desired, or he himself was inclined to
do: for he was under an higher, overruling Power, which he could not gainsay.

The word that God puts in my mouth, that shall I speak.] He seems to
acquaint him, that he had received such a Command from God, v. 35. and he must
be obedient.

And Balaam went with Balak.] This did not discourage the King of Moab from
carrying Balaam along with him into his Country; where he hoped he might be
persuaded to do as he would have him.

And they came unto Kirjath-huzoth.] The Royal City, it is likely; for it
signifies in our Language the City of Streets: that is, a large City, which had
many Streets (and consequently) Inhabitants in it.

And Balak offered Oxen and Sheep.] In thankfulness that he had procured
Balaam's assistance, as he hoped, against his Enemies.

And sent to Balaam.] They were such Sacrifices as the Jews called
Peace Offerings; of which the Offerers had a share for themselves and for their
Friends: and the Sacrifice being over, Balak invited Balaam to come to the
Feast he made thereupon.

And to the Princes that were with him.] The Princes, I suppose, of Midian and
of Moab, who were sent on the Embassy to him, and had succeeded in it, v. 7, 15.

Ver. 41. And it came to pass that on the morrow.] Balak would have him
immediately go about his business, and see what he could do for him.

Balak took Balaam.] Into his Chariot.

And brought him up into the High Places of Baal.] All Nations worshipped their
Gods in High Places; and Baal was the God of this Country; who was worshipped
in more High Places than one; unto all which he brought Balaam, that he might
see where he could take the fullest view of the Israelites, and which of them
would be fittest for his purpose. These High Places were full of Trees and very
shady, (as I observed XXVI Lev. 30.) which made them the fitter both for the
solemn Thoughts and Prayers of such as were devout, and for the filthy
Inclinations and Intentions of the wicked. Baal was the Name of several Gods,
both Male and Female, as our Seldom shows in his Syntagma II. de Diis Syris,
cap. 1. And I suppose Chemosh, the God of Moab, is here called by this Name,
(signifying a Lord) though that great Man seems to take it for Baal-Peor, cap.
2. of that Book.

That thence he might see the utmost of the People.] i. e. All their Armies; to
the very skirts of their Camp.

CHAP. XXIII.
AND Balaam said unto Balak, build me here.] Upon one of the High Places; which
Balaam, it is likely, pitched upon as fit for his purpose.

Seven Altars.] The number Seven was much observed we find among the Hebrews,
by God's order, (See IV Lev. 6.) but we never read of more than one Altar built
by the Patriarchs, when they offered their Sacrifices; nor was more than one
allowed by Moses. Therefore in this there was something of the Heathen
Superstition: who worshipping the Sun, (who is principally meant by Baal)
offered also to all the seven Planets. Unless we allow the Conjecture of
Fortunatus Scaccus, who imagines that as Moses erected twelve Pillars according
to the number of the Children of Israel, when he entered them into the Covenant
of God, (XXIV Exodus 4.) so Balaam ordered seven Altars to be erected, according
to the number of the principal Houses of Moab, Myrothec. Sacr. Elaeochrism. P.
II. cap. 59. But there is no ground for the conceit of Abarbinel, who, in his
Preface to Leviticus, sect. 4. says, Balaam ordered this in emulation of the
seven acceptable Altars to God, built by seven Men famous for Piety; viz, Adam,
Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses. There is more certainty in this,
that these Altars were erected in honor either of the most High, or of the
greatest of their Gods. For according to the account, which both Festus and
Servius have given us of the ancient times, they sacrificed to the Caelestial
Gods Only upon Altars (which were so called, because they were arae altae,
built high and lofty) whereas, to the Terrestrial they sacrificed upon the
Earth; and to the Infernal Gods, in holes dug in the Earth.

And prepare me here seven Oxen and seven Rams.] To offer one of each upon the
several Altars, as it follows v. 2. This number was used by pious Persons, both
in these days, XLII Job 8. and in after times, 1 Chronicles. XV. 26.

Ver. 2. And Balak did as Balaam had spoken.] Caused

And Balak and Balaam offered on every Altar a Bullock and a Ram.] Kings, in
ancient times, were Priests also; as appears by Melchizedek: But perhaps Balak
only presented the Sacrifices to be offered for him, and for his People; and
Balaam performed the Office of a Priest. The only doubt is, to whom these
Sacrifices were offered. I suppose each of them had their several Intentions:
Balak supplicating Baal by them; and Balaam making his Prayer to the LORD,
though with such Superstitious Ceremonies, it is likely, as were used by the
Worshippers of Baal; in one of whose High Places these Sacrifices were offered.
But it may also be supposed, that Balaam telling Balak he could not effect any
thing without the LORD, the God of Israel, persuaded him to join with him at
present in his Worship, that they might prevail with him to withdraw his
presence from the Israelites. For there is no reason to think, that Balaam
would go to enquire of the LORD, when he had Sacrificed to other Gods. And it
appears evidently from v. 4. that he pretended to Sacrifice unto God; and would
not have presumed surely to tell him so, if he meant otherwise.

And Balaam said unto Balak.] When he had laid the pieces upon the Altars.

Stand by the Burnt-offering.] Attend thy Sacrifice, and pray to God to accept
it. By this it appears that these Sacrifices were of a different Nature from
those mentioned in XXII. 40. being Burnt-offerings which were wholly consumed.
And one of them seems to have been offered particularly for Balak, which he
calls his Burnt-offering; as the rest were for the Princes of Moab, who, it is
likely, stood by them representing all the People.

And here it is to be observed, that in old time, before the Law of Moses was
given, Burnt-offerings served for all purposes in Divine Worship: whether they
gave thanks for Blessings, or deprecated evil things, or prayed for good. Thus
Noah, when he returned Thanks to God for his preservation in the Ark, offered
Burnt-offerings, VIII Genesis 20. And when Job beseeched God to pardon his Sons,
I. 5. and his Friends, XLII. 8. he offered Sacrifices of this sort: and so did
Balak and Balaam here use them, to procure Blessings upon Moab, and a Curse
upon Israel.

And I will go.] By my self, into some private place, to consult with God, and
to exercise his Enchantments (as may be gathered from XXIV. 1.) whereby he
thought he might prevail for such a power as he desired, of Cursing the People
of Israel.

Peradventure the LORD will come to meet me.] He durst not be confident,
because he had lately opposed his proceeding (XXII. 31.) in a frightful manner.

And whatsoever he shows me.] Whatsoever he reveals to me, either by word or
otherwise.

I will tell thee.] Deal faithfully with thee, and conceal nothing from thee.

And he went to an High-place.] Or rather, into a Valley, for he was now in an
High-place when he Sacrificed; and did not go into another High-place, but down
into the Plain (as the Hebrew word properly signifies) where he might in some
solitary Retirement, address himself to God, and expect his Presence with him.
So we translate it in the Margin, he went solitary. Therefore, if we retain the
other translation, it must be understood of some part of the High-place, where
he might be solitary, viz. into the Grove, which High Places seldom wanted. In
these High Places they built their Temples, and had their Oracles; as we learn
from Justin, Lib. XXIV. cap. 6. where, he says, the Temple of Apollo, positum
est in monte Parnasso, etc. was seated upon the Mountain Parnassus: and from
Pausanias, who speaking of the Cave of Trophonius in Boeotia, says, (...), the
Oracle is in a Grove upon a Mountain. The like might be observed of other
Oracles: which may countenance this Conjecture, that some such pretended Oracle
might be in this High-place, where Balaam went for direction from God.

Ver. 4. And God met Balaam.] Appeared unto Elohim is constantly used, as it is
here, and every where else, till we come to verse 16. Which strengthens the
opinion, that the LORD hitherto spoke to him only by an Angel.

And he said unto him.] i. e. Balaam said unto God, when he saw him appear.

I have prepared seven Altars, and have offered upon every Altar a Bullock and
a Ram.] This shows he sacrificed unto God, and not unto Baal: and he represents
it to God, that he might be moved thereby, to condescend to his desire. For
Sacrificing was a form of Supplication, as we find in other places;
particularly 1 Samuel XIII. 12. and that which he begged of God, was, in all
likelihood, that he would give him power to Curse Israel.

Ver. 5. And he put a word into Balaam's mouth.] Told him what he should say.
And therefore, says Maimonides, he spoke by the Spirit of God: which he makes
account was the second degree of Prophecy. Whence that Description Balaam gives
of himself, he has said, who heard the words of God, P. II. More Nevochim, c.
45.

And said, Return unto Balak, and thus shall thou speak.] He commanded him to
speak unto Balak, at his return to him, as he was instructed, and no otherwise.
The words he bad him speak, are those that we read below, v. 7, 8, etc.

And he returned unto him, and lo he stood by his Burnt-sacrifice.] He found
him in the very same posture wherein he left him ( v. 3.) Which shows Balaam
did not go far, nor stay long before he returned: and that Balak was earnest in
his Supplications.

He and all the Princes of Moab.] Who were concerned in the good Success of
this Negotiation.

And he took up.] An Hebrew phrase for speaking aloud.

His Parable.] Or, Prophetical Speech; which was sometimes delivered in
Parables, properly so called: that is, not in plain Words, but in apt Figures
and Resemblances, (concerning which see Maimonides, P. II. cap. 43.) But here
the word Parable signifies, as it does in the Book of Job, a weighty Speech,
expressed in sublime and majestic words, XXVII Job 1. XXIX. 1.

And said, Balak the King of Moab has brought me from Aram.] See XXII. 5.

From the Mountains of the East.] The Country of Mesopotamia lay Eastward of
Moab: and in that part of it toward Arabia, was stony and mountainous. See
Bochartus in his Phaleg. Lib. II. cap. 6.

Saying, Come curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.] Two different
Expressions for the same thing; only the latter word (which we translate defy)
imports something of fury; because he would have had him curse them in such a
Prophetic Rage, as should have the most direful Effects upon them.

Ver. 8. How shall I curse him whom God has not etc.] As much as if he had
said, Balak desires of me that which is impossible. In the Jerusalem Targum
this verse is thus paraphrased, How shall I curse the House of Jacob, when the
WORD of the LORD has blessed them? or how shall I diminish the Family of
Israel, when the Word of the LORD has multiplied them?

Ver. 9. For from the top of the Rocks.] Upon which

I see him.] As Balak desired he might, (XXII. 41.) though for another purpose;
that he might curse them.

And from the Hills I behold him.] The same thing again, in other words,
according to the manner of the Eastern People. And both these may relate, not
only to the present view he had of the Camp of Israel, but to their future
Settlement in their own Land; wherein they were represented to him as dwelling
securely, under the special Protection of the Almighty.

Lo, the People shall dwell.] In the Land of Canaan.

Alone.] Not mingled with other Nations, but separated from them by different
Laws, Religion, and Manners. It seems also to import their Security and Safety,
by the Situation of their Country, and God's care of them.

And shall not be reckoned among the Nations.] Be a peculiar People by
themselves; and therefore not liable to the power of my Curses, like other
Nations. All this came to pass, partly by the natural situation of their
Country, which was surrounded with high Mountains, and rocky Precipices, so
that the coming to it was very difficult: but more especially by their Rites
and Customs; and particularly by their Diet, which restrained them from common
Conversation with other Nations, because they could not eat of their Food
(Swines flesh, for instance, which was a delicate Dish among the Gentiles, was
an Abomination to the Israelites) By which means they were the better secured
from learning the Religion of the Gentiles, having so little Communication with
them, that they were called by Diodorus Siculus, and others, an unsociable
People, and thought to have an Enmity to the rest of the World.

Ver. 10. Who can count the dust of Jacob?] This may refer either to their
present, or their future Increase; which was so great, that they might be
compared to the Dust of the Earth, or the Sand on the Abraham, XIII Genesis 16.
and to Israel, XXVIII. 14. where he says expressly, Thy Seed shall be as the
dust of the Earth.

And the number of the fourth part of Israel.] Any one of their Camps; every
one of which was grown to a vast number. For the whole Host of Israel was
divided into four Camps, under the Standards of Judah, Reuben, Ephraim and Dan,
(as we read in the second Chapter of this Book) one of which Camps lay more
plainly before him than the rest, viz. that on the West, under the Standard of
Ephraim.

Let me die the death of the righteous.] By the Righteous he means Israel: who
were now a People free from Idolatry; which was the great Crime of those days.
And he desires either to be as happy as they in the other World; or that he
might not die an immature and violent Death, but enjoy such a long Life here,
as was promised to them. The Author of Sephar Cosri takes it in the former
sense; alleging this place as a proof that a future state was believed in
ancient Times, though not so clearly expressed in the Prophetical Writings, as
other things are: for there is a certain Prayer, says he, of one that
prophesied by the Holy Ghost, who desired that he might die the death of the
righteous, Pars I. sect. 115.

And my last end be like his.] Or, Let my Posterity (for so the word we here
translate last end often signifies, CIX Psalm. 13. XI Dan. 4.) or, those that
come after me, be like unto his Descendants.

Ver. 11. And Balak said unto Balaam, what have thou done unto me?] This is
very surprising.

I took thee to curse mine Enemies, and behold, thou Thou have not only
frustrated my desires, in not cursing them; but quite contrary, have pronounced
great Blessings upon them. For so the Hebrew words signify, Blessed them with
blessings.

And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which the LORD
has put in my mouth?] He had told him so before, more than once, (XXII. 23.
XXIII. 3.) and now makes him Judge, Whether it was safe for him to disobey the
LORD, to comply with his Desires.

And Balak said unto him, come I pray thee with me, to another place.] He
thought Balaam gave him a reasonable Answer; and therefore gently entreats him
to make a trial, whether God would be pleased to be more favorable to his
desires, if he sought him in some other place. For whatsoever Balaam thought of
this matter, Balak was possessed with a Superstitious Fancy, that the very
Place or Prospect had been a Cause concurrent to produce the contrary Effect to
what he desired; and therefore entreated he would come with him to another,
where he might not see too many of them at once.

From whence thou may see them.] It seems this was thought necessary to make
their Curses effectual; that they should have a sight of those whom they
cursed, and that they should look upon them.

Thou shall see but the utmost part of them.] The Skirts of their Camps.

And shall not see them all.] He imagined perhaps that Balaam was affrighted at
the sight of their Multitude; and therefore durst not meddle with them.

And curse me them from thence.] He seems to desire him to curse only that
small parcel of the Israelites, whom he saw in the utmost part of the Camp;
hoping he might by degrees get them all, in like manner, destroyed.

Ver. 14. And he brought him unto the field of Zophim.] Sed^ Zophim: a place by
the very name apt to enchant a Superstitious Mind with expectation of Success,
as Dr. Jackson speaks. It is thought by some to be so called from the Watchers,
that were placed here; which the word Zophim imports.

To the top of Pisgah.] A very high Mountain in the Country of Moab, from
whence one might see a great way, and take a view of all the Parts of Canaan,
III Deuteronomy. 27. XXXIV. 1, 2, etc. but on that side of it whether Balak brought
him, Balaam could not see much of the Camp of Israel. It is likely he thought
by bringing him to a place so exceeding high, he should be nearer Heaven, and
so procure a more favorable Audience than before.

And built seven Altars, and offered a Bullock and a Ram on every Altar.] As he
had done before at Balaam's desire, in another High-place, ( v. 1, 2.) for
there only he imagined their Sacrifices would be acceptable. From hence
Conradus Pellicanus concludes Balaam to have been a Worshipper of the true God,
(as Jethro was) because he still continues to offer only such clean Creatures,
as were wont to be sacrificed to him by his own People.

Ver. 15. And he said unto Balak, stand here by thy Burnt-offering.] The same
Direction which he had given before, v. 3.

While I meet the LORD yonder.] In a place to which he pointed. Balaam made a
peradventure of it before, whether the LORD would come to meet him, or no, ( v.
3.) but now he confidently expects it; though he endeavored (it appears from
XXIV. 1.) still to compass his bad ends, by his Enchantments.

And the LORD met Balaam.] This is never said before, but only that God met
him, (by his Angel, as the Jews interpret it) which I take to be much short of
what is here said, that the LORD himself now met him. That is, there was a
glorious Appearance of the SCHECHINAH to him, (though not in such luster, I
suppose, as when it appeared to Moses) which so amazed him, that after this he
never went so much as to enquire what he should say or do. For though he
doubted, perhaps, of what the Angel said, yet now he was fully assured the
Israelites must be blessed.

And he put a word in his mouth.] Instructed him what he should say to Balak.

And said, go again unto Balak, and say thus.] Viz. All that we read v. 18, 19,
20, etc. which is a great deal more than he had said before.

And when he came to him, behold he stood by his Burnt-offering, and the
Princes of Moab with him.] See v. 6.

And Balak said unto him, what has the LORD spoken.] He was more solicitous to
know his doom, than he was before, when he asked no such question: and plainly
demonstrated, that he believed Balaam went to enquire of the LORD.

Ver. 18. And he took up his Parable.] See v. 7.

And said, rise up Balak and hear.] If this word rise up has respect to the
outward Reverence, which was wont to be shown to all Messages brought from God,
(which was expressed by rising up to receive them, as appears from the story of
another King of Moab, III Judges 20.) then, after the Sacrifice was ended, at
which they stood, Balak sat down until Balaam could be ready to acquaint him
with the Mind of God. But it may have respect only to the Mind, and signify,
stir up thy self to attend; awaken thy thoughts, and listen to what I say.

And hearken unto me, thou Son of Zippor.] The same thing repeated with more
earnestness. For to give ear, as the word is in the Hebrew, imports something
more than merely to hear; viz. diligent and earnest attention of Mind to what
is spoken.

Ver. 19. God is not a man that he should lie.] Do Israel, when he has said he
will bless them.

Neither the Son of Man.] An usual variation of the Expression of the same
thing, VIII Psalm. 4.

That he should repent.] Alter his Mind, when he has absolutely resolved any
thing. Balak seems to have fancied that by the change of the place where he
sacrificed, ( v. 13.) he might procure a change of the Divine Counsels.

Has he said, and shall he not do it?] What should hinder? for he wants no
power to execute his Will; and he cannot be moved to revoke his Word, by better
Information; nor can any thing happen which he did not foresee, to make him do
otherwise than he intended.

Or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?] This is the same with the
former, after the Prophetical manner of speaking, Omnia perjuga repetendo (as
Conradus ^ellicanus glosses) ad exagerationem. Only the foregoing words may be
thought to refer to his Threatenings, and these to his Promises.

Behold, I have received commandment to bless; and he has blessed, and I
cannot reverse it.] In these words he applies the general Proposition, in the
foregoing verse, to his particular Case. God has ordered me to pronounce a
Blessing upon Israel, for he himself has blessed them: and I can neither
reverse that Blessing, nor go against his Order.

He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in
Israel.] Both the word aven (which we translate iniquity) and the word amal
(which we translate perverseness) signify frequently in Scripture the highest
wickedness, viz. Idolatry. And so Onkelos here understood it, when he thus
paraphrased these words, I see that there are none who worship Idols in the
House of Jacob, nor any Servants of Trouble and Vanity (so they called Idols)
in Israel. And accordingly the Vulgar Latin expressly translates this verse
thus, There is no Idol in Jacob, nor is there any Image seen in Israel.] Which
seemed so clear a truth to Johannes Forsterus, a famous Professor of the Hebrew
Tongue, in the beginning of the Reformation, that in his Explication of both
these words in his Lexicon, he says, From this place all the Prophets borrowed
these Phrases, and translated them to express Impiety, i. e. Idolatrous
Worship, devised according to Men's own humors and desires, and by the Instinct
of the Devil: For Moses was the Fountain of all the Prophets. Thus he writes
upon the word (...), and he repeats it again upon the word (...). So that this
is the reason Balaam gives, why God had blessed, and he could not curse them,
because they were free from Idolatry: unto which, unless they could be seduced,
there was no hope that God would deliver them unto the power of their Enemies.
For which reason, Balaam afterward counseled this Prince, to entice them to
this Sin by beautiful Women, as the only way to move God to be angry with them.

There are indeed a great many that take these words in the common sense, for
all manner of Sin: which God is said not to see in this People, i. e. so as to
mark it out for Punishment. For though they were many ways great Offenders, yet
he had such an indulgent Kindness to them, that he would not correct them for
every Sin which they committed. But this returns to the former Exposition; that
they were safe, as long as they kept themselves from the great Transgression,
that is, Idolatry.

The LORD his God is with him.] They worshipping God alone, were therefore
under his special Care and Protection. Onkelos renders it, the WORD of the LORD
his God is his help. And so the Hi^rosol. Targum.

And the shout of a King is among them.] God being their King, he prophesies
that they should always triumph over their Enemies. For he alludes to the
Shouts which are made when a King, or great Captain returns victorious, with
the Spoils of those he has vanquished. So the meaning of the whole verse is
this, in brief; Since they do not worship Idols, but cleave to the LORD their
God, and serve him alone, he is present with them, not only to preserve them
from their Enemies, but to give them glorious Victories over them.

God brought them out of Egypt.] That they might be his Worshippers and
Servants; which if they continue, he will not desert them. For God brought them
forth from thence, that they might be his peculiar People, and he their King
and their God, as he often says himself, XI Lev. 45. XXII. 23. XXV. 38. XV
Numb. 41. all which places are observed by the Author of Cepher Cosri, Pars II.
sect. 50.

He has as it were the strength of an Unicorn.] Some would have this referred
to God, who brought them out of Egypt by a mighty Power; because he speaks in
the Plural Number of those to whom the former Sentence belongs. But this is no
good reason; for the Scripture frequently varies the Number, when the same
Person is spoken of. And in XXIV. 8. it is expressly said, God brought him (i.
e. Israel) out of Egypt; and he has the strength, etc. Which every one allows
is spoken of the Israelites: who are said to have the strength of this
Creature, with whom they are compared; or rather the height, as the Hebrew
word certainly signifies, XXV Psalm. 4. The strength of the Hills, (or rather,
the heighths of the Hills, as it is in the Margin) are his also: and XXII Job
25. The Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of Silver. So
the sense led our Interpreters to translate the Hebrew word (...), which may be
literally here rendered great heaps of Silver. These are the only places where
this word is found. The only difficulty is, what Creature it is which is here
called Reem; which we translate (as many others have done) an Unicorn: which
though most now take to be a fabulous Creature, that is not in being, yet Tho.
Bartholinus in his Anotomical Histories (Centur. II. Histor. 61.) tells us,
that an Ambassador from the King of Guinea to the Duke of Curland, assured him
at Copenhagen, that there is a Beast in Africa of the bigness of an ordinary
Horse, very swift and fierce, which has a Horn in its Forehead, about three
Spans in length; the dead Carcass of which he had seen, though never one alive.
But if this be supposed to be true, it is not the Creature here meant; for it
is plain by the Scripture that the Reem has two Horns, XXXIII Deuteronomy. 17. where
we read of the Horns of the Unicorn (as we translate it) to which the two
Tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh are compared. See also XXII Psalm. 27. Therefore
the famous Bochartus, after along discussion of other Opinions, thinks it most
probable that the Reem is a kind of Goat, which the Arabians called Algazel,
and is now called Gazellas; which is a tall Creature (some of them as high as a
Stag) with long and sharp Horns. So that Balaam foretells the Israelites should
be as eminent among other People, as the Reem was among other kinds of Goats.
Unless we will think it refers to what the Arabians observe, that it is proper
to this Animal to carry its Head very high, and to erect its Ears; which is an
excellent Emblem of the People of Israel; who being lately oppressed in Egypt,
were asserted by God into a state of Liberty, and raised to a great height of
Glory, in order to be advanced unto an higher, Hierozoicon P. I. Lib. III. cap.
27. At this Onkelos seems to have aimed, when he translates these words thus,
Fortitude and Exaltation are his: taking Reem not for a proper Name, but for an
Appellative; as if it were derived from Ramam, which signifies to exalt. I
shall only add, that there is one, who refers these words, neither to God, nor
to the Israelites, but to Egypt beforementioned. As if the sense was, though
the Egyptians were as strong as an Unicorn, they were not able to detain the
Israelites any longer in Bondage to them; but God brought them thence with a
mighty Hand and outstretched Arm: So Joseph Hispanus, Lib. III. Ikkarim, cap.
8.

Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination
against Israel.] Neither I, nor any Body else, have power to hurt them, by all
the secret Arts of Sorcery and Sooth-saying, which are practiced in the World.
It is not proper here to mention the various sorts of them; but it is manifest
from ancient History, that these curious Arts (as St. Luke calls them) had got
a kind of Sovereignty in the Eastern Nations, who for many Ages were much
addicted to them. One of our own Church has said many excellent things
concerning the Original of this Sorcery, and Idolatry, which commonly
accompanied each other, to whom I refer the Reader: See Dr. Jackson's Original
of Unbelief, etc. cap. 19. The Vulgar Latin takes these words, as if they were
spoken in praise of the Israelites, that there were no Enchantments or
Divinations used among them, nor any other Diabolical Arts, which were
forbidden by their Law, in several places. From these they being as free as
from Idolatry (mentioned v. 21.) they were secure of God's favor to them. And
so we acknowledge, in the Margin of our Bibles, the words may be translated,
There is no Enchantment in Jacob, or among them: From which God intended in all
Ages to preserve them by the Prophets he raised up to them. And thus R. Solomon
expounds this verse, either to signify that they could not be cursed, because
they were not given to Enchantments and Divinations: or that they needed not to
make use of Diviners and Magicians, having all that was needful for them to
know, revealed to them by God's Prophets, and by Vrim and Thummim, etc.

According to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, what has God
wrought!] The LXX. translate the first words (...), when time shall be; or,
upon all occasions: not only now, but in future Ages, Men shall relate with
admiration, what God has wrought for this People. Not only in bringing them
out of Egypt, but in conducting them into Canaan; in drying up Jordan, as he
did the Red Sea; and subduing the Canaanites, as he overthrew Pharaoh and his
Host, etc. If there be any difference between Jacob and Israel, the former
signifies this People, when they were in their low estate; and the latter, when
they were eminently exalted: in both which God did wonderful things for them,
which astonished all that observed them.

Ver. 24. Behold, the People shall rise up as a great The Hebrew word Labi
certainly signifies a Lioness, which is no less, but rather more fierce than a
Lion: and so represented by Herodotus, Lib. III. cap. 108. and many other
Authors mentioned by Bochartus, in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. III. cap. 1.

And lift up himself as a young Lion.] The Hebrew word Ari is used in general
for any Lion whatsoever, without respect unto age. They that would have it
signify a younger sort, take it for a Lion full grown and adult (as they
speak) of a middle Age, between Cephir, which signifies a young Lion, and
Sachel, which signifies an old. And the Israelites are here said to rise up,
and to lift up themselves, like to these fierce Creatures, to signify their
Assaulting their Enemies with an undaunted Courage.

He shall not lie down till he eat of the prey.] Which Lions rend and tear with
their Claws and Teeth, irresistibly and speedily. So the Hebrew word tereph
(which we render prey) imports; the Flesh of Beasts torn in pieces.

And drink the blood of the slain.] He alludes to the ravenousness of Lions;
and signifies the entire and perfect Victory the Israelites should win over
their Enemies. For this Prophecy has a peculiar respect to the conquest of the
Canaanites under the conduct of Joshua.

And Balak said unto Balaam, neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.]
It seems he thought his Blessings to be as powerful as his Curses: and
therefore desires him to forbear both, if he could not have what he desired.

And Balaam answered, Told I thee not, saying, all that the LORD speaks that
must I do?] As I cannot do any thing against the Mind and Will of God, so I
must do as he bids me, v. 3, 12.

And Balak said unto Balaam, Come I pray thee, and I will bring thee to another
place.] Still he fancies, according to the Superstition of those days, there
might be something unlucky in the place, that made his Prayers unsuccessful;
which might prove acceptable in another. For as the Syrians imagined in future
Ages, that some Gods were powerful in the Hills, who could do nothing in the
Plains, (1 Kings XX. 23, 28.) so, it seems, there was such a Conceit at this
time in these Countries, that some Gods delighted more in one Hill, than they
did in another; for he still brings Balaam to another high place. Such a
Conceit we see remains to this day in the Romish Church, where the Lady, and
the Rood of one place, are thought far more powerful, and therefore more
frequented than those of another.

Peradventure it will please God, that thou may curse me them from thence.]
He said nothing of God's permission before, v. 13. but now was convinced his
consent was to be gained. And would not despair of it, but thought it possible,
that very thing might seem right and good in his Eyes (as the Hebrew phrase
here is) in a new place, which displeased him in both the former.

Ver. 28. And Balak brought Balaam to the top of This was the most famous
High-place in all the Country of Moab; where, as Mr. Seldom conjectures, Baal
had a Temple, and was worshipped; and thence called Baal-Peor. So Theodoret and
Suidas, (...). Beel signifies Saturn, and Phegor (or, as we pronounce it, Peor)
the place where he was worshipped. Just as the Greeks called Jupiter by the
name of Olympius, and Mercurius, of Cylenius, etc. And in all likelihood by
Beth-Peor, (XXXIV Deuteronomy. 6.) which in English is the House of Peor, in the Land
of Moab, is meant the Temple of Baal which stood upon the Mountain. For so the
word Beth signifies frequently among the Hebrews, not an ordinary House, but
the House of some God: As Beth-Ashtaroth, 1 Samuel XXXI. 10. and Beth-Baal, 1
Kings XVI. 32. And there is often mention of Beth-shemesh in the Holy Writings,
(XV Joshua 10. I Judges 33. and many other places) which signifies the Temple
of the Sun. From whence the word (...) among the Arabians upon the Red Sea.
Which Stephanus (de Vrbibus) expounds, (...), the House of the Sun. See
Syntagma I. de Diis Syris, cap. 5.

That looks toward Jeshimon.] See XXI. 20.

And Balaam said unto Balak, build me here seven Altars, and prepare me here
seven Bullocks, and seven Rams.] He orders the very same Sacrifices he did at
first, without any difference, ( v. 1.) either not knowing any other Method of
obtaining their Desires; or thinking it in vain to devise any other.

And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a Bullock, and a Ram upon every
Altar.] He was wholly governed by Balaam in this: and though he changed the
place, made no alteration in the Sacrifices; which were as complete and perfect
as any in those times offered.

Here is no mention made of the time when these things were done; but we may be
certain all the three forementioned solemn Sacrifices, in three several places,
were not offered upon one and the same day. And superstitious People, as all
Histories tell us, having been as curious in the choice of days, as well as
places, it is probable that Balak picked out some day or hour, which he thought
might be more lucky to him than the foregoing.

CHAP. XXIV.
AND when Balaam saw that it pleased the Of which he had given him a double
proof, XXII. 5, etc. 16, etc.

He went not out, as at other times.] See XXIII. 3, 15.

To seek for Enchantments.] This implies that he had hitherto, in the process
of this business, used some wicked Arts to effect his ends, or desired to be
directed to them. But being not able to obtain any thing, but Commands cross to
all his Designs, he gave himself up wholly to the conduct of God's Holy Spirit,
and did not so much as offer to seek for Enchantments. In the Hebrew the words
are, to meet with Enchantments; unto which he hoped to be directed, that he
might be able to Curse Israel. For though he addressed himself to the true God,
(whom he calls the LORD, XXIII. 26.) yet it was in a Superstitious way; with
such Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, as were not of God's appointment: but
either devised by evil Spirits, or very grateful to them; whereby he hoped to
be shown by what means he might disable Israel, and deliver them into the hand
of Balak. For the ancient Magic derived from Zoroaster, was nothing else, as
Plato pretends (in Alcibiade I.) but the Knowledge of Divine Things, and the
right way of worshipping God: And Apuleius says the same of it, that it was
Diis immortalibus accepta, colendi eos ac venerandi pergnara, etc. a Science
acceptable to the Immortal Gods, very skilful how to worship and honor them;
being pious, and knowing in Divine Things. Which sufficiently bewrays this
Divine Knowledge (as they called it) to be impious; for Zoroaster instructed
his Disciples in the Worship of the Fire, as an Emblem, at the best, of the
Sun; which they looked upon as a visible Image of this invisible God, and upon
that account worshipped it. And after his time, it is manifest, this heavenly
knowledge, as they esteemed it, degenerated into more uncouth Rites, and wicked
Arts, whereby they pretended to be able to make the Gods do what they pleased.
Pliny mentions an Herb, Lib. XXIV. cap. 17. which he says Magicians used, quum
Deos velint evocare, when they would call out the Gods, and draw them to their
purpose. In which power they so gloried, that the Witch in Apuleius threatened
the God's themselves with the greatest Mischief; and boasted she could deprive
the Stars of their Light; and by her Charms control, not only the Moon, but
the Sun himself, and the Gods of all sorts. And as for Mankind, nothing is more
known than those Magical words, devovere, defigere, obligare; which are proper
to that Black Art, as Salmasius observes (upon Solinus p. 1091.) which by
Incantations, Deprecations, direful Execrations, Herbs, Fascinations, so
confounded the Mind of him who was thus devoted, (as they term it) that he
could remember nothing of what he was about, nor discharge any Function of
Nature. The several Species of it are mentioned by Maimonides, who says the
Zabij pretended to exercise this power, not only over particular Persons, but
over whole Provinces, by certain Words, and Actions, and Things, which no Body
can understand to have any Virtue in them, More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 37.

But he set his face toward the Wilderness.] He stirred not from the place
where the Sacrifice was offered, as he had been wont to do, but only looked
toward the Wilderness, where the Israelites lay encamped, XXII. 1.

Ver. 2. And Balaam lift up his eyes.] To look

And he saw Israel abiding in his Tents, etc.] In the order God had appointed
in the second Chapter of this Book, v. 52. where he commands them to pitch
their Tents, every Man by his own Camp, and by his own Standard, throughout
their Hosts.

And the Spirit of God came upon him.] From whence Maimonides concludes, he was
a Prophet of the second rank, who spoke by the Holy Ghost, More Nevoch. P. II.
cap. 45.

Ver. 3. And he took up his Parable, and said.] He Hebrew words may be
interpreted, he lifted up his Parable. See XXIII. 7.

Balaam the Son of Beor has said.] Though the Spirit of God came upon him,
which suggested the words mentioned v. 5, 6, 7, etc. yet it did not alter the
Temper and Disposition of his Mind; which was no less vain and ambitious, than
it was covetous and, possessed with an hatred of the Israelites; as appears by
the counsel which he gave at last, how to ruin them: This Vanity seems to be
expressed in these, and in the following words, wherein he magnifies himself
more than the Spirit of God.

And the Man whose eyes were open has said.] Who when he was awake, received
Revelations from God, which was an extraordinary favor; for commonly he
appeared to Men in a Dream. Others translate it, whose Eyes were shut, i. e.
who was in a Trance or Ecstasie, so that he saw nothing with his bodily Eyes,
but only with his Mind. The Jerusalem Targum thus paraphrases these words,
(which shows he looked upon them as a boasting of himself) The Man said, who was
honored above his Brethren; to whom that was revealed, which was hidden from
all the Prophets.

He has said, who heard the words of God.] Mark what he says, who delivers
the words which he received from God.

Which saw the Vision of the Almighty.] With whom he was so familiar, that he
himself, at last, appeared to him in a Vision, XXIII. 16. as, at first, he
appeared to him by an Angel, XXII. 35.

Falling into a Trance.] There being in the Hebrew only the word Nophel, which
signifies falling, we supply the sense by adding into a Trance; lest any one
should think he fell to the ground, or fell asleep; which seems not to be the
meaning; but that he was in a rapture, perceiving nothing by his outward
Senses. Yet the forementioned Targum takes it as if he had fallen slat upon his
face; and the LXX. translate it, He saw the vision of God in sleep: according
to that XV Genesis 12. A deep sleep fell upon Abraham; where the word Naphela is
thought by some to give a good Explication of Nophel in this place.

But having his Eyes open.] His Mind being then possessed with a clear
apprehension of things, which God revealed to him, when his Senses were all
locked up, and could discern nothing.

Ver. 5. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel.] The
same thing expressed in different words: which was an usual Elegancy in those
Countries. Wherein he declares his admiration Moab.

Ver. 6. As the Valleys are they spread forth.] This Israelites themselves,
whom he compares to those fruitful Valleys which abound with Water: For the
Hebrew word signifies either Valleys or Brooks.

As Gardens by the River side.] Which were far more green and flourishing, cool
and pleasant, than those that lay in dry places.

As the Trees of Lign-Aloes.] Growing in those Gardens, or by the River side;
which perfumed the Air by their sweet Odors. For there are two sorts of Aloes
observed by the Ancients: the one a Tree which was very odoriferous, called
(...), and (...), growing in India and Arabia; and the other a Plant or Herb,
out of which was pressed a purging Juice. The former is often joined with Myrrh
in the Holy Scripture, and was burnt as a Perfume, and called by the Ancients
(...), (as Salmasius observes in his Exerc. Plin. upon Solinus, p. 1053, 1054.
etc.) which is the Lign or Wood-aloes here spoken of. And Plutarch in his
Symposiacs, Lib. VI. cap. 7. says, some were wont to color their Wine, (...),
either with Aloes, or with Cinamoms, (which is meant of this Wood-Aloes) which
gave the Wine a pleasant taste.

Which the LORD has planted.] Which grew naturally of themselves ( Solo Dei
Natu, as Bochartus glosses) without any Labor, Care, or Art of Man used about
them.

And as Cedar-trees beside the Waters.] The Cedar was one of the most goodly
Trees in those Countries, upon many accounts; particularly for its fragrancy;
the Greeks being wont to burn the Wood of it upon their Altars, as the same
Salmasius there observes, p. 951, 952. By all these Metaphors, Balaam sets
forth the present and future Prosperity of the Israelites, and their fame,
which spread it self into all Nations round about; and seems to be represented
by the sweet Odors here mentioned.

He shall pour the Water out of his Buckets.] I take this to be meant of God's
pouring down Rain abundantly, out of the Clouds, upon the Valleys, Gardens, and
Trees, unto which the Israelites are compared: signifying that they should be
exceedingly blessed by him; for they stood in need of nothing more than Rain in
those Countries.

And his Seed shall be in many Waters.] Or, by many Waters: i. e. be sown in a
Ground well watered, and consequently bring forth a plentiful Crop, XXXII Isa.
20. There are those who refer both these to their numerous Posterity;
Procreation of Children being sometimes expressed in Scripture by the Metaphors
of Waters, and Fountains, and Cisterns, as every one knows. And both the LXX.
and Onkelos interpret this of one particular Person that should arise of their
Seed. For thus the former of them renders this part of the verse; There shall
come a Man out of his Seed, who shall rule over many Nations. And the latter of
them paraphrases in this manner; There shall be a great King, who shall be
anointed of his Children, and shall have Dominion over many People: which the
Jerusalem Targum says expressly is Christ. For thus this verse begins in that
Paraphrase; A King shall arise out of his Sons, and their Redeemer from among
them, etc. and thus concludes it, and the Kingdom of the King Messiah shall be
magnificently exalted.

And his King shall be higher than Agag.] This seems to have been the Name of
all the Kings of the Amalekites, (for we read of one called Agag long after
this time, 1 Samuel XV. 8, 9.) as Abimelech was the Name of the Philistine Kings,
and Pharaoh of the Egyptian. And at this time, no Nation thereabouts was in
greater Reputation than the Amalekites, (v. 20.) who thought themselves able to
obstruct the Israelites passage into Canaan; and gave a very early proof of the
high opinion of their own Power and Prowess, by attacking the Israelites as
soon as they came out of Egypt. Balaam therefore foretells the King of Israel
should be the greatest of all other, (for he was acquainted with none higher
than Agag) which some think has a peculiar respect to their first King Saul,
who subdued the Amalekites, and took Agag captive. But his Successor was far
greater than he; and the Jews themselves think this has its full completion in
the LORD Christ.

And his Kingdom shall be exalted.] They shall increase and multiply, till
their Kingdom be greatly enlarged; as it was in the days of David and Solomon:
who were but Shadows of the great King MESSIAH.

Ver. 8. God brought him out of Egypt, he has as it All the power of Egypt
could not detain them in slavery; but they came out from thence with a strong
and high hand, (XIII Exodus 9. XIV. 8.) and are grown a mighty People. See the
foregoing Chapter, v. 22. where this has been explained.

He shall eat up the Nations, his Enemies.] Utterly destroy the seven Nations
of Canaan.

And shall break their bones.] So that they shall never recover their Strength.

And pierce them through with his Arrows.] Having given them their deadly
wound. Or, as some translate the Hebrew words, break their Arrows in pieces; i.
e. quite disarm them.

He couched, he lay down.] He prophesies that the Israelites, having conquered
the Canaanites, should settle in their Land, and take their rest, and live
securely. Which he speaks of with such confidence, as if it were already done.

As a Lion, and as a great Lion.] See XXIII. 24. the signification of Ari and
Labi.

Who shall stir him up?] Give them any disturbance. It is observed of Lions,
that they do not betake themselves to remote or secret places, when they go to
sleep; but lie down any where, (as Oppianus describes them, Lib. III.) as if
they understood, that let them sleep where they pleased, no Body durst meddle
with them. See Bochartus in his Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. III. cap. 2. And
therefore being applied to the Israelites, signifies such an absolute and
secure possession of the Land of Canaan, that none should have the boldness to
assault, or give them any disquiet. Which came to pass chiefly in the days of
David and Solomon.

Blessed be he that blesses thee, and cursed is he that curses thee.] These
are the very words wherewith Isaac concluded his blessing of his Son Jocob,
XXVII Genesis 29. Which God now confirmed from the Mouth of one of their Enemies,
who spoke, at this time, by his Spirit.

Ver. 10. And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam.] Balaam, (whom he had
sent for a great way, and entertained for some time) and therefore stopped him
from proceeding, for the present, any further in his Prophecy.

And smote his hands together.] A token of vehement Anger, XXI Ezekiel. 17.

And Balak said unto Balaam.] It is likely he was so full of Wrath, that he
could not speak presently, but expressed it only in his Looks and Actions.

I called thee to curse mine Enemies, and thou have altogether blessed them.]
Thou have not said one word to my purpose, but all quite contrary.

These three times.] Though I have been at great expense, and built Altars, and
offered many Sacrifices, in three several places. But at what distance of time,
one from another, does not appear.

Ver. 11. Therefore now flee thou unto thy place.] Get flee, which indicates
that he could not endure the sight of him, while he remained thus angry. And as
he banished him his Presence, so he commanded him to make all possible haste
out of his Country.

I thought to promote thee to great honor.] And to bestow as much Wealth upon
him, as he desired: which is included in the word honor, XXII. 17.

But lo the LORD.] Whom thou pretendest to obey.

Has kept thee back from honor.] By not permitting thee to comply with my
desire. It is uncertain whether these words were spoken in anger and scorn, or
seriously and in good earnest; believing he was hindered by the LORD's will and
pleasure from cursing Israel. Which he had more reason to believe, than he had
to hope he might obtain liberty to curse them, (XXIII. 27.) and therefore was,
without all reason, in this Passion against Balaam.

And Balaam spoke unto Balak.] Prayed Balak to hear him patiently, a few words,
before he departed.

Spoke I not also to thy Messengers, which thou sentest unto me, saying.] Did I
not before I saw thee, tell those that came to invite me to thee, the very same
which I told thee afterward.

If Balak would give me his House full of Gold and Silver, I cannot go beyond
the commandment of the LORD, to do more or less.] So he told his Messengers,
XXII. 18.

Of my Mind.] According as I please.

But what the LORD says, that will I speak.] So he told Balak himself, XXII.
38. All which he recalls to his Mind, to show him that there was no Cause for
his Anger, he having performed as much as he undertook; which was to follow
God's directions, as he had done strictly. And it is likely, that by this just
Representation of what had passed between them, he brought Balak to a cooler
temper, so that he suffered him to go on, to deliver what follows.

And now, behold, I go to my People.] And now I will obey thee, as well as God,
and be gone to my own Country.

Come therefore, and I will advertise thee, etc.] But before I go, permit me to
give thee some Advice. So the Hebrew word Jaatz constantly signifies, to give
Counsel. And so the Vulgar here translates it; but took it for the wicked
Advice, which we read, in the next Chapter, was executed after Balaam's
departure, and of which he was certainly the Author, XXXI. 16. and therefore
thus translates the next words, What thy People shall do unto this People. But
the Hebrew Text and the LXX. are directly contrary unto this; being, as we
translate the words, What this People shall do to thy People. Therefore
Onkelos, to take in the foregoing sense, without altering the latter part of
the verse, puts in one word, and makes the whole run thus, I will give thee
counsel what to do, and (will show thee) what this People shall do to thy
People in the latter days. And the Jerusalem Targum more largely and plainly,
I wll advise thee what thou shall do to this People; make them to sin.
Otherwise thou shall not have dominion over them, but this People shall
domineer over thy People in the latter end of days.

In the latter days.] In future Ages. This shows the foregoing words do not
speak of what Moab should do to Israel by his Advice; for that was done as soon
as he was gone.

Ver. 15. And he took up his Parable and said, Balaam etc.] This was the
Preface to his foregoing Prophecy. See v. 3.

Ver. 16. He has said, who heard the words of God, verse also is the same with
the fourth, only a few words added, And knew the knowledge of the most High.
Which he adds, to show his intimate acquaintance with the Supreme LORD of the
World. For he speaks of God in the very same style, which Moses does, calling
him both El, and Schaddai, and Eljon, and Jehovah. Which demonstrates that he
was not a Stranger to the true God; though corrupted with bad Affections, and
addicted also to foul Superstitions.

I shall see him.] Or, I do see him, (for the Future Tense is often used for
the Present) that is, he saw the Person of whom he was going to speak,
represented to him in a Vision.

But not now.] He saw him not as in being, now at present; but to come in
future times.

I shall behold him, but not nigh.] The same thing in other words; but more
plainly telling them, they must not expect this Person in their time, nor in
the next Generation, but in remoter Ages.

There shall come a Star out of Jacob.] A Star denotes a great Person: and
being understood to be spoken of Christ, it denotes his Caelestial Original.
And both Onkelos and Jonathan, and the Jerusalem Targum, take the Messiah to
be here meant, and so does R. Moses Haddarsan, and Bereschith Rabbath; and a
great many Christian Interpreters (as Huetius observes in his Demonstr. Evang.
Propos. VII. sect. 9.) particularly Eusebius and Cyril of Alexandria: Who, in
his VIIIth Book against Julian, confutes his Exposition of these words, which
is this; (...). That this belongs to David, and to his Successors, is
sufficiently manifest. To which St. Cyril replies, That if Balaam had spoken of
David, and the Kings of Israel, he would have said, There shall arise Stars out
of Jacob, etc. whereas he speaks of one alone, (...), as very illustrious among
the Stars, which, it is evident, can be none but Christ. Unto which I shall add
the words of a later Writer of the Jewish Nation, R. Isaac in his Illumin.
Fidei, set forth not long ago by the learned Wagenseil: Where he argues this
cannot be understood of David, or any other King of Israel, because none of
them ever reigned over all the Earth, (i. e. over all the Children of Seth,
whom none of them destroyed) but it is meant, he concludes, of the MESSIAH; who
is compared to a Star, because of the perennity of his Kingdom, and the
splendour of his Dominion, and his great Acts throughout the World, p. 72, and
80. Where he makes this a Prophecy of one Kingdom alone to be in the World,
viz. that of the Israelites, who are called the People of the Saints of the
most High, VII Dan. 27. Which is true enough, if he had understood the right
meaning of Israelites; who are those, not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

It is not fit to conclude this without one Observation more, that so long ago
as the time of the Emperor Adrian, this was understood by the generality of
the Jews, to be a Prophecy of the Messiah. For they followed one whose Name was
Chocab (i. e. a Star) to whom the famous R. Akiba (a Doctor, who, they say, had
Four and twenty thousand Scholars) applied these words of Balaam, and calling
him Barchoceb, i. e. the Son of a Star, anointed him their King, and carried a
Sword before him, crying, Behold the very King Messiah. This is reported by the
Jews themselves in Tzenach David, and several other Books. All which, I think,
does not hinder, but that King David may be hereby signified in the first
sense; though as a Type of the MESSIAH, the great Son of David, in whom it was
completed.

And a Scepter shall rise out of Israel.] This some think may first have a
respect to David, and then to the MESSIAH, the King of Israel. But the Chaldee
paraphrast refers the whole to Christ, whose words are these, A King shall
arise out of the House of Jacob, and the Messiah shall be anointed of the House
of Israel. Nor is it any wonder that Balaam should prophecy of him, so many
years before he was born, and so plainly, that Moses himself does not speak in
plainer terms: but it is to be looked upon as the effect of God's infinite
Goodness, who would not have those, that were not of the Seed of Abraham, to be
wholly ignorant of what he intended to do for all Mankind. And this was
necessary to be plainly told them, because otherwise they would not have
understood it.

And shall smite the Corners of Moab.] The latter part of this Prophecy,
Huetius thinks, belongs to David, as the former part to Christ. Which was the
opinion of Maimonides, who divided the Prophecy between them. And this was
indeed literally fulfilled in David, who subdued the Moabites entirely, as we
read 2 Samuel VIII. 8. LX Psalm. 8. CVIII. 9. Some translate these words, He shall
smite through the Princes of Moab. So the LXX. (...): which does not alter the
sense. And it is no unusual thing with the Prophets, when they intend to speak
of something nearer to them, to be transported by the Spirit of God, to speak
of things a great deal more remote. As Balaam here foretelling a great Ruler
should come out of Jacob, first speaks of the greatest of all, above Fourteen
hundred years after his time; and then of David, who reigned about Four hundred
years after this.

And destroy all the Children of Sheth.] They who interpret this of David, take
Sheth to have been some great Person in that Country, or some Place of great
note, the Inhabitants of which are here threatened to be destroyed. But these
are mere conjectures, which have no foundation in History: whereas, if we
understand it of Christ, and translate the first word, not he shall destroy,
but (as Castalio and others do) he shall rule over, the sense is very
remarkable. It being a Prophecy, that in the times of the MESSIAH, there shall
be no longer such a distinction, as God now made between the Israelites and
other Nations, (by the peculiar Laws he gave them at their entrance into
Canaan) but all Mankind, who are equally descended from Seth, shall be united
under his Government. And thus not only Lyranus and Abulensis and others
interpret it, but Onkelos also, whose words are, He shall have dominion over
all the Sons of Men. For he thought it reasonable by the Children of Seth to
understand all Mankind, who were propagated from him, who succeeded in the
place of Abel that was killed; all the Seed of Cain perishing in the Flood.

Ver. 18. And Edom shall be a possession.] So it was David, 2 Samuel VIII. 14.

And Seir shall be a possession.] This was a famous Mount in the Country of
Edom, XXXVI Genesis 8. and being the strongest part of the Country, may signify
here, that no place should be able to hold out, though never so strongly
fortified by Nature or Art. And so we read they all became David's Servants, 2 Samuel VIII. 14. 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 13.

For his Enemies.] i. e. For the Israelites.

And Israel shall do valiantly.] For they subdued in those days many other
Countries; as we read in the forenamed Chapters, 2 Samuel VIII. I Chron. XVIII.

Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion.] This may relate to
Christ, as well as to David, in whom it was literally fulfilled. And so
Baal-Hatturim observes, that v. 16. it is said of Balaam, that he knew the Mind
of the most High, for he prophesied of the Messiah, when he said, Out of Jacob
shall one come that shall have dominion. The word jerd, as the Masora notes, is
used only here, and in LXXII Psalm. 8. where the Psalmist describes the
Universal Kingdom of Christ in these words, He shall have dominion from Sea to
Sea, and from the Rivers unto the end of the Earth.

And shall destroy him that remains in the City.] Not only rout them in the
Field, but take their defenced Cities. And, it is likely, he particularly aims
at some great City, and best fortified, which was the Metropolis, and the
strongest hold in the Kingdom. Such a one there was in Edom, as the Psalmist
suggests, LX. 9.

And when he looked on Amalek.] On the Country which the Amalekites inhabited.

He took up his Parable and said.] See v. 3.

Amalek was the first of the Nations.] The most eminent among the neighboring
Nations; or one of the most noble, as Bochart renders it, Gens una e
nobilissimis.

But his latter end shall be, that he perish for ever.] This God commanded Saul
to execute (1 Samuel XV. 3.) according to the doom passed upon them, after their
fight with Israel, XVII Exodus 14, 16. and he lost his Kingdom for doing his
Work imperfectly. Which the Vulgar Latin takes to be the meaning of the seventh
verse of this Chapter. Onkelos paraphrases the whole verse in this manner,
Amalek was the beginning of the Wars with Israel, therefore his end shall be to
perish for ever. The Targum Hieros. more plainly, The Amalekites were the first
People that made War against Israel; and in the latter days they shall make War
against them, etc.

Ver. 21. And he looked on the Kenites.] He standing Peor, which was, it is
likely, the highest place of the Country, (for which reason Balak brought him
thither, after he had tried other high places, XXIII. 28.) might see a great
way, and possibly behold the very Rocks wherein the Kenites dwelt. But what
People are meant by this name, is not clearly evident. For there were a People
called Kenites, who were a part of the Nations that inhabited the Land of
Canaan, XV Genesis 19. these cannot be here intended; for they were too far off
from this place. And as for the Kenites mentioned in I Judges 16. IV. 11. who
dwelt among the Israelites when they came into Canaan, they had as yet no fixed
state, but were with them in the Wilderness. Therefore, it is likely, they were
some of the Kindred of Jethro (originally derived from the same Family that he
was of) who remained in Midian; and adjoined so close to the Country of the
Amalekites, that they are said to dwell among them, 1 Samuel XV. 6. For it is
plain, the word Keni in Hebrew is the Name of a People, not of a particular
Person; and there might be a great many of them; some in Canaan, others in
Midian; and of these latter, some went with the Israelites into Canaan when
they conquered it, and others remained still in their own Country. They seem
all to have been descended from one Ken or Kain mentioned IV Judges 11. (as
Scaliger conjectures in his Elenchus Trihaeres. cap. 23.) Jethro's Posterity
being but one Family of this People.

Strong is thy dewlling place.] They were but a small People, who dwelt upon
steep Mountains.

And put thy Nest in a Rock.] This is but a further description of their
Country, in other words. For Nest signifies their Habitation; only it seems to
import that their dwelling was little, in craggy Mountains, where they looked
upon themselves as very safe and secure, the access to them being very
difficult. And from hence, I suppose, they were called Shelamites, (as both the
Hierus. Targum and Onkelos here term them, instead of Kenites) i. e. peaceable
People; because no body meddled with them, nor they with any body.

And the Kenite shall be wasted.] By little and little diminished.

Until Ashur shall carry thee away captive.] Till at last they were all carried
away by the Assyrians, when they overran Syria, 2 Kings XVI. 9.

And he took up his Parable, and said.] Having rested a while, he sighed, and
said aloud. See v. 3.

Alas! who shall live when God does this?] What miserable times will those be,
when the Assyrians shall overrun a great part of the World? How few will
escape their Devastations? Or, who would not desire rather to die, than live in
those days?

But some, I observe, refer this, not to what goes before, but to what follows;
which relates to the Desolations made by the following Empires, especially the
Roman.

Ver. 24. And Ships shall come* from the Coast of Chittim.] Whether this
Prophecy has respect (in the word Chittim) to the Greeks or to the Romans, or
to both, it was plainly fulfilled, as the learned Huetius Hierom, but Onkelos,
and Jonathan, and the Jerusalem Interpreter, and the Arabic, understand by
Chittim the Country of Italy, or some part thereof. And Bochartus proves, by
many Arguments, that the People of that Country did descend from Chittim. See X
Genesis 4. Yet it is not likely that Chittim, being the Son of Javan who peopled
Greece, went so far at first from the rest of his Brethren; but his Children
peopled some part thereabouts. From whence, in after times, when they were
increased, they sent Colonies into Italy. Particularly Macedonia is called by
the Name of Chittim, in the Book of Maccabees, 1* Macc. I. 1. VIII. 5. And
therefore I take the Greeks under Alexander to be here intended in the first
place, and then the Romans in the next; each of them fulfilling the several
parts of this Prophecy.

And shall afflict Assure.] This was done by Alexander, who over-threw the
Persian Empire, which ruled over the Chaldaeans and Assyrians. So Theodoret
understands the word Chittim, to signify Alexander and his Macedonians, whose
Country was anciently called (...), as Hesychius tells us, they being a mixture
(as Mr. Mede probably conjectures in his XLVIII Discourse, p. 377.) of the Sons
of Madai and Chittim. The Romans indeed afterward overthrew the Greek Empire,
but we do not read that they made War against the Assyrians till the time of
Trajan; who subdued them, and reduced them into a Province, as Dio relates,
Lib. LXVIII.

And shall afflict Eber.] This was done by the Romans, not by the Grecians. For
we are to understand by Eber the Hebrew Nation, called the Children of Eber, X
Genesis 21. So the LXX. translate it, (...): the Name of Hebrews being as plainly
derived from Eber, as that of Jews from Judah. Now they were not afflicted by
Alexander in his Conquests, but rather kindly treated by him. And therefore
this cannot be meant of the Greeks; unless we will think it fulfilled in the
time of Antiochus, who descended indeed from the Macedonians, but did not come
from that Country; nor did he afflict them long; much less make them desolate,
as the Romans under Vespasian and Titus did, which seems to be here intended.

And they also shall perish for ever.] This does not refer to Eber, but to the
Nation that afflicted him, viz. the Roman Empire; which he prophesies shall not
always afflict others* but at last be utterly destroyed it self. Aben-Ezra
indeed refers it to the Kingdom of the Seleucidae, or the Greek Empire: but R.
Isaac beforementioned, thinks the destruction of the Romans is intended in
this Prophecy; only he fancies it is to be accomplished by a Christ not yet
come.

And Balaam rose up and went.] As Balak had commanded him, v. 11.

And returned to his place.] Unto his Country, viz. Mesopotamia. But he was
detained by the Midianites in his passage thither; among whom he was slain, as
we read in the XXXIth Chapter. For Men are said to do that, which they design
and endeavor to do, VIII Exodus 18. XIV Numb. 40. If this be not the meaning,
then after he came to his own Country, he returned to the Midianites, at their
entreaty, or by his own inclination; and (either as he was going home, or when
he came back) gave that impious Counsel, which was executed not long after
this, as we find in the next Chapter. For that he was the Author of it, we are
assured by three Divine Writers. See 2 Pet. II. 15. Jude v. 11. II Revel. 14.

It is a strange Exposition which Baal-hatturim gives of his going to his
place: that is, says he, he went down into Hell. But it may serve to confirm
the common Interpretation of that which is said of Judas, I Acts 25.

And Balak also went his way.] To Kiriah-Huzoth, I suppose, mentioned XXII. 39.

CHAP. XXV.
AND Israel abode in Schittim.] A place Moab (where they lay, while all the
forementioned things were transacted, XXII. 1.) called Abel-Shittim, XXXIII.
49. but it is usual to cut off the former part of a places name, for shortness
sake. As in this very Book, XXXII. 38. Baal-meon for Beth-Baal-meon, as it is
called XIII Josh. 17. And Hermon commonly for Baal-Hermon; and Nimrim for
Beth-Nimrim. To which may be added Salem for Jerusalem, LXVI Psalm. 3. This
Station was the last which the Israelites made, while they remained in the
Wilderness: in which the rest of the things that follow, to the end of the Book
of Deuteronomy, were done.

And the People begun to commit Whoredom.] Both bodily and spiritual; into
which they fell not long after Balaam was gone from Balak. Though not all the
People fell into this Guilt, but a great many of them; as appears from what
follows, v. 4, 5, 6.

With the Daughters of Moab.] And of Midian also, as we learn from v. 6, 17,
18. But those of Moab are here alone mentioned; because, it is likely, they
began this wicked practice. I see no ground for what Greg. Nyssen says, That
the Israelites having vanquished the Moabites in a Battle, fell in love with
the Captives which they had taken, being overcome by Lust, when they had been
victorious in War, as he speaks, Lib. de vita Mosis, p. 186. It is something
more probable, that the Prophecy of Balaam being spread abroad among the
Moabites, concerning the great Blessings God designed to bestow upon the
Israelites, particularly that of the MESSIAH, it might excite in the Women of
Moab a desire to have Children by the Men of Israel, that they might partake in
their Blessings. Unto which they might think they had some title, being
descended from the eldest Daughter of Lot, the Son of Abraham's Brother. This
might pass for truth, if it were not very evident from the following story,
that the Daughters of Moab exposed themselves, by Balaam's counsel, to the Lust
of the Israelites, that by this means they might seduce them to Idolatry, and
so make them lose the Blessing intended for them. For that this was done by
Balaam's advice, there is no doubt. See XXXI. 16. And the Jews have also a
conceit that he ever had been an Enemy unto Israel, being one of Pharaoh's
Privy Council, who advised him to drown their Children; as the Tale is told in
the Talmud in the Title Sanhedrim, cap. ult. But this is to make him to have
been now of a greater Age, than we have reason to believe ( viz. Two hundred
and ten years old, according to their own Computation) and quite contrary to
what others of them say, that he lived but half his time, according to the
Psalmist, LV Psalm. 23.

Ver. 2. And they.] That is, the Daughters of Moab.

Called the People.] Invited them to a Feast: For the ordinary Charms unto
Idolatry, were good Victuals, and bad Women.

Unto the Sacrifices of their Gods.] To eat of the Sacrifices which had been
offered to their Gods, particularly to Baal-Peor. These Feasts upon their
Sacrifices were very magnificent among the Heathen, being accompanied with
Music and Dancing, and sometimes pompous Processions, which enticed youthful
Minds to partake of them. Here the Israelites, casting their Eyes upon the
Daughters of Moab (which doubtless on this occasion appeared in the best Dress
and richest Ornaments) were smitten with their Beauty, and courted their
Enjoyment. Who would not yield to this Motion, but upon condition that they
would first worship their Gods: whereupon, pulling a little Image of Peor out
of their Bosom, they presented it to the Israelites to kiss it, and desired
them to eat of the Sacrifices that had been offered to him. Thus the Jewish
Doctors tell the story. And indeed it has been observed by the Writers of the
Church, that Women have been the most dangerous Seducers of Men from the true
Religion; being from the beginning the Spreaders of the old Heresies. For Simon
Magus advanced his Heresy, Helenae meretricis adjutus auxilio, being assisted
by the help of the Harlot Helena. Nicolaus of Antioch also, choros duxit
foemineos. The famous Marcion sent before him some Roman Ladies, to prepare his
way. Apelles, Montanus, Arius, Donatus, did all take the same course, as St.
Hierom shows in his Book adversus Pelagianos.

And the People did eat.] Which was an act of Idolatry (as to eat of the LORD's
Sacrifices, was an Act of Divine Worship) whereby they owned themselves the
Servants of the Gods of Moab. See XXXIV Exodus 15.

And bowed down to their Gods.] This was still a more plain act of idolatrous
Worship; expressly forbidden by God in the second Commandment.

And Israel was joined unto Baal-Peor.] This seems to signify, that they were
devoted to the Service of this Idol in great affection; with which they
performed the forenamed actions. The Jews commonly take this Baal-Peor to have
been no better than a Priapus; and the worship of him to have consisted in such
obscene Practices, or Postures at least, as are not fit to be named.
Particularly their great Commentary upon Numbers, says, That the Israelites
being unwilling to enjoy their Women upon those terms, they told them they
needed only uncover their Nakedness before Baal-Peor, which was all the Worship
required of them: unto which they easily submitted. This Maimonides himself
relates for a truth, that his Worship consisted in revealing their Secret Parts
before him, More Nevochim, P. III. cap. 45. But Solomon Jarchi goes further,
making this Worship to consist in Actions as ridiculous, as they were beastly.
All which seems to me very unlikely; and so it does to several Men of great
Judgment, particularly Mr. Seldom; who thinks, with great probability, that
Peor (as I observed before, XXIII. 28.) being the name of a Mountain in the
Country of Moab, the Temple of Baal stood upon it, (by whom some understand
Saturn, others the Sun, which is most likely) and thence he was called
Baal-Beor, because there he was especially worshipped; as Jupiter was called
Olympius, because he was worshipped in a famous Temple, which stood on the
Mountain Olympus. And every one knows, that anciently they chose the highest
Mountains, before all other places, for the Divine Service; insomuch that at
Jerusalem the Temple was set upon the Hill of Sion, which the Psalmist says
God preferred before all other places, LXXVIII Psalm. 68. Or Peor perhaps was
the name of some great Prince (as the same Mr. Seldom conjectures) translated
into the number of the Gods: for the Psalmist says, CVI Psalm. 28. that when
they worshipped Baal-Peor, they are the Sacrifices of the dead. Which seems to
signify, that in him they worshipped some dead Man, who perhaps was the first
Institutor of this Worship, whatsoever it was. Another great Man of our own
Nation has said much to strengthen this Opinion; having shown at large, that
the ancient Heathens were wont to Deify the Souls of Men, and Canonize them
after Death; and these we called Baalim. Being accounted an inferior sort of
Deities, who they fancied were Ministers for them, to their Caelestial Gods.
See Mr. Mede, Book III. p. 724, etc. Yet it must be acknowledged that there are
others of great note, who take all for truth which the Jewish Writers report,
concerning the filthy Worship of Baal-Peor, and imagine that Fornication was a
part of it: as in future times it was both among the Greeks and Romans, in the
Worship of some of their Gods. For what the Jews found then practiced, they
fancied was done in these early days. But it is observable, that the more
ancient the Books of the Jews are, which speak of this matter, the less they
say of the impurities in the Service of Baal-Peor. For Example, the Jerusalem
Talmud has none of that lewd stuff in it, which Solomon Jarchi upon this place
took out of the Babylonian; which was composed long after the former.

And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel.] As appeared
immediately, by the severe punishment he inflicted on them, both for their
Idolatry and for their Fornication.

And the LORD said unto Moses, take all the Heads of the People, and hang them
up.] The plain meaning seems to be, that he should take, i. e. cause to be
apprehended, the Heads of the People, i. e. the Rulers of Thousands and
Hundreds, and other principal Persons in their Tribes, who had been guilty of
the foul Idolatry beforementioned; and by hanging them up, put a stop to the
Peoples lewdness, when they saw these great Men made Public Examples of God's
Displeasure. For it is very likely, more of the Princes of the People were
guilty besides Zimri; especially if it be true which the Samaritan Chronicle
affirms, that the Daughters of the chief Men of Moab were sent finely dressed
to allure the Israelites; and one of the King's Daughters among the rest. But
though the LXX. and the Vulgar, and Symmachus, thus understand it, that he
commanded the Heads of the People to be hanged up; yet a great many other
ancient Translators, and many famous Doctors, take the word Otham (them whom he
commanded to be hanged up) not to refer to the Heads of the People, but to such
as had joined themselves to Baal-Peor: and they interpret the foregoing words,
as if he had bid him take unto him (i. e. to his assistance) the Heads of the
People, as they think he did, as is related in the next verse. The Judges
indeed there mentioned seem to me to be distinct from the Heads of the People;
and Moses did not take them to his Assistance, but commanded them to do their
duty. Yet it must be acknowledged that there is a great current of
Interprepreters which runs the other way; as if Moses was commanded to order
the Judges to assemble and call before them such as were suspected; and having
examined the Fact, accordingly proceed against them, and punish such as had
offended. Thus the Samaritan Copy reads it expressly, and so Onkelos, and the
Paraphrast called Vzielides, and the Jerusalem Targum, and the Arabic
Translation of Saadia Gaon; and both the Talmudists and Karaites agree in this
sense; as Mr. Seldom shows at large, Lib. II. de Synedriis, cap. 1. n. 10. And
Joh. Coch upon the Gemara of the Sanhedrim, cap. 4. sect. 4. where he observes
that Aben-Ezra, and Solomon Jarchi thus interpret it, and takes the meaning to
be certain, that the Heads of the People should divide themselves into several
Courts of Judgment, and examine who had committed Idolatry; and after
Conviction cause them to be hanged. For there is great reason to think the
Constitution of Judges, by Jethro's advice, continued all the time they were in
the Wilderness; who might easily find out the Guilty in their several Divisions.

Before the LORD.] i. e. Before the Sanctuary; as Men who had forsaken the
Worship of their God; and by his Sentence were adjudged to die.

Against the Sun.] Openly, that all the People might see, and fear to Sin. So
both R. Solomon and Aben-Ezra expound it. For this was a peculiar mark of the
Divine Displeasure against Idolaters and Blasphemers, that they should be
hanged up, and publicly exposed after they had suffered death. For none were
hanged alive among the Hebrews; but first stoned (which was the common
Punishment of the forenamed Offenders) and then hanged up in the eyes of all;
as R. Solomon expounds this Phrase against the Sun.

That the fierce anger of the LORD may be turned from Israel.] By their Zeal to
vindicate the Divine Honor.

And Moses said unto the Judges of Israel.] Some take these for the LXX.
Elders, mentioned XI. 25.

Slay ye.] By hanging them up, as some understand it. But the Hebrew word
imports killing with the Sword; which they commanded their Officers to do, with
the assistance of such as abhorred the wickedness of their Neighbors.

Every one his Man.] The LXX. Elders, being appointed to be coadjutors to Moses
in the Government, made a division of the People, it is most likely, into so
many districts: and each of them having the charge of one, all the People
therein, are called his Men; of whom he was to give an account.

That were joined unto Baal-Peor.] Who were so well known, that there was no
danger of slaying the innocent.

And behold.] This which follows is the more wonderful, if the Judges had
already begun, to execute the foregoing command, and argues Zimri to have been
very impudently wicked, who thought himself so great a Man, that no Judge durst
meddle with him.

One of the Children of Israel came and brought unto his Brethren.] In the Camp
of Israel, or into the Tent where his own Family dwelt.

A Midianitish Woman.] By which it appears that both Nations, Moab and Midian,
were in this Plot against Israel.

In the sight of Moses.] A high contempt of his Authority; and of God's also,
whose Servant Moses was.

And in the sight of all the Congregation of the Children of Israel.] This
seems to be a further aggravation of his Sin, that he was not content to go to
the Women, who invited them, ( v. 2.) but brought one of them along with him
into the Camp of Israel; and this he did before the face of all the People, as
well as of Moses; and that when they were mourning for this Sin, as it here
follows.

Who were weeping before the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] This
shows, that though there were great numbers engaged in this Defection, yet the
generality of the People clave unto the LORD, and bewailed the Wickedness of
their Brethren, most earnestly imploring God's Mercy toward them.

Ver. 7. And when Phineas, the Son of Eleazar, the Son etc.] A Man of great
Authority, being next to the High Priest, whom he succeeded in his Office, as
he did Joshua (if we may believe some Writers) in the Government of all Israel.

He rose up.] His Spirit (as St. Luke speaks of St. Paul) was stirred in him;
and being inspired with an holy Zeal, was moved to do what follows.

From among the Congregation.] Who were weeping at the Door of the Tabernacle;
or rather, from among the Judges with whom he was assembled, being one of them:
So Jonathan; he rose up from the midst of the Sanhedrin. For as Bonav. Cornel.
Bertramus thinks, Eleazar after the death of Aaron, appointed his Son Phineas
to be Prince of the Levites. Which he thinks appears not only from his rising
up here, from the midst of the Judges of Israel, but from the Embassy wherein
he was employed by Joshua, unto the Reubenites, etc. beyond Jordan, XXII Josh.
14. and from 1 Chronicles. IX. 20. where he is said to be Ruler over the Korahites.
Which signifies, he thinks, such a pre-eminence as Eleazar himself had over the
Levites, while his Father Aaron lived, De Repub. Jud. c. 15. And indeed the
Psalmist says, that Phineas stood up and executed Judgment, CVI. 39. Which
seems to import that he acted as a Judge, but by an extraordinary motion; which
made him kill the Offenders with his own Hands, without a Judicial Process
against them.

And took a Javelin in his hand.] Or a Sword, as Josephus calls it; which he
snatched out of the hand of Moses, as the tradition is in Pirke Elieser, cap. 47.

And he went after the Man of Israel into the Tent.] It is an unusual word in
the Hebrew, which we translate Tent; importing a private, secret place like a
Cave, as Kubba or Kobba is thought to signify, which the Arabians call
Alcobba. From whence comes the word Alcove; which signifies, as Bochart
observes, conclave camerati operis, quo lectus circumdatur: A Room of arched
Work, which incloses a Bed in it. See his Hierozoicon, Pars I. p. ult.

And thrust both of them through, the Man of Israel, and the Woman.] This he
did, says Philo, (...), by the command of Moses. But should rather have said,
by a Divine Instigation; which he followed, when the rest of the Judges were
afraid (as some conceive) to meddle with so great a Man as Zimri was. And upon
this Fact, the Jews ground that which they call, the Judgment of Zeal, which
authorized them, who were full of Zeal, to punish such as blasphemed God, or
profaned the Temple, etc. in the presence of ten Men of Israel, without a
formal Process against them. Thus Matthias killed a Jew, who sacrificed after
the manner of the Greeks, 1 Maccab. II. 24. and three hundred others were
killed by their Countrymen, as is related in the Book commonly called the
Third Book of Maccabees. And upon the pretense of such Zeal, St. Stephen was
stoned, and St. Paul intended to be killed, etc. as Grotius observes, Lib. II.
de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 20. sect. 9. and see Seldom de Jure Not. and
Gent. Lib. IV. cap. 4. But this Judgment (as they call it) seems not to be well
grounded upon the Fact of Phineas, who was a public Person, and had an
extraordinary motion, not to be imitated by private Men; nor was it followed
till the latter times of the state of that Nation.

Through her belly.] The Vulgar has it, through her Secret Parts. And so the
Jews in Pirke Eliezer, c. 47. and in other Books, such as Pesikta and Siphri:
where they make many Miracles to have concurred in this Fact; particularly,
they say, that the Relations of Zimri going to fall upon Phineas for killing
their Prince, the Angel of the LORD smote them, and cut them off.

So the Plague was stayed from the Children of Israel.] It seems a Pestilential
Disease (as Josephus calls it) swept away many of the Offenders, who could not
so speedily be punished by the Judges: But it stopped immediately upon this pious
Act of Phineas.

And those that died of the Plague were Twenty and four thousand.] There were
but Twenty and three thousand, who died of the Plague it self, as the Apostle
tells us, 1 Cor. X. 8. but there were a thousand more taken off in the Plague
time, or during the Plague, as the Hebrew words may be read. For in the Twenty
and four thousand, Moses comprehends all those who were killed by the Sword, in
the day of the Plague, (as the Phrase is v. 18.) whereas St. Paul reckons those
only who died of the Pestilence, as many have observed, particularly Bochartus,
Lib. II. Hieroz. cap. 34. P. I. It is probable that from hence it was, that the
Author of the Samaritan Chronicle took up a Conceit, that the King of Moab sent
Twenty four thousand Damsels to Seduce the Israelites, as Hottinger reports his
words, in his Smegma Orientale, cap. 8. p. 448.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] After the Plague was stayed, it is
likely Moses went into the Tabernacle to give God thanks for his Mercy to his
People; and then he spoke to him what here follows.

Phineas the Son of Eleazar, the Son of Aaron the Priest, has turned my Wrath
away from the Children of Israel.] Though they wept and mourned before the Door
of the Tabernacle, yet that did not prevail so much for Mercy, as this Heroic
Act of Justice.

While he was zealous for my sake among them.] With a fervent and courageous
Affection vindicated the Divine Honor, by a speedy punishment of those
notorious Offenders.

That I consumed not the Children of Israel in my Jealousy.] Did not proceed
to destroy them by the Pestilence, when I was so highly incensed against them.
For it is observed by Herodotus himself in his Euterpe, that (...), for great
Crimes there are as great Punishments sent from God; which is necessary for the
Public Good. For unless, by such means, a stop be put to open Impurities, to
Murders, and such like Crimes, not only all Civil Society will be overturned,
but Nations become so wicked, that they will be fit for nothing but to be
rooted out, by the Divine Vengeance, as the Canaanites were. Thus Cicero
discourses Philip. VIII. In Corpore, si quid ejusmodi est, quod reliquo corpori
noceat, etc. In the Body, if there be any thing which hurts the rest of the
Body, it is necessary to cut it off, or to burn it, that some one Member,
rather than the whole Body, perish. And so it is in the Body of the
Commonwealth; Vt totum salvum sit, quicquid est pestiferum amputetur; that the
whole may be preserved, let that which is infectious be lopped off.

Ver. 12. Wherefore say.] Unto Phineas, or unto

Behold, I give thee my Covenant of Peace.] The word Peace, in Scripture,
comprehends all manner of Blessings; and therefore this is a solemn Promise and
Engagement to make him and his Family prosperous: the particular Blessing which
he entails upon him, following in the next verse. But some will have this to
signify that he should be the great Reconciler of God to his People, and make
Peace between them hereafter, as he had done at present. Philo seems to think
this, and the Priesthood, to be two distinct things; when he says, God crowned
his Piety (...), with two Gifts, Peace and the Priesthood. And the Jews make
Peace to consist in a long Life of Prosperity; which was fulfilled in Phineas
his Person, who lived till the latter times of the Judges, XXI Judge. 28. Pirke
Elieser interprets it, he gave him the life of this World, and of the next.

And he shall have it, and his Seed after him.] It shall continue in his Family.

Even the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood.] This is the particular
Happiness which God settled upon him and his Posterity, as long as their State
lasted. Which was with some limitation, it appears by this, that after some
Successions in the Line of Phineas, the Priesthood came, for a time, into the
Family of Eli, who was descended from Ithamar the youngest Son of Aaron. The
reason of it is not mentioned in the Scripture; but some great Sin, it is
reasonable to suppose, provoked God to set aside the Line of Eleazar for some
years, till Eli's Sons also became so wicked, that the Priesthood was taken
from them, and restored in the days of Solomon to the Posterity of Phineas,
with whom it continued as long as the Priesthood lasted. What Sin this was, and
when committed, we do not know. Some of the Hebrew Doctors are so bold as to
say, it was because Phineas would not absolve Jephthah from his Vow, as Mr.
Seldom observes, Lib. I. de Success. in Pontif. cap. 2. But as there is no
ground for this, and such like fancies, which others of them have, so it is
more probable that some of Phineas's Successors offended, rather than he
himself; his Posterity for four Generations holding the Priesthood, before it
was translated to Eli, as Josephus and others (mentioned by Seldom in the place
before-named) make account.

Aegidius Camartus in his Book de Rebus Eliae, cap. 3. sect. 5. and Corn.
Bertram, cap. 15. de Republ. Jud. imagine that in those confused times, none of
the Priests were found fit to administer the Affairs of the Nation but Eli
alone: and therefore he was appointed by God to it, as appears from 1 Samuel II.
30. But L'Empereur in his Annotations upon Bertram well observes, That it being
the constant course of God's proceedings, to continue his Mercies to the
Israelites, according to his promise, while they were obedient, but to take
them away when they became disobedient, it is highly reasonable to conclude
there was some great Offense given to God by some of the Race of Phineas, which
was the cause that they lost this Dignity. But so constant was God to his
Promise, that he preserved his Line in a continued Succession of twelve Persons
from Phineas to Azariah, who executed the Priest's Office in the Temple that
Solomon built in Jerusalem, as we read 1 Chronicles. VI. v. 4. to the 10th. From
which time to the Captivity of Babylon, there were nine more, as we read there
in the following verses. And after the end of the Captivity, unto the time of
Antiochus Eupator, the Jews reckon fifteen more, the last of which, Onias, was
killed by Lysias. And after him there were eight of the Family of the Asmonaei;
the last of which, Aristobulus, was killed by Herod, who after that made whom
he pleased.

Because he was jealous for his God.] God, who searches the hearts, saw that
this motion proceeded not from any private Passion; but out of pure Love and
fervent Affection to him, and from Indignation to see his Divine Majesty so
affronted. For Zeal is a mixed Affection, of Love and Anger.

And made an Atonement for the Children of Israel.] Procured a Pardon for all
his Brethren, (...), (as Philo expresses it) by his uncommanded and spontaneous
diligence to vindicate God's Honor, flowing from his sincere Devotion to God's
Service.

Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain with the
Midianitish Woman.] God would have his Name stand upon record, partly to make
it infamous; and partly to do honor to Phineas, who durst venture to set upon
a Man, who had so great an interest in his Tribe, as is mentioned in the next
words.

Zimri the Son of Salu, a Prince.] Not the chief of the whole Tribe; but of a
great Family in that Tribe.

Of a House among the Simeonites.] In the Hebrew the words are, of a House of a
Father. For the Tribes were divided into Families; and these into Houses: every
one of which had a Head or Chief, (See the first Chapter of this Book, v. 2.)
and Zimri was one of those principal Persons, though not Prince of all the
Simeonites.

And the name of the Midianitish Woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter
of Zur.] This is set down also, to show how little Phineas feared the great
Men, either in Israel, or elsewhere. For Zur is reckoned afterward, as one of
the Kings of Midian, XXXI. 8. or Princes, XIII Josh. 21.

He was Head over a People, and of a chief House in Midian.] The Hebrew word
Vmmoth (which we translate People) signifies Nations. So that if we translate
these words exactly, they sound thus, He was Head of Nations, of a House of a
Father in Midian: that is, Chief of diverse Families, who all sprung from the
same Father or Original in that Country.

Ver. 16. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Moses his death.

Ver. 17. Vex the Midianites.] Among whom this Balak being so incensed against
Balaam, that he bid him be gone, in all haste, out of his Country, (XXIV. 11.)
Balaam would not stay to propound unto him, this mischievous Advice which was
in his Head, but went to the Midianites, and there discovered it. Which was the
same thing he knew, as if he had acquainted Balak with it, there being a great
Friendship between the two Nations, XXII. 4. It is likely also that the
Midianites were the first that advised Balaam should be sent for, which made
their Guilt the greater: but the Moabites did not escape, though (for Lot's
sake perhaps, II Deuteronomy. 9.) their Punishment was deferred till future times, as
Balaam prophesied, XXIV. 17. And they were also excluded, by a Law made
immediately after this, from the Society of the Israelites, for this very Fact,
XXIII Deuteronomy. 3, 4.

And smite them.] With the Sword; as we find they did, Chapt. XXXI.

Ver. 18. For they vex you with their wiles.] Have

Wherewith they have beguiled you, in the matter of Peor.] Drawn you in to
commit foul Idolatry. Here Peor, which was a Mountain in Moab, where Baal had a
Temple, (as I observed XXIII. 28.) is used for the Idol it self, which was
there worshipped, being a contraction of Baal-Peor. And so it is XXXI. 18. XXII
Josh. 17.

And in the matter of Cozbi.] And into lewd filthiness with Idolatrous Women.

The Daughter of a Prince of Midian.] By whose consent, no doubt, she went upon
this wicked design; that by her noble Garb and Attendance, she might the more
powerfully entice the great Men of Israel to Idolatry.

Their Sister.] Whom the whole Family were content to prostitute, that they
might compass the destruction of the Israelites. But by Sister may be meant,
one of the same Country or Nation; the same kind of Language being used among
them that was among the Jews; who called one another Brethren and Sisters,
(being descended from the same stock) as Christians did all those that were of
their Religion.

Which was slain in the day of the Plague.] When so many Thousands fell by the
Pestilence.

For Peor's sake.] For worshipping Baal-Peor; into which they were inveigled by
the Women; who invited them to a Feast, and there by their Charms excited
another fleshly Appetite in them: which they would not let them satisfy,
unless they would both eat of their Sacrifices, and worship their Idol. And
perhaps they told them, it was not lawful for them to consent to their desire,
unless they would be of their Religion.

CHAP. XXVI.
AND it came to pass after the Plague.] Mentioned Chapter, v. 9, 17. Though
some fancy it refers unto all the Plagues that had swept away all the former
Generation, except two Persons. It is likely this may be done in the eighth
Month of the fortieth Year, after they came out of Egypt.

The LORD spoke unto Moses, and unto Eleazar the Son of Aaron the Priest,
saying.] As God had formerly joined Aaron with Moses, (I Numb. 1, 17. II. 1.
IV. 1, etc.) So now Aaron being dead, he joins his Son Eleazar with him; to
show that he succeeded not only in his Place and Office, but also in his
Authority.

Ver. 2. Take the Sum of all the Congregation of the They had been twice
numbered before this: Once, before the building of the Tabernanacle, in the
first year after they came out of Egypt, when they paid every Man half a Shekel
toward it, (XXX Exodus 11, 13. XXXVIII. 25.) And again, when they were to be
encamped, in the second month of the second year, I Numb. 1, 2, etc. And now,
all those Men who had been then numbered (thirty eight years ago) being dead,
(as appears from v. 64. of this Chapter) God commands them to be numbered a
third time. Partly, that he might demonstrate his faithfulness to his word, in
multiplying them vastly, notwithstanding all their Provocations, (for their
number was within Eighteen hundred and twenty, as many as they were, at their
last muster) and partly, that the Land they were now going to possess, might be
the more easily divided among the Tribes, in just and equal proportions.

From twenty years old and upwards, throughout their Father's house; all that
are able to go to war in Israel.] All this is explained in the first Chapter,
v. 2, 3.

And Moses and Eleazar the Priest spoke with them.] With the Heads of the
several Tribes: who, it is likely, were to assist in this numbering, as they did
in the former, I Numb. 4, 16, 17.

In the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying.] See XXII. 1.

Take the Sum of the People.] These words are not in the Hebrew; but some words
of this kind are to be understood, that they spoke with them about numbering the
People, from twenty years old and upwards, as it here follows.

As the LORD commanded Moses and the Children of Israel, which went forth out
of the Land of Egypt.] He bad them proceed according to the directions God had
formerly given, in the second month of the second year, after they came out of
Egypt, I Numb. 1.

Reuben the eldest Son of Jacob.] This numbering being performed as the former
was, Moses uses more concise Language in the account he gives of it; as he does
in the foregoing verse, and in this, and those that follow. Where he sets down
the number of every Tribe, and the Families from whence they sprung, without
saying, Those that were numbered of the Tribe of Reuben were, etc. as he does I
Numb. 21, etc.

The Children of Hanock, of whom came the Family of the Hanochites, etc.] The
four Sons of Reuben (whose Families here follow) are mentioned both in Genesis
XLVI. 9. and in Exodus VI. 14. and are here mentioned again; because he intends
to set down the Names, both of the Children and Grandchildren of one of his
Sons, which he did not before.

Ver. 7. These are the Families of the Reubenites.] Families, rather signifies
Nations (Gentes) or Kindreds, as we translate it, XXII Psalm. 27. For all that
sprung from those LXX Persons, who came with Jacob into Egypt, are called by
this name of Mispecoth, which the LXX. here translate (...), People. Which were
divided into Houses, as the Hebrews call them; and those Houses into particular
Persons. This is plain from VII Josh. 14. where, for the discovery of him that
had sinned in the accursed Thing, God commanded the Israelites to be brought by
their Tribes, and then that Tribe by the Families belonging to it; and that
Family which the LORD took by Households; and that Household, Man by Man.

And they that were numbered of them were forty and three thousand, and seven
hundred and thirty.] This being compared with I Numb. 21. it appears this Tribe
was less than it was eight and thirty years ago, by near three thousand Men:
For some whole Households had been destroyed, as it follows v. 9.

Ver. 8. And the Sons of Pallu, Eliab.] He speaks Pallu; which is very usual in
the Scripture Language. See XIX Genesis 29. XXI. 7. XLVI. 7. and in this very
Chapter, v. 42.

Eliab.] He does not say from him came the Family of the Eliabites; for he made
only an Household in the Family (as we call it) of the Palluites.

And the Sons of Eliab, Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram.] The same must be
observed of these, that Families did not spring from them; but they were
Households belonging to the Family of the Palluites.

This is that Dathan and Abiram.] They are here again mentioned; partly to set
a new Brand upon them, for their insolent Rebellion against Moses; and partly
to show how the Reubenites came to be so diminished.

Famous in the Congregation.] See XVI. 2.

Who strove against Moses and against Aaron, in the company of Korah.] They
joined with Korah, who seems to have been the chief Incendiary: For he is
mentioned first in the XVI. 1.

When they strove against the LORD.] Who had appointed Aaron alone to be the
High Priest, and his Sons to Minister in the Priest's Office: which these Men
would have usurped, XVI. 11. where it is said expressly, They were gathered
together against the LORD.

And the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah.]
These words seem to import, that Korah was swallowed up with Dathan and Abiram,
as I have observed upon XVI. 32. See there. But it must be acknowledged that
these words may receive another Interpretation, and that very natural, in this
manner; The Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, (viz. Dathan and
Abiram, and the rest mentioned XVI. 32.) and then the next words, veeth Korah,
may be thus translated, and as for Korah (who was the great Incendiary) when
that Company died, i. e. he died, when the Company which offered Incense died:
for there is in many places a defect of a word, to be supplied from the word
that follows. This is a very easy construction, and agrees with the Psalmist,
CVI. 17. where he mentions only Dathan and Abiram's Company as swallowed up,
and then adds, v. 18. A fire was kindled in their Company, (i. e. in the other
Company of Rebels) and the flame burnt up the wicked; viz. Korah, and those
that were with him.

What time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men.] XVI. 35. If the
Interpretation now mentioned, of the foregoing words, be admitted, then Korah
must be added to the number of the Two hundred and fifty Men; which Moses takes
occasion to explain in this place.

And they became a sign.] A Monument of God's displeasure against those that
affront his Ministers; to give warning unto all Posterity not to follow their
pernicious Courses.

Ver. 11. Notwithstanding the Children of Korah died As those of Dathan and
Abiram did; but their Family continued famous in David's time. For perhaps they
left their Father, and departed from the Tents of those wicked Men; as Moses by
God's command exhorted the Congreation, (XVI. 24, 26.) and they obeyed, v. 27.

Ver. 12, 13. The Sons of Simeon after their Families, Genesis 10. and VI Exodus
15. only one of them, viz. Ohad, is here omitted; because, either he had no
Children, or his Family was extinct before this time. The first of them also,
viz. Nemuel, is there called Jemuel; and Jachin in 1 Chronicles. IV. 24. is called
Jarib; there being some reason, in process of time, for such alterations.

These are the Families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand, and two
hundred.] There was a wonderful decrease of this Tribe in the space of thirty
and eight years: For they were fewer by above thirty seven thousand, than they
were at the last numbering. See I. 23. Many of them, it is probable, being in
the same Crime with Zimri, and the Plague falling most heavily upon this Tribe,
whom Moses in the XXXIII Deuteronomy, does not bless.

And the Children of Gad after their Families.] They are reckoned here next to
the Simeonites, because they lay encamped next to them, under the Standard of
Reuben, II Numb. 10, 11, etc.

Of Zephon the Family of the Zephonites, etc.] They are reckoned up in the same
manner XLVI Genesis 16. only he that is here called Zephon, is there called
Ziphion; and Osni is there called Ezbon; and Arod called Arodi.

These are the Families of the Children of Gad, according to those that were
numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.] This Tribe also was less by
above five thousand than before, I. 25.

The Sons of Judah, Er and Onan.] These were his eldest Sons, but died without
Issue before the Children of Israel went down into Egypt, as it here follows.
See XXXVIII Genesis 1, 2, etc.

And the Sons of Judah after their Families were, etc.] Now he reckons those of
his Sons, who made Families, which were three: as we read also XLVI Genesis 12.

Ver. 21. And the Sons of Pharez were Hezron, etc.] Here he numbers two of
Judah's Grandchildren, as he did one of Reuben's, v. 6. only with this
difference, that these two made Families in Israel, which Er and Onan, who died
without Children. Or rather, the Family of Pharez growing very great, there was
a sub-division made of it into the other Families, who were all still
Pharezites, (for Pharez had no other Children but there two, to make a Family
of that Name) but called by these two Names of Hesronites and Hamulites,
because the Pharezites were grown too big to be but one Family, and therefore
parted into two.

Ver. 22. These are the Families of Judah, according This Tribe was very
numerous before, above all the rest. And now this new Generation, which sprung
up instead of the old (who were all destroyed except Caleb) exceeded them two
thousand. So faithful was God to his Promise, that this should be a most
powerful Tribe. See I Numb. 27.

Ver. 23. The Sons of Issachar after their Families.] Zebulon are mentioned
next, because they lay encamped together, under the Standard of Judah. See II
Numb. 5, 6, 7.

Of Tola, the Family of the Tolaites.] A wonderful fruitful Family, and very
valiant: there being of this one Family Twenty two thousand and six hundred Men
in the days of David, 1 Chronicles. VII. 2.

Of Pua, the Family of the Punites.] He is called Phuvah XLVI Genesis 13.

Ver. 24. Of Jashub.] Who is called Job in the same place.

Ver. 25. Threescore and four thousand and three hundred.]

Of the Sons of Zebulun after their Families.] There is no change in their
Names; which are the same without any alteration, as when they went into Egypt,
XLVI Genesis 14.

Those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.] This
Tribe likewise was increased above Three thousand since the former numbering.
See I. 31. And so the whole Camp of Judah was mightily augmented, as that of
Reuben was diminished.

The Sons of Joseph after their Families.] See XLVI Genesis 20.

Of the Sons of Manasseh, of Machir, etc.] This was his only Son; but those
descended from him, by an usual manner of speaking, are called Manasseh's Sons
also, being his Grand-sons. Some think indeed that Manasseh had other Sons,
which they gather from L Genesis 22. but, if he had, their Families were extinct:
for none but Machir and his Posterity had any Inheritance in the Land of
Canaan, XVII Josh. 1, 2. where the Grandchildren are called his Children.

Machir begat Gilead, and of Gilead came the Family of the Gileadites.] They
were not a distinct Family from the Machirites; but the very same: Machir
having no other Son but Gilead. Therefore that Family which at first was called
Machirites, were afterward called Gileadites: or they were indifferently
called, either by the one or the other.

Ver. 30. These are the Sons of Gilead, of Jeezer.] Called Abiezer XVII Josh. 2.

The Family of the Jeezreites, etc.] The Posterity of Gilead grew so numerous,
that his Sons made Families, Gileadites being too general to distinguish them
all, they were called, at length, by the name of his Sons.

Ver. 31, 32. Of Asriel, the Family of the Asrielites, Gilead; for each of
whose Children there was a Lot in the Land of Canaan, XVII Josh. 2.

Ver. 33. And Zelophead the Son of Hepher, had no etc.] Whose Case is
considered in the next, and in the last Chapter of this Book: where they are
ordered to have an Inheritance among their Father's Brethren, but to marry into
their own Tribe. And their Posterity, I suppose, were called after their
Grand-father's name, Hepherites: for such a Family there was, as Moses tells us
in the foregoing verse.

Ver. 34. Numbered of them fifty two thousand and If this be compared with I.
35. it will appear that this Tribe was increased above Twenty thousand. Which
is the greatest Increase of any other; and made good the Prophecy of Jacob
concerning the Children of Joseph, XLIX Genesis 22.

Ver. 35. These are the Sons of Ephraim after their He is mentioned after
Manesseh, because he was his younger Brother: yet in their Encampment this
Tribe had the Standard, under which Manasseh marched, II Numb. 18, etc.

Of Shuthelah the Family of the Shuthalites, etc.] He is mentioned first also
in 1 Chronicles. VII. 20. Where the next Son Becher is called Bered; and Tahan,
called Tahath. For time is wont to make great Alterations in the names of
Persons and Places.

These are the Sons of Shuthelah, of Eran the Family of the Eranites.] He had,
it seems, but one Son; whose Children (after the usual manner of speaking
before noted) were called the Sons of Shuthelah; though they made a distinct
Family, under the name of Eranites.

Those that were numbered of them, thirty two thousand and five hundred.] Though
this proved a very numerous Tribe in future times, yet for the present they
were fewer by eight thousand, than they were in the former numbering I. 33.
which makes Moses's Prophecy, a little after this, the more remarkable, XXXIII
Deuteronomy. 17. where he makes the Ephramites Ten to One, in comparison with the
Manassites.

The Sons of Benjamin after their Families.] This Tribe also was under the
Standard of Ephraim, and therefore mentioned here together with him and
Manasseh. When they went into Egypt, the Sons of Benjamin were no less than
Ten, XLVI Genesis 21. Half of which, either had no Children, or they were all
Extinct before this time; for here are only Five named.

Of Belah, the Family of the Belaites, etc.] The two first, Bela and Ashbel,
are there named, as they are here: but the next, Ahiram, is there called Ehi,
and in 1 Chronicles. VIII. 1. Ahara; such an Alteration does Time make in Names.

Ver. 39. Of Shupham, etc.] He is called Muppim in XLVI Genesis 21. and Hupham is
there called Huppim.

Ver. 40. The Sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman.] Israel. And the Son of one of
them was called after the name of his Uncle, the youngest Son of Benjamin, XLVI
Genesis 21. whose name was Ard; and in I Chron. VIII. 3. (by a small transposition
of Letters) is called Adar.

Ver. 41. There were numbered of them forty five thousand This Tribe was grown
to be Ten thousand more than they were at the last numbering, I. 37.

Ver. 42. These are the Sons of Dan.] Thus he speaks, v. 8.

Of Shuham.] Called Hushim, by a transposition of Letters, XLVI Genesis 23. Just
as the same Tree is called Almugim, 1 Kings X. 8. and Algumim, 2 Chronicles. II. 8.
And the same City in which Joshua was buried, called Timnath-Serach, XXIV Josh.
30. and Timnath-Cheres, II Judge. 9. And, to come still nearer, the same Man is
called Rechum, XII Nehem. 3. and Cherim, v. 15. of the same Chapter.

These are the Families of Dan after their Families.] That is, from these
Shuhamites came all the rest of the Families of this Tribe, which are not here
mentioned: but into which this Family was sub-divided, when it grew very great,
as it appears from the next words.

Ver. 43. All the Families of the Shuhamites.] This Shuham.

Were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.] A vast number to spring
from one Man; when Benjamin, who had ten Sons, wanted almost twenty thousand of
this number: which is Seventeen hundred more than were in this Tribe at the
last numbering, I. 39.

Of the Children of Asher after their Families, etc.] They all retain the same
names which they had when they went into Egypt, XLVI Genesis 17. Only he that is
here called Jeshui, is there called Ishui; and another Son there mentioned is
here omitted; his Family, I suppose, being quite extinct.

Of the Sons of Beriah, etc.] Instead of him, whose Family was quite lost, the
youngest Son of Asher (Beriah) had two Families sprung from him.

And the name of the Daughter of Asher was Sarah.] Or Serah, as she is called
XLVI Genesis 17. He does not say that a Family sprang from her, which Corn.
Bertramus (cap. 6. de Republ. Jud.) seems to think probable, instead of some
that were lost; but she was a Woman, it is likely, as eminent in this Tribe, as
any of her Brethren, for some Virtue or other. Insomuch that the Cabbalists in
the ancient Book Zohar, parting the heavenly Region where the Souls of holy
Women are, into four Palaces, make four great Women to be a kind of Presidents
of them, viz. Pharaoh's Daughter who educated Moses; and this Serah the
Daughter of Asher; with Jochabed the Mother of Moses; and Deborah the famous
Prophetess. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 4.

Ver. 47. Were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.] This Tribe also
fructified exceedingly; wanting but an Hundred of Twelve thousand more than
they were at the last numbering, I. 41.

Ver. 48, 49. Of the Sons of Naphtali after their Families, Egypt. See XLVI
Genesis 24.

Ver. 50. Were forty five thousand and four hundred.] Numb. 43. These two
Tribes, Asher and Naphtali, are mentioned together with Dan, because they were
encamped under his Standard, II Numb. 25, 26, etc.

Ver. 51. These were the numbered of the Children of That is, the whole Number
amounted to this Sum; which was but Eighteen hundred and twenty less than they
were, when they were last numbered, Thirty eight year ago, I. 46. So great was
the Goodness of God, and such his Faithfulness to his Word, that when he
destroyed all the former Generation, (who were above Twenty years old) he
multiplied their Posterity so fast, in that space of time, as to make them
equal, in a manner, to those that went before them.

Ver. 52. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.]

Ver. 53. Unto these.] i. e. These Families beforenamed.

The Land shall be divided.] i. e. The Land of Canaan, into which they were
going.

For an Inheritance.] Not to be alienated from those Families.

According to the number of Names.] Of the Persons in the several Families,
from Twenty years old and upward, v. 2. So that Minors, who had not attained
the Age of Twenty years, when this account was taken, the Jews say, were not to
have any share in the Land, though they were come to that Age, at the time of
the distribution of it among them. But those Minors had Possessions, as Heirs
of their Fathers, according to the Families.

To many thou shall give the more Inheritance, and to few thou shall give the
less Inheritance.] That is, order Joshua to assign them a share in the Land,
proportionable to the number of Persons in every Tribe: Some of which were far
greater than others, and therefore to have more Land, proportionble to the
largeness of their Families. But this was not measured merely by the number of
Acres, as we speak; but by the goodness of the Soil: for a little Ground, in a
rich Country, would maintain more Persons than twice as much in a barren. So
Josephus Lib. V. Antiq. cap. 1. where after he had said that Joshua made a
Distribution of the Land, (...), according to the bigness of each Tribe; he
adds, that in doing this, (...), it was necessary to consider rather the value,
than the measure of every Portion. And gives this reason why the Tribe of
Benjamin had so narrow a Portion allotted them, because the Ground was so very
fertile about Jerusalem. (...), This Lot was very strait, because of the
goodness of the Soil.

To every Man shall his Inheritance be given.] That is, to every Family.

According to those that were numbered of him.] According to the Account that
had been now taken; not considering who might be born after this, (and thereby
increase a Family) or die (and thereby diminish it) before the Division of the
Land was made. For several died, we may well think, in the Wars with the
Canaanites, and others were born before the Country was conquered.

Ver. 55. Notwithstanding the Land shall be divided When it was divided into so
many equal shares as there were Tribes, (a due respect being had to their
Number) they were not to choose which share they would have, but that was to be
determined by Lot. The manner of which they say was this: Two Urns being placed
before him that drew the Lots, in one of which were Scrols of Parchment,
containing the Names of the XII Tribes of Israel; and in the other, the
Portions of Land: he first put in his hand into the Urn wherein were their
Names, and drew out one, suppose that of Judah; and then he put his hand into
the other Urn, and drew out the Portion that fell to his share. Or perhaps,
there was only one Urn, wherein were the several Portions of Land; and they
began, suppose, with the eldest Son of Israel, viz. Reuben; and pulling out a
Scroll, said, This is the Portion of Reuben: and so with the rest. But which
soever way they proceeded, there were two Distributions made, One of the whole
Country into XII Parts; and another of each of those Parts among the several
Families that were in each Tribe. See Seldom, de Successionibus ad Leges Hebr.
cap. 21, 22.

According to the Names of the Tribes of their Families they shall inherit.]
This seems to justify what I now said, that they first named the Tribe, whose
Lot they would draw out; and that contained his Inheritance. But, after all
this, it might happen that some of their Lots were too scanty for their Number,
and others too large: In which case Eleazar and Joshua, and the rest appointed
for this Office, XXXIV. 17, etc. ordered some Portion to be taken from those
who had too much, and given to those who had too little for their Families.
This appears from XIX Josh. 9. where a Portion out of the Lot of Judah is
ordered for Simeon; because the one was too large, and the other too small: and
the same may be said of Dan, v. 47.

According to the Lot shall the Possession be divided.] The first words, which
we translate according to the Lot, being in the Hebrew, Al pi hagoral, which
literally signifies according to the mouth of the Lot, (which is no more than,
as the Lot shall declare) the Jews have a conceit that the Land was divided,
not merely by Lot, but by Vrim and Thummim: which Eleazar the Priest then put
on, (as the Talmud describes it in Bava Bathra) and two Urns standing before
him, in one of which were the Names of the XII Tribes, and in the other the
Names of the Portions of Land, he looked by the Holy Ghost upon the Vrim and
Thummim, and said, Let such a Tribe come up; which being done, he said again,
Let such a Portion of Land come up for this Tribe: by which means all the
People (before whom this was done) were satisfied that their Portion was
allotted to them by God; and all cause of murmuring and contention taken away.
Thus R. Solomon and others mentioned by Buxtorf in his Histor. Vrim and
Thummim, cap. 3. And Martinius Mauritius in his late Treatise de Sortitione
veter. Hebr. cap. 29. sect. 4, 5. where he observes, how ancient the way of
dividing Goods and Lands by Lot was in other Countries. But there was no need
of this Solemnity, the Division of the Land by God's Order after the manner of
Lots, sufficienly showing, it was not by Man's Directions, but by God's, that
such a share fell to them.

Between many and few.] Every Tribe having its Land assigned them by the Lot,
it was then divided among the several Families, in the same manner (as these
words seem to signify) and then every Household had their share allotted them,
according to the number of Persons that were in them. Which if they were many,
had a greater share; if few, a less. By which means every Man had reason to
rest satisfied, because such was his Lot. That is, such was the good pleasure
of God, who directed the Lots; as we learn from XVIII Joshua 6, 8, 10. where we
read expressly, that in the Division of the Land, he cast Lots for them before
the LORD in Shiloh, that he might order every one his Portion.

Ver. 57. And these are they that were numbered of the It was fit an account
should be taken of this Tribe also, that it might be seen how God had blessed
them, as well as the rest of the Tribes of Israel, with a numerous Issue:
though he had cut off, in the space of Thirty eight years, all the former
Generation, from Twenty years old and upward.

Of Gershon, the Family of the Gershonites, etc.] The principal Families in
this Tribe were three, descended from the three Sons of Levi, Gershon, Kohath,
and Merari. Whose Names were not at all altered since their coming out of
Egypt, until this time, XLVI Genesis 11. VI Exodus 16.

These are the Families of the Levites.] The three forenamed were the
principal Families; divided into those lesser Families, which here follow.

The Family of the Libnites.] Descended from Libni the eldest Son of Gershon.
Who had another Son, whose Family is here omitted, (viz. Shimi) though
mentioned VI Exodus 17. But in this place Moses does not give a full account of
all the Families of the Levites; nor is it given in exact order, because they
were to have no Inheritance in the Division of the Land: which was the reason
that all the Families of the other Tribes are set down so punctually.

The Family of the Hebronites.] From Hebron, one of the Sons of Kohath, VI
Exodus 18. III Numb. 19.

The Family of the Mahlites, the Family of the Mushites.] From the two Sons of
Merari, who were called Mahli, and Mushi, VI Exodus 19. III Numb. 20.

The Family of the Korathites.] From the great Grandchild of Levi, VI Exodus
21. XVI Numb. 1.

And Kohath begat Amram.] Who was Grandchild of Levi, and Brother to the
Father of Korah, VI Exodus 18.

And the name of Amram's wife was Jochabed, the daughter of Levi.] See VI Exodus
20.

Whom her Mother (viz. Levi his Wife) bare to Levi in Egypt.] See this there
explained.

And she bare unto Amram, Aaron and Moses and Miriam their Sister.] Who seems
to have been born before Moses, if not before Aaron, II Exodus 4.

Ver. 60. And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, VI
Exodus 23. where he tells the name of their Mother.

Ver. 61. And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered See X Lev. 2. v. 4. But
Eleazar (who was the eldest next to them) was now alive, and made High Priest:
and it is likely Ithamar also, being under Twenty years old, when the People
murmured upon the Report of the Spies; and so not cut off with that wicked
Generation, XVI. 29.

All this is here recounted, to show that the Tribe of Levi was preserved, by
the blessing of God, as well as the rest of the Israelites: though they were to
have no Inheritance in the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 62. And those that were numbered of them, were etc.] So they were a
thousand more, than at the last numbering, III. 39.

For they were not numbered among the Children of Israel.] But by themselves,
for the reason following.

Because there was no Inheritance given them, among the Children of Israel.]
For God was their Inheritance, as he told them, XVIII. 20, etc. And therefore
they were ordered not to be numbered, Thirty eight years ago, no more than now,
I Numb. 49, etc. The Jews are something curious in their Observations upon
these words, among (or, in the midst of) the Children of Israel: from whence
they conclude that the Levites might have Lands out of the Bounds of the Land
of Canaan, though not within it, among their Brethren.

Ver. 63. These are they that were numbered by Mose^ etc.] By a special command
of God, v. 1, 2, etc.

Ver. 64. But among these there was not a Man of them, whom Moses and Aaron the
Priest numbered, when they numbered the Children of Israel in the Wilderness of
See the first Chapter of this Book, v. 1, 2, etc. so exactly were God's
Threatenings fulfilled, as well as his Promises.

For the LORD had said of them, they shall surely die in the Wilderness.] He
had pronounced this irreversible Sentence, upon the whole Congregation, XIV.
23, 28, 29. where he swears they should not enter into the Land of Canaan,
because they had brought, or entertained an evil report of it. See also II
Deuteronomy. 14, 15.

And there was not left a Man of them, save Caleb the Son of Jephunneh, and
Joshua the Son of Nun.] Whom God promised to spare, because they were of
another Spirit, XV. 24, 30, 38. And their survival, was as remarkable an
instance of the truth of God's word, as the Death of all the rest.

CHAP. XXVII.
THEN came the Daughters of Zelophehad, the Son of Hepher, etc.] Who are
mentioned before, XXVI. 33. just as they are here; only their Genealogy is here
more fully set out, that their Father was the Grandson of Manasseh the Son of
Joseph, from whom he was lineally descended, but left no Sons behind him. Now
these young Women hearing Moses say (as he does in the foregoing Chapter) that
the LORD commanded the Land of Canaan should be divided among those that were
now numbered; and observing that only Males, from Twenty years old, were
numbered, ( v. 2.) presently apprehended, that they being Females, were excluded
from having any Inheritance among the Israelites (and so the Family of the
Hepherites, XXVI. 32.) would be extinguished. This was the ground of what
follows. Whereby it appears that every body was immediately acquainted with the
Laws which Moses received from God; and that there was a faithful Register kept
of every one that was born in every Family and Tribe, to prevent all Disputes
about the true Heirs to Men's Estates.

Ver. 2. And they stood before Moses, etc.] To represent

Before Moses, and Eleazar the Priest, and before the Princes, and all the
Congregation.] These made up the greatest Court of Judicature that at any time
sat. For by Princes are meant, either the Heads of the Tribes, or the highest
of the Judges appointed, XVIII Exodus called the Heads of the People, v. 25. And
by all the Congregation is meant the LXX Elders mentioned in this Book, XI. 24.
For they are called col ha edah (the whole Congregation, and sometimes only
Edah, the Congregation) as R. Solomon observes. See Bertram de Republ. Jud. p.
72. Now at the Head of all these sat Moses, and next to him Eleazar the Priest.

By the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.] Near to which this august
Assembly, it is likely, was wont to sit, when they met together; that Moses
might presently, if there were occasion, go and consult with God himself, in
any difficult matter, that came before them. And thus Mr. Seldom observes out
of Maimonides, that in future times the great Sanhedrim followed the
Tabernacle, sitting sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, according as
that was settled. As (after they came to Canaan) it was first at Shiloh, then
at Mizpeh, and afterward at Gilgal, Nob, Gibeon, the House of Obed-Edom, till
at last it was fixed in Jerusalem, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 15. n. 4. As
concerning that which the Talmudists say, concerning the proceedings in this
case of Zelophehad's Daughters, nothing certain can be determined. But they
give this account of it, That they first brought this Cause into the Courts
appointed by the advice of Jethro, XVIII Exodus 21. and began with the Rulers of
ten, who knowing not what to say to them, they went to those of fifty, and from
thence to the Centurions, and at last to the Chiliarchs. None of which durst
adventure to give Judgment, but referred the Cause, by reason of its
difficulty, to Moses; who brought it to the SCHECHINAH, as they speak, i. e. to
the Divine Majesty, Seld. ib. cap. 16. n. 1.

Saying, Our Father died in the Wilderness.] Among the rest mentioned v. 64,
65. of the foregoing Chapter. They seem to have drawn up their Cause in the
form of a Petition; or, as Mr. Seldom speaks, in the Legal Phrase, presented a
Libel to the Court, containing the entire matter of their Petition, and that
artificially enough.

And he was not one of them that gathered themselves together against the LORD,
in the Company of Korah.] They use the very words of Moses, concerning that
rebellious Company, XVI. 11. And instance in this Sin, rather than any other;
either to show that their Father had a due regard to the Authority of Moses,
(who they hoped therefore would be the more favorable to his Posterity) or,
rather to insinuate, that he was not guilty of such a Crime, as might make Men
justly forfeit what they had, for their Children, as well as for themselves.
For all the Family of Dathan and Abiram perished: and it is taken notice of as
a singular Mercy, that the Children of Korah did not, XXVI. 10, 11.

But died in his own Sin.] i. e. For his own Sin; which God had declared should
not affect the Children, XIV. 31. For to that General Sin, in which all the
People were engaged, these words seem to refer. And so, it was his own sin, not
with respect to the rest of the People, (for they were all alike guilty) but
with respect to his Children; it being a personal Guilt, in which they were not
concerned.

The Jews commonly say that Zelophehad was the Man that was stoned for
gathering Sticks on the Sabbath Day. For which they have no authority, but a
fancy of R. Aquiba, who is sharply reproved for it, by another considerable
Rabbi; who says it is a rash Judgment; for if it were true, since the
Scripture conceals it, he ought not to have revealed it: but has reproached a
just Man, for any thing that appears. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 1.
sect. 9.

And had no Son.] As was found when the People were numbered, XXVI. 33.

Ver. 4. Why should the name of our Father be done One Family of the Tribe of
Manasseh, viz. the Hepherites, being in danger to be wholly extinguished. R.
Judah will have the word Name in this place to signify as much as hereditary
possession; and so he thinks it signifies, XXV Deuteronomy. 6. as Mr. Seldom observes
out of Pesikta, Lib. de Successionibus, cap. 14.

Because he has no Son.] Merely for want of Issue-Male, when he has left many
Daughters.

Give unto us therefore a possession among the Brethren of our Father.] Let us
come in for a share among those that are descended from Manasseh. Which if they
did, the Name of their Father could not be thereby preserved, but by the Son of
one of these Daughters taking upon him, not the Name of his Father that begat
him, but of his Mother's Grandfather, viz. Hepher; which was ordered
afterward by a general Law, XXV Deuteronomy. 6.

And Moses brought their Cause before the LORD.] This was too difficult a Cause
(though there seemed to be a great deal of Reason on their side) to be judged
by the great Court beforementioned; and therefore it was referred to Moses
alone, as other weighty Causes used to be; (See XV. 32. XXV. 4.) for neither
Eleazar, nor any other Person (before whom it was brought, v. 2.) are here
mentioned as the Judges of this matter. And he durst not judge it, though the
equity appeared very plain, without bringing it before the LORD for his
direction, which he could have upon all important occasions, XXV Exodus 22. VII
Numb. 89.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] This shows that the Cause was devolved
upon Moses alone; for the LORD tells him, and no other Person, how it should be
determined.

The Daughters of Zelophehad, etc.] The LORD approves of their Claim; and gives
a Sentence in their favor.

Thou shall surely give them a possession of an inheritance, among their
Father's Brethren.] Because the word for them in the Hebrew, is of the
Masculine Gender, some think it signifies, they were to be considered as if
they had been Sons.

And thou shall cause the Inheritance of their Father to pass unto them.] So
that they were to enjoy, what would have fallen to his share, had he been alive:
ob indutam defuncti patris personam, as the Lawyers speak; because they stood
in the place of their dead Father, and represented his Person. And accordingly
they put in their Claim at the Division of the Land, and had their Portion
therein, according to this Decision, XVII Josh. 2, 3, etc. How the Portion was
divided among them, according to the Hebrew Doctors, Mr. Seldom shows at large
in his Book de Successionibus in bona defunctii, cap. 23.

Ver. 8. And thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel, Upon this occasion
he passes this special Case into a General Law, to be hereafter observed.

If a Man die, and have no Son, then ye shall cause his Inheritance to pass
unto his Daughter.] It being a reason, as Maimonides observes ( More Nevochim
P. III. cap. 42.) that what a Man leaves, should come to his Family, and to
those who are next of Kin to him: for the nearer any Person is to us, we are
inclined, by natural affection, to have the greater regard to him. But all this
is to be understood of Land: as for Money, and moveable Goods (which were of
his own getting) the Father might dispose of them, by his Will, to whom he
pleased.

Ver. 9. And if he have no Daughter, then ye shall give his Inheritance unto
his Brethren.] Unless his Father was alive, who undoubtedly, the Jews say, was
Seldom de Success. in bona defuncti, cap. 12. Where he observes that, according
to the Rule v. 11. it must come to the Father* because he is nearest of kin to
it. And therefore the Jews interpret this, as if Moses had said, If he have
Daughter, he shall give his inheritance to the next of his Kindred (to his
Father for instance) and afterward ye shall give it to his Brethren, i. e. the
Children of his Father. And the same is to be said of the Grandchildren; unto
whom the Brethren of a Father dying without issue, are heirs. For the
Grandfather stands in the same relation to a Father, that a Father does to his
Son.

And if his Father have no Brethren, then ye shall give it to his Kinsman, that
is next of Kin to him of his Family, and he shall possess it.] To his Brothers
Children; or to those who are descended from them, or from his Fathers'
Brethren. But no consideration was to be had of his Mother's Kindred, (as the
Jewish Lawyers say) who could never be capable of the Inheritance: Which they
gather not only from these words, which determine the Inheritance to his
Family, (i. e. the Family of the Father beforementioned, not to the Family of
the Mother) but from the frequent mention of the Father of Mischpachoth, which
we translate Families, or rather Kindreds of the Fathers, in the Books of
Moses, Chronicles, Ezra, and others. From whence this solemn Maxim of the
Talmudists, The Family, or Kindred of the Mother, is never called by the name
of Kindred. That is, it has not the effect of a Kindred in Successions to
Inheritances. Which is the same with that in the ancient Book Siphri, Families
follow the Fathers, as Mr. Seldom observes in the place beforementioned. Who
in the next Chapter ( cap. XIII.) gives an example, drawn up by Maimonides, of
such a Succession out of the holy Scriptures. Amram had two Sons, Aaron and
Moses, as we read VI Exodus 20. If they had both died without Issue, Miriam
their Sister had inherited. And if she had died in like manner, the Inheritance
of the Family would have reverted to Kohath, the Father of Amram: Or he being
dead, to his three Sons, the Brethren of Amram, viz. Izhar, Hebron and Vzziel,
as the Heirs of Kohath. And there would have been no consideration of
Primogeniture; both because none of them was the Firstborn, and because the
Inheritance was not in the Possession of their Father, at the time of his
Death, etc.

And it shall be unto the Children of Israel a Statute of judgment, etc.] A Law
whereby to determine such Matters in future times, and to be observed
inviolably. So that no Father should have power to make any other Settlement:
but if either by Word or Writing he declared his will to be, that his Son
should not inherit, his Act was null and void: As the Jewish Lawyers resolve
from these very words, a Statute or Decree of Judgment, i. e. as I said, a Rule
whereby to Judge of Succession into Inheritances. If therefore a Man made a
Will wherein he declared his Daughter, or Brethren, etc. should not inherit, in
case he had no Son, it was void, because contrary to this Law. See Seldom de
Successionibus, cap. 24.

Ver. 12. And the LORD said unto Moses, get thee up into this Mountain Abarim.]
Either these words were spoken after all that follows here, and in the
Deuteronomy, or they were repeated again, when he had repeated his Laws, and
enforced them by many excellent Discourses, and taught them that famous Song
XXXII Deuteronomy. where, in the conclusion of it ( v. 49.) it is said, that very day
he bad him go up this Mount Abarim. And there we learn also that Abarim was a
long Tract of Mountains, one of which was called Nebo; and the very top of it
called Pisgah. See XXXIV Deuteronomy. 1.

And see the Land which I have given to the Children of Israel.] Take a full
view of it, as he did from that high neighboring Mountain, III Deuteronomy. 17.
XXXIV. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And when thou have seen it, thou also shall be gathered unto thy People, as
Aaron thy Brother was gathered.] Upon Mount Hor, as we read in this Book, XX.
23, 24.

For ye rebelled against my Commandment in the Desert of Zin, etc.] See Chap.
XX. 1, 12, 24. where all this verse is explained.

And Moses spoke unto the LORD, saying.] He did not speak those words which
follow, immediately after God bad him go up Mount Abarim and die; but first
desired he might be permitted to go over Jordan, etc. III Deuteronomy. 24, 25, 26.
Unless we can think that he made the Prayer there mentioned, as soon as the
Sentence was passed upon him, at the Waters of Meribah; which does not seem so
likely.

Let the LORD the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, etc.] As soon as he found
that God was resolved he should not conduct the People into Canaan, he was
concerned for nothing, but for a fitting Person to take that Charge upon him.
For he had a most generous, public Spirit, wholly intent upon the good of this
People.

The God of the Spirits of all Flesh.] Who have not only made the Souls of all
Men, but know their Dispositions, (See XVI. 22.) and understandest who are
fit for this weighty Employment.

Set a Man over the Congregation.] To be chief Ruler and Governor of the
People in my place.

Ver. 17. Which may go out before them, and which If the latter part of these
words be not a mere repetition of the former, (as is usual) then the one
relates to their Conduct in War, and the other to the management of all their
Civil Affairs. And both of them seem to be a Metaphor from Shepherds watching
over their Flocks.

That the Congregation of the LORD be not as Sheep which have no Shepherd.]
Having none to govern and take care of them. This is a description of the most
miserable condition a People can be in, and became a Proverb among the Hebrews,
1 Kings 22.17. X Zachariah 2. XIII. 7. IX Matthew. 36.

Ver. 18. And the LORD said unto Moses, take thee Who had been a long time
Servant unto Moses, and attended upon his Person, (XXIV Exodus 13.) well known
to Moses, and perfectly acquainted with his administration.

A Man in whom is the Spirit.] Of Courage and Prudence, and the fear of God,
with all other Gifts necessary in an excellent Governor. Among which Onkelos
reckons the Spirit of Prophecy; which is not unlikely.

And lay thine hand upon him.] Which was a Ceremony usual in Blessing, XLVIII
Genesis 14, etc. and in setting Men apart, and Consecrating them to an Office,
VIII. 10. Upon which followed a more abundant measure of the Spirit, as appears
from XXXIV Deuteronomy. 9.

And set him before Eleazar the Priest, and before all the Congregation.] Being
all assembled for this purpose, that all might acknowledge him for the designed
Successor of Moses, and be Witnesses of all that Moses commanded him.

And give him a charge in their sight.] He told him before them all, what God
expected from him; and bad him not be afraid to execute it. See XXXI Deuteronomy. 7,
8. Where he sets down the words of this Charge; unto which God presently after
added one of his own, v. 14, 15, 23.

And thou shall put some of thy honor upon him.] Communicate some of thy
Authority to him at present; and not let him be any longer as thy Minister, but
as an associate in the Government. The word we translate honor being glory in
the Hebrew, it made Onkelos and other Hebrew Doctors imagine these words have
respect to that Splendour which shone in Moses his Face, after he came down from
the Mount. Some of which they suppose was imparted unto Joshua, to make him
appear more venerable in the Eyes of the People. And R. Menachem observes, that
it is not said impart thy glory, but of thy glory to him. From whence came that
ancient saying, the Face of Moses shone like the Sun, but Joshua's only like
the Moon. This might have passed for Truth, or at least that hereby was meant
some great increase of illustrious Gifts of Mind, which procured him such
reverence as Moses had, if it had been said that God put some of Moses his
glory upon him; whereas Moses is commanded to do it; which makes the first
sense most reasonable.

That all the Congregation of Israel may be obedient.] That the People may
begin to submit to his Authority, and learn to obey his Commands, as well as
thine.

Ver. 21. And he shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, Joshua to undertake
this Charge, he assures him he shall never want direction from God, what to do,
when he was in any doubt: but, in the manner here prescribed, most certainly
receive it. And what is here said concerning him, belongs to all their
succeeding Governors. And it is observed by Maimonides and other Jewish
Doctors, that the High Priest stood before the Kings of Israel out of great
respect to them: but no King is said to stand before the High Priest, but only
in this case, when he was to consult the holy Oracle. That it might appear the
Honor was given, not to the Priest, but unto the Divine Majesty, whom he
consulted by the Priest.

Who shall ask counsel for him, after the judgment of Vrim.] Because the word
Thummim is here wanting, some understand these words, as if he had said, the
High Priest shall ask counsel for him, by the illumination of the Spirit of
God. So Conradus Pellicanus. But the word Thummim, in all likelihood is here to
be understood, though not expressed, being always joined with Vrim (except in
this, and one other place, where Vrim only is named, after a short manner of
speaking) in XXVIII Exodus XXXIII Deuteronomy. II Ezra, VII Nehem. For they were
inseparable from the Breast Plate of Judgment, as it is called XXVIII Exodus 30.
(See there.) with which the High Priest appeared before God when he consulted
him, in great Affairs, concerning the Public Safety; more especially in times
of War; of which we have many Instances in I Judge. 1. XX. 18. 1 Samuel XIV. 18.
XXVIII. 6. David indeed is said to consult God by the Ephod, but it must be
observed that the Breast Plate was annexed to it; which Abiathar brought along
with him, when he fled from Saul, who commanded the Priests to be slain, 1 Samuel
XXII. 2, 9. XXX. 8. 2 Samuel V. 19. And it is further to be noted, that though
David thus frequently consulted God this way, being engaged in Wars; yet we
never read that Solomon asked counsel by it, being a peaceable King.

Grotius also observes, that Joshua now, and the Kings of Judah afterward,
therefore stood before the Priest, that they might be near to the Vrim and
Thummim, which he had upon his Breast; without which he could not receive any
answer, De Imperii Sum. Potest, etc. cap. 6.

Before the LORD.] The High Priest never inquired by Vrim and Thummim, but
standing before the LORD; that is, before the Ark, where the SCHECHINAH was.

At his word shall they go out, and at his word shall they come in.] That is,
says Grotius in the place forenamed, at the Word of the LORD, by the Judgment
of Vrim; which goes just before. Others, at the word of the Priest: which comes
to the same. And this the Hebrew Doctors understand, concerning the People of
Israel making War; which is wont to be meant in Scripture, by the words, going
out and coming in. And they distinguish between the War that was made by the
Divine Commandment (against the VII Nations of Canaan, and against Amalek) and
that which was voluntary, against any of their Neighbors or others, as there
should be reason. In the former case, they think there was no need, to ask
whether they should make War or no, because it was commanded; and Joshua and
the Kings afterward, did it when they pleased. But in the other, they were not
to make War without this Divine Order. See Seldom, Lib. III. de Synedr. cap.
12. n. 4. But it is plain from I Judge. 1. that they consulted the LORD also in
the first sort of War (with the People of Canaan) how to manage it to the best
Advantage.

Both he and all the Children of Israel with him, even all the Congregation.]
By the first word [he] the Jews understand Joshua, and all the succeeding
Princes of Israel, who were bound to advise with God by Vrim and Thummim before
they made War. And by the next words [all the Children of Israel with him] they
understand the Priest that was particularly anointed to go with the People to
War, XX Deuteronomy. 2. And by the last words [the whole Congregation] they understand
the LXX. Elders, or the great Sanhedrim. So Maimonides, Abarbinel, and a great
many others, expound these words (as Mr. Seldom shows in the same place) from
which they have framed this general Maxim, That no private Man might consult
this Oracle, but the King, and the Head of the great Sanhedrim, and he that was
appointed by all the People in their name. And that Col haedah [all the
Congregation] signifies frequently the great Assembly of the Elders and Judges.
See also Bertram de Repub. Jud. p. 72.

Here the Jews start a difficulty, as they account it, why we never read in the
whole Book of Joshua, that he consulted the LORD, after this manner; but as
soon as ever he was dead they did, I Judge. 1. From whence Abarbinel concludes,
that Joshua was bound to do this only at the first entrance upon his Office,
that all Israel might know he was Moses his Successor, and that God was with
him: but that afterward the Spirit of Prophecy rested upon him, and conducted
him without this Oracle. But if nothing was done, that is not recorded in the
Scripture, he might as well have said, that Joshua never consulted the Oracle
at all; for we do not read he did, though he be here so ordered. R. Levi ben
Gersom therefore seems to me to speak more reasonably, when he says, that those
words in the beginning of the Book of Judges, do not import that they did not
consult God by Vrim in the Life of Joshua, but only that after his Death, the
Children of Israel would not adventure to proceed in the War of Canaan, without
the same direction.

And there is something else, which they might have observed from this verse,
with great reason, which is, how much inferior Joshua was to Moses, though he
succeeded him in the Conduct of the People. For Moses never made use of the
Vrim and Thummim, to consult God by the High Priest; but went directly and
immediately to God himself: whereas Joshua was not admitted to such
Familiarity; nor had he such frequent Revelations from God as Moses had. Yet
sometimes God vouchsafed him the honor, to speak to him, as we find in the
beginning of Joshua, III. 7. IV. 1, 15, etc. And there was a most illustrious
appearance of God to him before Jericho, V. 13, etc.

Ver. 22. And Moses did as the LORD commandded him, and he took Joshua and set
him before Eleazar, and before all the Congregation.] According as he was
ordered, v. 18, 19. In this we see the great Moses, that he readily submitted
to have the Government of Israel translated from his own Family and Tribe unto
another; who was of the Tribe of Ephraim. Whereby his own Children were reduced
to a mean condition; being not so much as Priests, but mere Levites. This
demonstrates he acted not from himself, because he acted not for himself; but
was contented to have the Supreme Authority placed where God pleased, both in
Church and State; and to leave his own Family in an inconsiderable employment.
This shows him to have had a Principle, which raised him above all other
Lawgivers; who always took care to advance their own Families, and establish
them in some share of that greatness which they themselves possessed. This
likewise demonstrates that the future Rulers of this Nation, had no temptation
to advance the Credit of Moses, beyond what it really was; since they were not
descended from him, but were of other Tribes.

Ver. 23. And he laid his hands upon him, and gave He did all things which the
LORD required to create him his Successor, as the Jews speak: For thus (by
laying on of hands) they in after times, made a Man a Member of the Sanhedrin,
both of the great and of the small: which continued to the time of the
destruction of the second Temple, as Mr. Seldom shows, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap.
7. n. 1.

And this solemn Designation of Joshua to the Government by the Divine
Authority, was a clear Indication that God continued to be their King, as he
became in a special manner, when he brought them out of Egypt, (as I observed
upon III Exodus 10.) and he still reserved it to himself to appoint Governors
under him, out of what Tribe he pleased; as he did Joshua at this time out of
the Tribe of Ephraim; and not Caleb who was of the Tribe of Judah, and also a
Man as valiant as he was virtuous, XIV Josh. 11. For there was no Tribe that
could lay claim unto this Dignity, without the Gift of God. And this is one of
the principal Reasons, why the government of this People, before they had
Kings, was, as Josephus calls it, (...) (that is, the Empire of God) because he
stirred them up Judges to rule them when he pleased. Which being of his
immediate appointment, are so far acknowledged by him, that when they were
weary of Samuel's Government, and desired a King, God declared, that it was not
Samuel, but himself whom they rejected. And another reason was (as our Mr.
Thorndike observes) because God by his Oracle of Vrim and Thummim, prescribed
how they were to proceed in their Public Affairs, Review of the Right of the
Church, page 133.

CHAP. XXVIII.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Having numbered the People, and
appointed his Successor to bring them to their Inheritance (which he had
ordered to be divided among them, proportionable to the number of each Tribe)
nothing was more necessary than to persuade them to be truly religious, whereby
they might be preserved in the enjoyment of it. Unto which Moses is commanded
to direct them, in this and in the following Chapters. Which may be thought to
have been delivered also in the eighth Month of the last Year of their Travels
in the Wilderness.

Ver. 2. Command the Children of Israel, and say unto These Commands had been
given before, but are here repeated, because this was a new Generation, who
either had not heard them, when they were first delivered Eight and thirty
years ago; or at least, had need to have their Memories refreshed. Some things
also are now more particularly explained, concerning the Sacrifices which were
to be offered at certain times: and they are reduced into a certain order; some
being daily, others weekly, others monthly, and some anniversary. All which
were of such importance, that Moses being shortly to leave them, thought good
to repeat most of them once more, in the Book of Deuteronomy.

My Offering and my Bread.] The word and is not in the Hebrew; but the words
are, my Offering, my Bread. Which Isaac Abarbinel thus excellently explains;
Concerning Offerings for Sin, and Trespass-offerings, and the rest, I shall not
need to admonish you: but concerning my daily Sacrifices, which properly of
themselves are my own Oblation, my daily Bread, or my Food (which the Divine
Presence dwelling among them required, XXIX Exodus 42, 44, 45.) And so others by
the word Bread understand Meat or Food in general, as we translate it v. 24.
though it may have a particular respect to the Meat Offering, which was made of
Meal, and always accompanied the Burnt-Offerings. Which seem here to be
peculiarly meant; though some think these words relate to all the Sacrifices,
some part of which were God's Portion.

For my Sacrifices made by fire.] The whole Burnt-offerings are most properly
called Ische (Sacrifices made by fire) being all consumed upon the Altar; where
the heavenly Fire burnt continually, ready for that purpose.

For a sweet savor unto me.] So the Burnt-offering is called I Lev. 9, 13, 17.
See there. I shall only add the Paraphrase of the Jerusalem Targum, which is
this, My offering of Bread which ye offer on the Altar, does not the fire
devour it? And yet it is acceptable to me from you, as an Odor in which I am
well pleased.

Shall ye observe to offer unto me.] Be very careful to see duly performed:
This being the Food (says Abarbinel) which, to speak after the manner of Men,
was offered by God's Fire, upon his own Altar, for his Dinner and Supper.

In due season.] For that reason this Sacrifice was to be constantly offered,
says the same Author, that the Divine Fire which came down from Heaven to
consume the Sacrifices, might not be disappointed, and burn there in vain,
without any thing to do.

From this place the Jews endeavor to make out their Custom, of having
Stationary men, as they call them, to attend the daily Sacrifice: taking Moatho
[in its season] as if it had been Omatho [in its stations] but chiefly relying
upon the first words of this verse, command the Children of Israel, who could
not all be present at the daily Sacrifice, and therefore some particular
Persons were chosen to represent all the rest. For they thought it very
undecent to have a Sacrifice made for a Man, and he not stand by it; and
therefore the first Prophets ordained Twenty four Courses of Men chosen out of
the Priests, Levites, and People, to stand in the Temple, when the daily
Sacrifice was offered in the name of all Israel; and pray that God would accept
it for them, as if they were all present. This account the Mischna gives of
them in Taanith, and other places: where they say these Men were held so
necessary, that it was an usual Speech among them, without Stations the World
could not stand. For without Sacrifices, that is, the Worship of God, the World
would be undone; and Sacrifices could not be maintained without Stations. See
Voysin de Jubilaeo, cap. 25. and our Learned Dr. Lightfoot in his Temple
Service, chap. 7. sect. 3.

Ver. 3. And thou shall say unto them, this is the offering That Offering which
he peculiarly speaks of, is the daily Sacrifice; which was appointed long ago,
before the Tabernacle was set up, XXIX Exodus 38, 39. See my Notes there. And
add this, that God's promise to meet them there, v. 42, 43. and afterward to
dwell among them, v. 45. seems to depend upon this constant Service which he
expected should be paid to him: which if neglected, he withdrew himself from
them.

Two Lambs of the first year, day by day continually.] This is expressly
required in XXIX Exodus 38. Only here it is added without spot, or perfect in
its kind: which was required in all Sacrifices, particularly in the first Lamb
which they offered, when they came out of Egypt, XII Exodus 5. See there.

Ver. 4. The one Lamb shall thou offer in the Morning, and the other Lamb shall
thou offer at Even.] The very words in XXIX Exodus 39.

A tenth part of an Ephah of Flour for a This also is there explained, XXIX
Exodus 40.

It is a continual Burnt-offering.] To be continued throughout all your
Generations every day, as it is expressed XXIX Exodus 42. For it was in the
nature of a daily Prayer to God, that he would graciously continue his Mercy
unto Israel, (as Abarbinel observes) and increase their Corn, Wine and Oil,
which they acknowledged hereby they received from him.

Which was ordained in Mount Sinai.] There Moses received both this Law, and
all the rest (which are mentioned in the Book of Exodus) concerning the Service
of God, and the place where it was to be performed, and his Ministers, etc. And
this sufficiently shows that he speaks here to those who were so young at the
first Institution of these Laws, that they gave the less heed to them, or had
forgotten them. And there are those who think that for Eight and thirty years
they had difused them; which they gather from XII Deuteronomy. 8. But I do not take it
to be likely, that Sacrifices were wholly omitted during that space; though
perhaps not so regularly performed as when they came to Canaan. For to suppose
that, is to suppose that the Fire from Heaven, either went out, or burnt
continually to no purpose; and that the Divine Majesty had no entertainment set
upon his Table; and consequently did not keep House, and dwell among them all
that time: In short, that there was no Worship of God at the Tabernacle. All
these Arguments may convince any Man, there were offered, at least the daily
Sacrifice, Morning and Even, and those on the Sabbath.

For a sweet savor, a Sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.] See XXIX Exodus 41.

Ver. 7. And the Drink Offering thereof shall be the fourth So it was ordained
also in Mount Sinai, as appears from the same XXIX Exodus 40. And in this very
Book there is a general Rule given to this new Generation, that this should be
the least quantity of Wine, which should be offered with a Burnt-offering, or
Peace Offering. See XV Numb. 5. Which was a thing so constantly practiced, that
the Heathen never sacrificed, but they poured Wine upon the Flesh, as it flamed
upon the Altar. For though Water was sometimes poured upon the Sacrifices, yet
Nonnus says ( Lib. IV. Dionysiac.) it was when Men knew not the use of Wine;
for after that was found out, they never sacrificed without it. See Fort.
Scacchus Myrother. 2. cap. 42.

In the holy place.] Upon the Altar of Burnt offerings, which stood in the holy
place, near to the door of the Tabernacle, XXIX Exodus 42.

Shall thou cause the strong Wine to be poured out unto the LORD, for a
Drink Offering.] The Hebrew word Schecar commonly signifies any sort of strong
Drink, but here the noblest and most generous Wine; for it was not lawful to
use any other Liquor in their Sacrifices: The Heathens had this Reverence to
their Gods, that they always offered to them the most excellent Wine they had.
Which appears by those words we meet withal, so often in Homer (both in his
Iliads and Odysses) of Men's pouring out their Sacrifices, -- (...), black Wine;
or of the deepest Color, red as Blood; which was the richest of all other. And
Herodian, speaking of the vast profuseness of Haliogabalus, who offered
Hecatombs of Oxen every Morning, with great multitudes of Sheep, upon which he
heaped all manner of Spices, adds this also, ( Lib. V.) (...), etc. pouring out
many flaggons of the oldest and most excellent Wine on the Altars: So that
Rivers of Wine and Blood ran mixed together.

And the other Lamb shall thou offer at Even, etc.] All the foregoing verses
relate to the Morning Sacrifice; and this only briefly prescribes, that the
other Lamb should be offered in the same manner at Even, with the very same
Meat Offering and Drink Offering. And as no Sacrifice was to precede the
Morning Burnt-offering, but it was to be offered first: so this at Even was to
conclude all the Sacrifices of the Day, and none to be offered after it.

A Sacrifice made by fire, a sweet savor unto the LORD.] As acceptable to him,
as the Morning Sacrifice.

And on the Sabbath day, two Lambs of the first year without spot.] He does not
mean that, whereas every Morning and Evening they offered one Lamb, on the
Sabbath day they should offer two: but that there should be two Lambs offered
on the Sabbath, over and above the daily Offering, as appears from verse 10.
Whether one of them was to be offered in the Morning, and the other added at
the Evening Sacrifice, it is not said; but it is most probable the Sacrifices
on the Sabbath were so ordered. For the Jews say, that at the time of this
additional Sacrifice in the Morning of the Sabbath, they sang at the Temple the
Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. XXXII. dividing it into six parts, and singing one part
every Sabbath; so that in six Weeks they had finished it, and then began again.
And at the Evening Sacrifice they sang that Song of his Exodus XV. at which
times the Priest sounded the Trumpets three times more than they, did at the
ordinary Songs.

And two tenth deals of flour for a Meat Offering mingled with Oil, and the
Drink Offering thereof.] As the Burnt-offerings were double on this day, so a
double quantity of Flour is ordered for the Meat Offering that attended the
Burnt-offering, (for only a tenth part of an Ephah, v. 5. was offered on other
days) and consequently there was to be as much more Oil and Wine than daily.
And here it may be sit to note, that as soon as the Drink Offering was poured
out, then the Song beforementioned began, with the Trumpets and other
Instruments of Music; but not till then: For the Burnt-offering was not
perfect till the Drink Offering, which was to accompany it, was offered;
whereby it was completed. See Dr. Light-foot in his Temple Service, cap. 7.
sect. 2.

Ver. 10. This is the Burnt-offering of every Sabbath, The daily Sacrifice was
not to be omitted on the Sabbath, but this was to be added to it; and thence,
by the Jews called Musaph. Of which sort there were seven more; which were to
be added to the Sacrifice of the day; viz. that in the New Moon, v. 11. at the
Passover, v. 19. and the Feast of Pentecost, v. 26. in the beginning of the
Year, XXIX. 1. on the Day of Expiation, v. 7. on the Feast of Tabernacles there
were peculiar Sacrifices for seven days together, XXIII Lev. 35. and on the
last day of the Feast another, XXIX Numb. 35, 36, 37. All these were called
Musaphim, or additional Sacrifices to the daily Sacrifice.

And in the beginnings of your Months ye shall offer a Burnt-offering unto the
LORD.] This solemn Sacrifice seems to have been ordained by God, to prevent the
Idolatry which was usual among the Gentiles; who worshipped the New Moon with
great Rejoycings when it first appeared. Otherwise, the first day of every
Month was no Festival; but only a day on which extraordinary Sacrifices were
offered with blowing of Trumpets, as seems to be directed X. 10. See there:
which was usual at all solemn Sacrifices, (as I noted before) otherways, the
Feast of blowing with Trumpets, was only on the New Moon of the seventh Month,
and no other. And therefore it is observable, that there is no mention made of
the first day of the Month, among the Festivals appointed in XXIII Lev. And
consequently Servile work was lawful on this day; and nothing more required but
only the following Sacrifices. The Jews at this day say, this Solemnity was
appointed rather for the Women than the Men, (for which they give a fabulous
reason) who are bound to abstain from all work; but the Men only from the most
laborious, such as Plowing the Ground, etc. See Buxtorf's Synag. Judaica, cap.
22.

Two young Bullocks and one Ram, seven Lambs of the first year without spot.]
All these were Burnt-offerings which were offered, besides the daily Sacrifice;
and besides the two Lambs, if the first day of the Month fell out to be a
Sabbath. In which case, and all others, where several Solemnities met together
on the same day, the daily Sacrifice was offered first, and then the rest of
the Sacrifices peculiar for that day were to be performed, every one in their
order. As for Example, If the Sabbath, and new Moon, and the Feast of Trumpets
sell out on the same day, they began with the daily Morning Sacrifice; after
which followed the Sacrifices proper to the Sabbath; and after that the
Sacrifice appointed on the New Moon; and then, those that belonged to the Feast
of Trumpets; and all was concluded with the Evening Sacrifice, as Abarbinel
observes in his Preface to the Book of Leviticus.

Ver. 12. And three tenth deals of flour.] That is, Ephah, v. 5.

For a Meat Offering mingled with Oil, for one Bullock.] i. e. For each Bullock
there was to be this proportion of Flour: which is exactly according to the
general Rule before given, XV. 9.

And two tenth deals of flour mingled with Oil, for one Ram.] This is the
proportion there prescribed for a Ram, as the other for a Bullock, XV. 6.

Ver. 13. And a several tenth deal of fine flour mingled Unto each of the seven
Lambs, beforementioned ( v. 11.) a Meat Offering was to be joined in less
proportion than the other; according to the Rule there given, XV. 4.

For a Burnt-offering of a sweet savor, etc.] See v. 6.

Ver. 14. And their Drink Offering shall be half an hin See XV. 10.

And the third part of an hin for a Ram.] See there v. 7.

And a fourth part of an hin for a Lamb.] See there v. 5. They that allegorize
these things, think the New Moon signifies the Resurrection to a new Life in
the other World, where every one shall receive a Reward according to his
measure. Thus Procopius Gazaeus: in whom they that think such Expositions
useful, may find entertainment.

This is the Burnt-offering of every Month throughout the Months of the year.]
There are more Sacrifices appointed on the New Moons, than on the Sabbath it
self; because they returned seldomer. And the Gentiles multiplying Sacrifices
on such occasions, if the Jews had not been thus employed in the Worship of
God, they might have been tempted to pay their Services to Idols.

And one Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering.] This Sacrifice of a Goat for a
Sin-offering, says the same Procopius, is coupled with the rest, being a
shadow of the Passion of Christ, for whose sake all our Sacrifices are
acceptable unto God the Father.

Unto the LORD.] It is well observed by Grotius, that these words unto the LORD
were added, to put them in mind at this time of the right Object of Worship;
when they were in danger to offer Sacrifice to the Moon, after the manner of
the Heathen. This is the more to be regarded, because a Goat being appointed to
be offered at two other Solemnities, and to be offered for a Sin-offering, ( v.
22, 30.) it is not said, unto the LORD, (though certainly so intended) because
there was no danger at those times to direct their Sacrifices to a wrong
Object, as there was upon the New Moons; when the Heathen offered a Goat unto
the Moon, it being a Creature whose Horns are like to those of a New Moon. R.
Bechai long ago observed this: A Goat, says he, was offered to extirpate the
Religion of those who worshipped the Moon; which makes the Scripture say
expressly, unto the LORD. And Maimonides more largely in his More Nevochim, P.
III. cap. 46. where, after he had taken notice of the difference between
Sin Offerings and Burnt-offerings, the latter of which being wholly burnt,
might be properly said to be unto the LORD, whereas Sin Offerings, were
commonly eaten by the Priests; he adds, That this Sin-offering is peculiarly
said to be unto the LORD, least any one should think this Goat to be a
Sacrifice to the Moon, after the manner of the Egyptians: Which was not
necessary to be said of the Goats offered at other Solemn Times, because they
were not in the beginning of the Month, nor distinguished from other days by
any natural sign, but only by the appointment of the Law: which uses these
words concerning this Goat peculiarly, to pluck out of Men's thoughts those
inveterate and pernicious Opinions of the Gentiles; who had long sacrificed to
the Moon at this time, as they did to the Sun at his rising, and when he entered
into the several Signs.

Besides the continual Burnt-offering, and his Drink Offering.] This is so
often particularly mentioned, lest any should imagine it might be spared, when
there were such liberal Offerings of several kinds.

Ver. 16. And on the fourteenth day of the first Month See XII Exodus 6, 18.
XXIII Lev. 5. where it is called the LORD's Passover. See XII Exodus 27.

Ver. 17. In the fifteenth day of this Month is the Feast.] The fourteenth day
at Even the Feast of the Passover was kept, as appears from XII Exodus 14. the
Feast of unleavened Bread. See XXIII Lev. 6.

Seven days shall unleavened Bread be eaten.] See XII Exodus 15. XIII. 6, 7.
XXIII Lev. 6.

On the first day shall be an holy Convocation, ye shall do no manner of
servile work therein.] See XII Exodus 16. XXIII Lev. 7.

But ye shall offer a Sacrifice made by fire, for a Burnt-offering unto the
LORD.] The Solemnity was ordained before, and Offerings also in general
prescribed to be made seven days, (See XXIII Lev. 8.) but the particular
Sacrifices not set down tell now.

Two young Bullocks, one Ram, and seven Lambs of the first year, they shall be
unto you without spot.] The same Sacrifices which were appointed to be offered
upon every first day of the Month, v. 11.

And their Meat Offering shall be of flour mingled with Oil, three tenth deals
shall ye offer for a Bullock, and two tenth deals for a Ram.] The very same
which were appointed on the first day of every Month, v. 12.

A several tenth deal shall thou offer for every Lamb, throughout the seven
Lambs.] Just as it was in the forementioned Sacrifice, v. 13. And though the
Drink Offerings be not mentioned, they must be understood to be the same;
because they always accompanied the Meat Offerings of Burnt-Sacrifices, which
were not complete without them.

And one Goat for a Sin-offering, to make atonement for you.] As it was in the
New Moon, v. 15. But Meat and Drink Offerings did not accompany Offerings for
Sin, save only in the case of a Leper: who was to bring three Offerings, a
Sin-offering, a Trepass Offering, and a Burnt-offering for his cleansing; with
three tenth parts of an Ephah of Flour, XIV Lev. 10, etc.

Ver. 23. Ye shall offer these beside the Burnt-offering There are two things
that are here to be remarked; that these Offerings (as I noted before) should
not put by the continual Burnt-Sacrifice, but be added to it: and that all
these were offered in the Morning, after the daily Morning Sacrifice; and were
not part of the Evening Sacrifice, which concluded all.

Ver. 24. After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout Upon every one of
the days of unleavened Bread, v. 17. which though it was a great Expense, yet
was but a fitting Acknowledgment of God's wonderful goodness to them, in
bringing them out of the Land of Egypt, with all their Flocks and their Herds;
which was the foundation of all their happiness afterward, by making them a
free People.

The Meat of my Sacrifice made by fire.] Here is the very same word with that
v. 2. where he calls this Sacrifice his lechem, which we there translate his
bread, but here very properly, his meat or food. Which was set upon his Table
(the Altar) every day; and by his fire from Heaven consumed; which, according
to the language of Men, was called his eating of it: as the Heathen Gods also
are said to eat the Fat of their Sacrifices, XXXII Deuteronomy. 38.

Of a sweet savor unto the LORD.] Very acceptable to him, as has been often
observed.

It shall be offered beside the continual Burnt-offering, and his
Drink Offering.] There is the greatest care taken (by the frequent repetition
of this) that they should not think to save their daily Sacrifice by these
others; which were to be added to it, and not to supply the place of it. See v.
15.

And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy Convocation, ye shall do no
servile work therein.] This last day of the Feast was equal to the first, XXIII
Lev. 7, 8. and is called a Feast unto the LORD, XIII Exodus 6.

Also the day of the First Fruits.] Called the Feast of Harvest, the
First Fruits of their Labors, XXIII Exodus 16. and the Feast of Weeks, when
they brought the First Fruits of Wheat-harvest, XXXIV Exodus 22. XVI Deuteronomy. 10.
The Jews in their Writings commonly call this Feast by the name of Atzereth,
and so do the Chaldee Paraphrase upon this place: though Abarbinel observes
that this alone, of all the three great Feasts, is never called so in the holy
Scripture. It is hard therefore to tell, why the Jews call it so in a singular
manner; but our learned Dr. Lightfoot has made several probable Conjectures
about it: one of which (and most pertinent to this place) is, because there was
a restraint, as the word signifies, upon the People, from bringing their
First Fruits till this Feast. If any did, they received them not from them, but
laid them by till this day came. See Temple Service, chap. 14. sect. 4.

When ye bring a new Meat Offering unto the LORD.] Mentioned XXIII Lev. 16.
Which were two Loaves made of their first Corn, v. 17. where they are called
the First Fruits unto the LORD.

After your Weeks be out.] That is, the seven Weeks which they were to number
from the morrow after the Sabbath, XXIII Lev. 15. i. e. after the first day of
unleavened Bread. When they offered another sort of First Fruits, (which must
be carefully distinguished from those here mentioned) viz. of the Barley
Harvest, which began at the Passover; when they were to bring a Sheaf of their
First Fruits unto the Priest, XXIII Lev. 10. the presenting of which Sheaf was
an Introduction to Harvest, and procured them liberty to begin to put the
Sickle into the Corn; which now, after seven Weeks, they reaped, and carried in
at this Feast, when they brought these new First Fruits unto the LORD. All
which is a Description of that which in the New Testament is called the Feast
of Pentecost; being fifty days, as we read there in Leviticus, after the other
great Feast.

Ye shall have an holy Convocation, ye shall do no servile work.] See XXIII
Lev. 21.

Ver. 27 But ye shall offer the Burnt-offering, for a Over and above the
Burnt-offering which was prescribed to be offered with the two loaves
beforementioned, XXIII Lev. 18. unto which this was an additional Sacrifice,
plainly distinct from it.

Two young Bullocks, one Ram, seven Lambs of the first year.] The very same
that were ordered to be offered upon every New Moon, and every day of the Feast
of unleavened Bread, v. 11, 19, etc. whereas that in Leviticus is one young
Bullock, two Rams, and seven Lambs.

Ver. 28. And their Meat Offering of flour mingled etc.] The very same that is
prescribed to accompany the Burnt-offering, on the New Moon, and in the Feast
of Unleavened Bread, v. 12, 20.

Ver. 29. And a several tenth deal unto one Lamb, So it is ordained before in
the former Cases, v. 13, 21.

And one Kid of the Goats to make an atonement for you.] Beside the Kid
prescribed for the same purpose, when the two Loaves were offered, XXIII Lev.
19. which was accompanied with two Lambs for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings. So
that there were a great many Sacrifices offered at this famous Festival; though
it did not last so long as that of the Passover.

Ye shall offer them beside the continual Burnt-offering.] He still takes care
that this daily Sacrifice should not be omitted, by reason of such a number of
other Sacrifices, which were to attend upon it, but not to put it by, v. 10,
15, 23.

They shall be unto you without blemish.] This might have been sufficiently
understood, from what was said of the daily Offering, v. 3. and of all the
other prescribed in this Chapter, v. 11, 19. But least any profane Person
might think there was no need to be so scrupulous about these Sacrifices,
because it is only said, two young Bullocks, one Ram, and seven Lambs of the
first year, v. 27. these words are also here added, to take away all doubt,
they shall be unto you without blemish, i. e. as perfect as all the rest are
ordered to be.

It is observable that there is not so much as one Peace Offering ordered in
all this Chapter, which was a sort of Sacrifice that was most for the benefit
of those that brought them to the Altar: But all Burnt-offerings (except a few
Sin Offerings) which were wholly for the honor of God, and acknowledgment of
his Sovereign Dominion over them, and of the Duty they owed him. And as the
Sin Offerings were shadows of that great Sacrifice of God's own Son, which was
one day to be offered for the Sins of Men, out of his infinite love to them; so
the whole Burnt-offerings (which were always of the most perfect Creatures, the
finest Flour, the choicest Fruits of the Earth, and the best Liquor) were
shadows of that excellent degree of Piety, which the Son of God intended to
bring into the World, which would move Men, out of love to God, to give
themselves wholly up to him, and devote all they had, even their own Lives, to
his Service.

CHAP. XXIX.
AND in the seventh Month.] Which was Exodus 2.

On the first day of the Month ye shall have an holy Convocation, ye shall do
no servile work.] So it was ordained before in XXIII Lev. 24, 25.

It is a day of blowing of Trumpets unto you.] In that place of Leviticus it is
called a memorial of blowing of Trumpets from Morning until Evening. Which the
Jews fancy was to awaken them to Repentance, upon the great Day of Expiation,
which followed on the tenth day of this Month. But it was manifestly intended
quite contrary, to excite them unto Joy and Gladness. For Zichron teruah is a
memorial of Jubilation, Triumph, and Shouting for Joy: the word teruah being
never used in Scripture, but for a sound, or shout of Gladness, as the Chaldee
word Jabbaba, which is here used by the Paraphrast, always signifies. And this
agrees with their Notion, who think it was a special remembrance of the
Creation of the World, at which the Angels rejoiced. Or, it might be ordained
to stir up the People to a grateful remembrance of all God's Benefits the Year
past. Whatsoever was the cause, certain it is, this seventh Month was very
famous on this account, that more solemn days were to be kept in it, than in
all the Year besides. And upon that account, the People might be awakened, by
this blowing of Trumpets, to observe them aright.

And shall offer a Burnt-offering for a sweet savor unto the LORD.] Over and
above all other Sacrifices, which were heretofore ordered upon this day; as
appears from v. 6.

One Bullock, one Ram, and seven Lambs of the first year, without blemish.]
This is less than was appointed upon the foregoing Festivals, XXVIII. 19, 27.
because those very Sacrifices were also to be offered upon this day, on another
account; as I shall observe on v. 6.

And their Meat Offering shall be of flour mingled with Oil, three tenth deals
for a Bullock, and two for a Ram.] This is the proportion appointed, by a
general Rule, for all Sacrifices of this kind. See the XVth Chapter of this
Book, v. 6, 9.

Ver. 4. And one tenth deal for one Lamb, etc.] So it is there appointed, v. 4.

Ver. 5. And one Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering, to make an atonement for
you.] As is appointed in the foregoing Festivals, XXVIII. 15, 22, 30.

Ver. 6. Beside the Burnt-offering of the Morning, with It was appointed
before, that in two Bullocks, etc. XXVIII. 11, 12. which was not to be omitted
in the beginning of this Month: but these other Sacrifices added to the
Offerings of every New Moon. Which made this a greater New Moon than any other;
being the first Moon of the old Civil Year.

And the daily Burnt-offering and his Meat Offering, and their Drink Offering.]
With which the Solemnity of the Day began: and then followed the proper
Sacrifices belonging to it.

According to their manner.] Or, in the order which God appointed: which I
observed before (on XXVIII. 11.) was this; That first the daily Burnt-Sacrifice
was offered; then the Sacrifices appointed for the first day of every Month;
and then those appointed for this first day of the seventh Month.

For a sweet savor, a Sacrifice made, by fire unto the LORD.] Which was
acceptable to the Divine Majesty, when performed according to his directions.

Ver. 7. And ye shall have on the tenth day of this This solemn Assembly is
ordered twice before in the Book of Leviticus, XVI. 29. XXIII. 27. and here
repeated perhaps, for the sake of Eleazar and Joshua, who were newly advanced
to their several Offices, that they might take special Notice of it, and see it
observed.

And ye shall afflict your Souls.] That was the special intention of it (as we
read in both the forenamed places) that they might receive the benefit of the
atonement on this day made.

Ye shall not do any work therein.] It was to be observed as strictly as a
Sabbath, XVI Lev. 31. XXIII. 32. Wherein they were to abstain, not merely from
servile Work, but from all manner of Work whatsoever, XVI Lev. 29. XXIII. 28,
30.

And ye shall offer a Burnt-offering unto the LORD for a sweet savor.]
Endeavor to procure acceptance of the rest of the Sacrifices of the Day, with
this whole Burnt-offering, beside the daily Sacrifice, as it follows v. 11.

One Bullock, one Ram, and seven Lambs of the first year, etc.] The same that
were appointed on the foregoing Solemnity, v. 2. (except the monthly Offering,
v. 6.) to which was added another Ram for a Burnt-offering, XVI Lev. 5. as a
devout Acknowledgment that they owned him alone for their Sovereign LORD.

And their Meat Offering shall be of fine flour, etc.] The Meat Offering
attending these Burnt-offerings, were to be in the same proportion as was
before ordered, v. 3, 4.

One Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering.] As was appointed in the foregoing
Solemnity, v. 5.

Beside the Sin-offering of Atonement.] Mentioned XVI Lev. 9, etc. whose Blood
was carried by the High Priest into the most holy place; which was done in no
other Sacrifice but that, and the Bullock which was offered, as a Sin-offering
for the Family of Aaron on the same day, XVI Lev. 14.

And the continual Burnt-offering, and the Meat Offering of it, and their
Drink Offerings.] These were no more to be omitted on the great Day of
Atonement, than on any other day; but the Service of the day was to begin with
the continual Burnt-offering; and then followed the Burnt-offerings, with the
Meat and Drink Offerings belonging to them, and the Sin-offering here
prescribed; and then the Sacrifice of Atonement, and all that is ordered in the
XVIth of Leviticus for the Expiation of the Sins of all the People of Israel.
Which Sacrifice the present Jews now wanting, and yet being sensible of the
necessity of some Satisfaction, but not believing in our blessed Savior, who
has fully made it for all Mankind, they are in a lamentable plunge, and are
put to most wretched shifts to devise something to supply the place of the
Sacrifice of Atonement, which was wont to be made for them. One is their own
death: it being the continual Prayer of every one of them, upon their
Deathbed, Let my death be the expiation for my sins. Another is (which is so
absurd, that Leo Modina says they do not use it now in Italy, nor in the
Eastern Countries) the killing of a white Cock (if one can be got) by the Men,
and a white Hen by the Women on the Eve of this Day, saying, Let this Cock be
an exchange for me; let it come in my stead; let it be my Expiation; let it
die, but I and all Israel live happily: as Buxtorf shows in his Synagog.
Judaica, cap. 25. Which I should not here mention, were it not to show, that
they have the very same Notion still of a Sacrifice for Sin (even now that they
can only make an imitation of it) which we have of the Sacrifice of Christ, who
was put in our place, and offered himself to God in our stead: and that it
ought to be pure and innocent, which is offered instead of a Sinner.

Ver. 12. And on the fifteenth day of the seventh See XXIII Lev. 35.

And ye shall keep a Feast unto the LORD seven days.] viz. The Feast of
Tabernacles, XXIII Lev. 34. which was after the Harvest and Vintage, XVI Deuteronomy.
13. and kept seven days with great Joy and gladness of Heart; but they were not
bound to abstain from servile work all this time, but only on the first day and
on the seventh.

And ye shall offer a Burnt-offering, a Sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet
savor unto the LORD.] The same kind of Sacrifice which was prescribed on the
other Festivals, to be offered up wholly in honor of God. But here is a far
larger proportion than in any other Solemnity.

Thirteen young Bullocks, two rams, and fourteen Lambs of the first year, etc.]
On the other Festivals two Bullocks sufficed, XXVIII. 11, 19, 27. and on the
Festival in the beginning of this Month only one was appointed; but here are
thirteen: and so they continued to be offered seven days successively, with the
decrease only of one Bullock every day; till on the seventh day only seven
Bullocks were offered; which in all made LXX. Bullocks. The Rams also and the
Lambs were in a double proportion to what was usual, throughout the whole
Festival. Which was a vast charge, but more easy at this time of the Year than
any other, because now their Barns were full, and their Wine-presses
over-flowed; and their Hearts might well be supposed to be more enlarged then
at other times, in thankfulness to God for his great Benefits. Yet this very
gross, troublesome, and expensive way of serving God, made the best Men among
them groan, and long for the coming of Christ; in whose days, their own Doctors
say, no Sacrifices shall remain, but those of Thansgiving, and Praise, and
Prayer. With which they have been forced to be content for above Sixteen
hundred years: and instead of these additional Sacrifices, unto the daily, have
added peculiar Prayers (which they also call Musaphim) unto the common Prayers
they use every day. See Buxtorf concerning the Feast of the New Moon, in his
Synagog. Jud. cap. 22.

Ver. 14, 15. Their Meat Offering shall be of fine flour, Chap. XV.

Ver. 16. And one Kid of the Goats for a Sin-offering, etc.] There is no
augmentation of the Sin-offering; but it is the same with that on other
Festivals, v. 5. And all these Sacrifices, it appears by this, were to be added
to the daily Sacrifice.

Ver. 17. And on the second day ye shall offer twelve etc.] Here one Bullock
less, than on the day before, is ordered to be offered; and so on every
succeeding day there is still a decrease of one Bullock: which is all the
difference between the Offerings on the seven days of this Feast, upon every
one of which there was the same number of Rams and Lambs, without any
diminution. Which Moses thought fit to set down distinctly from this verse to
the thirty fifth, that there might be no mistake. But little need be noted upon
them.

Ver. 18. According to their number after the manner.] Prescribed v. 14, 15.

Ver. 35. On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn Assembly.] Lev. 36. See
there.

Ye shall do no servile work therein.] It was to be observed as the first day
of the Feast of Tabernacles: both of them being called a Sabbath, 23 Lev. 39.

But ye shall offer a Burnt-offering, a Sacrifice made by fire, of sweet savor
unto the LORD.] Here is a peculiar Sacrifice appointed upon this day, in the
same terms, as upon the first day of the Feast of Tabernacles, v. 13.

One Bullock, one Ram, seven Lambs of the first year, etc.] But though this was
an extraordinary day, and a distinct Festival (as I showed upon XXIII Lev. 39.)
yet here are fewer Sacrifices prescribed on this day, than upon any of the
foregoing seven. For on every one of them two Rams were offered and fourteen
Lambs; and here but half so many: And seven Bullocks were the fewest that were
offered upon any of those days (and on the first day thirteen) but here only
one. By which, God consulted, perhaps, the weakness of Mankind, who naturally
grew weary both of the Charge, and of the Labor of such Services, when they
are long continued. And therefore he made them every day less toilsom and
expensive; and put them in mind likewise, that the multitude of Sacrifices did
not procure their acceptance with God; and that, in length of time, they would
come to nothing, and be utterly abolished, to establish something better in
their room.

Ver. 37. Their Meat Offering, and their Drink Offerings, for the Bullock, for
the Ram, and for the Lambs, and shall be according to their number, after the
manner.] In such proportions as God had before Chapter of this Book, in the
beginning of it; as I have often observed.

Ver. 38. And one Goat for a Sin-offering, beside the etc.] This is never
omitted upon any Festival, XXVIII. 15, 22, 30. XXIX. 5, 11, 16, 19, etc. to put
them in mind, that after all their Services they stood in need of forgiveness.

Ver. 39. These things shall ye do (or offer) unto the All these Feasts were
fixed and stated at certain times; on which God was to be worshipped after the
manner here prescribed, in these two Chapters. For all these Offerings (except
one Sin-offering upon each set day) were wholly Burnt-offerings (as I have
already observed) which may properly be said to be done, that is, offered unto
the LORD: neither People nor Priest having any share in them.

Besides your Vows and your Free-will-offerings, for your Burnt-offerings.]
Besides these, every Man might offer other Burnt-offerings; either in
performance of a Vow, or freely out of his Affection to God. See XV. 3.

For your Meat Offerings, and for your Drink Offerings.] There were five
several sorts of Meat Offerings; which were left to every Man's free will, to
bring as he pleased. See the second Chapter of Leviticus, where they are
described.

And for your Peace Offerings.] These are described in the third Chapter of
that Book. A great number of which, it is likely, Men offered voluntarily upon
all the forementioned Festivals. For otherwise, they would have had no means
to feast with God at his House, nor to entertain their Friends and Neighbors,
as the custom was at such times of Public Rejoyceing. Which they did upon that
part of the Peace Offerings which was given them, after the Fat was offered to
God, and the Wave-breast and Heave-shoulder given to the Priest, VII Lev. 15,
etc. 34.

And Moses told the Children of Israel, according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses.] He acquainted all the People (by the Heads of their Tribes
perhaps, of whom we read in the beginning of the next Chapter) with all these
Commands of God, which concerned his Worship and Service.

CHAP. XXX.
AND Moses spoke unto the Heads of the Tribes.] There were wont to be
extraordinary Assemblies of these, or other great Men, upon special Occasions,
as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 14. n. 4. who are sometimes
called, as they are here, the Heads of all their Tribes, and the Elders, V
Deuteronomy. 23. and in other places, the Heads of the People, XXX Deuteronomy. 5. the whole
Congregation of the Children of Israel, XVIII Josh. 1. XXII. 12. the chief of
all the People, XX Judge. 2. all Israel, 1 Samuel VII. 5. all the Princes of
Israel, the Princes of the Tribes, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 1. all the Elders of Israel
and Heads of the Tribes, and chief of the Fathers, 2 Chronicles. V. 2. the counsel
of the Princes and Elders, X Ezra 8. And it is commonly said by the Hebrew
Doctors, concerning such Assemblies, that wheresoever the Children of Israel
were met together, or the greater part of them, there the SCHECHINAH (that is,
the Divine Majesty, or the Holy Ghost, as they sometimes speak) was wont to
rest.

Concerning the Children of Israel, saying.] Acquainted them with a Matter
which concerned all the People; willing them to communicate it to them.

This is the thing which the LORD has commanded.] It is very probable there
had been some Case propounded to him about Vows; concerning which he here gives
such Rules, as might direct them in time to come.

Ver. 2. If a Man.] It is reasonable to think, that

Vow a vow unto the LORD.] Promise solemnly unto God something that is for his
Honor and Service; for that seems to be meant by unto the LORD. As that he
will offer some Sacrifice at the Feasts abovementioned, more than is
prescribed; or afflict his Soul on some other day, besides the great Day of
Atonement. See v. 13.

Or swear an Oath to bind his Soul with a bond.] Whether it be a simple Vow, or
bound also with a solemn Oath: which made a double Obligation, by calling God
to witness the Sincerity of his Intentions.

He shall not break his word.] In the Hebrew it is, he shall not profane his
word: for it being solemnly passed to God, it made him vile and contemptible,
if he did not keep it. The Jewish Doctors very prudently advise their Scholars
not to accustom themselves to make Vows; but to content themselves with doing
what the Law commands, and abstaining from what it forbids. But if they did
make them, to look upon it as an high affront to God not to perform them.

He shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.] If the thing
be lawful, and possible. And if he appointed no time for the doing of it, he
was to think himself obliged to do it presently without delay, XXIII Deuteronomy. 21.

If a woman also vow a vow unto the LORD.] As most Interpreters think the word
Man, in the foregoing verse comprehends Women, who were in as perfect liberty
as the Men he speaks of; so the word Woman here comprehends all Men, who are in
the same Circumstances with those Women, whom he here directs in their Vows.
Whom he considers in a threefold state; before they are married, and after
marriage, and in their widowhood.

And bind her self by a bond.] By an Oath, wherewith she confirms her Vow; as
it seems to be interpreted v. 10, 13.

Being in her fathers house, in her youth.] That is, being a part of his
Family, and still under his government, and not married. For the Father's power
lasts no longer, as Grotius observes, Lib. II. de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 5.
n. 7. In which condition likewise are all Sons, who remain in their Father's
Family, undisposed of in marriage: And all Servants, who are manifestly in
subjection to their Masters; and therefore could no more resolve to do what
they pleased, then the Women here mentioned.

Ver. 4. And her father hears her vow, and her bond wherewith she has bound
herself.] The first of these may relate to her simple Vow; and the next to an
Oath wherewith she binds it, to make it firmer.

And her father shall hold his peace at her.] If he did not declare that he
disallowed what she had promised, it was supposed he consented to it: Unless he
said he would take time to consider; and neither allow nor disallow, for the
present; in which case, in all reason, she was to wait for his Resolution.

Then all her Vows shall stand, etc.] It was not in his power afterward to
disannul any of them, if he did not contradict them when he was told of them,
or after the time he had taken for deliberation.

Ver. 5. But if her father disallow her in the day that he hears.] As soon as
he comes acquainted with it.

Not any of her vows, or her bonds wherewith she has Though she had bound her
Vows with an Oath, they were not to be performed, when her Father had declared
his will to the contrary.

And the LORD shall forgive her.] The not performing her Vow, shall not be
imputed to her as a sin.

Because her father disallowed her.] Whose consent was supposed to be
necessary, before the Vow could be binding; she being, while a part of his
Family, under his power, and not her own. Some have fancied that when her
Father was dead, the Vow revived, because then she was at her own disposal: but
it is plain, her Father wholly disannulled the Vow, when he did not approve it,
so that it could not recover a force it never had, being made without his
consent. The same is to be said of a Guardian, who was supposed to be in the
place of a Father, when he died and left his Children to his care. And this
power was fit to be reserved to Parents (as a late learned Man, Puffendorf,
observes) not only least Women, in their imprudent years, should undo
themselves by vowing more than their Fortunes could bear; but also least the
Paternal Estate should be burdened by such Vows, or the necessary Affairs of
the Family hindered. So that this power did not flow from positive Laws, but
from natural Reason; no Body that is subject to another having any right to
dispose of those things which are under that power to which they are subject.

And if she had at all an husband when she vowed.] Was a married Woman, or
espoused to an Husband, though still in her Father's House (as it appears from
v. 10. this must be interpreted) when she made this Vow, then it was to be
considered, not what her Father, but her Husband (under whose power she now
was) should determine about it.

Or uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul.] Said any
thing, which she confirmed by an Oath.

And her husband heard it.] Either was present when she spoke it; or she told
it him afterward.

And he held his peace, in the day that he heard it.] Said nothing to signify
his disallowance of it. See v. 4.

Then her vows shall stand, etc.] As before v. 4.

Ver. 8. But if her husband disallow her, etc.] See v. 5. where there is the
same Case of a Daughter under the power of her Father, as here of a Wife under
the power of his Husband.

Ver. 9. But every vow of a Widow, or of her that is The reason of this is so
plain, that one would think it needed not to have been mentioned, because such
Women were wholly in their own power, being free from their Husbands.
Therefore, it is very probable, he speaks here of a Widow, or divorced Woman,
returned to her Father's House (as the manner frequently was, XXII Lev. 13.)
who might be supposed to recover his ancient power over her, to disannul her
Vows, as he might before she was married. Which is here absolutely condemned:
for though she lived with him, she was her own Woman, (as we now speak) and
might dispose of her self and her Goods, as she pleased, without his consent.

Ver. 10. And if she vowed in her husbands house, or Engaged herself in a Vow,
and perhaps confirmed it with an Oath, while she and her Husband lived
together, or before she was divorced from him.

Ver. 11. And her husband heard it and held his peace, etc.] She was bound, in
this case, to make them good after he was dead; or she was divorced from him.

Ver. 12. But if her husband has utterly made them etc.] Then, when she was in
her own power, by his death or by a divorce, she was not bound to make them
good; because when she made them, her Husband, under whose power she then was,
had utterly made them void.

Ver. 13. Every vow and every binding oath to afflict the soul.] This shows
what the matter of these Vows frequently was; to abstain from such or such
Meats, though in themselves lawful; or to fast, and eat nothing at all on other
days, as well as on the great Day of Expiation; which was the only Fast
ordained by the Law of Moses.

Her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.] There is an
excellent Discourse of Maimonides in his More Nevochim (P. III. cap. 48.) to
show that this is most reasonable; where he observes, that as the Law
prohibited some Meats, so pious People sometimes vowed to forbear such as were
not prohibited; that by this means they might learn Contentment with a little,
or Continence, and give a check to an immoderate Appetite. From whence the
saying among the Doctors, That Vows are the hedge of Separation; i. e. a great
guard to an holy Life. But since, through the vehemence of their Affections and
Passions, many Women are prone to act unadvisedly, if Vows were wholly in their
power, great Inconveniences, Dissentions and Confusions might arise in
Families, whilst this sort of Meat is lawful to the Husband, but not to the
Wife; this permitted to the Daughter, but prohibited to the Mother. For which
reason, says he, this Authority was given to the Governors of Families; in
all things to order them, as they saw would be for their profit, or detriment.

But if her husband.] Or, For if her Husband.

Altogether hold his peace at her, from day to day.] When he knew what she had
vowed; as it follows in the end of the verse.

He establishes all her vows, etc.] His silence was to be interpreted a
Consent, to allow what she vowed. There was no need to add the contrary, which
is here to be understood: that if he said he did not allow them, then they
should not bind her.

Ver. 15. But if he shall any ways make them void, Hinder her from performing
her Vow, after he had given his consent, by saying nothing against it, when he
heard her make the Vow.

Then he shall bear her iniquity.] God will punish him, not her, for not
performing the Vow. Paulus Fagius thinks the meaning is, that if the first day
he heard of her vow he did not disannul it, but attempted to do it the next
day, or the third day after, he should bear the blame, if the Vow was not made
good.

Ver. 16. These are the Statutes which the LORD It is likely some differences
arose in some Families about these Matters; and therefore these Laws were made
for the settling the power of Husbands over their Wives, and Parents over their
Children, while they were young, and continued a part of their Family.

CHAP. XXXI.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Not long before his death, as appears
from the next verse.

Avenge the Children of Israel of the Midianites.] This had been commanded
before, but no time set for it; which now is determined. The Moabites are not
mentioned, because the Midianites seem to have been the first or chief
Contrivers of that Mischief which befell the Israelites, by the enticements of
their Women. See XXV. 17, 18.

Afterward shall thou be gathered unto thy People.] When he had given a few
other Directions, concerning their possessing the Countries already conquered,
and the Land of Canaan, XXXII, XXXIV, XXXV. and providing for the Levites
there, XXXVI. God had warned him to prepare for his death before this, XXVII.
12. but he first let him have the satisfaction of seeing the Midianites
punished; and gave him some time to settle the Public Affairs; and to make
also a long Exhortation to the Israelites, to observe all that he had commanded
them.

And Moses spoke unto the People, saying.] He speedily put this Command in
Execution: which might possibly be in the ninth Month of the fortieth Year.

Arm some of your selves unto the War.] He does not at first determine the
number; but as many as pleased might offer themselves voluntarily, to be ready
to obey him.

And let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the LORD of Midian.] The
LORD bad him avenge the Children of Israel, v. 2. but Moses bids them avenge
the LORD: for they had the same interest; and were both injured at the same
time, and by the same means. And as God was so gracious as to resent the evil
done to Israel, so Moses, in duty and gratitude to God, thought himself bound
rather to consider the dishonor that was done to him. Whose War this was, not
only because undertaken by his command, but in his quarrel, (with those who had
drawn the Israelites to Idolatry) and for the sake of his People.

Ver. 4. Of every Tribe a thousand, throughout all the When a great many,
perhaps all the People, appeared ready to go to War, he ordered that only a
select number should be sent, of a Thousand out of each of the Twelve Tribes.

Ver. 5. So there were delivered out of the Thousands Their Officers picked out
this number from among the rest; or they were chosen by lot for this Service;
or they stepped out and offered themselves Volunteers (as we speak) which the
27th verse may seem to countenance, where they are called, those that took the
War upon them.

Twelve Thousand armed for war.] This was but a small number compared with the
whole Nation of the Midianites, (who had five Kings, v. 8.) But God would have
them rely more upon him, than upon the multitude of an Host; and let them see
by their Success against this People, that they needed not fear the Conquest of
Canaan.

Ver. 6. And Moses sent them to the war, a Thousand of every Tribe.] He gave
them their Commission to fight the Midianites.

Them, and Phinehas the Son of Eleazar the Priest.] Who was not their Commander
in Chief, (or their General, as we now speak) for it did not belong to the
Priestly Office to conduct Armies: and it is said expressly in the words
following, he went with the holy Instruments, etc. to be ready to perform all
such Sacred Offices, as should be required by the General, who, it is most
likely, was Joshua. It is true indeed that Phineas was a Man of great Courage,
and had lately performed a singular piece of Service, which had won him great
Reputation. This has made some think, he was the fitter to go and to avenge
the LORD of Midian, as he had begun to do, XXV. 8. In after times also, in the
days of the Maccabees, who were of the Family of the Priests, the Armies of
Israel were led by them against their Enemies. But then it must be considered,
that they were also the Supreme Governors of the People, and there were no
other.

With the holy Instruments.] By which Jonathan understands the Vrim and
Thummim; which some think Phineas carried along with him, wherewith to consult
the Divine Majesty, in case of any difficulty, that might arise about the
management of the War. And to make out this, they suppose Eleazar to be old and
crazy, or laboring under some Infirmity, which was the reason that Phineas his
Son was substituted in his room to perform this Office. See our very learned
Dr. Spencer, Dissert. de Vrim and Thummim, cap. 6. sect. 2. But this may be
justly doubted, whether Phineas being only the Son of the High Priest, and not
yet capable of that Office, could be substituted to perform this great Charge,
which belonged to the High Priest alone. Nor do we find any warrant for
consulting the LORD by Vrim and Thummim, but only before the most holy Place,
(See XXVII. 21.) And therefore it seems to me far more likely, that he means
the Ark, which was wont to be carried, in following times, into the Field, when
they went to fight with their Enemies, 1 Samuel IV. 4, 5. XIV. 18. 2 Samuel XI. 1.
Yea, Joshua himself, not long after this time, ordered the Ark to be carried,
with Priests blowing the Trumpets before it, when he surrounded Jericho, VI
Josh. 4, 6, 7, etc. And therefore the holy Instruments being here joined with
the Trumpets to blow in his hand, it makes it the more probable, that the Ark
may be here meant. There being also something in this very Book, to countenance
this Opinion. See XIV. 44. but especially XXXII. 20, 22.

But it must be confessed, that it is never thus expressed in any other place
of Holy Scripture, but always called the Ark of God, or of the Covenant, or the
Testimony, or the like. And therefore, perhaps, they give the truest sense of
these words, who take the following words to be an Explication of them. That
is, the Trumpets were the holy Instruments, which he carried in his hand.

And the Trumpets to blow, in his hand.] Which he delivered to the Priests who
followed him, to sound an Alarm, when they went to fight; according to the
direction X. 8, 9. and as the practice was in future Ages, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 12.

Ver. 7. And they warred against the Midianites.] Midianites came out of their
Country, to give them battle; or they first broke into their Country, and then
fought their Army.

As the LORD commanded Moses.] One would think this meant no more, but that
they obeyed the Commandment of God beforementioned, v. 2. But the Jews think
he has respect to another particular Commandment, which they say was given by
Moses, when they went out to this War: That they should not, when they besieged
any City, begirt it quite round, but only on three sides; leaving one naked,
that the besieged might flee away if they pleased; by which means effusion of
Human Blood was prevented. So Guil. Schickart observes out of Siphri in his
Mischpat Hammelech, cap. 5. Theor. 18. and Mr. Seldom since him, Lib. VI. de
Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 15. where he shows they understand this of all Wars,
but those against the seven Nations in Canaan and Amalek; toward whom this
kindness was not shown, as appears by the Siege of Jericho. But the Laws about
managing Wars, which are mentioned in the Book of Deuteronomy, do not seem to
have been yet given; though the Jews fancy this Law was now given about Midian,
and observed ever after.

And slew all the Males.] Who were in this fight, and did not save themselves
by flight.

And they slew the Kings of Midian.] Little Kings, called Princes XIII Josh.
21. where they are said to be Dukes of Sihon, i. e. great Men tributary to
Sihon, while he continued King of the Amorites. But after the Israelites had
conquered him, they took perhaps the Title of Kings.

Besides the rest of them that were slain.] They made not only a great
slaughter of the People, but killed their chief Commanders, who led them on.

Namely Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, etc.] They are particularly named, that all
their Neighbors might be satisfied of the truth of this History. And he that
is called Zur, is thought to have been the Father of Cozbi, whom Phineas slew.

Balaam also the Son of Beor they slew with the sword.] He had seen such good
success of his wicked Counsel (which he gave either as he went home, or
returning again to them, See XXIV. ult.) that, presuming the Israelites were
forsaken of their God, he adventured to go along with the Midianites unto this
Battle; hoping he might curse the Israelites now that iniquity (i. e. Idolatry)
was found among them; which he could not do while they were free from it. Thus
he perished by his own wicked devices, and was so far from having his wish,
that he might die the death of the righteous (that is, live long) that (as the
Jews say) he was slain in the Thirty fourth year of his Age. The Doctors in the
Gemara of the Sanhedrim, cap. 11. sect. 11. ask what did he here? To which R.
Johanan makes answer, he went to receive his Reward for the Death of the Twenty
four thousand Israelites, which he had procured, XXV. 9. And thus, says
another, it happened unto him, according to the Proverb, The Camel went to desire
horns, and they cut off his ears.

Ver. 9. And the Children of Israel took all the Women After they were Masters
of the Field (as we speak) by the overthrow of their Armies, they fell upon
their Cities; and, according to the ancient custom in the most bloody Wars,
they killed only the Men, but no Women, nor Children, XXXIV Genesis 25. 1 Kings
XI. 16. And so the Law of God afterward required they should do, when they took
any City that did not belong to the Canaanites, XX Deuteronomy. 13, 14. who were
utterly to be destroyed, v. 16, 17. where he says, Thou shall save nothing
alive that breaths.

And they took the spoil of all their Cattle, and all their Flocks, and all
their Goods.] As belonging to them, by the right of Conquest, in a just War.

And they burnt all their Cities wherein they dwelt, and their goodly Castles
with fire.] Made the Country desolate, that they who fled might have no
encouragement to return again; nor be able, without great hazard, to settle
themselves there, where they had not a Fortress left to defend them. This was
but a necessary care; notwithstanding which they had peopled the Country again
so well, in the space of about Two hundred years, that they were able to
oppress the Israelites, as we read VI Judge. 1.

And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of Men and of Beasts.]
They had possessed themselves of them before, v. 9. but now they carried them
away.

And they brought the Captives, and the Prey, and the Spoil.] Here are three
different words to express their Booty, which they brought to the Camp of
Israel. The first of which signifies, the Women and Children that were taken:
The second, the Cattle and the Flocks (though sometimes it includes in it, Men
and Women) and the third, their Money and Goods.

Unto Moses and Eleazar the Priest, and unto the Congregation of the Children
of Israel.] Unto the LXX. Elders, and Princes of the Tribes, who were assembled
with them, (See XXIX. 1.) as it seems to be expounded in the next verse.

Unto the Camp at the plains of Moab, etc.] From whence they marched against
Midian; and had been encamped there a great while, XXII. 1. XXVI. 3, 63.

Ver. 13. And Moses and Eleazar the Priest, and all Hearing they were returned
victorious, they went to congratulate them, before they came at the Camp: for
which there was also another reason, mentioned v. 19. This shows that Eleazar
was not so infirm, as some suppose; and affords an argument to strengthen their
Opinion, who think Joshua was now General of the Host: otherwise he would have
been mentioned together with Moses and Eleazar as going to meet them; being
chosen his Co-adjutor, and therefore Superior to all the Princes that are here
joined with them.

Ver. 14. And Moses was wroth with the Officers of Who were more to blame than
the Soldiers; whose duty it was to obey, not to give orders; which they
received, no doubt, from the Officers, to kill only the Men. Here now is an
Argument to the contrary, that Joshua did not Command in chief: but this being
only a Detachment (as they now speak) from the Host of Israel, was led by some
inferior Officer. The first Captain of Thousands, perhaps; for if Joshua had
been there, Moses would have expostulated with him, or rather there would have
been no cause for this Rebuke: he being a Man, in whom was the Spirit, XXVII.
18.

Ver. 15. And Moses said unto them, have ye saved all the Women alive.] Unless
he had commanded them to be killed, one cannot see that they deserved to be v.
49.) and therefore should have been destroyed, as the most mischievous: for so
it follows in the next verse.

Behold.] Reflect upon what is lately past, and consider.

These caused the Children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit
Trespass against the LORD, in the matter of Peor, and there was a Plague among
the Congregation of the LORD.] By these they had been inveigled into an heinous
Sin, and made obnoxious to a very heavy Punishment, which God inflicted upon
them on that account. For though the Moabitish Women had a great hand in it,
XXV. 1. yet those of Midian seem to have been the chief Seducers, v. 6, 17, 18.
and perhaps, he feared, might be so again.

Now therefore kill every Male among the little ones.] That the Nation might be
extirpated, as far as lay in their power.

And kill every Woman that has known Man, by lying with him.] For these, it is
to be supposed, had been the most instrumental in the Crime beforementioned;
either by prostituting themselves, or their Daughters, to the Lust of the
Israelites, and thereby drawing them to Idolatry. In which Sin they were so
settled, that there was no hope of reclaiming them; but they might rather (if
they had been saved alive) have enticed the Israelites to commit the same again.

Ver. 18. But all the Women-children that have not Being young, there was some
hope they might be brought off from Idolatry, and become Proselytes to the true
Religion.

For your selves.] To be sold as Slaves to any other Nation; or to be kept as
Servants; or taken to be their Wives, after such preparation as the Law
required, XXI Deuteronomy. 16, 17, etc. This was a peculiar Case, wherein a middle
course was held, between those that were of the Seven Nations of Canaan, and
those that were not. If they were not of those Seven Nations, the Israelites
might take the Women, and little Ones unto themselves, XX Deuteronomy. 14, 15. If they
were, every thing that breathed was to be destroyed, v. 16, 17. But here the
Midianites being guilty of a very great Crime against the LORD, and against his
People, are punished more heavily than other Nations; though not so heavily as
those of Canaan were to be. For they killed all the Women that were not
Virgins, as well as all the Males, both little and great; but spared the rest,
together with the Cattle, etc. Such an Execution was made, in after times, upon
one of the Cities of Israel, upon an high Contempt of Public Authority, in a
very great Exigency, XXI Judges 11. There is a Rule in XX Deuteronomy. 10. that when
they came to fight against any City, they should proclaim Peace to it; and if
they would accept it, they should only make the Inhabitants Tributaries to
them. From whence a Question arising, whether this extended to the Seven
Nations of Canaan? it is resolved by Maimonides that it did: which he proves
from XI Josh. 19, 20. But so great was the Sin of this People, that they
neither sent offers of Peace to them now, nor were they to make any Peace with
them hereafter, XXIII Deuteronomy. 6. And the reason is there given, because they
hired Balaam to curse them: which is as true of the Midianites, as of the
Moabites. Notwithstanding which Maimonides determines, that though the
Israelites did not send Messengers of Peace to them; yet if they of their own
accord sent to desire Peace of the Israelites, they were not to reject them.
See Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr. Lib. II. cap. 20.

And do ye abide without the Camp seven days.] As unclean Persons. For though
it was lawful to kill Men, in a just War against them, yet (...) (as Philo
speaks) because of the most ancient and common Kindred between all Mankind, if
was fit Men should use some Purification, to cleanse themselves from that,
which looks like a Crime, though it was none.

Whosoever has killed any Person, and whosoever has touched any slain,
purify both your selves.] The whole Army that went to the War, were to stay
without the Camp seven days: and such of them as had had their Hands in Blood,
or had touched a dead Body, though killed by another, were to use a special
Purification; which was made by the Water of Separation, mentioned XIX. 9, etc.

And your Captives.] Or the Prey that they had taken; of Garments, and other
things, mentioned in the next verse: and so the word is translated v. 26. For
we cannot think that the Persons they had taken, being Gentiles, were to be
purified with that Water, which was peculiar to the Jews.

On the third day, and on the seventh day.] So the Law was XIX. 11, 12. And
such Purifications were common among the Gentiles, especially the Greeks, upon
the like occasions, as Mr. Seldom observes, L. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap.
ult. Grotius L. II. de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 24. n. 10. To whom add our
late learned Dr. Spencer, L. III. Dissert. 3. sect. 1. where he takes this to
have been a Custom, derived from ancient time before the Law of Moses (which
may be questioned) and Bonfrerius, upon this place, has alleged the very same
Proofs, and several more; particularly this out of the Scholiast upon Sophocles
in his Ajax Mastigoph. (...), etc. it was the Custom among the Ancients, when
they either killed a Man, or made any other slaughter, to wash their Hands in
Water, (...), for the Purification of the Defilement.

Ver. 20. And purify all your Raiment, and all that etc.] With the same Water
of Separation (or else by washing them in running Water, as the manner was in
other Cases, XI Lev. 32, 33.) for they might all be supposed to be defiled by
dead Bodies, and so come under the Law, XIX. 14.

Ver. 21. And Eleazar the Priest said unto the Men of This Law was to be
observed hereafter by those who went to War: For though the Law before was, as
I observed, that he who touched a dead Body, should be purified with the Water
of Separation; yet nothing is there said of him that killed a Man in War, but
did not perhaps touch his Body; which now is brought under the same Rule.

Ver. 22, 23. Only the Gold, and the Silver, the Brass, etc.] All sorts of
Metals were to have this peculiar sort of Purification; which the other things
(mentioned v. 20.) would not endure. And the same Bonfrerius observes this was
a way of Purification among the Gentiles, as old as Homer's time, but they used
Sulphur with it. For so he makes Ulysses call to the old Women, to bring him
Sulphur, and then Fire, that he might fume the House wherein the Woers had been
killed. Which is observed by Fort. Scacchus also, Myrothec. 2. cap. 30. where
he also notes, that Ovid gives a long account why these two, Fire and Water,
were chosen for the Instruments of Purification, Lib. IV. Fastorum, where he
says particularly of Fire, Omnia purgat edax ignis, vitiumque metalli
Excoquit. --


Nevertheless it shall be purified with the Water of Separation.] On the third
day, I suppose, before it went through the Fire.

And all that abides not the fire, ye shall make go through the Water.] All
things that could abide the Fire were to be purified both by that, and by the
Water of Separation. And such things as could not abide it, were to be
purified, not meetly by sprinkling them with the Water of Separation, but by
making them go through the Water.

Ver. 24. And ye shall wash your Clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be
clean, etc.] Thus he that sprinkled an unclean Person with the Water of
Separation, was bound to purify himself, XIX. 19.

Ver. 25. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.]

Ver. 26. Take the sum of the prey that was taken.] Hebrew the words are, Take
the sum of the prey of the Captivity: which, it is plain by what follows,
signifies the Sum of the Prey, and of the Captives. For all that they took was
of three kinds, v. 12. The Persons, called Captives: the Beasts, which are
called the Prey: and Money and Goods (such as are mentioned v. 20, 21.) which
are called the Spoil.

Both of Man and Beast.] Here an account is ordered to be given of two parts of
what had been taken; but nothing said of the third (which was the Spoil) out of
which they, who had it, made a voluntary Oblation, v. 50, 53.

Thou and Eleazar the Priest, and the chief of the Fathers.] The same perhaps
with the Heads of the Tribes, XXX. 1.

Ver. 27. And divide the prey into two parts, between By this Partition, a far
larger share was given to every one of the Warriors, who were but Twelve
thousand, than to any of their Brethren, who were near Six hundred thousand.
For they had hazarded themselves, which the others had not; who notwithstanding
that, enjoyed some Fruit of their Labors; because it was a common Cause in
which they engaged, and the rest seem to have been ready to fight, as well as
they, v. 3. This Division was made by a special Direction of God, but was not
the Rule in after Ages, as appears from 1 Samuel XXX. 24, 25. nor had been in
ancient Times, as the Jews interpret, XIV Genesis 24. See Seldom, Lib. VI. de Jure
Not. and Gent. cap. 16. p. 747.

And levy a Tribute unto the LORD of the Men of War, etc.] The LORD was their
Sovereign, and therefore had a Tribute due to him, out of that which they had
taken in War; as a grateful Acknowledgment, that they owed their Success to him.

One soul of five hundred, both of the persons.] i. e. Of the Women, and the
Children.

And of the Beeves, and of the Asses, and of the Sheep.] The Hebrew word tzon
signifies Goats, as well as Sheep: and both being here intended, the LXX.
expresses them both. Here is no mention of Camels, which it seems their Country
was not stockt withal at this time. See v. 34, etc. what I have noted upon
XXXVII Genesis 25. This Tribute to God was but a very small proportion, in
comparison with what their Kings challenged in following times, if we may
believe the Talmudists; who say, they had all the Gold and Silver, and such
rich things that were taken, and half of the rest of the Prey, which was
divided between them and the People. See Seldom in the place abovenamed. But
anciently they had only the tenth part. See XIV Genesis 20.

Take it of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the Priest, for an
Heave Offering unto the LORD.] For the maintenance of the Priests, among whom
this part of the Tribute was divided. And it was just a tenth part of what the
Levites had, as they had a tenth part of their Tithes, which was paid them for
their constant support. So the Law was, XVIII. 21, 24, 26, etc. which was
observed in this Levy: which is called Trumah, as the Offering for the making
of the Sanctuary is called XXV Exodus 2. where we translate it, as here, a
Heave Offering.

Ver. 30. And of the Children of Israel's half, thou etc.] A far larger share
is demanded of the People (ten times as much as was paid by the Soldiers)
because they came more easily by it, without any pains or danger. And they pay
it in a very just proportion to the number of those who went to the War, and of
those who staid at home, but were able to go to War; who were above Six hundred
thousand (XXVI. 2, 51.) of which Twelve thousand, who were employed in this
Expedition, were the fiftieth part.

And give them to the Levites.] Who were far more numerous than the Priests,
and therefore had a greater proportion of the Tribute.

Which keep the charge of the Tabernacle of the LORD.] See I. 50. III. 6, 7, 8.

Ver. 31. And Moses and Eleazar the Priest did as This Command is peculiarly to
Moses, v. 25. but Eleazar was to assist him in the execution of it, v. 26. and
accordingly they took the Sum of the Prey both of Man and Beast, and divided
them between the Soldiers and People; and levied a Tribute upon each for the
LORD, who ordered them to his Ministers.

Ver. 32. And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the Men of Israel had
caught.] i. e. Besides what was necessarily spent for their Subsistence, during
the War; and while they lay out of the Camp, v. 19.

Was six hundred thousand, and seventy thousand, and five thousand sheep.] A
vast stock; far exceeding the number of Men of War which were in Israel.

And threescore and twelve thousand beeves.] It seems their Country had good
Pasture in it, as well as Sheep-walks. For as Arabia Foelix, it is certain, had
agros latissimos and fertilissimos (as Pliny speaks, Lib. VI. cap. 28.) most
spacious and Fertile Fields: so Arabia Petraea (in which Midian was) did not
wholly want them.

And threescore and one thousand Asses.] The Countries about Judea abounding
with Camels also, particularly Arabia, in which Job had a great number, it may
seem strange that we read of none here; especially since they had vast numbers
in following times, VI Judges 5. VII. 12. and the Ishmaelites (with whom they
were Associates in Trade) had them long before this time, XXXVII Genesis 27, 36.
But it is likely they did not yet find it for their profit to feed Camels, (of
which they learnt to make a Trafick afterward) no more than Mules, of which we
read nothing here, nor indeed in Judea, till the times of David. It may be
supposed that, if they had Camels, they were of that kind called Dromedaries,
which were famous in this Country in after Ages, LX Isa. 6. and that the
People, who escaped the slaughter, fled away upon them. And that there were
other Beasts in this Country, besides Beeves, and Asses, and Sheep, and Goats,
seems to be plain from v. 30. where after the mention of these, he adds, of all
manner of Beasts, he should take a Portion for the Levites. But of Camels or
Dromedaries, I suppose, none were found.

Ver. 35. And thirty two thousand persons in all, of women that had not known
Man, etc.] It appears by this to have been a very populous Country, in which
were so many Virgins.

Ver. 36. And the half which was the portion of them There is no difficulty in
this, or in the following verses: this being exactly the half of the whole
number of Sheep mentioned v. 32.

Ver. 37. And the LORD's Tribute of the Sheep, Which is exactly one in five
hundred, out of this half of the Booty, as God ordered v. 28.

Ver. 38. And the Beeves were thirty and six thousand, The very same
proportions are observed here, as in the Sheep; which appears by comparing this
verse with v. 33. And the two next verses (39, 40.) give the same account of
the Asses and the Persons; which were as exactly divided; and the LORD had the
same portion of them, as v. 34, 35. compared with these, demonstrate.

Ver. 41. And Moses gave the Tribute which was the etc.] This is recorded, to
show how faithful Moses was, in performing obedience to God's Commands, ( v.
29.) and far from desiring the smallest Portion for himself, out of so great a
Booty. Which if he had acted by his own private Spirit, he would scarce have
avoided.

Ver. 42. And of the Children of Israel's half, which There is nothing here,
nor in the following verses to v. 48. but a Repetition of what was said
concerning the other half beforementioned; to show that the same exactness was
observed both in the Division of the Prey among the People, and in taking out
of it such a Portion as God assigned to the Levites; which was one out of
fifty; as out of the Men of Wars part, one out of five hundred, v. 28, 30.

And the Officers which were over thousands of the Host, the Captains of
thousands, and Captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses.] The first words of
this verse seem to suppose, that there were other great Officers, as well as
the General, who were above the Captains over thousands, and the Captains over
hundreds: which is very probable.

And they said unto Moses, thy Servants, etc.] The greatest Men speak with the
greatest Reverence to Moses; who was in the place of God.

Have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our charge.] Made a
muster of them (as we now speak) at our return from the War.

And there lacks not one man of us.] A wonderful Victory; which shows the War
was the LORD's, (v. 3.) Who struck such a Terror into them, that one would
think they turned their backs, and did not strike a stroke against the
Israelites.

We have therefore brought an Oblation for the LORD.] For the Uses of the
Sanctuary; either in purchasing Sacrifices, or maintaining God's Ministers,
etc. For KORBAN signifies every thing that is given to God, though not
sacrificed upon the Altar.

What every man has gotten.] All of them offered something to the LORD, out of
the Spoil he had gotten, according to the Piety of ancient Times, XIV Genesis 20.
For we find no Precept in the Law for this; and yet it was constantly practiced
by David in after times, 2 Samuel VIII. 11, 12. and by the Officers of his Army,
1 Chronicles. XXVI. 26, 27. and by other Men, Samuel, Saul, Abner, etc. v. 28, etc.

Jewels of Gold.] Vessels, as the Hebrew word signifies, or all manner of
Ornaments, made of Gold: the Particulars of which follow viz. Chains,
Bracelets, etc. But the Jerusalem Va^gum takes these Jewels (as we translate
it) to have been the golden Attire about the Heads of their Women.

Chains.] These are commonly thought to have been the Ornaments or their Arms.
But they may as well be thought to have been used about their Legs, or their
Necks.

Bracelets.] These, it is apparent, were Ornaments about their Wrists or Hands,
XXIV Genesis 47. XVI Ezekiel. 11.

Rings.] They were Ornaments of the Fingers, XLI Genesis 42. III Esther 10.

Earrings.] Nothing more common in those Countries, especially among the
Midianites and Ishmaelites, as we find VIII Judges 24, 25, 26. where there is a
different word used to express this Ornament: yet the word Hagil, here used,
certainly signifying something round, and the Ornaments incompassing the Arms
and other parts, being beforementioned, it cannot well be thought to denote
any thing, but Rings in their Ears. And so we translate it XVI Ezekiel. 12.

And Tablets.] Some Ornaments about the Breasts. See XXXV Exodus 22.

To make an Atonement for our Souls before the LORD.] For the Guilt of which
Moses accused them, v. 14. or any other, which they had contracted in the War.

And all the Gold of the Offering which they offered up to the LORD, etc. was
sixteen thousand, seven hundred and fifty shekels.] It has been observed
before that Three thousand Shekels made a Talent: and therefore their Offering
amounted to above Five Talents and an half.

For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.] Or rather, had
taken the Spoil, mentioned v. 12. of which part of the Booty, no Division was
made between the Men of War and the People, v. 26. but they kept it entirely to
themselves, and now very gratefully made a Present of a considerable part of it
to the LORD. See v. 12. where the word Spoil is used strictly, for a part of
the Booty, distinct from the other two, the Captives and the Prey: and so it
signifies here.

And Moses and Eleazar the Priest took the Gold.] This was said before v. 51.
and therefore the sense here is, that, having received it as an Offering to the
LORD, they brought it into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, as it here
follows in the conclusion of this verse.

Of the Captains of thousands and of hundreds.] It was not their Oblation only,
but the Oblation of every one of the Men of War, v. 50, 51. But the Commanders
received it from the common Soldiers, and presented it unto Moses and Eleazar,
from the whole Host.

And brought it into the Tabernacle for a Memorial for the Children of Israel,
before the LORD.] That God might be mindful of them, i. e. propitious to them;
who were so grateful to him for his Benefits.

The Jerusalem Targum upon v. 50. fancies these Officers to have represented
to Moses their great Chastity, when they made this Offering; saying, We broke
into the Chambers and Closets of the Kings of Midian, and there we saw their
beautiful and charming Daughters, from whom we took the golden Ornaments upon
their Heads, and in their Ears, and on their Arms, their Fingers, and Breasts;
but did not cast a wanton look upon one of them: And therefore they hoped this
Oblation they made would rise up for them, in the Day of the great Judgment, as
a Reconciliation for their Souls before the LORD.

CHAP. XXXII.
NOW the Children of Reuben and the Children Here the Children of Reuben, who
was Jacob's Firstborn, are mentioned in the first place; but in the rest of
the Chapter ( v. 2, 6, 25, 29, 32.) the Children of Gad are constantly first
mentioned, because they were the first Movers of that which follows, as the
Hebrews conjecture.

Had a very great multitude of Cattle.] More than any other Tribe.

And when they saw the Land of Jazer.] Which was lately taken from the
Amorites, after they had slain Sihon their King, XXI. 32. This City, and
Country belonging to it, were near to the Spring of the River Arnon: and there
is frequent mention of it in the Book of Joshua, and in Isaiah XVI. 8, 9. and
Jeremiah XLVIII. 34.

And the Land of Gilead.] A noble Country, so called from the Mountain Gilead,
which bounded it on the East, as Jordan did on the West, the River Jabbok on
the South, and Mount Libanus on the North.

That behold the place was a place of Cattle.] Which in the fourth verse is
called a Land of Cattle, (...), as the LXX. translate it, fit for feeding of
Cattle; being famous for Pasture and other grazing Ground. For Bashan was in
this Country, (III Deuteronomy. 12, 13.) where every one knows the largest and fattest
Oxen were bred, XXII Psalm. 12. and Sheep also, XXXII Deuteronomy. 14. and therefore is
joined with Gilead, VII Micah 14. which, being woody and mountainous in some
part of it, was no less famous for breeding Goats, (See IV Cantic. 1.) which
delight to brouse on such Trees as Mount Gilead abounded withal. See Bochartus
in his Hierozoicon. P. I. Lib. II. cap. 51.

And the Children of Gad, and the Children of Reuben.] Neither here, nor in the
foregoing verse, is there any mention of the Children of Manasseh, (half of
which had their Portion in this Country) because they were neither the
Contrivers, nor Movers of this; but it is most probable had a lot assigned them
here, because these Countries were too much for the other two Tribes alone; and
they of Manasseh had much Cattle also.

Came and spoke unto Moses and Eleazar, and the Princes of the Congregation.]
Who were wont often to assemble, to dispatch Public Affairs, XXVII. 2. XXX. 1.

Ver. 3. Ataroth.] A place which was part of the Gad, as appears by v. 34.

And Dibon.] This is mentioned as a place in the Kingdom of Sihon, XXI. 30. and
was given to Gad also, as we read v. 34.

And Jazer.] See v. 1. and 35. where we find this also belonged unto Gad.

And Nimrah.] Called Beth-Nimrah, v. 36. and given to the same Tribe. It is
usual, I observed before, for the Hebrews to cut off the first part of the
Names of places, for brevity sake, (XXV. 1.) but this place is elsewhere called
at length Beth-Nimrah, XIII Josh. 27. where it is mentioned as a part of
Sihon's Kingdom, and signifies as much as Domus Pardorum, an Habitation of
Leopards. So Bochartus; who observes that when both Isaiah XV. 6. and Jeremiah
XLVIII. 34. speak of the Waters of Nimrim, they mean this very place. Which was
given to Gad, but in the days of those Prophets, mentioned as in the Country of
the Moabites; who had usurped upon their Neighbors the Gadites, and taken this
Place from them, as they had done Jazer also, as appears from the places
abovementioned, XVI Isa. 8, 9. XLVIII Jerem. 34.

And Heshbon.] The principal City of Sihon King of the Amorites, XXI. 26, 27,
28. and was given to the Reubenites, v. 37.

And Elealah.] This is frequently mentioned with Heshbon, as a Place adjoining
to it, v. 37. XVI Isa. 9.

And Sheban.] Called also Shibmah, v. 37. and Sibmah, XVI Isa. 8, 9. XLVIII
Jerem. 31. where it appears to have been a Place famous for Vines: and in the
days of that Prophet was fallen into the Hands of the Moabites; as were Heshbon
and Elealah also.

And Nebo.] Which was given to the Reubenites, v. 38.

And Beon.] There is no mention of this place any where else; but it is
probable was part of the Reubenites Portion, being mentioned together with
other Places that were given unto them: and possibly may be the Place called
Baal-Meon, v. 38. which they changed into Beon, because of the name of Baal:
but the Moabites, when it fell into their hands, restored part of its old name,
calling it Beth-meon, XLVIII Jerem. 23.

Even the Country which the LORD smote before the Congregation of Israel.] And
gave it to them for a Possession, as he intended to do the Land of Canaan. See
XXI. 24, 25.

Is a Land for Cattle, and thy Servants have Cattle.] Is very fit for us, v. 2.

Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight.] A Phrase often
used by humble Petitioners; even by Moses himself, when he speaks to God, XI.
15.

Let this Land be given unto thy Servants for a Possession.] The Israelites in
common possessed it hitherto, as belonging to them all, XXI. ult. But they
desire to have it assigned to them, as their particular Portion.

And bring us not over Jordan.] We desire nothing in the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 6. And Moses said unto the Children of Gad, and the Children of Reuben,
shall your Brethren go to War?] Can you think it reasonable, that the rest of
the Tribes should fight still for what they are to possess?

And shall ye sit here?] And you take up your rest here, and settle in their
Conquests, which they have already made?

Ver. 7. And wherefore discourage ye the hearts of the He seems to have
suspected that mere cowardice, and a vile love of ease, made them desire to
stay where they were, and go no further. Which ill Example might dishearten all
the rest of their Brethren, and make them have the same Inclination to settle
in the Land they had conquered; and not engage in a War with the Canaanites.

Ver. 8. Thus did your Fathers.] i. e. They disheartened

When I sent them from Kadesh Barnea to see the Land.] XIII. 3, 26.

Ver. 9. For when they went up unto the Valley of Eschol.] Eschol, (XIII. 23.)
where they cut down a Branch with a Cluster of Grapes, to show what Fruit the
Country afforded.

And saw the Land.] Had taken a full view of the Country.

They discouraged the hearts of the Children of Israel.] Represented the People
and the Cities to be so strong, that they should not be able to deal with them,
XIII. 28, 29.

That they should not go into the Land which the LORD had given them.] And
therefore persuaded them not to attempt to possess themselves of it. For they
said expressly, we are not able to go against the People, for they are stronger
than we, XIII. 31.

And the LORD's anger was kindled at the same time; and he swear, saying.] XIV.
21, 28.

Surely none of the Men that were come out of Egypt, from twenty years old and
upward.] XIV. 22, 29, 35.

Shall see the Land which I swear unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.] XIV. 23.

Because they have not wholly followed me.] See there v. 22.

Save Caleb the Son of Jephunneh.] XIV. 24.

The Kenezite.] A great deal has been said by many to prove that Caleb is
called a Kenezite, because his Father's Name was Kenaz. And this they prove,
because Othniel's Father was Kenaz, and he was Caleb's Brother, XV Josh. 17.
his younger Brother, I Judge. 13. III. 9. So that their Father must have two
Names, Kenaz and Jephunneh. But it is very strange, if this be true, that Caleb
is no where called the Son of Kenaz, but constantly the Son of Jephunneh (even
there where Othniel is just before called the Son of Kenaz, 1 Chronicles. 4.13, 15.)
nor is Othniel any where called the Son of Jephunneh, but always of Kenaz. And
indeed there is a demonstration against this Opinion; for Othniel married
Caleb's Daughter, which by the Law of Moses was utterly unlawful, whatsoever
the practice might have been before the Law was given. Therefore others think
it more probable that Othniel was one of his Brother's younger Sons, (for
Uncles and Nephews are often called Brethren, as Abraham and Lot were) and that
from this Brother, whose Name was Kenaz, Caleb is also called a Kenezite. But
this is very absurd, for the Name of Kenezzi in the Hebrew, denotes the
Descendants from one, who gave this denomination to the Family; which one
Brother could not do to another. It is most probable therefore, that Kenaz was
some common Ancestor both of Othniel and Caleb, from whom Othniel's Father took
also his Name. Accordingly we find Jephunneh called a Kenezite in XIV Josh. 14.
where it is said that Hebron became the Inheritance of Caleb the Son of
Jephunneh the Kenezite.

And Joshua the Son of Nun, for they have followed the LORD.] Fully, XIV. 24,
30, 38.

Ver. 13. And the LORD's anger was kindled against He had said this before, v.
10. but repeats it again, to make them the more sensible of a thing that was
done Thirty eight years ago; and to deter them from giving him the like
provocation.

And he made them wander in the Wilderness forty years, till all that had done
evil in the sight of the LORD were consumed.] XIV. 31, 32, 33. XXVI. 64, 65.

Ver. 14. And behold.] Mark what I say.

You are risen up in your Fathers stead, an increase of sinful Men, to augment
yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward Israel.] Are multiplied to as great a
number as your Fathers; only to succeed them in their sins: and thereby bring
down still more heavy Punishments upon the Nation.

Ver. 15. For if ye turn away from after him.] As your Fathers did; who refused
to go and possess the good Land which he had bestowed upon them.

He will yet again leave them in the Wilderness.] Lead them back again into the
Desert, where your Fathers perished; and there forsake you.

And ye shall destroy all this People.] Who following your example, will refuse
to go over Jordan, (v. 5.) to take possession of the Land of Canaan.

And they drew near unto him.] As Petitioners are wont to do, when they are
assured of their Integrity, and hope to obtain their request, XLIV Genesis 19.

And said, we will build Sheepfolds here for our Cattle.] There are five words
in the Hebrew Language for Folds for Sheep and Cattle; all signifying a place
fenced in, that they might lie safely, and be defended from Wild-beasts. And so
this word gedera plainly imports. See Bochartus in his Hierozoic. P. I. Lib. I.
cap. 45.

And Cities for our little ones.] Which stood in need only of repairing and
fortifying, ( v. 17.) for they already dwelt in those Cities of the Amorites,
XXI. 25.

But we our selves will go ready armed before the Children of Israel, until we
have brought them unto their place.] That is, a considerable number of them, as
many as should be thought necessary, (III Deuteronomy. 18.) in all Forty thousand, IV
Josh. 12.

And our little ones shall dwell in the fenced Cities.] Where it was necessary
to leave some Men to guard them from their bad Neighbors, and to take care of
their Cattle.

Because of the People of the Land.] That is, the Moabites, who were the
ancient Owners of this Country (XXI. 26.) and the Edomites, who had showed no
good will to the Israelites, as they passed through the Wilderness.

Ver. 18. We will not return unto our Houses, until Be settled in the
possession of the Land of Canaan, as we desire to be in this Country.

Ver. 19. For we will not inherit with them on yonder We will not desire any
share in the Country beyond Jordan, though it lie near to us; nor in that
Country which lies still further Westward.

Because our Inheritance is fallen on this side Jordan eastward.] We look upon
this as our Inheritance (with which we shall be fully satisfied) here in the
Land of Gilead. Which lay Eastward of Jordan, and of the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 20. And Moses said unto them, if ye will do Be as good as your word.

If ye will go armed before the LORD to war.] To go before the LORD, was to go
before the Ark, which was the Symbol of God's Presence, over which his Glory
resided. And it is to be observed, that these two Tribes, Reuben and Gad,
(together with Simeon) always lay encamped before the Sanctuary; as appears from
the second Chapter of this Book, v. 10, 14, 15, 16, 17. And accordingly, when
the Camp removed, they marched immediately before it, as is particularly noted,
X. 18, 19, 20, 21. So that here he requires them, only to hold their usual
place, when they went to the War against the Canaanites. And accordingly it is
expressly said, they did (together with half the Tribe of Manasseh, who were
joined with them) pass over before the LORD unto battle, IV Josh. 12, 13.

And will go all of you.] As many as shall be required, and can be spared, v.
17.

Armed over Jordan before the LORD, until he has driven out his Enemies from
before him.] Not only bring us into Canaan, but continue with us, till we have
expelled the Inhabitants of that Country. Which he incourages them to
undertake, by representing the Canaanites, as the Enemies of the LORD, who
would therefore fight for them.

And the Land be subdued before the LORD.] By this Expression, and that in the
foregoing words, it appears that the Ark was carried along with them to the War
every where, till it was ended; as it was when it begun, at the taking of
Jericho, VI Josh. 6, 7, etc.

Then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the LORD, and before
Israel, and this Land shall be your possession.] Not only be free from all
blame in this desire, but have what you desire.

Before the LORD.] By his order and appointment.

But if you will not do so.] If this be not your intention; or if you go back
from your word.

Behold.] Observe what I say.

Ye have sinned against the LORD; and be sure your sin will find you out.] Your
Guilt is exceeding great; and shall be most certainly punished, as it deserves.

Build ye Cities for your little ones, and Folds for your Sheep, etc.] As for
the rest of their Proposals, about their Children and Cattle, he consented to
them, without any Exception.

Ver. 25. And the Children of Gad, and the Children of Reuben, spoke unto
Moses, saying.] The word for spoke, in the Hebrew, being jomer, in the Singular
Number, instead of jomru, in the Plural, their Doctors take it for an
Indication, that some one principal Person spoke in the name of all the rest.
But there is no need of this; for the Singular Number in this Language is often
used for the Plural; and they never spoke all of them together, but some one in
the name of their Brethren. And it had been better, if they had observed, that
this signifies one and all (as we now speak) were of the same mind.

Thy Servants will do as my LORD commands.] And as they themselves had
proposed, v. 17.

Ver. 26. Our little Ones, our Wives, our Flocks, and Here they promise to
leave all that was dear to them, in this Country, and go to serve their
Brethren.

Ver. 27. But thy servants will pass over every man etc.] We our selves will
go, and fight for our Brethren. It has been often said ( v. 17, 21.) that this
does not signify, all the Men of War among them should go, but as many as
could be spared, and as were thought sufficient. For it is manifest, the far
greater half of them were left in this Country to defend their Wives and
Children, and look after their Flocks and Herds; as will appear by computing
all the Men of War that were found in the Tribes of Gad and of Reuben, which
were above Fourscore and four thousand, (XXVI. 7, 18.) to which, if we add half
of the Tribe of Manasseth, (who were in all above Fifty two thousand) there
were much above an Hundred thousand Men, able to bear Arms; and not above Forty
thousand of them marched into Canaan, as was before observed.

So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the Priest, and Joshua the Son of
Nun, and the chief Fathers of the Tribes of Israel.] He left this in charge
with the principal Persons, who had the government of Affairs under him;
particularly with Joshua, who was not unmindful of it, but remembered these
Tribes what Moses had said, when he was about to attempt the Conquest of
Canaan, I Josh. 13, 14, etc.

And Moses said unto them, if the Children of Gad and the Children of Reuben
will pass with you over Jordan, etc.] He repeats to these great Men, who were
to see it executed, what he had said to the Gadites and Reubenites themselves,
v. 21, 22.

Then ye shall give them the Land of Gilead for a possession.] They had not a
right to it, till they had performed the Condition upon which it was granted,
viz. till their Brethren were in possession of their Inheritance in the Land of
Canaan.

But if they will not pass over before you armed.] Perform their Promise, v. 17.

They shall have possession among you in the Land of Canaan.] Take what falls
to their share there; and this Country be disposed of, as God shall order.

And the Children of Gad, and the Children of Reuben said, as the LORD has
said unto thy Servants, so will we do.] They confirm what they had promised to
Moses, v. 25. and here take all that he had said, as spoken by the order of
God, who bestowed this Land upon them, on the Condition often mentioned.

Ver. 32. We will pass over armed before the LORD into the Land of Canaan.]
This they offered at first of themselves, v. 17. and solemnly promised, when
Moses accepted their Proposal, v. 27. and again here Eleazar and Joshua, and
all the Princes, v. 28.

That the possession of our Inheritance.] Which we have desired to have for our
Inheritance.

On this side Jordan.] They were now in the Land of Gilead, and so might
properly call it, on this side Jordan: but when they were in the Land of
Canaan, it was said to be on that side Jordan.

May be ours.] Settled upon us and our Posterity.

Ver. 33. And Moses gave unto them.] Not an absolute v. 29, 30, 31, etc.

Even to the Children of Gad, and the Children of Reuben, and half the Tribe of
Manasseh the Son of Joseph.] This half Tribe is not mentioned before, because
they did not put in any Claim, till they saw how those of Gad and Reuben would
succeed in their Petition. Which being granted, it is likely that thereupon
they represented also what store of Cattle they had; and that the Country would
be more than enough, for those who had desired it. This being found to be true,
Moses thought fit to give them a Portion in it, rather than any other; because
the Children of Machir, the Son of Manasseh, had by their Valor subdued part
of this Country, v. 39. XVII Josh. 1.

The Kingdom of Sihon King of the Amorites, and the Kingdom of Og King of
Bashan.] XXI. 24, 29. Which were the first Countries that the Israelites
possessed; and were the first that were carried Captive out of their Land, 2
Kings XV. 29.

The Land with the Cities thereof in the Coasts, even the Cities of the Country
round about.] The Land with the Cities, within such a Compass or Limits: and
all the Towns within that Circuit.

And the Children of Gad built Dibon and Ataroth.] Repaired and fortified these
Towns, which are mentioned before v. 3. For they were not destroyed, but only
their Inhabitants, 2 Deuteronomy. 34, 35. and if they had, there was not time now to
rebuild them. Thus Jeroboam is said to have built Schechem, 1 Kings XII. 25.
which was a City before, but gone to decay. And Azariah to have built Elah, 2
Kings XIV. 22. which he restored to Judah, as a City formerly belonging to them.

And Aroer.] A City of the Amorites, upon the brink of the River Arnon, as
Moses tells us, II Deuteronomy. 36. III. 11. IV. 48. It formerly belonged to the
Moabites; but was taken from them by Sihon.

And Atroth, and Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehak.] We do not read of any of
these Towns elsewhere, but only of Jaazer: which seems to be that called Jazer,
v. 3.

And Beth-Nimrah.] Called v. 3. Nimrah for shortness sake; as (it may be
further observed) Jemini is put for Benjemini, II Esther 5. Sheba for
Beer-sheba, XIX Josh. 2. where we find these two mentioned; but they do not
signify two several Cities, but are two Names for one and the same City; as if
he had said, Beersheba, which is also called Sheba. This is clear to a
demonstration; for otherwise there would be more than thirteen Cities in the
Tribe of Simeon, contrary to v. 6. of that Chapter.

And Beth-haran.] A place, some say, between Dibon and Jordan.

Fenced Cities, and Folds for Sheep.] All these Cities the Children of Gad
fortified; and built Folds for Sheep in the Pastures near to them.

Ver. 37. And the Children of Reuben built.] Repaired v. 34.

Heshbon and Elealah.] Mentioned above v. 3.

And Kirjathaim.] A place where a Giant-like People formerly dwelt, called
Emims, XIV Genesis 5. who were expelled by the Moabites, as they were by the
Amorites.

Ver. 38. And Nebo.] This City is mentioned in Jerem. 1. when it was fallen again
into the possession of the Moabites, as was also Kirjathaim. It seems to have
been near Dibon, being mentioned together with it, XV Isa. 2. At least there
were in these places two famous Temples; for the destruction of which, the
Prophet represents the People making Lamentation. So the LXX. (...), Nebo is
destroyed where your Altar is. And Hesychius says of (...) (i. e. Dibon) that
it was (...), a place where a Temple of the Moabites was built. And St. Hierom
suspects that there was an Oracle at this place; the word Nebo importing
Prophecy, or Divination, as he speaks.

And Baal-Meon.] Another place, where it is likely Baal was worshipped; which
made them change the names of these places, as it here follows.

Their names being changed.] For Nebo, as well as Baal, was the name of a God,
as we learn from XLVI Isaiah 1. and seems to have been an Assyrian Deity; there
being footsteps of it in the names of several great Men there; such as
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan, and many others. And it is not unlikely, that they
therefore changed the names of these Cities into some other, because they would
abolish all Remainders of Idolatry in this Country, according to the Precept
XXIII Exodus 13. that they should not take the name of their Gods into their
Mouth. But notwithstanding this, they still retained their ancient Names, as
appears from XIII Josh. 17. XXV Ezekiel. 9. so hard it is to alter any thing for
the better.

And Sibmah.] See v. 3.

And gave other Names unto the Cities which they builded.] If this refer to all
the Cities here mentioned, it is manifest they either retained, or recovered
their former Names: For we read of them all in future times; particularly in
the XVth and XVIIth of Isaiah. And Kirjathaim is mentioned in the place I now
quoted out of Ezekiel.

And the Children of Machir the Son of Manasseh, went to Gilead and took it.]
Here Gilead is used in a strict sense, not so largely as before, ( v. 1, 26,
29.) where it is taken for all the Country, on that side Jordan, where Gilead
was; but here for a part of it, about Mount Gilead. This is plain from the next
verse: and Gilead the Son of Machir, one would think, was the Person that took
it, XVII Josh. 1.

And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir, the Son of Manasseh.] i. e. To the Children
of Machir, (for he was dead long ago) who had a considerable Portion of that
half of the Land of Gilead, which was given to the half Tribe of Manasseh. For
one half was given to the Reubenites and Gadites, and the other half to them,
III Deuteronomy. 12, 13. where Gilead signifies all that Country properly so called;
neither so much as the whole Territory, which these Tribes demanded, v. 1. nor
so little as was given to Machir, v. 15. where Moses says, And I gave Gilead
unto Machir; i. e. to that Family of Manasseh, which were properly called
Machirites, XXVI Numb. 29. and to that Family descended from his Son, which
from him were called Gileadites. For as Manasseh had only this Son Mach^r, so
Machir had only Gilead; but he had many, XXVI. 30, 31, 32. who all raised
Families. And as to the Macharites (and I suppose the Gileadites) was given a
Portion in this Country, XIII Josh. 29, 30, etc. so Joshua gave to the rest an
Inheritance in the Land of Canaan, XVII. 2. And he gives a reason in the
foregoing verse, why he gave Gilead and Bashan to the Posterity of Machir,
because they were a warlike People, inheriting their Father's Valor, who was a
Man of War; and therefore fit to be placed in the Frontiers of that Country.

Ver. 41. And Jair the Son of Manasseh.] One of Manasseh, by his Mother's side:
For he was the Grandson of Gilead, the Son of Machir, by his Daughter, 1 Chronicles.
II. 21, 22. but his Father was of the Tribe of Judah. It seems he joined with
the Children of Machir in their Expedition against Gilead (mentioned v. 39.)
and was so successful, that he took several small Towns in that Country, and so
had his Inheritance among the Children of Manasseh, on this side Jordan, where
they now were. There were threescore of them in the whole, which were afterward
called Cities, XIII Josh. 13. 1 Kings IV. 23. but he had only twenty three for
his Possession, 1 Chronicles. II. 22, 23.

And called them Havoth-Jair.] That is, the Habitations of Jair. For Havah is a
dwelling, as Bochartus observes in his Phaleg. Lib. IV. cap. 29. And among the
Arabians the word Havoth properly signifies, many Tents, orderly disposed in a
Ring or Circle; which in those Countries made that which we call a Village. For
Hava in their Language signifies to compass. The same he observes in his
Hierozoicon, P. I. Lib. II. c. 44. p. 466.

And Nobah.] Who he was we find in no other place; but an eminent Person, no
doubt, in some of the Families of the Manassites: either of the Machirites or
the Gileadites. For they only, as I take it, inherited on this side Jordan.

Went and took Kenath and the Villages thereof.] At the same time, I suppose,
that Jair took the Towns abovementioned; of which this was one, 1 Chronicles. II.
23. But though Jair was the chief Conductor in that Expedition, yet he kept, as
I said, only twenty three Towns to himself: the rest were given to them who
accompanied him, of whom, it is probable, Nobah was one.

And called it Nobah after his own Name.] But it retained its old name also:
for St. Hierom says in his time, there was a City called Canatha, in the Region
of Trachonitis, not far from Bosra.

Thus this Country being settled upon these two Tribes and an half, the Land of
Canaan was divided by God's Command, for an Inheritance to the remaining nine
Tribes, and the other half of the Tribe of Manasseh, XIII Josh. 7.

CHAP. XXXIII.
THESE are the Journeys of the Children A brief recapitulation of the Travels
of the Children of Israel through the Wilderness; whereby the wonderful
Providence of God over them appears, in their Protection and Preservation, from
the time they departed out of Egypt, till they came to the Borders of the Land
of Canaan.

With their Armies.] For they marched in an orderly manner, as Armies do. See
XII Exodus 41, 51. XIII. 18.

Under the Hand of Moses and Aaron.] By whom they were conducted, as the
Ministers of God, XII Exodus 1, 28, 50.

Ver. 2. And Moses wrote their goings out according Every removal which they
made from the place where they were, unto another whither they journeyed.

By the commandment of the LORD.] This may refer either to their Journeys
(which were by God's commandment, X. 13.) or rather, to Moses his writing this
Epitome of their Travels; of which God ordered him to give a distinct account.
Which was no unnecessary Work, but most useful to Posterity; there being no
History extant in the World, as David Chytraeus well observes, (except that of
the Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of Christ) which contains so many
wonderful Instances of Divine Providence, as this of bringing the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, and leading them through the Red Sea, and through the
Wilderness. Concerning which Maimonides has an excellent Discourse, in his
third Part of More Nevochim, cap. 50. the Substance of which is this; That it
being impossible any Miracles should continue throughout all Generations, due
care should be taken that the Memory of them be not lost, but faithfully
preserved by the History and Narration of them in future times. Now there being
no greater Miracle than the Subsistence of the Children of Israel in the Desert
for Forty years; a Desert full of Scorpions and Serpents, destitute of Water,
uninhabited, through which no Man had been wont to pass, (as Jeremiah speaks,
II. 6.) where they ate no Bread, nor drank Wine, or strong Drink, XXIX Deuteronomy. 6,
etc. God would have the particular places set down distinctly where they
pitched in that howling Wilderness. That all Men might be satisfied (who would
take the pains to examine things) by what a mavelous Providence such a
multitude of People were fed every day, for Forty years together; and none
might be able to Cavil, and say, that they traveled through a Country good
enough, and pitched in habitable places, where they might plough, and sow, and
reap; or where they might have Herbs and Roots for their Sustenance; or where
Manna ordinarily came down from the Clouds for Men's support.

And these are their Journeys, according to their goings out.] As if he had
said, Having received this Commandment from God, this is a true and exact
Account, which here follows, of their Travels from place to place.

Ver. 3. And they departed from Ramsees.] See XII Exodus 37. Here, in all
likelihood, they Sacrificed the Paschal Lamb, and were preserved from the
destroying Angel, which made this place very remarkable: for

In the first Month, on the fifteenth day of the first Month, on the morrow
after the Passover.] Which they had kept in Egypt on the Fourteenth, XII Exodus
46.

The Children of Israel went out of Egypt with an high hand.] XIV Exodus 8.

In the sight of the Egyptians.] Who thrust them out, XII Exodus 39.

Ver. 4. For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn.] Exodus 33. And were so
employed in Mourning for them, and giving them decent Burial, that they thought
not of pursuing the Israelites, till some days after.

Which the LORD had smitten among them.] At midnight, between the fourteenth
and fifteenth days, XII Exodus 29.

Upon their Gods also the LORD executed Judgment.] Which still more astonished
them, XII Exodus 12. XVIII. 11. 2 Samuel VII. 23. just as he did with Babylon
afterward, XXI Isa. 9.

Ver. 5. And the Children of Israel removed from Rameses, XII Exodus 37. Here
they received the Command to set apart all the Firstborn unto the LORD, in
memory of God's sparing them, when he slew all the Firstborn of the Egptians,
XIII Exodus 1, 12, 13, etc.

And they departed from Suecoth, and pitched in Etham, etc.] See XIII Exodus 20.
where it immediately follows, That they were conducted hither by a miraculous
Cloud, which ever after led them in all their Journeys.

And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Piha-hiroth.] So it is
expressly recorded XIV Exodus 2. Hither they were led on purpose, that they might
see the wonderful Power and Goodness of God, in a place where they had high
Mountains on each side of them, and the Army of Pharaoh behind them, and the
Red Sea before them. Through which God made them a passage, rather than let
them fall again under the Egyptian Tyranny. Here is also the Singular Number
for the Plural, in the word turned again (as was observed before in another
word, XXXII. 25.) but the observation of the Hebrew Doctors upon it, seems to
be frivolous, That with one heart they did what Moses commanded.

Which is before Baal-Zephon, and they pitched before Migdol.] This is
explained in XIV Exodus 2.

And they departed from before Piha-hiroth, and passed through the midst of the
Sea.] XIV Exodus 23. Where Pharaoh and his Host were drowned; as they could not
but call to mind when they read this brief History. Which, it might be
expected, would also call to remembrance their own distrust of God,
notwithstanding which he most graciously delivered them, XIV Exodus 11, 12, etc.

Into the Wilderness, and went three days journey in the Wilderness of Etham.]
Called in XV Exodus 22. the Wilderness of Shur: where they were very much
distressed for want of Water.

And pitched in Marah.] Where God obliged them by a new Miracle, in making the
bitter Water sweet, XV Exodus 23, 25.

Ver. 9. And they removed from Marah, and came to etc.] See XV Exodus ult.

Ver. 10. And they removed from Elim, and encamped Not by that part of it,
where they lately came out of it; but by a more Southerly part of it, where it
bends toward Arabia. For the Red Sea, which Ptolomy calls the Arabian Gulf,
runs a long way, like the Adriatic, now called the Gulf of Venice, or the
Baltic Sea, as David Chytraeus observes. Who compares these three together, as
much of a length; and all, in some places broader, and some narrower. This
Station is not mentioned in the Book of Exodus.

Ver. 11. And they removed from the Red Sea, and XVI Exodus 1. where Manna first
began to rain upon them, with which God fed them forty years.

Ver. 12. And they took their journey out of the Wilderness This and the next
Station (Alush) are not mentioned in Exodus; because nothing remarkable (it is
supposed) fell out in these two places, as there did in the next. And they made
no long stay there.

Ver. 13. And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped The Jewish Doctors find
something remarkable here, though Moses says nothing of it. For as the Sabbath
was first commanded at Marah, which was their fifth Station, so it was first
observed here at Alush, as they fancy, which was their Tenth. And more than
that, this was the only Sabbath, in their opinion, which they exactly kept; the
very next being profaned. See Seldom, Lib. III. de Jure Not. and Gentium, etc.
cap. 11. and Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 1. The Author of Sepher Cosri says the
ancient Tradition is, That at this place the Manna first descended, P. II.
sect. 20.

And they removed from Alush and encamped at Rephidim, XVII Exodus 1.

Where was no Water for the People to drink.] And thereby an occasion given to
the Almighty Goodness, to show his wonderful Power, in bringing Water out of a
Rock for them, v. 5, 6. And here also Amalek lay in wait for Israel, in the way
when they came out of Egypt, 1 Samuel XV. 2. and smote some that lag'd behind,
XXV Deuteronomy. 16. but were vanquished by Joshua in a pitched Battle, XVII Exodus 8,
9, etc. And here Jethro also came to see Moses, and gave him advice about the
government of the People, with more ease both to himself and them, XVIII Exodus

And they departed from Rephidim and pitched in the Wilderness of Sinai.] XIX
Exodus 1, 2. This was forty seven days after they came from Rameses, on the
first day of the third Month. Three days after which ( viz. on the fiftieth day
after they came out of Egypt) God gave them his Law from Mount Sinai. Where
Moses was called up to him, and staid with him twice forty days. And was
instructed there how to make the Tabernacle, and to set it up when it was made,
with all the Furniture belonging to it. All sorts of Sacrifices were ordered
while they remained in this Place; Priests consecrated; Laws given about clean
and unclean things; and about Marriages, and Feasts, and the Year of Jubilee,
with several other things, mentioned in the Book of Leviticus. Here also the
People were numbered; their encampment ordered; a second Passover kept; Laws
given about the Water of Jealousy and the Nazarites, with several other
Matters: And then, after they had lain here eleven Months and twenty days, they
are commanded to leave this famous Station; the most remarkable of all other, X
Numb. 11, 12.

Ver. 16. And they removed from the Desert of Sinai, A place in the Wilderness
of Paran, three days Journey, from Mount Sinai, X Numb. 23. XI. 34. where there
was a dreadful slaughter of the People, that wantonly despised Manna, and
lusted after Flesh. Yet here God was pleased to vouchsafe to send his Spirit
upon the LXX. Elders, for the Assistance of Moses.

Ver. 17. And they departed from Kibroth-hattaavah, See XI. 35. Where Miriam
was punished for her Envy at Moses, XII. 1, 10.

Ver. 18. And they departed from Hazeroth and A place also in the Wilderness of
Paran, as appears from this Book, XII. 16. and was not far from Kadesh-barnea,
from whence the Spies were sent to search out the Land of Canaan. See XIII. 26.
In which place they lay a long time, I Deuteronomy. 46.

Ver. 19. And they departed from Rithmah, and This and the following Stages are
no where else mentioned; and seem to have all been in the Wilderness of Paran
before spoken of. Which was a very long Tract of Ground, from Elana, a Port in
the Arabian Gulf, to Kadesh-barnea: which, as David Chytraeus computes it, was
thirty German Miles.

And they departed from Rimmon-Parez, and pitched in Libnah.] This and the rest
to v. 31. are places of which, as I said, we no where else read, and so can
give no account of them. They were all uninhabited, and out of the road of all
Travelers; and perhaps had no names till they were given them by the
Israelites; who encamped in so many various places, (sometimes in Mountains, as
appears from v. 23. and sometimes in the Plain) that they might be taught, that
God was alike present every where to protect, defend and provide for them; even
there where no Man dwelt. The Jews make this use of their Travels here recorded
by Moses, through so many unknown places, by which he brought them at last to
Canaan; to keep up their Spirits under this long Captivity (as they call it)
wherein they now are, and have wandered uncertainly, from Mountain to Mountain,
from Kingdom to Kingdom, from Banishment to Banishment, (as they themselves
speak) till their Messiah come to redeem them. Which he will do when their Eyes
are opened to see, what one of their ancient Rabbis (Moses Hadarschan) has
told them, as he is quoted by Paulus Fagius, That the Redeemer was born before
him who reduced Israel into this last Captivity.

And they departed from Moserah, and pitched in Bene-Jaakan.] In X Deuteronomy. 6.
Moses seems to say the quite contrary, that they took their journey from
Beeroth of the Children of Jaakan, to Mosera. But there he may be thought to
speak of a different place, as Drusius notes upon those words. Or if he does
not, it is no wonder if, while they wandered in this tedious Wilderness, they
went backward and forward, from Bene-Jaakan to Moserath, which he mentions in
Deuteronomy; and from Moserath back again to Bene-Jaakan, which he mentions
here.

Ver. 32. And they journeyed from Bene-Jaakan, and This place was also called
Gudgodah, X Deuteronomy. 7. if Moses speaks there of the same places he does here.

Ver. 33. And they went from Horhagidgad and Called X Deuteronomy. 7. Jotbath.

Ver. 34. And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped All their removals
mentioned from v. 16. to this and the next place, are an account of their
wanderings in the Wilderness, from the second year after their coming out of
Egypt till the fortieth; in which time all the Congregation, above twenty years
of Age, were consumed, and buried in some part or other of this great Desert.

Ver. 35. And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped A place on the Red Sea,
unto which they were brought before they ended their Travels, 1 Kings IX. 26.
XXII. 18. It had its name from the snagged Rocks, like to the Backbone, which
stretched out a great way on that shore, as Bochart observes. Which Rocks made
this part so dangerous, that it was forsaken in after times, and Elah
frequented as a safer Harbor. See Lib. I. Canaan, cap. 44. It is not recorded
how long they remained in any of these places; but it is likely a considerable
time in some of them; for they spent Thirty eight years in these Removals.

Ver. 36. And they removed from Ezion-Gaber, and pitched in the Wilderness of
Zin, which is Kadesh.] See XX. 1. He does not mean Kadesh-barnea, which Canaan;
but another Kadesh in the Skirts of this Wilderness, toward the South, not far
from the Port I now mentioned (which the Greeks call Elana) on the Border of
Edom. Where Miriam died; and where Water was brought out of a Rock. See XX. 8,
14, 16.

And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in Mount Hor, in the edge of the
Land of Edom.] See XX. 28.

And Aaron went up into Mount Hor at the commandment of the LORD.] XX. 23, 24,
27. XXXII Deuteronomy. 50. The Hebrew Doctors are too conceited in their observation,
that because it is said of him, and of Moses, that they died al pi (at the
mouth) of the LORD; the LORD took their Souls out of their Bodies, with a kiss.
But Maimonides endeavors to make a sober sense of this, by making their
meaning to be, that they expired with the transcendent Pleasure of Divine Love,
More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 51.

And died there in the fortieth year after the Children of Israel came out of
the Land of Egypt, in the first day of the fifth Month.] A few Months before
his Brother Moses.

And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old, when he died in Mount
Hor.] He was just Eighty and three years old, when he and Moses first went with
a Message to Pharaoh, VII Exodus 7. By which it appears, that they were not long
in working all the Miracles in Egypt, before they brought the People forth; for
now Forty years after, he was but an Hundred twenty three years old.

Ver. 40. And King Arad the Canaanite, (which dwelt in the South, in the Land
of Canaan.)] See XXI. 1.

Heard of the coming of the Children of Israel.] Had News brought him, that the
Israelites were Moses intended in the recital of all these places where they
had been, to bring to remembrance the most remarkable Passages of God's
Providence over them: some of which he expressly sets down.

Ver. 41. And they departed from Mount Hor, and We read in the XXIth Chapter of
this Book, v. 4. that they journeyed from Hor, to compass the Land of Edom; but
are not told there where they pitched, which is here supplied, the name of the
place being Zalmonah. Which carries in it the signification of an Image; and
therefore here perhaps the brazen Serpent was erected. See XXI. 9.

Ver. 42. And they departed from Zalmonah, and Where Bochartus rather thinks
the brazen Serpent was set up; because after Moses has given us the History of
that, he says, they set forward and pitched in Oboth, XXI. 10. which was the
place of their abode next to Punon, as it here follows, Hierozoic. P. I. Lib.
III. cap. 12. in the latter end of it.

Ver. 43. And they departed from Punon, and pitched See XXI. 10.

Ver. 44. And they departed from Oboth, and pitched See XXI. 11. This name is
translated in the Margin, heaps of Abarim: which may possibly signify many
heaps of Stones, which lay not far from the Mountains of Abarim, v. 47.

Ver. 45. And they departed from Jim, and pitched Here half the name of the
first place is omitted; as is usual when the names are long. This may seem not
to agree with XXI. 12. where it is said they removed from thence, and pitched
in the Valley of Zered; near unto which, in all probability, was this
Dibon-gad. See what I have noted there.

And they removed from Dibon-gad, and encamped in Almon-Diblathaim.] See XXI.
13.

And they removed from Almon-diblathaim, and pitched in the Mountains of
Abarim, before Nebo.] We read no where, when they came to this Mansion: but, it
is plain, they were not far from it, when God bid Moses go into one of these
Mountains, and take a view of Canaan. See XXVII. 12. But this followed their
last Mansion; and therefore it is most likely this is the place mentioned XXI.
20. See there. Where I have observed other places mentioned v. 18, 19. of which
there is no notice taken in this Catalogue. But they seem to have been placed
where they only touched, and made no encampment in them; which is the thing of
which Moses here gives an account.

And they departed from the Mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of
Moab, etc.] See Chap. XXII. 1.

And they pitched by Jordan, from Beth-Jeshimoth.] A place where there was a
Temple, in all likelihood, to some Deity: For so Beth denotes in many
Compositions; as Beth-Peor (the House, or Temple of Baal on the top of Peor)
Beth-Astaroth, and Beth-Baal-berith, IX Judge. 4. And Beth-Shemesh is often
mentioned, where the Sun was worshipped. And possibly Jeshimoth may be the same
with Jeshimon, XXI. 20.

Even unto Abel-Shittim, etc.] Called simply Shittim, XXV. 1. which some fancy
had the name of Abel added to it, (which signifies mourning) because of that
Lamentation which was made there, by some for the grievous Sin there committed;
and by others, for the heavy Punishment inflicted in that place. But it seems
to have been anciently Abel-Shittim, before this time. See there.

Ver. 50. And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the etc.] After he had prepared them
for their entrance into Canaan; he ordered the first and principal work they
should there undertake.

Ver. 51. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say Accordingly Moses did
deliver this command unto them, VII Deuteronomy. 1, 2.

Ver. 52. Then ye shall drive out all the Inhabitants Not suffer them to dwell
in the Land any longer; but either destroy, or expel them; because they were
abominable Idolaters, devoted to extermination, (XXIII Exodus 33. XX Deuteronomy. 16,
17, 18.) by whom the Israelites would have been in danger to be corrupted, if
they were not rooted out.

And destroy all their Pictures.] Or their Temples, or Houses of Worship, as
Onkelos interprets it. But others (particularly the Jerusalem Targum)
understand it of the Idols, or Statues set up in those Temples; or some
Representations of their Gods. See concerning the Hebrew word Maskith, XXV Lev.
1.

And destroy their molten Images.] XXIII Exodus 24. XXXIV. 13. for if they
suffered them to remain, they might be enticed to worship them. These were
Idols, perhaps, in public places, or private Houses, out of their Temples.

And quite pluck down all their High Places.] They could not throw down the
Mountains, upon which the People of Canaan worshipped: but the meaning is, that
they should cut down the Groves which were there planted; and demolish all the
Altars that stood in them. For there were no other Temples, at first, but these
Groves upon Mountains; where the ancient Heathen worshipped the Sun, Moon and
Stars: unto which they thought the Mountains approached nearer than the rest of
the Earth; and therefore their Sacrifices there would be most prevalent. But of
this I have said enough elsewhere.

And ye shall dispossess the Inhabitants of the Land, and dwell therein; for I
have given you the Land to possess it.] Yet he did not intend they should
dispossess the old Inhabitants all at once, but by degrees; as he himself says
in XXIII Exodus 29, 30. VII Deuteronomy. 22.

And ye shall divide the Land by lot, for an Inheritance among your Families.]
Follow the directions I have already given for the dividing of the Land; after
the old Inhabitants are expelled, XXVI. 53, 55.

And to the mo ye shall give the more Inheritance, and to the fewer the less,
etc.] See XXVI. 54, 56.

And if ye will not drive out the Inhabitants of the Land from before you.] At
the first they could not drive them all out; nor was it God's design, as I
before observed. Therefore Joshua would not attempt it, while he lived: but
left several Nations, or part of them unsubdued, II Judges 21, 23. Of which he
himself takes notice a little before he died, XXIII Josh. 4, 7. where he warns
them to have nothing to do with them; promising them that God would in time
expel them quite, v. 5. But when the Israelites grew slothful and cowardly, and
negligently suffered the People of Canaan to dwell among them, and made
Friendship with them, (as they did after Joshua and all that Generation were
dead) then followed what is here threatened in the next words.

Then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain of them.]
Voluntarily permit to live among you, without endeavoring to dispossess them.

Shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides.] Bring very sore
Calamities upon you; as grievous and as mischievous as a wound made in the Eye,
which is a most tender part; or in the side, when a thorn sticks and festers in
it. Some are so curious, as by the first part of these words (pricks in your
eyes) to understand their being stimulated to Idolatry, by beholding their
Rites of Religion, and Manner of Worship. And the next they take to signify
the Effect of it, in sharp Punishments, which should befall them, for their
forsaking God. Joshua threatened the same before he died, XXIII. 13. Of which an
Angel, or Messenger of the LORD minded them, II Judges 3. And so it came to
pass, as we read there, v. 14. and throughout that whole Book.

And shall vex you in the Land wherein ye dwell.] Make you very uneasy, nay
sigh and groan, in the good Land which God gives you, by reason of their
oppression, II Judge. 18. IV. 3. VI. 6, etc.

Ver. 56. Moreover, I will do unto you, as I thought As I purposed to do unto
them; i. e. make you their Slaves; as they were to several People whom they
served many years, III Judge. 8, 14. VI. 2. and many other places. Or make you
flee before them; and at last expel you from the Land I give you.

CHAP. XXXIV.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] In the same place, where they were
when he last spoke to him; for they made no other Removals till they marched
for Canaan.

Command the Children of Israel.] Charge them to take notice of this.

And say unto them, when ye come into the Land of Canaan, this is the Land that
shall fall unto you, for your Inheritance.] Having spoken to them concerning
their dispossessing the Canaanites, and dividing their Land among their Tribes;
it was fit to describe the Bounds of their Country, that they might know whom
they were to destroy, and into whose Possessions they were to enter.

Even the Land of Canaan, and the Coasts thereof.] The Land beyond Jordan; and
the Limits or Bounds thereof.

Then your South quarter shall be from the Wilderness of Zin.] Mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, v. 36.

Along by the Coast of Edom.] Which bordered upon this Wilderness.] XX. 1, 14.

And your South border shall be the utmost Coast of the Salt Sea.] From the
very tongue of it, as it is expressed XV Josh. 2. where it appears, this was
the Portion of the Tribe of Judah. The Salt-Sea is that which is called
sometimes the Dead-Sea, and in other Authors, Lacus Asphaltites. See XIV Genesis
3. The Hebrews call all great Lakes by the Name of Seas; and this is called the
Salt-Sea, because the Water of it is very Salt, or, as some express it, bitter:
and the Dead-Sea, propter aquae immobilitatem, as Justin speaks, Lib. XXXVI.
because of the immoveableness of the Water, which is never stirred by the
greatest Winds. See Vossius de Orig. and Progr. Idolal. Lib. II. cap. 68.

Eastward.] Where the Eastern and the Southern Border meet.

Ver. 4. And your Border.] That is, this South

Shall turn.] Not go on in a strait Line; but bending toward the West.

From the South to the ascent of Akrabbim.] Or to Maale-Akrabbim; a Mountain on
the South-end of the Dead-Sea, XV Josh. 3. I Judge. 36. So called, as Bochartus
conjectures, from the vast multitude of Scorpions found here. From which
Mountain also, it is probable, the Region called Acrabatena, near to Idumaea,
had its name 1 Maccab. V. 3. See Hierozoicon, P. II. Lib. IV. cap. 29.

And pass on to Zin.] Either to a place called Zin; or part of the Wilderness
of Zin: which lay on the South of the Land of Canaan, XIII. 21.

And the going forth thereof shall be from the South.] That is, still on
toward the South; as appears from what goes before, and follows after.

To Kadesh-barnea.] From whence the Spies were sent to search out the Land; and
are said expressly to have gone up by the South, XIII. 22, 26.

And shall go on to Hazar-Addar.] Or, to the Village of Addar, as the Vulgar
Latin renders it: which seems to be justified by XV Josh. 3. where it is simply
called Addar. There is indeed a place called Hezron joined with it, which may
be thought to be the same with Hazar. But so is another place also called
Karkaa: both which may as well be thought to be here omitted, for brevities
sake.

And pass on to Azmon.] A place lying on the Westend of the Mount of Edom.

And the border shall fetch a compass.] There shall be a greater turn than that
mentioned v. 4. bending still more Westward.

From Azmon unto the River of Egypt.] By the River of Egypt is properly
understood Nile: and so Jonathan here renders the Hebrew word Nahal (River) by
Nilus. Which may seem to have taken its name from the word Nahal; which the
Ancients did not pronounce as we now do, but called it Neel, as we find in
Epiphanius. From whence Nilus was very easily made, as Bochartus observes,
Hierozoic. P. II. Lib. V. cap. 15. But if Nile be here meant, it must be the
more Northerly mouth of it, where Pelusium stood. See XV Genesis 18.

And the goings out of it shall be at the Sea.] This Border ended at the Sea,
called the Great Sea in the next verse.

And as for the Western border, ye shall have even the great Sea.] That is, the
Mediterranean, or midland Sea, which lay on the West of Judaea. And is called
by the Hebrews the Great Sea, in comparison with the Lake of Genesaret, and
Aspaltites, which they also called Seas.

For your border.] On the West, as it here follows.

This shall be your Western border.] From the River of Egypt as far as Zidon;
which was a part of the promised Land, as appears from XIII Josh. 6. I Judge.
31. All the Cities indeed on the shore of this Sea, were held by the
Philistines and others, till the time of David: but the Israelites had a right
to them. And the famous Rabbi Juda understands these words, as if they should
have the Western Ocean it self for their Portion, as well as the Land adjacent
to it. For so he expounds these words, as if Moses had said, this shall be your
Western Border, viz. The Border of the Sea, and the Isles near unto it. And the
Jerusalem Targum more plainly, And let the great Sea be your Border; i. e. the
Ocean, and the Isles thereof, and the Cities, and the Ships with the ancient
Waters, that are in the midst of it. See Seldom in his Mare Clausum, Lib. I.
cap. 6. where he alleges this as a proof, that Men anciently thought they
might have a Dominion over the Sea, as well as the Land.

Ver. 7. And this shall be your Northern border from From the Mediterranean,
which lay on the West.

Ye shall point out for you.] Mark out for your Direction.

Mount Hor.] Not that Mount where Aaron died; for that was on the South of the
Land of Canaan, toward Edom: but this was diametrically opposite, on the North
of it. And therefore must in all likelihood be some part of Mount Libanus,
which with Antilibanus (more toward the great Sea) bounded the promised Land
on the North. But there were several parts of Mount Libanus, which were called
by several Names; and probably one of them was called Hor; because of its
eminency or height above the rest. So the Vulgar translates it; reading, I
suppose, the Hebrew, not Hor hahar, i. e. Hor the Mountain, but Har hahar, the
Mountain of Mountain, i. e. the highest Mountain. The Jews generally by this
Mount Hor understand Amanus, which is a part of Taurus, (as Mr. Seldom observes
in the place before-named) which the Jerusalem Targum calls more briefly Manus.

From Mount Hor ye shall point out your border to the entrance of Hamath.]
There were two Hamaths: one called by the Greeks Antiochia; the other
Epiphania. The former called Hamath the Great, VI Amos 2. to distinguish it
from the latter; which is the City that is always meant, when we read the
Bounds of Judaea, were to the entrance of Hamath Northward, as here and XIII.
21. For it is certain, as Bochartus observes, they did not reach to Antiochia,
but came near to Epiphania, Lib. IV. Phaleg. cap. 36. And this makes it
probable that Hor, as I said before, may be a Promontory of Libanus; because in
XIII Josh. 5. Hermon is joined with the entrance of Hamath, as Hor is here. Now
Hermon was certainly a part of Libanus; by some called Sirion; by others Senir,
III Deuteronomy. 9. and by others Sion, IV Deuteronomy. 48.

And the goings forth of the border shall be to Zedad.] Which in Ezekiel's time
was reckoned the Northern Border (together with Hamath) from the great Sea;
just as it is here, XLVII Ezekiel. 15, 16.

Ver. 9. And the border shall go on to Ziphron.] Another Town in those parts;
of which I find no mention any where else.

And the goings out of it shall be at Hazar-Enam.] Ezekiel's time, XLVII. 17.
David Chytraeus seems to have given a full account of this Northern Border, in
a few words. It extended, says he, from the Mediterranean, by the Mountains of
Libanus, to the Fountain of Jordan. In which Tract are the Towns of Hamath,
Zadad (in the Tribe of Naphthali) Ziphron (in the same Tribe at the foot of
Libanus) and Hazar-Enan, which he takes to signify a Village at the Fountain,
viz. of Jordan.

Ver. 10. And ye shall point out your East border from From the Fountain of
Jordan, as was said before.

To Shepham.] A place, not far from thence: for the River Jordan was certainly
the Eastern Limits.

Ver. 11. And the Coast.] The Limits, or Bounds.

Shall go down from Shepham to Riblah.] A place no doubt near to Jordan; with
which River the Eastern Limits go along. St. Hierom takes Riblah to be
Antiochia: but that was in Syria; to which the promised Land did not reach.

On the East side of Ain.] The Vulgar reads it, the Fountain of Daphne. And
indeed Ain signifies a Fountain: and both Jonathan and the Jerusalem Targum
take Riblah for Daphne; as they do Shepham beforementioned for Apamia. But
this is only a vain Conceit of the Jews, who would extend their Bounds beyond
what God gave them. For it is certain the Land of Canaan never extended to
these places, as Bochartus observes, Lib. I. Canaan, cap. 16. And therefore
Daphne (which was in the Suburbs of Antiochia) cannot be here meant, unless we
understand another place mentioned by Josephus, Lib. IV. de Bello Judaico, cap.
1. which lay near the Lake of Semechonites, through the middle of which Jordan
ran. And then Ain must signify another Fountain of Jordan; for it had more
than one. And thus David Chytraeus explains this part of the verse, and the
foregoing: The Eastern Bounds were the River Jordan, near to which were these
places; Enan, which had its name from the Fountain of the River; and Shepham,
not far from thence; and Riblah, which was also near to Jordan, lying between
the Lake of Semechonites and Genesaret.

And the border shall descend, and shall reach unto the side of the Sea of
Cinnereth Eastward.] To the East side of this Sea or Lake, which had its name
from a City so called, XIX Josh. 35. and a Country, 1 Kings XV. 20. or else it
gave them their names: For David Chytraeus will have it called Cinnereth, from
the Hebrew word Cinnor, which signifies an Harp or Lute, the Lake being of that
shape and figure; about four German Miles long, and two and a half broad. It is
called the Sea of Galilee, or Tiberias, in the Gospel.

And the border.] i. e. this Eastern Border.

Shall go down to Jordan.] That is, to the River which was eminently so called,
(and was on the East part of Canaan, XIII Genesis 11.) for it was very small till
it came to the Lake of Genesaret beforementioned. From whence, being augmented
by several Torrents and Rivulets, it ran in a wider Stream, till it fell into
the Salt or Dead-Sea. See Bonfrerius out of Josephus, Lib. IV. de Bello
Judaico, cap. 1.

And its goings out shall be at the Salt-Sea.] There was the end of this
Border; where it met with the Southern, as was observed above, v. 3.

This shall be your Land with the Coasts thereof, round about.] As was said
before v. 2. therefore they were not to extend their Right any farther; this
being the Country he promised Abraham, when he bad him lift up his Eyes, and
look from the place where he was, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and
Westward, and walk through the length of the Land and breadth of it, which he
assures to his Posterity, XIII Genesis 14, 15, 16, 17. which now he lays out for
them, with the exact Limits of it, in all those four quarters.

Ver. 13. And Moses commanded the Children of Israel, He repeats it so often,
that they might know what People they were to dispossess, and with whom they
might make Friendship; and not extend their Desires beyond the bounds of Gods
gracious Grant to them. By which they were placed in a very fertile and
pleasant Country, bounded, as appears by the foregoing description, on the
South ( v. 4, 5.) by great Mountains, which sheltred them from the burning Air
of the Deserts of Arabia; on the West by the Midland Sea, which sent to them
refreshing Breezes; and on the North by Mount Libanus, which kept off the
colder Blasts from that quarter; and on the East, the delightful Plains of
Jordan, abounding with Palm Trees, especially about Jericho, which yielded them
a great Revenue.

Which the LORD commanded to give to the nino Tribes, and to the half Tribe.]
This he had not said plainly before, though it was necessarily inferred, from
his granting to two Tribes and an half their Inheritance beyond Jordan.

Ver. 14. For the Tribe of the Children of Reuben, etc. have received their
Inheritance.] Upon condition they performed their promise, to help the rest of
their Tribes to win their Inheritance in Canaan. So those words are to be
understood, I observed XXXII. 33. Moses gave unto them the Kingdom of Sihon,
etc.

The two Tribes and an half have received their Inheritance, on this side
Jordan, etc.] By the Gift of God, as they themselves understood it, XXXII. 31.
The bounds of which the Jerusalem Targum here undertakes to set down, and
makes them extend Eastward, as far as the great River Euphrates; having
respect, I suppose, to XV Genesis 18. and XXIII Exodus 30. Where he sets down
the utmost Bounds of the Countries he intended to bestow upon them in future
times, (See there) but here only describes the Limits of that Land, which they
were to enjoy in present possession; and was all that God granted to Abraham,
when he brought him out of Chaldaea, and made his first Promise unto him, XII
Genesis 1, 7. XIII. 14, 15, 17. XV. 7.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] Having told them what they should
divide, it was proper to appoint some Persons to take care to see the Division
made.

These are the names of the Men which shall divide the Land.] Though the Land
was to be divided by Lot, yet it was fit there should be some Persons to
oversee the Business, and take care there should be no Fraud in the drawing of
them: And when they were drawn, to prevent all quarrels, by determining what
Portion, those who had too much, should give to those who had too little, XXVI.
54, 55.

Eleazar the Priest, and Joshua the Son of Nun.] These were the principal
Persons concerned in this great Affair: who were so conscientious therein, that
they did it in the presence of God, at the Door of the Tabernacle, XVIII Josh.
6, 8, 10. XIX. 51.

Ver. 18. And ye shall take one Prince of every Tribe, They are called in the
place last named, The Heads of the Fathers of the Tribes of the Children of
Israel.

Ver. 19. The names of the Men are these, of the Tribe I have nothing to
observe upon this, and the following verses, to the end of the Chapter; but
that the Tribes are not mentioned in such order as they were at their first
numbering, (I. 5, 6, etc.) or at their second, XXVI. 5, etc. yet great
exactness, and a particular direction of God may be noted in their placing
here; for they are set down according to their situation which they had
afterward in the Land of Canaan: as if Moses foresaw who should be next
Neighbors one to another. For Judah having his Inheritance given him first,
(XV Josh.) Simeon, who is here next mentioned, was so near him in the Land of
Canaan, that he had a Portion given him out of the Lot of Judah, which proved
too large for that Tribe, XIX Josh. 9. I Judge. 3, 17. Then Benjamin, who here
follows, in the third place, was so near to Judah, that they never separated
when the ten Tribes were rent from them. Dan was not far from Judah; and the
Children of Joseph also were their Neighbors. And the rest of the Tribes,
Zebulun, Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, are set down here, just in the order
wherein their Lots fell to them in Canaan, XIX Josh. 10, 17, 24, 32. An
Evidence that Moses was guided by a Divine Spirit, in all his Writings.

CHAP. XXXV.
AND the LORD spoke unto Moses, in the Plains of Moab, by Jordan near Jericho,
saying.] See XXII. 1. Hitherto nothing has been said of the Levites; but that
they should have no Lot in the Land of Canaan. But now God provides that they
should have Habitations assigned them to dwell in, though they had no Fields,
nor Olive-yards, etc. as the rest of their Brethren had. They might indeed have
been able to purchase Houses for themselves out of the Tithes, and other things
which God had long ago bestowed upon them for their Portion: but it was not fit
that God's Ministers should be left without any certain dwelling. And besides,
God would have them live comfortably, and not only have Houses, but a little
Ground about them, for their more commodious Subsistence.

Command the Children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the
Inheritance of their possession.] Out of their share that shall fall to them in
the Land of Canaan, and on this side Jordan.

Cities to dwell in.] That they might not be in danger to wander up and down to
seek an Habitation.

And ye shall give also to the Levites Suburbs for the Cities round about
them.] Some Ground lying round about their Cities, the reason of which is given
in the next verse.

Ver. 3. And the Cities they shall have to dwell in.] Jerusalem, or the place
where the Tabernacle was settled; for we find in Scripture many proofs of their
dwelling in other Cities, beside these which are here assigned to them. And in
like manner, other People with their permission, might dwell with them in these
Cities, without any breach of this Law.

And the Suburbs shall be for their Cattle.] To afford Pasture for their Oxen,
and Sheep.

And for their Goods.] The Hebrew word signifies, not only all kind of
Household Stuff, but whatsoever was necessary for them and their Cattle without
doors.

And for their Beasts.] Horses, Asses, Mules, and all sorts of living
Creatures, as the Hebrew word signifies. But it was not lawful for them to
build Houses in these Fields, nor plant Vineyards, nor sow Corn: but they were
given them only to make their Dwellings more sweet; and that they might have
the convenience of Cattle about them, for Provisions and all other uses.

Ver. 4. And the Suburbs and Cities which ye shall give To be their Possession,
by as good and full a right, as their Brethren of the other Tribes had in their
Lands, which fell to them for their Inheritance by Lot. See XXV Lev. 31, 32,
33. where they themselves are disabled to alienate, either the Houses or Fields
of their Cities. But if they sold a House, it was to revert at the Jubilee; and
the Fields they could not so much as sell till that time.

Shall reach from the Walls of the City and outward, a thousand Cubits round
about.] This space was for their Outhouses; as Stables, Places for Hay and
Straw, and such like things; and perhaps for Gardens of Herbs and Flowers. The
Gemara, upon the Ninth Chapter of Sota, sect. 9. says, That under the second
Temple, the Levites had no Suburbs; which were not restored to them after the
Captivity of Babylon. But there being great care taken that the People shall
pay all the Tithe of their ground unto the Levites, X Nehem. 37. it is
unreasonable to think that care was not taken for places to lay them in.

And ye shall measure from without the City.] It is not said, as in the
foregoing verse, from the wall of the City; therefore I take it to signify
from the outside of the Suburbs before mentioned.

On the East side two thousand Cubits, and on the South side two thousand
Cubits, etc.] So there was in the whole three thousand Cubits round about the
City: a thousand for the Suburbs properly so called; and two thousand more for
their Pasture, called properly the Fields of the Suburbs, XXV Lev. 34. This is
the most natural and easy Explication of this place.

And the City shall be in the midst.] So that there was exactly, every way,
such a Circuit of Ground about it.

This shall be the Suburbs of the Cities.] Here the word Suburbs comprehends
the Fields also. And Maimonides says, that by the Constitution of the Elders,
they set forth also a Burying place for every City beyond these Limits: For
they might not bury their Dead within the Suburbs or Fields: which they ground
upon the foregoing verse, which appoints them for other uses, Schemita ve
jobel, cap. 13.

Ver. 6. And among the Cities which ye shall give unto Three in the Land of
Canaan, and three on the other side Jordan, v. 14. The names of which are set
down XX Josh. 7, 8. And those on the other side Jordan were set apart by Moses
himself before he died, IV Deuteronomy. 43. The reason of their being called Cities of
Refuge, is given in the next words.

Which ye shall appoint for the Manslayer.] Such a Manslayer as is afterward
described; who killed another against his will.

That he may flee thither.] And there be preserved and kept in safety, if he
was not found guilty of wilful Murder. The Cities of the Levites were appointed
for this purpose, rather than any other, because they were a kind of Sacred
Places, inhabited by Sacred Persons. And here Men might spend their time
better, than in other Cities, being among God's Ministers; who might make them
sensible of the negligence which Men were commonly guilty of in such Cases, and
of such Sins as they might have otherwise committed.

And to them ye shall add forty two Cities.] Which had all the same Privilege,
if we may believe the Hebrew Doctors; but not equally with the six. For in the
six a Manslayer was to have an House to dwell in for nothing; but in the other
forty two, he was to pay for it. And the Levites could not refuse him entrance
into the six; but as for the rest, it was in their choice whether they would
receive him or no. Thus Maimonides out of their ancient Authors. See Seldom,
Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. juxta Discipl. Hebr. cap. 2. where he observes
that the Altar also was a place of Refuge, according to XXI Exodus 14. but with
many Exceptions; both with relation to the parts of the Altar, and to the
Persons who fled thither, and to the quality of the offense, and their stay
there; which very much lessened the Privilege of this Refuge.

So all the Cities, which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty eight
Cities, etc.] Accordingly we read Joshua gave them so many, XXI Josh. 41.
Thirteen of which the Priests had; and the rest the Levites. And in the days of
the Messiah (whom they vainly still expect) other Cities shall be added to them
(says Maimonides) which shall belong to the Levites.

And the Cities which ye shall give them, shall be of the possession of the
Children of Israel.] And so it is said XXI Josh. 3. that the Children of Israel
gave unto the Levites out of their Inheritance, these Cities and their Suburbs.
Where we read also, they were given them by Lot, as the Children of Israel had
their Inheritance given them.

From them which have many ye shall give many, and from them that have few ye
shall give few.] According to the Rule in distributing their Inheritances to
the Israelites, XXXIII. 54.

Every one shall give of his Cities unto the Levites, according to the
Inheritance which he shall inherit.] Thus they gave Nine Cities out of the two
Tribes of Judah and Simeon, XXI Josh. 16. and but Four out of Benjamin, which
was a small Tribe, v. 18. out of the Tribes of Issachar and Asher Four apiece,
v. 28, 31. and out of Naphtali no more than three, verse. 32.

Ver. 9. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying.] This being a matter of great
importance, that guiltless Men should not suffer, nor the guilty escape
Punishment, Moses further direction about it, as he promised he would in XXI
Exodus 13.

Ver. 10. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and say Repeat this Command to
them; which God himself repeated to Joshua, XX. 1, 2.

When ye be come over Jordan, into the Land of Canaan.] When they had
possession of it, and divided it, and were settled in it: So it is explained
XIX Deuteronomy. 1, 2.

Ver. 11. Then shall ye appoint you Cities to be Cities This seems to signify
that all the Cities of the Levites were in some sort a protection to the
Manslayer, as I said upon v. 6. Such places the Temples were among the
Athenians, as Sam. Petitus observes in Leges Atticas, p. 12, 13. yet not all of
them; for he can find only six: that of Mercy, and that of the Eumenides and
Minerva, and those dedicated to Theseus (one of them within the City, the other
without the Walls) and that in Munychia.

That the Manslayer may flee thither, which kills any person at unawares.]
Or as it is XX Josh. 3. unwittingly, XIX Deuteronomy. 4. ignorantly: that is, besides
his intention, having no such design, nor hatred to him, as is there expressly
said, and here below, v. 22. This is repeated v. 15. And the Instances of it
are such as these, mentioned by Georg. Ritterhusius de Jure Asylorum, cap. 4.
If a Man cutting Wood, the Hatchet flying from the Helve, should hit a Man and
kill him: or a Huntsman shooting at a Deer in a Thicket should kill a Man, whom
he did not see lying there: An Example of which we have in Adrastus, mentioned
by Herodotus, Lib. I.

Ver. 12. And they shall be unto you Cities for Refuge From him who had a right
to call a Murderer to account for the Blood he had shed, and is therefore
called the Avenger of Blood, v. 19. who being stimulated with Anger and Grief
for the Death of a near Relation, might in a heat of Rage, hastily kill him who
was not guilty of Murder. And therefore this provision is made, for the
preservation of an innocent Person, against the violent Prosecution of the
Avenger. In the Hebrew the word for Avenger is Goel, which signifying a
Redeemer, plainly denotes that the next of Kin to him that was slain, is here
meant. For to that Person belonged the right of Redemption of Estates, XXV Lev.
25. and of marrying the Wife of a Kinsman deceased without Issue, III Ruth 12,
13. And consequently such a Person, that is, the nearest of Kin, is here
intended to be the Revenger of Blood: And therefore no Man might undertake this
Office, but he alone who was the next Heir to him that was slain; as Mr. Seldom
observes, Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 1. p. 469. Grotius observes the
like Custom among the ancient Greeks, of private Men taking Revenge for the
Death of their Relations or Friends, Lib. II. de Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 20.
sect. 8. n. 6.

That the Manslayer die not.] By a sudden heat of Passion. This was a merciful
provision (as Maimonides observes) both for the Manslayer, that he might be
preserved; and for the Avenger, that his Blood might be cooled, by the removal
of the Manslayer out of his sight, by his flight to another place, More
Nevochim, P. III. cap. 40.

Until he stand before the Congregation.] The City of Refuge protected him that
fled thither, Salvo tamen juris and justitiae examine, (as the Lawyers speak)
yet so that the Matter should be brought to a fair Trial before proper Judges.
They of the City of Refuge examined him, before his admittance into the place,
XX Josh. 4. But they were not Judges, nor could they examine Witnesses. And
therefore he was delivered, upon demand, to the Senate or Court of Judgment, of
that City where the Fact was committed, that they might try whether he were
guilty or no of wilful Murder. So the Hebrews understand the word Edah,
Congregation, in this place (as in many others) to signify the Sanhedrim of
XXIII. as Mr. Seldom observes, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 5. n. 2. and Lib. III.
cap. 8. n. 3. And as by Congregation is meant the Court where Causes were
tried; so it is reasonable to interpret it of that Court, which sat in the City
where the Fact was committed, and not that in the City of Refuge; because there
the Witnesses were; and it is expressly said, v. 25. that if the Congregation
found him to be innocent, he should be restored to the City of Refuge. Which
evidently supposes he was not judged there, but in another place; and none so
proper, as that before mentioned.

Ver. 13. And of these Cities which ye shall give, six They might flee unto any
other Cities of the Levites; but in these six they were most certain to find
Protection. See v. 6. And the best provision was made for the Man-slayers easy
and safe flying thither: For the ways that led thither were to be made very
plain and broad, (thirty two Cubits wide) and to be kept in good repair; for
which they allege (in the Title Maccoth, cap. 2. sect. 5.) those words XIX
Deuteronomy. 3. Thou shall prepare the way, etc. And two Students in the Law were to
accompany him; that if the Avenger of Blood should overtake him, before he got
into the City, they might endeavor to pacify him by wise persuasions. And
that he might not miss his way to the place whether he intended to flee, there
were Posts erected, where two or three ways met, with this Inscription MIKLAT,
i. e. the City of Refuge, to direct him into that Rode which led to it. A
certain day also was appointed, which was the fifteenth of February, for the
repairing of the Highways, and of the Bridges, which might have been broken by
the Winter Rains and Floods.

And ye shall give three Cities on this side Jordan, and three Cities in the
Land of Canaan.] This seems not to be an equal Partition; the Land of Canaan
being far bigger than the Territory beyond Jordan: for it contained above three
parts of four of the Tribes of Israel. But it is to be considered, that the
Country beyond Jordan was as long as the Land of Canaan, though not so broad:
and that they also beyond Jordan might flee to any of the Cities in Canaan, if
they were nearer to them. And besides, God commanded those in Canaan, if he
enlarged their Coast, to add three Cities more, besides these, XIX Deuteronomy. 8, 9.

Why six Cities are appointed for this purpose, and no more; and why three on
one side of Jordan, and three on the other, Philo alleges some mystical
Reasons; but so far fetched, that I do not think fit to mention them.

These six Cities shall be a Refuge.] They all began to be so at the same time,
according to the Talmudists. For till those three in Canaan were set out, these
three on the other side Jordan (though set out by Moses before they went into
Canaan, IV Deuteronomy. 43.) did not receive any Manslayer. Which they prove (in the
forenamed Title Maccoth, cap. 2. sect. 4.) from these very words, these six
shall be cities of Refuge; that is, when the other three were appointed, then
they all received those that fled to them.

Both for the Children of Israel and for the Stranger, and for the Sojourner
among them.] Both Strangers and Sojourners had renounced Idolatry; but had not
equally embraced the Jewish Religion: yet both of them had the same share in
this Benefit, with the native Israelites; it being a natural right, that every
Man who was innocent should be protected. The difference between a Stranger and
a Sojourner has been often observed, particularly upon XIX Lev. 33, 34. XV
Numb. 15, 16.

That every one that kills any person unawares may flee thither.] That is,
every one beforementioned, whether Israelites, Strangers, or Sojourners. But
as for such as were mere Gentiles, and not so much as Proselytes of the Gate,
if they killed another, though a Gentile, they had not the benefit of this Law;
because they were not suffered to dwell among them, though they traffickt in
the Country. And if a Proselyte of the Gate killed an Israelite, or one that
was Circumcised, he also, if we may believe the Jewish Doctors, was denied
protection in these Cities. But if he killed one like himself, ( i. e. a
Proselite of the Gate) then he had the same Privilege with the Israelites, as
they explain it. See Seldom, Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 2. p. 477.

Ver. 16. And if he smite him.] Or rather, but if

With an Instrument of Iron, so that he die, he is a murderer.] For it was to
be presumed, that he who run at a Man with a Sword, or any such Weapon,
intended to do him a Mischief; though perhaps he had no Malice to him
beforehand; but did it in a Passion.

So that he die.] He never going abroad after he was wounded, XXI Exodus 19, 20.

The Murderer shall surely be put to death.] Be taken away by the Judges,
though he were in a City of Refuge; and the Fact being proved, condemned to die
for it.

And if he smite him with throwing a stone.] In the Hebrew it is, with a stone
of the hand. That is, say the Jews, with a great Stone that fills the hand: not
with a small Stone, with which he could not be presumed to intend to kill him;
though he chanced to do it, by hitting him in the Eye, or some other very
tender part.

Wherewith he may die.] With a Stone big enough to kill him.

And he die.] So that it appears he died of that blow.

He is a Murderer; the Murderer shall surely be put to death.] He is as guilty,
as the forenamed Person, who smote with an Instrument of Iron: and his fleeing
to the City of Refuge shall not protect him from Death.

If he smite him with an hand weapon of wood.] Such as a Battoon (as we now
speak) or a Club, or any such kind of Instrument, as is likely to kill him.

Wherewith he may die, etc.] It made no difference with what kind of Weapon or
Instrument he was killed, whether it were of Iron, Wood, or Stone; if he were
killed wittingly and knowingly, it was Murder; and the guilty Person was to
suffer for it. Aul. Gellius has collected the Names of the several Weapons,
which are mentioned in ancient History; of which there are near thirty, Lib. X.
Noct. Attic. c. 25. one of which, called Lingula, he is pleased to explain,
being then not common, and says it was a little Sword, in the form of a
Tongue, like our Poniard, I suppose, or Dagger, or long Knife: which was a
dangerous Weapon, because Men might hide it under their Clothes, and kill
others while they were in familiar discourse with them.

Ver. 19. The avenger of blood himself.] See v. 12.

Shall slay the Murderer.] This is thought by many to be a mere permission, not
a Precept. But the Jews think otherwise; that the next of Kin ( i. e. the Heir
of him that was slain) stood bound to do his endeavor to avenge his Blood. If
he would not, (says Maimonides) or if he was not able; or if no such Avenger
was to be found, ( i. e. the Murderer himself was the next Heir, or the Man
slain was a Proselyte of Justice without Issue) he was to be prosecuted, and
put to Death by the Court of Judgment, and that by the Sword. See Seldom, Lib.
IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. cap. 1.

When he meets him he shall slay him.] He was not bound to stay for the
Sentence of the Court, but might kill him wheresoever he found him. See v. 31.

Ver. 20. But if he thrust him of hatred, etc.] Or rather, for if he thrust
him, etc. That is, if by any other means, besides those mentioned v. 16, 17,
18. he killed Deuteronomy. 11. Now this was a sufficient proof of hatred to him; if
being a Neighbor, and they having some difference, he had not spoken to him
for three whole days together.

Or in enmity smote him with his hand that he die, he that smote him shall
surely be put to death.] If he gave him only a blow with his fist, of which he
died, and it was proved he had Enmity to him, it was sufficient to make him a
Murderer; and it warranted the Avenger of Blood to kill him, or obliged him to
prosecute him, so that the City of Refuge should not save him.

The revenger of blood shall slay the murderer when he meets him.] The Civil
Law declared him to be unworthy to enjoy the Inheritance of one that was
murdered, if he neglected to prosecute the Person that killed him in some Court
of Justice. But the Jewish Law allowed, or rather required a great deal more;
that the next of Kin should kill the Murderer with his own hands, if he met
him. And thus the Abyssines at this day (as Ritterhusius observes out of
Alvarez) deliver the Murderer into the hand of the next Kinsman to torture him.
The reason of which Law among the Jews was (as the same Ritterhusius observes
de Jure Asylorum, cap. 4.) because they being all descended from one and the
same Stock, and equally partaking of the same right, they were all concerned in
the shedding of the Blood of any one of them, especially they who were nearest
to him in Blood, who seemed to be all struck at, and injured in him. So that
the Law with great reason allowed them to avenge the Blood of him that was
slain. With which these Verses of Ovid, he thinks, agrees.

Cum tibi sint fratres, fratres ulciscere laesos
Cumque pater tibi sit, jura tuere patris.
Ver. 22. But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity.] v. 20.) in a violent
Passion, having no such Intention, and being perhaps highly provoked by him; or
by chance, as we speak, and unawares, it being proved that there was no Enmity
between them, no signs of hatred before this Fact.

Or cast upon him any thing without laying in wait.] Happen to hit him with any
thing, without design to hurt him. See XXI Exodus 13. XIX Deuteronomy. 5.

Ver. 23. Or with any Stone wherewith he may die.] v. 17.

Seeing him not, and casting it upon him, that he die.] Throwing it at
something else, or playing with it; and having no thought of him, because he
did not see him.

And was not his enemy, neither sought his harm.] Not having any quarrel with
him, nor threatening him, or any other way discovering that he sought to do him
mischief.

Ver. 24. Then the Congregation.] That is, the Judges to whom the Trial of such
Causes belonged. See v. 12. Where I observed that the Elders of the City

Shall judge between the slayer and the avenger of blood.] They sent for him
out of the City of Refuge, to be brought before them; who heard what could be
alleged against him, and what he could say for himself.

According to these judgments.] Upon Trial they proceeded to give Judgment,
according to the foregoing Rules: which in brief are these. If a Man had no
intention to kill another, but it was purely involuntary, he was to be
acquitted. If there appeared any design upon his Life, or such hatred and
enmity, as might move them to conclude he had an intention to kill him, he was
to be put to death. But here the Hebrew Doctors (as Mr. Seldom observes)
distinguish the killing of a Man into three kinds. The first was, when, though
it was from pure Ignorance and Error, yet there was some Negligence in it,
which a prudent Man might have avoided. The second, when a Man kills another
ignorantly, and cannot be blamed for any negligence, because such a thing
seldom happens. An Example of the first they make to be, when a Man coming down
a Ladder falls upon another, and kills him. An Example of the second, when
going up a Ladder, a Man happens to do the same. The former is more frequent,
and therefore they say, has some kind of blame in it; the other seldomer, and
therefore has none. A third kind, when any Man kills another out of ignorance
and error also, but it approaches nearer to voluntary Murder. As when a Man,
intending to kill one Man, happens to kill another, with a Stone or otherwise.
In none of these cases, they say, the Court of Judgment could put any Man to
Death. And the Cities of Refuge were not provided for the second or third sort,
but only for the first; and that when the Man died presently, and did not lie
and languish of the Wound: for if he did, it might be supposed he died by his
own negligence, or other ways, as well as by the Wound. In which case there was
no need, that the Man who wounded him, should flee to the City of Refuge; nor
could the Avenger of Blood meddle with him: No more than he could with a
Father, when he gave his Son, or a Master, when he gave his Scholar Correction,
and happened to kill him. The same was the case of him, whose Office it was to
Arrest Men, by Public Authority, and bring them before the Judges, if he
struck a Man that refused to go along with him, and killed him. See Seldom,
Lib. IV. de Jure Not. and Gent. juxta Discipline. Hebr. cap. 2.

Ver. 25. And the Congregation shall deliver the slayer If the Court found the
Man was killed casually, as the Person accused pretended, (XX Josh. 4.) then
they charged the Avenger of Blood not to prosecute any further.

Both here, and in the foregoing verse, and in the next words to these, by
Congregation, is meant the Judges of the City, (as I observed v. 12.) who were
to determine, in the presence, and in the behalf of the People, whether the
Manslayer was capable of the Privilege of the City of Refuge, or not; as we
read XX Josh. 4, 6. Now these things (as a very Learned Person of our own
argues) which were done by the Elders (or Judges) being said to be done by the
Congregation or Assembly of the People, in whose behalf they were done; it is
no wrong to the Holy Scriptures, when we say, that which they report to have
been done by the Church, was acted by the chief Power of the Apostles and
Elders, with the consent of the People. For it is manifest in the New
Testament, that in the Apostles time all the Public Acts of the Church were
passed at the Public Assemblies of the same. As Ordinations, I Acts 23. V. 36.
Excommunications, XVIII Matthew. 18, 19, 20. 1 Corinthians. V. 4. 2 Cor. II. 10.
Councils, XV Acts 4, 22. other Acts, 2 Corinthians. VII. 19. And herewith agrees
the Primitive Custom of the Church for diverse Ages; whereby they gave
Satisfaction to the People of the Integrity of their Proceedings, and by the
same means obliged Superiors to that Integrity, by making the Proceedings so
manifest, and so to preserve the Unity of the Church. And from this Interest of
the People in such Acts it is at this day, that the People of the Church of
England are demanded, what they have to say against Ordinations and Marriages
to be made. See Mr. Thorndike in his Rights of the Church in a Christian State,
Chap. 3. p. 159, etc.

And the Congregation shall restore him to the City of his Refuge, whether he
was fled.] They were to send him back again, from the place where he was tried,
to the City where he had taken Refuge, there to remain till the time prescribed
in the next words. This was more merciful than the punishment inflicted by the
Attick Laws (which plainly show they were borrowed in great part from Moses)
for he who slew a Man involuntarily, was forced to fly his Country. So the
Scoliast upon the last of Homer's Iliads, (...), etc. It was the manner in
ancient times, for a Man that had killed another involuntarily, to flee his
Country; and betaking himself to some neighboring place, to sit with his Face
covered, begging to be expiated. But this was only for a certain time, as
Demosthenes tells us (in his Oration in Aristocratem) (...), etc. The Law
requires him that is condemned of killing a Man involuntarily, for some limited
time to go away, and keep at an appointed distance, till he can make his peace
with the Kindred of him that was slain: after which he may return again, etc.

And he shall abide in it.] Not stir out of the Limits of the City; that is,
beyond the Suburbs, and the two thousand Cubits which encompassed them, ( v. 4,
5.) within which Bounds he was to keep.

Unto the death of the High Priest, which was anointed with oil.] This looks
like a Punishment to the Manslayer; whereby others were taught to be very
watchful over themselves, lest by negligence they chanced to kill any body, and
so be forced to leave their own home. But Maimonides takes it for a prudent
Charity to the Manslayer, and to the Relations of him that was slain, For by
this means the Manslayer was kept out of the sight of the Avenger of Blood;
who might have been tempted some time or other to fall upon him, if he had come
in his way: but by long absence, his Anger might be mitigated; at least by the
Death of the High Priest, the most excellent of all other Persons, and most
dear to every one in the Nation. Which made the Public Grief so great when he
died, that Men forgot their private Resentments: For nothing could fall out
more grievous to all People, (says he) then the Death of the High Priest,
which swallowed up all other Grief, More Nevoch. P. III. c. 40. And in the mean
time the Jews say, that the Citizens of the place, were bound to teach him some
Trade, whereby he might provide himself with Necessaries: And he had this
comfort also, during his absence from his own Family, that the Mother of the
High Priest sent him many Gifts, that he might remain there more contentedly,
and not pray for the Death of the High Priest. So they tell us in the place
fore mentioned, Maccoth cap. 2. sect. 6. Where they also observe, that if a Man
killed the High Priest, or the High Priest himself happened to kill a Man
involuntarily, they were to stay in the City of Refuge as long as they lived:
yet they found this temperament, that if one who had been High Priest, but
removed from his Office, was alive when the slaughter was committed; after his
death, both he that killed the High Priest or any other unawares, and the
High Priest himself, who had done the same, were set free from the City of
Refuge. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 9. sect. 6. and Lib. III. cap. 8.
sect. 3.

There may seem to be some inequality in this Law, because as some Highpriests
lived long, and others but a short time, so some Man-slayers fled to the City
at the beginning of their Priesthood, and others just before their death. But
it must be considered that this could not be better ordered, than to make the
Man-slayer's Liberty depend upon the death of the High Priest, whenever it
fell out; that an higher value might be set upon him; and that it might
represent our Deliverance only by the Death of the Son of God; of which many
great Men look upon this as a Type or Shadow: though, it must be confessed,
there is not the least signification of this in the N. Testament. And since the
great Expiation, which the High Priest made every year on the Day of Atonement,
did not procure such Men their Liberty, I cannot look upon it as the effect of
the High-Priest's Death, but only as that which followed upon it, by virtue of
this Law. For the High Priest having a great power every where, and
particularly in these Cities of the Priests and Levites, over whom he was the
chief, it is possible the Manslayer might be confined here by some peculiar
Act of his Authority; which expiring, together with himself, he was released.

Ver. 26. But if the slayer shall at any time.] During

Come without the border of the City of Refuge, whither he was fled.] If he
went beyond the Bounds of the Fields, in which he had liberty to walk, and
might not be touched. For if a Tree was planted (as the Misna resolves in
Maccoth) within the Borders of the Fields of the City, though the Boughs
stretched themselves beyond the Borders, yet the Manslayer was safe under the
Tree. In like manner, when Churches became places of Refuge, the Civil Law
allowed the privilege to extend to the Church-gate: and the Council of Toledo
to thirty Paces from the Church; which Pope Nicholas enlarged to forty. Thus
among the Heathen, the Bounds of the Refuge at the Temple of Diana at Ephesus,
was sometimes more and sometimes less, as Ritterhusius observes in his Book
before-named, where he shows how far it was extended by Alexander, and
afterward farther by others. And Tacitus, Lib. III. Annalium mentions a Temple
of hers, to which was granted by several Emperors, duobus millibus passuum
eandem sanctitatem, the same Sanctity for two Miles round about it.

And the avenger of blood find him without the borders of the City of his
Refuge, and the avenger of blood kill the slayer, he shall not be guilty of
death.] The Court of Judgment were not to put him to death; though perhaps he
was obnoxious to the Judgment of God, because he had killed an innocent Person:
But he was free from the Punishment of the Law, that Men-slayers might be the
more careful to keep within their Bounds; which was a profitable restraint upon
them, for the Public Good. All Men seeing how much God hated Murder, by the
confinement of him, who had slain a Man unawares, to a kind of Imprisonment.

But it may be said, on the other side, that he who killed a Manslayer in this
case, was perfectly guiltless; because he did not herein act as a Private
Person, but executed a Sentence against him, who was condemned by Public
Authority. Which gave no protection to the Manslayer, but within the Borders
of his City of Refuge; leaving him to the Avenger of Blood, if he came out of
those Bounds, till the death of the High Priest. After which, if the Avenger of
Blood killed him, no doubt he was to be punished as a Murderer.

Because he should have remained in the City of his Refuge, until the death of
the High Priest.] These words give the reason, why the Avenger of Blood was not
to be punished in this case; because the Manslayer was guilty of breaking
another Law, and so in some sort accessory to his own death; for he might have
been safe, if he had pleased.

But after the death of the High Priest, the slayer shall return to the Land of
his possession.] Where he was not only to remain safe, but to be restored to
all his Honors, if he had any before he fled to the City of Refuge.

Ver. 29. So these things shall be for a Statute of Judgment A Rule whereby to
judge between Man-slayers and Murderers.

Throughout all Generations.] The like Clauses are usual in the ancient Civil
Law: Hoc perpetua lege sancimus. Hoc generali and in perpetuum valitura lege
decernimus, etc.

In all your dwellings.] This the Jews interpret as an obligation upon them, to
have Courts of Judgment wheresoever they dwell. Thus R. Solomon upon these very
words; They teach us, says he, the use of Courts of Judgment, which ought to
be even out of the Land, all the time that they were used in the Land. So the
ancient Book Siphri, and many others mentioned by our most Learned Seldom, Lib.
II. de Synedr. cap. 5. n. 1.

Ver. 30. Whosoever kills any person, the murderer shall This direction for their
proceedings in this Case, was to be the Rule in all others of like nature, by
examining Witnesses, who were to be competent. Upon which account ten sorts of
Persons were incapable to be Witnesses, according to the Hebrew Doctors, viz.
Women, Servants, Minors, Fools, the Deaf and Dumb, the Blind, Impious, and
audacious People, near Relations, and those that had been convicted of bearing
false witness: and they endeavor, after their manner, to find Reasons against
all these in the Law it self. See Seldom, Lib. II. de Synedr. cap. 13. n. 11.

But one witness shall not testify against any person, to This was such an
established Rule in the Civil Law, that it says, ubi numerus testium non
adjicitur, sufficient duo, where the number of Witnesses is not mentioned, two
suffices. Pluralis enim locutio, duorum numero contenta est. For where
Witnesses in the Plural Number are spoken of, two are enough to answer the
intention of the Law. Which number therefore are frequently mentioned expressly
in Scripture, as necessary in all Cases, XVII Deuteronomy. 6. particularly in this of
Murder, XIX. 15. Yet where there was but one Witness, or not two who both
together saw the Man killed, so that he who was accused of the Murder, could
not be put to death; he was thrown into a very strait Prison, and there fed
with Bread and Water of Affliction, till his Bowels were sorely pinched, etc.
if we may believe the Jewish Doctors, mentioned by Seldom, Lib. IV. de Jure
Not. and Gent. cap. 1.

Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the Life of a Murderer.] If a
Murderer would have given all his Estate to save his Life, or the Avenger of
Blood would have accepted a Compensation, or freely let him go, the Judges
(when they had found him guilty) could not restore him to the City of Refuge;
but he was to suffer Death. For the Life of him that was slain, was not (as
Maimonides speaks) part of the Goods of the Avenger of Blood, but belonged to
Almighty God; who set such a value on a Man's Life, that he would not suffer
any price to be taken for it. See Seldom in the same Chapter, p. 470.

Ver. 32. And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the City of
Refuge, that he may come to dwell in the Land, until the death of the
High Priest.] No Money was to purchase his Liberty to dwell any

Ver. 33. So ye shall not pollute the Land wherein ye By this it appears, that
the next of Kin was bound to prosecute the Murderer unto death, for the good of
his Country, which otherwise would have had a Guilt upon it, and that very
grievous. For they are the greatest Crimes, as Maimonides observes, which are
said to pollute the Land, or them, or God's Sanctuary, viz. Idolatry, XX Lev.
3. all the filthiness that is forbidden XVIII. 24, 25. and Murder here
mentioned, More Nevoch. P. III. cap. 47.

And the Land cannot be cleansed of the Blood that is shed therein, but by the
blood of him that shed it.] The same Maimonides observes in the XLI Chapter of
that Book, That it is a piece of Universal Justice to make a Man suffer, what
he has made another suffer. If he have hurt his Body, he must suffer for it in
his own Body: if in his Money, his own Purse must pay for it: if he have taken
away his Life, he must die for it himself. And the Punishment can neither be
mitigated, nor any compensation accepted for it. For which he quotes these
words; and upon this account resolves, that if he that was murdered should live
a few days or hours after his deadly wound, and being in sound understanding,
should desire he that killed him might not die for it, declaring that he freely
forgave him; his desire was not to be granted, but Blood was to be punished
with Blood: whether he that was slain was a great Man or a mean; a freeman or a
slave; a wise Man or a fool; because there is no Sin committed by Men greater
than this is.

Defile not therefore the Land which ye shall inhabit.] By suffering a Murderer
to live.

Wherein I dwell.] This is given as a reason elsewhere, (See V. 3.) why they
should put all polluted People out of their Camps, because God dwelt in them,
viz. in his Sanctuary, which made this Land be called the holy Land, and God's
Possession, 2 Chronicles. XX. 11.

For I the LORD dwell among the Children of Israel.] See XXV Exodus 8. The very
same was practiced among the Athenians, with some little Alteration. For
Demosthenes says it was one of their Laws, (...), that he who out of
forethought killed a Man, should be put to death. And he tells us also, that
it was not lawful for the Judges to take Money to remit the Punishment, after
he was Condemned: though if the Prosecutors compounded with him, or his Friends
beforehand, and desisted from the Prosecution, his Life was saved. If he fled
from Justice, all his Goods were confiscated, and he forfeited all the Rights
of a Citizen, both Civil and Sacred. See Sam. Petitus his Comment. in Leges
Atticas, Lib. VII. Tit. 1.

CHAP. XXXVI.
AND the chief Fathers of the Families of the etc.] Not the Fathers of those
Families, whose Inheritance had been assigned them already on this side Jordan,
in the Land of Gilead: but the other half of the Tribe of Manasseh, who were to
have their Inheritance in Canaan, where the Daughters of Zelophehad also had
their Portion, as appears from XVII Josh. 3, 4, etc.

Come near and speak before Moses, and before the Princes, the chief Fathers of
the Children of Israel.] Who were met together in a great Assembly, as they
used to do, about Public Affairs. See XXVII. 2. XXI. XXXII. 2.

Ver. 2. And they said, the LORD commanded my This shows that one of them was
the Mouth of the rest.

To give the Land for an Inheritance by lot to the Children of Israel.] See
XXVI. 52, 53. For there the Foundation of all these Doubts was laid.

And my Lord was commanded by the LORD to give the Inheritance of Zelophehad.]
Which should have fallen to Zelophehad, had he been alive.

Our Brather.] So they called their near Relations.

Unto his Daughters.] Who petitioned him for the Possession which should have
been their Fathers, and it was granted them. See XXVII. 6, 7.

Ver. 3. And if they be married to any of the Sons of the other Tribes of the
Children of Israel.] They being rich, many, it might be supposed, of the other
Tribes, Moses the Inconveniences which from thence would follow.

Then shall their Inheritance be taken from the Inheritance of our Fathers.] i.
e. Go out of our Tribe, to which it originally belonged.

And shall be put to the Inheritance of the Tribe, whereinto they are
received.] Become a part of the Inheritance of that Tribe into which they
married.

So shall it be taken from the lot of our Inheritance.] For it must have
descended unto their Children, who were of another Tribe by the Father's side;
which alone was considered, and not the Mothers, in this case.

And when the Jubilee of the Children of Israel shall be.] Which was ordained
for the preserving Estates in the Tribes and Families to which they originally
appertained, XXV Lev. 10, 13.

Then shall their Inheritance be put unto the Inheritance of the Tribe
whereunto they are received.] The Jubilee will not help us in this Case, by
making their Inheritances return as other Lands do; because they are become the
Inheritance of another Tribe, by the right of Marriage.

So shall their Inheritance be taken away from the Inheritance of the Tribe of
our Fathers.] So will their Estate go out of our Tribe, without remedy, because
the Jubilee it self will give us no Relief.

And Moses commanded the Children of Israel, according to the Word of the
LORD.] Whom, I suppose, he consulted about this matter, (as he did when the
first doubt was moved about the Inheritance of these Women, XXVII. 5.) and
received the answer by which he here commanded the Israelites to govern
themselves.

The Tribe of Joseph.] In whose name the chief Fathers of their several
Families made this representation to Moses; as became Men who took care of the
concerns of the whole Tribe.

Has said well.] In desiring the Inheritance of these Women might not go out
of their Tribe; which was prevented by the following Law.

Ver. 6. This is the thing which the LORD does They were not confined to any
particular Persons; but might have their choice among those who were descended
from the same Stock, as it immediately follows.

Only to the Family of the Tribe of their Father shall they marry.] Only with
these two limitations, that they might not marry a Man of another Tribe; nor a
Man of another Family in their own Tribe. For it is very manifest, that they
are tied to marry into the Family of their Father; and accordingly they did
actually marry their Cosin-Germans, as we now speak, v. 11. For this Law was
made for the preservation of Families, (as well as of Tribes) as the Law for
the Redemption of Lands was. And therefore these words, the Family of the Tribe
of their Father, is well translated by Grotius (upon I St. Matthew 16.) familia
stirpis paternae, the Family of the Sto^k of their Father, which was that they
desired might not perish, XXVII. 4. and was the ground of the Law, which
commanded a Man to marry the Wife of his Brother, who left no Issue, XXV Deuteronomy.
16. Therefore there being several Families in the Tribe of Manasseh, XXVI. 29,
30, 31, 32. these Women could marry only into the Family of the Hepherites.

So shall not the Inheritance of the Children of Israel remove from Tribe to
Tribe.] For by preserving it in the Family to which it was given, it was
necessarily preserved in the Tribe.

For every one of the Children of Israel shall keep himself to the Inheritance
of the Tribe of his Fathers.] And not endeavor to get any part of the
Inheritance of another Tribe, by marrying an Heiress in it. Plato himself took
care of this, that when a Man left only a Daughter, his Estate should not be
carried by her to a Stranger, but she should be bound to marry (...), one that
was nearest of kin to her. And if there was a want of near Kindred, (...), etc.
it should descend to the Children of her Father's Brother, or the Children of
the Grandfather, some of which he ordains should marry her, Lib. XI. de
Legibus, p. 924, 925. Edit. Serrani.

And every Daughter that possesses an Inheritance in any Tribe of the Children
of Israel.] Here this Law is made general, that all Women who were Heiresses,
as the Daughters of Zelophehad were, should do as they are here commanded. And
this was one of the Attick Laws, which, as Grotius observes, were plainly
borrowed from the Law of Moses, (...), etc. That an Heiress should not marry
out of her Kindred, but dispose of her self and Estate, (...), to one nearest
of kin to her, which was one of the Laws of Solon, as Sam. Petitus observes out
of Isaeus, Pollux and others, in his Comment. in Leges Atticas, Lib. VI. Tit.
1. p. 441.

Shall be Wife to one of the Family of the Tribe of her Father.] Here she is
confined to her Family, and not merely to her Tribe. But this concerned only
such as were Heiresses: all other Women might marry into what Tribe they
pleased; as appears by these very Books; wherein we read that Aaron himself
married the Sister of the Prince of Judah, VI Exodus 22. And if any object that
this was before the giving of the Law, it is evident that Jehoiada, a Priest,
and consequently of the Tribe of Levi, married King Jehoram's Sister, who was
of the Tribe of Judah, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 11. And long before this, all the Tribes
of Israel being in great solicitude how to find Wives for their Brethren of
Benjamin, did not scruple their having them out of any Tribe, if it had not
been for their Oath, XXI Judge. 18. And, to add no more, David himself, of the
Tribe of Judah, married Michael the Daughter of Saul, who was of the Tribe of
Benjamin.

The Talmudists add, that even these Heiresses might marry into what Tribe they
pleased, after the first Division of the Land by Joshua: to which they imagine
this Law was restrained; it being a common saying among them, That it did not
belong to any Age, but that in which it was made. In the following Ages they
pretend a Man might purchase Land in any Tribe, and possess it always; or have
the Inheritance of it by Marriage, though he were of another Tribe, as Seldom
shows their Opinion to be, Lib. de Successionibus ad Leges Hebr. cap. 18. and
Lib. III. de Synedr. c. 4. n. 1. and Buxtorf. de Sponsal. and Divortiis, sect.
44. But this is well confuted by Grotius in his Annotations upon I St. Matthew,
v. 16.

Ver. 9. Neither shall the Inheritance remove from one Tribe to another Tribe.]
This establishes in general what he had said before, v. 7. with particular
respect Zelophehad. But Moses ben Nachman upon these very words, asserts the
Talmudick Opinion beforementioned, that this concerns only the present Time,
not future Ages. And puts this Case (which is the strongest that can be thought
of) if a Woman were married into another Tribe, after which Marriage her Father
and all her Brethren dying without Children, the Inheritance fell to her, and
consequently, says he, the Possession must devolve from one Tribe to another,
into which she had married. But according to the Letter of these words, the
Inheritance was rather to descend to the next of her Kindred, than by her be
carried out of the Tribe to which it belonged.

But every one of the Tribes of the Children of Israel shall keep himself to
his own Inheritance.] Shall cleave, or stick close to his own Inheritance, as
the Hebrew word signifies; and as the Greek and Latin expresses it. The reason
of the Command was, as Procopius Gazaeus observes, to prevent the Confusion of
Tribes. How the Vulgar Latin came to deviate so much from the Hebrew Text, and
from the Intention of this Law, (as it has done in this and the two preceding
verses) I shall not here examine. It is sufficient to note that Onkelos has
expressed the Hebrew Text word for word; and the LXX. do not depart from the
sense of it.

Even as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the Daughters of Zelophehad.]
Accordingly they followed this direction, when they came into the Land of
Canaan, and had received their Portion there. Now there being no such words
added here, as there are in other Cases, this shall be unto the Children of
Israel a Statute of Judgment, XXVII. 11. much less a Statute of Judgment
throughout your Generations, XXXV. 29. it led, I conjecture, the Talmudick
Doctors into the forementioned Opinion, that this Law concerned only the
present Generation.

Ver. 11. For Mahlah, Tizzah and Hoglah, and Thus they are called both in XXVI.
33. and XXVII. 1. though they are not there mentioned in the same order; for
Tirzah is there named last, who here is named in the second place. Perhaps they
are set down here in the order wherein they were disposed in Marriage; and
Tirzah, who was the younger, was married in the second place.

Were married unto their Fathers Brothers Sons.] For Hepher, no doubt, had
other Sons besides Zelophehad, who had Issue-male, though Zelophehad had not.
What their Names were, or how many of them, we do not know; but some suppose
them to have been six; one of which died in the Wilderness without Issue. See
Seldom de Successionibus, cap. 23. where he discourses at large of the Portion
which fell to them in the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 12. And they were married into the Families, to some that were of the
Families; i. e. to one of the Families of Manasseh, from whom several Families
descended, XXVI. 29, etc.

And their Inheritance remained in the Tribe of the Family of their Father.]
The word for Tribe signifies sometimes merely a Family in a Tribe. And so the
LXX. (as Grotius observes in the place before-named) in this very business,
uses sometimes the word (...), and sometimes (...); the former of which
signifies a part of a whole Tribe. And thus Josephus also uses the word (...)
to signify a Family. Mr. Seldom has the same Observation in his Book de
Successionibus, cap. 18. that (...) is sometimes translated (...); and then it
signifies not a Tribe, but (...), familiam, cognationem, seu genus sanguine
proximum; a Family, a Kindred, or those that are next in Blood. But there is no
need of these Observations, if the words be translated, as they may rightly;
and their Inheritance remained in the Tribe, and the Family of their Father.
See v. 6.

These are the Commandments and the Judgments which the LORD commanded by the
hand of Moses, to the Children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near
Jericho.] He began to deliver the Precepts here intended at the XXVIth Chapter,
(See v. 3.) and continues them to this place. By Commandments seem to be meant
the Precepts about the Worship of God, Chapt. XXVIII, XXIX, XXX. and by
Judgments the Civil Laws about dividing their Inheritances, and regulating
their Descent to their Posterity, and establishing Cities of Refuge for
Man-slayers, which are expressly called a Statute of Judgment, XXVII. 11. XXXV.
29. Some other things are interspersed, as God's Commandment to number the
People, (which was in order to the assigning them their Inheritances
proportionable to their Families) to execute Judgment on the Midianites; and to
set down in Writing their Travels in the Wilderness; of which I have given an
account in their proper places.

FINIS.
By reason of the Distance of the Author, these ERRATA have happened, which the
Reader is desired to Correct.
Page. 5. Line. 7. read are reckoned. Page. 73. Line. 29. r. See Levit. II. 15.
Page. 74. Line. 22. r. were signs. Page. 82. Line. 12. r. Rabboth. Page. 96.
Line. 4. r. aquatiles. Line. ult. r. so that they might not. Page. 107. Line.
13. r. other shoulder. Page. 110. Line. 2. r. Chaskuni. Page. 123. Line. 31. r.
XL. Exodus Page. 140. Line. 30. r. may teach. Page. 152. Line. 5. r. (...).
Page. 158. Line. 31. r. Acropolis. Page. 163. Line. 10. r. Choten. Page. 166.
Line. 31. r. the following story. Page. 167. Line. 3. r. Rise up. Page. 171.
Line. 22. r. it is likely. Page. 190. Line. 12. r. Setting forth the Praises.
Line. 20. r. such credit. Page. 191. Line. penult. r. (...). Page. 195. Line.
21. r. whose Presence. Page. 198. Line. 1. r. kadim. Page. 201. Line. 11. r.
but besides that there is. Line. 12. r. and it is. Page. 210. Line. 28. r. as
were never bred. Page. 216. Line. 18. r. not deigning to stay. Page. 221. Line.
21. after July, begin a new line. Page. 227. Line. 2. r. Torquatus. Page. 228.
Line. 3, 4. r. a stony place. Page. 241. Line. 1. dele and that. Page. 251.
Line. 7. r. Bitter. Line. 31. r. Spirit with him. Page. 282. Line. 1. r. The
Man shall be. Page. 284. Line. 31. r. And the Garment, the Jews say, in the
Selvedge, etc. Page. 284. Line. 33. r. Talith. Page. 316. Line. 19. r. it being
broke out. Page. 332. Line. 3. r. where as. Page. 333. Line. 21. r. within the
veil. Page. 335. Line. 11. r. Zeback. Page. 358. Line. 7. r. more fit to treat.
Page. 367. Line. 7. r. as we may call it. Page. 387. Line. 26. r. Successors of
Esau. Page. 402. Line. 19. r. by way of apposition. Page. 404. Line. 24. r. the
words are. Page. 406. Line. 30. r. Bootius. Page. 420. Line. 6. r. from Arnon.
Page. 426. Line. 1. r. whence Hesychius. Line. 22. r. (...). Page. 433. Line.
18. r. Kosem. Page. 446. Line. 9. r. proffered him. Page. 468. Line. 9. r. per
juga. Page. 469. Line. 7. r. (...) Page. 470. Line. 15. r. Sepher Cosri. Page.
482. Line. 2. r. Dei nutu. Page. 501. Line. 4. r. Baal-Peor. Line. 26. r. were
called Baalim. Page. 519. Line. 30. r. are reckoned. Page. 523. Line. 14. r.
Zelophehad. Page. 532. Line. penult. r. who was born. Page. 539. Line. 21. r.
being but reason. Page. 555. Line. ult. r. pouring out upon. Page. 556. Line.
4. r. Heliogabalus. Page. 564. Line. 18. r. and so does. Page. 598. Line. 19.
r. and what I have. Page. 618. Line. 22. r. Jogbehah. Page. 634. Line. 22. r.
to have been places. Page. 635. Line. 9. r. anciently called Abelshittim. Page.
673. Line. 14. r. XXXI. XXXII. 2.
Books written by Simon Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Ely; and Printed for
Richard Chiswell.
THe Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The Sixth Edit. 4 to. 1681.
-- Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper:
In which the Ends of its Institution are so manifested, our Addresses to it so
directed, our Behavior there and afterward, so composed, that we may not lose
the Profits, which are to be received by it. With Prayers and Thanksgivings
inserted. To which is annexed, -- Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse concerning
Baptism: In which is inserted a Discourse to persuade to a confirmation of the
Baptismal Vow. 8 vo. -- Jewish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the present Generation.
Wherein is shown both the false and the true way to a Nations or Persons
complete Happiness; from the sickness and recovery of the Jewish State. To
which is added, A Discourse upon Micah 6.8. belonging to the same matter. 8 vo.
-- Divine Arithmetic: A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Jacomb, Minister
of St. Mary-Woolnoth-Church in Lombard Street, London. With an Account of his
Life. 8 vo. -- A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Grigg, Rector of
St. Andrew-Vndershaft, London. 4 to. -- An Exposition of the Ten Commandments.
8 vo. -- Heart's Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles. With a Consolatory
Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost their Friends and
Relations. To which is added Two Papers, printed in the time of the late
Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12 mo. 1695. -- The Pillar and Ground of
Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church falsely claims to be That
Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St. Paul, in 1 Timothy 3.15. 4
to. -- An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz. ANTIQVITY.
4 to. -- An Examination of the Texts which Papists cite out of the Bible to
prove the Supremacy of St. Peter and of the Pope, over the whole Church. In Two
Parts. 4 to. -- A private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. -- A
Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance. -- A Prayer for Charity, Peace
and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent. -- A Sermon preached upon St. Peter's
Day; printed with Enlargements. 4 to. -- A Sermon Preached in St. James's
Chapel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan. 20. 1688. on Isaiah 11.6. -- A
Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text.
Preached in Covent Garden. -- A Sermon Preached before the Queen in March
1688/9. on Colos. 3.15. -- A Sermon against Murmuring, Preached at
Covent Garden in Lent, 1688/9. on 1 Cor. 10.10. -- A Sermon against Censuring,
Preached at Covent Garden in Advent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 4.10. -- A Fast-Sermon
before the King and Queen, April 16. 1690. on Prove. 14.34. -- A
Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for reducing of Ireland,
and the King's safe Return. On Deuteronomy. 4.9. -- A Fast-Sermon before the Queen,
April 8. 1692. On Numb. 10.9. -- Easter-Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1696. on
2 Timothy 2.8. -- A Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 5. 1696. on Dan. 4.35. -- A
Commentary on the First Book of Moses, called Genesis, 4 to. 1695. -- A
Commentary on the Second Book of Moses, called Exodus, 4 to. 1697. -- A
Commentary on the Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus, 4 to. School. -- A
Commentary on the Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers, 4 to. 1699. Memoirs of
the most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Cranmer, sometime Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury: Wherein the History of the Church, and the Reformation of it,
during the Primacy of the said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many
singular Matters relating thereunto, now first published. In Three Books*
Collected chiefly from Records, Registers, Authentic Letters, and other
Original Manuscripts. By John Strype, M. A. Fol. Origo Legum: Or, a Treatise of
the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power. As also of their great Variety:
and why some Laws are immutable, and some not, but may suffer change, or cease
to be, or be suspended, or abrogated. In seven Books. By George Dawson, Fol.
The History of the Troubles and Trial of the most Reverend Father in God,
William Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Wrote by himself during his
Imprisonment in the Tower. To which is prefixed the Diary of his own Life,
faithfully and entirely Published from the Original Copy; and subjoined a
Supplement to the preceding History: The Archbishop's Last Will; His large
Answer to the Lord Says Speech concerning Liturgies; His Annual Accounts of
his Province delivered to the King: And some other things relating to the
History. Fol. Animadversions on Mr. Hill's Book, Entitled [ A Vindication of
the Primitive Fathers against the Imputations of Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum,]
in a Letter to a Person of Quality. 4 to. Of Sincerity and Constancy in the
Faith and Profession of the True Religion, in several Sermons, by the most
Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Being the
first Volume Published from the Originals, by Ralph Barker, D.D. Chaplain to
his Grace. The Second Edition. 8 vo. -- Sixteen Sermons preached on several
Occasions. By the most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Ld. Archbishop of
Canterbury. Being the second Volume. Published by Ralph Barker, D. D. Chaplain
to his Grace. 8 vo. -- Sixteen Sermons preached on several Subjects; being the
Third Volume, by the same Author. Published by Dr. Barker. 8 vo. -- Several
Discourses, viz. Of the great Duties of Natural Religion. Instituted Religion
not intended to undermine Natural. Christianity not Destructive, but Perfective
of the Law of Moses. The Nature and Necessity of Regeneration. The Danger of
all known Sin. Knowledge and Practice necessary in Religion. The Sins of Men
not chargeable on God. Being the fourth Volume, by the same Author. Published
by Dr. Barker. 8 vo. Reflections upon a Pamphlet, Entitled, [ Some Discourses
upon Dr. Burnet, and Dr. Tillotson, occasioned by the late Funeral Sermon of
the former upon the latter.] By the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert L.
Bishop of Sarum. 8 vo. -- His Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal on
Christmas Day, 1696. 4 to. Gal. 4.4. -- His Sermon preached before the King at
Whitehal, on the Third Sunday in Lent, being the Seventh of March, 1696. 1
Ephesians. 5.2. -- His Essay on the Memory of the late Queen. The second Edition. 8
vo. Dr. Williams (now Ld. Bishop of Chichester) his 8 Sermons at Esquire
Boyle's Lecture for the year 1695. 4 to. [Any of them may be had single, to
perfect sets.] -- His 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th Sermons at the same Lecture for the year
1696. 4 to. -- His Sermon preached at St. Lawrence Jewry before the Lord Mayor,
etc. on Saturday the 28th of September, 1695. at the Election of the Lord Mayor
for the Year ensuing. Joshua 22.31. 4 to. -- His Sermon preached before the
honorable House of Commons, on Wednesday, Dec. 11. 1695. being a solemn day of
Fasting and Humiliation, appointed by his Majesty for imploring the Blessing of
Almighty God upon the Consultations of this present Parliament. 4 to. 1 Samuel
11.30. -- His Sermon upon the Resurrection, preached before Sir Edward Clark
Lord Mayor, etc. on Easter-Monday, April 5. 1697. on Acts 10.40, 41, 42.
Reflections upon a Libel lately Printed, Entitled, [ The Charge of Socinianism
against Dr. Tillotson, Considered, 4 to.] The Church History of Ethiopia;
wherein, among other things, the two great splendid Roman Missions into that
Empire are placed in their true Light; to which are added an Epitome of the
Dominican History of that Church. And an Account of the Practices and
Conviction of Maria of the Annunciation, the famous Nun of Lisbon. Composed by
Michael Geddes, D.D. Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of Sarum. 8 vo.
Fourteen Sermons preached in Lambeth Chapel, before the most Reverend Dr.
William Sancroft, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. In the Years 1688, and
1689, by the Learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace; with an
Account of the Author's Life. 8 vo. Dr. William Owtram's 20 Sermons. On several
Occasions. The 2d Edition. 8 vo. Sermons preached on several Occasions. By John
Conant D.D. The first and second Volumes. Published by Dr. Williams, now Ld.
Bishop of Chichester. 8 vo. The Fathers vindicated: Or Animadversions on a late
Socinian Book, Entitled, [ The Judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity,
against Dr. Bull 's Defense of the Nicene Faith.] By a Presbyter of the Church
of England. 8 vo. A Fifth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discourses,
published by his Chaplain Dr. Barker, on these following Subjects: viz. Proving
Jesus to be the Messiah. The Prejudices against Jesus and his Religion
considered. Jesus the Son of God, proved by his Resurrection. The Danger of
Apostasy from Christianity. Christ the Author, and Obedience the Condition of
Salvation. The Possibility and Necessity of Gospel-Obedience, and its
consistence with Free Grace. The Authority of Jesus Christ, with the Commission
and Promise which he gave to his Apostles. The Difficulties of a Christian Life
considered. The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. Children of this World
wiser than the Children of Light. 8 vo. School. A second Volume of Sermons
preached in Lambeth Chapel before Archb. Sancroft, 1690. By the Learned Mr.
Henry Wharton, his Graces Chaplain, Which with the first Volume lately
published, are all that he preached. A New Account of India and Persia; being
Nine Years Travel, began 1672. and finished 1681. Containing Observations made
of those Countries: namely, Of their Government, Religion, Laws, Customs: Of
their Soil, Climates, Seasons, Health, Diseases. Of their Animals, Vegetables,
Minerals, Jewels. Of their Housing, Clothing, Manufactures, Trades,
Commodities. And of the Coins, Weights, and Measures used in the principal
Places of Trade in those Parts. By John Friar M. D. Cantabrig. and Fellow of
the Royal Society. Fol. School. SCRIPTORUM ECCLESIASTICORUM Historia Literaria.
facili and perspicua methodo digesta. Pars Altera. Qua plusquam DC. Scriptores
novi, tam Editi quam Manuscripti recensentur; Prioribus plurima adduntur;
breviter aut obscure dicta illustrantur; recte asserta vindicantur. Accedit ad
finem cujusvis Soeculi CONCILIORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particularium
Historica Notitia. Ad Calcem vero Operis Dissertationes tres, (1) De
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis incertae aetatis. (2) De Libris and Officiis
Ecclesiasticis Graecorum. (3) De Eusebii Caesariensis Arianismo adversus
Joannem Clericum. Adjecti sunt Indices utilissimi Scriptorum and Conciliorum
Alphabetico-Chronologici. Studio and labor Gulielmi Cave, S.T.P. Canon.
Windesoriensis. Fol. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity. The Fifth Edition.
School. Bp Wilkins of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion. The 3d
Edition. A Sixth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discourses. Published by Dr.
Barker. Being upon the Divine Attributes and Perfections. 1699.

