IMPRIMATUR,

Nov. 7 1668. Tho. Tomkyns, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Dom.
Gilb. Arch. Cantuar a Sacr. Dom.

A Friendly Debate Betwixt two Neighbors, The one A CONFORMIST, The other A
NONCONFORMIST, About several weighty matters.

Published for the benefit of this City, by a Lover of it, and of pure
Religion.

Prove. 15.32. He that refuses instruction despises his own soul: but he that
hears reproof gets under standing.

To the Reader.
Reader,
DO not throw away this little Book as soon as ever thou meetest with something
that offends thee; but sit down rather, and consider upon what account thou art
offended. If it be only because the Author contradicts thy Opinions, and
perhaps accuses them of folly, thou have cause to turn thy displeasure from him
upon thy self, for presuming so much of thy own infallibility: which if thou will not pretend unto, then read on further, and consider whether he
contradicts thee with reason, or without: and howsoever it prove, thou will not
repent thee of thy pains. For if he reprove thy Opinions without reason, thou will be more confirmed in them; if with reason, thou may exchange them for
better. It is possible, indeed, that some things may seem to be expressed too
tartly and severely, and others too lightly and merrily: but let not that put
thee out of humor neither, nor make the reason which is offered less
considerable. For the Author (I can assure thee) has no gall in him, nor was
in any passion when he write these things: but intended only (as naturally as
he could on a sudden) to express such Discourse as Neighbors are wont to have
in their private conversation; in which if there be nothing that is smart or
pleasant, they can scarce keep one another from sleeping. He is very well aware
under what great prejudices we all labor; and considers how hard it is to
dispossess an Opinion, though false, nay ridiculous, which a man has sucked in
with his mothers milk, and which has been impressed on him by education,
confirmed by custom, much encouraged by the consent and practice of those with
whom he daily converses, and has perhaps his complexion and natural temper to
befriend it, and incline him to it. Upon such considerations as these he cannot
be angry with those against whom he writes; but rather pities them, and is
sorry they consider not such things themselves; and so repress that heat and
passion wherewith they advance their own private late inventions, against
public Decrees and ancient Constitutions. One sort of men (he confesses) are
apt a little to move his indignation, who pretend to the greatest niceness of
conscience, and have handled the matter so as to b^ thought the most religious
of all others; and yet make no scruple to do those things continually which are
utterly contrary to good conscience. (So, I believe, an understanding Heathen
or Turk would resolve, were he made judge in the case, and had first their
Principles, and then their Practices, laid before him.) Such the Author thinks
deserve to be rebuked; and if there be any thing spoken with sharpness in the
ensuing Discourse, it is when he has to do with them. Yet in that case he has
used due moderation, not studying to vex men, but only to awaken and convince
them. For he is very sensible that when we go about to displace any Opinion,
and introduce another in its room, we usually lose our labor, if we either
fail to propound our mind dexterously, or use not such meekness as may show we
have a good will to those from whom we differ. Where these are wanting, instead
of inviting men to receive a Truth, we find they are commonly further alienated
from it. Now he has some confidence he is not much defective in the first,
having taken care to express his mind clearly and in plain words, and contrived
his Discourse into the form of a Dialogue, to make it more easily apprehended.
As for the Later, he cannot but think that he has done his duty, and testified
his kindness every where, even to those against whom thou may think him most
severe. But if thou judge otherwise, then he earnestly beseeches thee to
overlook it and pass it by, as an inconsiderate and hasty expression; and to
weigh rather what Truth is here presented to thee, than in what manner it is
delivered.

In short, If it had not been to fill up some vacant pages, he had made almost
as short a Preface as those words of the Son of Sirach (according to which he
expects the success of his labor) Ecclus. 21.15. If a skilful man hear a wise
word, he will commend it, and add unto it: but as soon as one of no
understanding hears it, it displeases him, and he casts it behind his back.

Examine all things, and judge righteous judgment.

October. 20. 1668.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Discourse.
THe occasion of it. page 1. All are not Christ's Ministers who pretend to it.
2, 3. Of powerful Preaching. 4, 5, 15. Of spiritual Illumination. 6, etc. The
great proof of Christian Religion is the Spirit. 9, 10. Of Spiritual and Logal
Preaching 11, etc. Of the necessity of Good works to our justification. 13, 14.
Who are the most Soul searching Preachers. 16, 17, etc. Upon this occasion Mr.
Watson's late Book of Repentance is a little examined. 20, 21, etc. Mr. Bridges
his Ten Sermons considered, especially that about the Difference between New
Testament spirit and Old Test. spirit. 25, 26, etc. By what means this whole
Nation came to be overrun with folly. 34 Mr. Bridges one of them that helps to
continue and increase it. 35 unto 40. Of Spiritual Preachers. 40. etc. Of
applying Promises. 43, 44, etc. Of Experimental Preachers. 47, etc. Foolish
Application of Scripture 49, 51. A Comparison between the discreet Conformists
and the mon-conformists. 54. Of the Seal that some pretend God has given to
their Ministry. 55. Who are the most guilty of being Time-servers. 57, etc. The
Annotations commonly ascribed to the Assembly men say nothing of Sacrilege. 59,
etc. Several other instances of Men-pleasing. 64. Of forsaking Principles 66,
etc. None more guilty then they that accuse others of it. 68 unto 79. Of the
calling of the present Ministers of our Church. 79. Of praying by the Spirit.
89 to 92. Pretense to it has brought Religion into contempt. 87 etc.
Concerning a Form of Prayer. 93, etc. Of the Common Prayer. 97, etc. That some
things may be done concerning the Worship of God which he has not expressly
commanded. 101, etc. That the enjoining things indifferent makes them not
unlawful. 104. All do not think our Forms of Prayer and other Orders unlawful,
who speak against them, or suffer others to do so. 110. Of Will worship. 113.
None more Superstitious then they who seem most afraid of it. 117, etc. The
reason men are no more affected with a good Form of Prayer. 120, etc. A brief
confutation of a new book called Nehushtan. 123 unto 143 Who the
Non-conformists call dull Preachers. 13, etc. Christian Religion teaches the
highest Morality. 145. Of profiting by Sermons. 147, 151. Of Christian comfort.
148, 149. All the Godly (as is pretended by some) are not Nonconformists. 152.
Nor the Generality of them. 154. They reason now as they did in the late
Rebellion. 159, etc. They have not more of the Power of Godliness then others.
161. S. Paul's description of those who have only a Form of Godliness. 162. Who
have the Power of it. 165. Of keeping Days. 167, etc. A better way of spending
our time then in running to private Meetings, and keeping Days. 169. How
frivolously we are charged with Slightness of spirit. 172. Concerning
Experience, and what things are to be known by it, what not. 173, etc. Of
delighting in heavenly discourse. 178, etc. Of going to see a Play. 180, 184,
etc. We are not always bound to do what is best. 183. A remarkable passage in
one of Mr. Bridges's Sermons considered. 188, 189, etc. Of plain Preachers.
192, 196. Of painful Preachers. 194. Whether Non-conformists be the strictest
people. 198. And the most serious people. 199, etc. And tender-conscienc'd.
201. They are to be praised who read the Prayers devoutly. 202. etc. Zeal
carries men beyond and against their Reason. 203, 204. A Difference to be made
between one Nonconformist and another. 205, 206. We should be reconciled, if
the Presbyterian Ministers would persuade their people to do what they can do
themselves. 208. A brief view of their own Discourses heretofore against
separation from them. 209, 210, etc. They complain of Persecution unjustly.
217, etc. They were contented some Ceremonies of their ow^ making should be
enjoined. 220 etc. Their own Advice about the Covenant very goo^ for them to
follow. 222. The Covenant against the Law. 223, etc. They had as good stay away
as not use Reverence i^ Divine Service. 230. How to hear Sermons. 231. How
Non-conformists should behave themselve while they remain unsatisfied about
things i^ difference. 234 unto 240.
A Friendly Debate BETWEEN A Conformist, and a Nonconformist.
Conf. GOod morrow, Neighbor: I am very glad to see you, and you are welcome
home.


Non-Conf. I thank you kindly: But I do not understand your Salutation, not
having been from home this twelvemoneth.


C. No? what is the reason then that we have not seen you at Church of late?


N. C. I believe you did not see me: but I ^ssure you the Church never wants my
company.


C. How can that be? Are you there, as the Angels are, after an invisible
manner?


N. C. Pish! you do not apprehend me. Do you take your house of stone to be a
Church?


C. Yes indeed do I: and (as I have been informed by them that know it) it is
more properly called so, than your Assemblies. For the English word Church,
Originally signifies an house of the Lord for Christians to worship in; as I
have been told by your Minister.


N. C. Minister? he may be the Kings Minister, perhaps, but he is none of
Christ's.


C. My good neighbor, do not grow warm so soon; for you and I must have a
great deal o^ Discourse together. Pray walk in here to my house.


N. C. Well, what have to say for your Minister?


C. This I say, that he is both the Kings's Minister and Christ's also: whereas
I have reason to fear he whom you follow is neither.


N. C. Fare you well.


C. Nay, stay a little, and hear me out. How can he be the Minister of Christ,
who is disobedient to his Sovereign, whom Christ bids him obey?


N. C. Disobedient? Yes, in those things which Christ has forbidden him to do.
And therein I hope you will be content he should obey God rather than man.


C. I knew this would be your answer. But, what if I prove that he is
disobedient even there where Christ and his Laws are not at all concerned?


N. C. You cannot do it.


C. Why, what Law of Christ is there that requires him to live in London, or at
least within five miles of it?


N. C. None that I know.


C. But the Law of the Land forbids him to live in this place, or within such a
distance. And yet notwithstanding he lives here in defiance of that Law (which
you confess is not contrary to Christ's. And being here, he lives also in the
breach of a great many other Laws.


N. C. That was a Tyrannical Law.


C. Very good. But it is not repugnant, you are convinced, to the Commands of
Christ; and therefore he is not a good Subject, and consequently not a good
Christian; much less such a person, as a Minister of Christ ought to be.


N. C. Would not you think it hard to be so abridg'd of your liberty?


C. Yes, without doubt. But, if we must never submit to such things, as we
count harsh and rigorous, then farewell all the Doctrine of Christ concerning to
king up our cross, and suffering patiently, etc. Which Doctrines, if you had
studied, you would not have uttered such a word as implies the King to be a
Tyrant.


N. C. Pray pardon me that rashness.


C. I do most readily, and hope you ask God pardon for this, and all other your
rash words and actions. But that I may a little further convince you of that we
were speaking of; I beseech you tell me, what Law of Christ is there that
enjoins him whom you follow to hold his Assemblies just then, when the public
Service of God, established by Law, begins? Is not this sufficient to convince
any unprejudiced man, that he is not content to enjoy his own way of
worshipping God, but he would also destroy ours? That is, not only to act
contrary to a Law^ but to endeavor to subvert what is enacted by it? Else, why
might it not suffice him to begin when the public Service is done;


N. C. For that I cannot tell what to say.


C. Then I can make an answer for you. Your Minister is afraid, lest any of you
should go to Church, and like our Minister so well, that you should think there
is no need of him.


N. C. Away, away! There is no danger o^ that. He so far excels yours, that if
we should come to hear him, it would only make us like our own the better.


C. Wherein ( I pray you) does this excellency consist?


N. C. O Sir, he is a very powerful man Yours is a mere Dr. Dulman in compare
with him.


C. What do you mean? that he has a louder voice, that he is more vehement,
and lay^ about him more than ours? Or what is it? If yo^ take him to be
powerful, who presses his Doctrine with strong and powerful reasons, such as we
cannot gainsay or resist; I believe our Minister will prove the more powerful
of the two.


N. C. It may be so. I have heard indeed tha^ he is a man of Reason: but what
is that to the Demonstration of the Spirit, and of power?


C. True: there is no compare between these. But has your Minister that
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power?


N. C. Yes sure, if ever any man had.


C. That Is good news; for then we shall see that which before we only believed.
Has he the gifts of the Holy Ghost? Can he speak with Tongues, and Prophecy,
and work Miracles, and tell us the thoughts of men's hearts?


N. C. What do you mean?


C. I mean that which the Apostle Saint Paul meant, who had this Demonstration
of the Sipirit, and of Power; which he gave the world, to convince them that
Jesus was risen from the dead, and was made Lord of all, whom they were
therefore bound to obey.


N. C. But I mean something else.


C. Pray tell me what that is. Only let me desire you not to use words, without
the sense belonging to them; and to entreat your Minister, that he would
hereafter forbear to pray to God that he may speak in the Demonstration of the
Spirit, and of Power; for no body now can hope to do it.


N. C. I mean, that he is spiritually enlightened to search the deep things of
the Spirit of God, which the natural man cannot discern.


C. I wonder at you, that you should not discern the Apostle there speaks of
the Holy Ghost ( i.e. the wonderful Gifts of it) in them, which ^ssured them of
those things that no mere natural Reason could prove. I doubt your Minister is
not spiritually enlightened, because he does not instruct you better in the
Scriptures.


N. C. Scriptures? He never says (...) but he quotes a place of Scripture for
it. (...) Sermons are nothing else: whereas you (...) but Rational Discourses.


C. I remember I have heard a wise man say that one may talk nothing but
Scripture, and ye^ speak never a wise word. And I verily believe it; for it is
not the Word of God when we mistake its sense, as you commonly do.


N. C. Does yours do any better?


C. Yes: he seems to me to make it his business to let us into the meaning of
the holy Book. And he backs his Reason, not with phrases snatched from thence,
but with such place as manifestly speak the same sense that he does.


N. C. I have heard him sometimes endeavou^ to open the Scripture, but methinks
he does not do it in a Spiritual way, but only Rationally.


C. My good Neighbor, consider what yo^ say. Do you think that these two
words, Spiritua^ and Rational are opposed the one to the other If they be, then
Spiritually is as much as Irrationally and absurdly.


N. C. No, pardon me there. I do not think those two are opposite; but Carnal
Reason is opposite to the Spirit.


C. To speak properly, you should say that Carnal Reason is opposite to
Spiritual Reason* That is, a Reason that is guided by Fleshly lusts ^s opposite
to that which is guided by the Gospel of Christ.


Ns. C. I say, as I said before, it is opposite to the Spirit.


C. You must either mean as I do; or else that it is opposite to the Gospel,
which is frequently called the Spirit in Scripture. But, pray tell me, how
shall we understand the Gospel, by our Reason, or by something else?


Ns C. By the Spirit.


C. What, must we have an immediate Revelation to make us understand its sense?
or must we study and consider, and lay things together, and so come to know its
meaning?


N. C. Yes, we must give our minds to it, and then the Spirit enlightens us.


C. That is, it guides us to reason, and discourse, and judge aright. Is not
that it you mean?


N. C. No; I mean it shines into our minds with its light.


C. These are phrases which I would have you explain if you can. My Question is
this, Does the Spirit show as any new thing, which is not the conclusion of the
Reasonings and Discourses in our minds about the Sense of Scripture?


N. C. I cannot say it does.


C. Then you confess that the Scripture is to to be interpreted in a Rational
way; we not having that which is truly to be called Spiritual in distinction
from the other, viz. the immediate revelation of the Holy Ghost, which the
Apostles had.


N.C. Still I cannot think that this is Spiritual.


C. That is, you are prejudiced: or else you fancy every thing that you do
not understand to be Spiritual.


N.C. No, not so: but the manner of understanding the things of God, methinks,
should be other than you conceive.


C. Truly, if you have any other manner of understanding besides this, and have
not the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost; I conclude you take the sudden
(and many times pretty) suggestions of Imagination to be Illuminations from
above.


N.C. Now you have hit on something that I would have said: The Spirit does
often dart things into my mind.


C. How know you that? Do you take every thing that comes into your head you
know not how, to be an Irradiation from the Holy Ghost?


N.C. No, I dare not say so.


C. Then you examine it, and consider whether it be rational and coherent, or
no.


N.C. Yes.


C. Then you fall into our way whether you will or no. And whatsoever you think
of us, we do not deny but God's good Spirit puts good thoughts oft-times in our
minds, and represents things more clearly to us than we could make them by all
our reasonings: which is as much as to say, that it lets us see the
reasonableness and aptness of such a Sense (for instance) of the Divine
Writings as we discerned not before.


N.C. Well, I am glad to hear you speak so much of the Spirit.


C. You might hear ten times as much, if you would but frequent our Assemblies.
For there we are constantly taught, that the very ground and foundation of our
Faith in Jesus Christ is the Spirit, i.e. the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven
upon our Savior and his Apostles.


N.C. You mix so much of Reason with what you say, that I am afraid you are not
in the right.


C. You should rather conclude the contrary, and not believe any thing but what
you have a good reason for.


N.C. Say you so? How then shall I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God?
Can Reason tell me this?


C. I am sorry to see you so ill instructed. If you had continued to hear our
Minister, he would have made you understand before this time, that though our
reason could not find out that Truth, yet God has given us the highest reason
to believe it. And this I told you is the Spirit; the Spirit in Christ and in
his Apostles.


N.C. Pray explain your meaning, for I understand not these new Notions.


C. The Holy Ghost ( I mean) descended on our Savior at his Baptism, with a
voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
This is one reason we have to believe on him. Then he wrought miracles by the
power of this Spirit; and though he was killed, yet he was raised again from
the dead by it; and after that he sent the Spirit upon his Apostles, who
thereby demonstrated that he was the Son of God with power. Which are all
reasons for my belief; and if you have any other I would gladly hear them, or
know whether you believe without any Reason at all.


N.C. These are Spiritual Reasons.


C. I like your Language very well: only remember that these are the Divinest
Reasons which cannot be resisted. For thus our mind argues with it self: That
which God testified by voices from Heaven, and by a world of Miracles, is to be
believed; that Jesus is his Son, he did in this manner testify; therefore we
are to believe that he is God's Son.


N.C. Who taught you to reason on this fashion?


C. Is this such a mighty business, that you wonder at? We are taught
continually to give our selves these reasons, why we should believe: And
methinks it is the most powerful preaching in the world. For, if I believe
firmly that Jesus is the Son of God, is risen from the dead, and will come to
judge the world; how can I choose but obey him with great care and constancy?


N.C. You say true. But me thinks there is more Spiritual Preaching than this.


C. What should that be?


N.C. To preach the great Mysteries of the Gospel.


C. Is not this the first great Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the
flesh? (1 Timothy 3.16.) and is not this the next, that he was justified in, or,
by the Spirit; which we give as a proof that he was manifested in the flesh?
Read the rest, and then come and hear our Minister, and you shall find them a I
unfolded one time or other in a plain and ample manner.


N.C. These methinks are no such great Mysteries.


C. No? sure you know not the meaning of the word Mystery, but live only upon
phrases. Was not this a Secret kept in the breast of God from ages and
generations?


N.C. Yes.


C. Then it is a Mystery, and the chief and first of all. That God has sent
his Son into the World. As for the ends of his sending him; if those be they
you call Mysteries, they are as much declared among us, as among you; and
perhaps a great deal more.


N.C. What do you mean?


C. I mean, his dying for our Sins, and rising again for our Justification, and
Intercession on our behalf at God's right hand. I dare say these are as well
opened to us, as ever they have been to you.


N.C. I am glad to hear it; for I always thought there was little but Legal
Preaching among you.


C. You mean, we are taught to obey the Commands of Christ.


N.C. No: the Doctrine of Good works is always sounding from your Pulpits.


C. These are the same thing: for no other Works are taught us, but such as
Christ injoyns. As for the Works of Moses his Law, we never hear of them, but
only that they do no longer oblige us. If we did, I assure you we should call
our Preachers Legal as much as you can do.


N.C. But I am afraid the insisting so much upon Good works, is Legal.


C. You should rather fear that the Preaching of them so little, leads men to
Libertinism.


N.C. We are tender least the Grace of God should be impeached, by putting men
so much upon Doing.


C. Then, it seems, you think it peculiar to the Spirit of the Law, to be very
sollicitous about Doing well.


N.C. Yes.


C. Now I see you are in very gross darkness. For certainly both the Law and
the Gospel put men upon doing; but not the same things, nor with the same
disposition.


N.C. Explain your self; for methinks you are in the dark.


C. The Gospel give us better rules of life, and gives us power to do according
to them with a more willing and cheerful mind, than the Law did.


N.C. Where then is grace all this while?


C. It was the Grace of God that gave us the Gospel; and it is his Grace that
accepts of our repentance and obedience after we have offended him; which
pardons also, and passes by our failings and imperfections, when we sincerely
design and study to obey him in all things.


N.C. You do not think then that you can deserve any thing of him.


C. No: how should we, seeing we are his Creatures, and owe him all the Service
we can do him? Which makes us believe, that if we had been born in innocence,
and continued so till this time, we could have merited nothing; much less can
we pretend to it, now that we are Sinners.


N.C. But you think Good works are necessary to our Justification.


C. Who ever doubted of it that understood himself?


N.C. That does many a Godly Divine; whom I have heard say, that they are not
requisite to our Justification, but only to our Salvation.


C. I am loath to say, that those Godly Divines did not mind what they said,
because I ought in modesty to suspect my own Understanding, rather than theirs:
But to me it seems a strange thing, that they should not observe Salvation to
be nothing else but our final and absolute justification at the day of
Judgment. And then I am sure our Savior says he will examine what men have
done; and according as he finds it good or bad, pronounce the sentence of
Absolution or Condemnation. Read the 25. of S. Matthew, from the 31. verse to
the end.


N.C. What do you conclude from thence?


C. What? That if good works be necessary to our Justification then when we
come before the Judge; they are necessary now to the beginning of our
Justification, or (if you would have me speak other words) to enter us into the
state of Justified persons.


N.C. How can that be, since we are justified by Faith only?


C. Very well. For it is not an idle ineffectual Faith which justifies us; but
that which works by love to our Savior: and love is the keeping of his
Commandments.


N.C. I see one shall not want rational discourse at your Church (as you call
it:) but methinks I nevr found that life and power in your Ministry which I
have in ours.


C. I told you before, that I find nothing so powerful as the Christian
Doctrine rationally handled. And if the Faith of Christ be not so preached as I
now told you, for my part I feel no force in the loudest words that I hear; but
am apt to say as the man did when he shear'd his Hogs, Here is a great deal of
noise, and little wool.


N.C. My meaning was, That ours move my affections very much, and yours stir
them not at all.


C. I have been taught, that there are two ways to come at the Affections: One
by the Senses and Imagination; and so we see people mightily affected with a
Puppet-play, with a Beggar's tone, with a lamentable Look, or any thing of like
nature. The other is, by the Reason and Judgment, when the evidence of any
Truth convincing the Mind, engages the affections to its side, and makes them
move according to its direction. Now, I believe your Affections are moved in
the first way very often; by melting Tones, pretty Similitudes, riming
Sentences, kind and loving Smiles, and sometimes dismally sad Looks; besides
several Actions or Gestures which are very taking. And the truth is, you are
like to be moved very seldom in our Churches by these means. For the better
sort of Hearers are now out of love with these things: nor do they think there
is any power either in a puling and whining, or in roaring and tearing voice.
But if you can be moved by such strength of reason, as can conquer the
Judgment, and so pass to demand submission from the Affection; you may find
power enough ( I think) in our Pulpits. And let me tell you, the Passions thus
excited differ as much from the other, as the motions of a Man do from them of
a Beast, if not more. For one may be affected, whether he will or no by Objects
of Sense: but Reason convinces and moves us by sober consideration, and laying
things seriously to heart. And I wish heartily you would examine whether the
cause why you was no more affected with our preaching, was not this, That you
took no pains with your self; i. e. you would not be a Man, but was contented
to be moved in Religion like a mere Puppet, whose motions depend upon the power
of other Agents, and not its own.


N.C. You need not have made so long a discourse in this business; for when you
have said as much as you are able, I can answer all in a few words: Assuring
you that I am moved with the things they say; for I think they are the most
soul-searching Preachers in the world.


C. It is an hard matter to understand your Phrases. If you mean such
Phreachers, whose Doctrine touches the Conscience, letting men see their duty
and their sins plainly; I think none are to be preferred before ours.


N.C. Pray, Sir, consider what you say.


C. What I have said, I say again. And I must add, that I have cause to believe
some of you have left our Congregation, because the good man's Doctrine
searched into you too far, and came too near the quick.


N.C. I understand you not.


C. Have you never heard any man say, that he would come no more to Church,
because his Minister ripped up his sins of Disobedience to Gover^ours, Faction,
Rebellion, Reviling Superiors, ^ash Censuring and judging their actions,
immodest and malapert Disputing with Spiritual Instructors, Meddling with other
men's matter, Gadding from house to house, to hear or tell news, if not to talk
against the Court and Church; with other such like things that are too common,
but not commonly reproved?


N.C. Yes, I cannot deny it.


C. Then no doubt he searched to the bottom of that man's heart; who finding
himself wounded, instead of seeking for a Cure, kicked at him that shot the
arrow, and flung dirt in his face; calling him Railer and Reviler, when he only
told him the plain truth.


N.C. You are angry.


C. No truly, I am only desirous you should understand things nakedly, as they
are in themselves.


N.C. Do you think that our Ministers do not inform their Auditors of the
danger of these sins?


C. If they did, I believe they would have fewer come to hear them.


N. C. You are uncharitable.


C. No such matter. I know many of those that flock to them are not able to
bear such Doctrine. But they call those plain and searching Preachers, that rip
up other men's faults, and that discover to them some kind of sins, which they
have heard the Godly most bewail and complain of: for instance, Deadness of
heart in duty, Spiritual pride, and unprofitableness under Ordinances, though
so powerfully administered.


N. C. Well; and are not these home^ truths?


C. But I doubt many of those you call Godly are troubled with other diseases,
which had need be looked narrowly after. And besides, me think^ your Ministers
do too plainly commend themselves, when they tell you what powerful Ordinances
you live under, and how you are fed wit^ a feast of Fat things; whilst other
poor Soul are even starved in other Congregations; mean in a such as ours.


N. C. You might as well say that they commend us, when they caution us so much
again^ Spiritual pride.


C. You are in the right. It does too palpabl^ suppose you to be endowed with
great gifts and so is apt to put you into a high conceit o^ your selves,
notwithstanding all their cautio^ against it. And therefore my opinion is, that
they had better teach you all your duty; and then finding how short you are of
Perfection, that will be a more effectual means to keep you humble, than all
their Declamations against Spiritual Pride.


N. They do tell us our duty. And I assure you some preach even against those
sins which you say we do not love to hear of.


C. I Will take your word for it. But they are rare men, and they do it rarely. I
could tell you also of one, that doing thus, was forbid by his Auditors to
proceed, if he intended to have their company.


N. C. Methinks you should not suspect any of them to be guilty of negligence
in these matters: Do you not take them for conscientious and good men?


C. Yes truly, I think there are many good men amongst them. But, to deal
plainly with you, I look upon most of them as very imperfect and in a lower
form of goodness.


N. C. Strange! What reason have you for this?


C. They do not govern their Passions, nor reverence their Governors nor
Elders, nor fear to make a Schism in the Church; being furiously bent to follow
their own fancies, impatient of Contradiction, conceited of their own Gifts,
too ready to comply with the Peoples follies, and to humor them with new and
affected phrases; nay, to gratify their rudeness with most unsavory, clownish
and undecent expressions, not only in their preaching, but in their Prayers.
And especially they seem to me to have little and narrow spirits, wanting that
great Charity which our Savior commends, and confining Godliness to a small
Sect and Party.


N. C. O Sir, how much are you out of the way* If they were not the best men in
the world, they could never come so close to us in their Preaching, and search
the very Heart, as we find they do.


C. Now that you repeat this again, you force me to tell you that, which
otherwise I would have concealed.


N. C. What Is that.


C. That if we may judge of the Sermons you hear by those we see in print; I
think many o^ them are so far from searching into the Conscience, that they
rather dally and play with men^ childish phansies.


N. C. Are you in good earnest?


C. Why should you make a doubt of it? Yo^ know I do not use to jest.


N. C. I do not believe you can give me on^ instance of any such thing.


C. Yes but I can, and more than one. What d^ you think of the Doctrine of
Repentance? Is the^ any thing deserves to be more gravely handled or can one
ever expect to be pierced and wound^ by that Preacher; who treating of that
argument does not touch the Soul in a lively manner?


N. C. I acknowledge it is a most weighty Doctrine: but what then?


C. I Will tell you, I never met with any Treatise (in so serious a subject) more
light and toying, than a Book which came lately out of the Press, called The
Doctrine of Repentance, useful for these times, by T. W.


N. C. You are prejudiced.


C. I doubt you are; and yet I believe I shall make you of my mind. Look you;
here is the book, which one lent me. What think you of the very beginning of
the Epistle to the Reader? Faith and Repentance are the two wings by which we
fly to Heaven. Does not this look like a School-boyes phrase, which he applies
to every Subject? For at another time T. W. would tell you, That Prayer and
Meditation are the two wings whereby we fly to Heaven. Now as for Repentance,
he tells you presently it is a Purgative, and bids you not fear the working of
this Pill. That ^oist tears dry up the rheums of sin, and quench the ^rath of
God.


N. C. Let the Epistle alone, and go into the body of the Book: there you will
find it more powerful.


C. Truly I have not read it over; but I open^d it in several places, and I met
only with a ^ngle there, where I expected a clap of thun^er.


N. C. That Is because you had not a fancy to it.


C. I assure you I brought an indifferent mind to it, being glad if good things
be said by any body. But I could not but be disgusted when I read this, page
16. That holy Sorrow is the Rhularb to purge out the ill humors of the Soul,
etc.


N. C. You take little bitts, and mind not his continued discourse.


C. Read then what he says of an Hypocrite, page 89.90. and you will think you
are reading one of Blunt's Characters, if you ever saw that B^ok. I expected to
have found him cut up and anatomized; whereas in truth he does but stroke him,
and play with him. For thus he says; The Hypocrite is a Saint in jest; he makes
a majesticck show, like an Ape clothed in Ermine or Purple. The Hypocrite is
like an House with a beautiful Fr^ntispiece, but every Room within is dark: ^e
is a rotten P^st fairly gilded. Under his mask of Profession he hides his
Plague^ sons. The Hypocrite is against painting of Fa^s, but he paint^
HOliness: he is seemingly good, that he may be really b^d. In Samuel 's Mantle
he plays the Devil therefore the same word in the Original signifies to use
Hypocrisy, and to be profane. But at thi^ present we will let the rest alone,
and only obs^rve how he concludes what he says of him Hypocrites are far g^ne
with the Rot, and if an^ thing will cure them, it must be feeding upon the sa^
Marshes of Repentance.


N. C. Why do you look me so in the face?


C. To see if you did not smile; as sure you would do, were you not angry with
me for laying open this Childishness. Nay, do not frown. I appeal to your
Conscience, whether you feel any more force in such words as these, than in a
Feather, blown with a great blast against your face, or in a Straw trust with a
strong arm against your Breast.


N. C. I cannot commend them; but you ought not to examine Books (writ with a
good intention) so severely.


C. I am far from that humor, and have only exercised a little of that liberty
which he gives us in the second page of his Epistle; where he tells us, He
thought to have smothered these Meditations in his Desk, but conceiving them of
great concern at this time, he rescinded that first resolution, and exposed
them to a critical view. Now if I had a mind to play the Critic, as simple as
you think me, I could show you that he ought to have exposed them only to the
view of his very good Friends, and not to Critics.


N. C. That was only a careless word.


C. Being one of his friends, I am willing to believe so; else I should have
thought it an affectation of a fine expression.


N. C. I wish you had never seen the Book.


C. So do I wish too, provided no body else had seen it. But pray be not
troubled, nor interpret this as any disrespect to him; for I should not have
given notice of any of these things to you, but that you would needs make
Comparisons, which are always odious. And you may make a good use of this
freedom which I take: for I persuade my self, if you would but compare some of
our Books, which you despise, with this now mentioned, you would find there is
as much difference between the jingling and rimeing of this and their solid
sense, as between the noise of a Jews-trump, or Bag-pipe, and the grave sound
of an Organ.


N. C. But have not your men that quibble, and hunt after little Sentences and
fine Words, like him whom you condemn?


C. I had no intention to deny that; but only to show that there is trifling
every where. And therefore that you ought not to be so partially affected to all
your own, and so unequal to all ours.


N. C. What Is one to so many, as are among you, whose Books also are licensed
to pass the Press?


C. To answer the last in the first place: I can tell you upon my own
knowledge, that such simple Books have been rejected; and if any of them have
chanced to pass, you shall seldom find the Preface of some other grave Divine,
much less of three or four Divines of note, set before in commendation of it.


N. C. Why? no more has that, you have been speaking of.


C. True; but no doubt he might have had those Ornaments, if he had pleased:
For I have seen many pitiful Books that have had great Commendations prefixed.
And as the Dunghilcocks have the largest Combs; so commonly the meanest Books
are set off with the largest Praises.


N. C. I perceive you still persist in your confidence, that you know more
Books of this nature.


C. Yes: But I do not delight to muster up all the folly that is in Print; and
therefore shall only take notice of one Book more, writ in another way; and (if
you please) try whether it deserve the Commendation which the Preface bestows
upon it.


N. C. What Book is that?


C. It is called Christ and the Covenant, etc. in ten Sermons, by W. B. which
pretends to be full of Mysteries; and, as we are told in the Epistle to the
Reader, gives us the very marrow and quintessence of the Gospel. Upon which
account he exhorts us to buy it, and makes us believe it is worth any money.


N. C. And you bought it.


C. No, I did not think it worth any thing, when I had once perused a little of
it.


N. C. What part did you peruse?


C. I thought that the Marrow I was told of might be found (if any where) in
that Discourse which he calls the Way and Spirit of the New Testament. But as
far as I examined it, I met with nothing but a great many bones to pick, and
they had little or nothing on them.


N. C. Pray forbear this merriment; and let us seriously consider what he says.


C. That Is my desire. And for your satisfaction read that part where he tells
us, what the way of the Old Testament was, and what the way of the New is. I
believe I shall convince you, that he is not only out of the true way, but also
describes his own way after a poor and wretched manner.


N. C. Be not so earnest.


C. He tells us in the first place, That the Old Testament Legal spirit serves
God upon the account of Rewards mostly, or chiefly, or only: But the New
Testament spirit does not. Whereas there is nothing plainer, than that Rewards
are propounded in both Covenants to encourage our duty. And the Gospel urges us
so frequently with the consideration of the rewards it promises, that I
question not but he that has them always in his mind, and serves our Lord
Christ out of those hopes, as his chief motive, pleases him very well. For the
true difference between the Covenants is not, that the one sets rewards before
men, and the other not; but, that the old Covenant made with the Jews
propounded Temporal Rewards and the Gospel propounds Eternal; which ar^ as
often repeated in the Gospel as the other it the Law. And therefore he has
discovered (...) New-nothiing, when he says, that to serve Go^ for Rewards
mostly, etc. is plainly Legal. Nay, it is absolutely false. For if a man be
moved (a I said) only by hopes of unseen things in ano^ there world to obey God,
and quit things present for his sake; no doubt he serves him in an Evangelical
manner.


N. C. Good Neighbor, be not so confident.


C. Why should I not have some degree of confidence about these things, seeing
I am master of common Reason, and I have consulted also with several of our
Ministers about them, who have made it plain to me, that the Gospel propounds
Eternal Rewards in the Life to come, as the great motive to well-doing? The
most that any sober man ever said (as far as I can learn) in this argument is,
that he who does well only in sight of those rewards is in a weak estate; but
they always allowed him to be endued with an Evangelical Spirit.


N. C. Then it seems you live upon your own purse, and upon what you can earn
of God; which he tells you is contrary to a Gospel spirit.


C. It is so. But that is an impertinent Conclusion from his former discourse.
For a man may serve God upon the account of Reward, and yet not be so foolish
as to imagine he can earn any thing of him.


N. C. Indeed you speak too confidently.


C. I am not of that mind. For I may judge what is consequently spoken as well
as another man. And I am sure that Conclusion is nothing to the purpose: only
he imagined this to be a pretty saying, That a man of a Gospel spirit knows he
lives upon a better purse, than all his own ^arnings can amount unto.


N.C. I wish you would be more temperate.


C. Who can endure to see men bear up themselves so highly, and hear them cried
up, as if they were full of the Spirit, when as there is scarce common sense in
them, and not be a little concerned?


N.C. Well, suppose there be one flaw in that Discourse, must that make all
this ado?


C. One flaw? Read the rest, and you will find that it is no wiser. For he
would have us immediately after to receive this as another note of a Legal
spirit, that it is a fearing spirit, put on rather by the Threatenings, than the
Promises; and the Gospel spirit rather by Promises than Threatening.


N.C. And is not this true?


C. No. For our Savior bids his Disciples again and again to fear* ( Luke
12.4, 5.) not indeed such things as the Mosaical spirit did, Temporal
Calamities upon their Bodies, Goods. etc. but Eternal Miseries, which they
should avoid, though with the enduring of all the hardships in the world. And
whereas he says, that the difference between the Dispensations is, that the one
is terrible, the other comfortable; it is manifestly false. For the Gospel
speaks a great deal more terribly, than the Law does, to Hypocrites and
Unbelievers.


N.C. Therefore he tells you afterward, that a gracious Soul may be full of
fears about its condition.


C. This is nothing to his business. For he was not speaking concerning the
fears, which a Soul has about its estate; but of the Principle upon which a
man does his duty. And, if I understand any thing, a Christian is moved by
fear, as well as hope.


N.C. Well, he acknowledges so much when he says a gracious heart may be full
of fears.


C. I tell you again this is impertinent; for these are not motives to his
Duty, but rather hindrances and impediments, as he will tell you. And besides,
he makes them to be causeless fears; for, he says, they are the fears of a man
that stands upon a rock; and therefore he ought not to be troubled with them.
Whereas the Scripture requires us to fear, ( Hebr. 4.1.) (and tells us there is
cause for it) lest a Promise being left us of entering into rest, any of us
should seem to come shore of it: and to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling: and, to have grace to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear. Mind this last place, and tell me if it do not directly oppose what he
says. He persuades you that a fearing spirit is a Legal spirit^ and the
Apostle tells you, it is an effect of the Gospel grace, and such a thing
whereby we acceptably serve God.


N.C. You have studied this, I perceive: and I have not. But what say you to
the third, which is this, A Legal spirit measures the love of God by outward
things.


C. I say it is the best thing he says; and he was to blame, that he passed it
over so slightly and hastily, as if it were not worth his notice.


N.C. Is not the fourth as remarkable, viz. That an Old Testament Spirit trades
much, or most, or altogether, with conditional Promises; the other not?


C. It is indeed very remarkable: First, for the paltry phrase of trading in
promises; and Secondly, for the pernicious consequence of the Doctrine.


N.C. Why? Is not the Doctrine true?


C. No. For though there was an absolute Promise of sending Christ, yet there
are no absolate Promises which Christ makes to us.


N.C. He seems to grant as much.


C. That is, he contradicts himself.


N.C. No; he says, though the Promise b^ Conditional; yet the Lord has
promised that Condition elsewhere, and that without a Condition.


C. Then it is not Conditional; for what i^ without a Condition is absolute.


N.C. You would make him speak Nonsense.


C. Do you try at leisure if you can make good Sense of his words, which
methinks are not much better, than if he had said, The Promises are
Conditional, but without any Condition.


N.C. Phy, Sir! they are thus to be taken: The Promise is upon a Condition;
only that Condition is promised without a Condition.


C. Now you have mended the matter finely; and made it plain, that he thinks
all the Promises are absolute. Which how well it agrees with their being
Conditional, I pray tell me, when you have thought of it, at our next meeting.


N.C. Do not you grant then that God promises the Condition (upon performance
of which we shall enjoy the Promise) without a Condition?


C. No indeed; for it is certainly false. He promises (for instance) Eternal
life if we repent and effectually believe, and not otherwise. Repentance
therefore and Faith are the Conditions of that Promise. And I affirm that God
nowhere promises that any of us (do we what we will) shall repent and believe.
But he requires us to consider and lay to heart what is spoken to us by his Son
Jesus; which is as much as to say, that upon this Condition he will work
Repentance and Faith in us.


N.C. He does so. But though the Promise runs conditionally, yet he tells us,
it shall be fulfilled absolutely.


C. You mean, W. B. tells us so; and therein confesses he did not speak truly
before, when he said the Promise was without a Condition; for now he
acknowledges that it runs conditionally. And to say it shall be fulfilled
absolutely, is to say, that it seems to be Conditional, but is not.


N.C. Well; methinks there is much of Mystery in what he delivers.


C. That is, you do not understand it, but it sounds prettily, and so you like
it. And so I believe you do the next, (for the same reason) wherein he tells
you, that in the Old Testament they came to Christ by the Promise, but now we
come to the Promise by Christ.


N.C. I like it because it seems to carry a^ great mystery in it.


C. It may seem so, but it does not.


N.C. No? what do you make of it?


C. I think it rather carries a plain falsity in it. For we come to Christ by
the Promise as well as they; and they went to the Promise by Christ, as well as
we.


N.C. I know not what you mean.


C. That Is because you know not what he means. But if you will understand me,
thus it is. There was a Promise that God would send Christ into the world; and
the fulfilling of thi^ Promise is one great reason why we believe it Jesus; and
so we are led (you see) to him by the Promise. On the other side, there were
Promises of great things that Christ would do for those that believed on him;
and those then tha^ did believe the Messiah would come, hoped for the enjoyment
of these Promises by his means; and so (if I may speak in his phrase) they went
first to Christ, and then to the Promise,


N.C. I do not well apprehend you; and therefore thinks it is time to lay aside
this Book.


C. You do discreetly? For if you had continued your discourse about it, I
should have discovered a world of Follies to you.


N.C. The things of God are Foolishness to the natural man.


C. These are not the things of God, nor the things of a man neither; but
childish Fancies, or as we commoly speak, New-nothings.


N.C. I know they appear so to the natural man.


N. I do not judge according to mere Nature but by the direction of the Spirit
which instructed the Apostles; and therefore you apply that Scripture foolishly
to me.


N.C. You use your reason too much.


C. You have some reason to say so, for if I had used it less, things had not
appeared so ^idiculous.


N.C. By that time your heart has lain so long ^-soke in the blood of Jesus as
his has done, we shall hear other language from you.


C. You are taken, I perceive, with that new ^hrase in the Epistle to the
Reader, and only because it is new: else it would seem very irre^erent, being
taken from a Toast in a Pot of ^le, or a Sop in a Dripping-pan; a great deal
more fit for a Preface before a Book of one of those you call Old Sokers, then
of such a Reverend Author.


N.C. You are merry, Sir.


C. Truly, I do not make my self merry with any men's Sins: but at their little
foolish Affectatious, how can one choose but smile? But could he not as well
have said, that he had a long time thought of the efficacy and virtue of the
Blood of Christ; or, that he was much acquainted with the Love of Christ in
dying forus? Why to say that he had lain long a soke in his blood, is as absurd
as if he had told us that he had lain long beaking himself in the Beams of the
Sun of Righteousness; or roasting himself before the Fire of the Divine Love.


N.C. Pray, Neighbor, forbear these expressions.


C. I was only going to show you that we have as good a faculty, as you to coin
new Words and Phrases, if we would take the liberty. But I will forbear, if you
will but be content upon this occasion to look back with me, and consider how
all the Nation comes to be overrun with folly.


N.C. How, I pray you?


C. As soon as you had cast out of doors all that was Old among us; if any
Fellow did but light upon some new and pretty Fancy in Religion, or some odd
unusual Expression, or perhaps some swelling words of Vanity* presently he set
up for a Preacher, and cried up himself for a man that had made some new
discovery. And such was the confidence of these men, both in inventing strange
Language, and proclaiming their great Discoveries every where, that the poor
people were persuaded, the Nation never knew what Communion with God meant till
this time. Now they thought the happy days were come, when the Spirit was
powered out, the Mysteries of the Gospel unfolded, Free grace held forth, the
Anointings and Sealings of the Spirit vouchsafed, Christ advanced to his
Throne; and when they should have such Incomes, in dwellings, and I know not
how many other fine things, as never was the like heard of before. For one man
comes and tells them of the streamings of Christ 's Blood freely to sinnners:
another bids them put themselves upon the stream of Free grace, without having
any foot on their own bottom: A third tells them how they must apply Promises,
absolute Promises. A fourth tells them there is a special Mystery in looking at
the Testamentalness of Christ's Sufferings. And because he found that every body
had got into their mouths Gospel Truths, hidden Treasures, and such like words;
he presented them with Sipps of Sweetness, and told them he was come to show
them how the Saints might pry into the Father's Glory; and in short, bid them
not be afraid of New Lights, but set open their windows for any Light that God
should make known to them.


N.C. Sure, no body used such Expressions as these.


C. This last is to be found in that very Author you have laid out of your
hands, page 47. who also puts the people into a fancy, that they have
Revelation and Visions in these days.


N.C. Certainly you do him wrong.


C. You shall be judge of that, when you have read the beginning of the next
page. There he tells you that there are four times wherein you should think
much on Christ crucified. And the first is this, In case of some Revelation or
Vision that you may be under. Which he repeats again in the following page. It
is a good thing, says he, to think of Christ crucified at all times, (...)
when you have Revelations and Visions, etc. (...) is a good time. From whence I
conclude, (...) as he bids you open your windows for new Lights to come in, so,
when he thinks on it, he will call upon you, as the Beadle does in the Streets,
Hang out your Lights, Hang out your new Lights.


N.C. Pray be not so abusive.


C. There is no abuse at all in this. For the same reason that made him step at
first out of the common way of speaking, may make him use such an expression as
this if he light on it. I^ being also a thing peculiar to such men to please
the people with some newfound Words and Phrases; which if they should lay
aside, together with all their abused Scripture-expression they would look just
like other men, only not so well.


N. C. You may say your pleasure.


C. I thank you. And pray look back again, and consider what followed all these
glorious Discoveries, as they called them. Since the people were so much in
love with new-minted Words, in which they thought there were great Mysteries
concealed; those men who would excel all the rest of these new Teachers set
forth themselves in more pompous Language, and made a show of a more glorious
Appearance of God in them. For they told the people of being Godded with God,
and Christed with Christ, etc. which strangely amused silly Souls, and made
them gaze and stare, as if the Holy Ghost were come down again from Heaven upon
men.


N. C. Our Ministers are not of this strain.


C. But they first began this affectation of new phrases; and no wonder if
their Scholars endeavored to outdo them.


N. C. They are none of their Scholars.


C. Sure they all came out of their School. For they taught men first to
despise sober and plain Doctrine, which teaches them their Duty toward God and
their Neighbor, entertaining them with finer Speculations of pretended
Gospel-Mysteries and Manifestations; with which we heard almost every Sermon
stuffed: so that he was thought no body that had not good store of them. Now as
those you admire found they could win no great number of Proselytes, unless
they left the old track of Preaching Sobriety, Justice, Charity, and Godliness:
so their Scholars found in a little time that the new Notions and Language of
their Masters were grown stale; and that unless they invented newer, at least
coined some other Phrases, their Reputation would be but small. And thus it
came to pass, that every one, striving not so much to speak what would profit,
as what would please, dressed up Religion in affected Language of his own
making; and new Expressions, if not new Notions, were heaped one upon another
every year; till none knew what Christianity was. For at last there arose a
Company of fine Youths, who judged even their Masters to be in a low and dull
Form of Religion, sticking in the beggarly Elements, and the dead letter, and
the Old Testament spirit, as their manner of speaking was. These imagine that
not only we, but you, know Jesus only in the Flesh, and stand in the outward
Court, and are not yet come within the Veil to discern the Spirit and the
Mystery, which they alone bring to light. Such a progress does Fancy make, when
once it is let loose, and men are taught not to reason, but to believe, there
is no end of its Follies; and God only knows when this Nation, which is
overflowed with them, and is made fond of them, will be reduced to a more sober
mind.


N.C. We bewail it as well as you.


C. I am glad of it. But I wish you would bewail the Original sin of all (as W.
B. advises you in another case, I doubt with no good meaning, page 473.) which
will be found in your selves; from whence a great number of other Mischiefs
have flowed, and made the same progress with that now named. For you first
taught the people to forbear all expression of Devotion when they came into the
Church, and decried the reverence of uncovering the Head there as Superstitious
and abominable. And so they soon took the liberty to come talking into the
Church, and not only to walk with their Hats on to their Seats (even when the
Minister was reading the Holy Scriptures) but keep them half on when he was at
Prayer. And then, because others were wont to kneel, or at least Stand, in that
holy Duty; they would show their Liberty, or their Opposition (I know not
whether) in Sitting, nay in Lolling after a lazy fashion, as if the Minister
were telling a sleepy Tale, not praying to our Creator. In short, there were
no bounds could be set to their Extravagancies; but they found out as many new
Gestures, and odd phrantick Expressions, in their Prayers, as before they had
done in their Preaching.


N.C. For all this you shall never make me believe but that they are the only
Spiritual Preachers.


C. This you told me before; and I am of your mind, if you call that Spiritual
Doctrine which is airy, thin, and so refined that no body can feel and touch
it, no not with his most serious thoughts.


N.C. Yes, I can feel it to be very Spiritual?


C. It is an hard matter to understand your Language. Do all our Preachers
only tell us carnal things?


N.C. That is not my meaning.


C. What then?


N.C. I call it Spiritual, to distinguish it from Moral Teaching.


C. As much as to say, our Ministers teach men their Duty, and yours do not: or
else, that yours teach them only such Duties as may be done in their Spirits
between God and themselves, but not such as are expressed in Life and Manners,
in our bodily actions, which tend to the good of our Neighbors, and the
Happiness of the world.


N.C. I understand you not.


C. Your Sermons are chiefly about prayer, and meditation, and Communion with
God, and Believing, --


N.C. Yes, Believing: Now you have hit my meaning.


C. But I was going to add something to that word, viz. Believing, without
Doing. Else you will not count it spiritual Preaching.


N.C. Not if they should insist much upon Doing. For there are more Spiritual
matters for Believers to be instructed in.


C. That is, things revealed to us by the Spirit sent down upon the Apostles.


N.C. I know not what to say to your explication; for I never heard it before.
But pray proceed.


C. I know no spiritual things but those which concern the glory of our Savior
in the heavens, his power at Gods right hand, his Intercession there for us,
his coming again to Judgment, and such like; which are proved to be true; not
by humane Reason, but by the Spirit descending from heaven on the Apostles.


N.C. Well, and are not these great things?


C. And do not our Ministers treat of them as well as yours?


N.C. But none in a spiritual way. Ours treat of spiritual things spiritually.


C. I guess what you mean. They treat of these things in such a manner, as not
to bring them down to meddle with our Lives, or not much and chiefly, as W. B.
speaks. Or thus, they draw matter of Comfort from them, but little or nothing
of Duty.


N.C. I know not how to express it. But I always find that they handle these
things in a sweeter manner than other men.


C. I believe you. For nothing is so sweet and pleasing to flesh and blood, as
for a man to hear how much a great Prince is in love with him, and how freely
he loves him; how his heart beats in Heaven toward him; and especially how
careful and compassionate he is toward him in a persecuted condition.


N.C. And is not this very spiritual Doctrine?


C. Yes. But setting aside all fancy; nothing is more solidly opened by our
Divines, than the power of our Savior, and his great love toward his faithful
and obedient Disciples.


N.C. You must needs still bring in Obedience.


C. I have been taught to do so. For this great Lord always loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity: and therefore God has anointed him with the
oil of gladness above his fellows; i. e. given him such a Royal Power in the
Heavens, ( Hebr. 1.9.) Unto which glory we cannot be promoted but by the same
way of Righteousness. And let me tell you, I think I have heard it clearly
demonstrated, that though there is infinite comfort and satisfaction in
believing that our Lord Jesus is so exaled, and has made us such promises,
which he is able to make good; yet all this is but to encourage our Obedience,
and to make us constant and firm in the Christian Religion, notwithstanding all
the Difficulties and Troubles we meet withal for Christ's sake. So that in
truth these are the most spiritual Preachers, that is, the best Interpreters of
the mind of the Spirit, who urge and press men, from the consideration of what
God has revealed to us in these matters, to be steadfast and unmovable, and
abundant in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord.


N.C. Does not Christ himself say that the Work of God is Believing? ( John
6.29.)


C. Yes, but not such a believing as yours, which is only a relying on Christ
for the forgiveness of your Sins.


N.C. What was it then?


C. An effectual persuasion that God has sent Jesus into the world, as he
there tells you, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has
sent. And if you can think he means a bare persuasion of this, that God sent
him, without the effects and fruits of it, which is the becoming his Disciples
sincere profession of his Religion, and living according to it; then the Devil
may be a good Believer, a very Spiritual person and great Saint, for he very
early acknowledged Him to be the Son of God. And we read that the Devils
believe and tremble.


N.C. Alas! this is a poor Faith, which cannot apply the Promise.


C. That Is because it is not made to them. For if it were, and they had but a
good fancy, they might apply it (in your way) as well as any body else, and yet
remain Devils still.


N.C. Now you go beyond all the bounds of Reason.


C. Because I follow you, whose Doctrine leads to this.


N.C. How does that appear?


C. I cast my eye casually upon one place in the Book newly named, and there I
found this Mystery; That though there is a Condition in the new Covenant, yet
no Condition to be performed by us, but by Christ our second Adam: page 69. And
though he confesses something must be performed by us, yet he says, it is all
promised to us, and that without Condition. And therefore a little after he
makes this a mark of those that are in Covenant, to be begot again by a
Promise, especially the absolute Promise: page 72. Now since no Condition is to
be performed by us, why should any person take any care about it? or why should
any one trouble himself about doing that, which is already done for him, or, if
it be not done, is promised that it shall be done? especially since his great
work is (as you say) only to close with the promise, to lay hold upon the
absolute promise? For no body being named particularly in the promise, nor any
quallification supposed in any man whereby he may know that he is capable of
the Blessing rather than another; no reason can be given why all should not
apply it to themselves, though never so bad; nay, why they ought not to apply
it.


N.C. No, that is too great a boldness; they must be humbled and cast down --


C. Then it seems they ought to feel some Qualification in themselves, which
incourages them to lay hold on the Promise. Though, if it be absolute, it is
more than needs, nay, than is good: for they ought to have no respect to any of
those things, but only the Freeness of the Promise. And then I pray why might
not a Devil remain so still?


N.C. But such as are within the Covenant will find themselves wrought upon to
forsake their sins, etc.


C. Grant that. Yet if they do, it is no Encouragement to them, according to
your Doctrine; and therefore if they do not, it ought to be no Discouragement.
For they ought not to take any confidence to go to God because anything they
find in themselves; and therefore they may be confident, though they find
nothing in themsevles but only a strong fancy that the Promise belongs to their
Persons.


N.C. Though they cannot take any confidence because theyare so disposed toward
God yet they must be well disposed.


C. Why so?


C. Will he have it so in order to give them Confidence to hope in his Mercy
that their sins shall be forgiven?


N.C. No; the promise of that is absolute.


C. Then one man may be as confident that has not those Dispositions as he
that has, believing that it is God's will he shall have them when he pleases.


N.C. I see you understand nothing of the Covenant of Grace.


C. Yes, I understand that it was the riches of God's Grace, to make a Covenant
of saving those Sinners who would obediently believe on his Son. For this was
more than he was bound to grant; and this Believing and Obedience can deserve
nothing of him (it being a Duty to believe what he reveals, and to do what he
enjoins;) and besides, he gives us the means of Faith, and Helps to well-doing,


N.C. How can it be Free, if we do any thing for it?


C. I have told you, that we cannot do any thing for to deserve it; and what we
do he inables us to perform it And therefore it is free; because when we have
done all, yet he is no way tied to give us any thing, but only upon the account
of his own most gracious Promise.


N.C. You grant then his Promise is from mere Grace.


C. No body doubts of it that I know of. But this Grace is not so fond as to
make the Promise to any one that is confident it belongs to him, even whilst he
remains in a state of Sin Such a Favor God had to Sinners, as freely, and
without any disposition in them, to send his Son and his Holy Spirit: but
unless they become like to his Son, they are taught by him not to presume he
will give all the Blessings the Gospel promises; for they are made only to the
faithful.


N.C. God will make them so.


C. But according to your Opinions, that is a thing which they need not
consider when they apply the Promises of Salvation to themselves. For you say,
they must have respect to absolute promises; which you know have nothing to do
with any Qualification for this Favor. In pursuance of which Doctrines you
persuade your selves that Assurance of God's Love is not to be grounded upon
any Grace wrought in us; but only upon the Testimony of the Spirit, persuading
us that our Persons are beloved, and that the Promises are made to us.


N.C. This is Antinomianism.


C. May be so; and your Ministers may be Antinomians, and yet not know it.


N.C. Call them what you please, I am resolved to follow them: for I think you
will allow them to be the most experimental preachers, in the world.


C. Still you pester me with Phrases which I doubt you understand no more than I.


N.C. Is not the word plain enough?


C. It is, if you mean by an experimental Preacher a man that has tried
himself those ways which he earnestly beseeches others to walk in: but then it
will not serve your purpose; for you cannot deny but we have men that lead as
strict and holy lives as any of yours can do.


N, C. I mean, one that preaches his own Experiences in the ways of God,


C, You do not well know what you mean. For this is either the same that I now
told you; or else, it may signify no more than one that preaches his own
Fancy.


N. C. Now it is hard to know what you mean.


C. I mean that tells you stories of God's Withdrawings and Desertings; and
again, of his Shinings in and Sealings, etc,


N. C, And do you call these Fancies?


C. Commonly they are no more. For I observe well, meaning people fall into
these melancholic and despairing Fits: and are recovered again into greater
Cheerfulness and Assurance, without any reason at all; but only by a fanciful
application of some Scripture or other, which belongs not at all to their
condition: and yet casts them down, or raises them up.


N. C. You are mistaken; they have Reason.


C. If there be any that can be thought a sufficient ground, of God's
withdrawing himself, sure it must be some provoking Sin which they have
committed. And yet I see that they who cannot charge themselves with any
voluntary act of Sin, nor with any such Omission neither, fall into these
fancies (so I must still call them) of being forsaken by God. All the occasion
that ever I could find for such black thoughts is, but some such thing as this,
that they have not such Inlargments as they were wont; or cannot go to Duty
with that delight which formerly they took in it: which your Ministers ought to
teach them, are no Reasons, but only melancholic Conceits. And if these be the
things you call Experiences, there are none of us but understand them, as well
as you, finding the same Dullness and Heaviness in our selves. Only we are
taught not to talk or complain of it, but to do our duty notwithstanding as
well as we are able, and we shall find it will not last always.


N. C. You make too light of these things.


C. I hope not. But you lay too great weight upon them, and make these such
Marks of a Gracious Soul, that it helps to put good (but weak) people into
these Humors; and, I doubt, makes them lay hold on all occasions to fancy
themselves deserted.


N. C. Pray speak no more of these matters, for I see you are ignorant in them;
as you are in all the great things of God, which are Foolishness to the world.
Why do you smile? They are the Apostle's words, (1 Cor. 1.23.)


C. I know it. But I smile to see how you prove that which you deny, viz. that
Fancy governs you.


N. C. How do I prove it?


C. By this application of the Apostle's words according to their Sound, and
not their Sense.


N. C. Why what is their Sense, think you?


C. That to a mere Gentile it seemed a foolish thing to believe that a
Crucified person was made Christ, that is Lord and King of the world. The Jews
stumbled at this, and would not receive him for the Messiah, or King of Israel,
who shamefully hung upon a Cross: and the Gentile thought this a ridiculous
persuasion, which none but Idiots would receive. But then he tells you what
Gentiles and Jews these were; viz. such as were merely natural, and did not
allow the testimony of the Spirit, whereby the Apostles proved this Doctrine.
For they who were convinced that the Holy Ghost was in the Apostles; and judged
not by mere humane Reason, but Heavenly testimonies, made no scruple to believe
that this crucified Jesus was made Lord of all: and herein they acknowledged
the great Power and Wisdom of God to be made apparent.


N. C. You give the oddest interpretations of Scripture that ever were heard of.


C. Every thing seems odd to you which is cross to your Fancy. But examine the
Scriptures seriously, and you will find the interpretations which I have learnt
to be plain and even.


N C I do read them continually.


C. I believe you; and that you apply every thing, as you fancy it will fit
these times.


N. C. I apply it as I see those do who (notwithstanding all that you have
said) I take to be the most experimental Preachers. For that which they have
seen with theer eyes, which they have look ed on, and which their hands have
handled of the word of life, that declare they unto us, as S. John speaks, 1
Ep. 1. 1. Pray be more serious, and do not laugh while we speak of these things.


C. Well, I will. Bring me one of those men that have done this, and I tell you
seriously I will become one of his Disciples.


N. C. I can bring you an hundred that I am acquainted with.


C Then the story of the Wandering Jew is no Fable. Would I could see but one (
one, I assure you, would suffice me) of these happy men.


N. C. Would I could know what the matter is that makes your fancy wander and
rove on this Fashion. You have talked so rationally all this wile, that I cannot
but admire now to see your wits go a wool-gathering I know not whither.


C. I do not stray one jot from the business. I have heard (as I was going to
tell you) of a Jew. who being present at our Savior's Death, and seeing him
hang upon the Cross, has ever since wandered up and down from place to place,
and (as the story goes) remains somewhere or other to this very day. I always
took it indeed for a Lie, till now that I meet with you, who give me hopes to
see an hundred such men, and that in London.


N. C. You seem to me to be distracted. I have nothing to do, either with Jews,
or with Lies.


C. A little, my good Neighbor, with Lies. For if your men have seen the Lord
of Life with their eyes, and looked upon him, and handled him; then they were
alive in our Saviors time, as that Jew is said to have been. Or else he has
appeared to them since, as he did to S. Thomas saying, Reach hither thy finger,
and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side.


N. C. No: there was some other seeing beside that.


C. What? has W. B. or some of his Disciples had a Vision, wherein they beheld
him and looked upon him?


N. C. You cannot understand the things of God.


C. Yes, as well as you; unless you have had some Revelation, which he presumes
you may enjoy.


N. C. There is seeing and feeling without that.


C. You can tell me of none which we are strangers unto. If you mean, that you
discern the truth and certainty of the Christian Faith; I doubt not that our
eyes are as good as yours in that point. If you mean, that you approve of the
Christian life, even from your own sense of the satisfaction and Happiness
there is in it; I make no question it as palpable to us as to you. Or if you
would have us think that you have long and seriously meditated upon the
Mysteries of the Gospel, so as to be mightily affected with them; I do not
believe that we are defective in that neither, but have looked upon them, as
long as your selves, and are as affectionate Admirers of them.


N. C. You are fallen, methinks, into a strain of Boasting.


C. It is you, that have compelled me, as the Corinthians did S. Paul by
undervaluing him. And if you think me a fool in this (as well as other things)
I am in a worse conditon than that great Apostle thought he might be: Read his
discourse in 2 Cor. 11.16, 17, etc. and give me leave to speak to you a little
in his words. You are a wise sort of people, and so can be content now and then
to suffer fools gladly. For you suffer if a man bring you into bondage to
certain Opinions of his own, which make it necessary for you to do or not to do
that which God has not tied you unto. If a man devour you, by living
continually upon you; If he take of you, Gold, Silver, and other gifts whereby
he must be maintained; If he exalt himself, pretending perhaps, to more of the
Sprit, and a more special Mission from God, than other men have; still you
suffer him very patiently. Why then cannot you suffer me only to boast a little;
especially since it is not of my self, but of our Ministers which I hear? And
those few words of S. Paul in that place shall suffice to this purpose; Are
yours the Ministers of Christ? ( I speak you will think, as a fool) ours are
more, For they know Christ Jesus the Lord, ^s well as yours: they preach him as
sincerely and feelingly: they tread in his steps, and crucify the flesh with
the affections and lusts. And beside, they are more peaceable, more obedient to
Governors, more respectful to their Superiors, more modest in their Inquiries
and Resolutions about difficult Points, more charitable to those that dissent
from them, and more desirous methinks to edify, rather than to humor the
people. For they do not seek to please their itching Ears, and gratify the
longings of their Fancies with newfound words, affected Expressions, and odd
Phrases; but tell us those things that concern our Savior and his holy Life in
plain and proper Language. Which, I protest fills me with joy and gladness
whenever I think of it. And it makes me conclude they have much Experience of
the things of God because they make me so feelingly conceive what the pleasure
and contentment is of being meek and lowly, sober and chaste, contented and
heavenly-mined; and above all things, of having an heart enlarged with great
Charity to all men, so as to be ready to forgive, and to do good. This holy
disposition, you cannot deny, must needs make them capable to understand the
Mind of God revealed to us in his Word; which book I observe they are very
careful we should understand aright, and not interpret and apply it, as I see
you do, according to our Fancy. For you conceive that, because S. John declared
what he saw and handled of the word of Life. ( i. e. of our Savior and his
Gospel) to convince some that denied he was come in the Flesh, or gainsay'd
their Doctrine; you are able to do the same.


N. C. Well, I see my mistake in that. But say what you will, your Preachers
never had such a Seal to their Ministry as God has given ours, by converting
thousands through their means.


C. More Phrases still? You mean God has shown they are rightly called or sent
by himt


N. C. Yes.


C. Then all those men who turn people may say that they have a Seal of God to
their Ministry; See, say the Popish Priests, what multitudes we convert!
therefore we are sent of God. Behold; say the Quakers, we have a Seal from
Heaven; for so many of your people have forsaken you; and follow us.


N. C. But you mistake me, Sir; They do not only convert men to our Party, but
to to be good They really turn them from sin to God.


C. I am glad to hear it. But may not a question be made, whether they are not
converted only from some, not from all Sins; nay, whether they are not
converted from one Sin to another? So I am sure you confess it is with the
Quakers, who make men sometime more civil in one regard, but more uncivil, than
ever in others.


N. C. Sure, you cannot suspect us to be like them.


C. It will be fit for you to examine yourselvs thoroughly in this Point;
Whether, for instance, many among you are not converted from loving the World,
to hate their Neighbors; from cold Devotion at our Churches, to a fiery Zeal
against our Ministers; from Undutifulness to Natural Parents, to the greatest
Contempt of Civil and Spiritual. Nay, is this never made a Note of a man
converted, that, though he have a great many Faults, yet he is wrought to
Antipathy to Bishops, Common Prayer, an innocent Cassock, and a Surcingle, as
you are pleased in derision to call our Ministers Girdles?


N. C. Truly, I think the badness of your Ministers may have provoked the
people to be rude to them; the best of them being no better, than Time-servers.


C. We will consider that by and by. Only let me note, that you cannot deny
what I suspect you guilty of. And beside, suppose there be a great many
converted by your Ministers to true godliness, this is no greater Seal (as you
call it) than we have, there being many turned from all their evil ways, to a
more noble degree of Virtue, than you can commonly show, by those very men who
did then heartily serve God when yours too much served the Time.


N. C. You will say any thing.


C. If you know, what is meant by a Timeserver, and do not only pelt with
words, I hope to make you confess, what I say.


N. C. Try what you can do.


C. I think we are agreed that a Timeserver is one who complies with the
naughty Humors of the time for his own profit, and meddles not with the
reigning sins, for fear of offending his good Masters by whom he is maintained.
A thing which it is hard to sind any man of note guilty of among us; but which
it is notoriously known the most eminent of yours were faulty in, in their time.


N. C. I doubt you will prove your self a fase Accuser.


C. Charge me with that, if you can, when I have done. And let me ask you,
whether you are not satisfied that the sins of Sacrilege, and Rebellion or
Disobedience to Governors, are very heinous; and whether it be not apparent
that their was great need, in the beginig of the late Times, to warn the Nation
to take heed of involving themselves in that Guilt which several considerable
persons were running headlong into I think you will not oppose me in either of
these, and I take your silence for Consent. And then I dare appeal to you,
whether your Divines were not very mealy-mouthed, as we use to speak, and afraid
these words should come within their lips, even then when they saw these Sins
come to their full groowth Nay, I affirm that you shall scrace find mention of
them in their Writings, much less was any thing heard of them in their Sermons.
Which is an evidence to me, that either they had not sound and good
Consciences, or that they wanted Courage, and contented themselves to swim along
with the Stream. And in the first place, let me tell you something that has
been observed of their unworthy Compliance with the Sacrilegious humor of
those times. A worthy Minister of my acquanitance once told me, that your
Assembly-men or other Divines, who wrote the larger Annotations upon the Bible,
(of the Edition An. 1646) are very guilty in this point. For where there is a
fit occasion, said he, to speak against Sacrilege, and where other Expositors
are wont to declare the foulness of the Sin, there they say not a word, but
pass it quite over, as if they knew of no such thing in the world. Though he
wouldnot impute it to their ignorance, but to their base Cowardice and
flattering disposition, which was loath to displease the Lords of that Time.


N. C. Sure he did them a great deal of wrong


C. I Will tell you some of the places, he instances in. First, that known place
Act. 5. where he told me in that Edition of 1646. there is no mention made of
their Sacrilege, and defrauding God of that which was devoted to him, (though
that was their chief Crime) but only of their Hippocrisie, Covetousness, and
Lying I must confess I have not the Book, and therefore you must take his word
for it But thus much I will tell you upon my own knowledge; that having
occasion once to look upon their Annotations, (and that of the third Edition,
much enlarged) upon Romans 2.22. where there was a fitter occasion to say
something of this Sin, than in the former place, because the very word
Sacrilege is here mentioned, I observed ( I well remember) that these
tenderfinger'd Gentleman would not so much as touch it, but fairly slipped over
it. For they only speak of the notion of the word in the Civil Law, (and that
not directly) defining it, The taking away from the Emperor any thing that his
is. Would not this make one think that they were very much afraid to meddle
with this Sin?


N. C. Perhaps that is the meaning of Sacrilege, there.


C. One can scarce believe it, who consults the place; where the Apostle
reprehends a manthat commits something of the same nature with tha^, which he
reproves another man for. And therefore I doubt not but, those who then cried
out against Idols, and by no means would endure them in the Holy place, did
discover their Profaneness and disrespect to that place some other way, which
in all likelihood was in not bringing their Offerings thither, but detaining
from God that which was his own peculiar goods. They that are learned, I doubt
not, can give you other reasons.


N. C. But I have heard some say, that things are not holy now, so as they were
then; because they were separated by a particular direction and express command
of God, which was the thing that made them holy.


C. This is one of the most notable things you have said yet, however you came
by it. But it will not do your Business. For what will you say, if I show you
that even in their Notes upon the Law of Moses, and other places of the Old
Testament, they say not a word of this Sin, of turning that to another use
which God has separated by his special command unto his own? no, though there
be the fairest invitation, and sometimes great reason, to do it?


N. C. I believe you undertake more than you can do.


C. Thus much I can assure you upon my own knowledge, that consulting upon a
time (as any man may have occasion to do) their Notes upon Levit. 25.34. where
the Fields belonging to the Levites are forbidden to be sold; I found that they
were perfectly mute, and said not a word of the nature of this Sin amongst the
Jews for fear, one would think, that any Christian should thence conclude, that
it was unlawful to sell the Bishops Lands, which then their Masters were about.


N. C. The Text is plain enough, if any one had a mind to make that Inference.


C. I, but some Annotations on a plain place make it more observed: and I am
sure they are large enough in their Descants upon as plain words as those. And
therefore why they should forbear to say any thing there I cannot imagine,
unless it were a fear of displeasing the Parliament and many of their
partakers. For as for themselves, I believe many of them would not have had the
Lands sold, but employed to their use and benefit.


N. C. Well, is this all?


C. No, there is another remarkable place in the Book of Joshua, Chap. 6.19.
where God commands all the Gold and Silver, etc. which should be taken in
Jericho, to be consecrated to him, and put into the Treasury. Notwithstanding
which we read that Achan purloined 200 shekels of Silver and a wedge of Gold to
his own private use, and was therefore severely punished, nay all the
Congregation troubled for his offense, till he suffered for it, Josh. 7.21. And
yet these men say not a syllable of this Sin in their Notes on either of those
verses; though all other Divines are wont from thence to show how dangerous it
was then to rob God, and take a way what was separated to his uses. In other
places I am sure they often make large Declamations against some Sins, and in a
manner preach against them: and therefore why they should not have a syllable to
say here about this matter, is a great Mystery, unless I have discovered the
cause of it. As for that place, Genesis 47.22. I know you will say they were
Idolatrous Priests whose Land Joseph sold not. But methinks they needed not
have made an excuse (as they there do) for Joseph's not selling them as if it
had been an act of greater Virtue, if he had. And methinks they should have
told the world pretty smartly that if Pharaoh had such a respect to the
Egyptian Priesthood as not to sell their Land; Christian Princes and
Governors should not be more unkind (if not unjust) in these days, nor expose
to sale those Lands which have been sertled upon the Priests of the most High
God. But above all, I wonder at their profound silence in their Notes upon
Ezekiel. 48.14. where one would think at last they would have broken it;
especially since they might have done it pretty securely in such an obscure
place, which few read. There the Lands of the Levites are again forbidden to be
sold: And by Levites according to their own Principles we are to understand the
Ministers of the Gospel, whose Lands therefore ought not to be sold. I prove it
clearly. thus, In the beginning of their Explication of this Vision, they lay
down this for a Foundation of their Exposition (Chap. 40.2.) that herein was
represented the ample and flourishing estate of Christ's Church, under the
Types of the Re-building of the Temple, Restoration of the Levitical Worship
and Service, and the Repossession and Inhabitation of the whole Land. Which
they repeat again Chap. 43.1. and in sundry other places. If this be true, (as
they believed it to be) then, according to their own Rules, the assigning of
Land for the Levites must signify the care that ought to be taken to settle a
Maintenance for the support of the Gospel-Ministery and Service; and the
prohibition against selling the Levites Lands must denote the pleasure of God,
that the portion of Land or other things settled upon the Evangelical
Priesthood, or Ministry, should never be alienated from them. Now I pray you
tell me, why would they not open their mouths at last in so plain a case as
this? What should be the cause, that they do not so much as name this Sin, much
less bid the World beware of it, and still much less pass any sentence upon it?
Do you think they did not know what is wont to be said on these places? Did
they not understand well enough, that if they would write consequently to their
own principles before laid down, they must either tax that Sin in this place of
Ezekiel, or else say just nothing? Why did they choose the later, and pass it
over with a word; but only referring us to two or three places of Scripture
nothing to the purpose?


N. C. Truly I know not what to say.


C. I Will tell you then. The most probable conjecture is that which I have made
already, That they were afraid in the least to displease their masters who set
them on work. The Parliament would have taken it very ill, and all the good
people too, who, to save their own purses, were content the Churches Lands
should be sold to carry on the War which they had illegally begun.


N. C. I hope better, and that you will not now take occasion from the mention
you make of the War, to fall into a Declamation against the other Sin of
Rebellion.


C. Since you love not to hear any thing of it, I am content to be as silent as
your Minsters were wont to be: only let me tell you, I have observed several
other things which they forbear, not because they think it is their Duty, but
for fear of displeasing a party.


N. C. What do you mean?


C. I mean, it was for this reason that they seldom or never (some of them)
used the Lora's Prayer, because the people had been taught on a sudden to
abhor Forms, without remembering them that the Lord's prayer was a Form. It was
not fit to tell them that, for fear they should have continued to like other
Forms of prayer for its sake. I observe also, that still they will by no means
give the title of Saint to one of the Apostles or Evangelists of our Lord,
(though I think they will call them Holy, which is the same) no not when they
read a Text out of their Writings. For which I can conceive no other reason,
but their good Dames and Masters do not like it. They are afraid that it is
Popish. And rather than these Men-servers will be at the pains of convincing
them of their error, or, to speak more properly, rather than venture the
danger of losing them, (for many might in a passion fly off, if they heard the
name of Saint given to any but themselves) they will not offend their tender
ears by naming that abominable word. And were it not that I am loath to try
you, I could instance in a great many other things wherein they are mere Slaves
to the humors of the people, and serve the time; not daring to say those
things, or to use those words, which they know are fit to be said and to be
used, merely because many people will run away from them.


N. C. There is no danger of that. Whither should they run?


C. To our Ministers; whom perhaps they forsook upon such little accounts, and
so may return to them when they see others do like them.


N. C. Hold you content, Neighbor. They will never return to one that is an
Apostate, and has forsaken his Principles. And that I am sure you will grant
your Minister has done; though you will not have him called a Time-server.


C. You have a company of the most frivolous exceptions against our Ministry
that ever I heard of. None of which (as I might have shown you all along) are
sufficient to justify your separation from us, were they true. But being as
they are, either false Imputations, or else such things as no man need be
ashamed of, you can the less be excused for your forsaking our Assemblies. As
for this that you charge our Minister withal, I have reason to think it is a
Forgery, and that he never had any other Principles than he has now. Or if he
had, what do you say to those who stuck so fast to their Principles, that it
cost them all they were worth? Are there no^ a great number of these among our
Clergymen? And do you not hate these as much as any else? nay look upon them as
your old Enemie^ because you remember what Enemies you we^ to them?


N C. There are a great many, I am certain^ that were once ours, and now are
fa^n away ^wore^ you. Those I abhor a great deal more the your old Clergy, and
cannot endure to he^ them


C. Suppose there be many such; yet there no reason for this strong Antipathy
against the^ For it is like they were very young when the followed you; and may
say, as S. Paul, When was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood a^ Child, I
thought (or reasoned) as a Child: (...) when I became a man, I put away
childish things.


N. C. Belike you think ours a Childish Religion.


C. Perhaps I do, and, for any thing you know, can prove it to be so in great
part. But that is not our business now; which is only to show, that it is no
shame for any body to think and speak otherwise than he did, provided his
Judgment be grown more ripe and manly. What? Do you think Youth must never
examine the Principles they receive with their Education, nor judge for
themselves when they are able? If you would not have them follow their Masters
or Parents, as Horses and Asses do those that lead them in a string, why do you
blame any of them that consider who it is that leads him, and whither he is
carrying him? nay, that forsakes the track in which he has always walked, when
he finds it to be wrong?


N. C. Nay, a great many Old men have forsaken their Principles, who, one would
think, should have had more wit or more honesty.


C. They have never the less for that: For I hope you are not too old to learn.
And this is all you can make of it, that once they thought it unlawful to do
according to their present practice; but days have taught them wisdom, and
given satisfaction to their Scruples. Beside, the extravagant Freaks and the
mad fantastic Tricsk which were played in Religion, when you reigned, opened
many men's eyes (whom you had deluded by fair speeches and goodly pretenses) to
see their folly in condemning and cashiering Bishops and Common Prayer.


N. C. You have an art of Apologizing for any thing.


C. Let Us see your skill in that art; for I would fain try it a little. What
will you say if none be found so guilty of this which you charge us withal as
your own dear selves?


N. C. I will say, that you can prove any thing.


C. No: you shall only say, that they have the least reason of all other men
to talk against forsaking Principles, who have done it so notoriously.


N. C. I cannot but wonder at your confidence. Are not your very Senses
convinced of the contrary? Do you not see how they suffer for their
Consciences; how they are deprived of their Liberty, and have lost good
Benefices. If they would have forsaken their Principles, what needed they have
been thus deprived? --


C. You need say no more, for I know it all beforehand. But pray be not you too
confident, no^ take it ill that I stop you thus in your carier; since I think
you will spend your breath to little purpose. Answer me soberly a few
questions, and then perhaps you will thank me for saving you the pains you were
about to take. Do you not remember a time when the Covenant was m^gnified as
the most Sacred thing in the world, next the Holy Scriptures? Did you never
meet with such a passage as this in Commendation of it? This Oath is such, and
in the matter and consequence of it of such concernment, as I can truly say, it
is worthy of us, yea of all these Kingdoms, yea of all the Kingdoms of the
World? If you have not, it is to be found in Mr. Nye's Exhortation at the
taking of the Covenant, September. 25. 1643. page 2.


N. C. What of all this? is there any thing we more suffer for than that holy
Covenant?


C. Surely, that Gentleman and a great number beside (who now are followed and
esteemed above our Changelings, as you are pleased to call them) have long
since altered their minds, and reprobated that Covenant; or, to speak in his
own words, they have been found to purpose, nay more, to vow and to swear, and
all this according to the flesh; so that with them there is, notwithstanding
those Obligations, Yea, yea, and Nay, nay; page 5. A thing which he there
accuses of great falsnesse and inconstancy, such as is not to be shown amongst
us.


N. C. What do you tell me of Independents? We have nothing to do with them.


C. Yes, but you have. For it appears by your discourse, that your Opinions now
are a mixture of the Fancies of more Sects than theirs. And as for your
Ministers, it is plain that they are in part turned Independents, (which is a
gross Apostasy from their Principles) having Congregations in several places
that have no Dependency one upon another.


N. C. They are forced to it.


C. If that be a good excuse, no body will want an Apology for his faults,
which he will find there was some necessity or other for. But (I pray) do you
not remember such a creature some years ago, as the people called a Lay Elder,
but by your Ministers was named a Ruling Elder?


N. C. Yes.


C. And you remember it was disputed very hotly, whether he were one of God's
creatures, or of Man's.


N. C. Very well.


C. And the Ministers whom you adhere to, confidently affirmed that their
Ruling Elders were by Divine right, and ought to be admitted not only upon the
account of prudence, but as seated by God in the Church as Church Officers. If
you doubt of it, read the Vindication of Presbyterial Government, set forth
1649, from page 34. to page 55.


N. C. I know their Opinion well enough.


C. But can you tell me what is become of these creatures? does not the whole
species seem to be lost among you? what is the reason that we bear never a word
of them?


N. C. They are still in their first Principles.


C. You grow witty. But it will not serve your turn; for I should think the
principles are lost as well as they. Else what is the cause you have none of
them in your private Congregations, where you may do what you list? Either you
have deserted those Principles, or else your Covenant, which I am sure you
thought bound you to maintain these. Choose which part you will; for either of
them will serve my turn.


N. C. I never troubled my head much about those Seniors, and therefore do not
much care what is become of them.


C. But you should think what is become of your Ministers Principles, who, I
believe, are content now to let the Lay Elders die; they being but the
creatures of men, and so of a mortal nature.


N. C. It is no great matter if they do, and never rise again.


C. Good. But I have another Question to ask you. Was not there a time when
this was a Principle among your Ministers, that they should obey the Orders of
the Magistrate under whom they lived, if they were not sinful?


N. C. I am not much acquainted with their Opinions in those matters.


C. You may know them then by their Practices, (which I suppose you will by all
means have to be consistent with their Principles.)


N. C. What Practices?


C. I think there were Orders in the late Times that no man should pray
publicly for King CHARLES; and they obeyed them. They were required also to
keep a thanksgiving for the Victories at Dunbarr and Worcester; with which I
believe the most, if not all, complied. Nay, that Thanksgiving was repeated
every year at Whitehall; and I believe Cromwell found some among you that would
not deny to carry on the Work of that day.


N. C. What do you infer from hence?


C. That they have forsaken their Principles. For now they will not obey the
King's Orders. Mark what I say: They would obey Usurpers, because they had a
Power for the time being; and now they disobey their Sovereign, whole Power
they acknowledge to be just, and who commands things that are not unlawful. As
for example, they will not hear Common Prayer, (at least many of them do not)
which they can if they list: nor will they observe an Holy Day, which is no
more unlawful to be kept, one would think, than one of those thanksgivings.
Give me a reason, for instance, why the Nine and twentieth of September may not
as well be observed as the Third sometime was.


N. C. That day is observed for superstitious purposes; to remember the Victory
of Michael over the Dragon.


C. Suppose it were Is not that a great deal better than to re^ember the
Victory of Cromwell over the King?


N. C. That was but once, and away.


C. But once all over the City and Kingdom; yet every year at White Hall. But
why is not that lawful to be done always which we may do once, the reason
continuing still the same?


N. C. You love to rip up old things, which had better be forgotten.


C. Not I. But you force me to it, by reflecting upon the old Principles of
some of our men. And how can one choose (upon such an occasion) but take notice
of the Fantasticalness of your men's Consciences, (at least some of them) that
are so nice and squeamish in some Fits, and at another time can swallow any
thing?


N. C. I do not see but they are the same.


C. That Is strange; when they are so scrupulous now, and were so little
scrupulous then: or at least could do things with a Reluctance and Regret, and
perhaps some Fears and doubts in their minds in those days; and now nothing
will serve them but perfect Satisfaction. If you would have me speak plain, and
show you the difference between things they did then and those they will not do
now, I will take the pains.


N. C. Save your self the labor, I have no mind to hear more of it.


C. That is, you have no mind to see how they have left their Principles, or at
least do not act according to them.


N. C. They know their own Principles better than you.


C. Would they would let us know something of them, that so we might have a
reason for some other alterations we see in them.


N. C. What are they?


C. Did you never hear them cry out against Separation, and forsaking of
public Ordinances? Were there not many books writ to this purpose, when they
possessed the Pulpit?


N. C. I perceive whither you are going.


C. And you shall not stir, but go along with me. Cousider, I beseech you, what
are become of those Principles; or how much are their present practices
condemned by them? Do they not keep Private Meetings every week, and that in
the time of the Public Service, as I told you before? Are they not thereby
kept from Church themselves, and do they not thereby keep away a great many
others? Tell me (good Neighbor) what is this but a down right Separation from
us?


N. C. They are not for a Separation from Christ's Ordinances, but from yours.


C. Ours are Christ's Ordinances as much as any you frequent: for we pray and
give thanks to God in his Name. And we do this according to his appointment;
praying only for such things as he would have us, and no other. As for words,
I hope you g^ant that neither yours nor ours know any ordained by him but the
Lord's Pray^, which we use, and you perhaps do not, And as for Cere^ies, I know
those very men now separate from us, who heretofore approved those books which
were writ against Separation upon the account of Ceremonies. And whatsoever you
imagine, they do not think our public Ordinances (as they now stand) are
Antichristian, or that it is unlawful to be present at them. Therefore I must
have a better reason for their Separation from our Assemblies; or else you must
confess that they (not we) have changed their Principles.


N. C. I doubt not but they have a Reason.


C. No more do I. They have, without question, a great many: but they are
carnal reasons.


N. C. Why are you so censorious?


C. I am content they should have other reasons: but I speak according to your
conceptions of them.


N. C. You are very Mysterious on a sudden.


C. Methinks the matter is plain. If they have sound reasons to alter their
Principles, then we have done. If they have not, what reasons can they be but
carnal ones, which alter their practice?


N. C. I do not love to hear you talk thus.


C. Nor do I love to hear my self talk thus: but you constrain me to it. And (I
pray you) whether you love it or no, do so much as hear me one word more.


N. C. You may speak your mind.


C. Was there not a time when your Ministers would by no means hear of Liberty
of Conscience? Did they not cry out upon it in their Pulpits and their books,
and call it Cursed Toleration? Read but a Book called A Testimony to the truth
of Jesus Christ, and to our solemn League and Covenant, etc. subscribed by the
Ministers of the Province of London, December. 14. 1647. There you will find that
among other abominable Errors and damnable Heresies, (as they are called, page
4.) this is condemned for one, page 22. That little can be done, unless Liberty
of Conscience be allowed for every man and sort of men to worship God in that
way, and perform the Ordinances of Christ in that manner, as shall appear to
them most agreeable to God's Word, etc. This, among others, they call a horrid
and prodigious Opinion; and tell us ( page 32. and 33.) that it will lay the
glory of the most high God in the dust, if it take place, and raze the Truth of
Christ to the ground, and overthrow all Christ's Ordinances, and together
therewith Magistrates and Ministers, and all Religious and comely Order, etc.
In short, they say we shall be disowned by all Reformed Churches, who will cry
out, Is this England, who covenanted to extirpate Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Schism, etc? and after so long travel has she nom b^ought forth
an hidious Monster of Toleration?


N. C. I know all this as well as you can tell me: and they are of the same
mind still; for this was writ only against an Universal Toleration of all
Sects, which they abhor.


C. I can tell you another story. They would not so much as tolerate five poor
men, who professed to agree with them in all matters of Doctrine. Judge then
what their Opinions were about Liberty, when they would not allow it to so few
dissenting Brethren.


N. C. That was a great while ago, and most of those streight-lac'd men are
dead.


C. No such matter. But if they were, their Principles did not die with them,
but survived in their followers. And yet now all on a sudden they are vanished.
Now they are for Liberty of Conscience. By which if they mean only a Liberty
for themselves let them speak out, that all their Brethren of the Separation
may hear them. And withal let them acquaint us by what Title they claim this
Favor more than the rest of the Sects that are sprung from them, who might
take the liberty to separate from them, as well as they take the Liberty to
separate from us. And before they prove that it is due to them, let them first
answer their own Argument against the Independents, (which I can show them in a
Letter of the London Ministers to the Assembly of Divine,) which was this; That
to grant a Toleration to them, and not to other Sectaries, will be counted
Injustices


N. C. I perceive you are of a persecuting spirit.


C. You rather discover your self of a turbulent spirit, which cannot forbear
to trouble and confound even our discourse. For that is not the business,
whether all Restraint of men's liberty be Persecution; nor whether I am for it
or no: but to show you that once your Ministers were of such a spirit as you
call persecuting, and now are not.


N. C. Then they are changed for the better.


C. You should have said, Then they are changed, (which was the thing we were
speaking of;) whether for the better or no, that is another question: And let
them, if you please, resolve it. I believe they will not confess they were of a
persecuting spirit, when they were against the Liberty which they now claim.


N. C. What, do you make them of no Principles at all?


C. Do not mistake me so. They are constant to some Principles, particularly
this, That all is well done that they do, though quite contrary to what they
did before.


N. C. You are bitter.


C. Do you like this Principle better, (which they will not forsake, I warrant
you) That they are in God's way, and therefore ought to be tolerated; whereas
all others are our of his way, and therefore ought not to be tolerated?


N. C. You much offend me by these Reflections.


C. I Will tell you another then, that is more moderate, and will please you
better: That they must by all means keep you from coming to Church, for fear
you should see that you may be as well taught elsewhere as in their private
Meetings.


N. C. I told you before, there is no danger of that.


C. But you told me no Reason, as I have shown you, that is worth any thing.


N. C. We have one that will never suffer us to come to Church more, as long as
your Ministers are there.


C. What terrible Scarecrow should that that be?


N. C. To tell you the truth, many of us do not think that they are Ministers.


C. Now you have revealed the Bottom of your heart. -- Pardon me that sudden
conclusion; you may have more yet lurking behind, which you have not told me. I
should rather have said, Now you have revealed your Unskilfulness more than
ever. For what have any of yours to qualify them for the Ministry which ours
have not as well as they? If you require the inward motions of the Spirit of
God inclining a man to devote himself to this work; (which some of you think is
enough) this ours profess to have felt, as you may see in the Form of ordering
Priests. If it be further necessary to be approved by Presbyters, and to have
their hands laid on them; this is not wanting to ours, as you may there also be
satisfied.


N. C. But the Bishop lays on his hands also.


C. And can this unhallow them, when they are so dedicated to God?


N. C. Yes so I am told.


C. Then you would sooner believe what one of your own Party says without any
reason, than what we say with all the reason in the world: which is plainly
partial affection.


N. C. Why so?


C. Is it not apparent that a Bishop is a Presbyter too? though we think him
more.


N. C. You acknowledge a distinction of persons in the Church, which is
Antichristian.


C. Nay, then I have done with you. You condemn all the ancient Church of
Antichristianism; and more than that, the very Apostles themselves and the
Evangelists, who it is manifest had some Superiority over their brethren. But
observe whither you are run, having once left your way. You mix the very dregs
of all other Sects with your own; and believe any thing that makes against us,
even such things as the Minister you commonly hear would be ashamed to say.
First, you only disliked the Common Prayer; then you did not love the man that
read it; next you would not come to hear him; and now you will not allow him to
be a Minister: nay rather than suffer him to enjoy that name, you will venture
to deprive Apostolical men of their Office, who exercised an Authority over
their brethren.


N. C. Suppose they did; yet they were not Lords.


C. No, nor do we ordain any Lords when we make Bishops. That Is an Honor which
the King does them, to qualify them to sit in Parliament and advise about the
Affairs of the Realm, in which they are as much concerned as other men.


N. C. If their Lordships would preach more, perhaps we might like them better.


C. I doubt not. For those that do, you will not come to hear.


N. C. Their Lawn-sleeves offend us.


C. And why should you not as well take offense at the White Cap and the Lace
which I have often seen under the Black upon your Ministers heads?


N. C. Any thing becomes a Godly man.


C. I thought thither would be your retreat. But why are not the Bishops Godly
too?


N. C. They do not love and encourage good men.


C. You still suppose none are good but your selves; which is no great token of
that Modesty and Humility which we think necessary to make a Godly man. But
suppose any of them should be so bad as not to countenance the very best among
us, but rather the worst; yet this would be only the fault of the Men, not of
the Office.


N. C. I have often heard that Distinction; but I could never love your Logic.


C. Yes sometimes. For you once liked a more subtle Distinction than this, and
that was between the King's personal and politic capacity --


N. C. Pray forbear to scratch those old sores. But why do your Bishops oppose
all Praying by the Spirit?


C. I thought you might come to that at last, and I fancy it is the great
quarrel you have with the.


N. C. Verily it is.


C. Then let me assure you, the Bishops are the farthest of any men in the
world from opposing Praying by the Spirit.


N. C. You tell me a thing incredible. I should come sometimes to hear your
Ministers but that they have not the Spirit of Prayer; which the Bishops (I
suppose) suppress and keep down all they can.


C. Belike then you think that to pray by the Spirie, and to have a Spirit of
Prayer, are all one.


N. C. Why not? I know no difference.


C. Because I am sure ours have a Spirit of Prayer; but neither ours nor yours
can pray by the Spirit. If they could, the Bishops would rather suffer
Martyrdom than oppose it.


N. C. I apprehend you not.


C. Very likely: for I see you have been nourished with phrases, but understand
very little.


N. C. Pray try if you can make me understand more, since it seems you are so
skilful.


C. Hear me quietly then, and I will tell you what I have learned. For my skill
is only borrowed from such good men as our Parish Priest; whom you (I doubt)
sometime deride, and scornfully call by that name.


N. C. I am in no passion: speak your mind.


C. Tell me then; when a man reverently addresses himself to God, seriously
acknowledges his Authority over all, his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, professes
to depend upon him entirely, dreads his Displeasure, waits upon him for his
grace and favor, hungers and thirsts after Righteousness, and devoutly renders
his Thanks to the Possessor of Heaven and Earth for all his benefits; has he
the Spirit of Prayer, or no?


N. C. I cannot say but he has, if his heart go along with his lips.


C. Then our Ministers have the Spirit of Prayer; for in all appearance, and as
far as we can judge, they have an inward sense of these things when they pray.
And as for their words and gestures, they are generally more reverent and
becoming than yours.


N. C. Methinks you should not be of that mind.


C. Truly I have heard such bold, and sometimes rude, things spoken by some of
yours in Prayer, that I could not think they had any sense and feeling of God
at all at that time. Their Gestures also were ridiculous. Nay, I have seen some
of them look about upon the people, (to see, I suppose, how they were affected)
when they should have turned their eyes toward Heaven. Which was an argument to
me they had something else in their mind then, more than God.


N. C. Then it seems you hear them sometimes.


C. Not now. But I have heard them heretofore, when they preached in our
Churches.


N. C. O! but if you could hear them now, you would say they are full of the
Spirit.


C. Because they pour out such abundance of words.


N. C. No, but they are more earnest than ever; and they plead with God after a
more effectual manner.


C. You call Loudness of speech Earnestness, which I always took to be the
ardent desire of our Souls after that good which we humbly beg of God. And as
for their pleading with God, I think it is rather sauciness.


N. C. Now you are bitter.


C. If I thought so, I should condemn my self as much as you can do; for I have
learned, that we ought to put away all wrath, bitterness, clamor, and evil
speaking. Nay, if I thought I had done amiss, I would ask forgiveness, not
only from God, but from you too.


N. C. That is a good mind. But why d^d you use such an harsh expression? Is it
not one of Jobs words? Job 16.21.


C. Yes, but not in your sense. For he would willingly have maintained his
innocence, and have had his Case argued, that he might make it appear he was
not so guilty as his friends made him: Which is nothing to your purpose; who, I
suppose, do not intend (though you call Jesus Christ, a Days-man between God
and us) to stand upon your defense, and justify your selves before him. This
you think too great a boldness, do you not?


N. C. Yes.


C. Why then may I not call it a Sauciness in you to do a great deal more; I
mean, to question God so much as you are wont, and to ask him over and over
again what is the reason he does not this or that, and why he suffers you to be
so and so, and how he can deny you this or the other thing?


N. C. Does not David sometimes ask questions?


C. Yes, in a great agony of spirit, and upon some great occasion: which will
not warrant you to take this unheard of boldness. So I call it; because things
done in imitation of others, when we are not in that condition, and have not
that occasion, and that spirit also which they had, are very fulsome; no better
than the motions of a Monkey when he imitates a man. To do those things also
commonly which those great men did now and then, is monstrously unbeseeming.
Besides, his Psalms are pieces of Divine Poetry, in which Passions are wont to
be expressed much otherwise than they ought to do in plain and familiar speech.
And yet you not only venture to use their Figures of speech, but you go beyond
them. Like a man that having light upon a good Figure in Rhetoric, will never
have done with it but is always touching upon it. Then which nothing can be
more absurd, especially if he heap a great many of these Figures together, as
your manner is, asking God over and over again, (as I said) why he does not
this or that, and when he will do it. Besides, that which in a great agony (as
I said) is very decent to be spoken, does not befit a man's mouth at another
time; but they that go about to imitate it, do a thing unnatural. And the truth
is, you seem to me to endeavor by these questions to put your selves and the
people into a great passion, and a kind of agony; but they do not spring (I
persuade my self) nor arise of themselves from any ardency of Devotion. But
there is another thing that offends me more than all this; that having stirred
up some confused passions in your selves by this and other such like means, you
proceed to such an high degree of confidence in this bold way of Arguing with
God, that you quite forget who you are speaking to. For some have told him that
he little knew how his enemies insulted, (or some such thing;) and that if he
did but know how desirous they were of such a thing, or how much they would
prize it, he would not deny them.


N. C. Pray, Sir, hold your peace, or I will stop my cars. You abuse good men.


C. I tell you only what is credibly reported: and if it be not so, I shall be
very glad. But I must add, that they take such a liberty of saying any thing
to God, which they would say to one another, that I conceive it not unlikely
that some might fall into those unseemly (others perhaps will call them
blasphemous) expressions. Are not you of the same mind?


N. C. I cannot deny but that they use great familiarity with God.


C. Familiarity do you call it? would the world had never known it: For it is
such a one as has bred in men's minds a contempt of God and Religion. It has
taught every body to let that Member loose which ought to be always bridled,
especially in God's presence. They vent all their foolish Opinions to him; they
tell him News, and inform him how things go abroad; which they have received
many times upon a false report: which has brought such a scandal upon
Religion, that it cannot but grieve any good man's heart to think on it.


N. C. It is such as you that have brought Religion into contempt, and not we.


C. How so, I pray you?


N. C. By despising the Spirit.


C. It is false We reverence that Spirit which was in the Apostles; and if we
could see such an one again, none would entertain it with greater gladness. We
acknowledge also the power of the Spirit of God still in the hearts of men,
especially of those who are good; and we bless God continually for it. But that
which we deny is this, That either you or we are able (as I told you) to pray
by the Spirit.


N. C. Do you not then despise the Spirit?


C. No; we suppose there is no such thing as Prayer by the Spirit: if there
were, we should reverence it.


N. C. Would you would tell me your meaning.


C. I mean a prayer immediately dictated by the Holy Ghost, as some were in the
Apostles day.


N. C. I understand you not.


C. Such a prayer, in which by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost a man
conceives those things which he speaks to God. Or (in plainer terms) I mean,
that the Spirit of God does not now suggest to any of us (when we pray) the
very matter and words which we utter. If you pretend to this then those prayers
are as much the Word of God as any of David's Psalms, or as any part of the
Bible; and (being written from your mouths) may become Canonical Scripture.


N. C. But we do not pretend to this.


C. I wish then you would not talk as if you did. I am sure, your discourses of
Prayer are commonly such, that one would think you took your selves to be full
of the Holy Ghost. And this I must tell you has made a great many scorn
Religion, when they saw the Spirit of God entitled to such pitiful stuff as
they heard many vent with the greatest confidence.


N. C. This is their own fault.


C. And yours too.


N. C. I cannot believe that our Prayers ever had any such effect.


C. But I can; and I will tell you how. You constantly tell us that the Bishops
by prescribing a Form limit and stint the Spirit. By which Spirit you mean the
Spirit of God, not your own. From whence it follows, that you think (or would
have the world think) that the Spirit of God speaks in you when you pray, and
that you utter its mind and words. Now many men hearing you pray so
inconsiderately and wildly, uttering most absurd (if not impious) things, yet
with a mighty zeal and confidence, have been tempted to think that whatsoever
is said of the Spirit, even in the Apostles days, might possibly be no more
than such an Extravagance and Fury as this.


N. C. A most senseless conceit.


C. I think so too. But you have given occasion to such conceits in those that
are inclined to Infidelity.


N. C. I hope not. For we only mean, when we say we pray by the Spirit, that
the Holy Ghost assists us


C. With what? Does it furnish you with words?


N. C. No, with devout and ardent affections.


C. This indeed you should mean; but your brags of the Spirit import more.


N. C. Pray, Sir, use no such reproachful words: we boast of nothing.


C. Well, pardon me that word. But if you do not brag, yet you say that you can
pray by the Spirit, and we cannot, at least do not. In which you ascribe
something more to your selves than is to be found among us.


N. C. Yes.


C. Then you mean more by praying by the Spirit than being inspired with devout
Affections. For those you cannot deny we may have as well as you; and unless
you will take upon you to search the heart, you must grant we feel them, since
we protest that we do. From whence I conclude, whatsoever you say, that your
men would have you believe that it is the Spirit which speaks in them and by
them when they pray. Which is a thing that reproaches not only them, but the
very Spirit of God, and (as I said before) has at least confirmed men in their
Atheistical or unbelieving inclinations.


N. C. Well, I will not dispute this with you any longer. But tell me
seriously, do you think that men could pray with that readiness and elocution,
and lenght, if they were not mightily assisted by the Spirit of God?


C. Yes indeed do I. Their own spirits will serve them for this purpose; if
they be but endued with good phansies, and a sufficient measure of boldness.
For it is a great virtue (I assure you) in this case not to be modest; though
we reckon it a singular virtue to be so.


N. C. I cannot think it possible.


C. Why? Neighbor, you may take my word for this. There are many of our men
could outdo you in this Gift (as you call it) of Prayer, if they would give
themselves the liberty; and yet you would not think them inspired, I am sure. I
mean, they are able to speak so readily and fluently so earnestly and
passionately of all manner of things, and to continue this strain so long, and
that without humming or hawing; that if you did not know them, perhaps you
would admire them above most of your own.


N. C. Then I should conclude they had the Gift of Prayer but suppress it.


C. So they have; but it is both in you and us only a Natural gift, or
acquired by Exercise, and Practice, and Imitation --


N. C. Now you speak profanely.


C. I speak the sense of the soberest of your own Party, (as I verily believe)
who would say the same, if they durst but deal plainly with you. And (as simple
as I am) I dare undertake to justify the truth of what I say against any of
them, if they have the face to contradict it.


N. C. I see you leave the Spirit of God nothing to do in our Prayers.


C. Would you would see how you forget your self. Did I not tell you what the
Spirit of Prayer was? how that God bestows it upon us, when he gives us a sense
of himself and of our needs, and stirs up in us holy desires, and passionate
longings after his Righteousness; which we should express in such words as are
becoming that Majesty with whom we have to do? And this is the reason that we
take care to choose our words, and not leave them to extemporary invention,
especially in the public Service of God.


N. C. Do you think they will ever want Words whose hearts are full of Desires?
or can great Affections ever fail to furnish us with plenty of Language?


C. Yes, that they may. For all experience tells us, that very great and high
Affections are too big for Words, and make a man at a stand for want of
Expressions; which no man sure will think a seemly thing in a public
Congregation. And the passions of Admiration and Reverence of God restrain a
man's forwardness of speaking to him, and make him like a few words best, which
he is not then in a fit case to invent. A^ for lesser Affections and
superficial Heats; I grant they seldom let a man want words (if he have
tolerable Parts) and make him speak more readily than he would do at another
time: yet they are not able ever to furnish him with those that are fit,
proper, and decent. Which methinks should make you not quarrel with a sober
form of words, at least in our public Devotions.


N. C. Would you could persuade me that a Form of words is lawful to be used;
it would go a great way to persuade me to come to your Church.


C. Strange that you should be so inapprehensive! It is so lawful to use a Form
of words, that I have shown you it is in a sort necessary: that is, we can have
no security that the Service of God will always be performed well without one.


N.C. I confess I do not yet apprehend you.


C. Observe then. I say, the best of men, though their hearts be full of good
desires, may, from some cause or other, want such words as are fit and proper
to express their meaning. In this case they must hack in an unseemly manner, or
make a stop, or use such words as are too rude and slovenly, or speak broken
and imperfect language, or at the best such as is too hard and obscure, and
unintelligible by the Vulgar. None of which things are to be permitted in the
public Worship, which ought to be performed with the greatest solemnity and
gravity. And therefore to prevent that Undecency, and secure the Service of God
from all that is unhandsome; you must consent to a prescribed Form of words,
wherein men shall address their humble and hearty Desires to him. For though
some men, at some times, may pray well enough; yet other men, and the same men
at other times, may be very confused, and full of Tautologies; and it is well if
they endeavor not to supply these defects with rude Clamours, brutish Noises,
and a deal of the Holy Scriptures woefully misapplied. Beside; how can you
persuade any strangers to be of our Church, or to hold any Communion with us,
if they do not know how we worship God? And how should they know that, unless
you can produce something which by a general consent is owned for his Service?
This no doubt is one reason why all Churches in the world have had their
public Forms of Prayer, that they may let every body know how God is served by
them; and why the best men in Reformed Churches have wished those happy days
might come of amity and friendship, that they might by a Common Counsel and
Consent form a certain Liturgy, which might be as a Symbol and Bond of Concord
among them all. And truly I cannot advise how your Ministers can justify
themselves in separating now from all the Reformed Churches, (as well as ours)
with whom they covenanted to maintain an Uniformity, not only in Doctrine and
Discipline, but Worship also. To me they seem to live in an open breach of one
branch of that Covenant, of which they are so tender. For they do not endeavor
in their place and calling to reform according to the example of those Churches.


N. C. What should they reform now they have no power?


C. Themselves and their Congregations, which they take the boldness to gather;
who ought to serve God (according to the Covenant) after the example of the
best Reformed Churches; all of which have an Order and Form of Prayer, and
never imagined that those written Forms did bind up and stint the Spirit. This
is a peculiar fancy of your own, who have no Form at all in any of your
Conventicles or Meetings; though it is in the power of your Ministers to have
one, as well as to hold such Meetings; and though they be bound by their League
and Covenant to do their endeavor to imitate those that have. Nay, I much
question whether they use the Lord's Prayer. They that do (I believe) have the
least company; such is the prejudice which they (contrary to their Covenant)
have sown in peoples minds against Forms of Prayer, even that of the Lord's.
Which thing considered, it makes me astonished at your impudence in pretending
such niceness of Conscience, and fear to break your Covenant; when you break it
every time you meet together without some Form of Divine Service.


N. C. They only covenanted to reform this Church of England according to the
example of the best Reformed Churches: which they cannot do.


C. Only, do you say? Is that a less thing then to reform a particular
Congregation? Methinks they should think themselves obliged to do what they
can, when they cannot do what they would; and to do that in a part, which they
cannot do in the whole; that is, bring in some Form of Prayer into your
Churches, for so no doubt you esteem them.


N. C. I do not think they can if they would.


C. Why?


N.C. Because most of us think Forms unlawful.


C. That Is their fault, who either taught you to believe so heretofore, or do
not instruct you now to believe otherwise. Though it were a very casie thing
for them to do it, and convince you of your error, even from your own Practice.


N. C. My Practice? I never use any, and I think never shall.


C. It is a wonderful thing that you should be so blind. Do you never sing the
Psalms of David, and that as they are translated into English Meter?


N.C. Yes.


C. Those are Prayers and Petitions as well as Thanksgivings, are they not? And
let me tell you, the words are so mean and sometime uncouth, nay, the sense of
the Prophet so often mistaken in that Translation which is commonly used; that
if you had so much to except against the Common Prayer, as may reasonably be
excepted against many things there, there would be no end of your Complaints;
you would be ten times louder in your Clamours than you are.


N. C. Indeed I did not think of this.


C. Your Ministers do; but are not so smcere as to give you notice of it? lest
you should be disabused, and they should lose your Custom. But pray think of it
your self hereafter; and tell me why it is not as lawful to use a Form of
Prayer in Prose, as to use one in Verse. You will be a mavelous man, if you
can show a Reason of the Difference.


N. C. But this Form is not taken out of the Mass book as the Common Prayer is.


C. Then you lay down your quarrel at a Form of Prayer; and only scruple this
Form now in use; and that because it has been used in the Roman Church.


N. C. Very right.


C. Then pray lay aside your Bible too; at least cut the Psalter out of your
book, for that is much in use in their Service.


N. C. You go too fast; that is the Word of God, and therefore to be used; but
any thing else used in the Church of Rome I think we should have nothing to do
with.


C. This is a foolish exception. For the Reason you gave me concludes against
the use of the Psalms too, or else it concludes nothing: which I thus
demonstrate. You lay down this Proposition, Whatsoever is used in the Service
of the Roman Church must not be used by us. To this I add another; The Psalms
and other Scriptures are used in the Service of the Roman Church. Now do you
draw any other Conclusion if you can from these two, but this, That those
Scriptures must not be used by us. If you like not this Conclusion, then you
must mend the first proposition, (which is your own, and you may do what you
will with it;) as for mine, it cannot be mended, for it is certainly true. Now
how will you mend it, but by allowing us the use of whatsoever is good in their
Service? And then you must admit of more than the Scripture to be used by us,
even all that is according to the Scripture: As our Prayers certainly are;
though some of them are but Translations of the Latin Prayers used in that
Church.


N. C. I will mend it in this manner: Whatsoever they use (except it be the
Word of God) we are not to use it.


C. It is mere Humor that makes you limit it in this manner. For there is
something good besides the Scripture. viz. that which is writ, said, or done
according to it. And why they should make any thing of this nature unuseful to
us by their using it, since you confess the Holy Scripture, notwithstanding
their use, nay abuses of it, is not profaned thereby, is past my capacity to
understand. But perhaps you will be more sensible of what I say, if I tell you,
that upon these principles you must reject the use of the Creed, commonly
called the Apostles Creed, because it is Professed there in Divine Service as
well as here.


N. C. I would not willingly go so far from them.


C. Not go? you must whether you will or no, if you will follow your
Principles, which will carry you so far, and a great deal farther. For this is
the very bottom on which your Discourse stands; that whatsoever has been in
use by a bad company of men, must by no means be used by us in God's Worship;
except only such portions of Holy Scripture as shall be thought fit to be read
in our Assemblies. From whence it follows, that you may not lift up your Eyes
to Heaven, nor Kneel when you pray, nor --


N. C. Now methinks you rave.


C. Pray hear me a little, and you shall see it is you that are wild, and not I:
so wild, as to practice that which you condemn. If we must not do what the
Church of Rome does in the Worship of God, then much less what Heathens have
done and still do; for they are worse than the Roman Church.


N. C. I think your Proposition is good enough; but who does that which the
Heathen Idolaters were wont to do?


C. That did the Jewish Church, and that do you.


N. C. Prove that.


C. So I will; and you shall have Scripture for it.
The Jews and you also Bow your Knees or Bodies to God, and the Heatheus bowed
their Knees to Baal, and Bodies to Rimmon, 2 Kings 5.18. 1 Kings 19.18. You all
list up your Eyes to Heaven when you worship; and the Heathen lifted up their
eyes to their Idols, as appears by the practice in Israel, who imitated their
Customs, Ezekiel. 18.12. and 33.25. You stretch out your hand to God, and so the
Custom was to do to a strange God, Psalm. 44.20. The Heathens sat down at
their Feasts, when they eat of the Sacrifices in the Temples of their Gods, 1 Corinthians. 8.1^. Exodus 32.6. which is the very posture which you are so fond of
when you come to seast with Christ, in the holy Sacrament of his Body and Blood
sacrificed for us. I would add more, but that it would be tedious. And the
truth of it is, good men use that every day well which bad men use ill: And
therefore I see not but we may do so with many things practiced in the Roman
Church. Do not good men use the Name of God with Reverence, which wicked men
continually blaspheme? Do we not refresh our selves with Meat and Drink, of
which many Debauched persons take a Surfeit? Those fine Clothes which some wear
for pride, do not others wear because they befit their Quality? And, to come
nearer our business, Those Prayers which some men mumble over, others read
devoutly: and those Garments which some may use as holy, others use as decent.
What should ail us then, I ask you once again, that we cannot rightly use those
things which the Church of Rome abuses? say those good Prayers, for instarce in
English, which they say in Latin? wear a white Garment without any Ceremony to
consecrate it, which they hallow with many Prayers, and Crossing, and Holy
water? Nay, use the Sign of the Cross it self upon one occasion only once,
after the Sacrament of Baptism, and merely as a token the Child is already
become a Servant of the Crucified Jesus; which they use upon all occasions,
before and in Baptism, a great many times, and that also to drive away the
Devil, and to make the Sacrament more efficacious? There are an hundred things
more, present themselves to my thoughts about these matters; but I am ashamed
to discourse any longer against so absurd a Principle as yours. For in my
judgment you may as well do some things which the Church of Rome does, as
believe some things which she believes; as I hope you do. Nay, you believe even
what the Devil believes. And as it would be a very dangerous rule, if any one
should say, Believe quite contrary to what the Devil believes; so it is no less
(but rather more) dangerous to say, Do quite contrary to what the Church of
Rome does.


N. C. I have not much to say against your discourse; but we have a persuasion
among us, that Nothing is lawful to be done by you or any body else in the
Worship of God, but what is enjoined by himself in his Word. And then what
becomes of your Crossing and Chaunting and Kneeling, with all the rest of your
Inventions? are they not all Idolatrous?


C. This is the wildest fancy that we have yet heard, as many of our
Ministers have shown by unanswerable Arguments. For it makes that unlawful
which the Scripture allows; in which we find many Holy men doing those things
(without any censure) in God's Worship which he had no where commanded. Nay, it
makes the Worship of God impossible; the Time, the Place, the Vesture in which
it shall be performed being no where appointed. It condemns also the best
Christians in all Ages till of late, who without any scruple used Forms of
Prayer, and such Rites as those about which there is all this stir. And, which
perhaps will most move you, I have heard our Ministers show that this Principle
does condemn your selves, who (when you take an Oath) do not resuse to lay your
Hand upon the Book, and kis^ the Gospel, according as the custom is.
Now all agree that an Oath is a solemn act of Divine Worship, it being an
acknowledgment of all God's Attributes, and he being invocated and called upon
to be a Witness and a Judge in the case. And if that be an act of Worship, I am
sure, Kissing the Book and Laying on the Hand are as much Ceremonies as Signing
with the Cross; outward signs (I mean) accompanying the action of Swearing,
though they belong not to the Essence of it. And I am as sure that you can no
where show me that God has commanded this Religious action to be attended with
this Ceremony. Behold then, into what perplexities these men cast you! What
Snares they entangle you and themselves in! Out of which they cannot set you
free, but by acknowledging (as we do) that men may appoint this Ceremony in
taking an oath, though God has not appointed it; according as in this very
case, Abraham made his Servant put his Hand under his Thigh when he swear,
though it were a thing no where commanded. But then consider again, that they
and we may take the like liberty in other parts of Divine Worship, and submit
to such Usages as are appointed by our Governors, provided they be no where
forbidden. Or if, rather than condemn themselves, they will condemn good old
Abraham, and say he followed the custom of the world too much: there is no way
for you but to turn Quakers, and to condemn Clean clothes when we come to
worship God; to find sault with the Minister for standing in a Pulpit, for
Preaching by a Glass, for wearing a Gown, yea, a Cloak or a Cap, especially
with Ears: for none of these things are by any Divine Command.


N. C. I see you have something to say to every thing. If I did not know you, I
should suspect you for a Jesuit.


C. That would be ridiculous. For if there be any of them in Laymens clothes,
they do not persuade you to our Church, but from it; knowing that is the surest
way to gain you, if they can once unsettle your minds, and fill you with
Phansies: of which they will at last persuade you there is no end, till you
rest your self in the bosom of that Harlot which you so much abhor.


N. C. I see one cannot weary you. But suppose these things be lawful in
themselves; I am told they become unlawful when once they are enjoined.


C. This is an Extravagance wilder than all that went before. They are so far
from being unlawful by being commanded, that they become necessary; to be done,
I mean.


N. C. I thought you would say so. But that is the very thing makes me think
them unlawful when commanded; for it takes away Christian liberty by making
them necessary to be done.


C. Goodly! what fine things do your Christians make themselves, that must be
restrained in nothing, though for public Orders sake! Nay, must overruled the
Laws of Christian Princes, and show the power they have over their Commands? Do
you think there ever were any Christians in the world before you that held
themselves bound not to do a lawful thing, merely because his Sovereign would
have it done? If he did command a thing unlawful, there were good reason not to
do it: but if he is like to be equally disobeyed whether he command things
lawful or unlawful; nay, and it be a duty to disobey him in both alike; he is
in miserable circumstances, and had better never meddle with the Worship of
God, but leave it to be ordered as every body phansies.


N. C. That Is the best way.


C. Nay, now I think on it, there is a way to make you do what he likes best; and
you shall hold your selves bound to it.


N. C. That Is strange.


C. Not so strange as true. For when a Prince has a mind you should do a
thing, if I were of his Council, I would advise him to make a Law that you
should not do it. For then you would either show that you are people of a
humoursom Conscience, that is guided by no certain Principles; or else,
according to your own Rules, you would do what he for bids you. For as when he
commands a thing about the Service of God, it becomes unlawful to be done: So
when he forbids any thing, it becomes unlawful to let it alone; your Liberty
being invaded by him either way. If he would but require therefore that no body
should wear the Surplice, or use the Sign of the Cross; we should see all your
Ministers with Surplices on their Backs, and all your Children crossed in the
Forehead: For else you would be restrained in your Liberty.


N.C. I never knew any man fetch things about in this fashion as you do. The
truth it, you entangle me, but you do not persuade me.


C. I have not much hope of it, If you feell not the force of these arguments:
Yet I Will try what a familiar Resemblance will do. We are agreed that the thing
commanded by Authority, is not less indifferent in its own nature after it is
commanded than it was before; but only our use of it is not so indifferent and
at liberty. We must needs be therefore agreed also that this Restraint comes
not upon us from the things themselves, because still perfectly indifferent;
but only from the Law, which ties us up: Now we say, that to this Law we are
to be subject, not regarding our own Liberty so much as the Prince's Authority.
You say, No. But as the Law cannot alter the Nature of the things, so it ought
not to Restrain your Freedom in the use of them; but leave that as indifferent
as the things themselves. That is, that the King ought to make no such Law
about those matters: If he do, then it is unlawful to do what he commands to
be always done; because he ought to leave you at Liberty to let it alone if you
please, and you ought to maintain your Liberty, and by no means to part with
it. Put the case then that you (being Master of a Family) will have your
Children and Servants to come at a certain time and place, etc. to worship God.
It is indifferent indeed in it self, and all one to God, whether it be at ten,
eleven, or twelve a clock, or in what part of your House they meet, or in what
Clothes they come, or what Postures they use: But you appoint the hour of
meeting shall be twelve; and that they come into your Parlour, or Hall, or
Chapel, if you have that convenience: And beside, you require your Servants
that they shall not come into your Parlour (suppose) in those Frocks wherein
they just before rubbed your Horse's Heels, (which you think not handsome or
decent) but in their Liveries, or some such neater Apparel. And when they come
there, you bid them stand some part of the time, and the rest you bid them sit,
if they please, and at Prayers kneel, as you do your self. Let me ask you now,
Do you really think that this is any such Restraint of their Liberty, as they
have just cause to complain of it? Would you think you took too much upon you
in making these Orders for your Family, of which you are Governor? Or would
you judge that Servant to be without fault, and guiltless of any Contempt, who
should say, that he will come at ten of the clock, but not at twelve; because
it matters not which, so the thing be done; and he will not be tied to any
Order, but to do the thing? And suppose another should come and say, that he
will pray, if you please to come into the Stable, but he will not come into the
Parlour; for it is indifferent where it is; and he must not be confined to one
place more than another. And a third should come and tell you that he is ready
to join in Prayer, but then it must be in his Frock, otherwise he will not; for
God may be served as well in that as any other Garment, and he must use his
Christian Liberty, and not be bound to your Fashions. And the next should tell
you, that he will sit in your presence, or else you shall not have his company:
His reason is, because it is all one to God whether he sit or stand; and he is
not to let you be Master of his Freedom in those matters. What would you say to
these people? Nay, what would you do with them? Would you excuse them, and
acknowledge your own guilt in making such Injunctions? Or would you not rather
treat them as a company of saucy Clowns and ill-bred Fellows, not fit to be
kept in any orderly family? If you should not, all the world would hold you as
ridiculous as they. For every Master of a family is vested with sufficient
authority to see such commands as those observed. And when they that will not
observe them, yet acknowledge them to be indifferent things; truly I think no
body will think them harshly used, if they be turned out of doors. If they be
Fools and Blocks, that cannot understand common sense; then (I confess) they
are to be pitied; and his good nature may work so far as to bear with their
simplicity, if they be otherways good Servants: But yet those Knaves that
abused their simplicity, and instilled these filthy Principles into them;
deserve to be punished, and put out of his Service, till they acknowledge their
fault, and learn more manners. Just like this is the present case before us.
The Church is but a larger Family, a wider Society, in which the King is the
Father and Supreme Governor. If he make some Laws for the more convenient,
orderly and decent Worship of God there, which in themselves are Lawful, and
declared not to be in their own nature necessary, but only prudent
Constitutions; I cannot see but that those who refuse to obey them upon
pretense of their Liberty, and that God may as well be worshipped without those
things, do show themselves as unmannerly, rude, and refractory persons, as the
Children or Servants in that supposed Family, of which I bad you conceive your
self Master. And I leave you to apply this case to that; and to make the
parallel complete in your thoughts at your leisure. I hope it will be worth
your labor, if you do it seriously.


N.C. It gives me some light into the business already. But still I wonder that
all our Ministers should hold your Forms and Orders unlawful. Sure they have
some better reason for it than I have.


C. Alas, good man! you are merely abused. For though they are willing you
should remain in the opinion of their Unlawfulness; they do not think so
themselves.


N.C. What would you make of them? Do not I hear them constantly speak against
them?


C. Nay, do you make what Consequences you think sit from it. As for the thing
it self, I will maintain, that those Ministers you hear (some indeed think
otherwise) are not of the mind, that it is unlawful to come to Common Prayer,
or wear a Surplice, or kneel at the Sacrament.


N.C. You cannot make good your confident Assertion.


C. Why, Man? I have seen them at the Prayers; and many of them have professed
they did not think the Ceremonies such great Bugbears that one need to be
afraid of them. And if this will not do, I have a more convincing Argument of
their Opinion in these matters.


N.C. And do these very men now seem to dislike the public Prayers?


C. Seem? you confess they speak against Forms. And we see the open affronts
they put upon our Service, by meeting at that very time when it is performed:
the reason of which I expounded to you before.


N.C. Therefore I always thought they accounted it unlawful.


C. No such matter. You should rather think something else; and (to help you a
little) consider whether their Integrity be so great as you imagine.


N.C. Your meaning, Sir?


C. I mean, they do not seem to me to deal sincerely with you, in suffering you
to live in this dangerous persuasion of the sinfulness of Common Prayer and the
Ceremonies; when they know in their Consciences they are not sinful. And then
to hear you call it Bibble-babble, Porridge, or such like vile names, without
any reproof, is still worse. But if you hear themselves speak against the
Common Prayer and the Ceremonies; there is the greater reason to have a
vehement suspicion of their Dishonesty; because they decry that which in their
Consciences they allow.


N.C. I am not fully satisfied of that.


C. Why did many of them deliberate so long whether they should accept of
Dignities in the Church, if they did not believe it lawful to hear the Prayers,
and to put even the Babylonish Garment (as you will needs call the Surplice)
upon their backs; and more than that, to wear the very Rags of the Whore, the
Lawn sleeves? If it was so plain a business, that their Conscience and their
Covenant would not let them conform, one would think they should have professed
it openly without any more ado. And therefore I conclude, that Pause and
Deliberation was about something else; not about matters of Conscience, but of
Interest and Policy. As, Whether the people would take it well, and not laughed
at them, as so many Magpies got upon a Perch: whether it would not be a
scandalous thing, that is, not for their Credit and Reputation: whether they
could not hold such a Party with them in Nonconformity, as would balance the
Episcopal, and so force them at least to a Toleration. In short, whether they
should not lose the Affections of their own party, which they had already made;
and win very little upon the Affections of others, whom they had so much
disobliged in the late Troubles. These were their secret Debates in their
Cabals, the weighty Points that were to be stated in those Consultations. You,
Good man, think perhaps that they spent their time in Fasting and Seeking God
to direct their Consciences. No, no; it was not their Conscience, but their
Credit, which then lay at stake. --


N.C. Why should you think so?


C. Because I have heard some of them acknowledge they did not scruple what we
do, but thought it unhandsom for them to do it. Sometimes they put it in a more
Religious phrase, and said, it would give a great scandal to the world, who
would think the worse of the Profession of Christianity. But the meaning was in
plain English, that they were ashamed to confess their Error, and to set up
those things again which they had rashly pulled down.


N.C. And would you not have men to consult their Credit?


C. Yes, but not so much as the peace of the Church of God. We ought to deny
our selves, and be content to be put to shame for God's sake; (which is indeed
true Glory) and there is little of God among them that seek not Peace, though
on those terms. Besides, there can no account be given of their Behavior since
in cherishing this Fancy among you, (or suffering it to grow) that Conformity
is unlawful, unless it be this that they think it will make more for their
Reputation among you, if you believe it was Conscience, not care of their own
Credit and Estimation, that kept them from Conforming


N.C. You are the severest man that ever I knew, and love to search too far
into the reason of things.


C. Would you would do so too; for then you would soon be of my mind.


N.C. No, not as long as one Scruple remains in my mind.


C. What Is that?


N. C. I have heard some of them call yours, Will Worship, which the Apostle
condemns, ( Col. 2. ult.)


C. Very likely they might, and not understand what they said.


N.C. Do you believe they would, like brute Beasts, speak evil of things they
know not?


C. I will not censure them of that, but this I can tell you, that one of your
Ministers confessed to a sober person of my acquaintance, that he had never so
much as read over the Common Prayer Book in all his life; and yet he was no
Youngster. Perhaps there may be more such: and then if they speak against it,
judge of them as you see Cause.


N. C. I believe such men dislike it without looking into it; because, as I
told you, it is Will Worship, a mere invention of man.


C. That Is a word of S. Paul, whom no doubt they have read; but I question
whether they understood him.


N. C. Why should you doubt it?


C. Because, if we take the sense of the Word, not from Fancy, but from the
matter wherewith it is connected, it makes nothing for your purpose, but rather
much against you.


N. C. Can you tell better than they?


C. I do not say so; but I have heard one of our Ministers give such an
Explication of the place as satisfied me, that you use a Weapon which wounds
your selves.


N. C. Let Us hear it.


C. If you look a little back, you will find the Apostle forbids Worshipping of
Angels; ( v. 18.) as a bold invention of men, for which there was no
Revelation. And then he speaks against such superstitious people (whether Jews,
or others, the minister could not tell us) as made it unlawful to Marry, to eat
some kind of Meats, to touch or come near some things; none of which God has
made sinful, but they were the mere Commandments of men, ( v. 21.22.) Now those
that were of this Humor he immediately after ( v. 23.) charges with
Will Worship. Which must consist, therefore, one would think, in these two
things.

First, In giving the Worship due to God to some Creature or other. Secondly,
in enjoining that as a thing necessary, and commanded by God as a piece of his
Worship and Service, which he has left indifferent; or, in other words, when
any thing is so enjoined to be done or not done, as if it were the Will and
Command of God he should be so served, when it is a mere Constitution of the
Will of Man, then a Will Worship is erected. Now I am sure you will not make us
guilty of the First fort of Will Worship, because none are more against it than
we. As for the Second; our Church has declared to all the World, that none of
the things you boggle at are imposed under the Notion of Necessary, or
Religious, in themselves, or as commanded by God; but are of an indifferent
Nature, and only used as decent and comely in the judgment of the present
Governors, who can alter these things, and constitute something else in the
room, if they see it fit; which they could not pretend to, did they think them
necessary. But then, as our Church is not guilty of Will Worship in the
Apostles Sense; so, on the other side, I know not how to excuse those from that
very guilt, who oppose what is ordained among us as unlawful, and forbid us to
use those Rites and Orders, because sinful things. For they make that necessary
to be forborne and left undone, which God has not made so, but left
indifferent; and so they in effect condemn those as Sinners whom God acquits
from all blame. As those in the Apostle's Discourse, said, Touch not, Taste
not, Handle not, so you say, Kneel not, Pray not by a Form, We are not a
Surplice, etc. Now since you think (as those men did) to please God by not
doing those things which he has nowhere forbidden; I do not see but you
commit the very fault which the Apostle reproves: That is, you make that
necessary not to be done, (if we will be true Worshippers of God) which he has
not made necessary not to be done, but left us at liberty to do it if we
please. By which means you make a Religion of your own, and study to honor God
by abstaining from these things by which he never said that he was dishonored.
O that all tender Consciences would seriously consider this. For they would
soon discern that your Ministers by forbidding these things now in dispute, lay
greater burdens upon the Consciences of their Brethren, and clog them with
more Duties, than God has laid upon them. Whereas we, who think those things
may be done, lay no other burden upon the Conscience than what God himself
has laid; which is, to obey our Governors in all things wherein he himself
has not bidden us to do the contrary.


N. C. You will endeavor by and by to make me believe the Moon is made of green
Cheese. All this discourse tends to prove that we are Superstitious, which you
know in your Consciences we abhor; and are therefore so averse to your ways,
because we judge them Superstitious.


C. You begin to be sagacious and to smell things a far off. The very truth is,
I think it is no easy matter to find more Superstitious people in the World
than your selves. And your Clamours against Superstition prove nothing, but
that a man may be guilty of some faults, and not know it.


N. C. Phy for shame!


C. You must not think to put me off with words and wry Faces. I will prove you
grossly Superstitious, or else be converted to you.


N. C. You will not make good your word.


C. Yes, but I will. Tell me, what is Superstition?


N. C. I am not well skilled in Definitions.


C. No, if you were, you would have smelt the foul Beast among you before this
time. But your business is, only to get some ugly Words by the end, and then to
throw them at every body whom you do not fancy, though they have less to do
with them than your selves. We have been taught that Superstition is a great
Dread lest God should not be pleased, unless we do some things which we need
not do, and lest he should be displeased when we do some things in which there
is no harm. Which Dread springs (as you very well saw) out of an opinion that
such things are good or evil, (and so must be done or must not be done, else
God will take it ill) which in truth are merely indifferent. Or, in shorter,
and perhaps plainer, terms, It is a needless Fear in Matters of Religion, which
makes a man either not dare to do those things which he has a liberty to do,
or think he must upon pain of Damnation do those things which he may as well
let alone.


N. C. What then?


C. What then, do you say? I would have you behold your face in this Glass, and
see how wretchedly and superstitiously you look. For you think you must not,
for fear of God's Displeasure, use a Form, nor sign a Child with the Cross in
Baptism, nor Bow in the House of God, nor go up to the Rails, nay, nor Kneel,
nor hear Church Music, nor uncover your Heads when you enter into a Church,
nor call the Lord's Day Sunday, nor keep an Holy Day. Nay, it was a long time
before you thought it lawful to let your Hair grow below your Ears. All which
things we may do, and not displease God at all. On the other side. You imagine
you are bound to propagate and spread all your little Opinions, though with the
Ruin of Kingdoms: That you are tied to maintain your liberty in indifferent
matters, against all the Authority of a King, and to the disturbing a Church:
That you have a Sermon or two on a Fasting day, or else you fear it is not
kept; and two Sermons on the Lord's Day, or else you doubt it is not
Sanctified. Nay, some of you (I remember) fansied heretofore, that it was no
Sermon, if it were not in the Pulpit. And to such an height is your
Superstition grown, that you scarce think a Prayer is acceptable to God, unless
it be long. And you are afraid he is not served aright, unless we have a long
Prayer before Sermon, after we have been praying a great while for all manner
of things. And such a Necessity you seem to lay upon extemporary Prayer, that
many well-disposed people, who have not that Gift, dare not pray at all, (at
least in their Families) for fear they should not pray aright. And all these
are things of such a nature, as that they may not be done, or done otherwise
than you think they must, and God be never the less pleased with us.


N. C. Now you have discovered the Naughtiness of your Heart, in speaking
against Sermons in the Afternoon.


C. If I should do so, I should speak against my self, and ran into your fault,
I think they may be used, or they may be let alone, according as the
Edification of the People shall require. But to make them so necessary as you
do, arises from a Superstitious Fancy, that God is not well served without
them. Whereas in truth the Catechism expounded, or the Scriptures opened, would
be as well, or rather better.


N. C. I doubt there is something that is naught lies at the bottom of such
Discourses.


C. You should rather suspect there are naughty things at the bottom of such
Opinions as yours. For the Fruit of your Superstition is this at the best; Rash
and unjust Censuring of your Brethren, that do not the things which you make so
necessary to be done, or do the things which you make so necessary to be
forborne; and at last downright Schism and Separation from them, because you
fancy they are out of the way of God.


N. C. I must confess I have some fear you are so; who can be content without a
Sermon in the Afternoon, and satisfied with Common Prayer; which I could never
feel my self so affected with, as I am with extemporary Devotions.


C. That Is because you had so low an esteem of it, and therefore brought no
desires, nor used any Endeavors to be moved by it: but rather you set your
self in a dull and sleepy Posture, as one that had no list to hear it. I could
tell you something else besides this, but it would only vex you.


N. C. I am not afraid of any thing you can say. Pray speak your mind.


C. I believe if you would examine your self, you would find there is some part
of your Ministers extemporary Prayers, which do no more affect you than our
Service.


N. C. What part should that be?


C. The Entrance or Beginning of his Prayer: When he speaks very slow, as if he
was studying what to say, and draws out his words with a low Voice, and with a
small degree of Vehemence, and little or no Motion; then I say, I believe your
Affections are low too, and you feel not your heart much moved. But when his
Voice begins to rise, (especially, if he lift it up on a sudden, and it break
out like a Clap of Thunder) and when he speaks more fluently, and his Zeal
begins to kindle, and he lays about him, and is full of life (as you call it)
that is, uses a great deal of Action; then is the time, if the truth were
known; that your Affections stir, and begin to rise from the bottom of your
Heart, where they lay heavy and dull before. Then you sigh and groan, and
perhaps weep, and are put into many Passions, which lay quiet enough till his
Breath blew louder. Is not this the plain truth?


N. C. What then?


C. Then you are no more affected with the Prayers of your Minister, (as they
are pious Petitions or Acknowledgments of God) than you are with our
Common Prayer; But only with the Voice, the Vehemence, the Action, the pretty
Fancies and fine Phrases, which perhaps he lights upon when he is a little
heated; which were it my case, 'twould make me suspect the Love of God was not
in me. For why should he think he loves God, who is not moved with Affection to
him when he hears his Greatness, Goodness, Wisdom, and Benefits to us, soberly
and gravely expressed, but is in a great Commotion when he meets with a new
Word that pleases him, or a kind Phrase, or melting Tone, a sweet Voice, or
some such thing?


N. C. I hope it is something else that affects me.


C. If it be, then pray tell me, why should not the Common Prayer affect you,
whose sense is good enough, only it is not varied and dressed up in new words
every day? I beseech you try your Heart, by examining the Book, and considering
whether those very things be not requested of God there, which you desire in
your Prayers: and if they be, then demand of your self a Reason why they move
you no more. I doubt you will find it is because they are not new, but old
Expressions.


N. C. I will consider of it at leisure.


C. To help you a little take this along with you; which will go near to
convince you, that if it be not the Voice and Tone, it is the Novelty which
affects you. Suppose one of the Prayers of your own Ministers, which you think
is indicted by the Spirit, was taken in shorthand writing, and afterward used
every day in the Service of God, as often as our Prayers are: Tell me
seriously, do you not think it would seem very flat at last, fuller of nauceous
Repetitions and faulty Expressions than you conceive to be in the Common Prayer?


N. C. You put a hard Question to me.


C. I see you are inclined to be of my mind; and therefore pray consider these
two things. First, That since even a Prayer which you think so heavenly would
not affect you always, if it were always used; it is to be feared you are moved
only while Prayers are new, and indeed because they are new, not because they
are good and pious Petitions. And Secondly, that since it is convenient, if not
necessary, to have a Form of Prayer in the Church, and the Common Prayer has
no other Imperfection but what those whom you so much admire would have, were
they constantly used, as it is; why should you not like it as well as any,
especially since it is established by public Authority?


N. C. I will consider of it, as I said before. But I wish you had seen a Book
(as I perceive you have many of ours) newly come out, which supposes your
Service Book has been abused to Superstition and Idolatry, and therefore must
be abolished.


C. He does well to suppose it, and not to undertake the proof of it. What is
the name of the Book?


N. C. Nehushtan.


C. I have had a short sight of it, as it creeps up and down privately.


N. C. What do you think of it.


C. I will tell you first what I think of you.


N. C. Why what is the matter.


C. You seem to be in a most dangerous condition; for you are infected, as I
told you, already with the extravagant Fancies of a number of other Sects, with
whom you are blended. And in all likelihood you will have such new Inventions,
or rather Frenzies, every year, as will at last destroy your selves as well as
us. Some of your Ministers, for instance, acknowledge that the Liturgy is lawful
to be used, and can read it themselves. Others there are that think it lawful,
but not convenient for men of their Parts and Gifts, whose Ministry (which it
seems is of great Necessity and Benefit) they conceive would be thereby rendered
less useful. Then there is a third sort who are gone farther and doubt of its
Lawfulness: So that they dare not be present at it, though they are content
others should, who think it lawful. And now here is a man thinks no body ought
to hear it, nor be suffered to use such a Form of Worship; but though the
Magistrate ought to tolerate you, yet he ought not to tolerate us. For he
says, It is his Duty utterly to extirpate the Liturgy, as well as the
Ceremonies. And every one of you in your places ought to do your parts toward
the abolishing of it; and not sit still in the midst of such Defilements and
Snares, but discover your hatred of them, decline their use, and in such ways
as Prudence, Justice and Order do allow, Endeavor the rooting of them out.
Whether you will go next, God only knows. And God help the poor Children of the
Church of England, who when all so boldly challenge Liberty and Toleration,
must be the only Persons excluded from this Favor, and, according to this
Gentleman, be denied the use of the Common Prayer, when every body else may
pray what he list.


N. C. You must be content, if he have Evinced (as he tells us he has, in his
Title page) That the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and other things used at this day in
the Church of England, ought neither to be imposed, nor retained, but utterly
extirpated and laid aside. And he pretends in his Epistle to have said more in
this Argument than ever was said before.


C. He does so, and imagins he can weild an old rotten Engine, that has been
long laid aside, better than former Workmen, who were but Bunglers in compare
with this Artist. For he doubts not to manage it so as to throw down the whole
Fabric of the English Church.


N. C. What Engine do you mean?


C. It is this Principle, That it is the will and pleasure of God, that such
things as have been abused and polluted in Superstitions and Idolatrous
Services should be abolished and laid aside (page 15.) Which I observe he
contracts into these words, (page 21.) It is Gods will that things abused in
corrupt and false Worship should be laid aside.


N. C. And what have you to say to it?


C. I will first tell you what he says to it, After he had told us a great many
things (which every body knows) concerning the will of God that the Israelites
should abolish the Images and Groves and Altars of the Cananites, etc. and
thence concluded, that such things as have been employed to corrupt ends and
purposes must be abolished: at last he comes and tells us, that this principle
must not be extended too far, nor made to serve against all things that have
been so abused, and he excepts a great number. Nothing Commanded by God must be
disused upon this account; none of Gods Creatures are to be refused; nay, no
necessary and profitable Devices of men need be sent packing, though they have
been so profaned, and more than this, he says that things which are but in a
competent degree useful, may be retained, if they have been abused to Idolatry
only in a slight manner; that is, a little while. Nay, things that have been
more grossly abused, in case there be no danger for the future of their being
employed, to Idolatry, he is content should be spared, and used either to Civil
or Religious purposes. Now let any man, that can be Master of coherent Thoughts
but for one minute, tell me, if this be not as much as to say his Principle is
not true; and that things are not to be rejected merely upon this account, that
they have been employed in false Worship, but there must be some other reason
for it. For if there be so many things, as he confesses, that may be abused;
and yet may, nay some ought to be still used in God's Service, then the Abuse
is not a sufficient reason for our throwing them away utterly, but there must
be some other which makes it necessary. And if he had told us that reason
plainly, and spent his Discourse in making it good; he had done like a man. But
he saw (it is like) that this would not have done his business, for it would not
for instance, have reached to the taking away of Common Prayer; because it may
be still useful, as much (sure) as his Pen, which, he tells us, must not be
thrown away, if any man be so foolish as to bow down to it and worship it.
(page 130.) And as necessary I should think, as the Water-Pots in Cana of
Galilee, which he confesses our Savior used, though abused to Superstition and
unlawful Purifications, And it is in no danger to be employed to Idolatry, for
the Papists hate it; and I hope he has no thoughts that we ever intend to say
these Prayers to Saints or Angels, any more than to bow to a Saint or Angel
standing for a Sign at an Inn-keeper's door: And yet that is no such
Profanation of the Sign in his judgment, but that the owner may let it stand,
unless it become customary to bow to it.


N. C. Well. Is not the Gentleman to be commended for his Honesty, in not
concealing this from his Readers, that his Proposition or Doctrine is not to be
understood universally?


C. He durst do no otherwise. For if by things abused which must be abolished,
he had understood all things abused, then he saw the Lord's Day would be
antiquated, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper laid aside, nay, he himself put
out of his Ministry: the Christian Priests or Ministers having so much served
Idols as he supposes. But since his Doctrine was to be limited, why was he not
so honest as to do it at first; that so no Reader might be abused, who perhaps
would not go so far as to come to his Limitations? Why did he not say, some
things abused must be laid aside, and in some Case; for that is the sense of
his Proposition? To make it plainer what I mean, I say, (mark it I pray you) by
things abused, he understands only some things; and when he says they must be
laid aside, he means in some Cases they must be laid aside; as appears by his
Exceptions afterward. And therefore he had done sincerely, if he had drawn up
his Proposition thus, (and it had been agreeable to his Text, 2 Kings 18.4.)
Some things abused, etc. are in some cases to be laid aside. But, I conceive
he saw that this would not so well serve his purpose; which was, to put people
out of conceit with the Common Prayer and Ceremonies as much as ever he could.
For the Doctrine would not have been so popular, nor so easy to declaim upon.
It would have put him to a great deal of pains, to specify the things that
must of necessity be destroyed, and then he must have undertaken an harder
Task, to name the Cases wherein those things, that might otherwise be spared,
must needs be abolished; and another harder than that, to show that, because
some particular things were abolished at one time, none of the like kind must
ever be used. And then he must have proceeded to show, which ought to have made
the principal part of his Book, but now in a manner is taken for granted) that
the Liturgy is in the number of those things that have been so abused; and that
the case is so, that it cannot be tolerated, but must be destroyed by the King,
as the Brazen Serpent was by Hezekiah. Which would have proved the most
difficult labor of all. For supposing it had been ever employed to Idolatry,
(which can never be proved;) yet since Hezekiah, in all likelihood, would never
have destroyed such a Monument of God's mercies as the Brazen Serpent, had the
people of a long time ceased to burn Incense to it, and been in no danger to do
so again; why should we throw away the Liturgy, now that it is not abused to
any Idolatrous purpose, nor in any likelihood so to be? Besides, it cannot be
so abolished as the Brazen Serpent was, but the very same Form may be brought
forth again upon occasion. And therefore any likelihood that may be fansied of
its being used to Idolatry in future times can be of no consideration here,
because it may be so used whether we lay it aside or no.

All these things considered, he very wisely waved this Method; and only tells
the people in general terms that things abused in false Worship must be laid
aside: Under which he knew the Liturgy and Ceremonies would be concluded by
them, without any more ado. For though his Instances or Proofs be all
particular, and therefore he saw well enough his Proposition ought to have been
so; yet the people he knew might not see it, but presently conclude the Liturgy
must be packt away among the things abused. And though he makes limitations and
restrictions of this Proposition, to show it is not Universal; yet they come a
great way behind. And before there is any certainty what the abused things are,
which must be laid aside; the Magistrate is told his Duty, and earnestly
pressed to remove them: the people also are instructed in theirs; who, he
says, are all concerned in one respect or other, as you may see Sect. 7. Then
he spends another Section to show the manner how it must be done; and another
about the time; declaring, they must forthwith lay their hand to the work, even
before they knew what they had to do, (for the time was not come to tell them
that.) And then another follows, to give the Reasons of the Point: wherein
these things are Represented as so odious and loathsome to God, that you may
well think the Liturgy might be condemned to the Flames by the Reader, before
he came to consider whether it was not an excepted thing; and he might be in
such a flame to see execution done forthwith; as not to have patience to
deliberate whether he ought to save it or no. Nor is the matter much mended
when he comes to his Cautions: for, lest it should happen to be acquitted or
reprieved, he does not so much as bring it to a trial, much less bid his
Readers take heed of passing rash judgment, without examining whether it were
guilty of the aforesaid Crime or no; but fairly leaves it to take its chance,
and to stand or fall in their opinion as it should happen. And therefore he did
wisely intimate in the beginning of that Section, that it must be left to the
Reader to compare his Cautions with what he had said; for there is not one in
twenty that will take that pains, and fewer that are able to do it to any
purpose, without some assistance. In short, as far as I can judge, (for God
only knows the Heart) he saw it was his best way to let his Restrictions alone
till the last, and to propound his Doctrine in round and general words, because
he knew the people would more readily swallow it; whereas if it had been broken
into parts, some of which were to be taken, and some left; they might prove
more nice, when they saw there was a scrupulous difference to be made. But that
we may see what force there is in his Principle to do such feats as he imagins,
I pray, if you can, resolve me one thing.


N. C. What Is that?


C. Whether a Roman Priest being truly converted (as far as we can judge) may
not be made an English Minister.


N. C. Yes, surely: what should hinder?


C. I will show you clearly that it must not be according to his way of
Reasoning. He tells you ( page 21.) that things abused in False Worship must be
laid aside; Then ( page 44.) he tells you, that under the word Things he
comprehends Persons, and lastly, ( page 49.) he affirms the Papists to be no
better than Idolaters. Now show me how any Popish Priest, who in his language
is a thing abused (so notoriously) in Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship, may
ever be made use of more in the Service of God especially when you consider
what a possibility there is, that he may be Serviceable in the false Worship
again. For my part, I think, according to his Principles, that he ought not
only to be laid aside, but to be killed.


N. C. God forbid.


C. Read his third Section at your leisure, and tell me what you think of it.
For it is like you have such Books among you, though we see them but by chance.


N. C. I have it not, nor know when I shall see it. Pray tell me briefly what
he says.


C. He tells you that God is so Impatient of gross and open Idolatry, and of
such as are guilty of it, that he every where breaths forth Death against them.


N. C. You have told me enough.


C. Nay, since you have put me upon it, you shall have a little more. God
peremptorily decrees he says that whosoever pleads for Idols, offers to them,
or performs them any service, shall not only be looked on as unfit to approach
him, but also lose his life.


N. C. Since you would not leave off when I would have had you, I will be even
with you, and require his reason for this Assertion. Does he bring any place of
Scripture that contains so Universal a Decree, that Whosoever he is that
pleads, etc.


C. No: You know his way is to make his Proposition Universal, and his Proofs
Particular. He brings you above half a score Texts out of the Scripture, which
speaks of the execution that was to be done upon the seven Nations of Canaan,
or the Apostate Israelites and the Priests of Baal; and leaves you to be so
kind as to suppose, (though he go not about to prove it) that God has decreed
the like against all Idolaters whatsoever. And then at last he thus concludes;
How far this concerns the Papists, the knowledge of their ways and practice will
inform us. That they are Idolaters the best Protestant writers affirm. And it
will not relieve them to alledg that they worship the true God; for so did the
Israelites when they worshipped the Calf, yet no body questions but they were
guilty of Idolatry. I wonder he did not add, from what went before, and you
very well know Moses ordere^ them to be slain.


N. C. I must confess his Discourse ought to have ended so, if it be as you
relate. And as I do not like it upon that account, so there is another thing
that makes me think he is out of the way. There are many that scruple to call
the place of your Assemblies a Church, and yet they would not have them pulled
down, (as they must be by these Principles) they being convenient Places to
meet in for the Service of God. And for my part I would have the Cathedrals
stand, if it were but to be an ornament to the Nation; though I plainly see his
Engine, as you call it, will throw them all down, if we suffer it to go to work.


C. He saw this as well as you; and therein could not but discern his Principle
was bad, because it proved more than he would have it. And therefore perceiving
how it undermined the Foundation of all our Churches, (except some few lately
built) and being loath such goodly Fabrics should tumble down, nay all the
stateliest Buildings in Europe be laid in the dust; he, in great compassion
quits his Principle, that he might support them. For he tells you, that those
only are to be thrown down which in respect of their Situation and Figure or
the like, are unfit for profitable Uses; and such as remain decked with their
Idols Attire; and stand among such people as are scandalized with the use of
them, and are in such places where there is danger of their return to Idolatry;
which a man half blind sees is as much as to say, They are not to be laid aside
because they have been employed to Idolatry, but for other considerations. He
himself confesses as much, when he says, if they be in regard of their
Situation and Figure, and the like; sit for profitables Uses, etc. they may
lawfully be retained. That is, as if he had said, there is no necessity of
laying them aside, because they were abused in false Worship; and therefore my
Principle is not true which I laid down at the beginning, that things abused in
false worship must be abolished. Are you not amazed that he should be thus
forced to forsake his Principle, and yet not mend it? Nay, as if he would
demonstrate that men are carried by Humor and Prejudice when they talk of
these matters, after all this, he would have Cathedrals pulled down, as the
High places were.


N. C. Why? What difference is there?


C. For any thing I can see there is none, but they have all the qualifications
he mentioned to deserve his Favor. Neither the Situation nor their Figure
hinders but they may be fit for profitable Uses. I never saw any Idols attire
with which they are adorned; nor do they stand among those who are scandalized
at them, unless it be such as himself, (and some other humoursome people) who
first take offense at them without any reason, and then make this serve for a
Reason why they should be pulled down.


N. C. No doubt he has some Reason.


C. If he have, he concealed it, or it must ly in their Figure and Situation
rendering them unfit for profitable Uses, or in their remaining decked with
their Idols Attire; from none of which can there be any thing alleged more
against the Cothedrals than against other Churches; nor so much neither, in
some regards. For they may be made to serve many more profitable uses than a
small Church. But if his people's being offended at them, no body knows why,
nor wherefore, must stand alone for a Reason; then mark unto what a fine pass
he has brought his business. He has quitted his ground in this particular to
no purpose, and done the Churches, he thought to save, no service at all; for
he holds fast one Fancy which will not let them stand.


N. C. What is it?


C. I have told it you already; that if they stand among such as are
scandalized at them, they ought not to be retained. Alas poor Churches! To what
purpose was all this care to keep them from Ruin? The Quakers and many other
people are extremely offended at them, and could be content with a Gothish
Barbarism to demolish them. Or if they were not, we know not when the Conceit
will take men to be scandalized; and then they must be converted into Stables
or Cow-houses, or what they please; or rather pulled down, for fear they be
converted to Churches again. And truly when I consider all things, I wonder
they were not long a go destroyed upon this very score.


N. C. When were they in danger: I pray you?


C. Upon a Petition of the Assembly of Divines, July 19. there was an Ordinance
(I remember) of 28. Aug. 1643. requiring that all Monuments of Superstition and
Idolatry should be demolished; which was repeated again, to make sure work, May
9. 1644. Now why Churches were not mentioned is hard to tell, for they were
dedicated to the honor of some Saint or other at the first: and to those
Saints there was then such an Abhorrence, that as they would not let their
Images or Pictures stand, so, it should seem, their Coats of Arms, if they had
any, were to be defaced. For thus a Proviso at the latter end runs: This
Ordinance shall not extend to the taking down the Image, or Picture, or Coat of
Arms, set up for any dead man, who was not commonly reputed a Saint. It seems
they concluded, that none of the reputed Saints in their days would be thought
so hereafter, (for then no Picture or Image at all should have been allowed,
for fear of being worshipped) and their words suppose, that any of those
(either Image, Picture, or Coat of Arms) belonging to any ancient reputed
Saints must not stand. The Churches therefore that bore their Names, and were
better Monuments and remembrances of them than any Coat of Arms, had good
fortune they were not beaten down.


N. C. They had so: But they were fit still for Use, and so were not Images and
Pictures.


C. Yet those in the Glass-windows were fit enough, and served still for the
same use they had done before, where they had the wit to turn their Heels
upward.


N. C. It is like, some had no mind to take any notice of them, but were rather
well pleased to pass them by.


C. Perhaps so: For men can pass things by, or take but little notice of them,
when they list; though they concern them very much: Of which we have an
instance in this very Writer. For being to treat of things abused, first he
tells us of Persons, then of Names, next of Times, and after that of Places
which have been employed to Superstitious or Idolatrous Uses. And of each of
these he discourses in a section by it self. Would not any man have expected
now to find one Section on purpose about Books that have been so abused?
Especially since his greatest Spite is at the Liturgy, and it is the prime
thing he undertook to overthrow? And yet he thrusts this thing into a Corner,
as some did their Glass-windows heretofore, not being desirous to meddle much
with it, nor having much to say in this matter. I mean, he crowds it in among
many other things, at the end of that Section about abused Places; and there
you find it under the Name of such Vtensils as have been devoted to
Superstitious Uses, which are Altars, Images, Books, Relics, Vessels and
other Instruments that have been employed in that manner. Now mark, I pray you,
in what general terms he speaks of all these together, (for you must not expect
to have them distinctly handled:) Though in themselves (says he) they are
never so innocent, rich and splendid; yet when once they have been Serviceable
to such Wickedness, He would have them cast away, as things unfit to be
retained by those that profess his Name. Would you look now to find any
limitation of this, and to hear that things fit for God's Service may be
retained? And yet in this very Section he allows this favor to Places; and
there is the same reason Books should enjoy it. And would you not expect a
clear proof of this, that even Innocent things must be destroyed, (and
particularly Books employed in Idol-worship?) especially since he pretends to
justify his Assertion by Scripture, and says, This appears by diverse express
Precepts which he gave the Israelites to this purpose?


N. C. Yes, indeed, should I; and I suppose he produces them.


C. Read but page 75. and try if you find a Syllable spoken to the Israelites
about Books, or about innocent things either. I can see nothing but what
concerns their Altars, Images and Pictures. He tells you, indeed, that whole
Cities in Canaan and every thing in them were to be destroyed. But he would not
take notice, at the same time, that this was only commanded concerning that
Country; and that there is no proof can be made, that there were any innocent
Books there employed in their Idolworship. No, we conclude rather all were
Superstitious and Idolatrous in themselves, and such as could never be employed
in Divine Service. It is true, at last he comes to remember us, that in the New
Testament we read, the Christian Converts burnt their Curious Books, Act.
19.19. But what is this to the Precepts he promised to show us given to the
Israelites? And what is this to the business of Prayer-Books? Nay, why did he
not show us the Innocence of these Books, and prove that Conjuring was a very
harmless Art? --


N. C. I wish you would have done with this Book of his, which I think in one
sense is innocent enough, and will do no harm among considering people.


C. I am content to make an end; for I fear I have been too tedious. But it was
out of a desire to examine seriously whether there were such force as he
conceives in this Engine, to batter down all the Fortifications that they who
preside in the Church, or their Assistants, can erect, in defense of the abused
Scandalous things (as he calls them) which with so much zeal we contend for,
viz. the Liturgy and Ceremonies. They are his words in his Epistle.


N. C. He tells you a little after, that he will not offer to impose his belief
on others. Let every body read, and then do as he finds cause.


C. I commend his Ingenuity and Modesty, only I wish his Zeal was a little less
in this matter, and that he would not think himself and others engaged to
endeavor to the utmost of their power the Extirpation and abolishing of the
Liturgy. For what is this but to impose his belief upon us, as much as he is
able, in his place? Does he only offer his Reasons, who solicites and persuades
and entreats men to promote his Design? Does he leave others to judge, who
ingages their Affections, and stirs up their Passions, as if the Cause were
already decided according to his mind? This it is to be zealous to advance a
private Opinion, He meant, it is like, as he spoke, when he told us in his
Epistle, that he expected and desired (...) more but that we would heartily
weigh the case: but his zeal made him forget himself, and earnestly beseech us
to be up and doing, as if judgment were already given on his side. This I make
no doubt, was the thing that put him so much beside the Cushion, as to make him
magnify the Purity of those Doctrines, which in sober thoughts he saw were of
pernicious consequence. And I would willingly think it was nothing else that
made him only pass his word, that the Liturgy is one of the things that God
would have laid aside, without any Proof of it: For whatsoever he or the
Assembly have been pleased to say, no body ever made an Idol of it, or were
guilty of adoring it. These are but a kind of Conjuring Phrases and Magical
words, which make a great Sound, and astonish the silly people, but signify
nothing, save only this, that men care not what they say to serve their cause.
And therefore I hope you will not be afrighted by such Bug-bears, but come and
do your Duty to God and man both together, in joining with us in Common Prayer.


N. C. I will consider it as I have told you more than once: But I have had the
less mind to come to it, because after it is done, your Minister prays so
coldly himself.


C. That is, he does not put himself into a Sweat. But are not his words
lively, and apt to warm the Hearts of those who attend to them?


N. C. Methinks not. And beside, his Sermons that follow are very dull, and
nothing comparable to ours.


C. Now you are got again to the Hole from whence I did drive you a good while
ago: you run in a Circle of discourse, and are returned thither where we first
began. But since I have followed your motions thus far, I will ask you this
question; Why do you not rather think your self dull than him?


N. C. Because I am not dull in other places, and yet was so at your Church.


C. You may be in the fault for all that. For perhaps you was disaffected to
his Person, or to his method of handling things; or you had a greater Kindness
for some other; and then, though S. Paul himself should preach, you would be
apt to prefer that man before him.


N. C. No; methinks his matter is dull and flat.


C. Why, what did you hear him treat of?


N. C. I heard him preach about the necessity of Obedience to the Laws of
Christ. And there he told us how we must do as we would be done unto, and love
our Neighbors as our selves, and forgive Injuries, and make Restitution of
ill-gotten Goods; with a great many other such like things, which every body
knows already. And yet he spent I know not well how many Sermons about these
common matters.


C. Does every body know these things, say you? The greater shame then that
they live not according to them. I am afraid they are not sensible of the
necessity of these things, about which a man of any understanding and
seriousness cannot well speak, and be flat and dull. I much suspect that you
even set your self to sleep, or suffered your thoughts to run to other matter,
or fell a reading in your Bible, (as I have seen some do) when he begun to
treat of such Arguments as these, thinking that you was little concerned in
them.


N. C. I must confess part of what you say. For when I come to Church, I look
not for Moral, but Christian Doctrines.


C. How now? Do you oppose Morality and Christianity? Is not the former a part
of the latter? I mean; does not the Christian Religion teach us the highest
Morality?


N. C. No I think it does not meddle with it.


C. Then you talk of this as you do of many other things, without
understanding. Pray what is Moral Doctrine?


N. C. Do you tell me, if you please.


C. I always took it to be that Doctrine which teaches us how to regulate our
manners, that is, to order and govern our actions, or our whole Behavior in
this World. Now I appeal to any man that reads the Gospel, whether this be not
the very design of it, to teach us to live soberly, righteously, and godlily.


N. C. Is this morality?


C. Yes, that it is. And therefore I said that Christian Religion advances
Morality to the greatest height; because it gives us the best and most
excellent Motives to live soberly, righteously, charitably, and piously in this
World.


N. C. For all this, I think it were better if Jesus Christ were more preached.


C. Still I see you deceive your self, and trouble the world with Phrases. Does
not he preach Jesus Christ that preaches his Doctrine? If you doubt of it, you
shall have Scripture enough to prove it.


N. C. But I mean that the Love of Jesus Christ to poor Souls should be more
preached.


C. I cannot say it should be more preached; but it ought to be preached, and
so it is; and perhaps better; than you would have it. For his Love is declared,
to the end we may love him and keep his Commandments. This is that which the
Grace of God teaches us, to live soberly, etc. The Loving Kindness of God
toward mankind, in Christ Jesus was expressed for this very purpose. And
therefore he that preaches both these together is the best and wisest Guide
with whom to entrust our Souls; and that is the design of our Minister. He does
not tickle us merely with a soft Story of the great love of Jesus Christ
toward Sinners; But labors to beget in us an ardent love to him. And lest we
should run away with a pleasant Fancy, he makes us understand wherein this
love consists, Viz. in Obedience to him to the very death; in Meekness,
Humility, Patience, taking up the Cross, and such like Graces; which seem to be
rough things, and have no amiableness in the eye of the World, but are as dear
to all those who love our Savior, as their very Lives. And this makes me think
him the most sincere and honest, that he does not seek so much to please us in
his Preaching, as to profit us.


N. C. Profit, Do you call it? I could never profit by him at all.


C. Whose fault was that? Yours, or his? You are loath to suspect your self, and
inclined to lay all the load on others. I believe it will be found at the great
Day that he has done his duty better than you.


N. C. That Is a thing, which neither you nor I know. But this I am sure of,
that I can profit more by others, than by him.


C. Let me try the truth of that, if you please, for I very much doubt of it.


N. C. I am sure of it.


C. If you profit so much, then your Ministers make you wiser and better than
you were before: For there are but these two things that argue Proficiency. Now
do as much as answer me the first. Wherein are you wiser than you were? What
one thing do you know, that you did not understand before, or might have
understood easily, when you pleased? What things do you now understand the
Reason of better than formerly? Or what account can you give me of the grounds
of Christian Faith, and of the Hope that is in you? What Rules of Prudence have
you met withal? What explication of Scripture? I was going to ask what Point in
Divinity you are able to state with Judgment and due Caution? But that is too
hard a Question.


N. C. I am not able presently to call things to mind. But this I am sure of,
that I get more good by them, than any men that ever I heard.


C. That is, you are grown better: wherein I beseech you? Are your carnal
Affections more mortified? Are your Passions more subdued to Reason? Are you
more humble and lowly in heart? More meek, more merciful, more compassionate to
all men, more affable, more courteous? I am afraid in this last Point you are
grown better, as sour Ale does in Summer; that is more sharp and eager.


N. C. Methinks I have much more Comfort.


C. That Is strange, when you are neither wiser nor better, as far as I can
discern. One would think you should suspect them to be foolish and deceitful
Comforts, because they have so little ground, except it be in your Imagination.


N. C. Why? would you have me fetch my Comforts from my self, and not from
Jesus Christ?


C. Now I see indeed how wise you are grown by this profound Question.


N.C. Must not all our Comfort be fetched from Jesus Christ?


C. Yes: But every body cannot fetch it. They are the weary and heavy laden,
and such as take upon them his Yoke and Burden, i. e. submit to his Commands,
whom he invites and promises ease and Refreshment unto. By which you may see,
if you will that we must feel something that is good in our selves, (and more
than good Desires, and Affections and Purposes) before we can feel that solid
Comfort and Satisfaction you speak of.


N. C. Then it seems we must fetch our comfort from our own selves.


C. No. But it seems you are grown so wise, and taken up in such high Notions,
that you cannot understand common Sense. Is there any other Comfort you dare
give to an ungodly man besides this, that he may by the Grace of our Lord be
made better, and so received into his Favor?


N. C. I think not.


C. Then before you can take that full Comfort in him which you talk of, you
must feel that you are truly changed and converted to a love of Godliness, and
a Life according to those good Affections. All the good, indeed, that is in us,
and all that we hope for, we derive from our Savior Christ: but till we become
good, and be made like him, we do but put our selves into a Fool's Paradise, if
we fancy that we are in his Favor, and that he will carry us to Heaven. And
on the contrary, when we are once made partakers of his blessed Nature and
Spirit, how can we choose but be full of Joy, both in that Resemblance we find
in our selves to him, and much more in the hopes he has given us, that he will
perfect those Beginings in eternal Life? But it is as plain, that though we
cannot but rejoice very much in that which we feel in our selves, (the Likeness
of Christ and good Hopes) yet the Original of this Joy and Satisfaction is not
from our selves, but him, who gave us that Participation of his nature and
those good Hopes.


N. C. I do not well understand you. But this I know, that you all talk as if
we were to bring something to Christ, and not to take all from him.


C. Rather to talk thus is to be very ridiculous. For he invites us to come to
him, i.e. to believe on him, and become his Disciples and Followers. And this
we must do, or else be disowned by him; though when we do it, we only obey his
heavenly Call, and bring him nothing, but only all our Desires and Affections
to be governed by him. Is there any body so absurd, as to imagine we must not
give up our selves to be led and guided by him in his ways? and when we are in
them, does any body think we came there without his Motion and gracious
attraction? Would you have us without any more a do conclude, that all the
promised blessings are our portion? or must we not first be persuaded our
Savior tells us the truth of God, and then purpose to learn of him and obey
him, and next set our selves with all our might to subdue every Thought and
Passion to his obedience, and last of all, order all our actions (by the
assistance of the same Grace whereby we do the rest) according to the Rule of
his Laws? And must we not have a sense that we are sincere in all this, before
we can reasonably expect that he should give us all the good things he
promises? In short, must he not give us his Grace to will and to do, and must
we not receive it, and effectually do thereby all that I have said, before we
conclude our Sins are pardoned, and take the confidence to hope our Savior
will give us eternal Life?


N. C. I perceive you pretend to have profited very much by your Minister.


C. Yes indeed; I think, I am grown wiser a great deal and much better.


N. C. I wish you would tell me briefly wherein.


C. I know God and his Attributes better, and perceive how all Religion depends
on that Knowledge: I think also, I understand the nature of Religion in
General, and of Christianity in particular more exactly, than I did. I know
wherein Religion consists; with the grounds of Faith, and the Reason why I am a
Christian rather, than of any other Profession. And withal, I hope I understand
many places of Holy Scripture, and am able to give a clearer and soberer
account of them than heretofore; whenas I ingeniously confess, I was wont to
expound the Word of God by fancy, and not by serious and attentive
Considerations. And as for growth in goodness, I may truly say, I have learnt
many things to be my Duty, which I scarce ever heard you speak of. As for
example, to bridle my Tongue; especially when I speak of my Superiors; to
reverence my Governors; to live in obedience to Laws, though they happen to
hinder my private profit; and for that end to look upon humane Laws, as binding
the Conscience; to answer my Betters with great Modesty and Humility: in
particular, not to contend boldly and malepertly with the Priest, as if I were
upon equal ground with him; not to be a Busy-body, and a Gadder from house to
house; not to pry into every body's Secrets: not to rejoice in iniquity, or
take a pleasure in hearing of the Sins of the contrary party; to be very
fearful of making a Schism in the Church; and to name no more, to take heed of
itching Ears, and not to run from my own Church, out of a fancy that I can
profit more in other places.


N. C. Well, talk as long as you please, all the Godly will follow those men
whom you would persuade me to forsake.


C. I am heartily sorry to see your Arrogance and Uncharitableness. But it
gives me to understand how much you profit by your Ministers; not in the Graces
of Christ, but in the peculiar unheard of Virtues of your Sect, Pride,
Boasting, Good opinion of your selves, Contempt of others, and rash judging
even of men's Spiritual estates.


N. C. I think you judge rashly of me.


C. No such matter. Your Censoriousness and Rashness is apparent; and I do not
commit the same fault, when I take notice of it. And I must let you know, that
you commit another like this, when you make an Outcry through the Nation and
tell the people that all Ungodliness has over-flown it, only since Bishops and
Common Prayer came home again. Which is an arrant Lie; as will be made good, if
need be, against the best of you. For it began to break in upon us when the
Bishops and all good Order was thrown down, and the Kingdom put into Arms. Then
men ran into excess of Riot, when their was no Restraint upon them. I will not
say into so much Drunkenness, but into Whoring (I may add Atheism and
Irreligion) and such like Wickedness, which are said now to be the reigning
sins. And though men were not presently openly lascivious and profane (for the
older Wickedness grows, the bolder it is;) yet then they got loose from their
Chains, and these works of Darkness secretly lurked, and were privately
practiced.


N. C. I do not believe you.


C. You will believe the Assembly, I am sure, and they say so.


N. C. Where?


C. In their Petition to the Parliament of July 19. 1644. where they desire (in
the seventh Branch of it) that some severe Course may be taken against
Fornication, Adultery, and Incest; which do greatly abound, say they,
ESPECIALLY OF LATE, BY REASON OF IMPUNITY.


N. C. I am not concerned about this. But I affirm the Generality of the Godly
people now follow us.


C. Suppose they did; you will not allow it a good Argument in other cases to
say that all the Godly for many Ages did such and such things, for instance, use
a Form of Prayer, and such Ceremonies as ours; and therefore, why do you keep
such a stir with it now? but where did you get a List of all the Godly, that
you can tell so exactly the major part follow you? Were they ever brought to
the Poll? And who were Judges, I pray you, in the Case? You do but still
persist in your over-fond Love to your selves, and your own Party and way, when
you talk in this manner: For there are many ways to show, that they are far
from being the Generality of the Godly that flock to you^ Meetings.


N. C. Then you allow that some Godly people follow us.


C. Did I ever dispute it? Nay, does there any body doubt (except your selves
and the Papists) but that there may be Godly people of every Sort and Party?
But then it is an imperfect sort of Godliness which we acknowledge in them; and
we hope God will bear with their Defects, when they are sincerely humble and
modest, and do not fancy themselves the only or the most godly people in the
World. And if you will have me speak my mind plainly, and not be angry; I think
I may say without any rashness, that your godly people are generally of the
lowest Form in Christ's School, as I told you before. A great deal of their
Religion is of their own making, (as I lately showed you) and they want a great
deal of God's Religion.


N. C. You are very envious.


C. No truly. I admire the Grace of God wheresoever I see it, for it is the
most lovely sight that can present it self to me. But I cannot allow them to be
such excellent Christians as you imagine: they rather appear to me with many
Deformities. For they are ever wrangling about little Ceremonies. They break
the Peace of the Church by this means, and seem to make no scruple about it.
They are froward and peevish, greedy of Riches, stubborn in their Opinions, and
by no means can bear with any man differing from them in matters of Doctrine.
In short, I see a strange Ignorance mixed with Presumption and Wilfulness, not
without a high degree of Superstition, in those whom you admire for godliness.
But then there is a sort of people who enjoy that name among you, in whom I can
see nothing but an humor of Despising and Railing at all ancient received
Customs, how good soever; Together with a sullen Devotion, and such a turbulent
nature, as will give no rest to themselves or others. And they have one
peculiar Quality, proper to themselves alone; which is to revile our Ministers
even as they go along the streets: a thing which I could never observe our
ungodly people to be guilty of toward your Ministers, who may pass peaceably
enough: nay, I think is not committed in any Country in the World, where they
are of different Religions. Perhaps you will say, that ours would do it, did
not the power of the Lord overawe them and shut up their Mouths, that they may
not reproach his faithful Servants. But this is only a cast of your skill in
searching the Hearts of men, and gives us a taste of the opinion you have of
your dearness to God.


N.C. I doubt not but they are very dear to God; and that God will reprove even
Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm.


C. You have a strong Faith. But methinks before you suffer it to grow to such
a Confidence, you should soberly consider whether some of those precious ones
may not be anointed --; that make godliness a pretense for their Disobedience
to Kings, and Sauciness toward their betters; that flatter you into a conceit
of your godliness, that you may flatter them with the title of the Prophets of
the Lord, To me it is no mean argument of their want of Integrity, that they
teach you no better, and connive at all this Wickedness, and never (that I
could hear of) lay bare, and rebuke these Sins that reign so much among your
Party. Tell me whence came all the scurrilous Pamphlets that are abroad? Out of
what Shop do the venomous Libels fly about the Town? Who are they that not only
despise our Clergy, but put open affronts on them as they quietly and soberly
walk the Streets? That have the Poison of Asps under their Lips, and spit it in
good men's faces? That in a fearful manner, scorn and revile their Holy Calling,
and salute them every where with the ordinary name of Baal's Priests? Are they
not all bred up in your Churches? Do they not all frequent your Meetings? And
do not bystanders of your Persuasion laugh and rejoice when they see this
Contempt poured on them? Do they not seem to encourage those by their
Applauses, who are so rude and insolent in their behavior toward good men? And
yet these style themselves the godly, and take it ill if we do not think them
so. These you are content to wink at, that your Congregations may be full. Your
Ministers dare not preach down these Abuses; lest they should be thought to be
friends to Baal.


N.C. There will be some bad people every where.


C. I am glad to hear you say so. By and by you will confess that there may be
also goo^ people every where, and that some of our Ministers may be good;
though your Revilers make no difference, but if they see a man in a Cassock,
presently throw dirt in his face, and call him a Limb of Antichrist, or some
such thing. So brutish and outrageous are the Passions of this Heady people.
So wonderfully do they profit in your School in those new Virtues of Hatred to
ancient Customs and Habits, though never so innocent, and Hatred or Anger to
all that are not of their Way. For such is the Fire, I have sometimes seen in
their Eyes, when they meet one of our Ministers, that one would think they had
a mind to burn them up. And I make no doubt they would call upon your Prophets,
if they were but like Elijah, to call for Fire down from Heaven to consume us.
You may condemn their Folly perhaps; but whatsoever you are pleased to say,
they are the most Zealous of your Party, and think themselves the most godly.
And for any thing I can hear, they may think so still. It not being the manner
of your Preaching, to meddle with such things as these; nor the time, I doubt,
to be named when you heard a Sermon to reprove the scurrilous and railing
language of some among you against the English Clergy. No, the way has been,
and I doubt still continues, to declaim only against Superstition, and
Formality, and Will Worship, and sometimes against Morality; and then to exhort
the people to prize Ordinances, and seek after pure Ordinances, and admit of no
humane Mixtures. But whilst the poor people are thus afrighted, and made
exceeding timorous lest they should be righteous overmuch, by following vain
Traditions of men; they have little or no fear wrought in them of being wicked
overmuch, by Schism, and Disobedience, and letting loose their furious
Passions and unruly Tongues; by reviling God's Ministers, nay, by despising
Governments, and speaking evil of Dignities.


N.C. I think they should be taught to fear these things more than they do.


C. I, and they should be taught not to think themselves godly too soon.
Whereas the manner has been quite contrary, to breed in them an opinion of
their Piety, if they be but a praying people, and follow Ordinances, and
frequent private meetings. And when they are taught on such easy terms to call
themselves gracious and godly, then your Ministers make this an Argument
against us, that all or most of the Godly are on their side. And now it comes
into my mind, that this was the Pretense wherewith they countenanced the late
Rebellion, as now I suppose, you will give us leave to call it. But to let you
see how idle and frivolous such Arguments were, and that they might serve any
bodies purpose; it was not long before you were numbered among the ungodly: For
the Army learnt to call themselves the only godly party, and in a manner
excluded you. Though I believe You would have liked it well enough, if a
Painter had drawn a man with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven and one hand on his
Breast, with the other Hand in his Neighbors purse, or cutting of his Throat;
and writ over it this Inscription, An Army-Saint. I mean, you thought them an
ungodly and untoward generation. But whatsoever you thought, the Argument was
as plausible and succesful for them as it had been and is for you: for the
people were strangely drawn away by it. This cut off the King's Head; that it
was for the safety of the godly. This was in a fair way to keep our present
Sovereign from returning to us; that those that feared the Lord were against
it, and would be undone by it. And I find that to this day this pretense of
godliness has left an impression on some peoples minds, and excuses all those
impieties. For not long since I heard one commending them for a very gracious
people: and when it was soberly objected, that they were unjust, and even
Cruel, and False, and Turbulent, and Disobedient to their own Governors, and
Troublers of the Nation; it was answered, that notwithstanding all these
things, there was more Grace among them than there is to be found now-adays.
Meaning, I suppose, by their Grace, that they were a praying people, and much
in seeking God. As if S. Paul did not understand himself when he told us, that
the Grace of God teaches us to deny ungodliness and all Worldly Lusts; and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in the World. And to deal Freely with you;
I am much afraid there are many of this kind of Godly people whom you associate
your selves withal, I am sure, some of those who were Patrons to their
wickedness, and allowed, if not justified, the killing of the KING, and were
Army-Chaplains; and now private Preachers, and not a little adored.


N.C. Well, no more of this. For I am satisfied we are not the only Godly. But
yet I am still inclined to think there is more of the Power of Godliness to be
found among us, than any where else.


C. I always thought the Power of Godliness did not consist in words, but in a
great deal of Humility, and a great measure of Charity; together with exact
Justice and Meekness, and Peaceableness, and purity of Heart. Now, methinks,
there is not such store of this among you as one would expect; at least, not
more than we see in other people.


N.C. Do you call this the Power of Godliness?


C. Yes; and so does the Apostle, as will appear, if you think good that we
consider seriously together the Character he gives of those that deny the Power
of Godliness, and content themselves only with the show or Image of it, which
he calls the Form of Godliness.


N.C. With all my heart. For that will be a better way of spending our time,
and edifying one another, than the continuing Dispute will be.


C. You say very well, and I love you for that sense of Piety which you
discover. Let Us take the Book then, and read what S. Paul teaches us in 2 Timothy
3.2, 3.4, etc. concerning them that want the Power, and have only the Form of
Godliness. First, he tells us, they are lovers of themselves, i. e. as I
understand it, study above all things, their own Profit, Credit, Honor, and
Pleasure. From which (as the Root of wickedness) they grow to be Covetous, or
Lovers of Money; and then Boasters, that is, people who magnify themselves,
arrogating to themselves more, than is their due, and bragging they can do
that, which they are not able to perform. From whence it follows that they are
Proud, that is, Contemners and Despisers of others; who perhaps are better,
than themselves: Blasphemers, i.e. of Magistrates and Dignities, (upon a
pretense, perhaps, that they have nothing of God in them, or are Antichristian:
Disobedient to their Natural Parents, (as some now are, because they say, they
are unsanctified and unregenerate people:) Unthankful to their Benefactors:
Unholy and impure Wretches, or, as some have expounded it to me, such as make
no difference between things Sacred and Profane: without Natural Affection,
viz. to their Children or Kindred, as well as Parents: Truce Breakers, or
perfidious people, whom no Bond or Tie can hold to their Promises or Duty:
False-accusers, or such as calumniate, and tell false and devised Stories, to
the prejudice of those whom they do not love, or set themselves to oppose:
Incontinent, which I have been told, signifies such as have no Power over
themselves and their Passions, and as are inconsistent with themselves: Fierce,
that is, Bloudy-minded men, and such whom no Kindness, no Benefits can
reconcile to Society, Friendship or Modesty, Despisers of those who are good, (
i. e. that have no Kindness for men who are solidly Good,) or, as our
Translation seems to take it, such as contemn true Virtue, as a mean thing:
Traitors, that is, such as will betray their best Friends and Companions, for
to serve their own Interest: Hea^y, that is, rash, inconsiderate, impudent and
bold people; ready for any bad Design: High-minded, or men puffed up and swollen
with an Opinion of themselves, of their own Knowledge, suppose, or Piety: Lovers
of Pleasure more than lovers of God, or such as pretend to God, only to have a
better opportunity to satisfy their desires of pleasure. And in conclusion, he
tells us that they were of this number who in those days crept into folks
houses, and insinuated themselves into the Favor of silly Women; having a
design either upon their Wealth, or their Chastity. And Women they were for
their turn; being led away with diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never coming
to the knowledge of the truth; that is, always frequenting Christian
Assemblies, but getting no good by them: or else opening their Ears to every
Wind of Doctrine, desiring still to hear some new thing, running from place to
place where any novel Teachers were: but remaining just as wise as they were
before, and not a whit the better for all the Sermons they heard.


N.C. Me thinks you have made me a short Sermon; at least I have heard the
Doctrinal part of it: would you would come to the Use and tell me what you
gather from hence.


C. I gather two things, and leave you to gather the rest.


N.C. What are they?


C. First, that all this Wickedness which I have described from the Apostle
will consist with a Form or show of Godliness. For that is a part of the
character of these very men, verse. 5. Having a Form of Godliness, etc.
Secondly, I collect from hence, that, those men have the Power of godliness who
are of a disposition quite opposite to them now named: Such, I mean, as deny
themselves for God's and their Neighbor's sake; that set not their hearts upon
getting Riches; that are humble and modest; that reverence their Governors, and
study in word and deed to preserve their Authority; that honor their Parents,
though not of their Opinion, or perhaps ungodly; that are sensible of Benefits,
and grateful to their Benefactors; that study Purity and Chastity; that are
kind and tenderly-affected to their Relations; that keep their Faith, and
perform their Promises, though to their own damage; that are easily reconciled,
if they have been grossly injured; that speak well if they can, of their
Neighbors, and are not ready to believe every Story of them; that endeavor to
preserve an even Temper; that command their passions, are steady and uniform in
their Actions; that are meek and submissive; peaceable and sociable; that love
Virtue wheresoever they see it, and do not despise or reproach it under the
name of mere Morality; that are faithful to their Trust; sober, advised and
considerate in their Undertakings; that have no high Opinion of themselves, and
love God above all things; that choose rather to keep at home, and mind their
own Concerns, than to be prying into the Secrets of their Neighbors Houses;
that have no other Design upon any, either Man or Woman, than to make them
good; and further their increase in true Wisdom. These, and such like men in
whatsoever place you find them, undoubtedly have the Power of Godliness, though
they should not talk of it so much, as others?


N. C. I see you are able to preach, if you list.


C. If I should think so, I should run into the company of those proud and
high-minded men, whom I now spoke of. I can only repeat a good Sermon to you,
which I have heard.


N. C. You would have me preach, or at least make a piece of a Sermon; for you
told me you would leave me to gather the rest from your discourse.


C. It Is profitable to Preach to your self such things as you read and hear,
and to press upon your Heart such Truths, as you cannot but observe plainly
follow from them, though they were not named.


N. C. And what do you think I should gather from what I have heard you say?


C. I told you it would be best to leave you to consider what farther Use is to
be made of this Character. But if you would have me direct you; then you may be
pleased to consider, when you are alone by your self, whether any part of it
belong to those, whom you call Godly or to those whom we esteem so: or, which
is all one, you may consider whether those opposite Qualities, wherein I told
you the Power of godliness consists, be to be found most among your, or our
Godly. Always carrying this in your mind, that we do not call all them Godly
who are of our Party, as you are wont to do. Our Ministers, I assure you, will
not allow them to enjoy this name, who are Lovers of themselves, Covetous,
Boasters, Proud, False, Fierce, Heady, etc. But whether many such do not pass
with you for Godly men, and cry out against the Form of Godliness, while they
have little else, I leave you to judge.


N. C. Truly, I thought once that the Power of Godliness had consisted in
keeping the Sabbath, in repeating Sermons, having a Gift of Prayer, and using
it in our Families, treasuring up and communicating Experiences, and meeting
together to exercise our Gifts. And, now it comes into my mind on a sudden,
this is a thing which has made me fear you want at least a great deal of the
power of Godliness, that you never keep a Day together.


C. Strange! I thought on the Contrary, that this had been one of our
Accusations; our keeping too many days.


N. C. Really, I never heard that any of you kept one.


C. What did you never hear, that we have a Holy Day at lest once a Month, and
sometimes more, which we always observe?


N. C. Pish! I perceive you understand not my Language. I mean, that we keep a
private Day together, which we set apart for Prayer, and humbling our selves
before God, and hearing the Word.


C. Alas! How should I guess at your meaning! when as I thought you would have
kept no Days but that of God's appointing.


N. C. Yes, we can keep other Days, and think we ought, at least that there is
much Religion in it.


C. Why then will you not keep those which your Governors appoint? Have you
power to appoint Days, and not they? I am sorry to see your partiality, and
that you are so full of Humor, as not to do things when you are bidden, and
yet to do the same when you are not bidden, nay, when you are forbidden.


N. C. O, but we do not keep days, as you do.


C. What Is that to the Purpose? Seeing what we do is good, why should you not
join with us in it? You pray, and so do we: You read the Scriptures and so do
we: you give thanks to God, and that is part of our Business. Only we do it in
public, and you in private; we when our Governors would have us, and you when
it pleases your selves.


N. C. We not only pray, but hear a Sermon also, when we keep our Days.


C. So you may at some of our Churches, if you please, every Holy Day. But what
a foolish Conceit is this, to think that this makes a Day not to be well
observed, if we want a Sermon? This is a piece of the Superstition I told you
of. For was it not always the chief Design of those Days we observe, to
acknowledge God, to praise him in all his wonderful Works, to meditate on his
admirable mercy in sending his Son, in giving him to die for us, in raising him
from the dead, in sending the Holy Ghost, and after that the blessed Apostles
to preach the Gospel? And is not this sufficient work for one Day? Or cannot we
meditate upon the holy Scriptures the read, or on the Sermon we heard the
Lord's Day before; but we must needs have a new Sermon, or else think God is
not glorified, nor well pleased? I am amazed at the gross Absurdity of such
Fancies.


N. C. You may be so; but we shall never leave them, nor come to Church, till
you have more than Common prayer on those Days.


C. I cannot understand any Reason for that Resolution. For if you be not
satisfied with our Service, but yet must needs have something else; why do you
not come to the public Prayers and Praises first and then make up their
Defects (as you conceive) in your private Meetings? Or why do you not seek and
endeavor that these days may be kept more Religiously, seeing public
Praising God is far better than private, and does him more honor in the World?
For my part, I verily think (and I speak it sincerely) that if you would come
to Church, and there join in the public Service of God, and then go home, and
spend some other part of the Day in Catechizing your Children, instructing your
Servants, teaching them among other matters, how to use the Liberty You then
allow them discreetly and soberly, and in visiting, inviting or relieving your
poor Neighbors; it would be a thing far more acceptable to God, and more for
the honor of Christian Religion, and the good of Souls, than a whole day of
Prayer and hearing Sermons.


N. C. I am not yet of that mind.


C. Why? look over all the Families you know, and see if many of them be not
miserably neglected, whilst their Masters and Mistresses are keeping Days, as
you call it. And then tell me, whether they spend their time to so much Profit
and true Comfort as I would have them.


N. C. I think some may be too negligent.


C. Why do not your Ministers chide them, and exhort the good Women to keep
more at home, and not, under a notion of Religion, neglect their necessary
Duties? It were easy to tell you of some who are the worst Wives, and Mothers,
and Mistresses, in the Parish, merely upon this account, that most of their
time has been taken up in gadding about to those private Exercises. Sometimes
you are mightily offended at our Holydays upon this account, that they take up
too much of men's times from their Business; and yet you can be content to see a
Day set apart every Week, if not oftener, by your selves, to the great Damage
of many Families. And so, when the Fit is upon you, we are told that
Magistrates ought not to bind the people to observe Days, which is to make that
necessary which God has left free: But yet notwithstanding you your selves
stick not to lay such a necessity upon men of observing Days, now and then, as
if there were a Divine Commandment for it; for you think they have no Religion,
or want the Power of it, that do not. And what a stir do you keep to have
Lectures on the Weekdays; as if we were dead, and had but a Name to live,
unless we hear a Sermon or two, then? whereas very good Christians, perhaps,
have no more time to spare from their honest Employments, than they ought to
bestow in private Prayer and Meditation; digesting of what they heard the
Sunday before; searching seriously into their Consciences, and constant
Examination of their Lives and Actions; in conferring with their Ministers
about their Doubts, or those Indispositions, or, perhaps, ill Inclinations,
which they find in their Souls; in Comforting the poor and the sick; in
Endeavoring to reconcile Differences among Neighbors; in consulting how to
advance the public Good either of the City or Town where they live, and
discharging the public Office well, to which they may be called. If after all
this done, they can find any leisure to hear a Sermon, who is there that
forbids it? We are only afraid, lest whilst the necessity of that is so much
urged, things more necessary should be neglected.


N. C. You say a great many notable things; but yet to me you seem a man of a
slight Spirit, which you betray when you speak of these weighty matters.


C. If you mean that I slight many of those things which you think matters of
great weight and moment; I cannot contradict you. But why you should thence
conclude, I have a slight Spirit, I see no cause: For therefore I slight them,
because I have thoroughly considered and examined them, and find there is
nothing but Fancy or Superstition at the bottom of them. Mistake me not; your
honest Affections I do not slight, but the things to which you are so affected.
As for instance, you abound in insignificant Phrases, and Scripture-Expressions
misapplied: You have a great many Superstitious Conceits and Opinions, and
oftimes alledg your Experiences very absurdly --


N. C. Nay, now you discover your self. Does not this argue a profane Spirit,
to slight Experiences, when the Apostle mentions Christian Experience as a part
of our Rejoicing and Glory? Romans 5.4.


C. I do not slight his Experiences, but yours; and not all of yours neither.
For if by your Experience you meant, that you had made a proof of your
Constancy and Faithfulness to Christ, by patient enduring of any Affliction for
Righteousness sake; and made a Trial also of his Faithfulness, in performing
his promises of giving us Strength, Support, and Comfort, (which I conceive is
the Apostle's meaning:) I should accuse my self of great Profaneness should I
slight it. But when you will needs give me this word for a proof of a thing of
which I know you have no Experience, and perhaps can have none; and when you
alledg your Experience in a matter of Reason, and in effect say no more than
this, I pray believe me: you must not take it ill, if I make light of it. As
for example, when you will tell us, you find by Experience that you are in the
right way; it is a thing that may be entertained with a smile. It is in truth
no better than to say, you may take my word for it. For whether you be in the
right or no, is not to be known by Experience, but by Reason. In like manner,
if you tell me you find by Experience your Minister is a good man because he
does you good; it is a frivolous Argument, and I may be allowed to slight it;
for it cannot be known by your Experience, what he is. You can only know by
your Experience, that you are made better; but he may be bad enough
notwithstanding. As the Quakers were reformed of Cheating and Cousenage in some
places by those, who there is great reason to suspect, were cheating knaves
themselves.


N. C. But I may know by Experience whether the things he preaches be true or
no.


C. It will deceive you, if you rely upon that Proof. For you may have some
good done you by false Principles. Nay, those very Principles may make you do
some things well, which shall make you do other things ill.


N. C. That Is strange.


C. Not so strange, as true. For what Principle was it that led the Quakers to
be just in their dealing?


N. C. That they ought to follow the Light within them.


C. This led them also to be rude and clownish, and disrespectful to Governors.
For all is not Reason, that is in us: there is a world of Fancy also: and the
Flashes of this now and then are very sudden and amazing; just like Lightning
out of a Cloud. By this they find they were misled in many things, which they
have now forsaken; being content to wear Hatbands and Ribbons too, which they
so much at the first abominated.


N. C. I take them to be a deluded people.


C. And yet they are led, they will tell you, by Experience. For they found
themselves amended by entering into that Religion, whereas they cheated and
cousened in all other Forms wherein they were before. And therefore do not tell
me any more of the good you have got by your private meetings, nor make it an
argument of their Lawfulness. For the same Argument will be used against your
selves by the Quakers; who will tell you, God is in no private Meetings but only
theirs, for otherwhere they could never find him. Take your choice: and either
let it alone your selves, or else allow it them. It will either serve both, or
neither.


N. C. But I have seen you smile, if one bring his Experience to prove the
truth of Christian Religion.


C. Yes, and very deservedly: Because the Ground upon which we believe it to be
true, cannot be known by Experience; nor is your Experience of any thing in it
a Ground for any other man to believe it. You cannot know, for instance, by
your Experience, that our Savior was born of a Virgin, that the Holy Ghost
came upon him at his Baptism with a Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my
well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. You cannot know by that means that
he dyed, that he rose the third day, that he went to Heaven forty days after,
and after ten days more gave the Holy Ghost; and that S. Paul was struck blind
with the Glory of our Savior, whom (...) saw and heard, and was sent by him to
preach the Gospel.


N. C. Yes, I feel that he and the rest of the Apostles speak the very truth.


C. They say all these things; and do you know them by your feeling? The
Apostles indeed, felt, or saw, or heard them; but we cannot do so, nor know
them by any other means than their Testimony.


N. C. I feel that their Testimony is true.


C. What? Do you feel that they say true, for instance, when they tell you that
our Savior turned Water into Wine, and that he raised Lazarus from the dead?


N. C. No, I know these things otherways.


C. Then you must know the rest by the same means that you know these, viz. by
believing Eyewitnesses of these things, who you find are persons worthy to be
credited.


N. C. But I feel the Commands of Christ are exceeding good, and agreeable to
humane Nature, which the Apostles have delivered to us.


C. That is, you find it good to live soberly, and peaceably; to be charitable
to others, and to take up your own Cross with Contentedness and Patience --


N. C. Yes.


C. But may not these things be felt by Heathens as well as you? And may not
they by Experience commend the practice of these Virtues to us?


N. C. I think they have done it.


C. Then this Experience of the goodness of Christ's Commands is no proof of
our Creed, by which we are distinguished from Heathens. No, nor will your
Experience prove to any man that Christ's Commands are excellent, any farther
than he believes that you say true, when you tell him what trial you have made
of the best kind of Life, and that you are a person fit to judge of the
Difference of things.


N. C. Methinks I feel that Jesus Christ is in the Heavens, and in great Power
and Glory there.


C. Whatsoever you feel in this matter, it is the Effect of your belief, not
the Cause of it. I mean, you first believe, that he is in Glory; before you can
feel any good hopes in your Soul of immortal Life. And you believe his being in
Glory upon good Reasons; else you do not know but entertain your self with a
pleasant Dream, both of his Glory and yours. And lastly, whatever you feel it
is no proof of the truth of the thing, but only of the truth of your Belief. It
is to be proved otherwise that Christ reigns gloriously in the Heavens, and is
able to bring us into his everlasting Kingdom: only your being so mightily
affected with it, proves that indeed you believe it. But you had best look you
have good Reasons for your Faith. For all the Severities of the Religious men
among the Turks, prove likewise that they believe strongly in Mahomet: though I
hope, if they quote their Experiences never so much, you will not be a Disciple
to their Prophet, and hope he will take you by the hair of the head, and pull
you up to Heaven.


N. C. I find that you are able to talk more rationally than I can in these
matters. But yet I find likewise, there is another kind of Spirit in our people
than in yours. For they delight more in Heavenly Discourse, and are always
talking of Religion when they are together: which argues they are not of so
slight a Spirit as others, who love to discourse of unprofitable things.


C. Do you and I talk frothily, (as your phrase is) and spend our time in
unprofitable Chat? Is this Discourse earthly, and not at all pertaining to
Religion? And, deal sincerely with me, do not you sometime, when you are
together, pass the time away in speaking against Bishops and Common Prayer, and
the Government? Do you not know some that are ever complaining of the Times in
which we live, and saying the former Days were better than these? And are the
Reasons of this murmuring so Heavenly as you suppose? Do they not say the
Nation was in more Credit; and had a better Reputation abroad, and they a
better Trade at home, and such like things?


N. C. I cannot deny but I have heard some Professors talk thus. But there are
a great number that you shall scarce ever hear talking of any thing else but
Heaven, and Jesus Christ, and the business of their Souls.


C. And such people there are in all Parties and Sects in the Christian World;
who perhaps are never awhit the better for that.


N. C. How irreligiously you talk?


C. Not at all. For unless they take a true delight in God, and in that
Heavenly Discourse above all other things, and unless they understand what they
say, and delight also to do God's will in all things: I think they had as good
be talking of, or doing something else.


N. C. Can they possibly be better employed?


C. Yes, that they may. For if they only tumble out a great many words and
Phrases which they have learned, they had better be Studying what the Religion
of Jesus Christ is. And if they talk of those matters merely as it is a Duty,
and be not so heavenly-minded as that, whenever they have leisure, it is the
greatest joy that can be to be thinking or discoursing of them; they will do
this after a very bad fashion, when some other good thing they might have done
better; as, visited the Sick, inquired after the Wants of the Poor, or ordered
some Parish-business. And again, unless they be very prudent, and do not think
they must needs draw the Company wherein they are (who are engaged, perhaps, in
other necessary Business) to hear their discourse; I think their room, as we
say, would be better than their company, or, that it were better that they
would hold their peace. For if a man take himself to be bound in Conscience to
be always speaking of these things, (as I doubt many do) it is the effect of
Superstition, which makes Religion a great burden to a man's self and others.
For whether he and the Company be disposed or no, this he thinks is his
Business which he often manages very dully, and without any Taste: thereby
rendering Christianity Contemptible, and making himself also still more flat and
indisposed for all honest employments. All which considered, I leave you to
judge, whether that man had not better have bestowed his time otherways; for
then he might at the end of it have been good for something, whereas now he is
good for nothing at all; but mopishly sits bewailing himself, and complaining
of the deadness of his heart.


N. C. Ought not a man to be always thinking of Heaven?


C. No: He may and ought sometime to think of other things. And he should do it
without any Scruple, not fearing that he is ill employed, when he does not
break God's Commands.


N. C. He may be meanly employed.


C. That is, he is but a Man, and not yet come to the degree of an Angel.


N. C. But when others are recreating themselves, (as you call it) ours are
talking of Heaven.


C. If it be their choice, and if they do not neglect any necessary Business,
nor censure others that do not as they do; I have nothing to say against them.
But, as I told you, there are so many such like people in all Religions, that
you must not imagine this is a thing peculiar to yours. And if they think they
offend God, if they do otherwise, and if they condemn those that now and then
innocently recreate themselves, and sigh over them as if they were lost; they
trouble the World and themselves, to say no worse, a great deal too much with
their Superstition.


N. C. You give liberty to your people even to go to see Plays.


C. Did you ever hear any of our Ministers commend Plays for a good
Divertisement to their people?


N. C. No, But they do not discommend them, and show how unlawful it is to use
such pastimes.


C. How should they, when they never yet saw it proved that they may not be
lawfully used? But they preach against all undue and in ordinate use of lawful
pleasures, among which they number this for one. And in this business, they are
as faithful as your Ministers could be, were they in their places, and perhaps
a great deal more discreet.


N. C. These discreet men have spoiled Religion.


C. You should have said indiscreet men, for that is the truth; who declaim so
violently against innocent things, that they are not at all regarded when they
speak against things Sinful. Their Zeal is equal against things indifferent and
things unlawful; and so the people easily imagine; there is no more reason
against the one than against the other. Besides, they lay Burdens upon men
which are not necessary, and make Christ's Yoke heavier than indeed it is,
which is a great Discouragement and Hindrance to some, making them unwilling to
submit themselves to him. And again, they entangle Religious People in a world
of Scruples, which make their lives very uncomfortable.


N. C. Then your Ministers, belike, allow your Religious people to go to a Play.


C. You have put a good word in my mouth; they do I believe, allow it in due
measure; Encourage them to it they do not; but yet cannot say, if they be asked
the question, that they sin, if they do.


N. C. They might tell them, they may be better employed.


C. What Authority have they to pronounce that in general terms? Sometimes they
may, and sometime, perhaps, they may not. And beside this, if we be always
bound to do that which is best, (which you suppose) we can never tell whether
we please God or no; but shall be engaged in endless Doubts. For it is an hard
matter sometime to discern which is best: and one thing may appear best, when I
consider such and such things; and another will seem best, when I reflect upon
other matters. And I may verily be persuaded, looking but at a few things, that
this thing is best for me to do, which indeed is rather bad, and should not be
done. As, I may conceive it best to wear no Lace, no Ribbans, no fine Cloth or
silk, but give all the money I spend in such things to the Poor: whereas this
may prove very pernicious, though it have a show of great piety; and maintain
many poor in idleness, that love not Work; and spoil the Labors and Trade of
many others, who would not live idly. Farther, how much time must we pass in
resolving which is best in every action we do? as whether it be best to eat
now, or stay a while longer; to drink this Cup of Wine which is offered me, or
refuse it; to talk with a Friend or to part with him: to visit a Neighbor, or
to stay at home? And while we are deliberating in this fashion, the thing might
be done which we had a mind unto; and we might be returned to that which
possibly we thought would be best. It is sufficient, therefore, that we be well
employed; and we ought not to torment our selves, and mispend our time in
fears, lest we have not done the best. Let us but consider, whether no
necessary Duty toward God or Man, that we are capable of, will be neglected,
when we go to divert our selves; and then we should not spoil our innocent
Delights with needless Jealousies.


N. C. But surely this liberty you give, will do people hurt, for they are apt
to take too much of it.


C. Many will take it, whether we give it them or no. But I can assure you
there are many excellent persons of extraordinary piety (whom I know) who will
not take it, though we give it. Not that they think it an unlawful thing, as
you do; but they have no use for that Liberty. They are above such pleasures,
and can find employment or ingenious Divertisement that is far more sweet to
them. I know others that scruple not the thing at all, and yet judge it not so
expedient for them in their place and relation; and so wholly forbear it: which
is a far greater Virtue than that which you boast of; as much as it is more
noble to abstain from those pleasures we think lawful, than to be restrained
only from those which we think are sinful, I am acquainted with others also
that go to Plays, but very rarely, only for a harmless Recreation when they are
dull, or to accompany a Friend, that earnestly importunes their company. And
these, methinks, are as much above those, whose Piety you so much admire; as it
is an harder thing to abstain from the pleasures of which we have tasted, and
find to be very agreeable to us, than to forbear those, to which we are
strangers, and know nothing of. Besides these, I know others that go oftener;
and yet I dare not say, they are not pious, because I see by all their actions
that they love God and Man. And I have heard them say, that the time they spend
on that fashion, does not hinder them in any Christian Duty that they know of,
(and yet they are not negligent to inform themselves) and is a great deal
better spent than in talking against ones Neighbors, or hearing others rail
upon the ill management of Affairs, and find fault with the times, or such like
things.


N. C. None of those things need be done neither.


C. It is true. But they want company, and they can find little of any fort,
where those things are not their entertainment. And it is very considerable,
that such people pass for Godly among you, who spend many hours in talk of that
nature now mentioned, and therefore we would fain know why we may not with
better reason call those Godly that go to Plays, and otherways are
unreproveable. I say with better Reason; both because this is at least more
innocent (if it be not perfectly blameless) than backbiting ones Neighbors;
and our Godly do nothing but what they allow, whereas yours do that which they
cannot but condemn. I am also of the opinion, that our Ministers speak as often
(if not more frequently) against the excessive use of that Recreation; as yours
do against all Bitterness, Wrath, Anger, Backbiting, and Evil-speaking, which
are altogether unlawful.


N.C. I did not think you would have justified these things so far as you do.


C. You need not have a worse opinion of me for that, because I do it not to
justify my self. For I am one of those that never saw a Play in my life, nor
ever intend to see one. I could wish also there were not so many acted, because
they invite men, perhaps, too often to them. But tell me, I pray you, why one
may not as well look upon a Picture, as upon the man himself whom it
represents? or, why a Painter should be commended, and a Player condemned?


N.C. I understand you not.


C. A Play does but present men's Actions before you, as a Picture does their
Faces. And since you see such things done every day as they there represent,
why may you not see both the things and the Representation of them, if you have
a mind? Nay, tell me why they that do, should not be thought to spend their
time as well as you, that can hear long Stories of the Bishops, or of such and
such a Parson, (as you in scorn, though very foolishly, call our Ministers; for
some of them are but Vicars, and you your selves would be glad to hold a good
Parsonage, as many Laymen do) or of some of your Neighbors; whose Life and
(perhaps) domestic and private Affairs, you having pried into, can be talking
of half a day together? This is, in truth, no better than hearing of a Play;
only you do not see it. That is, you hear the same things, that others both
hear and see acted in a Play; and there is a great deal of Art, and Wit, and
Fancy, and you have none.


N.C. I think our time ought not to be spent in either of these, as I told you
before.


C. I am well content it should be so. But let our people be as Godly as yours,
(if this be all you have to say against them) since you confess they do both
alike, or are not much different. Do not cast them out of the House of God
merely because they go to a Playhouse; But hope, that though you are gilt more
gloriously, yet they may be as good Metal as you. And therefore let them stand
upon God's Cupboard no less than your selves.


N.C. How come you to talk thus Metaphorically, and indeed obscurely? For
though I guess at your meaning, yet it is not so plain as you pretend to speak.


C. A great deal plainer than W. B. speaks; who, in one of the Ten Sermons I
told you of, informs us, that God is departed from the Nation, but will return
again, because he has left a great Cup-board of plate behind him. Believe it
Christians, says he, God has a very great Cup board of plate in this Nation,
Christ has much plate in England, as much as in any Nation in the World; and
he will not lose his plate. But he will not tell us how he is gone, nor when he
went, nor what drove him away, nor what his Return will be, no nor what mark
there is upon the plate, whereby we may know it. And I doubt you would not be
well pleased, if I should go about to guess what he means by all this.


N.C. Nothing but what is good, you may be sure.


C. Let the King look to that, and get it expounded; for I believe he is
concerned to know, whether the time when God went away was not when he came
into England last, and so whether he must not be gone and pack't away, when God
returns again to you.


N.C. I do not like this Discourse.


C. Do you mean of mine, or of his?


N.C. Of neither.


C. It Is well you do not approve of his; but why you should dislike mine, I
know not. For if you your self was a King, you would look upon them as
dangerous people, who should suppose God had forsaken your Kingdom since you
came to it.


N.C. He means, perhaps, no more but that God has deserted them, who are his
people, and once enjoyed more liberty than now they do.


C. You cannot excuse him so; for the Title of his Sermon tells you that it
relates either to a Soul, or to a Nation. And in the body of the Discourse (if
it deserve that name) he often applies it to this Nation, saying, What shall we
do that God may return to this Nation?


N.C. He would not have you think that he is quite gone, for he only says, God
is much departed, and gone in great measure.


C. True: But his meaning is plainly this; that he would be quite gone, but
that he and such like are here. Were but they removed, God would have no
dwelling among us. It Is they that lay hold on him, and will not let him totally
depart. They are his Plate, and as long as that remains, he has something to
engage his affections, and so will not perfectly abandon the Nation. But for
all that, he complains sometimes, as if the Lord had abhorred and cast us off;
telling us, that Christ is offended, his Gospel Institutions trampled on, and
that it is not an easy thing to bring him back. And it is very likely, if he
had thought of it, he would have told you, That the Plate upon the Cup-board is
thrown down, the Plate is battered and bruised, the Plate is abused and soiled.
For he tells his Congregation, You are in a suffering day, p. 478.


N.C. What if he had said so?


C. Then, to make the Play complete, one need only have added this, that the
Plate must be at least well scoured, if not a little beaten.


N.C. That is, you would have us persecuted.


C. Not I; but since you fancy you are persecuted, when you are not, it would
not be amiss if your Folly were a little chastised, in order to make you
thankful for the Liberty which, even by Law, you enjoy.


N.C. To me your words are as bad as a Persecution, which compare good Sermons
to a Play.


C. Why! that Sermon has more of Fiction in it than many of the Plays. For
they are sometimes grounded upon an Historical truth: but he entertained the
people in his Theater with a pleasant piece of his own pure Invention; telling
a Story of God's Departure, and of his coming back again, and their excelling
other men as much as a Cup-board of Plate does common Furniture and of their
remaining here as a pledge of his Return; when as there is no such thing, but
only in his and their Fancy. Only one thing, I observe, he very wisely
conceals, lest it should happen to prove in their conceit a plain Tragedy. For
having said, in order to assure them of God's Return, that if a man have left
Plate and Jewels in his House, he will either come back to them, or send for
them away to him; this pleasant Gentleman, supposing his Hearers (together with
his Truth and Worship, i. e. their Opinions and way of serving God) to be the
Plate; would not disturb their Fancies by telling them that, according to the
state of that Resemblance, God will either return to them, or send for them to
him, but tells them absolutely, he will return again to them. Read his words, (
p 477.) Such Plate the Lord has much of here, and he will not lose his Plate;
therefore he will return again, though he may afflict, and afflict sorely, yet
he will return again. And a little after (p. 482.) As sure as the Morning is
after the Night, so sure will God return. His going forth is prepared as the
Morning: as certain he will return as the Morning does. This I must needs say,
was kindly said, and like a Poet; who can invent what he pleases, and leave out
what makes not for his turn.


N.C. Methinks you invent what you please. And since you are so good at it, I
pray let me know what invention you have to excuse your Plays, which have so
much Obscenity in them.


C. It Is more than I know if they have any at all. And should there be any,
assure your self, the Ears of those whom we esteem Godly, are no less chaste
than yours, and would not endure it. But did you ever hear that any of our
Ministers spoke things so nearly approaching to immodesty as W. B. does?


N. C. I shall stop my ears, if you offer to rake into such matters.


C. I did not intend it, were you never so willing to hear it. I would only
have you know, that if I should present you with all the filthy Expressions and
Allusions that I have met withal in such Books as his, I should make you repent
that ever you led me to this Discourse.


N.C. I cannot conceive that they should fall into such Errors, since they are
the strictest sort of men, as you very well know, and love to preach very
plainly.


C. Now I understand what you mean by plain preaching, (which you so much talk
of) viz. to use rude and broad expressions. As when W. B. says, a little
Estate is but a Mess of Pottage, and a great Estate, a great Bowl of Pottage.
Have I not hit your meaning?


N.C. No.


C. Then it is very hard to know what it is. And, indeed, the Assembly of
Divines, when they direct men how to perform their Ministry, and among other
things, tell them they must preach plainly, do not speak plainly themselves in
their Directory, i. e. not so as to be understood. For these are their words,
page 17. The Servant of Christ is to perform his whole Ministry, etc. Plainly,
that the meanest may understand, delivering the Truth, not in the enticing
words of man's wisdom; but in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, lest
the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect. Now since you acknowledge
they cannot prophesy, nor speak with Tongues, nor Demonstrate their Doctrine by
Miracles, as the Apostles did; I would gladly know what they mean by the
Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. I am apt to think it would puzzle a
new Assembly, to tell us in plain words, what they intended by that Phrase.


N.C. If you were taught of God, as they are, you would easily know.


C. We are all taught of God by the Apostles, who have revealed his Mind to us,
and that in a Divine manner. And therefore by pretending you are taught of God
more than we, when you cannot prove it, you only show that you are taught to
Cant in Scripture Phrase. Pray let us see if you understand any better, another
Direction of theirs, which is, to preach painfully, not doing the work of the
Lord negligently. Whom do you account a painful Preacher.


N. C. One that takes a great deal of pains.


C. It is just as plain as it was before; and you give me a very good
demonstration how well you are bred to a clear and plain understanding of
things. But that which you mean, I believe, is, one who preaches often.


N.C. Yes.


C. That Is the way to do the work of the Lord negligently, as common experience
has taught us.


N. C. Not, if they take pains to consider what they say.


C. But you would see them so often in the Pulpit, that you do not allow them
time for that, and other Ministerial Duties. Hence it is, that upon all
occasions they apply the Holy Scriptures, very impertinently, and interpret
them negligently, and allege that for a Proof, which is nothing to the
purpose, nay, quite contrary to that which they maintain. Witness W. B. who
from that place in Hosea 6.3. (his going forth is prepared as the Morning)
would have his people believe, that God will as certainly return to them, as
the morning is after night. Whereas that is only spoken to the Ten Tribes, and
the Prophet does not give them an absolute assurance that they shall return to
their own Land; but only invites them to Repentance, and on that condition
promises; God in a little time will revive them. Nay, he requires not only that
they should begin to know God whom they had forsaken; but that they should
continue and persevere to know him: and then, says he, his going forth is
prepared as the Morning, i. e. he was ready to comfort them, as the
Morning-light does those that wait for it; and would come upon them as the
Rain, which quickens and calls back the Corn to life, which otherwise would
have lain dead in the Earth. It is true, W. B. says a little before, if you
desire God should return to you, return you to him; as if there were some
condition in the business. But this is only his usual way of saying, and
unsaying; of granting promises to be Conditional, which he would have his
people believe shall be performed absolutely. And, indeed, so much he had told
them before this, that they might not be discomforted, though they did not
return to God. Friends, says he ( page 478.) there is a time when God will
deliver his people for his Names sake, and with a notwithstanding, i. e.
notwithstanding all their Sins, and notwithstanding all his Displeasures, as he
explains himself. Now if you would know when that time is, he tells us, When a
people suffer for God's Name's sake, then God will deliver for his Name's sake,
then God will deliver with a notwithstanding, And this he would have them
believe is their present state and condition. How is it with you now? (they are
his words) you are in a suffering day; but are not all your sufferings for the
Name of Christ? Be of good comfort then; though God may be departed, and your
City destroyed, yet he is not quite gone, but will return again: that is,
notwithstanding all their Sins, he would not leave them. Do you not see how
confident he is? This it is, for men to fansy themselves at the Fathers knee,
and to be in his arms, and held in his Embraces, held in his Smiles, (as he
speaks, p. 469.) They say even what they please, when they are full of this
conceit; and think it is the Oracles of God. They tell you their own mind, and
believe it is the mind of the Lord. And when they tell it you in such delicate
Expressions as these, or such rude and gross ones as those before mentioned;
you call it plain Preaching, and powerful Preaching.


N.C. The Assembly told you (if you would have observed) what plain Preaching
is, in that very place which you quoted; where they require Ministers to
forbear unprofitable use of unknown Tongues, strange Phrases, Cadences of
Sounds and Words, and to cite Sentences out of Writers sparingly, though never
so Elegant.


C. By your favor, this is only one part of that which they call plain
preaching. For first, they say a Minister must preach in the Demonstration of
the Spirit, and of Power: and then it follows, Abstaining also from an
unprofitable use, etc. So that still we are to seek what that Preaching with
Power means. And as for this sort of plain preaching now mentioned, either your
Ministers do not understand it, or do not mind it. For who has more strange
Phrases than W. B.? Or, (to pass by him, who it is like regards not the
Directory) who is there that stuffs his Sermons with more Shreds of Authors,
and more affects little Sayings and Cadences of Sounds and Words, than T. W. As
for his Power in preaching, I showed you before how unable it is to Rouse and
Shake an Hypocrite, and bring him to Repentance. For he studies rather to
please him with the enticing words of man's Wisdom, (though after a poor
fashion) than to make a plain Representation of his Wretched State and
Condition to him. If many of those, whom you despise, had had the handling of
him, they would have turned his inside outward, and set it before his eyes:
They would have ripped his very Heart, and discovered his Entralls; that he might
have beheld how he stands divided between God and the World. He should have
seen how many secret Sins he suffers to lurk in his Breast: Nay, in what a
detestable manner he reserves a kindness for many of the vilest Sins; such as
are Covetousness, Oppression, Hard dealing, Unmercifulness, Malice, Revenge,
Bitterness, Wrath, Implacableness, and such like; which are the Sins of too
many Religious people, that is, of Hypocrites, that are not entire and uniform
in their Religion. For an Hypocrite is not a mere Player in Religion, as T. W.
fancies* but one that concerns himself with a mighty Zeal for some good things,
and, perhaps, would rather die, than not do them, but has no Affection for the
rest of Christ's Commands. He does not only put on a Garb of piety to deceive
others; but there are a number of men that love some part of piety, and by that
means deceive their own Souls. And let you and I, my good Neighbor, look to
it, that we be not of that number.


N. C. Our Ministers, you may well think, give us such Cautions. For you must
acknowledge, as I intimated before, (but you would pass it by) that they are
the strictest people in the World, and teach us so to be.


C. So were the Pharisees: For that Sect was more curious and exact in many
things than any of the rest. But these two things among many others you shall
observe of them. First, that they were very desirous of the peoples Favor and
Esteem: the desire of pleasing, whom I doubt sometimes betrays your Preachers
into such rude and unhandsome speeches, as I have heard and seen from them. And
secondly, the best of them (as appears in S. Paul) were carried with a blind
preposterous Zeal, even against the Truth of Christ; which arose from their
high Esteem of themselves, and a Confidence they were very dear to God above
all others. I wish the like Heat, and Conceit of your infallible spirit do not
now make you violently oppose many things which have Christ's Stamp upon them.
And then you had best examine whether you are not strict people, just as they
are plain Preachers.


N.C. Your meaning.


C. I mean, not strict. For as to me those are very obscure Speakers, and hard
to be understood, whom you call plain: So it is possible those may take too
much Liberty, especially in their Tongues, whom you call strict.


N.C. O, Sir, there are no people so serious as they.


C. If you mean that they look solemnly, and will not laugh, nor be merry; it
is like it is true of some of them. But whether this be the effect of their
Religion, or their Natural Temper, it is no great matter, for it does not much
commend them. Otherwise, if you mean, that they long consider things, and come
not to a Resolution till it be late; that they ponder all their words and
actions, and weigh well what they are going about; I doubt you will find but
few of these serious persons. For to me, the Zeal of most of you seems to make
you heady and rash. I have observed, for instance, that they are apt presently
to condemn those that are merry; or at least to shake their Heads, and express
their fears as if they were too vain and light-Spirited. This, Censure has a
show of Seriousness, but in truth, proceeds from a want of it. But if you mean,
that they are in good earnest in their Religion: So are many of the Nuns and
Friars, and other devout people among the Papists, who seriously say their Ave
Mary's and Pater Nosters, and would not omit them for all the World. And so
were the Pharisees a very serious people, especially upon a Sabbath, and would
not neglect their Devotions, in which they were earnest and long, for any good.
And assure your self, a man may be serious in Religion, and yet be an
Hypocrite: That is, he may in good earnest do many Duties, and love to Pray,
and Hear, and Repeat Sermons, and the like; And all the while he may in as good
earnest love the World very much, and (to say no more) love the praise of men,
and Desire to be better thought of than his Neighbors. In short, he may love
Money and Esteem, being Covetous and Censorious as the Pharisees were.


N.C. You love to compare us with the Pharisees. Were they such a
tender-conscienc'd people?


C. Yes indeed were they, in many things. They would rather die than break the
Sabbath: They made a great Scruple of walking above so many Paces upon that
day, and had infinite Ceremonies and Superstitions about its Observation; of
which they were so tender, that they could not endure any body else should
break them. The like Tenderness they had about Idolatry, and many other things.
But yet they made no bones (as we say) of a Widdow's house, which they could
devour at one bit as soon as the Sabbath was done: They were horribly Covetous
and desirous of Riches: They made no Conscience of Oppression and Extortion:
They were monstrously Uncharitable and Proud: They thought themselves the
wisest and the best men in the world, and despised all others, as men that knew
not what Religion meant. And lest you should think they wanted Zeal to increase
their party, (which they called Love to pure Religion) they compassed Sea and
Land (as Christ tells you) to make a Proselyte, who, when he was gained, became
twofold more the Child of Hell than themselves. Which thing I would have you
observe, because it shows us that men may be converted from gross Profaneness
to Sins of a more Spiritual and invisible nature; to Diabolical Pride, and
Malice, and rage against all that oppose their Sect. And therefore you would do
well to consider again, whether there be not many such Converts now that hate
us as much as they do Common Prayer, and are zealous for little else but to
make men Non-Conformists, and to disgrace those that are not.


N.C. I did not think you would have pleaded so hard for all the Superstitions
and Superstitious people of your Church. And, to tell you all my mind, I should
love your Minister better, if he did not seem to love the Common Prayer so
well. For he reads it with as much Devotion as he expresses in his own prayers;
and besides, he maintains the Use of it, and the things appointed by it, (as
you do) in his private discourses.


C. In my mind, you ought to like him the better for this, because he is not an
Hypocrite, and does not that to get a Living which he inwardly dislikes, nor
approves that by public practice, which he disallows or discommends in private
talk. And methinks it argues too much insincerity in your selves, that you
could be content, nay glad, that another man should do contrary to his
Conscience and Profession; either in using those Prayers which he inwardly
disaffects, or in speaking against them (at least silently hearing them
reproached) when he is convinced of their goodness. Above all, I wonder how any
honest-hearted man can endure him that mutters over the public Prayers (which
he pretends by his use of them to like) without any Spirit or life, on purpose
to disgrace them and bring them into contempt; at least to make his own prayers
better accepted, and preferred before them.


N.C. Well, but what need he justify and maintain the use of Common Prayer,
wherever he hears it disputed of?


C. He thereby does but justify himself and his own practice. It seems you
would have him stand like a Fool with his Finger in his Mouth, Merely to Humor
you. And withal, you would fain have it thought, that all Conscientious men are
of your mind; if they had but Heart and courage to profess it.


N. C. Well, Neighbor, I think we had best leave of this Trade of talking one
against the other, and finding out one another faults; which I see is the
business both of you and us.


C. To say the truth, it would be more for the Interest of Christianity, if we
did. But though you seem very desirous, in a good mood, that we should cease to
undermine each the other, and both join together to promote sound Religion and
true piety; yet this Fit holds not long. For commonly you labor nothing more
than to overthrow the Religion established; nay, many of you glory in your
hopes of this: as if it were a mighty matter to pull down a Building, and bring
things to Ruin; which is the easiest thing in the world; the work of Ignorance
and Confidence, and, as one of our Ministers said, the Pastime of the Devil,
and the Employment of his Children; of whom we may speak in the Apostles words,
Romans 3.16. Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of Peace have
they not known. In order to this, you disgrace the Bishops; undervalue, if not
despise, all our Ministers; revile the Common Prayer; accuse us of
Superstition, Popery, Anti-christianism, and what not? You everywhere divulge
and spread abroad the Faults of any of the Clergy; and rejoice to hear or tell
a Story of any drunken Parson, as you are wont to call the best of them by way
of derision. Nay, you have more Favor and kindness for wild and Phanatick
people, who undermine the very Foundation of Religion, than for us.


N.C. No more of this, I pray you.


C. I should rather say to you, Let us hear no more of this: and I shall
rejoice and be ready to correspond with you in all offices of Love and Kindness.


N.C. Belike, you can love one of our way.


C. Yes, very heartily. And therefore I would not have you expound any thing I
have said, as if it were meant against the humble, the modest, the charitable,
and such as are afflicted and mourn for our present Differences: but as
intended to check the pride and presumption of many among you, who, though full
of Folly, think they know the Mind of God more than all the Bishops and Priests
in the World; and by their Confidence and bold pretense of the Spirit would
over-bear all sober Reason, and impose all their fond Opinions on us; making
the poor people believe that they are God's only Favorites, and fit to teach
and rule the whole Nation. These we cannot well suffer to strut as they do, and
not endeavor to display their Vanity: Nor can we approve of those who for the
sake of their party, are content to dissemble it, if not favor their impudent
pretenses. For we know well enough how like they are in many things to S.
Paul's formal Christians; especially in this one part of their Character, that
they are Despisers of those that are good. A thing I would by no means be
guilty of, and therefore hope you will not suspect my esteem of you.


N. C. I am glad you are so charitably disposed; and am the more pleased,
because I thought you had looked upon us with the greatest Detestation in the
world.


C. I have already told you, that we do not think you all of a kind, though now
you flock together. There are some (of your Ministers for instance) who I
believe are of an humble Spirit, quiet and peaceable in the Land, desiring
Unity and Accord, grieving for the Breach of it; and are so far from condemning
those, that are satisfied to do what the Law requires, that they are sorry they
cannot contribute to the common Peace by doing the same. Upon which account
they go as far as they can, and conform to public Order in all things wherein
they are satisfied, and are tender of breaking any Laws; and when they cannot
obey them, do not rail upon them and their Makers, but silently and without any
noise omit to do what they enjoin. These we cannot but love; and are sorry that
in so great a number we can find so few of this good temper. For there is a
second sort (with which the Kingdom swarms) who are of an haughty Humor, of a
furious and factious Disposition, puffed up with a conceit of their Gifts to such
a height, that they will scarce allow any man to know any thing of God, who is
not of their Party. Sour and crabbed they are above all other men, cross and
peevish beyond all expression: they never speak well of our Governors or
Government; they are always reviling Bishops and Common Prayer; and talking
like men inspired: it is an easy matter for them to disparage all our
Ministry, and beget an ill opinion of them in the minds of their credulous
Followers. Which we conceiving to be their Business, no wonder if our men seek
to preserve themselves, not by disgracing, but by rightly representing them to
the World. They ought not to betray the Church wherein they live, by a base and
unworthy Silence. Even the meanest Child of us ought to speak, when you are
about to kill our Mother. Your long Nails wherewith you now scratch her Face
must be shown the people; who see them not, while they behold your hands lifted
up to Heaven. But besides these two, there is a third sort between both, who
are dissatisfied only with a few things; allow our Ministers to be good men,
and wish for Peace, but yet for private respects hold fair correspondence with
the Furies now named; keep up the Separation; hold Conventicles; suffer the
people, without reproof, to be fierce and violent against us; connive at a
great many of their false and absurd Opinions; let them alone in their rude and
insolent behavior; take not sufficient care to instruct them in the Truth, to
bring them to a modest and peaceable temper; In short, to qualify them for
Compliance with us. Do not smile at the word, for I can demonstrate it might
soon be brought about, if they pleased.


N. C. How, I Pray? Can you do more than all the men in the Kingdom?


C. Let them persuade their people but to be of their mind, and the business is
done.


N. C. Do you think they do not?


C. No, I warrant you. If they did, the people would conform, though they
cannot. For that which keeps this sort of Ministers from Conforming, is not any
thing to which the people are bound, but something particularly required of
them.


N. C. You have revealed a Secret to me.


C. It is easy for any body to find out, that has a mind to it. There being
nothing plainer than this, that they would have read those prayers which I
would have you hear, if something else had not been in the way, which you are
not concerned in; and that is, renouncing the Covenant. Let them then but
persuade you to do all that they can do themselves, and in order to that give
you Reasons why it should be done; and then I may hope to see you and I go to
the same Church together: And for them that do not stand upon the Covenant,
(for there are some such) they ha^ the greater reason to exhort you to come,
nay, to come themselves, and bring you along with them. But lest they should
not do their duty, give me leave to speak to you in those very words which they
have writ to others; and, if you think they have now any weight in them, (as I
believe you once thought they had) we shall not be long separated.


N. C. What have they writ?


C. In a Book called A Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, etc. You
will find a speech of your Ministers and Elders in the Province of London, to
those that had left their Communion, and stood in divided Congregations from
them: Which if it had any force then in your opinion, ought to prevail with you
now to come and join your self again to us, whom you have forsaken. I will cite
you some Passages of it in their own words. And let me begin with those which
you find page 130. in a distinct Character, (as the strength, I suppose, of
what they had to say) If we be a Church of Christ, and Christ hold Communion
with us; why do you separate from us? If we be the Body of Christ, do not they
that separate from the Body, separate from the Head also? We are loath to speak
any thing that may offend you; yet we entreat you to consider, that if the
Apostle call those Divisions of the Church of Corinth, (wherein Christians did
(...) separate into diverse formed Congregations of several Communion in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper) Schisms, 1 Cor. 1.10. may not your Secession
from us, and professing you cannot join with us as Members, and setting up
Congregations of another Communion, be more properly called Schism? Thus they
plead for Unity and Uniformity in those days, (1649.) And we say the very same
now. Be just, I beseech you; and either pronounce that they had no reason on
their side when they wrote those words, or that we have reason too, who use the
same to you. Hear also what they say a little after, and think one of us speaks
it to you. You gather Churches out of our Churches, and you set up Churches in
an opposite way to our Churches; and all this you do voluntarily, and
unwarrantably, not having any sufficient cause for it. For you acknowledge us
to be the true Churches of Jesus Christ, and Churches with which Christ holds
Communion. This, I dare say, is the Judgment of every true Fresbyterian, that
the Church of England is a true Member of Christ's Body, and that Christ holds
Communion with her, and has not cut her off (because of any Ceremonies she
uses) from him the Head of the Church. If so, consider, I beseech you, as they
entreat their Brethren of the Separation, How dare you refuse to hold Communion
with those, whom Christ Jesus holds Communion withal? How can you with a safe
Conscience thus separate your selves from those who are not separated from
Christ? Is it nothing to make a Schism in his Body? Do you not rend your selves
from him, when you thus rend your selves from it? Think seriously on it, before
you sleep; that you may, at least in purpose and resolution, presently unite
your self to us, from whom you have departed.


N. C. But I am told that every Separation is not a Schism.


C. To this they answer in that Book, and pray mind it: The godly Learned say,
that every unjust and rash Separation from a true Church (that is, when there
is no just, or at least no sufficient cause of the Separation) is a Schism: And
that there is a negative and a positive Schism. The former is, when men do
peaceably and quietly draw from Communion with a Church, not making a head
against that Church, from which they are departed: The other is, when persons
so withdrawing do consociate and withdraw themselves into a distinct and
opposite Body, setting up a Church against a Church; (which let me tell you by
the way, is your Case, my good Neighbor) which Camero calls a Schism by way of
eminency; and farther tells us, there are four Causes, that make a separation,
from a Church, lawful. First, when they that separate are grievously and
intolerably persecuted: Secondly, when the Church they separate from is
Heretical: Thirdly, when it is Idolatrous: Fourthly, when it is the Seat of
Antichrist. And where none of these four are found, there the Separation is
insufficient, and Schism. Now we are fully assured, that none of these four
Causes can be justly charged upon our Congregations; therefore you must not be
displeased with us, but with your selves, if we blame you as guilty of positive
Schism. What say you now, my Neighbor? Was this good Doctrine then, or no? If
it was, it is so still; and I beseech you, make good use of it.


N. C. Some think it is a sufficient cause to separate, in that there are such
sinful mixtures tolerated among you; and that your Congregations are
miscellaneous Companies of all Gatherings, and all sorts are admitted even to
Sacramental Communion.


C. That Is the very Objection which your Ministers and Elders saw framed
against them by the Separatists. And what they answer to them; we return to
you. First, That this Charge is not true; the Rule of the Church of England
being as full and strict for Church Members, that shall come to Communion, as
that of the Assembly there cited, page 133. which is this: That they must be
visible Sainst, such as, being of age, do profess Faith in Christ, and
obedience to Christ, according to the Rules of Faith and Life, taught by Christ
and his appostles. Secondly, Suppose there were some sinful Mixtures (say they)
at our Sacraments; yet we conceive this is not a sufficient ground of a
Negative, much less of a Positive Separation. The Learned Author forementioned
tells us, that Corruption in Manners crept into a Church, is not a sufficient
cause of Separation from it. This he proves from Math. 23.2, 3. and he adds
also this Reason for it; Because in what Church soever there is Purity of
Doctrine, there God has his Church, though overwhelmed with Scandals. And
therefore whosoever separates from such an Assembly, separates from the place
where God has his Church; which is rash and unwarrantable. The Church of
Corinth had such a profane Mixture at their Sacrament, as we believe few (if
any) of our Congregations can be charged withal; and yet the Apostle does not
persuade the Godly party to separate, much less to gather a Church out of a
Church.


N. C. What do you tell me of the Doctrine of a Foreign Divine?


C. They have made it theirs, by approving what he says, in their Book. And
besides they tell you, there were many Godly and Learned Non-conformists of the
last Age, that were persuaded in their Conscience they could not hold Communion
with the Church of England in receiving the Sacrament kneeling, without Sin;
yet did they not separate from her. Indeed, in that particular act they
withdrew, but yet so, as that they held Communion with her in the rest; being
far from a Negative, much more from a Positive Separation from her. Nay, some
of them, (mind the words) even then, when our Churches were full of sinful
Mixtures, with great Zeal and Learning defended them so far, as to write
against those that did separate from them. who these Good and Learned men were,
they tell you in the Margin; Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Dod, Mr. Hildersham, Mr.
Bradshaw, Mr. Ball.


N. C. Then we shall communicate with men in their sin^; and we must not be led
to that by the greatest Examples.


C. To prevent that, they will advise you, that if any Brother offend you; you
are not to separate from him, (for this is not the way to gain, but to destroy
his Soul;) but to tell him of it privately, and in an orderly way to bring it
to the Church. And when you have done your Duty, you have freed your Soul, and
may safely and comfortably communicate in that Church without Sin.


N. C. I perceive you are read in our Writers. And, trely, you have now told me
so much from them, that I shall not have so hard an opinion of you, as I had
before. And I hope this will preserve me from being guilty of the sin of
Schism, because the Nature of that consists in an open breach of Christian Love.


C. This will not serve your turn, but you must come and join in Communion with
us again. For they tell you, that as he, who denies a Fundamental Article of
the Faith, is guilty of Heresy, though he add not Obstinacy thereto, to make
him an Heretic: So he that does unwarrantably separate from the true Church is
truly guilty of Schism, though he add not Uncharitableness thereunto, to
denominate him a complete Schismatic. You may read the words, if you will,
page 137. And afterward they tell you that to make a Rupture in the Body of
Christ, and to divide Church from Church, and to set up Church against Church,
and to gather Churches out of true Churches, and because we differ in some
things, therefore to hold Church Communion in nothing; this, we think, has no
warrant out of the word of God, and will introduce all manner of confusion in
Churches and Families; and not only disturb, but in a little time destroy the
power of Godliness, Purity of Religion, Peace of Christians, and set open a
wide Gap to bring in Atheism, Popery, Heresy, and all manner of wickedness.
Thus they. And how fast all this is a doing by your means, who now will have no
Communion with us in any thing, because we differ in some things, is apparent
to all the world. For the love of God, and of the Church, nay, of your own
Families, consider of it in time, and repent; that so they may not be brought
to utter Confusion, but the Gap may be stopped, which you have opened too wide
already, to Atheism, Irreligion, and all the rest of the Wickedness which
comes, pouring in it self upon us. Do not continue that Separation any longer,
which you have rashly begun; lest you be found guilty of that very thing your
selves, which you condemned so much in others, and profess is by all good men
to be abhorred. Read what I have now said over and over again, and seriously
lay it to heart: lest your own Books be opened at the day of Judgment, and
Sentence be pronounced against you out of them. Nay, desire your Ministers to
read it, and to expound the reason to you, why they should ssparate now more
than Mr. Dod, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Ball, and such like, did heretofore. Entreat
them to let you know, how they excuse thewselves from the guilt, not only of
withdrawing themselves from our Communion, (which they call Negative Schism;)
but also of making an head against us, and drawing themselves into a distinct
and opposite Body, and setting up a Church against a Church which they call
Positive, and Schism by way of Eminency, Ask them which of the four Causes of
Separation they allege to make their Departures from us necessary: What we
have done that should make it unlawful for them to communicate with us; or
rather, How we have separated our selves from Jesus Christ, and made him disown
us. If they be not able to give you very good satisfaction in this, and in all
the rest, I hope, you see what you are to do, according to their own Advice and
Counsel.


N. C. I suppose they will say that they are persecuted, which will justify
their separation.


C. I cannot imagine what they should pretend, unless it be this. But bid them
show you what has befalen them, that should deserve that name. And likewise
show, that the Persecution is grievous, nay, intolerable, (for else they have
told you it will not warrant a Separation:) and one thing more desire to learn
of them, which is, whether those things that any of them have suffered, be not
the Effect and Punishment of their separation, and not the Cause of it. As for
any Restraints the Law has laid upon their Liberty, they are nothing
comparable to those that were laid on us, when they were in Power: and yet they
will take it ill if they should be called Persecutors. For if you look into an
Ordinance of Parliament of 11. August 1645. for putting in execution the
Directory, you will find these words: That if any person or persons whatsoever,
shall at any time or times, hereafter, use, or cause the aforesaid Book of
Common Prayer to be used in any Church, Chapel, or public place of Worship,
or in any private place or Family, within the Kingdom of England, or the
Dominion of Wales, or Port and ^own of Berwick; every such person so offending
^herein, shall for the first offense, pay the sum ^f five pounds, of lawful
English money; for the second offense, ten pounds; and for the third, shall
suffer one whole year Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprise. Can you name me
any Law now extant so severe and cruel, as this was? Do we abridge the poorest
Tradesman so much of his liberty, as then they would have abridg'd all the
Nobles in the Land, nay (for any thing I see) the KING himself, at least his
Family, which were forbid the use of Common Prayer under such great Penalties?
Are you not all allowed to worship God, just as you please your selves in your
own Families? Nay, may not some of your Neighbors join with you, if you and
they be so minded? For shame do not complain of Persecution, when you are so
kindly used, who endeavored in such a manner to oppress others. And blush to
think that you should separate upon this account; which yet is all that you can
have the face to pretend, to excuse the Schism you have made. The Common Prayer
you see was never imposed with such rigor, as your Directory was* And whereas
you now take what liberty you list to preach, and Write, and print what you
think good against the Common Prayer; it was then ordained, that none should do
so against the Directory, or any thing contained therein, (which is a great
deal more; and in case any man was so bold, he was to forfeit such a sum of
money, as should be thought fit to be imposed on him, by those before whom he
had his Trial; provided it was not less than five pounds, nor more than fifty.
Who should try him no body knew; but he was sure to meet with little favor, if
the Directory-men met with him, and were to handle him; who would tolerate no
Dissenters from them. And their reason is given, (in the London Ministers
Letter to the Assembly) because they were bound by the Covenant to extirpate
all Scism; and to endeavor the Lord should be one, and his Name one, in the
Three Kingdoms, i. e. that all should subscribe to the Directory. And there is
another thing which to me seems something hard, (I am sure you ought to judge it
so,) viz. an Ordinance of 2. June 1646. requiring, that all people who were
come to reside in the Parliament-Quarters, should take the National League and
Covenant, and the Negative Oath, notwithstanding any Articles that had been
made by the Soldiery. Why should you complain of the late Oxford Act (as it is
commonly called) who could endure heretofore that men should be used so
severely? Compare that and this Ordinance together, and tell me which of them
is most moderate; that which banished men out of many Counties, or that which
only prohibits their near habitation to a Town or two? that which made void the
promises which their own Officers had made, or that which was against no
engagements at all? I wish you would consider these things, with a great many
more of like nature; for, though your prejudices are strong, I hope sometime
they may serve to convince you. And the mention of the Covenant, just now
brings a considerable thing to my mind, which if it would not be tedious, I
would willingly propound, and desire you to enquire about it.


N. C. I pray, say on; for your discourse begins to be pleasant to me.


C. I wish you would ask your Ministers, why they themselves heretofore not
only approved of certain Ceremonies in the Worship of God, but also were well
pleased they should be enjoined; and yet now cry out upon our Ceremonies, or,
at least, would have them left at liberty.


N. C. What Ceremonies and Worship do you mean?


C. Was not the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant a piece of Religion?


N. C. Yes; it was an Oath.


C. Read then an Ordinance of 2. Febr. 1643.
and you will find it is ordained, among other things, that during the time
that the Minister read the whole Covenant to the people, the whole Congregation
should be uncovered: There is one Ceremony, which now you will by no means
endure should be imposed on you at the hearing of Sermons. Then, at the end of
the Reading it, they appoint that all shall take it standing: There is another
Ceremony. And, lastly, that they should lift up their right hand bare: That Is
another, if not two Ceremonies more. For they enjoin them to lift up the right
Hand, not the left; and that it should be bare, not covered with a Glove. And
this very Ordinance touching the Manner of the taking the Covenant, they
desired might be confirmed by Act of Parliament; as you may see in the
Propositions sent to his Majesty at Newcastle, July 11. 1646. Pray tell me, if
you can, or else make enquiry, why they did not leave men to their way and
manner of doing this Religious Act; seeing they would have no body tied to a
Posture now in the Worship of God.


N. C. I will enquire; For I know no reason of it.


C. If you please, ask them another thing; which is, why they do not take their
own Advice which they give about the Covenant? For if they would, the Covenant
need not keep them from doing that, which otherwise many of them profess they
could do.


N. C. You must be at the pains to interpret your self; for I know not what you
intend.


C. The Parliament, in the Ordinance now mentioned, desire the Assembly of
Divines to prepare an Exhortation for the better taking of the Covenant, which
should be read together with it. Now in that Exhortation (which was voted to be
printed, Febr. 9. 1643.) the Assembly entreat the Episcopal Clergy, (who said
they could not take the Covenant, because it was against their former Oaths) to
consider this, which is the thing I would have them consider now; That if any
Oath be found, into which any Minister or others have entered, not warranted by
the Law of God and the Land, in this Case they must teach themselves and
others, that such Oaths call for Repentance, not Pertinacy in them.


N. C. I know what you are going to infer. But they will not yield that this
Covenant was unwarrantable by the Laws of God and the Land, and therefore they
will not repent of it.


C. It was plainly against the Laws of the Land, and those reasonable and good
Laws: from whence I conclude, it was against the Laws of God, which would have
us obey humane Laws, (that do not contradict them) and not combine together to
destroy them.


N. C. They will never grant, it was against the Laws of the Land: and I think
you cannot prove it.


C. Did they not Covenant to endeavor to preserve the Reformed Religion in the
Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government?


N. C. Yes, its the first Barnch of the Covenant.


C. And did they not next of all Covenant to endeavor to reform Religion in
these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in all Points according to the Examples
of the best Reformed Churches?


N. C. Yes.


C. Then they were bound to reform us according to the Pattern of Scotland: For
that Church must needs be the best Reformed, which needs no Reformation; as it
seems the Church of Scotland did not, being to be preserved by them just as it
was.


N. C. What of all this?


C. Then I will prove they bound themselves in an Oath against the Laws of the
Land. For our Laws make the King Supreme Governor over all persons and in all
causes: But the Presbyterial Government as it was in Scotland, (and was
intended to be here) though it allow the King to be Supreme Governor over all
persons, (as they are his Subjects) yet will not subject all Causes to his
Government; because Christ according to the Discipline, is the only spiritual
King and Governor over his Kirk. As much as to say, they are subject only to
Christ in some things.


N. C. This is only a Collection which you make from several things compared
together, in which you may be deceived. Sure they never intended to set up such
a Government here.


C. That you may not be left therefore to my uncertain Reasonings (as you will
esteem them) in this particular; You may be satisfied about the Mind of the
Assembly, if you be at all acquainted with the History of the late Times. By
that I am informed, they intended to bring the same Government among us that
was in Scotland: And, Secondly, they thought the Parliament was obliged to set
it up by virtue of the Covenant. When these two things are proved, I believe
you will be of my mind, that they took an Oath against the Laws, and therefore
ought not to persist in it, but repent of it.


N. C. I shall be glad to hear them proved.


C. You must know then that the Parliament declared for Presbyterial
Government, and passed most of the particulars brought them from the Assembly
without any material alteration; saving the point of Commissioners; as they
tell us in a Declaration of April 17. 1646.


N. C. What Is the reason it was not set up?


C. Have patience, and I will tell you. These ugly Commissioners stood in the
way, which the Assembly would not admit of; as the Parliament would not admit
of their Arbitrary Government.


N. C. Why do you call it so.


C. The title of the Declaration tells you, that the intention of it is, among
other things, to secure the people against all Arbitrary Government, viz. in
the Church, which they spoke of before. But that you may be sure of it; they
let you know, when they come to that part of it, which concerns
Church Government, that the Presbytery challenged an Arbitrary Power, which
they could not grant. The reason was, because they would have set up ten
thousand Judicatories within the Kingdom which should have had a supreme
Authority over us in many things. And this was demanded in such a way (as they
proceed to tell us) as is not consistent with the Fundamental Laws and
Government of the same, and by necessary consequence excluding the Power of the
Parliament of England in the exercise of that Jurisdiction. This was the very
cause (as they farther inform us) why they had settled no Government since
their sitting, because they could not subject themselves and the People of the
Land, to so vast a power as the Presbytery challenged; which, they tell us a
little after, would have been for the Civil Magistrate to part with some of his
Power out of his hands. Now before we go any farther, I pray tell me, who was
the supreme Civil Magistrate then, but the KING? And how will you excuse these
men from going about to rob him of a part of his Power, and wrest it out of his
hands?


N. C. Sure they did not Covenant to do this.


C. We shall try that by and by. But that you may better know how they meant to
go to work, and to over rule the Supreme Power in many Causes; you must
understand these things. That it being resolved by both Houses, that all
persons guilty of notorious and scandalous Offenses should be suspended from
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the Assembly likewise resolved, that these
two Powers lay in the Eldership or Presbytery, and only in them. First, the
Power of judging and decluring what are such notorious and scandalous offenses,
for which persons guilty (...) Power out of his hands, which is contrary to the
Law of God: And therefore they ought not any longer to hold themselves bound by
it; but rather should repent, as they advise others to do in that case. To sum
up the whole business. An Oath that is not warranted by the Laws of God and the
Land ought to be repented of. Your Ministers took an Oath not warranted by the
Laws of God and the Land, but contrary to them. Therefore they ought to repent
of it. The former Proposition, is their own. The latter is partly theirs, and
partly the Commons of England. For your Ministers expounded the Covenant as it
obliged them to set up the Presbytery in an absolute Power; and the Commons
declared the exercise of such a power to be against the Fundamental Laws of the
Realm, and the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate. (I might add, but that you
little regard, that His MAJESTY in his Proclamation declared it an
unwarrantable Oath, October 9, 1643.) And therefore do you and they see,
whether the Conclusion do not unavoidably follow, and make a good use of it, I
beseech you before it be too late.


N. C. As Paul said to Agrippa, that he almost persuaded him to be a Christian;
so I must say to you, that you almost persuade me to be a Conformist, and come
to Church.


C. I wish, as S. Paul said then, that you were not almost, but altogether,
such as I am. I mean, that you would not only come thither, but with such
reverence and seriousness as becomes the Service of God. But to come and sit,
or ^oll, or look about, or whisper and talk, as many do, methinks is as bad as
staying away. Nay, it seems to be far worse, because it is a more public
Affront to God, even while we are in his presence; an open Scorn of his
Worship, and a Contempt of all his people that devoutly join in it. Therefore,
for the love of God, never involve your self in this guilt, as I see too many,
even of the Great ones do; who show not half so much Reverence before God in
the time of Divine Service, as the people do before the meanest Justice of
Peace, Nay, in his absence, before his Country-Clerk. Lord, lay not this Sin to
their charge. And as I would desire you to pray with Reverence, so to hear the
Sermon also with due Attention, and without any Prejudice or Passion. Lay aside
all naughty and corrupt Affections, which blind the Understanding, and will not
let it discern the clearest Truth. Witness the Pharisees, who could not see the
most necessary things concerning everlasting Salvation, though manifestly
delivered in Holy Scripture, and plainly proved by many illustrious Miracles:
and all because they were Covetous, Proud, Self-conceited, and loved the praise
of men more than the praise of God. For what was more clearly set down in their
Books than the time of Christ's Coming; together with the Characters or Marks of
his Person, when he should appear? And what was more necessary to be known than
him when he came among them? In what were they so much concerned every way, as
to receive and acknowledge him? And yet, notwithstanding, they could not see
him, even when they saw him. They resisted the Holy Ghost it self, in the
Prophets both old and new. They could not endure such a Christ as taught them
to be humble, and pure in heart, and heavenly-minded, and meek, and merciful,
and peaceable, and patient under all injuries, and obedient to Government; and
that would not oppose Caesar, and advance them to Power and Dominion. From
whence you see how necessary it is to follow the Counsel of S. Peter, 1. Ep.
2.1, 2. and laying aside all Malice, and all Guile, and all Hypocrisies, and
Envies, and Evilspeakings; as a newborn Babe desire the sincere Milk of the
Word, that you may grow thereby. Do not think I take too much upon me thus to
instruct you. I do but repeat what I have heard from some of my Instructers.
And our Minister told us the other day, that some render the last words thus:
Desire the reasonable (or rational) Milk, without mixture; it being the same
expression, which is in Romans 21.1. where we read of reasonable service. But
that I find is a thing few care for: As little reason as you please will
suffice them. So their Fancies or their Affections be but tickled, they care
not whether it be with Reason or without. Any little Toy takes them; and if the
Exposition of Scripture which is given them be but pretty, they never mind
whether it be solid or no. Now this, I have been instructed, proceeds from a
Vicious Affection; from a lazy, slothful, disposition of mind; from a lothness
to be at any pains to understand the Truth; nay, sometimes from all evil
Affections; from a love of the Flesh and Sensual things, and a too great
strangeness and aversness to all the Concerns of a Soul. And assure your self,
there is no ignorance so black and dark as this which proceeds from corrupt
affections. That which is the effect only of Weakness of Parts; want of
Opportunity, ill Education, or bad Instruction, may find some help, and be in
great measure cured. A man of very mean natural parts, that has an honest.
Heart, may come to understand much. But this that I am speaking of, being
chosen and affected, is in a manner incurable. Men love it and are concerned to
maintain it; and will not understand the clearest Reasons, but shut their eyes
against them. And therefore if you would profit by any Sermon, come with a free
and unprejudiced mind, with an upright and true heart; and so you may be
convinced of your errors, or grow in wisdom and understanding, and, finally,
think your self as happy in our Company, as any where else.


N. C. You speak very reasonably and discreetly. But if I still remain
unsatisfied, I hope you will love me, as one Neighbor should do another.


C. Make no doubt of it. And the greatest act of Charity I can express to you
is, to advise you how you should behave your selves while you continue to
dissent from us. You were wont in the beginning of these Differences, to call
your selves the weak Brethren, This was the Language of your Forefathers, who
begged that they might be forborne, and treated gently, and, like the tender
Children of Jacob, driven no faster, than they were able to go. But now none
drive so furiously, as you. Nothing will serve your turn but to be the
foremost, I mean, the Leaders of all: You would be Masters of the Law; you
would Rule and Govern, as if you were the wisest and strongest Christians, nay,
illuminated with a more singular degree of Knowledge, than any body else. It
does not suffice you to let alone what is enjoined you, but you arreign it
before all your Neighbors; you judge and condemn it; nay, you thwart and
oppose it; you would fain do Execution upon it, and having pulled it down, set
up your own Fancies in the room. And so far has this Confidence carried you,
that you would fain set up your Fancies in all the World, if you were able. For
you know very well where you invited all Reformed Churches, and that in a way
of Prayer, that they would associate themselves with you in your, or the like
Covenant. I must desire you therefore, as you love your own and the Kingdom's
Peace, to have a lower opinion of your selves and Gifts; and so to abate of
your Confidence, and your Forwardness and violence to impose upon others. Set
not so high an esteem upon your own Models and Draughts of Government. Be
content to obey, rather than rule. Let nothing of Pride, Ambition, Vainglory,
and love of popular Esteem, bear sway in your hearts. And oh that we could see
all these evil spirits cast out by your Prayers and Fastings! Approve your
selves to be Tender-conscienced, by your tender care in all your actions to be
void of offense to God and Man. Show that nothing in the world but your fear to
displease God keeps you from us, by your humble carriage; by your speaking well
of all, as near as you can; by saying nothing against the established Religion;
by honoring your Superiors; by meeting very secretly, (if you must needs
assemble in greater Companies, than the Law allows) that so you may not give a
public Offense. And I beseech you never meet in time of Divine Service. Pray
your Ministers to search and examine, as much as they can, whether none of
their Auditors come to them only out of humor and love of Novelty; and that
they would exhort all that can, to go to the public Ordinances. For which end
let them acknowledge in plain terms, that the Worship of God among us is
lawful, and far from being Antichristian; that there are many godly men among
us; that they themselves have received benefit from their Labors. Let them
express their sorrow, that they are not enlightened enough to see the lawfulness
of using some Ceremonies; and desire the people not to follow their Example
without their Reasons. Speak well of your Governors, and reprove those that do
not. Believe not Rumors and Reports, and take care you be not the spreaders of
them. Keep a day of Humiliation for this Sin among others, that you have been
the Authors or Abettors of so many false and scandalous Stories concerning the
Bishops and others. And do not excuse your selves by saying that some Stories
are true; for I can demonstrate, if need be, that it is not the manner of your
people to examine carefully whether things be true or no, before they divulge
them, but presently they run away when they have got a Tale by the end, and
carry it about the Town. By which means, right Reverend persons (which is a
horrid shame) have been openly charged in public Assemblies with things
notoriously false, without any ground at all. All which proceeds from your
unmortified Passions of Anger, Hatred, and Uncharitableness; which make you
hastily believe any thing that is bad of those you do not like. Let these things
therefore be bewailed and reformed: As also your wresting of the Scripture, and
bold, but vain, pretenses to the Spirit; in which, I beseech you, hereafter
show greater Modesty. It would do well also, if you thought upon all the
Contempt which has been poured by you, or by your means, not only upon the
Bishops, but their Order and Function; and consequently upon all the Ancient
Churches, who flourished so happily under that Government: upon all the present
Ministry also, for whom no name could be found bad enough: nay, and more than
this, upon all Civil Governors, for whom there is scarce left any such thing,
as Honor and Reverence. And now I speak of them, let me again entreat you not
to oppose their Commands, if you cannot obey them; but only let them alone, and
forbear to do them. And let this Forbearance, be with much Modesty, Humility,
(...)



