A CONTINUATION OF THE Friendly Debate. By the same Author.

Prove. 14.10. A wise man fears and departs from evil: but the fool rages
and is confident.



(...).

London, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1669.

To the Readers.
I Shall only detain you so long as to tell you a few things that concern the
Motives to this Work, and the Author of it. For the former, take it from me
(who know better than any body else) they are none but the Authors love to
Truth and Peace; and his Charity to well-meaning and abused people. Think what
you please; I am sure he is not naturally sour or quarrelsome, much less angry
with any man merely because he differs from him. He has not been exasperated
by contending, nor put out of humor by fierce disputings; for he has no
Difference with any man living; he neither loves Divisions, nor lives by them.
He has as much respect also and regard as he desires: so much as may secure
him from the temptation of envying, and the mean arts of seeking to gain a
reputation to himself by disparaging other men. As for hopes of preferment,
which some have said are his end, besides that he studiously conceals himself,
I declare, that if he were capable or desirous of it, he would not be at so
much pains to seek it. And as he seeks not to gain any worldly thing hereafter
by his writing, so he loses nothing at present by that which he writes against.
For neither he, nor any of his friends (that he knows of) receive the least
prejudice by any man's Nonconformity, or separated Meetings; and so he should
not have taken any notice of them, if Religion had not been concerned. But he
is very sensible that this suffers very much; and that which many Ministers who
keep separated Assemblies, cannot condemn, is condemned, nay despised, by those
that follow them. For there is undoubted evidence that their not coming to the
Common prayers, and not declaring plainly the true reason of it, makes many
stand aloof of, and abhor our Service, as if it were the Mass. The people are
seldom at leisure to examine the Reason of things, nor apt to put themselves
upon that work without much urging: but they are always ready to follow-the
example of those whom they admire, and the less they know why, the more forward
they are to outdo the Copy they choose to imitate. So that the Ministers not
doing what they can in compliance with the established order, and not declaring
sincerely the causes why they do not, is interpreted to a farther abhorence,
than they (if they durst speak out) are willing to own. When they do but
signify their disgust, and that their palate is not pleased; their followers
are nauseated presently, and their stomachs turned. If they make an halt, or a
step back; those get the bit between their teeth: they kick and fling and run
away. Now though this bogling and starting may be looked upon by many credulous
and well-meaning people, as the effect of a commendable caution, or a quick
sense or perception of an approaching mischief, and of an exacter difference
they make between good and evil, than others do; yet experience tells us the
contrary, that the more ordinary cause is defect of eyesight and confused
apprehensions of things, Ignorance and humor, if not restiveness and Jadish
tricks. For to give but one palpable instance of this among many; have you not
observed at the funeral of a Friend when a Sermon has been preached, how a part
of the company, as soon as they come toward the Church door, presently draw off
and separate from the rest, as if they were going about some Idolatrous
service? Would not a stranger think that some noisome and offensive vapor or
stifling smoke ascended from our Devotions, which made these men so shie to
enter, till by the singing of a Psalm they had notice given that the air was
clear and fit to breath in, and then it may be they came in? But where lies the
offense all this while, if we may be worthy to understand it? Is it in the
white garment wherein the Minister officiates? But why, I pray, is this more
troublesome (unless to the tricks I spoke of) than a black one? There is
nothing frightful sure in three sentences of Scripture, in reading a Psalm of
David, or a lesson of St. Paul; and yet this is all, save the Gloria Patri at
the end of the Psalm, which one would think might escape with fair quarter,
especially now that their pursuit seems to be so hot after the fresh game of
Socinianism. I know there are some sober persons who dissent from us, that are
not thus skittish; and finding them humble, modest and not censorious, I not
only love but honor them with all my heart. There are others also, who from
the womb have been taught to start aside and to abhor our service; and being
unable to reason and incapable of better information, I pity them very much.
Let them but be quiet and not seek to govern us by their fancies and
prejudices, and I for my part shall not look upon their aversion as a vice, if
they will not account it their great Virtue. For what if some Children receive
impressions and inclinations in their infancy from their Mothers big-bellied
frights or longings, which they carry with them to their graves? What is the
World concerned in this, or in those men's unaccountable Antipathies? Is any man
more commendable for them? Surely no; but oftentimes more troublesome. You have
seen it is likely a person (pardon the instance I use, because it is familiar) as
soon as the Cheese after Meal has been set on the board, presently make scurvy
faces and change color, stop his nose, or run in have out of the room; yet
neither the Master or guests are farther concerned in this, than to pity, or
perhaps but smile or slightly complement the man's infirmity; and none forbears
the more to taste that has a need or a good liking. But you never heard of any
such man who, in a conceited humor, thought fit in this case, that his
particular aversion should prescribe to all others; or raised fierce disputes
about it in every company; and contended that this was no Primitive food, or at
least that our way was not the Primitive way of making it: that endeavored
busily to make a party against it among the indifferent and uninclin'd either
to love or hate it? much less that reviled and gave reproachful Nicknames to
those that used it, and sought for Orders to banish it from every Table. If you
could suppose such prodigious folly, you would not blame the Neighborhood,
especially the Officers, if they were concerned in it, or any that should
represent the ridiculousness, or the malice of such an undertaking. I know the
instance is not considerable enough to be applied to all things at this day
contested, but to a great many it may; and expresses well enough the humor of
those, who, according to their breeding, seem with an equal passion to oppose
every thing they dislike, even to the color of a Garment, or the fashion of a
Girdle. You have enough (Readers) concerning the Motives to this Continuation
of the Debate, when you are only told this farther, that the Author having
heard of some exceptions against the former Book, thought good to Answer, and
(as they deserve) to shame them in this. It is like some of our deceived
Brethren will hold this labor damnable and execrable, Preface to the
Confutation of the Errors of the Brownists. B. 2.
as being bestowed in their opinion, against the Church of Christ, against the
Saints, and Children of God and his Holy truth: To whom I answer as the
Non-conformists did to the Old Separatists, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my Mouth when I endeavor to speak, and my Pen stick to my fingers when I
attempt to write any thing, against the Church, the Children, or the Truth of
God. But the Errors and follies in those whom I think to have some goodness in
them, may I hope be reproved, without being thought to reprove their goodness:
besides, by endeavoring to keep them from being Righteous overmuch, I take a
course to preserve them from becoming too Wicked.

And now I believe nothing would be more grateful to some than to know the
Authors name: but I have nothing to say to them, but that it is an impertinent
curiosity to inquire any farther after him, since he has no mind to be known,
and since there is no need of it. For his name can add no credit or strength to
his Reasons; and as for matters of* Fact, he has directed you where to find
them, without inquiring after him to be resolved about them. But if any body
think it good manners to inquire into that which others would have kept secret;
Yet I am sure it argues great want of good breeding (to say no more) to
bespatter (as some have done) this and the other person whom they only
conjecture to be the Author; Laying to their charge things that they know not.
Let me advise them to be more Civil; Since I am sure they do not yet know me,
nor I believe, ever shall, unless I please; and since by disturbing themselves
and others still in this kind, they are like to reap nothing save their own
further shame. I end with the great Counsel which Mr. Whittingham long ago
concluded a Letter of his withal Troubles at Franckfort, Printed, 1575.
Know before you judge, and believe not all flying tales; keep one ear open and
report the best.

April 15. 1669.
THe Reader may take notice that there is an Alteration made in this second
Edition of almost two pages in the first, 364.365. The Author conceiving that
those words of the Book which he confuted, should be otherwise construed than
he thought at first sight, as was intimated in the Errata. But in stead of
them, he has now noted some other; very much deserving to be censured.

IMPRIMATUR,

Tho. Tomkyns, R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dmo Gilberto Divina
Providentia Archi-Ep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

Apr. 24. 1669. Ex Aed. Lambeth.
The Contents of the Continuation.
THe Non-conformists affected language and foolish imitation of
Scripture Phrase noted page 1. About taking Gods name in vain, and breaking the
third Command page 2, 3. The Covenanters highly guilty of it page 4, 5. etc.
How Mr. Case taught them to take the Covenant page 7. Some pleaded Religion for
breaking it page 8. Contrary to the solemn Protestation taken by both Houses
before page 9, 10. Non-conformists offended at the Friendly Debate, and why
page 11 The Apostles sense of giving no offense, 1 Cor. 10.32. Ib. The Debate
not guilty of it page 12 Non-conformists did not think heretofore that they
ought to forbear reading Common Prayer, because some said it gave them scandal
page 13 Great scandal of Schism Ib. Of grieving the Godly page 14
Non-conformists guilty of it in the proper sense by casting scorn on Divine
Service and our Governors page 15 Mr. W. Bridge an instance of this page 16
Just severity against such defamers petitioned for by themselves heretofore
page 17 Answer to another objection against the Friendly Debate for being writ
Dialogue-wise, etc. Ib, Non-conformists have writ Dialogues too, and those very
absurd page 18, etc. Mr. Hughes's Conference noted Ib. And two more Ancient,
one of which teaches to depose Kings, etc. page 21 The Non-conformists pretense
of not being guilty in breaking the Laws, because they are ready to suffer the
penalties, answered page 22 Their presumption that it is his Majesty's pleasure
they should take this Liberty against the Laws, answered page 24 Their change
of Principles, who held heretofore, that the Law was the Kings Superior page
26, etc Mr. W. Bridges remarkable for this Doctrine in a Book of his published
by Authority page 27, 28 More instances of their changing for their interest
page 29, 30 This remarkable in the Army Saints page 31 Who writ after the Copy
set them by their Superiors page 34 That the Author of the Debate is of a
harsh, bitter and jeering spirit, answered at large page 35, etc. Railing not
the better, because in Scripture phrase page 39. Some instances of
Non-conformists reviling language, the better to show whence the present
railers learnt theirs page 40 Reflections upon a passage in Mr. Case page 41 An
instance of sanctified wit as they call it page 43 Some famous New England
preachers guilty of foul language page 44 That it has woefully infected the
people is apparent page 45 And it is an old disease Ib. How they were served in
their kind page 46, etc. The Author falsely accused of writing out of Malice,
etc. page 51, 52 How the Non conformists despise those that are not of their
party page 53 The Authors moderation in his censures page 54 How he has dealt
with Mr. Bridge Ib. His way and spirit further discovered page 55, etc.
Particularly, that it is Antichristian and schismatical, as appears by the
Sermon of the two Witnesses page 59, etc. His dangerous doctrine about their
power to disturb the state, etc. page 60 His prefixing the time for it out of
the Revel. page 62 * How often they have been deceived in their conjectures
About this time page 65, 66, etc. * The danger of interpreting every judgment
that befalls, in favor of their conceits page 64 A rare interpretation of the
prophecies forenamed page 68 A reflection upon those bold deceivers page 71 The
cause of these conceits page 72 Their presumption that their platform should be
a pattern to all Churches page 74 Mr. Case his high opinion of the Covenant
page 75 His, and Dr. Wilkinsons, and some of the Scots and others opinions of
us page 77, 78, etc. And of the favors they receive from others page 80 Of
their Canting phrases, as Generation-work, witnessing time from page 81. to 91
Dr. Wilkinsons confidence noted page 85, 86 How they have shifted and changed
phrases to serve their turn Ib. Of the power of phrases to hinder men from
observing how they have been cheated page 88 The power they fancy they have to
destroy us page 90 Their opinion of their knowledge and worth page 93, etc. Of
their practice and skill in expounding works of providence page 94, etc. Their
people not more knowing than ours page 99 Many know not what that is which they
cry out against page 101 Instances in Popery, superstition, Will Worship page
102, 103, etc. About forms of prayer page 106 Their forms of railing, which
they use even in prayer, etc. page 107 Their small skill, save only in phrases
page 110 As appears by their easy turning to the wildest Sects page 111 A
famous instance of this in New England page 112 Mistakes about the Spirits
teaching and inspirations, etc. page 113 This, together with the obscurity of
their Doctrine a great cause of peoples doubts and desertions page 114 An
instance of the intricate way of Mr. Hooker to satisfy a doubting Christian
page 115 And to bring it to the promise as he speaks page 116 Hence the New
England whimseyes page 117 Mr. J. Durants way of comforting believers and
opening Scriptures page 118, 119 They are no better at resolving doubts about
particular actions page 120 How Religion has been spoiled of late and exposed
to contempt page 123 Non-conformists great want of Modesty page 126, etc.
Concerning eminent men page 129 Of judging others; in what things we may, in
what not page 130 Charity covers a Multitude but cannot or may not cover all
sins page 131 By what means profaneness came to abound page 133 Publicans and
Harlots, or Scribes and Pharisees, which the worse page 135, 136 The danger of
Schism and separated Congregations page 138, 139 Mr. Bridge his vain conceit
that we are angry because they withdraw from us and slight us page 140, etc.
How 2 Cor. 6.17. is abused by him to countenance the separation page 144 By
which and such like the old Brownists and more ancient Donatists justified
their Schism page 145 The wise and charitable courses to which St. Austin
directs us when men are generally bad page 146, 147 Mr. Calvin's judgment of a
true Church and separation from it page 149 And Presbyterian Ministers judgment
page 151 Act. 19.9. does not countenance the separation page 152 The
impertinent allegation of that place Rev. 14.4. by Mr. Bridge page 153 How the
people have been cheated with the noise of such words as Babylon, etc. page 154
And by other means page 155, 156, etc. Of Idol Ministers page 158, etc. The
folly of those who think our Ministers (out of respect to themselves) are
troubled to see people go to meetings page 161 The true reason of their
trouble, and the great danger of separation page 162 Not only to those who are
of it, but to others page 163 The great extremities it hurries men into page
165 The Presbyterian excuse that they separate not from us as Antichristian,
considered page 166, etc. It makes their cause the worse, if it be true page
168 Which tender conscienc'd men should consider, especially remembering the
issue page 169, 170 The disorders among the Independents, when in Holland page
171 And more anciently among the old Separatists page 172, 173, etc. No
security against the like, or worse again page 175 In vain to bewail these
Divisions unless we take a course to amend them page 177 What belongs to
private persons to do in order to it page 178, etc. Not study so much their
Governors duty, as their own, and what that is page 180, 181 Of yielding on
both sides page 182 The ancient Non-conformists did not think they still ought
to preach when they were deprived; but the contrary that they ought not page
183 The idle pretense of some from that place, Woe be to me if I preach not,
confuted page 185, 186 And of not consulting with flesh and blood page 187
Non-conformists do it too much Ib. Else why do they not teach as the old
Non-conformists did, how lawful set forms are, etc. page 188, 189 And teach
this with great earnestness page 190 Especially considering how miserably some
are prejudiced against them page 191 That exception answered though a form be
lawful yet useless page 192 Some reflections on a Book called Common Prayer
Book Dovotions Episcopal Delusions, etc. page 193 The profaneness, and
chollerick scurrility of it page 194, etc. The Ignorance and boldness of the
Prefacer page 197 Mr. Cartwright not against a set form of Prayer, etc. page
199 How vainly he vapors with the name of Mr. Parker Ib. And abuses Mr.
Greenham page 200 But above all Dr. J. Reynolds, who lived and dyed conformable
in all things to the orders of the Church of England page 201 Some of the
little reasonings in the book answered page 203, 204 The abuse of a place of
Scripture noted page 205 The Liturgy smells not of the Mass Book page 206
Antiquity of Liturgies by their own confession page 207 The presumption and
uncharitableness of this Writer page 208, 209 His main Argument answered page
210 After all his blustering he allows a prescribed form to be lawful page 211
And is fain to wrest some Scriptures in favor of conceived prayers page 213
His false arguing from Jer. 7.31. and such like places page 214 How that place
Deuteronomy. 12.32. is wont to be misinterpreted page 215 It was the manner of Mr. J.
G. to speak confidently, be the cause never so bad page 217, 218
Non-conformists generally guilty of too much confidence page 219 A gross
corruption of Dr. Sibbs his souls conflict after his death, noted Ib. 220, etc.
Of Forms of Prayer and of imposing them page 222 Smectymnuus allowed
impositions in some cases page 223 The Presbyterians were against a Tolleration
of the Independent way page 224 The Independents also impose their own devices
and have forms also, etc. page 226, etc. Of Christian Liberty, page 229 The
opinion of Mr. Dury and Mr. Cotton, etc. about this page 230, 231 Of Penalties
page 232 The opinion of Presbyterians and Independents formerly about them page
233 How the King himself was abridg'd of his Liberty page 234 The Independents
for punishments page 236 Some good Counsels out of Mr. Bernard page 239 How to
behave our selves in doubts page 241 Some good Rules to guide our selves by
page 242 What to do if we think that is sinful which Authority commands page
243 Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, opened Ib. Of fear to offend
others page 244 The great want of charity and such like graces page 245 How
these good Counsels were contemned by the separatists page 246 A description of
them Ib. The Resolution of the Presbyterian heretofore about Uniformity and
Obedience to Laws page 248
ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 16. r. Ordinances, P. 4. l. 15. r. witness to any. P. 11. l. 18.
marg. r. * Second part p. 135. P. 19. l. 14. dele almost. P. 22. l. 15. r.
Discipline. P. 29. l. 9. r. should find P. 32. l. 18. r. packt. P. 48. l. 11.
dele that, before you. P. 56. l. antepen. dele an. P. 60. marg. r. p. 122. P.
73. l. 1. r. persons come. P. 86. l. 2. r. the Generation. P. 94. l. 26. dele
now. P. 120. l. 26. r. insnarked. P. 129. l. 20. dele and P. 149. l. 24. r.
forsaker. P. 152. l. 21. r. neral of all, because of the graces of some. Ib. l.
18.21. r. Apostle. P. 177. antepen. r. as well as Innovations. P. 180. l. 8. r.
inconvenient. P. 183. l. 19. r. objected. P. 188. l. 7. r. that it is. P. 215.
l. 31. for abused, r. devised. P. 217. l. penult. r. suspense. P. 221. l. 7. r.
that are Gods under God. P. 222. l. 21. r. Friends. P. 223. l. 6. r. a Book. P.
228. l. 1. r. A great. P. 229. l. 32. r. things are. P. 232. l. 28. r. their
sincerity. P. 236. l. 19. r. selves challenge. P. 237. l. 32. r. may justify.
A CONTINUATION of the Friendly Debate.
C. YOU are well met Neighbor, How do you?


N. C. Very well, through Mercy. Why do you sigh?


C. To see you so far from mending your Schism, that you proceed to make it
wider; and divide our very language. Why cannot you speak as the rest of your
Neighbors, and say, Well I thank God? Is it a commendable thing to be Singular
without any need? and to separate from us even in your words and forms of
speech? Or is this a part of the Language of Canaan (so much talked of in the
late times) to be learnt of all those, that will be accounted the People of God?


N. C. Take heed how you speak against the Israel of God. They are a peculiar
people, and must not do after the manner of the Nations.


C. What Nations? Do you take us to be all Heathens? Nay, such Heathens from
whom you are not only to separate your selves, but utterly to root out?


N. C. You carry our meaning too far.


C. No farther than some of your Sect do, whom you have taught in a foonsh and
dangerous manner to imitate the Scripture Phrasse? and to apply all that
concerned Israel, to Themselves; and all that concerned the seven accursed
Nations, or Egypt and Babylon, to their Neighbors.


N. C. I am not one of those; but I and many others, when we are asked about our
welfare, dare not speak as you do, lest we should take Gods name in Vain: of
which you know Israel was to be very careful.


C. Is it to no purpose then to thank God for our own and our Families health?
Or to pray God would be with our Friend when we meet or part with him? Perhaps
you think that Boaz took Gods name in vain, when according to the Custom in
Israel, he said to his Reapers, the Lord be with you: and that they were
Offenders for replying, the Lord bless thee. I doubt ere long you will refuse
to say upon occasion, GOD SAVE THE KING, for fear of taking Gods name in Vain.


N. C. Not so. We can use such words when we are very serious, but not commonly.


C. You made me believe, the last time we talked together, that you were
commonly, if not always, Serious. But now it seems the world is altered with
you.


N. C. We are afraid you are not Serious; but use these words so carelessly that
you break the Third Commandment: upon which account we would teach you to
refrain them.


C. You are excellent Interpreters of Holy Scripture What a rare Comment should
we have upon it, if all your Expositions were but gathered and put together? As
you find words now used in common talk, so they sound to your fancy there: And
this makes you take it so often into your mouths in vain; I mean besides its
purpose and intention. Alas! that you should be no better instructed than
generally to entertain this conceit, that a man breaks the third Commandment,
if he mention the Name of God, without lifting up his Eyes, clapping his Hand
on his Breast, or some signification of Devotion! This absurd Fancy I have
heard some allege as a Reason why they would not let their Children ask them
Blessing; i. e. desire them to pray to God for them: And others have made this
the cause why they would not teach them their Catechism, nor any Prayers, lest
they should take Gods Name in vain; that is, in their sense, make mention of
it, and not mind what they say.


N. C. I do not approve of such Opinions as these.


C. If you did, you would condemn your self many hundred times in a Day. For
how often do you tell us in common discourse, of the People of God, and the
things of God, and the Ordinance of God, not minding that you mention his Name.
Nay how many times have we heard you say in your Prayers, O LORD, O GOD
(sometimes thrice in one sentence) when we have great reason to think you did
not know whether you used it so often or no. Now, which will you say? That you
sinned in this; or that it is sufficient to have an habitual Reverence toward
Almighty God, and never to use his Name in an irreverent manner; though we do
not always actually attend when we use it?


N. C. I have not considered this; but was always bred in a Belief that we break
the Third Commandment when we use Gods name in common talk; and that is the
Reason I did not answer you after the usual manner.


C. It Is well if you be not more careful to keep the Commandment in the
Phrase-sense, than in its proper and Principal meaning.


N. C. How now? must we be beholden to you to invent a new word for us?


C. It cannot be new to you sure, who are so well versed in a Divinity that
consists, in a manner, wholly of Phrases; and setting them aside, has little
or nothing in it, upon which account it may well be called, Phrase-Divinity.


N. C. You will never leave your Pleasantness. Pray talk more gravely, and
explain your self.


C. I Will tell you then what I mean. There are many I observe, who have been
very scrupulous about the Third Commandment, and careful to keep it, as the
words are vulgarly used in our language now a-dayes; who have made no
Conscience at all of it, at least notoriously broken it, according to the true
import of the Words among the Hebrews. For, as I have been taught, when Moses
said, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc. His
meaning was; that no man should dare to call God to witness any thing he spoke,
and yet utter a falsehood, or not do according to his promise. If he were so
profane, he assures him that God who was Witness to what he said, would also
be his Judge, and by no means acquit him. Now how often you have broken the
Commandment in this, which is the main sense; while you have been very strict
to keep it in the other, I need not tell you.


N. C. You must tell me; or else I must tell you that you are like the Devil, a
false accuser of the Brethren.


C. Your Ministers can tell you a great deal better than I, who were wont to
complain of this as one of the most grievous sins of the times; that so many
had forsworn themselves by breaking their Solemn League and Covenant. You
covenanted, for instance, to extirpate Heresy and Schism; and such great
diligence was used in this point, that they grew faster, and to a greater
height than ever had been known among us. So Mr. Case tells the Parliament in
his Thanksgiving Sermon for the taking of Chester p. 25. And asks them how it
comes to pass that these abound more than ever they did, and that under their
Noses? There is such a numerous increase (says he) of Errors and Heresies, as
I blush to repeat what some have affirmed, namely, that there are no less than
an hundred and fourscore several Heresies propagated and spread in this
Neigboring City. And many of such a Nature, as that I may truly say, in
CALVIN'S language, the Errors and innovations under which we groaned of late
years (He means under the Bishops) were but tolerable trifles, childrens play,
compared with these damnable Doctrines, Doctrines of Devils. Nor is he alone in
these complaints, but Mr. Edwards Epist. Ded. to both Houses before his
Gangraena, 1. part.
craves leave to be free with them, and to tell them that Sects had been
growing ever since the first year of their sitting; and every year increased
more and more. No sooner had they put down the Common Prayer, but down went the
Scriptures themselves together with it, which many among us (says he) slight
and blaspheme. The Images of the Trinity, Christ, Virgin Mary, and the Apostles
were ordered to be broken down; and at the next stroke there were those that
overthrew the Doctrine of the Trinity, opposed the Divinity of Christ, spoke
Evil of the Virgin Mary, slighted all the Apostles. The Parliament cast out the
Ceremonies in the Sacraments, the Cross and Kneeling; and then the People in
many places cast out the Sacraments themselves; Baptism and the Lords Supper.
The one took away Saints days, and some of the other made nothing of the
Lord's Day. The superfluous maintenance as he calls it, of Bishops and Deans
being cut off, immediately the necessary settled maintenance of all Ministers
was cried down and denied too. Nay the Bishops and their Officers being gone,
there were many that would have thrown away all Ministers after them. A great
deal more you may find there to the same purpose if you have a mind; but he
seems to sum up all in this; the Fourth Commandment was taken away in the
Bishops days (so he is pleased to calumniate them) but now we have all ten
Commandments taken away at once by the Antinomians; yea all Faith and the
Gospel denied by the Seekers. He would have inserted this clause sure, if he
durst; the Third Commandment is now taken away by the Parliament. For I pray
you, my good Friend, what remembrance had they of the dreadful name of God, to
whom they had lifted up their hands? What a trifle was that sacred Oath now
accounted? That water of life which (as Mr. Case fancied Sermons about the
Covenant, p. 66.
) had kept all the Nation from giving up the ghost, was dead it self; and had
not the least spirit remaining in it, to quicken these Covenanters to extirpate
Heresies. Nor would all the expostulations of their Ministers put any life into
them: But as these complainers had violated other obligations in taking that
Covenant; so now their Masters set it at naught, and, to serve the ends of
State, continued to connive at those things which they promised to root out.
For a great while after this, I find no less than three of your Divines (in
their Epistle to the Reader before Mr. Pooles book against Biddle) renew their
Complaints, that the whole body of Socinianism which walked only in the Dark,
and in Latin, in the Bishops time, was now translated into English. Many bold
Factors for those Blasphemies which in those times durst not appear,
disseminating now their Heresies without fear, both publicly and from house to
house: Which by the way may instruct you who are to be charged with a great
part of the guilt and mischief of such Books as the Sandy-Foundation ( i. e.
the Doctrine of the Trinity) Shaken, and several others lately published. In
short, this was a thing so notorious, that Mr. Case moves the Parliament (in
that Thanksgiving Sermon p. 30.) that there might be a solemn fast to humble
and afflict their Souls for Covenant-violations, and wherein the Covenant might
be renewed in a more solemn and serious manner with God*


N. C. These were hot spirits, and might be too forward to charge the
Covenanters with taking Gods name in vain when they were not guilty of it.


C. But you will not say that the greatest part of the London-Ministers were
rash and heady. Now if you read their Seasonable exhortation to their
respective Parishes, printed 1660. you will find, they complain of the Odious
scandals of those that profess themselves the People of God: particularly of
their self-seeking under pretense of the public good; and their unparalleled
breach of all civil and sacred Oaths and Covenants both to God and Men.


N. C. This I confess is a sad story.


C. Consider then I beseech you; if these Leaders and great Professors were so
guilty, what shall we think of the common People, who took the Covenant hand
over head (as we say) being totally ignorant of several things to which they
swore: nay were taught by Mr. Case (in his Sermons about the Covenant p. 41.)
to take it, though they did not understand it?


N. C. I cannot believe you.


C. Go to the Book then and believe your own Eyes. There you will find he
alleges the Example of Josiah for it, who renewed the Covenant when he was a
Child; and of Nehemiah who made the Women and Children do the like. He was
sensible indeed, that there is a great difference between that which was
Divine, and this which was but the Device of men; and therefore would persuade
them that they were bound no further by this Oath, than they should find the
things contained in it to be according to the Word of God. But it is plain, I
showed you the last time, the Parliament did not allow any Body to expound the
Covenant but themselves. And beside this, they swear without any limitation to
preserve things as they stood in the Church of Scotland, where for any thing
they knew, there might be as absolute a Tyranny, as is exercised under the
Papacy. Nay, in Scotland it self, there were some who argued so strongle
against the Convenant, that a Jolly man I have read of, Mr. Andr. Cant.
was driven to such straits at last, as he had nothing to say but his, That
they must deny Learning and Reason, and help Christ as Life. If you will give
me leave, I Will tell you something worse than this.


N. C. How is it possible?


C. There were some that in plain terms pleaded Religion for the breaking of
the Covenant: So that (contrary to Mr. Nye's Exhortation I told you of) with
them there was Yeas, and Nay. J. Lilbura for instance, in his Englands
Birth-wirthgt p. 29. says, that the Covenant is impossible to be kept, and
that the Framers and Makers of it have run into wilful perjury. See Mr.
Bellamy's Vindic. of the City Remonstr. 26. May, 1646.
Nay, he calls it; This Makebate, persecuting, sould-destroying,
England-dividing and undoing Covenant. With whom you may join Mr. J. Goodwin,
who tells us (in his 12. Cautions p. 4.) that to violate an abominable and
accursed Oath (speaking with reference to this Covenant) out of Conscience to
God, is an holy and a blessed perjury.


N. C. Now I hope you have done.


C. It ought not to be forgot, that this Covenant was contrary to you Solemn
Protestation, taken first by both Houses of Parliament, wherein they promised
to defend the true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of
the Church of England. Did they not?


N. C. Yes.


C. Whey then did your Minister persuade them to enter into this New Oath,
which was so contrary to some Articles of our Churches Doctrine?


N. C. They explained themselves as I remember, before they Covenanted, and
told us what they meant by the Doctrine of the Church of England.


C. Very good. And was it not finely done, that after the Members of both
Houses had taken the Protestation, so as I now said, the House of Commons alone
should make a Declaration, that by those words [ the Doctrine of the Church of
England] was intended only so much of it, as was opposite to Popery and Popish
Innovation, and should not be extended to the maintenance of the Discipline and
Government? And then that under this Explication published only by the Commons
and never assented to by the Peers, this Protestation was imposed on the
Kingdom, and all that would not take it declared unfit to bear office in Church
or Commonwealth? What is there to be said, I beseech you, to excused these
strange proceedings. First, both Houses swear to plain words. Then one House
claps an interpretation on them. And after that, they alone so far entrench
upon the Peoples Liberties (which they were bound to maintain) as to impose
this Protestation upon them without consent of Parliament: and that under a
heavy penalty on those that should not comply with them. All this is no less
than a Demonstration, methinks, that too many of you (for we will not condemn
all) have been too forward to take Gods name in vain; at least to engage your
selves in Oaths and Vows hastily and rashly. And withal it shows that you were
of that imposing Spirit which you now complain of; and that Religion was more
pretended than truly aimed at: And lastly, that you were so vainly confident
your favor with God, that you could take his name into your mouths backward
and forward, and never blush; so you did but look demurely, and express much
reverence to it in common talk. All which I protest, is spoken to no other
purpose but to humble you; and to show that you unjustly usurp the name of the
most Religious People, the most conscientious, and the most fearful of
offending God, that are in the Nation: and that you abuse the simple, when you
make them believe that you are the Pillars upon which the Kingdoms welfare
stands; for whose sake alone it is, that we were not made long ago like Sodom
and Gomorrah. For it is manifest you have involved the people in abundance of
guilt and made Religion vile in their eyes, and helped to bring the name of God,
which you have taken so often in vain, into great contempt.


N. C. This is not a place to talk in.


C. You say right: otherwise I should have told you of a fresh guilt of this
kind. For I am informed some have set up Schools for the instructing Youth in
Logic and Philosophy* directly contrary to the Oath they took in the
University. But I am run beside my intention in this discourse: having told
you, I remember, it would be in vain to dispute any more; and therefore
desired, when we met again, the time might be spent to other purposed.


N. C. I have not forgot it. But if you will go in here, we will not wrangle at
all, but only talk fairly, as loving Friends, of some matters in which you are
concerned.


C. I suppose it is about our old business, and then you had better consider of
what I have said already. If that will not move you, I have little hope to do
any good upon you.


N. C. You are a strange man. When I had no great mind to be troubled with your
Discourse, then you would never have done. And now that I am earnest to be
satisfied in some things, you hang back and have nothing to say. Methinks you
might be willing, at least, to receive an account of my Thoughts concerning our
late Debate.


C. Have you then considered what I said, as you promised you would?


N. C. Yeas that I have. And being somewhat staggered with it, I thought good
to consult with some Christian friends, and hear their Opinion, which I prefer
before my own.


C. And what was the issue?


N. C. I perceive they are generally offended at you to a high degree.


C. So were the Scribes and Pharisees at our Savior. And for any thing I know
both upon the same score, because you are plainly told of your faults. This
nettles and vexes you at the heart: only to hide and conceal your secret anger;
you call it by another name, and say you are offended.


N. C. No they are not angry with those who give them a private reproof, but to
print a book against them, what can it intend, but mischief?


C. Now I guess at their meaning. Their offense is of the same nature with that
which Mr. Edwards says the Sectaries took at his Gangraena, * Because it
hinders their making Proselytes, and so for want of growing up to such a number
as they design and hope for, they may miss of a Toleration, and so in the issue
a Domination, which is so much sought for by them.


N. C. They mean the same that the Apostle does, who requires us to give no
offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the Church of God. 1
Cor. 10.32.


C. By your favor Sir, Saint Paul and you have not the same meaning: as you
might have learnt long ago (if you did not converse more with your frivolous
writers, than those who have some sense in them) from your great Champion Mr.
Cartwright. He tells you expressly that by offense the Apostle does not intend,
that which displeases, or discontents, but that whereby occasion is given to
any of transgressing against the Laws of God. For he is treating of eating
things offered to Idols even in the Temples of Idols, or in the presence of
such as were endangered thereby: The Gentiles being hardened in their Idolatry,
the Jews provoked against Christianity, and some Christians drawn by such
examples to follow them doubtingly. Take now the Word in this proper sense, and
I shall be cleared from this imputation; and you your selves condemned for
looking no better to your feet, that they go not awry.


N. C. How so?


C. It is the very design of my Book to keep you from falling into sin any
more: and to direct you to such a Course that you may not break the Laws of God
again your selves; nor cast such a stumbling block before others, that they
take occasion to break them too, If any have misinterpreted my meaning, or out
of anger and vexation grown worse and more audaciously violent by my writing,
they must bear the blame which they would throw upon me. Nay, a far greater
blame, for they both take Offense, when none was given, and they notoriously
give Offense to others, whom I would have kept from offending.


N. C. They will believe both alike; that you meant to take away Offenses, and
that they lay any in the peoples way.


C. That is; they seldom believe any good of others, or any ill of themselves.
But I do not beg your belief, for it is manifest to any unprejudiced reason,
that the Book was sent abroad on no other Errand, than to remove stumbling
blocks out of every bodies way; especially your Shism which is the greatest of
all. And if notwithstanding, you be scandalized, and confidently affirm it were
better to forbear such writings, you shall be judged out of the mouths of some
of the old and better Nonconformists. Who tell their Brethren of New England
(and I say the same to you) when they would have had them forbear to read the
Common Prayer because of the scandal it gave to some; It is a scandal taken and
not given; and by forbearing, we shall offend you the more, if to confirm men
in error be to scandalize them; yea we shall prejudice the Truth; and it might
be an occasion to beget needless scruples in others, and draw men ignorantly
from the fellowship of the Saints and the holy Ordinances of God, and
strengthen them who by your own confession, are run too far into Schism already.


N. C. Whose words are these?


C. You may find them p. 16. in the Reply made 1640. by many Ministers in
Old-England, to the Answer which their N. E. Brethren gave to their enquiry
about 9. positions in the year 1637. And I would to God your Ministers would
lay them to heart, and no longer continue to harden their Followers in Schism,
by forbearing the use of that which they know is lawful. Remember I beseech you
the famous observation of a great Author, Lord Bacon Essay of Unity in Religion.
that Heresies and Schisms are of all other the greatest scandals, yea, more
than the corruption of manners. For as in the natural Body a Wound or Solution
of continuity is worse than a corrupt Humor; so it is in the Spiritual.
Nothing does so much keep men from the Church, and drive men out of it, as
breach of Unity. One of his Reasons is, because every Sect has a diverse
posture, or cringe by themselves, which cannot but move derision in worldlings
and depraved Politics, who are apt to contemn holy things. It is possible you
may thinks, for you are very censorious, that he was no better than one of
those depraved persons, and so take no heed to his words. Let me remember your
therefore, that there was a time when the Presbyterians applauded this
observation, and labored to serve themselves of it. For I find it cited in a
Book call's wholesome Severity reconciled with Christian Liberty, licensed by
Mr. Cranford 1644. where the Author likewise says, that the experience of
former times makes us so wise, as to foresee that Heresy and Schism tend to
the breach of the Civil peace, and to a rupture in the State as well as the
Church. Of which he gives many instances, especially the Donatists in Africa,
and the Anabaptists in Germany. But now it seems you are grown stark blind; and
whereas you had a foresight in times past, at present you cannot or will not
see what is before your eyes --


N. C. I told you I would not enter into long disputes with you. But I am
heartily sorry that your have so much grieved all the Godly.


C. You still persist in your old Uncharitableness, Pride, and high esteem of
your selves above all others. Or if you mean, only all the Godly of your way,
yet you are guilty of great partiality; in taking a liberty which you will not
give. For you say what you list against that way, wherein so many good people
among us truly serve God, and make it ungodliness in us to say any thing
against yours. Pray give me a reason, when you have duly considered it, of this
unequal dealing. You speak and write against the Bishops, Common Prayer, the
Ceremonies; nay many of you openly revile them to the just grief of our People,
and all this with a reputation of great Godliness: But we must sow up our
mouths, and not say a word against you and your devices; or else be accounted
ungodly and profane, nay it is well if we escape the brand of Atheism. What is
this, but to imitate those Hucksters, who have double weights and balances,
one for buying, another for selling? To have one measure for your selves, and
another for all other folk?


N. C. I do not approve of this.


C. But you side with those that play these tricks. And besides; you that are
so loath to be grieved in the vulgar meaning of the words make light of grieving
others in the proper sense of it. For you have so sorely galled and wounded
many by your practices, that the Anguish has been such as (according to the
Observation now named) to thrust some back who were coming to us, and drive
others out, who were among us. The Reproaches, I mean, which you have cast upon
our Church, the divisions you have made, the confusion you have been Authors
of, have been such thorns in some men's way, that when they were just at the
door of our Church they have drawn back their foot and fallen back to the Popish
Religion. Of this I have good evidence; and such as you dare not question of
the other; that some have taken such distaste at the state of things among us,
as to turn aside out of the right way, into the bypath of Romish Superstition
and Idolatry. Witness the Seasonable Exhortation of a great number of the
London-Ministers; who tell us p. 10. That some are fallen from the Truth which
they saw so much despised, and back slidden to Popery, as the only Religion, in
their opinion, wherein Unity and Order is maintained. And a little after, p.
16. they say they are afraid lest too many may be too well conceited of that
Religion, finding Rome justified by Englands Confusion, as Sodom was by Isreal's
sin. You may say perhaps, according to your usual manner, that all these were
wicked. But this is not so easily proved, as peremptorily said. And there want
not good reasons to make us think, that several well disposed persons, by
occasion of this Schism and the Scorn cast upon our Governors and Divine
Service, which accompanies it; have forsaken our. Communion, and gone thither
where they heard there was more Unity, Order, and reverence to Authority.


N. C. Our Ministers are as much against those, who revile your Worship and
Service, or do not reverence Authority, as you can be.


C. How does that appear? There is nothing more frequent with such as Mr.
Bridge, than to teach the people that our way of Worship and Church Government
is Antichristian. Read but the 5. of his Ten Sermons p. 370. and you will see I
do not belly him. Or, for more full satisfaction, I refer you to another Book of
his called Seasonable Truths in Evil Times Newly Princed, 1668.
, where you may find him instructing them too plainly ( p. 118.) that such as
he have their Orders to preach or prophesy from Jesus Christ himself; but
Others (by whom he can mean none but our Ministers) have their Orders and power
from Men, from Prelates, from the Beast: for these are all one in his language.
Nay more than this, he teaches the poorest, weakest man or woman to go to Jesus
Christ for a power to Prophesy: remembering them what one Alice Driver said in
Queen Mary's days, I Will set my foot against the foot of the proudest Prelate
of them all, in the cause of Jesus Christ. And therefore why should you not go
to Christ, says he, and lay your selves flat upon the Promise, and say to him,
O Lord, I am a poor weak creature, I fear I shall never be able to bear my
Testimony; but thou have said, I will give power to my two witnesses, and I am
one of thy witnesses: Now then O Lord, give power to me, etc. By which you may
judge what he thinks of those Magistrates that uphold our Worship and Orders,
and allow no such weak creatures as his silly credulous followers, to commence
Prophets and Prophetesses, when ever they shall fancy that Jesus Christ himself
has given them Power and Orders to preach, and whether they be the Godly
Magistrates or no, Gods anointedones, whom he speaks of p. 110.


N. C. Those that I am acquainted withal dislike his boldness as much as your
self.


C. If the rest of your Ministers have such an hearty abhorrence, as I have, of
those that cast dirt even in the face of Authority it self, let them show it by
some means or other. Why do they not petition his Majesty now as some of your
Churches did the late Protector not many years ago, that he would chastise such
Persons as these?


N. C. I remember no such thing.


C. But I do; and you shall find it in the address presented to Richard Cromwell
from the County of Northampton: There, after many high commendations of his
Father (whom they call the light of their eyes, and the breath of their
Nostrils) and great expressions of joy that he had left him to them as a most
choice Legacy, they desire he would show tenderness toward the name of God
against the bold Blasphemers of his Magistracy, Defamers of his sacred
Ordinances, Seducers from Truth, Corrupters of his Worship. And then, that he
would exercise just severity against despisers of Dignities, and revilers of
Authority, Whose unhallowed Tongues (set on fire from hell) spare not to flash
out their insolent reproaches and impious execrations against his Fathers
Sepulcher, and his own throne. But I consider that in those days it was their
concernment to have despisers and revilers punished; Now they serve the Cause,
and help to disgrace the present establishment: which is the reason, I suppose,
that all the Churches are so mute in this matter.


N. C. You take the Liberty to say what you list; but let me say little or
nothing: And when you have done, you write a Dialogue between Your self and a
Nonconformist; in which you make him speak just what you think good and no
more. Is this fair dealing?


C. Where did you get the sole privilege of writing Dialogues? You imagine,
perhaps, we have forgot those that you entertained the people withal some years
ago; but our memories are not yet so slippery. I call to mind, for instance,
the Dialogue between a Countrey-Gentleman and a minister of the Word about the
Common Prayer, answered by Authority 1641. And another between a Loyalist, and
a Royalist, about our Civil Liberties, an. 1644. The first of these I can
scarce forget, if I would; the Author of it (Mr. Lowes Hughes) imparting to me,
such an extraordinary piece of Learning as this, that Kyrieleeson is a word
compounded of Hebrew and Greek, signifying in English, Lord have mercy upon us.
He furnished me also with a memorable reason, why the Mass Book leaves out the
Dexology at the end of the Lords Prayer; because the Pope, says he, will have
none of his Church, neither Priest nor People, to give so much honor and glory
to God. Which he was so well conceited of, that he repeats it twice within the
compass of a few leaves. This good man, I sometimes fancy, would have been a
chosen instrument, and done marvelous well, to write a RATIONALE of the
Directory. In which he might have told us, that RATIONALE was a word compounded
of Latin and English, signifying, All Reason. And informed us, in particular,
that the cause why the Assembly left it to men's liberty, to leave out the whole
Lords Prayer if they pleased, was only this, that all their Church might give
all honor and glory to Jesus Christ. So I suppose his Affection would have
made him say; though if he had followed his Reason it would have led him to
this; that as the Pope left out some of it because he would not do our Savior
so much honor: so they permitted men to leave out all, that every man might do
him as little honor as he pleased.


N. C. You cannot for your life forbear to lead me now and then to some mirth.


C. I intended only to represent how your Ministers sometime abuse themselves,
more than any of us ever did. As for my self, I am not conscious of the least
abuse I have put upon you; nor that I have made you say any thing but what your
people are wont to talk. Certain I am that all the wit your Party has, shall
never be able to find any such Absurdity in my Book, as that Dialogue against
the Common Prayer is guilty of; where the Minister makes the Gentleman
presently confess it to be full of Popish Errors; and to appoint horrible
Blasphemies, and lying Fables to be read to the People. Nay, makes him cry out
almost, almost as soon as they had begun their Discourse. O horrible! How have
the Bishops deluded King Edward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and our
gracious King Charles, and the whole State; and made them believe there was
nothing in the Service Book that is amiss, or any way contrary to the Word? God
Almighty deliver us from them. I should blush to the end of my life, if after
our whole debate I had concluded, as this man begun. But this is the way of
those Sots that talk as if they were infallible, and would bear all before them
by their bare word; nay, take it very ill if you be not converted, as soon as
they open their mouth. Pythagoras is revived in some of you; and Mr. such a one
said it, is of as good Authority, as the best proof in the world.


N. C. This was some ignorant Zealot, I believe.


C. So one would think; and yet he had so good an opinion of himself, that he
thought such Works as these fit for the eyes of the High Court of Parliament.
To whom I find he presented Certain Grievances an. 1640. of the very same
import with this goodly Dialogue, but so absurdly slanderous, that you cannot
but be astonished at his brutish stupidity. For there he tells them (as he does
the Gentleman at the conclusion of their Conference) that the Bishops have
appointed some portions of Scripture to be read on certain days and omitted
others, on purpose to pervert the meaning of Christ, and to keep weak
Christians in blindness.

The whole Book of Canticles for instance, is never appointed to be read; that
the People (as he will have it) may not be able to see the ardent Love and
affection of Christ toward his Spouse, the Elect: and they thereby be stirred
up to love Christ, and be truly zealous for his Glory. Nay, if you believe him,
the Books of the Kings, (all save the 8 first chapters) and the Chronicles were
forbid, because they show that Godly Kings did ever love Gods true Prophets,
and did hearken to them, and were zealous of maintaining true Religion, and
suppressing Idolatry. In which words he discovered the very grounds of their
quarrel with the King, viz. that he did not take such great Seers as himself
into his bosom; and suffer them to guide his Conscience, as if they were of the
Privy Council of Heaven. But he discovered withal how little esteem he for his
part, merited: Or rather how well he deserved to be stigmatized and branded in
the forehead, as one, (to speak in his own language) that was a false-Prophet,
Prophesying lies. For was there ever any man before this so impudent, as to put
a Libel of this Nature against his spiritual Fathers and Governors, into the
hands of the Highest Court of the Kingdom? Did any of the Priests or Prophets
of Baal think you, ever help themselves and their cause by such invectives
against the Prophets of the Lord? For my part, I am of the mind, that the Devil
himself would be hard put to it, to invent more bold and malicious Slanders than
these of this man's forging; who wanted nothing but wit to make him like that
Father of Lies. And yet, I suppose, he passed for a Godly man, a precious
Servant of Jesus Christ, a Faithful Minister of the Lord: Nay, was cherished
and encouraged as one of Gods Prophets; who had told them things that could be
known no ways, but by a Revelation His Book also, no doubt, found wonderful
acceptance, though it was stuffed with so much Ignorance and railing. The people
read it with a blind Devotion, just as he was transported with so blind a
Passion, as to accuse our Church of that, which all that had eyes must needs
acquit it of. For both the Books of the Kings were Appointed to be read
entirely in the later end of April, and in May. As for the Chronicles, they
being little more than a Repetition of what was writ before, might well be left
to our private Reading; together with some other Books, not easy to be
understood without great Labor and long Meditation.


N. C. I wish you would dismiss this man, for he has given us both too much
trouble.


C. Your people would not, when time was, so easily lay his Book out of their
hands, as I am able to prove. But let him go; together with all the Crew of
Revilers that were before him. For you must know there were Dialogue-writers of
the same Stamp in the days of your Forefathers. In one of which Books, called
the Dialogue of White Devils, the Author expressly tells us, that if Princes
hinder the bringing in of their Disciples, they are Tyrants; and may be deposed
by their Subjects. A Doctrine which with all your reading in the Books of the
Kings and the Chronicles you will no where find justified. For the people were
better taught than to go about to depose those that did not favor the Lords
Prophets. I know you all disclaim this principle; and I verily believe many of
you abhor it: but I mention it to let you see what the Maxims of some of your
Predecessors, imboldned some of their Posterity to do. For this purpose I could
relate strange passages out of some Books esteemed by your Party; which would
verify the censure of the Bishop of Down and Conner In his Visitation speed at
Lisnegarvy, 1638. published by Authority.
upon the Title of the Dialogue now named. Which he says was very fit for such
men's Books; for if ever there were White Devils, or Devils transformed into
Angels of Light, it is in their persons who under the pretense of Sanctity,
labor to bring in all manner of Disorder into the Church, and confusion into
the Common wealth. But you have no mind we should remember any thing that is
past; that so you may the more confidently fill the world with loud clamors, as
if there never were such doings, as now. Else you might know there was another
Dialogue in Queen Elizabeth's days, between Diotrephes and S. Paul, in which
the Discipline and its Favorers are magnified as Apostolical: but the Bishops
of the Church of England made no better than so many proud Diotrephes's; nay so
many Devils; and he of Canterbury (so they speak) is Beelzebub, even the Prince
of the Devils.


N. C. Still you will have all the talk to your self, and I must hold my
tongue. Pray give me leave to enlarge my self a while, for I am blamed, I
assure you, very much for saying so little in our last Conference.


C. Speak your mind.


N. C. I must ingeniously confess that we cannot accuse you of such speeches as
these; but yet you show your great malignity to us otherwise. In particular it
is very ill taken, that you make our Ministers guilty of breaking the Oxford
Act, and the Act against Conventicles. For you make as if they were obliged to
keep within that distance from this place which the Law prescribes, if they
have not taken the Oath: And if they have; yet not to hold Assemblies (without
Common Prayer) especially in time of your Service. Now it is plain to us, that
they are not obliged to keep these Laws, so as you would have them. Mark what I
say; they do not refuse to obey them; only they cannot do it in your manner.
There are two ways I have heard them say sometimes, of obeying Laws; either by
doing what they Command, or by suffering what they inflict. Now our Ministers
are content to endure the penalties; choosing to satisfy the Laws that way,
which is most convenient for themselves.


C. Have you done?


N. C. Yes.


C. Then give me leave to tell you, I do not believe they are so well contented
as you pretend. But if they be; they are no better observers of Laws than a
Thief, who is content to be hanged after he has robbed his neighbors. I doubt
they are contented both alike, i. e. they hope to escape without punishment;
and when they are laid hold on, they submit because they cannot help it. But
when that is done, they are still both alike under sin; because it is not the
thiefs hanging, and your fine and imprisonment, which the Prince intends; but
the doing that which he commands. If this be neglected, or you do contrary to
his Laws; you offend God as well as your Prince, and are liable to be punished
by both.


N. C. There is a wide difference in these things. For God you know requires we
should not steal; but he does not lay such Commands on us, as your Laws.


C. He requires you to obey the Magistrate; which your Apology plainly
confesses, while you suppose he is sufficiently obeyed if you suffer the
penalties of his Laws. Which I must tell you, is a ridiculous fancy; and makes
the Magistrate a most barbarous Tyrant; who is as well pleased, or takes
himself to be as well obeyed, if his subjects be hanged or broken on the Wheel
after they have done a world of Mischief; as if they had been honest and
peaceable Members of the Commonwealth. Away with these absurd doctrines: which
suppose all Governors to punish the innocent; and all Subjects to obey merely
for wrath and not for Conscience sake. You had best go and correct St. Paul: or
else correct your selves; believing that you are guilty of a sin when you do
not the things which a Law not contrary to God's, requires, or else the
Magistrate could have no right to punish you: and that your Punishment also is
not to free you from the guilt of the First Fault; but to prevent a Second.


N. C. But this is not all they have to say for themselves. They are men of a
tender Conscience, whatever you think; and have a great regard to the commands
of their Governors; nay think they ought to be obeyed for conscience sake --


C. To what purpose then do they use the former shift?


N. C. Pray let me go on. They consess I say that Laws should be kept; and yet
they are are well assured they commit no sin, in not keeping those you speak of
--


C. They are wonderful men.


N. C. For they are very confident it is his Majesty's pleasure that they
should take this Liberty against the Laws.


C. Good Sir, take heed what you say. How come you to know his Majesty's
Pleasure? where did he whisper it so softly, that none could hear it but your
selves?


N. C. I was going to tell you, if you would but be patient. We hold that since
his Laws are not executed; it signifies his pleasure to allow us this Liberty;
and we esteem it a sufficient warrant for our present practice: Nay, a tacit
Declaration that he does not desire the Laws should be obeyed. And upon this
account you are justly blamed, who being but a private man have expressed
greater severity against them than the Magistrate himself: for you have charged
them with the guilt of Sin, when the Magistrate does not so much as punish
them. Do you not think the King can dispense with us? and does he not in effect
give us a dispensation when his Laws are not executed? Why do you then
disallow, what he approves of? May not his Majesty do what he thinks good? --


C. I understand you well enough; and therefore these Repetitions are needless.
But I would fain know what warrant they had when they first ventured to act
contrary to those Laws. What assurance had they, that it might be done without
danger to themselves, or dislike to their Prince?


N. C. Indeed, I did not think of that.


C. If you cannot satisfy that Question, you must acknowledge you have but
spun a Cobweb in making this Excuse. And confess in plain terms that when they
broke the Ice, and first took this Boldness, they were Sinners: and now they
make one sin the Justification of another.


N. C. How so?


C. They first tried whether any notice would be taken of their abiding here,
and of their closer meetings contrary to Law: and when they found there was
none; then they ventured further, and opened their doors more confidently for
all comers: and still there being no notice taken of this license they gave
themselves; now they make it an argument to justify what they do, and would
persuade us it is as good, as if they had a license from others for these
unlawful practices. So I call them: for you must know further, that the
Non-execution of the Laws, is no proof of his Majesty's pleasure they should
not be observed. For it may be imputed to the negligence of his Officers and
Ministers in the discharge of their Duty. But if to serve your turn, you will
say it is an argument of his will and not of their neglect; you must
unavoidably serve some bodies turn besides your own. In plain English you must
affirm it is his pleasure that the Mass should be said, and the Papists should
take the same liberty and openness in the exercise of their Religion, that you
do in yours. Nay, I do not see why all Drunkards, Swearers, and Blasphemers may
not think themselves allowed in their crimes; because little or no notice is
taken of any of them. To which I may add, that several persons who think the
non-Execution of Laws is a warrant to you; yet find very much fault with your
meetings in the time of our public Assemblies: Which is void of all sense if
your Reason be good; for there is no more notice taken of that, than of your
meeting at other times. And yet it is demonstrable that the not punishing your
meeting in time of Divine Service does not signify his Majesty's pleasure to
allow it; and consequently your not being punished, can never signify his
pleasure to indulge you in other matters. For if from thence you can gather
that he approves of what you do, then so may we if we list to do the same: And
upon that ground may meet in little companies where we please, and leave our
Churches quite empty. A thing, without all doubt, which his Majesty abhors to
think of. You your selves have declared in times past, that it is absurd to
think, that Laws nay Ordinances of Parliament (even in matters of Religion)
should not equally oblige all the subjects of one Kingdom. If therefore the
Laws oblige us, then they oblige you: If they do not oblige you, then they
oblige not us neither. We are all alike either bound or free.

But to leave all these Considerations; there is something more remarkable me
thinks in this case, that deserves to be remembered above any thing else. And
truly I cannot but smile sometimes --


N. C. Why what is the matter?


C. I was going to say (but the very thought of your odd humor hindered me a
little) that I cannot but smile to my self when I call to mind, how you shift
your Principles and change your Maxims, according to your Interest. There is
no Weathercock more guided by the wind than You are by this. For it was a
Fundamental Maxim, heretofore, I well remember, and obstinately maintained
among your party, who now fawn and flatter; That the Law is the Kings Superior:
and that he has not so much power over it as to be its Supreme Interpreter:
That his Oath ties him expressly to observe it; and binds him to see it
executed. Upon which score all the Kingdom was filled with loud complaints
about the Non-execution of Laws, and of the Indulgences granted to several
persons who offended against them. For execution, they said, was the Life of
the Law, whithout which it became, vain and useless. This was the bold Doctrine
current not many years ago, and he was held for a Malignant that did not
believe it. But now on a sudden we hear you sing a new Song in praise of his
Majesty's gracious Indulgence (for so you will call it) and withal you
earnestly desire the Execution of Laws may still be suspended; that is, ly dead
and become vain and useless. For which alteration, I can find no reason but
this; that now the Indulgence is to your selves and then it was to other folk.
Then also you thought your selves able to make the King bow to you; and now
your Weakness forces You to worship him.


N. C. Where do you find any such Maxims? For my part I have forgot them.


C. I can send you to several Books where you may refresh your memory:
particularly to the Medicine for Malignants; which tells you p. 25. That the
King has not power over the Law, but the Law over the King. But for your
greater ease, I will only refer you to one small Pamphlet called Known Laws: in
which you shall not fail to meet with more than I have said.


N. C. These, I believe, were the Maxims of the State-faction.


C. I know no difference between Them and your Divines in this matter. I am
sure Mr. Will. Bridges (who differs from Mr. Will. Bridge as little as their
Names do) makes none at all. In whom I find a passage so directly opposite to
your present Opinions about the obligation of the Oxford Act, and declaring so
fully the sense of your Divines about the Kings Power, that I must crave leave
to mention it.


N. C. I am content to hear it. But you must remember that these were but the
Opinions of private persons.


C. You are mistaken. This man made an Answer ( published by Authority 1644.)
to a Book called the Loyal Convert, in which he tells the converted Gentleman,
that he speaks illegally if he say the King can protect a Papist any way. His
reason is Universal, though his Instance be Particular; for whom the Law
Protects not, the King either cannot or ought not to protect. No, he ought not,
as he tells us, so much as to require the help of such persons to protect him.
For they ought only to be Tributaries, and to hold themselves to their U B I,
to their place, Which words I would have you apply to that business which begat
this Discourse. I would fain know of your Divines how his Majesty's Power comes
to be so variable at their pleasure? Whence is it that He can dispense with
your Residence in the V B I or place to which you are by the Law confined, who
could not dispense at all with others, nor release them (no not for his
necessary assistance) from that place to which according to your Doctrine they
were immoveably chained. The Law protects both alike; that is, not at all: what
is the cause then that he can give you Protection, notwithstanding the Law; and
not them? Mistake me not; it is the farthest thing from my thoughts to call in
question the extent of his Majesty's Supreme Power. I only question your
Principles, who pretend to be no Changelings. Answer me this. If the King have
a power to give an Indulgence and dispense with the Law, why did you so rudely
and barbarously clamor against him heretofore, and say the contrary? If he
have not, why do you every where seek to justify your selves in your illegal
Practices, with a mere shadow and fancy of his Indulgence?


N. C. There is a great distance of time between the one and the other, and
they have changed their minds upon second thoughts.


C. Very likely. And you believe also, that if Presbytery were in its height
and Glory, his Majesty might dispense which the Laws of their making, as well as
with his own: Do you not? Alas good man! you shall find, I doubt, to your cost,
if things were come to that pass; that no Authority could remit the Rigor of
them. For they have condemned all Dispensations and Licenses, as Antichristian.
Their Decrees are so sacred, that as there lies no appeal from their Courts, so
none may take Authority to relaxate their Laws. For they take themselves to sit
in Christ's Tribunal Seat; and so their Laws are no more to be dispensed with
than his.

But why do I insist so long upon one thing, since there are so many instances
of your windings and turnings as your Interest leads you? There was a time I
remember, when the Parliament was magnified as the only keepers of the Peoples
Liberties. We were told Observator on his Majesty's Answers 1642.
that we might not so much as imagine the Houses could be injurious; or that a
Committee should have any private ends to mislead them. And therefore they
could nor sit too long, nor prove a burden to the good people. But now you are
quite in another strain. There is no greater grievance than a Parliament. No
more intolerable mischief than their long Continuance. For which different
judgment there is no reason, that I can see, but this; that then the Parliament
was for you, and now it is against you. The time was also, as I told you
before, when the Commons alone might impose a Protestation on all the Subjects,
under the Pain of being incapable of any Office, if they refused it. But now
you will be free from all imposition of this Nature: And an Oath enjoined by
the King and both the Houses, under no severer penalty than a small Restraint,
is looked upon as a grievous Oppression. There are those likewise that can
remember when the Commons alone put out another Order about some of the affairs
of Religion: But now a Law enacted by the Kings Authority, is thought an high
invasion of Christ's Prerogative; and he must not meddle in matters of his
Worship. The reason is; any thing may be done by any Body to advance your
fancies, but nothing against them by no creature in the World. Nay, we have not
forgotten the time when Mr. Case used this Argument among others to persuade
the People to take the Covenant, Sermons about the Covenant, p. 64.
because Antichrist and his faction had prosper'd so much by entering into
Covenants; therefore the People of God should try what this way will do, which
has been so advantageous to the enemy. For God, said he, may make use of that
Stratagem to ruin their Kingdom, which they used to build it. But now if any of
us say, that the same Persons have maintained a great reverence in the people
to their Religion, by many Stately Ceremonies, splendid Vestures, and Pompous
Rites, and therefore we may hope to keep the Ordinances of God from contempt by
a few solemn and grave Ceremonies, by decent habits, and such rites and
gestures as may beseem the dignity of our Religion; presently you raise an
outcry against us, and the People are told, that we are Popishly affected, of
an Antichristian spirit, and imitate Idolaters. For which I can assign no cause
but this; that then the Argument was for you; and now it makes for us. And you
are resolved to serve your selves by all means, though it be by approving and
anon rejecting the very same things.

If a thing like you well, it shall go very hard but you will find some
Scripture for it. And if none speak plainly, you will torture and draw some or
other to be on your side, and labor to prove that they signify according to
your meaning. But if a thing dislike you, then you ask for plain Scritprue.
Nothing will satisfy, unless we show it you in express terms. It is
Superstition, Will worship, any thing, but good, unless we produce a text in
so, many words to confirm it. Of the same shifting humor was the late Army, as
appears by their unparalleled Story, which in brief is this. On the 20. of April
1653. they turned their Masters, whom they had long served, out of doors, as a
company of Self-Seekers, who minded their own private, more than the public
Good. About six years after, finding the good Spirit declining, which formerly
appeared among them, in carrying on the great work (those are their Canting
expressions) and the good old Cause it self become a reproach: they were led to
look back and examine the cause of the Lords withdrawing his wonted presence
from them. And among other things they remembered what Injuries they had done to
the remnant of the long Parliament, and that they were eminent asserters of
that Cause, and had a special presence of God with them, and were signally
blessed in that Work. And therefore invited them by their Declaration of May 6.
1659. (in which you may find these things,) to come and sit again; promising to
yield their uttermost Assistance for their sitting in safety. Would you not
imagine now that they would for ever reverence these Eminent, these Blessed
men? and that to oppose them in their great work, would be, in their opinion,
to fight against God, to drive away the good Spirit, and to endeavor to
destroy the Cause of God? And yet it was not long before they were of another
mind. They held themselves, for all this, to be the greater Saints; the Army of
the living God; and so immutably settled in his favor that they should not lose
it, do they what they would. And therefore as soon as ever the Parliament
refused to act according to their mind, they refused to yield their obedience.
When they voted some of their Commissions void, and resolved to govern the Army
by Commissioners in stead of a Lieutenant General; these late penitents could
see nothing of God any longer among them: The special Presence of God vanished
and in a moment disappeared. So that on the 13th. of the next October, they
locked up the doors of the House, set themselves once more above their Masters;
and in an insolent manner declared Declara. agreed at Wallingford House, October.
27.
all their Orders, Acts, pretended Acts, or Declarations (and all proceedings
thereupon had or done) on Monday the 10. of that Month, and on Tuesday, and
Wednesday following, null and void to all intents and purposes, in as full and
ample a manner as if they had been never done. And immediately after, they pact
the Men away after these Acts and Orders. Nay, this they did, notwithstanding
that they had styled themselves several times, but five days before this 10.
of October, Your faithful Servants the Army; and professed that having
diligently inquired into their hearts and ways, Humble Represent and Petit.
October. 5.
they found nothing among them but faithfulness and integrity to the
Parliament; concluding their address in this manner that notwithstanding all
endeavors to the contrary, they would by the help of God, be found faithful to
them. Were not these gallant fellows? Wonderful constant to their Principles
and Professions? Mightily overawed by the presence of God; Single-hearted, and
faithful to their word? Yes, by all means, you must needs say; for of such as
these a great part of the Churches of the Saints is now composed. And faithful
they were to themselves; and that was enough. Constant to this principle, that
they were always in the right; and what would you have more? They could Cant
still in Scripture language, and therefore God was not withdrawn from them.
They could fast and pray still, and had a power to turn even the Lordsday, into
a day of Humiliation; and therefore the Good Spirit had not forsaken them. They
hated Antichrist, that is us; and were resolved to burn the flesh of the Whore
with fire, and so still remained the Army of the Lord of Hosts. For as if they
had some such work in hand as the Apostles had, they call upon all the Godly in
the nation to say on their behalf, who are sufficient for these things? and to
cry aloud for them before the Throne of Grace, that the Lord himself would
appear, and carry on his work in their hand. And great reason there was to
expect it; since they had once more injured those, who asserted his cause; and
done that very thing, for which (as they said,) he had before withdrawn his
wonted presence from them. O the Impudent foreheads of these Men! O the
Sottishness of the People, that will be still cosened by such like Canters!
Will you never open your eyes and see how vain their pretenses to the Spirit
are? Will you never be convinced of their presumptuous Boastings, and empty
Confidence? Will you still believe that these men are highly illuminated, who
call that darkness, which a little while ago was light; and then cross
themselves again, and say no; it is but Darkness? Are these the men whom we
must all follow; who run, we see, in an endless round of contradicting their
own Professions? or must we shut our eyes, and give them our hand that they may
lead us whither they please? Must we forget all that is past, and believe they
are now possessed with an infallible Spirit? This is the thing no doubt, they
desire. We must resign our belief to their Declarations. We must allow all
their Reasons and Excuses, whatsoever they be, We must, at least, suffer them
to justify themselves by those very things which they formerly condemned; and
say nere a word. And then we love them; then we favor the people of God; then
they have some hopes of us; and it is possible God may have mercy on us, though
we be out of the way and do not follow them.

I know you will say, that such as you, are none of the Army-Saints: that you
condemn their Practices, and hate their lewd pretenses to Religion as a great
scandal to it: All which I verily believe. But, let me tell you, the Army had a
copy set them of unconstancy and double dealing by those men whom you admired.
For there was a time when the Lords and Commons could see some good in the
Liturgy and Government of the Church by Law established. Nay more than that;
they made a Declaration April 9. 1642.
, caused it to be printed and published in all Market Towns, That they would
take away nothing in the one or the other, but what should be evil and justly
offensive, or at least unnecessary and burdensome. And yet when they had more
power, they were of another mind. Every thing was offensive, at least
unnecessary and burdensome; nothing would serve but taking away all the
Common Prayer; and plucking up Episcopacy by the very roots. The reason, I
suppose, was, because this became as necessary to promote their Designs in
process of time; as that Declaration was at the beginning. If they had rested
there, and gone no farther, they had lost the hearts of the most spiritual; who
would never have seen such a glorious anointing upon them from the Lord, Beam
of Light by Chapter Feak.
as now appeared. Now they very fifth kingdom men, could not but see it, and
acknowledge it in Print: though it was not long before they also changed like
all the rest; and had lost the sight of this glory, being able to spy no
Unction any where but upon themselves. For they helped to profane the Crown of
these anointed ones, and cast out the greatest part of them, as if they were
but scum and filth. But I think it is best to trace your windings and turnings
no further; for fear they lead us too far out of the way.


N. C. A good Resolution. Too much of one thing you know is good for nothing.


C. True. And I think the first thing I said about your pretenses of a tacit
Indulgence, is sufficient to show, that you are perfectly like men in danger of
drowning, who catch hold indifferently of what comes next to hand; be it a
naked Sword or an hot Iron.


N. C. Pray make an end of this: for you have quite tired me with your
Discourse. In which you have largely proved the truth of the common talk, that
you are of a barsh, nay a bitter and jeering Spirit, and was in a choleric
mood when you wrote your Book.


C. Rather, they that say so, prove what I have been saying all this time that
they blow hot and cold out of the same mouth; and condemn that in others which
they allow, nay, praise in themselves. For you shall hear them call that Salt
and Smartness of wit in one whom they love; which is Bitterness and jeering in
him whom they hate. And that passes for innocent Mirth and Pleasantness in one
of their party; which is Levity and Frothiness in one of ours. Nay, it is Zeal
for God and his cause if you aggravate the faults of other men, or rashly
charge and bring even a false Accusation against your Betters: but it is
malignity of Spirit, hatred of God and the power of Godliness, if we do but
tell a plain and true story of your miscarriages. No man ever opposed you
resolutely, but you said he railed. No man discovered your Partiality and other
vices; but you complained of his Bitterness, and said he was in a rage against
you. If by this you meant nothing else, but that I write with some heat and
earnestness, I would confess it, and say it is not to be condemned. For who can
contend coldly and without affection about those things which he holds dear and
precious? A Politic person indeed may write from his brain (as my Lord Bacon I
think observes) without any touch or sense on his heart; as in a speculation
that pertains not to him: But a Feeling Christian will express in his words a
Character, either of Zeal or Love; which you know are warm Passions. For my
part, I think I have expressed both, but nothing at all of wrath and
bitterness. And therefore, as to that censure which your Friends pass on me, I
believe he will speak a great deal truer, that affirms the Authors of it were
full of choler themselves. Otherways, they could not but have discerned a
charitable spirit in my writing, and easily seen, that the Indignation I
expressed against some vices, is such as consists with Christian Meekness, and
ought not to be condemned as an unmanly Passion. Do you not find that Moses was
very wroth, when Israel committed a great sin? and yet his Meekness is
commended above all other men's. And what think you of St. Paul when he calls
the Galatians a foolish sort of people: and plainly tells the Corinthians that
he could as well use a Rod, as the Spirit of Meekness: and bids Titus, whom a
little before he warned against rash anger, to rebuke some persons sharply? Nay
what think you of our Savior himself? was not he angry at the hardness of the
Jews heart? Mark. 3.5. Was he in any fault when he said to his Disciples, O
fools and slow of heart to believe? Undoubtedly I may sincerely and heartily
love you when I express a just Indignation against you; and you may as heartily
hate me, when you seem very gentle and kindly affected toward me. It is
possible you may have met with this saying out of St. Austin, which is
ordinarily cited by our Writers, and worth your consideration. It is so far
from being true, that every one that is angry with others bates them; that
sometimes he who is not angry, is thereby convinced of bearing the greatest
hatred to them. And this also. I am not to account every one my Friend that
spares and forbears me; nor every one my enemy that severely corrects and
lashes me. Besides; there are some of such a nature, that nothing but sharp
dealing will do them good. They are like knotty Blocks, which require more
Wedges, and harder blows also to drive them home. If he that undertakes (says
Dr. Corn. Burges Fire of the Sanct. uncovered.
, once famous among you) shall dally, and not strike home with all his might,
he shall find the Wedge about his shins.

They will rage the more confidently when they see he favors them: They will
think he fears and stands in awe of them, and so fly in his face with the
greater fury. I have never found any thing truer than this; that to speak some
men fair, is but to make them have a better opinion of themselves. They never
thank you for your gentle and tender usage; for they imagine their Merit
extorts it from you. Whatsoever Favor you show them, it is not imputed to your
kindness, but their own deservings: and they perk up the higher in their own
Conceit, because you have such regard to them. That they may know themselves
therefore; they must not be stroaked, but smitten; you must not gently jogg,
but roughly shake them; if you intend to awaken them. If you would not have
them sooth themselves up in their sins; you must openly detect and discover
them. If you would have them see the greatness of their Offenses, you must
boldly reprove them, and tear in pieces all their pretenses and excuses whereby
they seek to hide them. And as long as you are truly charitable, and allow all
that is good in them; they may see, if they be not perfectly blinded with a too
fond Love of themselves, that you are a Friend to them, though an enemy to
their vices. For (to use the words of a famous Writer) as the coldest and
fiercest winds are observed to grow mild and gentle by passing through
temperate Regions, so do severe and sharp Reproofs partake of the nature of him
that gives them, and lose part of their Austerity when they are managed with
Prudence and charity.

It is a very good Old saying, Love thy Neighbor, yet pull not down thy hedge.
We will be kind to you, but yet make you to know your Bounds. We will not
suffer you to ingross to your party, the name and reputation of Godliness. You
shall not pass for the only nice and tender Conscienc'd men, nor be thought
more Conscientious than you are. Nor will we suffer you if we can help it, to
pull down the Fence that is about our Church; those wise and wholesome Laws that
are made for its Safety and Security. Too much civility to you, does but make
you presumptuous. You only take Occasion to grow more bold and licentious; if
in some things we commend your strictness, but wink at your faults. And
therefore we must tell you your own (as we commonly speak) and let the deluded
people know, how Ignorant, how Superstitious, how Defective you are in a great
number of Christian duties; whilst you imagine your selves the most knowing the
most holy people in the world. If you be angry at this and call it bitterness,
it is no more than I expected from many of you. For a galled horse, I know,
loves not to be curried, and a guilty conscience loves not to bereproved. Let
us go about the one or the other with never so much caution, they will be sure
to winch. Though the necessity be great and our charity much, it is all one;
they have no mind to be touched. Now how necessary and seasonable those
Instructions were that I gave you, I leave others to judge who are impartial.
And as for the manner of delivering them; show me any thing in my Book that
bites, but only Truth; and I will knock out its teeth: Which if you think I
have sharpened too much; I assure you, it was only to give you a quicker sense
of your Errors. All the Salt you may fancy in it, was intended only to season
you, but not to fret you at all.


N. C. You can make smooth and handsome Apologies for any thing. But study as
long as you will to blanch the the matter, they will believe your tooth is
black: and that your voice indeed may be the voice of Jacob, but your hands the
hands of Esau: as hairie and rough as a Satyr.


C. You are marvellously witty. And as I have heard you commend a sanctified
wit, so it seems there is a sanctified scurrillity; and one of you may rail
with good Approbation, provided he do it in Scripture phrases.


N. C. What ailes you to talk in this Fashion? Have I given you any occasion?


C. Since you will not be satisfied, but still complain of bitterness and
Reproaches; It is fit to let you know, that you of all other men should not
speak a word of this; which you have been so notoriously guilty of your selves.
You are perfectly like the Friar, who declaimed against Stealing, when he had a
pudding in his sleeve --


N. C. Good Sir, say no more; For I see the more we stir in this business, the
worse it will be.


C. You speak modestly: But let the issue be what it will, you shall give me
leave, now we have begun; to spread before you some of the Dung that you have
thrown in our Faces. And I shall the rather undertake it, because it will serve
another purpose. For it will plainly demonstrate where your people learnt all
their reviling Language; and that your Ministers have been so far from
reproving them for it, that in truth they taught them how to blaspheme, and put
those very words into their mouths, which now they belch out against us.


N. C. I had rather believe you upon your word, than be troubled with such
stuff.


C. No, I will not be so much beholden to you. But since you are so good
natured, you shall not be troubled with much of it. Let me only entreat you to
peruse two or three of your Authors. First, there is a Book entitled A looking
glass for Malignants, writ by one of your ancient Ministers, Mr. Vicars; the
famous Author of your Parliamentary Chronicle, called, God in the Mount, In
which he treats our Clergy and people with the wonted civilities, that your
rude People now bestow upon us. He begins with the Archb. of Canterbury, whom
he calls a Cursed cow, dr rather a rageing fat Bull of Bashan: whose heart, he
says, was more hard and Adamantine than a nether Millstone, and most extremely
cauteriz'd, yea stigmatized with the hottest Iron of most desperate
Impenitency. And having thus expressed his respects and charity to him; then he
greets our inferior Ministers by the name of Baal-Priests, Popish sons of
Belial: and makes it an admirable piece of Divine Providence, that the
Soldiers who went against Scotland (before our Wars) should have their hearts
overruled by God, and their Spirits ordered to plunder and terrify those
scandalous Baal-Priests. As for the People that followed the King, he calls
them Marble-hearted Malignants, implacable and inveterate haters of Holiness;
that were for mere formal Protest antism at large, which is in effect down
right Atheism. This excellent Treatise was licensed by Mr. John White who was
himself such another Reviler; and called our Ministers by the same names; nay
far worse: not only Priests of Baal, but of Bacchus and Priapus. And though you
may imagine he speaks only of those particular men whom he put into his
Centuries, He will inform you otherwise if you look into his Epistle before the
first of them. Which he put forth, as he tells us, for this end that the World
might see what manner of persons our Clergy be. As if there was no difference;
but the People were to judge of all the rest, by those stories which were told
of some. And truly, so they did, and so they do to this day.


N. C. I never observed these things. But you must consider that this Vicars
was old, and so might be testy: For no man well advised sure would approve of
that disorderly action of the Soldiers, much less make God the Author of it.

C. I remember indeed Mr. Buroughs Vindic. against Mr. Edw. Gang.
wonders that so old a Professor of Religion as he should be found jeering and
scorning at it, (for he cast some reproaches on his way) and can find no excuse
for it, but the infirmities that sometime attend an old Age. But as for that
action of the rude Soldiers, I remember very well, it is applauded by M. Case
in a Book licensed by the same Mr. White June 27. 1642. called Gods waiting to
be gracious, etc. Where he makes this one of their Encouragements to expect the
fall of Babylon, because God had so wonderfully wrought upon the Spirits of
men, particularly on those soldiers, who went, he says, to fight the Bishops
battles in Scotland; that they pulled down the Railes, Threatened the Priests,
and kept such a Visitation in their progress, as the Bishops hardly ever had
done since Queen Elizabeth's days. This he says, p. 119. was the Finger of
God, the work of him that created the Spirit of man.


N. C. You tell me News.


C. It Is very stale. But no news at all to us who are well acquainted with
their pitiful way of arguing. And I heartily wish your Ministers would
seriously consider, upon this occasion, these two things. First, how wretchedly
they were wont to reason, and how they abused the poor people by encouraging
them to draw the greatest hopes from the slightest grounds. For what Connection
is there between these two things? The disorderly Soldiers were uncivil to our
Ministers, and profaned our Churches as they went into the North, therefore
the fall of Babylon is near at hand? It is just like the reasoning of Mr.
Henderson who told the Parliament that the Fast which they kept on St John's day
Sermon on 27. December. 1643.
was a presage that by the blessing of God on theirs and the Assemblies
proceedings, the Superstition of observing Christmas should shortly expire, and
that it was at its last gasp. As if one should say, there was a solemn Fast
indicted (as they speak) in the Church of Scotland on the second Lords day in
Sep. 1642. for the promoting Unity in Religion, and Uniformity in Government:
Direct. anent Malignants by the Commis. of Genesis Ass.
and the Officers of the Army at Wallingford house turned that Festival again
into a day of Humiliation: therefore that solemn remembrance of Christ's
Resurrection shall shortly cease, and Christianity fall to the ground.


N. C. I am ashamed of the incoherence of such Discourses.


C. So should they be too, and do public penance for it. As also for their
gross hypocrisy and partiality in assuming a power to themselves, less than
which they condemn in other men. For they may turn it seems a Festival of our
Lords appointing into a Fast; but we may not make a Festival in honor of him.
I would desire them also to consider in the second place, whether their
Connivance at, nay, their Approbation of such things as were done without any
Authority; I may add, their praising the blind zeal of private men who took
upon them to be Reformers; and, more than that, their imputing it to the work
of the Spirit and the mighty power of God; did not help to embolden the Army
afterward to do those things which they themselves abhorred; with a persuasion
that they were moved by the Spirit, and had a call from the Lord, though no
Authority from men? It is a thing much to be laid to heart, and then honestly
to be consessed; and publicly bewailed. And when we see them so humble and
sincere as to take shame to themselves for what they have done; we shall all
have the better opinion of them.


N. C. I hope these speeches may be imputed to the rashness of a few men; at
least they were not approved by any Authority.


C. Think you so? How came Mr. Wilsons Sermon then before the Parliament to be
printed by their Order, 28. Sept. 1642. In which he calls the Clergy about the
King, Croaking Frogs that crept into Kings Chambers: Who are known by the
gutter (there he thought lay a jest) whence they come; out of the mouth of the
Dragon, out of the mouth of the Beast and the false Prophet. They are the
spirits of Devils which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth to gather them to
battle, etc. The Frogs head is like their Caps [Quadrata ranarum Capita] Here
is work for the Parliament, that the king may have no more Croakers in his
Chambers.

And here (I may add,) is a taste of your sanctified wit, or rather, devout
Railing; though borrowed, alas! in great part from Paraus on the Revelation.


N. C. You take things in the worse part, when you hear or read our Sermons.


C. You would have said, perhaps, if you had read Mr. Vicars, that to the
hearing of the Word there came as well ears of Scorn as ears of Corn. For sure
you could not but have remembered such an admirable piece of wit as this, which
you may find in his Epistle to the Reader.


N. C. We do not regard Wit, nor pretend to it.


C. It is not because you do not love it. For according to the Proverb; John
would wipe his Nose if he had it.


N. C. There is wit in picking a lock; but it is better to let it alone. And
therefore I will not vie Proverbs with you.


C. You are just like the Gentlemen we are speaking of, who do things and know
it not: nay then do them, when they say they will not. Mr. W. Bridges for
instance, reproves the Loyal Convert for ill language, and tells him be seems
in vain to be Religious if he refrain not his tongue: when as he himself had,
just before, let his tongue loose in a most riotous manner against us; Telling
him that the Cathedrals were a Nest and Cage of all unclean Birds, a harbor of
dumb Dogs, proud Prebends, and a crew of Aleswilling Singing men: And that they
came daily to offer near the Holy Table, the blind Whelps of an Ignorant
Devotion; of which one may say, as the Apostle, the things which the Heathen
offer in Sacrifice to their Idols, they offer them to Devils and not to God.
Nay, as if his tongue was set on fire of Hell and could not be tamed,
immediately after he had given that caution out of St. James, he falls into a
rage again; and in a most nasty manner compares our Prelates to Swine lying in
their Ordure. For he says the Hogsty-Prelatical had been swept but twice since
the Conquest, and the Temple of Jerusalem three times in the 3. years of our
Saviors Ministry. What office he designed himself in this sweet work I cannot
tell; nor how you will excuse this savoury language; unless it be sufficient to
say, that he railed by Public Authority.


N. C. I abominate such Reformers: and think they deserved to keep Hoggs,
rather than feed the Sheep of Christ.


C. I am glad to hear you say so: And hope you as much abhor Mr. Hughes his
Reproaches, who says, the Common Prayer may be likened fitly to the
abomination of Desolation standing in the holy place.


N. C. By what you told me before, I could expect no better from him; whom I
think worthy to have been preferred to the same office with the other.


C. But you would expect better language, would you not? from two such Holy men
as Mr. Allin, and Mr. Shepherd, the famous New England Preachers?


N. C. They sure were more Conscientious than to utter any foul speeches.


C. Yet they tell you, the English Service Book has stunk above ground twice
40. year, in the nostrils of the godly, who breathed in the pure air of
Scripture. Defense of the 9. positions. p. 61.


N. C. No more of this Noisome language, I beseech you: which is enough to
poison the Air we breath in.


C. As it has done already: and so diffused its venom among your people, that
they are generally infected with this Plague. Nay, they not only do such things
themselves, but take pleasure in them that do them. Witness all the filthy
reproaches they bestow upon our Divine Service, Clergy, and People: and the
great satisfaction and applause wherewith the late Cobbler of Glocesters
writings were entertained, even by those whom you esteem Religious. This shows
what manner of spirit you are of, and that your people are in danger to deprive
themselves of all sense of true Religion: to pave their own hearts, and make
them like the highway; through which all things may pass without any
difference (save only a few innocent Ceremonies) even whole Cart-loads of dung
and filth. And of the very same spirit, I must tell you, this sort of Religious
people have ever been. For Martin Marprelate, with whose Devil this man was
possessed; was received with the like Applause, and his Writings so thumb'd,
that they were even worn out, with continual reading and handling of them. If
you will not believe me; yet I hope you will trust Mr. Brightman whose words
these are; as you may see if you look into his Comments on the 3. Rev. 17. p.
49. of the English Edit. where speaking of the Nakedness of Laodicea ( i. e. in
his opinion, the Church of England) he makes this an Argument of it, that this
man had poured such great contempt and shameful reproach upon it, which is the
meaning of her being Naked. There was one, says he, that called himself by the
name of Mar-prelate, who set forth a Book wherein he dealt somewhat roundly
with the Angel. How were those bitter jests of his favored among the People?
How plausible were they in a manner to all men? How willingly and greedily;
with what great mirth were they every where entertained? There is none so rude
and unskilful but pondering that time in his mind, would say thus to himself,
and that not without cause; Truly, the Lord has poured out contempt upon
Princes; those that honor him does he honor, and those that despise him,
shall be despised. He has made our Priests contemptible to the whole People,
because they have broken their Covenant. You may read what follows there if you
think good: For it is a great Demonstration, how well those people were
instructed in the Christian Religion; and what rare devises you have been
taught to blind your eyes that you may not see your sins. For you may speak
evil; and rejoice in iniquity; and sport your selves in beholding your Fathers
Nakedness; and fancy all the time that you are fulfilling Prophesies, executing
the judgment written; and pouring out Vials, like so many Angels.


N. C. I should think rather this was the Devil with his followers fighting
against Michael and his Angels.


C. And a Devil it was, whom when you had once raised, you could never conjure
down again; nor with all your Prayers and Fastings dispossess him. Nay, this
foul Spirit grew in time so outrageous that he flew at last in a foaming manner
in your own face. Which is a thing so remarkable, that I cannot but put you in
mind of it: how you were served in your kind; and felt the tongues of men
sharpened against your selves, which you had whetted to wound the reputation of
others. No sooner had you pulled down the Bishops, whom you had laid low before
by such fellows as that Martin-Mar-prelate: but out comes Martins Echo which
returned all those Reproaches upon Presbytery. Baal, Babylon, Egypt, and all
the rest of those Heathenish names were pressed to war against you, which you
had made to serve against us. Presbytery was called a Limb of Antichrist: a
tyrannical Lordly Government; a worse bondage than that under the Bishops; a
bondage under Taskmasters, like those over Israel in Egypt. Nay that Very Mouth
which reviled our Church, now reviled your intended Reformation. Mr. Burton
himself, whom your people had so much admired, and brought home with such joy
and triumph, that you fancied (as I shall tell you before we have done) that
day to be the Resurrection of the Witnesses; bestowed those censures on
Presbyterial Government: which he said Dialogue called Conformity, Deformity.
would bring us under perpetual slavery, worse than either Egypt or Babylon.

And in the very same terms wherein you had railed against our Priests, we
heard the Sectaries railing against your Presbyters: whom they called Romish
bloody Priests, Black Coats, Diviners and Soothsayers; Croaking Frogs; the
Devils Agents; Pensioners to the accuser of the Brethren. Nay, the Assembly it
self we were told had two horns like a Lamb, but a mouth like a Dragon,
teaching the Parliament to speak blasphemy against the Saints that dwell in
Heaven. Your Uniformity also was as much disgraced as ours, and styled the
Burden of the Saints, the bondage of the Church, the straightning of the
Spirit, the limiting of Christ; Edw. Gangr. 1 part. p. 212.
and the ecclipsing of the glory of the Father. Nay it is pretty to observe,
how the very Mystery of Iniquity, you had so long complained on, was now found
working among you. Uniformity, Mr. Saltmarsh said, was a piece of it. And Mr.
Dell (in his Epistle before his Sermon of Right Reformation, preached before
the Parliament) calls Presbytery, a new form of that mystery of iniquity, which
had been so long a working. The Beast, they held, had only changed its shape,
and taken another name, and so they baited it most fiercely as you had taught
them: And told you in effect, what the Proverb says, that Goose, and Gander,
and Gosling, are three sounds, but one thing. But they would not part with you
thus; for after they had done with this, then they fell upon your darling, the
Solemn League and Covenant. This became a brand of infamy, a Cains mark almost
(as Mr. Case tells us Thanksg. Sermon. for taking of Chester. p. 26.
) so that if they would stigmatize a man to purpose, they would say, He? He is
a Covenanter. As you had told us that we made an Idol of the Common Prayer; so
Mr. Peter's told you publicly in a Sermon at the three Cranes, that you kept
such a stir about the Covenant, as if you would have the people make an Idol of
it. Mr. Feak also called it, the great Idol of the two Kingdoms. And so fit had
this word been found to do service that at last one told us, that you had got
two Idols for on one. For the Parliament and the Pulpit, said an Letter to
Card. Barber.
Outlandish Gentleman (imitating the language of the times,) are the two great
Idols of the people, the greatest that ever were. For it is held a kind of
blasphemy to speak against the one; and the whole Body of Religion is nailed to
the other. It comes to my mind also, how you who joined in the outcryes against
Malignants, were numbered in conclusion, among them, and said to be grown indeed
to a more refined Malignancy; but that there was no greater difference between
a Presbyter and a Prelate, than between a half Crown piece, and two shillings
and six pence. And as your good friend Mr. Vicars had told us, that God had
made us to be the very drudges and Scul-boyes of his Church and children. So
Mr. Peter's in good time told you (in a Pamphlet of his) that the Presbyterians
were no better than Gibeonites, who might help to hew stone and square Timber
for a more glorious building.


N. C. Will you never have done?


C. You must let me remember you what a mighty clamor you raised against the
Bishops, as if they had been so many Ishmaels that persecuted Gods Isaacs: and
you have not forgot sure how often you were called your selves, the Carnal seed,
the fleshly children; the persecuters of the children of the free woman. For
your Ministers that accused the Bishops (and made it a main part of their
Remonstrance to the house of Commons in the beginning of the Wars) that they
had put some who were but Serving-men into Orders, and made them Ministers: saw
in a little time a whole swarm of vile creatures (nothing so good as
Serving-men) making themselves Ministers, and setting up for the most
Gospel-preachers. And there was no remedy: but all their preaching and
printing, and petitioning against it was despised. These taught the people to
call them blind Guides, as they had taught them to call our Priests. Nay, their
Masters at last encouraged and rewarded the scoffs of those that said, These
blind Guides travailing as they thought to Sion, are fallen into the ditch in the
Isle of Wight. Insatiable hirelings, Gehazi's, cheaters, pulpited Divines, and
a great lurry of such like names were liberally dealt to them; as you may see,
if you will not believe me, in their own complaint, called A Seasonable
Exhortation, p. 11. Nay, the Army it self which had been so instrumental in all
this wickedness, and magnified by these revilers as the Army of the Lamb; at
last heard themselves called, the Abomination of Desolation. All which I mention
only for this end: to show what your Ministers got by instructing the people in
this easy Art of disgracing all they disliked, with the names of
Antichristian, Babylonish and such like. As they had done, so they were
requited. And while the Episcopal Clergy silently bore the punishment of their
sins; they that had cast out their names as abominable, were whipped with their
own rods. When they thought to reign as kings without us; immediately they were
assaulted as Egyptian Tyrants: when they expected all should bow to the Scepter
of Christ in their hand, they saw men rising up against them as Antichristian.
Those that had heard their Invectives against us, employed them against
themselves. And all the Dung they had laid at our doors, was flung by those
that had been their followers, in their own faces. If I were endued with the
Spirit of Mr. Vicars, or Mr. Case, I should have said upon this occasion.
Behold the finger of God! the Work of him that created the Spirit of man! See
how the Lord overruled men's hearts; and ordered their Spirits to terrify
these Presbyters. Or Mr. Brightman would have taught me to say, The Lord has
made your Priests contemptible to the whole people, because they have broken
their Covenant. But I dare not imitate their boldness, nor talk as if I was
infallible. I will let them enjoy this particular gift to themselves, of
knowing what God does upon the spirits of men. For my part, I think they might
be able to say all this, even without any extraordinary help of the Devil.
There was no need that Beelzebub should come to inspire them with this fury:
For they were already possessed with a mighty Rage. That Spirit which spoke out
of the Press and Pulpit, had abundantly furnished them with this powerful and
taking Rhetoric. And if Mr. Brightman had lived to that day; he would have
wondered to see, how near of kin his Heat was to this Fire. Nay, he would have
been ashamed of his rare way of reasoning against our Church, when he had heard
some retort his words against us, upon the Philadelphians (I mean
Disciplinarians) saying; Truly, the Lord has powered contempt upon Princes:
Those that honor him, does he honor; and those that despise him shall be
despised.

And thus I have at last opened this rotten Ulcer (I hope you will not be angry
if I use his words In 3. Rev. 17. latter end.
) If my labor shall be acceptable, and the sore being purged, be healed again;
how great thanks shall I return to God? But if the evil shall be only stirred
up, and the handling of it shall offend the sick and sore parties; I will yet
comfort my self with the conscience of the good discharge of my Duty, and with
the ordinary reward of a Physician.


N. C. Discharge of your duty? you should say disgorging your Choler and Gall.
Nay, they will never believe if they hear what you now Discourse; but that you
wrote out of mere malice, on purpose to disgrace them; and that you deserve the
reward of such Physicians as kill more than they cure.


C. How came they by this faculty of searching the heart?


N.C. How came you to ask this question?


C. I forgot my self. Since they can see what God does in the Spirits of men;
no wonder they can spy our thoughts and intentions.


N.C. I meant, that they can see by your Book what your intentions were.


C. So they may. For I told them plainly in my preface that I intended only to
awaken them to see their Errors, but it seems their Spirit looked into mine
when I wrote those words, and could see my thoughts better than my self. Has
W. B. or his disciples had some Revelation about this matter?


N.C. None but what they received from your Book, which contradicts they think,
your Epistle, and declares the hatred you bear to them.


C. To their Schismatical spirit you should have said. For I can sincerely
profess, as Mr. Edwards does in another case, That I have no personal quarrel
with any of them, no old grudge, or former difference; and therefore had not
Truth constrained me, Pref. to Antapolog.
I had out of respect, and love to some of them, forborne to say any thing of
these matters. And therefore let not my Book by reason of its truth and
plainness be branded for a bitter, railing and malicious Writing: But let them
consider that they need such a Book as does not flatter and extol them, but be
plain and free with them. For the truth is (as he goes on) they have been too
much flattered, both in their Persons and Churches; and are undone for want of
being plainly and freely dealt withal. A Candle has been too long held to
them; I hope my Book may do them much good, to abate their swelling and
confidence. And if many of our Ministers would deal more plainly with them, it
would be better both for them and us. I remember a passage concerning Luther in
an Epistle of Calvin's to Melancthon (they are still the same man's words) which
the persons being changed, may be fitly applied to my purpose. If there were
that mind in us all, that ought to be; perhaps some remedy might be found. And
certainly we transmit an unworthy Example to posterity, while we cast away all
liberty, rather than offend a few men: Will not their vehemence rise and grow
the more, while all bear with them, and suffer all things from them?
Undoubtedly it will. Our base silence does but make them open their mouths
wider to declaim against us. We cherish their insolent behavior while we make
no Opposition and give no check to their violence. They imagine we allow them
to be so worthy as they fancy themselves, while we sit still, and only see and
hear their Folly. And therefore to show that we know them, not that we hate
them, I took the Freedom to write those things which you accuse of Malice.


N.C. But, as I told you, they tend to their Disgrace.


C. No man ought to think himself disgraced by Truth, nor reproached by just
Reproof. He should rather think he dishonours himself, a thousand times more,
by still persisting in his Errors, and justifying his faults. And if you
resolve upon this Course, and seek rather to cast reproaches on us than amend
your selves; I doubt not it will turn at last to your greater disgrace, and
make you more vile in the esteem of all indifferent men.


N.C. Assure your self you had better have been otherwise employed, and never
have meddled in this business.


C. I am not afraid of any evil Tongue, nor of any thing else that man can do
unto me: But, as your Mr. Cartwright once said, am of Alcibiades his mind; who
trusting to the power of Truth, when one lift up his staff ready to smite him
if he would not hold his peace, boldly replied, Smite me, so thou will but hear
me.


N.C. No, they will not smite, but they will defend themselves.


C. With all my heart. But be you assured, as he said, in another case, their
heels will sooner ache with kicking against the prick, than it suffer any hurt,
by receiving their broken and strengthless Resistance.


N.C. You are very warm, and confident.


C. To tell you the very truth I have long observed in the fiery men that
oppose our Church, a strange Pride and conceit of the godliness of their own
party beyond all reason; together with a most shameful despisal of us, as if
our Piety were little or none at all. This moved my Indignation, and it will
stir, I think, the spirit of any honest and cordial Christian, to read such
haughty Censures as these from the mouth of your most famous Divines. That the
Bishops are a generation of the Earth, earthly; Preface to the Dioces. Trial.
An. 1621.
and savor not the things of God. They are the words of Mr. Paul Bains,
approved by no less man than Dr. Ames, who is pleased to add in his great
modesty, that there was as much agreement between them in their management of
Religion (except two or three) and their powerful Preachers, as between the
light which comes down from Heaven, and that thick mist which arises from the
lowest pit. And that there is more of God and his Religion in some one
congregation of a silenced Minister, than in all the Bishops families in
England. I appeal to all the world whether I had not reason to stomach these
proud vaunts, and scornful speeches. And whether it was not absolutely
necessary to let you see the emptiness and flatness (to say no worse) of those
men who now insult over us in like manner; and would bear the world in hand
that they are the only powerful Preachers, who alone savor the things of God.


N.D. You have only culled a few sayings out of one or two Books --


C. They should have thankt me for that. And might have seen if they pleased,
by that moderation, that I was not desirous to publish their shame more than
needs: but studied their amendment by disclosing a little of their folly and
concealing the rest. If they will not believe but that I did my worst, and
revealed all I knew; let them but signify this distrust of my Charity, and I
shall give them abundant satisfaction. Mr. T. W. I am sure has no cause to
complain, who with so much labor brings forth childish fancies, and is so
curious to speak absurdly, and takes so much care to avoid serious and solid
sense in the most weighty Arguments, that his great Pains is conspicuous in
these Defects. Of this I did but give a small taste, and that, not out of the
worst of his conceits; which he ought to look upon as the Civility of a Friend,
and not as the want of skill in an enemy. As for Mr. W. B. I confess
ingenuously, I said a little the more of him, because you have been too long
gulled by such pretenders to Mysteries and Spirituality. Yet I do not think I
said enough, but ought to have told you plainly, that he is one of the
principal Impostors that have perverted the Truth as it is in Jesus, and
adulterated the Christian Religion in this Nation. He spoils almost all the
Holy Scripture he meddles withal; and turns it into an idle tale of these
times, and makes it say whatsoever it pleases him and his Proselytes to hear.
Which when I seriously consider, I cannot but say with a little alteration as
one does, on another occasion, to his Countrymen. That it is a shame there are
laws against those who counterfeit Coins, and falsify Merchandises; yet such
are permitted who Sophisticate our Divinity, and corrupt the Holy Scriptures,
and turn our Religion into a new fancy and device of their own. The late great
Plague is but of small consideration in compare with this mischief; and if
speedy order be not taken, the multiplying of such Authors will make a Library
as big as London, wherein there shall scarcely be found one wise Sentence, or
reasonable Conceit.


N.C. It Is thought Sir by some that you are much mistaken in making him the
Author of that Book which you reprove, since it bears only the two first
Letters of Mr. Bridge his name. And I have heard you blamed for charging him
with those things which he has not owned.


C. I think rather those Apologists are mistaken. For why does he not disown
it, if it be not his Book; since it contains such dangerous things? Or why did
not the Preface to another Book, since stolen into the world and carrying his
name in the front of it, inform us that this was genuine, and the other
Spurious? But if he had, there are very few that would have believed him. For
they are as like each other, as two pieces of Cloth, that are of the same Wool,
the same thread, the same color, working and breadth. There is the very same
Canting in both; the same abuse of Holy Scripture, the same Spiritual pride and
contempt of others, the same evil speaking and seditious Doctrines; and in one
word, the way and Spirit of Mr. Bridge.


N.C. Why do you jeer? I know you allude to the Title of one of those Ten
Sermons, which he calls, The Way and Spirit of the New Testament.


C. I do so: And am better able to describe his Way and Spirit than he to set
out that.


N.C. I think you had better forbear such Comparisons.


C. Pray let me try a little. It will both divert us a while, and not prove
unprofitable. Turn I pray you to the fifth Sermon, at your leisure; and tell me
when you have compared our Conceits, P. 371. etc.
whether of us do better.

First, I say, the way and Spirit of Mr. Bridge, is not (as he would have it) a
Childlike, but a Childish Spirit. A way and Spirit that has nothing manly;
nothing of the ancient Christian sense and Spirit in it: but abounds with
Phrases, trifling observations, and perpetual Tautologies: And yet thinks it
self most gorgeously bedeck't with Gospel Truths, Dispensations,
Manifestations, Discoveries, and I know not how many other glorious things
besides.

Secondly, it is not a fearing, but a fearless Spirit; dareing to talk of God
and our Savior in the boldestand rudest terms, taking a kind of Pride in
inventing new and monstrous Expressions; and spiritualizing Religion into airy
fancies.

Thirdly, The way and Spirit of Mr. B. is not an understanding, but a
Non-sensical Spirit. An instance of which is this, that it has no certain rule
whereby to measure the love of God. But sometimes it made successes a great
argument of Gods regard to them; and now it tells us that the Crosses are a
mark of it, and that the Children of God must be persecuted by the World.

Fourthly, The way and Spirit of Mr. B. is to trade much, or most, or
altogether with fancies and Dreams.


N.C. Pray do not say so.


C. You may put it in other words if you please, and say it trades with
absolute Promises. But that is the same; for they are no better than dreams and
fancies.

Fifthly, In the old time men examined and considered what they believed; and
came to Faith by rational discourse; But now in the days of Mr. B. Men are
taught to believe they know not why, and Reason is decryed as an enmity to the
things of God.

Sixthly, In the old times Christians were of a modest and humble Spirit; but
the way of Mr. B. is to teach them to be high and confident; and to imagine
great Discoveries and Revelations to be made to them. And therefore they
wronged Mr. Edwards very much, when they said his Gangraena was full of lies,
because he told strange stories of men that pretended to have had Revelations,
and seen Visions: for we find Mr. B. is one of them.

Seventhly, In the old time Humility, Purity, Righteousness and Charity were
held to be things most dear to God; but now in the way and Spirit of Mr. B. we
can hear no tidings of them. For he can tell us but of three things that are
dear to him, His People, his Truth, and his Worship. These are his Plate, his
fewels, his Treasure, as I told you the last time out of one of his Ten Sermon.
But you must know it is not a new discovery, but an old and darling Notion of
his; which I find in his Sermon before the Parliament, 29. Nov. 1643. There he
tells us, Three things God loves more specially; His People, his Truth, and his
worship. And it is a beloved conceit I perceive among the party; for one of his
Brethren delivered it to the Parliament before him, and told them in a
peremptory manner, excluding all other things, Mr. Tho. Goodwins sermon. of Apr.
27. 1642. p. 31.
God has but three things dear to him in the World; the Saints, his Worship,
and his Truth. But which of these he loves best he could not tell; for God
therefore ordained Saints to be in the World that he might be Worshiped; and
appointed Ordinances of Worship, as means to build up his Saints. Some honest
old Christian would have told this great Divine if he had heard him; you
trouble your self, Sir, about needless Questions: There is something God loves
better than all these, viz. Holiness, and all Moral virtue. For in truth there
are no Saints or people of God (but only in name) without these. Take away
these, and the most Orthodox Notions that can be in your head, will make you no
better than a Devil. Nor will the exactest worship, according to the purest
Ordinances, fail to be an Abomination to the Lord, if these be absent. But I
forget my self. The way and Spirit of Mr. B. is not to talk of any thing else,
but pure Worship, pure Ordinances, Gospel Administrations, and such like
matters; upon the account of which they esteem themselves more holy, Spiritual
and Evangelical than other men. And be they never so bad; all is one for that.
Mr. B. has a rule which is very comfortable; Sinfuln. of Sin. p. 34.
Humble your selves for sin though it be never so small; but do not question
your condition for any sin, though it be never so great. Perhaps you will say,
I do not understand him: and truly that is no such great wonder: For, Eighthly,
Whereas in the old time men wrote and spoke so, that one might understand what
they meant; the way and Spirit of Mr. B. is quite contrary, which is to speak
that which he himself, I believe, does not understand. Witness several things I
could show you in his First of the Ten Sermons, concerning Love to Christ's
personal excellencies, without respect to his benefits.

Besides this, Ninthly, In old time they gave good proof for what they said;
but the way and Spirit of Mr. B. is, to put us off with a lousy Similitude or
two; by which he does all his feats.


N. C. Why do you speak in this manner?


C. I have good reason for that Epithet, but now it is time to make an end.
And to say no more but this, in the old time the way was to demonstrate things
either from their Causes, or from their Effects, or from Testimony, according
as the matter would bear: but now it is much, or mostly, or altogether the way
of Mr. B. to make a comparison, and find out some pitiful resemblance, which
passes for a good reason of what he says, with the men of his way and Spirit.
Ex. g. to prove that an unconverted man cannot know how full of sin he is, he
will tell you the reason is because his Hoops are on. Sinfuln. of Sin. p. 29.
As a vessel that is full of liquour, and the liquor issues through the Hoops;
you see there is liquor in it, but you do not know how full it is, till the
hoops are knocked off: but then you will say, O how full was this Vessel? Ah
now our hoops are on, and it does not yet appear how full of sin men are; only
it comes issuing through the hoops, through their duties; but a Day is coming
when all our hoops shall be knocked off, and then it will appear how full, of
sin men are. Thus he argues excellently from the Barril; and at another time
you shall find him as good in his reasons taken from another liquor in a brass
pan or pot. For to prove that some men's little sufferings may amount to much,
whereas other men's great sufferings may amount to little, he can give you no
other Reason but that God has a very gracious allowance for his people; a
little will content him from them whom he loves. For which he alleges the
Commendations bestowed on the Patience of Job, though he was impatient: First
and last in suff. work. p. 47.
True, says he, but God did not measure Job in his wallops, but when he was
cold. As we do not measure milk when it wallops and seeths, but when it is cold
--


N. C. Good Sir, have done with this; for it is but the same that you said
before in the former particular, when you told me of his similitudes.


C. That Is very true. But this is still the way and Spirit of Mr. B. to say the
same thing over again in a new fashion, and as the old saying was, to serve up
one joint, in a dozen or two of dishes. But to give you a full measure, I will
put another in the room of that. There was a good Christian Spirit in the
ancient times; but the way and Spirit of Mr. B. is Antichristian.


N. C. Fie for shame. That Is the thing he charges on you.


C. I know it very well. But setting aside the Papists and a few others,
Compare with his Ten. Sermon. p. 370.
who so guilty of it as himself? For it is Antichristian to reproach our Church
as he does. It is Antichristian to condemn the present worship of God among us,
and call it Antichristian. To decry an outward glorious Worship as he makes
bold to do, is Antichristian. It is Antichristian to oppose all degrees of men
in the Church; it being plain that there were Apostles, Evangelists and
Prophets ordained by Christ, as there were high Priests, Priests and Levites
ordained by Moses. It is Antichristian to call white Garments legal and
Antichristian. In short, a furious, seditious, schismatical Spirit, I am sure
you will grant, is an Antichristian Spirit, and such is the Spirit of Mr. B. as
I will evidently prove.


N. C. Do not undertake an impossible task.


C. There is nothing more easy, as you will soon see, if you look but into his
Sermon of the Two Witnesses, printed with his name to it. In which you may read
the danger we all are in, if his Visions and Revelations be true. For having
told us, plainly enough, that such as he and their followers are the Witnesses,
who receive their Orders to prophecy from Jesus Christ himself, not from men,
from the Prelates, from the Beast: then he proceeds to let us know what power
they have; V. page 123. of that Book lately printed, 1668. called Seasonable
Truths, etc.
which to omit the rest, is twofold and much to be observed. First, to shut the
Heavens that they shall not rain, Rev. 11.6. that is, says he, to restrain the
highest powers in Church and State, from their wonted influence, which can have
no other sense than this; that they shall be so powerful as to bind the hands
of their Governors, and ty them up from being able to act. And then Secondly,
They shall have power over the waters to turn them into blood, that is, to turn
the still people of a State or Nation into war and blood.


N. C. Surely they have no such Orders from Jesus Christ; nor will he ever give
men such power as this.


C. That Is nothing. They may take this Power, though he do not give it them.
For he tells you, This may be done, though not legally. For the proof of which,
he bids you observe, that though it be said he will give them power to
prophecy; it is not said he will give them, but they shall have power, to shut
heaven, and turn the waters into blood. That is, give such orders to
themselves, and assume this Authority; for he repeats it again, It may be this
may be done, and not legally. What though the Laws of, God and man command us
to obey Magistrates, not to govern them; to live in peace and quiet and not to
disturb the public tranquillity: That Is a small matter with these men, who
fancying they have received a Commission to prophesy, may enlarge it a little
further on their own heads, and shut up, or imprison the higher powers that
they shall not act; and then put the people into a commotion that they may fish
in the troubled waters. And whenever you see these things come to pass, as he
tells you; when you see the Witnesses have power to restrain the highest powers
in Church and State from their wonted influence; and that they have power to
turn the still Nations into war, (and so they themselves are slain for the
present) then you may lift up your heads and comfortably say. Now is our
Salvation near; For God will bring near his righteousness, and his Salvation
shall not tarry.


N. C. God forbid I should thus understand his Revelations. Truly, it would
make me hang down my head; If I thought any such things were now a brewing. I
hope for Salvation in another way, and had rather it would tarry than be thus
accomplished.


C. Take it as you will, these things are near; if he may be believed, and will
not tarry. The influence of the Higher powers he imagines, I conceive, are
already very much restrained: There wants nothing but the troubling of the
quiet and still people that they may restrain them more powerfully: and that
may soon be effected, if his doctrine be received.


N. C. He says no such thing.


C. Not in express words, he is wiser than so; but it is the plain sense of his
Discourse. For he tells you the 1260 years of their prophesying in sackcloth
began about the year 400. and therefore surely the end of the time we must
needs be about; as his words are p. 114. Now if you mark what they are to do
toward the end of the time; you will see it as plain as the nose on my face,
that he thinks we must needs be about the time of shutting the Heavens and
turning the waters into blood.


N. C. We are past the time, my good Friend, for if we add 1260. to 400. the
year when they ended their prophecy was 1660. O how glad I am that he was
mistaken. I hope we shall have no wars nor tumults; and that God will open
these men's eyes to see their errors; since no powers were then restrained, but
those that would have kept the King from his throne, to which he was restored
in that happy year.


C. You are an honest hearted man I see? which makes you less suspect the craft
of others. There Is one word in his discourse which you do not observe, viz.
thereabout. That salves the business, and serves him for a little while. For he
tells you the 1260. years might begin in 406. or 410. after our Saviors Birth.
If you take the former number, then the prophesying in sackcloth ended in 1666.
the year when they expected such great matters, that some confidently cried to
the people out of the Pulpits (before they left them) Be patient. for 1666.
will make a mends for all. But it failing their expectation and producing
nothing according to their mind; that is the reason I conceive why he has since
that, put in the year 410. for the beginning of the years 1260. and so adjourns
us for their ending to 1670. which is now approaching. Then no doubt he fancies
the Witnesses must be slain (when they have first troubled us) and after three
years and a half rise again. For he asks his people, p. 115. If Christ's
Witnesses shall lie in sackcloth 1260. years, will not you be contented to be
in sackcloth three or four years? Christians will you not be contented to be in
sackcloth three or four years? And in the next page after tells them, Why now,
according to the calculation, there is not much time to come. There is but a
little time of sackcloth to come. Shall we not watch with him, one hour, and
wear sackcloth with him one hour? Wait a while and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry, And then he tells them they shall wear white robes,
and come out with Palms in their hands; that is the kingdom shall become
theirs, and they shall reign and triumph over us.


N. C. He does not apply these things to us in this Nation, as you seem to
understand him.


C. He tells us indeed, p. 124. That he will not apply them to times and
places. But those words are only a gross equivocation (which he must be very
thick-scull'd who does not discern) for he had done it already. Having told his
Hearers than they were Christ's Witnesses, and that now they were in a sackcloth
condition (as his phrase is) but that it would not last long, and that before
it was ended they should have power to restrain the higher powers and trouble
the people. What need he tell them more? It is enough, I make no question, to
make them lift up their heads (as he often exhorts them) and bear them very high;
as being likely in short time to have Dominion over us. And I cannot for my
life but look upon them as satiating their fancies, with the imagination of
this day of vengeance. Methinks I see them (to use the words of a famous Writer
against our Church and State in another case) like a man, who in the drought
observes the Sky, sitting and watching, when any thing will drop that may
solace them with the likeness of a punishment from heaven upon us; which they
straight explain as they please. No evil can befall us, but presently they
positively interpret it, a judgment upon us for their sakes: and as if the very
Manuscript of Gods Judgments had been delivered to their Custody and
Exposition, they make the people believe that the Witnesses are smiting the
earth with plagues, and finishing their testimony against us. But thanks be to
God, their Reading declares it abundantly to be a false Copy which they use.
For (to speak in his words again) they often dispense to their own bad deeds
and successes the testimony of Divine favor; and to the good deeds and
successes of other men, Divins wrath and vengeance. And besides, they have
abused the people so often with their false Predictions from these and other
Prophesies, that I hope the world will see, these are false Witnesses (if I may
use the words of David to a different sense) that are risen up against us,
breathing forth cruelty: who behold lying Visions, and prophecy out of their
own hearts: whose thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, as the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, wasting and destruction are in their paths. And I would to God you for
your part would seriously consider (to use his words once more) that to
counterfeit the hand of God is the boldest of all forgeries; and that he who
without any warrant but his own surmise takes upon him perpetually to unsold
the secrets and unsearchable Mysteries of high Providence, is likely for the
most part to mistake and slander them: and approaches to the madness of those
reprobate thoughts that would wrest the sword of justice out of Gods hand, and
employ it more justly in their own conceit, It is but a small thing for such
men as these to grasp at all power here on earth; when we see them doing little
less than laying hands on the Weapons of God himself, which are his judgments;
to wield and manage them by the sway and bent of their own frail cogitations.
It is true indeed, in this manner to sit spelling and observing Divine Justice
upon every accident and slight disturbance that may happen humanely to the
affairs of men, is but a fragment of your broken Revenge: yet it is the
shrewdest and cunningest Obloquy (as he well observes) that can be thrown upon
our actions. For if they can persuade the people, that we are pursued with the
divine Vengeance, they have obtained their end to make all men forsake us, and
think the worst that can be thought of us. If they can make them believe that
they are the witnesses of Christ, and we the beast that ascends out of the
bottomless pit: that we are going to slay them, and that three or four years
hence they shall rise again, and all become theirs: they have promoted their
Design in the craftiest manner that can be devised. The still people will be
put into seditious commotions notwithstanding all the Laws; they that are now
quiet will be stirred as with a mighty wind, and conceit (poor Souls) that they
are moved by the Spirit of the Lord, and are doing the work of God, fulfilling
prophecies, and making the clearest Comment on the Revelations.


But if there be not a fatal blindness on them, I shall plainly show you, that
this is so gross a Cheat that no observing person can be deluded by it. Mr.
Bridge you must know is not the first that has suborned the Revelation to
speak on his side, and witness to his Cause. There have been many before him
who have assumed the persons of Prophets, and prognosticated their own wishes
would come to pass. But the event has so evidently detected the fraud, and
made the forgery appear, that he is very impudent who goes about to serve
himself of this old trick; and they prodigiously silly who will still be
deluded by it. And feed on the weak conjectures of those who have nothing else
to support their sinking spirits, but that which has made so many ashamed who
relied on it.

For Mr. Archer In his Book of the personal reign of Christ.
, you must know in the year 1642, from this very prophecy of the two witnesses,
filled the peoples heads with this Conceit, that the end of the Papacy would be
in the year 1666. They are his express words page 44. And he repeats the same
again p. 46. where he tells us, that the Witnesses shall recover again in 1666.
and draw off one Kingdom in Europe from the Papacy and ruin Rome; and this was
that Woe which ends the sixth. Trumpet. Upon which account he adds ( p. 60.)
that the seventh Trumpet may begin presently after the ruin of Rome, and so the
Thousand years commence An. 1670. This no doubt was of singular use in those
days to inspire your people with lofty hopes, and bear up their hearts in the
good Old Cause against all discouragements: and therefore Mr. Bridge flies to
this Sanctuary now, and expects the same success again on the spirits of his
Ignorant Proselytes, who have forgot the vanity of such Prophets, or never
reflect on the uncertainty of their Guesses.

N. C. Do not trouble me, I entreat you, with such relations.


C. It need be no trouble to you, because you may reap a singular profit by
hearing how such as he have deluded your expectations. For there was another
man a little after Mr. Archer, who in his Lectures at St. Lawrence-Jewry, about
the two Witnesses (printed by an Order of a committee of the house of Commons,
Mr. Fr. Woodcock.
27. April 1643,) tells us quite another story; and will have the rising of the
Witnesses to begin more early. For his opinion is that the 1260. years begin
between the first invasion of the Empire An. 365. and the sacking of Rome An.
410. And the year he pitches on, is 380, or two or three years before: and then
the end of them (excluding the three years and a half in which the Witnesses ly
dead) fell out about 1637. or 1638. Then, he says, the Antichristian powers,
i. e. the Bishops slew the Witnesses, by silencing, suspending, and throwing
them out of their places. And then there was great rejoicing and making merry
(according to Rev. 11.10.) by the Popish Prelatical Faction, as he is pleased
to call them. But after three years and an half, i. e. at the beginning of the
long Parliament, the spirit of life from God entered into them, and made them
stand upon their feet, and restored them to their liberty, to the great
astonishment of the Antichristian faction. Nay, they ascended up to heaven (
verse. 12) i. e. were called by the Parliament to a more ample condition. and
they went up in a cloud, i. e. abundance of people congratulated their freedom.
Which was then done most remarkably when three of these Witnesses (Mr. Prin,
Mr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton,) were brought in triumph from the utmost parts of
the Kingdom. Then was the Earthquake (spoken of Rev. 11.13.) i. e. great
Commotions which began with the Parliament. And a tenth part of the City fell,
i. e. if you will believe him, Prelacy and Ceremonies: and 7000. men were
slain, i. e. Prelates, Deans, and Chapters with their appurtenances, had their
honor, places, maintenance taken from them. In short, he confidently affirms
the Scene wherein these great things must be acted, is one kingdom only: And
that it is no other but the Island of great Britain: and the time of doing
them, some years before and since the calling of the Long Parliament, p. 83.
And so he concludes very triumphantly, p. 90. Since the Witnesses are slain and
risen again; cheer up then: strengthen these weak hands. Verily, the bitterness
of death is already over; and from henceforth expect better days, than either
our eyes, or the eyes of our Forefathers ever saw. Which is a clear
Demonstration, that these men think themselves concerned in all the good
things, and us in all the Evil, contained in that Book: and that every little
change in our affairs, makes them imagine they see themselves about to be
raised, and us to fall under their feet: but yet that their high Confidences
hitherto have been ungrounded, and were the birth of their proud Fancies, not
the fruit of their sound Understanding of the Revelations of God. And such M.
B's prophecies I hope will prove, who notwithstanding all those glorious days
which his Fellows promised, is still whining and complaining of their Sackcloth
condition; and waits for another Parliament to make them ascend up to heaven in
a cloud, and slay 7000. men, once more, i. e. according to the former
Exposition, the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, with all the maintenance that
belongs to them. Yet this I will say for him, that he is a little more merciful
than Mr. Woodcock was. For he only threatens destruction to us in this world:
but the other says, the power of the Witnesses to shut Heaven that it rain
not, is the power to hold all tidings of forgiveness, mercy and peace, from the
Antichristian Gentiles ( i. e. such as We) while they continue such: and
declaring them a people to whom no Heaven, no Forgiveness belongs while in that
condition, i. e. while we oppose your desires. You may read this p. 70. and p.
73.


N. C. Enough of this. I see their Vanity plainly.


C. Nay, let me tell you a little more, for fear you should forget all this,
and shut your eyes again. About two year after this Prophet, another, who will
not name himself, arose; and dedicated a Book to the parliament with this
Title; The great Mystery of God; or the Vision of the Evening and the Morning
Opened. Printed 1645.
In which he tells us the two Houses of the Lords and Commons, are the two
Witnesses which the Spirit of Christ foretold should be raised up to Heaven,
the high place of Justice and Judicature. For though all the people of God were
Witnesses for 1260 years, yet they in a more especial manner: because they were
not only to protest against Antichrist, but were that judgment which should
sit, and take his Kingdom and Dominion from him, raised to Heaven by the power
of Christ for that end. 7. Dan. 26. For the Ruin of mystical Babylon (he tells
you in his Title page) and erecting the Spiritual Jerusalem were the ground of
our Commotions, which were not to cease till by that Parliament the work was so
completed, that Christ in and by his Sts. should reign on earth a 1000. years.
And therefore he is very confident that our Lord reckoned the 1260. years,
from the year 375. So that the time of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth
ended 1635. Then they were slain, i. e. deprived of their civil power, if they
spoke any thing against the Pope and Prelates; and those three Gentlemen
mentioned before, he tells us, were a lively Emblem of the rest. But then
between 1638. and 1639. the Spirit of God entered into the hearts and Spirits of
the Godly party, both in England and Scotland, as he did into Cyrus; and they
took all the power and strength they had, to free themselves from that dead and
slavish condition, whereinto Antichrist had brought them. And a great fear fell
upon all the Antichristian party both in England and Scotland, yea (such, if
you will believe him, was the terror of their appearance) at Rome it self. And
then presently they heard a voice from Heaven, ( i e. the place of Judicature)
saying, come up hither, i.e. that Wise and Godly men would ascend now to those
places to do justice upon Antichrist. This Voice was heard first from the whole
Commons in Scotland, in whom (mind it well for it is rare Doctrine) all the
power that is in Heaven did originally reside:
and afterward in England, both from the whole Commonwealth, and likewise
from the King himself, who sat in Heaven. And they ascended to Heaven, ( i.e.
to the high places of Judicature,) the same time 1639. in Scotland; and
afterward here in this Kingdom. For the rest of the godly were with Child with
this great Truth, that the Lord Jesus in and by his Saints was to rule all
nations with a rod of Iron: Which is spoken of he says, 12. Rev. 1. etc. And
they cried and travailed in pain to God, by humble and servent Prayers; and to
his Witnesses which sat in Heaven by humble petitions, from the year of Christ
1639. to 1641. That the Lord Christ, that man-child, v.p. 5. and p. 26.
might in and by his Saints rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron. Whereupon the
great Red Dragon, i. e. the Popish Lords and Prelates bestirred themselves to
devour this man-child as soon as it was born: but the people of God bestirred
themselves both to God by Prayer, and to the godly party in Parliament, that
these Popish Lords and Prelates might be cast out. And these Petitions and
prayers were heard of Christ and his Witnesses, 12. Rev. 5. And so the Church
did not only bring forth the Man-child of Government (mark that; for it tells
you some Presbyterians taught, that all power was originally in the People) but
it was likewise received up to God and his Throne, into the high place of
Judicature. But the Dragon with his tail drew a third part of the Parliament to
fall off at the same time, and likewise a war was raised between the Dragon and
his Angels ( i. e. the King and his Followers) and the Lord Jesus and his
Witnesses sitting in Parliament. In short, he tells you, that what was done
here should be done in all other Kingdoms, in the year 1655. When Christ and
his Witnesses should take the power of all the Ten Kingdoms, which Antichrist
had, into their hands; and should reign. Yet so that there should be some
little relics of Antichrist in the hearts of men till the year 1700. Then the
New Jerusalem he assures you shall be built and the Lamb be married to his
Church and Antichrist cast not only out of the World, but out of the hearts of
men.


These are some of the goodly Dreams or Visions (call them which you please) of
your Divines heretofore. And no doubt they were then as much believed as Mr.
B's Predictions are now. Who if he live to see himself deceived, will be able
it is like to invent some new beginning for the 1260. years; and you will still
be so foolish as to give him credit; unless these things convince you of the
madness of the Prophet. But if he be at a loss, and think such a blind creature
as I can give him notice of any thing he sees not already, I may help him at a
dead lift, and direct him to a Book where he shall find relief. All my fear is,
that he will give me little thanks for my pains, because it will make his heart
sick, to hear his hope is like to be so long deferred. For after these Writers
I have mentioned, Mr. Tho. Parker of New England printed a Book about these
things, The Visions and Prophec. of Dan. opened 1646.
in which he lays down two ways of accommodating the years. If they begin
when there were but dark and weak beginnings of the signs mentioned, that was
he thinks in the year 390. and so the 1260. years end with 1649. Then the Turks
will cease to be loosed, and the next year after, they may begin to fall
together with the Pope, if this way of accommodation hold. If it do not; then
we must stay a great while. For the more evident, open and perfect state of the
things foregoing was not till the year 600. and so no shutting of the Heavens,
no turning the water into blood, at least no putting off their sackcloth, which
Mr. B. now expects; till the year 1859.

N. C. Stop Sir, I beseech you once more. For I think you have told me too much
of this stuff.


C. The last man speaks modestly, and therefore it was not amiss to hear him.
As for the rest I should not have troubled you with their conjectures, had it
not been to let you see; First, what they think of us, whom they call the
Antichristian, the Popish party, the Gentiles and Nations; the followers of the
Dragon, and such like Names. Secondly, what they think themselves; who are, in
their own esteem, the Witnesses of Christ Jesus, the Godly party, the Saints
that are to rule the Nations, with a rod of Iron; the followers of the Lamb,
who are to ascend to Heaven, the Seat of Justice, and do execution upon us.
Lastly, What a Sandy Foundation their hopes are built upon; and how confident
they are, and well persuaded of themselves without any cause at all. And that
indeed is the chiefest thing I aimed at. To make you sensible, they have no
ground for that high opinion they have conceived of their own wisdom and
insight into the things of God: they being blindly lead by their own
Imaginations and passionate Desires, while they think they understand and see
more than all the Wise men in the World. So the last man but one, that I named,
bragged and vapoured: glorying that he had found out that truth which none of
the wicked should understand; neither Priest nor Prophet; Rulers nor Seers. All
is hid and covered from them, and the reason is, because they drank of the Cup
of the Whore, of which if a man take but one Sip, he is utterly incapable to
have the Visions or mysteries made known to him. And therefore he triumphs in
this manner over all our Nobles and Clergy: Who will believe of all our great
men and learned Prelates, that Jesus Christ is come in the Clouds of Heaven,
and is set down upon the Throne of Judicature in his Saints and Witnesses, to
judge that man of sin? No indeed; they had more wit. And yet this the man
thought, in his self-conceited Wisdom, to be as clear as the Sun.


N. C. I am fully satisfied that they were much out of the way: And therefore
more words are needless.


C. That the way (you might have said) and Spirit of Mr. Bridge is mostly and
chiefly to be out of the way.


N. C. I leave those conceits to you.


C. And you will leave it to me also; for you take no notice of it, to tell you
the cause of all this.


N. C. Because I do not know it.


C. It Is easy to see that is nothing else but their pride and vain conceit of
themselves; as if God would reveal all his secrets to them, and hide them from
others. For they are the Watchmen upon the Tower, the Ambassadors of Christ,
the Angels of the Churches, the Lords Worthies: And they that follow them, are
the Holy ones, the Dear people of God, the little Flock, the Lambs of Christ,
the Meek of the Earth, the Redeemed ones, and the Remnant of Jacob. Nay, as
soon as ever any person comes to hear them preach; they hope there is a work of
Grace in their hearts, and that they begin to savor the things of God; and to
desire the sincere Milk of the Word. As for our Ministers, Alas poor Creatures!
they are the False Prophets, blind Guides, Idol Shepherds, that have eyes
indeed but cannot see at all. And our people are the World, the Wicked, the
children of the Evil one, Enemies of God, and such as remain still in Egypt. At
least, the vail is before our eyes; or we have taken a sip of the Cup of the
Whore, and that sends up such fumes into our heads, that we cannot possibly
discern the mysteries of God. Hence it is that the meanest of you takes himself
to be wiser than the best of us; than any of our Bishops and Priests, nay the
whole Clergy put together. And if we will not have such a man in the same
esteem that he has himself; presently we are looked upon as enemies of the
power of Godliness, formal fellows, or mere moralists, that hate the true seed.


N. C. Does not David tell us, that God had made him wiser than any of his
Teachers?


C. See how you still equal your selves with men inspired. From which vain
conceit and arrogant Opinion, I make no doubt, it is, that you take every
sudden fancy and strong imagination that comes into your head, to be an
Inspiration of God. And that you are so adventurous and bold in expounding the
Holy Scriptures, as if it were given you in that moment, as it was the
Apostles, what you should think and what you should speak. Nay, so deep have
you drunk of this Witches Cup, and are so intoxicated with self-conceit and
self-love, that you imagine all your Devices, and forms of Religion and
Government must be received by all the world. For your mind is the mind of God,
and your words the Oracles of God. So even Mr. Edwards himself seems to fancy,
Epistle before his Antapolog.
when he exhorts all people that were waving and hung doubtful between
Presbytery and Independency, to wait upon God in that way of his, and Assembly
of so many learned and Godly men, to see What he will be pleased to speak by
them.


N. C. What is this to all the World? were they bound also to listen to what
this Oracle would utter?


C. You are too quick. I was going to add that as they think themselves the
best people here, so the best in the world: and look upon the Reformation it
self, as needing a Reformation. And therefore hoped that if they settled
Religion among us according to their mind* there would be a pattern from the
Word set up in this Island, for an example to all other kirks abroad. Thus the
Commissioners of the general Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland tell us:
Directions to Ministers anent Malignants. p. 12.
and therefore call upon the Ministers to stir up themselves, and the people in
Truth and Unity; because, say they, it will be a powerful means to preserve our
Religion, and to propagate the same to other Churches, groaning under their
several burdens, and panting for such a Reformation as the Lord in Mercy has
granted us. And accordingly they indicted the Fast, I told you of, on the
Lord's Day, for the promoting Unity in Religion, and Uniformity in Government,
and the advancing the Kingdom of Christ ( i. e. their Discipline) every where.


N. C. None excepted?


C. No. For Mr. Case tells the Commissioners of the General Assembly, Epistle
before his book called The quarrel of the Covenant dedicated to them.
that God had honored their Nation in making them the first fruits and pattern
of a thorough and Covenant-Reformation to us, and all the rest of the Christian
World. And withal says, I am humbly confident, that the same shore shall not
bound this Covenant, which bounds the now two Covenanting-Nations, But, as it
is said of the Gospel, so it will be Verified of this Gospel Covenant; The
Sound thereof shall go into all the Earth, and the Words of it to the End of
the World. P. 62. of that Book.



N. C. Strange Presumption!


C. I suppose he could have found a text for it in the Revelation, if you had
presumed then to question his humble confidence. For I observe the General
Assembly tell his Majesty, that if they may but have that Unity in Religion and
Uniformity of Church Government in the two Kingdoms which they petition him
for, it will appear then that the unhappy Commotions and Divisions among us,
were but the Letter to his Majesty, July 27. 1642.
Noise of many Waters, and the Voice of a great Thunder, before the voice of
Harpers, harping with their harps; which shall fill the whole Land with Melody
and mirth; and the name of it shall be, the Lord is there. The place to which
they refer, you know, is 14. Rev. 2. Now immediately after this joy and Melody,
there follows, as you may see. v. 6. an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven,
having the Everlasting Gospel to preach unto every Nation, kindred, tongue, and
people. That is, as Mr. Case perhaps might have expounded it, this
Gospel Covenant St. John saw, upon the wing, about to fly to the end of the
World.


N. C. No man could be so absurd.


C. What greater absurdity is there in this, than in the application which the
general Assembly make of the foregoing words to the same purpose?


N. C. I approve of neither.


C. But then possibly they might have persuaded you it was a good exposition;
when Mr. Case made you believe the Covenant was an Ordinance of God, and Holy
Ordinance, V.P. 8. and other place of the forecited Book.
a pure and Heavenly Ordinance; yea, one of the most special and solemn, being
a joining Ordinance which strikes the main stroke between God and us: the
Marriage knot, whereby God and a people are made one: a piece of Divine
Worship, and, as far as I can discern, a more holy, or higher Ordinance, in his
esteem, than the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood.


N. C. For shame do not abuse men.


C. I am far from it, as you may see if you will but consult his Answer, to
this Objection which some made against it. It is needless, say they, to take
the Covenant; or rather a profanation of so holy an Ordinance; since we have
done it over and over again in our former Protestations and Covenants. To which
he replies. Page 40.
You receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper once a month, and that is but a
Seal of the Covenant. Consider it, and be convinced.


N. C. I am convinced of this, that you do not belly him.


C. Very well. And therefore he exhorts the Ministers to endeavor; to
sanctify the people for so holy a Service, as the taking of it; and tells the
people they must get their hearts into an holy Ordinance frame. Just as if they
were going to a new mount Sinai, to be entered into a new Religion; and
separated from the Nations to be a peculiar people zealous of the Covenant. And
indeed, he all along makes it of the same nature with that Covenant, which the
children of Israel made or renewed with God: and so confidently applies all the
places of Scripture which speaks of that, to this holy service: that one cannot
tell by any thing he says, but this was the Covenant which the Holy Books speak
of. Nay some of them when the Covenant came into England looked upon it as the
Ark of Gods presence, as Mr. Feak tells us Beam of Light.
, upon the account of which they should certainly prosper. And Mr. Case, I
remember, tells us, this was the sin of England in former times, That our
Fathers knew not this service: it was hid from them; they regarded it not: and
those times of Ignorance God winked at, or God lightly regarded them.


N. C. Sure he did not imagine all our Pious Ancestors to be Heathens.


C. You shall judge by and by what thoughts these men have of us all, when I
have told you, that in the strength of these high towering thoughts, and lofty
imaginations they taught the people to go to battle against their Sovereign,
and to fancy the Lord marched before them. They were confident they should
prevail because they were the Jacobs and we but Esau's; and the Elder must
serve the Younger: nay, we the seed of the Serpent and they the seed of the
Woman; and so they must wound our head, i. e. give us an incurable mortal blow.
Thus they were taught by Mr. H. Wilkinson, in an Epistle before a Sermon
Preached before the Parliament, 25. October. 1643.
of his: in which he tells the Parliament again, that they have to do with a
brood of Serpents, p. 13. at the best, that we are but a piece of Papal
Christendom, as his phrase is, p. 8. Nay, when the pride and passion boiles up
to its height, then they look upon us and the rest of the world, but as
Infidels and Pagans. What other construction can you make of the letter of the
Scots in Ireland to the General Assembly Convened at St. Andrews in July 1642.
? In which they desire them to send over some Ministers to them; God having now
opened a fair door to the Gospel by the banishment of the Prelates and their
followers. Nay, they call to them, as if they made an address to so many
Apostles, and the Protestants in Ireland were but so many Heathens; Pity poor
Macedonians, crying to you, that you would come and help us, etc. Send able men
to help to lay the foundation of Gods house according to the pattern. And
agreeable to this Petition they returned an Answer August 6. of the same year.
in the Apostolical language, telling them, though they are loath to stretch
themselves beyond their own measure, yet they dare not be wanting to the
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom. And so they send them some men to plant and to
water according to the directions of Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine and
Discipline of that Kirk wishing that they who are sent may come with the full
blessing of the Gospel of peace; and that they will with all cheerfulness
embrace and make use of the message of Salvation. Who would not think, that
reads this, if he were a stranger to our Country, that some few Christians in
that Island had sent for some Apostolical men or Evangelists to plant the
Gospel among a Pagan People? And that the Prelates and Ministers under their
obedience, had been but so many Heathen-Priests, that nursed up the Nation in
barbarous Ignorance? Such is the goodly conceit they have of themselves, and
their horrible contempt and scorn of all others. From whence it is, that they
call us the Nations; asking their people when they do any thing that we do, Why
do you imitate the Customs of the Nations? And there used, I remember, to be
no phrase more common than this, when a man removed his dwelling to a place
where one of your Ministers was, that he went to live under the Gospel. And
when they inquired of the welfare of their Friends, the current Phrase was, How
do the Christians of such a Town? According to the import of which language Mr.
Bridge takes the boldness to call us Gentiles, in the ears of the House of
Commons Fast Sermon. Nov. 29. 1643.
; telling them that the Horns (the Kings party) may push and scatter for a
time; but the Carpenters (viz. the Parliament) shall fray them away, and cast
out these Gentiles. And another bold Writer Paraenetick to the Parl. and
Assembly for Liberty, 1644.
tells them that the Army had often put the Armies of the Aliens to flight, and
therefore must be considered. Nay, he is so profane as to say, take heed of
resisting the Holy Ghost, for that mighty works have been done by these men you
cannot deny. p. 12. Miracles it seems were revived again to convince us, who
were either poor Legalists, or Heathen Idolaters. Yea, God did by a continued
series of Miracles and wonders (if you will believe the Rump of the Parliament
Declar. of 27. Sept. 1649.
) exalt his name in the eyes of this and neighbor Nations by their means. But
alas! we were the most reprobate and hard hearted of all other Aliens, that
could not be converted. Uncircumcised Philistines, in Mr. Case's language: Nay,
Amalekites, with whom the Lord would have war for ever.


N. C. Now you grossly abuse them.


C. Read the Preface to Mr. W. Bridges his Sermon, Preached before the House of
Com. Febr. 22. 1642.
and judge whether I be guilty of that fault or no.


N. C. What does he say.


C. He tells you that the business of Christ's Kingdom is looked upon by the
squint-eyed multitude, under an Hexapla of considerations.


N. C. What Is an Hexapla?


C. Nay, you must not trouble your self about his phrase, for he tells you in
the conclusion of that preface, It is such as I can speak, and I desire to be
thankful it is no worse, considering my deserts.


N. C. Well then let us hear it, as bad as it is.


C. After he has done with the Theological, the Historical and the Legal, he
comes to the fourth consideration, which is Critical. And what is that think you?


N. C. You would not let me ask Questions, and therefore I Will make no answer to
yours.


C. You would never guess if you did; nor can the most Critical of you all tell
why he gave it that name; for it is only this. My money shall never help to
kill men. To which he Answers; well, if you hinder the killing, quelling of
those who would both kill and quell us, ours, our Religion, Kingdom; you become
friends of Gods enemies and ours: and resolve to make peace with them, with
whom God has resolved to have war, Exodus 17. ult. What think you now, did not
this man look upon us as Amalekites? and wish the Servants of the living God,
to whom he addresses his Hexapla of considerations, would have war with us
eternally? Do you not see what is like to become of us, if men of this Spirit
have Power again proportionable to their Will? must not our name be blotted
out? and must not he be accursed that does the work of the Lord negligently? --


N. C. I pray no more Questions.


C. And then all your Victories will be called once more, the return of
prayers, which you take to be as powerful as the lifting up of Moses his hands.
And all the Miseries which befall us, the day of the Lords vengeance for the
blood of his faithful servants. For I must tell you another effect of your
Pride, is --


N. C. Do not put me among that number.


C. Their pride then, is to think every favor that is done them to be their
due, and so they are bound to thank no body for it. God they fancy makes the
wicked serve them, and causes them to do that for their sake, which they had no
intention to do. And on the contrary, if any justice be done upon any of
themselves, presently it is voted persecution, cruelty, enmity to the People of
God, and hatred of his Truth and Ways. But let them exercise never so great
oppression, tyranny and cruelty upon their Neighbors: it shall be cried up as
zeal for God and his cause, Love to justice and pure Religion; at least
excused, as a fulfilling the Decrees of the Almighty, spoiling the Egyptians;
and acting for the Lord in the day of Vengeance.


N. C. This is your time: and so you may say what you will against Christ's
witness-bearing people, while they are in their sackcloth condition. It is now
only their witnessing time, but --


C. But, what? Why do you make a stop?


N. C. The times will mend, and the Witnessing time, they say will be over.


C. You would have me think then, that you speak their sense not your own: But
I perceive you are a little taken with those new Phrases, of the Witnessing
time, and witnessing work. As indeed it was always the humor of your party, if a
noted man invented an unusual Phrase, presently to form their mouths to that
new mode of speaking: Just like a pack of Hounds, that when one begins to open,
immediately all sollow, and almost deafen one with the noise. When a Preacher,
for instance, from that text, David served his Generation by the will of God,
raised this impertinent Observation; That it is our duty to mind
Generation-work; instantly all Pulpits sounded with this Doctrine of
Generation-work. That was the phrase in those days: In so much that you should
hear both Minister and people bewailing it in their prayers, that they had not
minded Generation-work more. Which made some good innocent souls, that were not
acquainted with the secret, blush when they first heard it, and wonder what
they meant. And to say the truth, that was a hard matter to tell. For the
Presbyterians, I think, meant nothing but reforming according to the Covenant,
the Lord having given them such an Opportunity, as the General Assembly speak
in their Answer Presented 25. Aug. 1642.
to the Declaration of the Parliament of England. Where they tell them that
when the Supreme Providence gives opportunity, of the accepted time and the Day
of Salvation, no other work can prosper in the hands of his servants, if it be
not apprehended, and with all reverence and faithfulness improved. And withal,
they add, This Kirk when the Lord gave them the calling, considered not their
own deadness, nor staggered at the promise through unbelief, but gave glory to
God. And who knows but the Lord has now some controversy with England, which
will not be removed, till first, and before all, the Worship of his name and
the Government of his house be settled according to his will? This was their
Generation-work. But others meant by this Phrase; the pulling down every thing
that they imagined Antichristian; Presbytery and all. And some went so far as
to think it was Generation-work to pull down Monarchy, to bind Kings in chains,
nay Protectors in fetters of Iron. And when they were not able to do the last,
though they had effected the other; then they fell to witnessing-work, and
prophesying against it: For that was the Commonwealths men's phrase, when they
spoke of O. CR. himself. True Catalogue p. 12.
The Lords faithful people, the foolish contemptible nothings, irreconcilable
enemies to the Government of a single person, were putting up their prayers and
appeals to the Lord, witnessing, and prophesying against him, and the
Beast-like foundation on which he stood, etc. For the setting up of him, you
must know, was in their opinion the healing the deadly wound of the Beast Ib.
p. 9.
. Though by others who were for Generation-work too, and thought themselves as
great promoters of it as they; He and his son were called, Moses and Joshua; or
David and Solomon, as you may see in several Addresses made to them. But above
all commend me to the good people of Chard in Somersetshire, The address from
those at Leicester was much to the same purpose.
who bless that Providence who had given them such a Joshua to conduct them to
the land of promise. Another phrase as hard to explain as the former: But as
greedily swallowed, and made use of by your wretched Phrase-mongers, to abuse
themselves and the Nation. In short; All the whole gang thought God was
fulfilling prophecies, and making good the Revelation, and they must help and
be instrumental to him in this Generation-work: Else they might be shut out of
the land of promise, and not enter into the New Jerusalem. There was no man of
this sort, who had never so little power, were he but a petty Constable, or the
like Officer, but he imagined he heard God saying to him as Mordecai to Esther,
Who knows but thou art raised up for such a time as this? Nay those whom you
count the soberest persons were so drunk with this conceit, that they fancied
themselves or their Friends to be Angels pouring out Vials, or some such thing.
Mr. Edwards, I remember, who with so much zeal and courage incountred all the
Sectaries, and gave a particular reproof to one Durance, who prayed that the
King might be brought to the Parliament in chains: Fell into this dotage
himself, peremptorily to affirm, that God would honor their Brethren of
Scotland to be instruments of pulling down the Sectaries. They shall all fall
before the Scots, says he, whom they have so vilified and unworthily dealt
with; as the Prelatical and Popish party did. Which he proves from Revel. 3.8,
9, 10. All those promises to Philadelphia, he assures you, do in a special
manner belong to our Brethren of Scotland, as First, that God will make them
come ( i. e. those who are the Antitype to those Jews, Gangraemi second part p.
193. 194.
the Sectaries, Anabaptists, Independents, that whole faction) and worship
before their feet; and to know that God has loved them; that is, they shall
overcome and triumph over those Sectaries, etc. O Church of Scotland, and all
ye that are for Reformation Presbyterial against the Sectaries, nourish your
Hopes by these things, neither let your hearts be troubled, whatsoever the
world speaks against you. And so he interprets a story of a Drum beating in an
Independent Congregation, as a signification, that the War which the
Independents thirsted for with the Scots, as much as ever an unhappy Boy did to
be at fisty-cuffs with one of his fellows, would prove their ruin, and be a
means to overthrow all their Conventicles. Gangraena 3. part. page 165.
Though alas! Quite contrary to his expectation, the Sectarian Army beat the
Scots to dirt, subdued the whole Nation, brought Philadelphia into bondage, and
made her worship at their feet. And yet Mr. Buroughs, I observe, one of those
Independents Mr. Edw. writes against; seemed, when time was, to have the same
opinion of the Scottish Brethren: and to foresee glorious things that they
would do. For he tells the Citizens, Certainly that Nation is a Nation that God
does love, a Nation that God does honor, and, by whose many expressions of his
love, shows that he does intend to make them SPECIAL INSTRVMENTS of the GREAT
THINGS he has to do in this latter age of the World. Speech at Guild Hall upon
the occasion of the coming in of the Scots.
And it should seem, he read this in the Revelation too, for he adds; We may
truly call it Philadelphia, And Mr. Brightman (that famous light it former
time, 30. or 40. years since) did Parallel the Church of Philadelphia with the
Church of Scotland. Philadelphia signifies Brotherly-love: When was there ever
a Nation, such a Church that joined together in such firm Covenant as they have
done? Hid we the like Union among us, O how great things had we done before
this time? And then he tells them that it is a Nation engaged to God in a
higher, more extraordinary way than any Nation upon the face of the Earth; a
Reformed Nation: A people that have risen up against Antichrist more than ever
any people have done; and that is the great work of God in these times: And
therefore certainly God has a love to them, because they break the Ice, and
begin the work, and arise in such a way as they do, for the pulling down of the
man of sin. I suppose he means they arose in the way of Arms, and resolved not
to lay them down till they had finished the work of the times. What that was,
Mr. Buroughs tells you; though the word Antichrist now signifies nothing
certainly, but what every one pleases. And Mr. H. Wilkinson tells the
Parliament of England what it is, in the same terms. Your business, says he,
lies professedly against the Apocalyptical beast, and all his Compliees.
Epistle before his Sermon preached, 25. Octo. 1643.
The birth with which you travel, as it was the expectation of Antiquity and
Ages past, so it will be the happiness of posterity and Ages future. Think not
that it is in the power or compass of Devils or men, to make that birth prove
abortive, which himself has undertaken to bring forth, and to baptize with the
name of Israel, it being a child of promise Isa. 66.9. Shall I bring to the
birth and not cause to bring forth, says the Lord, shall I cause to bring
forth and shut the womb, says thy God? No, says he a little after, God has
spoken the word for the restoration of Sion and building up the walls of
Jerusalem, and therefore let your Faith hang out its conquering and triumphing
Flag, and let Emanuel be the Moto.

Thus you see, what both the great Parties thought was the work of Generation:
and what fine work they have made of it; there being a greater growth of
Antichristianism of all sorts since that time, than ever we knew before. You
see likewise, what work they make with the holy Scriptures; and that it had
been a great part of the work of that Generation to pervert and abuse them. And
withal you see what is become of their high Confidence that they should not
miscarry in their Designs upon us, whom they baptized with the name of the
Accomplices of the Apocalyptick Beast. Their hopes are proved abortive; and now
they are travailing with a new Wind, and are in pain till they bring forth a
Lie. They that were triumphant a little while ago, have taken in their Flag and
changed the Motto. Now the word is Ichabod, Where is the Glory? They have
altered the Phrases very much and speak in a complaining tone. After so
glorious a progress in the Work of pulling down Babylon, and such Assurance
they should have the Beast under their feet; they are cast back again, and are
but at their Witnessing-work, and Prophesying its Destruction. Now Mr. Bridge
tells us, Seasonable Truths in Evil-times p. 100.
this is the work of our Generation, Witness-bearing to the truth of Christ in
opposition to the ways of Antichrist in Antichristian times. This is the work
of our Generation. Good lack! That the World should be thus turned upside down:
That their hands should be lately at the work; that the Carpenters Mr. Bridge
sermon before the Parl. Nov. 29. 1643. 17.
should be at work in every part of the Kingdom to cut off the borns: and now
they should have no work but for their Mouths; Witness-bearing-Work is all the
business! strange! The work of the time, said Mr. Bridge above 20 years ago, is
to measure the Temple. Nay, we are upon the work of Reformation, building the
Temple Ib. p. 24.
He saw the measuring line in the Parliaments hand; yea, the Stones were going
to be laid; and all the fear was, they should not lie even. But now all is
vanished, a new Vision appears; the Church is hidden, the Inner-Court is not to
be seen, and the Holy-city is still trod under foot, and they are got no
further than Witnessing-work. Then the work was to cast out the Gentiles, Ib.
p. 17.
and now the Gentiles remain within, and the work is only to witness against
them. Seas. Truths, p. 112.
This is the work to which a thousand years of Glory and Comfort is promised.
This is the work; witness bearing to the Truths of Christ, in opposition to the
ways of Antichrist, as he tells over and over in his late Sermons. P. 101.
Seas. Truths. printed 1668 Sermon before the Parl. p. 17.
Do you not wonder at this; that the work was so long ago to cast out the
Gentiles and the word was given forth, * Up and be doing, and do it fully.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently; and withholds his
hand from shedding of Blood: But now they are only Witnessing and waiting for
the Power to turn the Nations into was and blood?


N. C: They are grown very humble.


C. No. This is but a new proof of their insufferable Pride. They will not
ingenuously acknowledge their Errors. They are still as bold and confident in
prophesying from the Revelation as if they had never been mistaken. And you
feed and encourage their Presumption, while you admire these Dreamers; and
suffer them to lead you quietly by the Nose backward and forward, just as they
please. The Cause of which I doubt is your Pride too; who are resolved not to
be ashamed of your vain hopes, nor abate your confidences; but surrounding your
selves with Prophesies and Promises, to harden your faces, and look as boldly
upon us as ever. The world must not think you have missed the Mark: but only
suppose you have received a farther light, and that the mind of God is more
fully revealed; and that now you have found certainly in the Revelation
whereabouts we are: Or rather, many of this sort make no reflection upon what
is past. A new Phrase is able at any time to blot out all remembrance of former
things. Let them but get this by the end, and there is no other talk, no other
thoughts. Away go all Objections and Difficulties, all doubts scruples and
fears: All sad thoughts if they have any, vanish as soon as they hear this; and
you may quiet them with it when you will, as you do a Child with a Rattle when
it cries. Lord, say they, it is Witnessing-time. How shall thy poor Creature go
through this Witnessing-work? Alas! Christians, says another when he meets his
Friends, we are fallen into the Witnessing-days: Bear your Testimony: Fear not
their faces; only let your Testimony agree. If you would bear Witness, unite
your Testimony., O, it is a sackcloth-condition, Seasonable Truths, p. 124.125.
replies a Third, Let us mind the duty of a sackcloth-condition, let us wear
our sackcloth handsomely. I, and then says a Fourth, Christ will pay all the
charge that you are at, in Witness-bearing. If a man have a suit at Law, and
have 5 or 6. Witnesses, and carry them an hundred mile, he bears all the charge
of their Witness-bearing. Says Christ, I will give power to MY Witnesses, they
are MY Witnesses. Ye are Christ's Witnesses, and look whatsoever charge you are
at, he will bear the charge; he will bear all the charge of your
Witness-bearing. And therefore be faithful in your Witness-bearing.


In this manner they are lulled asleep, and tickled out of the remembrance of
all things past. Nothing else comes into their Minds, nothing into their
Mouths, as long as the strength of these New Phrases last. And their Ministers
having found the admirable power of them, and how they stick in their Fancies,
and work there, and wholly possess them; they will not fail to furnish them
with good store of them, when there is occasion. And should they but change a
certain Word now in use, into one of these Phrases I believe it would help to
do their business very effectually.

N. C. You will not teach them sure in this Art. What do you mean?


C. Preaching you know has been a Word long in use among us, and no body needs
be told what we mean by it. But this being an old Phrase there were some that
grew weary of it, and changed it into Teaching. And for some time, who taught
to day? was the Phrase. But this growing common fell into dislike too; and so
they called it, Exercising. And when this became stale also and pleased them no
longer, then I remember, some called it Lecturing. But this would not take, and
so Speaking became, in a manner, the only Word. And among the most pure the
question still was, who Speaks here this Morning? But afterward this was held
forth by him to day? A great many more such Alterations it is like you can
remember, who are better acquainted with these matters than I. But I was going
to tell you, that if any man should have the conceit to call it Witnessing, or
Prophesying; and this Phrase should get among them, who Witnesses to day in
such a Congregation? or who Prophesies in your Meeting? or will you go hear Mr.
A. B. C. bear his Testimony to day? No doubt, it would take wonderfully; and
make a Rabble run like mad to hear what new thing, this Witness-bearing is. For
such is the filliness of this people, that they imagine with every new phrase,
there is some new thing to be learnt; and that the old Preachers are nothing to
the new Teachers; and they who hold forth have something more to say, than he
that only Speaks. And therefore what will they fancy there to be in
Prophesying; and Witness-bearing? nothing less, I warrant you, than a clear
Discovery of the things that lay hid from Ages and Generations; the opening of
Seals; the numbering of the years, and unlocking all the Secrets of the
Revelation. And though they understand never a word, yet they will believe
themselves marvelously enlightened, when they are well stuffed with phrases: and
are able to talk of Generation-work Witnessing times, shutting up Heaven and
commanding that it rain not, turning the waters into blood, and such like
things: especially when they can fancy themselves to be Witnesses, and to have
Power given them to prophecy, and to send fire out of their mouths to devour
the Adversaries. V. Season. Truths. p. 120, 121.
This is comfortable Doctrine indeed; that they can but open their mouths, and
out-come scortching and devouring Judgments, at their prayers, to blast and
destroy us all. If this fancy get into their heads, it will be sure to keep
them in heart, and blow up their furious Zeal to a greater Heat. And if ever
they chance to reflect on the miscariage of their former hopes wherewith they
were big, they will then have a trick ready at hand to salve the business; that
it shall not discourage their present confidence. It was only because they were
not hot enough, and did not open their mouths wide enough, and breathe forth
fiery and devouring prayers against the Enemy. And therefore now they will call
to one another as Mr. Bridge teaches them *, and say, Christians, is there a
fire, a fire in your mouth? Ib. p. 121. and 126.
O you that have any credit in Heaven, pray now. What? Does fire come out of
the mouth of the Witnessing-people of God to devour their Enemies, and will you
shut your mouth and not pray? O you that are Witnesses, now open your mouths;
for fire proceeds out of your mouths to devour the enemies that hurt the
Witnessing-people of God; Open your mouth wide; and you that never prayed, pray
now.


Thus they open their mouths; but shut their eyes, and will not see how they
have been deceived. They maintain their confidence by these Arts; and are all
agreed in this, never to agree with us. They must have war with Amalek for
ever. And though they have many differences, as Mr. Bridge acknowledges, and
are divided into many opinions and persuasions, yet if they agree in this one
thing, which is the main, to unite their Testimony against us, it is enough.
This shall bear up their Spirits, and make them hope though they clash and jarr
in a thousand things. Let but their witness against us agree, and their hearts
shall not fail; but they shall still talk as if they were infallible.

N. C. I was loath to be so uncivil as to interrupt you too much in your
carreer: but you have drawn your discourse to such a length, that it would
weary your Friends, were they here, as much as vex your Enemies.


C. I did not intend so many words: But my thoughts ran so nimbly before me in
this Argument, that feeling no weariness in my self, I never reflected how much
I might tire you. Pray pardon me.


N. C. Well it is done now: And I will not begin it again by making any
reflections on what you have said. But this I must needs say, that Mr. Bridge
was always held a very precious man, one that has a deep insight into the
things of God; much enlightened in the knowledge of the Mysteries of Christ, and
of long experience in his ways; and therefore I confess, I much wonder at these
things, and am troubled that he should write on this fashion. Yet say what you
will, there are those, who will follow and admire him.


C. Do you think I am so simple as to doubt of it? when I consider, as a French
Gentleman once said, how there are scarce any kind of Beasts, which has not
heretofore been adored among Idolaters; nor any Diseases incident either to
Body or Mind, whereunto Antiquity has not erected Teruples; what should make
me wonder at so small a thing as this, that diverse men have those in high
esteem, who are no ways deserving? It is no marvel, if simple people hold Sots
in high reputation, since they have addressed their Incense to Apes and
Crocodiles. There are those, I have been told, who prefer the neighing of an
Horse, before the sweetest and most musical voice of Singing-men and
Singing-women: and others that have thought the smell of Garlic to exceed the
best perfumes; why should I think it strange then, if there be such men found
as are more moved with the knocking of hoops, and walloping of milk, and such
like Sounds; than with the still voice of the clearest and most harmonious
Reason? In short, I am not forgetful of the Proverb, that the Purblind is King
in the Blind-man's Country.


N. C. I looked when you would bring forth a Proverb again.


C. And is it not significant? I think it deserves to stick in your mind more
than any of your Phrases.


N. C. But I always thought, whatever you judge of us otherways, that you had
all allowed us to be the most knowing people in the Land.


C. Yes; in your own conceit: But otherwise you have discovered the greatest
solly. For you would never hear Instruction: but always tickled your selves with
this fancy that you had the work of God in hand; and that what you designed was
the very mind and counsel of the Lord; who would never let it miscarry, but
bring all your thoughts to pass. Otherways, you need not have been in this
condition wherein you are. For I can tell you, who forewarned you of it in
Print five or six and twenty years ago, and bad you take notice of these words;
If it shall come to pass that in point of Reformation what formerly was
proffered by the Sovereign and refused by the Subject, shall hereafter be
requested by the Subject and denied by the Sovereign; we shall have leisure
enough to admire Gods justice, bemoan our own condition, and instruct our
posterity not to out-stand good offers; lest for want of seeing their
happiness, they feel their own misery. But you have no spare moments, it seems,
to admire any thing but your selves: Nor to bemoan any thing but that you do
not still sit in Heaven, the place of Judicature, to which you thought your
selves advanced. And are so far from instructing posterity in any true wisdom,
that you would have them think the greatest happiness we can next desire is to
see the still Nation turned to war and blood. The old saying was, that if
things were to be done twice, all would be wise; but you --


N. C. Pray leave off your old sayings, We do not understand matters of Policy,
and human Wisdom: but in the things of God sure you will not deny us to have a
spirit of discerning more than other folk.


C. In the Revelation you mean, and the ancient Prophecies: In Witnessing-work
and the work of the Generation. In which indeed you have discovered a
mavelous skill; and shown that you can see as far (you will needs have it
farther) into a Millstone than other men.


N. C. I am sufficiently convinced that we know no more of those secrets than
you: But there are a great many other you know beside those, in which it was
ever thought we were well seen.


C. Now perhaps I guess at you meaning. You have great skill in expounding the
Works of Providence, though not in interpreting Prophecies: And can give the
reason of those misfortunes which befall some particular persons; contrary to
the express sentence of our Savior, Luke 13.


N. C. Those very words of our Savior deterr us from passing rash Censures.


C. Do they so? How came Mr. Vicars then professedly to handle this Argument?
and not only tell stories of Gods hand upon Malignants; but expressly affirm,
Looking glass for Malignants, Or Gods hand against Godhaters.
this was a direct judgment of the Lord for desperate Malignancy; and that, a
clear evidence of Gods undoubted indignation? And now how came Mr. John White
to license this desperate Book; but that you thought you might do any thing to
promote the cause, because it was the cause of God? This makes you still
compose Prophecies to amuse the credulous; and fill the Nation with the noise
of Prodigies to set the timorous into a fit of Trembling. When your troubled
imaginations present you with a throng of dismal thoughts; then you thunder out
judgment against us; and when any unusual thing befalls any of us; then you
instantly cry out; See the hand of God! Behold how the Lord plagues them for
our sakes! You know I do not lie. There are two or three whole Books writ since
the King's return, that will witness against you, if you should gainsay me. And
so would Mr. Vicars; who has nothing to affrighten Neuters withal but such
tales as this; that a certain Malignant being filled with terrors on his
deathbed repented of his crime; obtained assurance of Pardon from the Lord;
saw Christ himself in a Vision, who told him he had a cause on earth, and that
the Parliament of England defended it, and shortly none of those wicked
Ministers, that had mislead Gods people, should be left among them.


N. C. I renounce all those Books; and hate that the cause should be served
with such stories of Gods judgments.


C. I wish it be because Christ taught you better, and not merely because
experience has a little instructed you, that this weapon may be turned against
you, and wound your side as well as ours. I my self could tell you strange but
true Misfortunes that have besaln some of your way; which I will not interpret
to the justifying of our cause or the condemning yours. I will only remember
how you were wont to clamor, if any man took notice of unusual calamities upon
any of you; and to cry Blasphemy, Blasphemy: Though you were so prone to cry
Providence, Providence, when the like betided any of us. Mr. W. Bridges for
instance, when the converted Gentleman spoke of some remarkable strokes upon
three great Persons, Answer to Loyal Convert. p. 12.
whose names I will not so much as mention, replied in a great passion; Surely,
were not profaneness and blasphemy as toys and trifles among you, you durst
not speak much less print such blasphemies as these. Solomon says, that all
things fall alike to all, and the same condition (in regard of outward things)
is to the just as to the wicked: As is the good so is the sinner and he that
swears, as he that fears an Oath: There is one event to All. For my part; I
embrace this Doctrine with all my Soul; for a greater than Solomon has taught
me, not to construe events according to my own fancy, and as will best promote
and justify my opinion: Only I wish, you would not alter your mind when the
persons are altered; and make one rule for us and another for your selves.


N. C. No. You and I are well agreed in this.


C. Thank you for nothing. When you see that which you took to be a sharp sword
prove but a wooden Dagger, you throw it away. Such is the great wisdom and
knowledge you brag of. You first furiously lay about you, not regarding whether
you hit friend or foe; and when you have hurt both alike, then you repent and
say, you will do so no more. I pray God you be as good as your word. But I much
fear you will prove like King Saul, who when he heard David was in Keilah,
said, Now God has delivered him into my hands, for he is shut in a City that
has Gates and Bars. And though he saw he was deceived, yet grew never a whit
the wiser; but when his Enemy was in a New strait, concluded again that God had
intrapped him, and would not let him escape his Vengeance: According to the old
saying, They that have forward desires fall into Dreams, although they do not
sleep.


N. C. We have done I assure you, with expounding the meaning of Gods
Providence: And shall not pry any more into his hidden Counsels.


C. Very good. What piece of knowledge then have you to brag of more than
others? Unless you mean some secrets which you keep to your selves: Special and
extraordinary Excitations, and Christian Inspirations to make a Reformation
without the calling of the Supreme Magistrate, as Mr. Saltmarsh's words are: An
inward call from God giving you leave to break his Law, or as Mr. Bridge
expresses it, to make a change, but not in a legal way. This I confess is a
Trick, but no such Mystery; a new device, but no great Secret. There is none of
us all but can easily learn it; and that we do not, is not because we have not
so much Wit, but because we have more Conscience.


N. C. No body ever pretended to such knowledge.


C. Yes but there did. Mr. Saltmarsh confesses that the early setting forth of
private men in the work of Reformation is apt to exceed to a tumultuous motion:
Yet for all that he would not put them so far behind, as that they should lie,
Animad v. (on Mr. Fullers Sermon.) dedicated to the Assembly.
like the Lame and Diseased at the Pool of B. thesda, waiting till a Supreme
Power come among them. No, there are many public engagements which they are
capable of, and which Providence will often guide them unto: as in finding
Outways of Facilitation, and Advancements for the business; beside some other
Accana, and secret Preparations. What these Out-ways were, into which a man
might lash and so skip over many difficulties, he leaves us to guess. You may
be sure they are not the Common high-road of the King of Heaven; as the Reply
tells him. His Arcana also he keeps to himself, as if he was one of Heavens
close Committee, and so bound to Secrecy. But the most likely person to
disclose these Mysteries and reveal the Arcana (if he be not sworn to secrecy
too) is Mr. Bridge; of whom you may enquire. And perhaps he will think himself
much beholden to you for teaching him a New Phrase which he has not yet used;
Out-wayes of Facilitation of the great and hard work now at hand. These
Out-wayes will do knight service, when they come to the business of restraining
the higher powers, and turning the still people to war and blood


N. C. You are resolved I see, to lead me out of my way* and to take one
occasion or other to divert me from the main business.


C. We are in our way yet. But I was going I confess to lead you to the dancing
on the ropes, and then indeed you might have taken occasion to complain.


N. C. I think you are out of your wits. Can you tell what you was going to
say?


C. I was thinking with my self, what Out-wayes the dancers upon the ropes
could find; to whom Mr. Bridge compares Reformers. They have no Out-wayes sure,
but what may endanger to lead them out of the world.


N. C. Would you would rest a while and take a nap: For I doubt you have heated
your Brain by this long discourse, and so begin to talk idly.


C. I understand my self well enough; and call to mind that I should indeed
have said, Walking (which is more becoming the gravity of Reformers) not
dancing on the Rope. For his words are these (when he is exhorting the
Parliament to lay the Stones of Reformation with most exactness) You see that
when a man walks upon the Rope, he carries a pole in his hand to sway him, and
he looks diligently to his sect, because if he fail be cannot mend his
miscarriage, And I say, that in this work of Reformation if there be the least
slip, Sermon before the Commons, 29. Nov. 1643. p. 21.22.
it will be a hard thing to recover it, when once a Nation is settled in that
miscarriage. Surely therefore the work is to be done with the most exactness.


N. C. Well, and does he not say true?


C. I should indeed have considered, that Out-wayes are only to facilitate your
getting the work of Reformation into your hands. When you are about it, then
Out-wayes are dangerous. All must be done by the Rule and by Line (or in a new
phrase by Rope) according to the Word. In brief; I recollect now that this is
the Out-waying time, in order to those better times of Walking upon the Rope.
But I pray, What was it that I diverted you from?


N. C. Oh, now I see you are come to your self. And will you then ever hear me
speak a Sentence or two more -- I thank you for this small silence. You have
snapt, of late, at my words too hastily; and cut me short in what I was going
to say; which was plainly this. We observe the Multitude that run in your way
to be a company of blind Ignorant Creatures, that have scarce a dram of the
saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the Mysteries of our Religion. Nor do they
care to know these things; but only content themselves to come to Church and
say their Prayers, and learn their Catechism, and hear perhaps a Sermon, which
they presently forget. Whereas our People are very inquisitive after knowledge,
and can discourse rarely of matters of Religion, and repeat Sermons; and
besides, are very careful to know the pure Gospel-way of Worshipping God. And,
truly, when I consider things well, I cannot but wonder how sottish many of
your Conformable creatures are, who never scruple any thing, and would without
all doubt conform to the grossest Superstition and Popery; should it be
enjoined. But we are very tender, and solicitous as you your selves confess to
have pure Ordinances, and to know the very mind and way of God.


C. I perceive you have little or nothing more to say of this matter; therefore
I pray let me tell you what I think. I cannot deny that many of our common
People are very Ignorant: Nay, they themselves are sensible of it and will
confess it. But I must add; that yours are generally Ignorant too, only think
themselves very knowing. Now which of these think you are the worse; they that
are Ignorant but humble and void of self-conceit; or they that are as Ignorant,
but very Proud and conceited of their Knowledge? Nay, bold and confident of
their own skill, taking upon them to instruct their betters, to dispute with
our Ministers, and that as if they were their Equals if not Superiors; without
any respect to their learning or office? For I must tell you withal, that as
to their duty toward God and man; a great number of those, on whom you bestow
only your pity, and esteem Ignorant creatures; have more understanding, at
least more conscience than many of those that sigh over them.


They are more reverent in their Devotions and addresses to God; more
respectful in their behavior to his Ministers; more obedient to their
Governors; more humble and modest before all their betters; and, as far as I
can see, more just and charitable toward all men: And therefore are in a better
disposition to learn more and increase in knowledge, than your prating
self-conceited people. And if there be such Effects as these of the little
knowledge that you despise; and sew better fruits than talkativeness, malepert
contradictions of their Elders, censuring and contemning the ignorance of
others, from that great high knowledge which you boast of, I would fain know
which of these you judge are like to be most saving. But of these things perhaps
we may have occasion to discourse some other time. As for the Rest; I flatly
deny that your people are more knowing. For of those that are the most earnest
for pure Ordinances, Gospel Worship, and cry out upon our Liturgy, nay abhor
it, as Superstitions, Popish, Idolatrous, etc. there is not one in an hundred
that knows what those words mean. Be but so true to your self and studious to
understand men aright, as to ask the next you meet, and bid them deal plainly
and freely with you, what Popery, Superstition or Will Worship is; and I doubt
not you will find they are like a company of Piggs running after an old Sow
(which falls a grunting) squeaking and making a fearful cry they know not for
what.

N. C. You use a very homely Similitude.


C. It may pass well enough in common talk, and was the first that came to hand
to represent the rude and senseless noise which the multitude make with those
words, only by imitation.


N. C. But you compare them to Swine.


C. No. I only compare their cries together, which are both alike unreasonable.
Do but ask for instance what they mean by Popery: and some of these Ignorant
Zealots will tell you, it is to do that which is practiced in the Church of
Rome: Which is no better than the voice of a Brute. If this be Popery, all our
Religion is Popery. We must turn Jews, or Turks, or Pagans, that we may not be
Papists. And yet that will not do neither; for this Popery will still be found
among us, that we pray and give thanks to God, which are actions common to all
the world with the Church of Rome.


N. C. You need not have spent one word to confute such a gross Conceit as this.


C. True. But this sottish Definition of Popery you will be sure to meet withal
from some, if you will but take the pains to enquire. Others it is like will
tell you, that it is Popery to do any thing after that manner that the Papists
do: And then we must never kneel, nor lift up our eyes or our hands, nor meet
together in a Church --


N. C. Why do you fetch such a sigh?


C. I sigh to think of the intolerable blockishness of those people that will
pretend to know all the Mysteries of God. For others, who think themselves more
wise than the rest, will tell you that to use any ceremonies in use among them,
is certainly Popish. And then we must use none at all (and so make no outward
expression of Religious devotion, which must be done in some manner or other)
or else they must be such as are confessedly absurd and ridiculons. Nay all
civil Ceremonies and Customs will be forbidden us in time by these men. At
least for every thing that they hate, this shall be the name, Popish,
Antichristian, or Babylonish. For O. C. himself, True Catalogue p. 15.
I well remember, could not be carried to his grave without their clamours;
that it was a needless, chargeable, Popish funeral solemnity; because there was
black Velvet, a Bed of State, and a Waxen Image Nay, let Monareby look to it
self, for that is Popish and Antichristian too in such men's opinion, and this
Kingdom one of the Ten Horns of the Beast. And down shall my Lord Mayor go also
(when they are able) as an Image of that Government; together with all the pomp
and foolery which attends him; as their words formerly were.


N. C. I hope there are no such dangerous persons now among us.


C It Is well if there be not. But you will certainly find some who will tell
you, that all Ceremonies invented by the Pope are Popish; and think themselves,
much wiser than their Neighbors if upon this ground they furiously rage against
our Church. But the best of it is, that this is nothing to the purpose: For
none of ours were invented by him. The Cross was used among Christian people
long before the name or power of the Pope was heard of: And so was kneeling;
and white garments, and bowing the body in adoration of our Blessed Savior.


N. C. But I have heard some say, that it is Popish to do any thing of this
nature but what is prescribed by the Word.


C. This is as sottish as all the rest. For it supposes, both that nothing may
be done in or about the worship of God, but what we have a Command for, in Holy
Scripture; and that the Pope and his followers, are the only persons who have
done any thing not prescribed there. Else why should they call it Popish, or
Romish, more than Patriarkish, or Greekish?


N. C. Is not the Supposal true?


C. No. All the ancient Christians did many things in Divine worship appointed
by the Scriptures, for which they had no particular prescription there. Nay,
such is your Ignorance, you your selves do so too and never mind it. For what
direction is there to make a new prayer twice or thrice a day? And one Prayer
before the Sermon, and another after? To receive the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood in the morning and not after Supper? To deliver it into the hands of
every person that receives it, with Prayer for him, or Exhortation to him, or
both? --


N. C. Pray stay. You will let nothing at all be Popish, if you be let alone:
At least nothing of this Nature.


C. Yes. We are taught by our Divines, that, to ordain such a multitude of
Ceremonies, as will employ most of our thoughts and care in time of Divine
Service how to do them aright; deserves that name. Or if we make any of them an
essential part of Gods worship, or give them power to obtain pardon for us, or
work grace in us: Or, lastly, it we make them Apostolical and necessary
Commands that bind the Conscience as the Laws of God do: Then call them Popish
and Antichristian, or what you please.


N. C. You say well: And I confess I know a little more than I did.


C. O that you would help to reduce those silly, and many of them I hope
well-meaning souls, who through mere Ignorance and blind prejudice are departed
from the grave and sober way of serving God among us, to follow their own vain
fancies; and perhaps conceit they are Witnessing against Popery and the ways
of Antichrist; that is, against they know not what.


N. C. I am not come so far yet; nor hold my self able to Witness against such
persons; but this I can say, that all is not Popery which is so called.


C. Nor Superstition neither. Though with the same doltish Ignorance, they
charge us with that vice which they are most guilty of themselves and do not
know it: As appears by what I told you at our last meeting.


N. C. They like not your definition of Superstition.


C. That Is because they like nothing that we say: And because it makes them so
plainly guilty of that which they condemn. But do they like Mr. Calvin's
definition of it better?


N. C. What is it?


C. You may have met it is possible with his Institutions, for they have been
long in the English Tongue. There he tells you almost in the beginning of the
Book, Book 1. chap. 12. page 41.
that as Religion has its name from binding, and is set as contrary to
wandering Liberty; because it binds men up, and prescribes bounds and limits to
them, in which true Piety consists: So Superstition has its name from going
beyond all measures; being a humor that will not be bounded nor limited; or as
his very words are, that not being contented with the manner and order
prescribed, heapeth up together a superfluous and order prescribed, heapeth up
together a superfluous number of vain things. Do you like this, I say, or no?
If you do, then I will show you that as in Prayers, so in other holy Duties,
your humor is to keep no measure nor order, but to heap up one superfluous
thing upon another: No set Form can content it, no limits or bounds can hold
it; but it is still inventing something new to please your selves and others;
and then you fancy God is pleased, because you are. I know you have a conceit
that you keep your selves within the limits of the Word, and that you dare not
for a world stir beyond the confines which God prescribes: But this only makes
your Ignorance appear the more gross, as I will plainly show you.


N. C. I guess by what you said the last time whereabouts you will be; but it
will turn us too much out of our way to enter into that discourse at this time.


C. Well then, I Will let it alone till you give another occasion. And the
rather, because I would have you go as soon as may be, and ask what
Will Worship is? That Is another word in these Witnesses mouths, of as much
efficacy and as little sense as all the rest, for when they are angry, they
charge one another with it as well as us. The Independents were wont to say,
that it was Will Worship to set up the office of Ruling Elders in the Church:
And I can show you one that calls the Church Covenant, requiring men to give
some signs of grace, and all the way of Admission of Members into Independent
Congregations, by the very same Name. And therefore I believe you will soon
leave such to wrangle it out; and go and ask some others, what they mean to
bawl so against Forms. But I believe there is not one of a thousand can give a
reason, why he may not as well accuse the whole frame of Nature as our Liturgy
upon this account. Especially if you tell him that there is nothing in Heaven
or Earth but has a Form. That when we understand, it is by forming some
conceptions in our Mind; and that we form our Speech or words to make our
conceptions understood by others. And therefore even your Prayers must be in a
Form, or else they are senseless stuff; a mere noise and sound that no body can
understand.


N. C. We are only against set Forms.


C. And so many of your Prayers have none at all; but are then thought most
heavenly, when they are most confused; and to have much of God in them when
they have nothing of Man. For the common word is, I like not Forms, etc. He
still sticks in Forms: He is a dull formal man: Which are Phrases as set and
stinted as our Prayers. They are never out of use, but repeated an hundred
times a day. No repetitions they think are bad, but only of the same Prayers;
nor any other constant Forms unlawful, no not of railing and reviling, but only
those of Divine Service. These they leave to the wicked, and take the other to
themselves.


N. C. Pray do not say so.


C. I must say more than that. They hate a Form of Prayer, but love to pray in
these reviling forms of speech. For they tell God, how a Superstitious and
Antichristian way of worship has justled out his own Institutions. That men
worship the Graven Images of their own inventions. That Gebal, Ammon, and
Amalek are risen up against them. And the people are taught to go and spread
their anger and threatenings before the Lord: And to tell him, that it is an
angry time, a persecuting time, a day of great wrath; abundance of anger and
wrath, Seasonable Truths, p. 180 182, 184.
and hatred and malice in the bearts of men against the people of God at this
day: Or as Mr. B. Now
his language is in another place, Popish men have laid their net privily for
us; and we may go to Christ and say, Fullness of Christ, p. 37.
Lord pull us out of the net that they have laid for us, for thou art our
strength. And, for any thing I can see, much of that they call the Power of
Prayer consists in such Forms as these.


N. C. Alas! You know not what that power is.


C. I know it is just such another word as Form, which they use without any
certain-sense, as they are wont to do the Apostles words concerning a Form of
Godliness without the Power of it. This Form of Godliness if you will believe
some, is Praying by a set Form Answer of the Ministers of New Engl. to the
first Position, p. 2.
, and then the Power of Godliness, must be praying without one.


N. C. It cannot be.


C. It is as I tell you. And this is one of the reasons that the world hate the
Saints; for that the Saints are a praying people: You must not mistake: Forms
of Prayer they can endure, Seasona. Truths, p. 168.
but the Power of Prayer they cannot bear. They are Mr. B. his words.


N. C. No indeed, not if it consist of such railing language as you speak of:
But neither you, nor I, it is like, apprehend his meaning.


C. Do you know what he means when he gives this for another reason of the
hatred of the world to the Saints; that they destroy their Gods, destroy their
Idols. Men of all things cannot endure to have their Gods destroyed: now the
people of God do destroy the Gods of the wicked, no wonder therefore that they
are so provoked against the Saints and people of God. Ib. p. 167.



N. C. Not I.


C. Then you are very dull. He means our Worship, which they are wont to rail
upon in those terms also, calling it Idolatry, worshipping the Golden Calves,
and setting up new Gods: which are such rude and beastly Clamours, that I am
loath to foul my mouth with naming them. They are only vile and abominable
Phrases which every Ignorant wretch can serve himself of, when he lists to
reproach his Neighbors. At first the Presbyterians called Conformity to the
Innovations (as they were styled by them) Worshipping the Golden Calves.
Afterward the Independents called the Directory, the Golden Calves of Jeroboam;
Edw. Gangr. 1 part. p. 36.52.
and affirmed that this order to help in the way of Worship was a breach of the
second Commandment. Nay, Mr. Burton, one of the Witnesses said, that to make a
Law about Religion was to set up the Golden Calves, or Nebuch adnezzar's Image:
Or if you will have another Phrase for it, to choose new Gods and then was war
in the Gates, Ib. p. 25.
as an Independent Preacher said at Chester when they were about to choose
Lay Elders. But to be even with them, the Presbyterians threw those Phrases
back again in their faces, and asked the five Brethren: Is the Golden Calf of
Independency and Democracy come out of it self, without Aarons making it? And
in conclusion one Web (as the same man tells us) called the Scripture it self;
that Golden Calf, and Brazen, Antapologia, p. 188.
Serpent which set at variance King and Parliament and Kingdom against Kingdom,
and said, Things would never do well, till the Golden Calf and Brazen Serpent
were beaten in pieces *. No wonder therefore, if the same man said, Gangr. part
1. p. 86.
The Scottish Nation was the Babylonish-Beast, Ib. p. 87.


N. C. I should not have been offended if you had caled such men as these,
Beasts; and said they bellowed or brayed (or what you please) against your
worship; Speaking evil of those things, which they know not. But you are not
Ignorant, I hope, that we have a more knowing people than these, who are truly
Religious and mind serious things.


C. What is this to the purpose? I ask for a Pick-ax and you bring me a Spade.
We are not talking of some select persons, but of the Multitude; which I affirm
are grossly Ignorant. Yet since you lead me to it, I must tell you there are
Serious as well as slight follies: And I have reason to think there are diverse
of those who are more sober than those we now spoke of, and pass for very
knowing Christians, that have small skill in any thing but Phrases. For what
greater token can there be of Ignorance than either not to understand what a
man means, or elso to slight and undervalue what he says, if he declare the
Doctrine of Christianity in plain and simple words? Nay to complain as if
Religion were lost and the Gospel gone, if we leave off their Forms of Speech
and beloved Phrases?


N. C. Now I scarce know what you mean?


C. Do you not remember what a noise and clutter there was, when Mr. Baxter
began to speak more intelligibly about some weighty things in Christianity,
than others did?


N. C. Yes very well. Some thought he taught a new way of Religion, and led us
from Christ to the Law again.


C. The reason was because he put them very much out of the rode of their
Phrases. This made them fear Christ would be taken away from them; and free
Grace be despised, and a Covenant of works restored. And for the very same
cause they raise such a dust now against many of our Ministers. They do not
hear them talk of getting into Christ, and getting an interest in Christ; and
that for this end they must get Faith, and go to the promise, and eye Christ in
the promise, and close with him in the promise, and lay themselves flat upon
the promise; and go out of themselves that the promise may enter: All which you
think are very mysterious things, because you are Ignorant; for let all the
sense that is contained in any of these forms, be delivered in proper plain and
easy words, and you despise it as a thing of naught. Though you talk of
Gospel Light, and Gospel-discoveries, and Gospel-manifestations, yet there is
little or nothing all this while to be known or understood. Religion you will
have to be such a Mystery, that if a man thinks he understands it, he ought to
conclude he is not acquainted with it. It is a certain sign a man has no skill
in it, if he imagine he knows the plain meaning of it. It must be looked upon
as a Great something: A thing to be star'd at and admired, but no body knows
what: At least you cannot clearly discover it to us, not withstanding all the
brags we hear of light and discoveries.

Hence it is (which is a great argument of their Ignorance) that great numbers
of your Religious people, have been so easily perverted and turned to the
wildest Sects; when as the clearest Reason that our men can speak will not
convince them. What multitudes have soon turned Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Familists, and Behemists; but how few, and with what difficulty, can be brought
to the Church of England? This is an evident proof to all considering men that
they can be made in love with any thing but only Reason: And that a Disciple of
Jackpudding shall lead greater troops after him, than the gravest Divine. They
will sooner listen to a fancy, and are more ready to embrace another pack of
new Phrases; than the soberest sense and the wisest Instructions that can be
spoken.

There is a famous and undeniable instance of it in the other, and as you
think, the Purer England. Was it not a wonder that the whole Church of Bostou
(some few excepted) should become Converts on a sudden to a daring woman, and
be infected with her damnable Opinions? And that, You may find these very words
in the proceedings of the General Court holden at New-Town, Oct. 2. 1637.
against Mrs Hutchinson and others, p. 32.40, 65, 66.
though they were esteemed, Wise, sober and wellgrounded Christians; and some
of her opinions also had the whole Current of Scripture against them? Nay, they
looked upon her as a Prophetess (such were her spiritual gifts) raised up of
God for some great work now at hand, as the calling of the Jews, etc. So as she
had more resort to her for Counsel about matters of Conscience, and clearing up
men's Spiritual Estates, than any Minister, (I might say all the Elders) in the
Country. This they impute to the craft of this American Jezabel: But I have
reason to think the truer cause was the Ignorance of these knowing people; who
were easily cheated by her new Phrases, and soft Doctrines concerning Free
Grace, glorious light, and holding forth naked Christ: Especially with such
pretended. v. Mr. Welds preface, and Error, 25.33.38, 48, 71. etc.
Mysteries as these, that, Christ is the New Creature; that we may have all
graces and yet want Christ. That there can be no true closing with Christ in a
premise that has a qualification or condition expressed; that conditional
promises are Lagat, and therefore no true comfort can be had from them. That to
act by virtue of, or in obedience to, a Command is Legal; that to Evidence
Justification by Sanctification or Graces, savours of Rome; that the Witness of
the Spirit is merely immediate, without any respect to the Word, or omeurrence
with it; that the Seal of the Spirit is limited to this immediate Witness, and
does never witness to any work of grace, or any conclusions of ours. And
finally, that the immediate. Revelation of my good estate. without any respect
to the Scriptures, is as clear to me, as the voice of God from Heaven to Saint
Paul.


N. C. There was Witcheraft sure in the business.


C. Yes; of sweet Doctrines, and glorious phrases: The pleasing murmur of
mysteries and spirituality, of immediate Sealing and witnessing; of Revelations
and manifestations of the Spirit. These bewitched the wisest and soberest and
well-grounded Christians (because in truth they were Ignorant, and stood upon
the ground of fancy and imagination) who would have stopped their ears like the
deaf Adder to the charms of sober reason, should a man have charmed never so
wisely. Nor could they ever be dis-inchanted by all the Arguments and
persuasions of all the Ministers in that Country, but she kept her strength and
reputation, even among the people of God, Ib. page ult.
till the hand of Civil justice laid hold of her; and then she began evidently
to deeline, and the faithful to be freed from her forgeries. So wholesome
sometime is a little severity: And so much is the force of Civil Authority with
these people, above the sharpest Arguments of Divines. For they opposed the
Spirit, and their manifestations and illuminations, to all their Minister's
Reasons; which would do no service at the bar of the Court of Justice, where
they understood none of this language. And now I speak of the Manifestations of
the Spirit, it is very strange to me, that you should generally expect the Holy
Ghost should do for you, what Christ promised at his parting to the Twelve
Apostles; teach you all things, and guide you into all truth. It is another
sign of great Ignorance in you, and of insincerity I doubt, in many of your
Ministers; who are afraid to dispossess you of this conceit, and to instruct
you in the plain difference between these times and those; but suffer, if not
teach, you to apply to your selves whatsoever our Savior spoke to the Apostles
alone. A thing which is so palpable, that I cannot but wonder men should so
pervert the Scripture; especially when they see there is no such thing, but
that those whom they account the people of God, are of several, nay contrary
minds. And that all cannot be in the right, and yet none they think devoid of
the Spirit, to teach them all things and lead them into all truth. This sure
makes so many think every strong and unusual motion they find within them, is
the work and operation of the Spirit of God. And that every place of Scripture
that comes on a sudden into their mind, is darted from Heaven and the immediate
dictate of the Holy Ghost: Though never so impertinently applied to their
present occasions. And that all the ardent affections and transports, and
raptures they have in prayer or at other seasons, are likewise Inspirations
from above; and that now they are filled with the Holy Ghost. Which is a gross
and ignorant Conclusion, in my opinion; for want of such obvious considerations
as these; that such heats and flights are common to them with the Heathen
Poets, and excellent Orators; and that bad men have had them as well as the
best: As I am able to show you, if you please.


N. C. Some other time if you will; for we have spent now a great deal in this
kind of discourse.


C. Let me tell you notwithstanding, that this, I believe, is one reason that
your people are filled with so many doubts, jealousies, and fears of being
deserted. When they have not these heats; then they think the Spirit is gone;
and how to comfort them, it is hard to tell, till they return again. And now I
mention this, give me leave to tell you, it is another evidence of great
Ignorance, That the minds of well meaning and honest-hearted people among you
are full of so many scruples, and so uncertain what to resolve on all
occasions. You may say perhaps it is, because their consciences are tender, and
very careful and wary what they do: And so you may say when you see a Blind man
tremble and walk softly, and feel his way at every step with his staff, that he
is, a very Wary man; when it is not Caution but his want of sight that makes
him so diffident. And indeed how is it possible they should have any true
assurance in any case, when it is to hard if not impossible, to be resolved in
the great question of all, What a man must do to be saved; and attain the
satisfaction of knowing that be has an interest in Christ? To this, the most
admired Divines reply, that a man can have no comfort but only by going to the
promise. O, but says the poor Soul (according as it is taught) I dare not so
much as look to the promise, Mr. Th. Hooker's Poor Doubting Christian drawn to
Christ. p. 30.
I cannot believe it. To this the Answer is (p. 115.) That a man shall never
believe on these terms, if he look to have faith besore he go to the promise.
For thou must not have faith and then go to the promise; but, must first go to
the Promise for the power of that faith; from it thou must receive power to
believe. But then how shall the Soul go without Faith? Will a Promise do him
any good unless he believe it to be the very Word of God, on which he should
trust? This is an unanswerable difficulty, as far as I can find. These Divines
cannot tell him how he should go to the promise since it is confessed he must
go by Faith, and if be look to have faith before be go to the promise, he will
never have it. They only tell him over again p. 117. and if it will do, well
and good: That we must not bring faith to the Promise; but receive faith from
it to believe. Thus the poor Soul is sent to the promise for Faith, and back
again to says to lay hold on the Promise; but how to do that who can tell? It
must first go to the promise to fetch faith; and yet how should it go, if it
have no faith? In this case how should a man choose but be full of scruples, and
like one that is bewildred and lost, not knowing what will become of him?


N. C. I have read the Book, for it uses to be one of the first that is
recommended to us, and as I remember he tells you a little after, How a Soul
should get to the promise.


C. I thank you for remembering me of it. He moves indeed that question p. 144.
But methinks he only leads a man into a worse Labyrinth. For these are the
Rules to be observed how the Soul may get to the Promise. First, Throw off all
power and ability in thy self. Let the beart lie still, till the wind and tide
and promise come, and that will carry thee. And yet the Second Rule (which
immediately follows) is this, which contradicts the former: Bring the promise
home to thy heart, that the promise may bring thy heart to it. How is this
possible? I would know how to get to the promise; and I am told I must lie
still, that the promise may come to me. And yet at the next breath I am sent to
bring the promise home to my heart; which supposes I must go to fetch it. What
a case am I in now? What Direction can he give me to bring me out of these
Briars? Why? To answer this doubt, the only way is to unsay this in the third
Rule, which supposes the Promise will come of it self, and that I need not
bring it home: For it runs in these words; When the promise is thus come home
to thee, and thou see the sufficiency and the Authority of it; then all thou
have to do is this In the stream of that promise, be carried home to the
promise, p. 149.


N. C. I can make no sense of it.


C. Nor I neither. But the thing he seems to aims is this; that a man must only
wait till Christ assures him that he had made all the promises to him. For thus
he explains the business. Jacob would not believe that Joseph was alive till he
saw the Chariots that were come for him. These sent from Joseph to Jacob,
brought Jacob to Joseph. So every believing Soul is poor and feeble; disabled
to go to God and to believe in the Lord Jesus. Doubting-Christian drawn to
Christ. p. 148.150.
Therefore be must look to the Chariots of Israel first (it should be of Joseph
according to the resemblance) and that will convey him to the promise: and when
the chariots are come, get up into them: The Lord Jesus is gone to heaven and
has sent these chariots for thee; therefore get thee up, and say, Lord, take
me up with thee. And so they did: They got up into I know not what fiery
Chariots, and mounted into the Air, and there fancied they saw the Lord Jesus
immediately revealing himself to them; and so carrying them to the promise, the
absolute promise. And I verily believe these Doctrines were they from whence
the American Jezabel (as they called her) extracted her Poisons, and by which
the people were prepared, to drink of the cup of her Fornication; persuading
themselves that a man is united to Christ and justified without Faith, that
Faith is not a receiving him, but discerning be has received him already; that
a man is united to Christ only by the work of the Spirit upon him, without any
act of his; that there is a testimony of the Spirit and a voice unto the Soul,
merely immediate, without any respect unto, or concurrence with the word. And
that there are distinct seasons of the workings of the several Persons; so that
a Soul may be said to be so long under the work of the Father and not the Sons;
and so long under the work of the Son, and not under the Spirit. And in
conclusion, that a man is not effectually converted till he has full
assurance, and that this is given immediately; all the activity of a Believer
being only to act to sin. All these, I say, are the plain sense (if there be
any at all in this Book) of what he delivered in more obscure words.


N. C. Pray go not about to prove this. For my head begins to turn round
already, merely with the scent of these intoxicating ingredients.


C. If these Doctrines had been broacht by any of us, you would have found out
our picture long ago in the Revelation, and said, that the Church of New
England was Thyatira, and this the Jezabel, which called her self a Prophetess:
and that such Divines as these were the Prophets of Baal, the Priests of
Jezabel, and these Doctrines the Doctrines of Devils. All which you might have
done with a greater color and show of reason, than apply these names to our
Priests. But you are favorable to one another; and wink at such Books as
these, provided, the Authors be Nonconfurmists; and cannot (as you ignorantly
speak) bow to Baal.


N. C. I am glad there are none of these Doctrines here in this England.


C. Those Books are here, and highly admired by such sound Believers, as take
all for Gospel that some men say; but can find nothing of Christ among those
that speak sense and make the Doctrine of Christ intelligible. Nay, I can find
you Disciples of such Authors as these among your Preachers; who will sometimes
tell you that Christ will do all for you; Sips of sweetness, or Cons. for weak
Believers, by John Durant, 1662.
and then tell you presently that something must be done by you. Thus one of
them introduces the Soul complaining, That the Duggs of Divine love are full,
but I cannot suck. Answer, Be of good comfort, Christ will not only open his
Bosom, but thy Mouth. But I cannot fetch out the Milk that lies in his Breast;
I am but weak. Answer, Christ is sweet; and with his finger be will force out
the Milk of Mercy into thy Mouth; if thou can but open thy Mouth. What need
he have made an if of it, if Christ would open its mouth? and if he will do
that and every thing else, why did he not make an end of the business in one
word, and say, All the Activity of Believers is to act to sin? And so comfort
the believing Ewes, who are big with young in a sinful sense, and say --


N. C. We talked a little while ago of some men's bellowing and braying, and now
you are going to fall a bleating.


C. You are very pleasant. I hope then it will not offend you, to let you know
that I was giving you the explication which this man makes of those words in
Isaiah 40.11. I will gently lead those that are with young, that is, says he
(according to the admirable way, Page 102, 103.
now in fashion, of expounding the holy Writ) Christ will be very kind to those
Saints that step aside (which is called whoring in Scripture) and deal gently
with those who are big with young in a sinful sense; whom, I was going to tell
you he comforts thus: O ye sinning Ewes, who have been big with young, has not
be gone after you, and furned you, and laid you upon his shoulders rejoicing
Page 114. The very Phrase of Mr. Hooker. Though thou can not find the way to
heaven, yet he will find thee, etc. and lay thy Soul upon his shoulders, i. e.
upon the Riches of the freeness of his Grace, p. 149, 150.
? It may be thou have been wandering like Dinah from thy fathers house, and art
big with young, and afraid to go home. But fear not; go and try; be will not
cast you out of doors. Though you come with big bellies (to keep to the
Metaphor) he will deal gently with thee, though with young. p. 119.


N. C. We have followed these Ewes, or Goats, or what you do please to call
them, too far.


C. It Is true. But at first I intended only to tell you, how he describes weak
believers: Who have, as Divines say, the Faith of Adberence; they will stick to
Christ as theirs; but they want a faith of Evidence, they cannot see themselves
to be his. p. 18.


N. C. These Divines speak Nonsense.


C. Judge then in what uncertainty the Disciples of these Divines live, who
never tell them plainly what Faith is. And what a strange blindness they labor
with, who cannot see (as they speak) that they are Christ's; though they
persuade themselves that he is theirs. Nor do I see what satisfaction they are
like to receive in particular cases, any more than in this, the greatest of
all. Your Doctrine seems to me to be so obscure, that it is hard to come to any
solid setlement or peace of mind. One of your Rules, for instance, is that we
must have a warrant from the word of God for every thing we do: If there be
neither Precept nor Practice that we can find there to justify an action we
intend, it must not be done. This without doubt has wosully insuared your
peoples Consciences, and is one great reason they are so full of fears and
scruples: They have been taught not to rely upon impartial Reason, but to seek
still for a place of holy Scripture to be their guide and warrant. So Mr. W.
Bradshaw (a famous Divine, Defense of his Book of Lots against Mr. Balmford.
whose name I know you reverence) confessed to Mr. Gataker; that he was often
troubled to satisfy some in their Cases propounded to him, though he gave them
never so good reason for his Resolutions, because they would not therewith be
satisfied, unless he could produce some place in Scripture for every particular
Thus infinite perplexities, doubts, and scrupulosities must needs arise in men's
minds (as Mr. R. Hooker well expresses it) and stops and rubs without any end
be cast into the course of men's lives concerning their ordinary and civil
affairs, if the light of Reason shall be suppressed; and men shall be
constrained, burn it never so clearly, not to proceed by it in ought they are
to do, till they have had solemn access, first to the written Word, and fetched
light from some particular sentence in it, for the farther confirmation of them
therein. And thus I may add, the Scripture came to be basely wrested and bended
from its proper sense and meaning, to serve their particular occasions. And, in
their great Ignorance, they went away better satisfied with a fanciful and
impertinent application of it to their present business; than if the soundest
Reason in the world had been offered to them. Only, this in time was the
mischief of it, that by this means they found a Way to justify unlawful
Actions, and supported their Confidence in those ways, against the most
evident Reason. But it is possible you will not regard what I say, nor Mr. R.
Hooker neither, being one of those you call blind and superstitious writers.
Let me send you therefore to Mr. Calvin, who tells you that if you understand
not your Liberty about things in themselves indifferent, there will be no quiet
in your Consciences, no end of Superstitions. Many indeed think, says he, that
we are fond to move disputation about the free eating of flesh, about the free
use of days, and garments, and such other small trifles, as they think them:
But there is more weight in them than is commonly thought. For when Consciences
have once cast themselves into the snare, they enter into a long and cumbersome
way, from whence they can afterward find no easy way to get out. If a man
begin to doubt, for instance, whether he may use linen Sheets, Instit. L. 3.
cap. 16. Sect. 7.
Shirts, Handkerchiefs and Napkins; neither will he be out of doubt whether he
may use those of Hemp, and after that of coarser stuff, Nay, he will begin to
weigh with himself whether he cannot sup without Napkins, and be without
Handkerchiefs. If he think dainty meat to be unlawful, at length he shall not
with quietness before the Lord eat either Brown-bread, or Common meats, when he
remembers that he may yet sustain his body with baser food. If he doubt of
pleasant Wine, afterward he will not drink even that which is dead, with peace
of Conscience; last of all, he will not be so bold to touch sweeter and cleaner
water than other. Finally, at the length he will come to this point, to think
it unlawful (as the common saying is) to tread upon a straw lying a cross. For
the Question is not light and small, being no less than this; whether God will
have us do this or that, whose Will ought to guide all our Counsels and Actions.


N. C. I know none that are troubled with such idle scruples as these.


C. That may proceed from the dullness and shortness of their thoughts, which
never let them see into what endless Labyrinths their principles will lead
them. I am sure such rules as these have been so improved by your Ministers,
that in an ignorant zeal, they deny you your lawful Liberties, and lay upon you
unnecessary Restramts. And on the other side entice you to hear controversies
and all manner of Doctrines; saying, that no part of the Counsel of God must be
suppressed, and conceiving the People would be defrauded, if they were not
admitted to these disputations. They make no difference, as my Lord Bacon Wise
and moderate Discourse of Church affairs, printed, 1641. since published in his
Resuscitatio. 1657.
observed long ago, between Milk and Strong-meat, and, to speak again in his
words (which now come to my mind) what I said before in my own; they seek to
prove every thing by express Scripture, or else imagine it is not to be
allowed; and then that constrains them to wrest it, and make conceited
inferences and forced allusions. And as for preaching it has been in a manner
made necessary to sanctify every Ordinance; which is another very ignorant
Conceit. There are many have thought, says he, that it is almost of the
Essence of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to have a Sermon before it. This
has brought Liturgies, and firms of Divine Service into contempt; and made
those to be despised who had not the faculty of constant preaching. As for
those that could not preach at all, they have been always reproached by you in
so strange a manner, that it has been another occasion of corrupting our
Religion, and bringing the holy Ordinance of God into contempt.


N. C. It Is impossible; you should rather say the quite contrary.


C. Hear me a little and then judge. These poor men were in a manner constrained
by your rude clamours, to take upon them to expound the word of God, though
very unable for it; and thereby exposed too early even Preaching it self to the
laughter and scorn of those that had some Wit to discern, but no goodness to
pity their Weakness. They were loath to hear themselves called Idol-Shepherds,
that had Mouths but could not speak a word from God; and so rather than endure
this reproach they entertained the people with their Glosses, Paraphrases, and
Discourses, upon the holy Scripture; and called all the Word of the Lord,
though never so absurd and senseless. Silence I confess had better becom'd them,
than straining themselves to speak what they did not understand: but yet
consider how hard it was to resist the temptation to open their Mouths as often
as they could; whereby at once they might both avoid the contempt and odious
brand of a dumb dog; and also get a great reputation, with the Ignorant
multitude, of an able, painful Minister of God's Word.

And as for those who had some abilities to expound the Scriptures and exhort
the People, they were called upon with so much earnestness to preach the Word
in season and out of season, that they knew not at last what to preach. They
were forced to step up into the Pulpit and make a noise, when they had little
or Nothing to say. By which means the Holy Writings were applied according to
their present fancy; and handled in a very careless and Superficial manner. A
bold Face and a ready Tongue were fain to supply the place of good Reason and
well digested Thoughts. Fire of the Sanctuary uncovered p. 310.
Loudness (as Dr. Corn. Burges once told you) was made to serve instead of
matter. For they found if they were but earnest, the people accounted them very
zealous preachers, and imputed their want of matter to their wisdom and desire
of edifying: Not to their want of study or ability. And it was their custom to
say, He preaches to the Conscience, He stands not upon deep learning: He
reproves sin boldly; and if it was other men's, not theirs, so much the better.
For the very truth is, the people do not love to hear nothing but their duty;
or to hear it frequently repeated. And some taught them in time to call this
Legal-preaching; Gospel Sermons were then to be contrived; nothing but Christ
and free Grace to be preached. And because they grew weary even of hearing
these so often over; there, was a necessity to device Novelties, or else not
preach so many Sermons. The last would by no means be admitted, and so the
Scriptures were to be squeazed, new notions invented, delicate new phrases
coined, and indeed a new Religion made to please the people. Could it, for
instance, have entered into the head of any man, from those words of Isaiah
before mentioned, to talk of Believers being big with sin; and to make such
observations as these, that it is our Glory to be Christ's Ewes; and that when
a man is big with young, and cries O my belly, my belly; here is a point of
comfort, that Christ is sweet to such persons; could a man I say have ever
thought of such things as these, but that he was to strain the words as far as
ever fancy could stretch them; because he must have soon done with the Text,
had he given only the proper sense of it; and the people have soon done with
him, had he not sought out some new Inventions? They were at least to be
courted with some sweet and indearing phrases, and called O Blessed Ewes, O
Believing Ewes, and O Believing Bees, that suck the honey of sin hatred, out of
the Wormwood of sin acted: And told, that Christ accounts their stammerings
sweet: Meih, Meih, says the little one, and the mother counts it Music. And
so no doubt do the people count this puleing sort of preaching. O he, is a
sweet man says one, an affectionate man says a second; a melting preacher
says a third; because he lays them to the Dugs of Christ's Love, and bids them
suck, or but open their mouths and cry Meih; of if they cannot, assures them
Christ will do it for them: Not considering all this while, that he entertains
their fancy with the fullness and freeness of those Breasts, and leaves their
thoughts hanging and admiring there; merely because he is dry and empty
himself, and has nothing else to say.


N. C. O Sir, we find that they are never drawn dry.


C. You must say so, who can fancy you drink up rivers when they give you but a
sip: and see with much satisfaction some Sips of Christ streaming through a
poor creature. Epist. to the Reader.
And truly, as long as there are Streams and Beams, your Poets will never want
rhymes, nor these Preachers stand in need of Reason. For Beaming and Streaming
will do the business at any time, and make them pass for extraordinary men:
Especially if they have the confidence to say as this man does, that Chrtsts
spirit brought that Text (Isaiah 40.11.) to his hand, and that his soul has
tasted some sweetness by what Christ gave in upon that subject. For so you must
believe, if you will be kind and sweet as he is, that the Holy Ghost has made
him overseet of the flock of God and bid him feed his Lambs, and that Christ
gave in to him this sense of the prophets words, that he will be sweet to his
believing Ewes, when they are big with Sin. And indeed it is craftily done to
entitle Christ to their Dotages, for were it not for that; there are scarce any
so stupid that would not despise them. But consider then how modest these men
are; who had rather Christ and his blessed Spirit should bear the reproach of
being Authors of such absurd Glosses and ignorant Comments; than honestly
acknowledge that they are the fruit of their own, Fancies; which would soon be
drained, if they did not supply them with such Inventions.


N. C. There Is no danger of that; for they are very full men, as you have often
heard me say.


C. So they are: very full of impertinent allegations of the holy Scripture, of
tautologies, absurd resemblances, childish fancies, and false reasonings: and
yet withal very full of Confidence and self-Conceit, which, to say the truth,
you are all full of; a very few excepted.


N. C. You are full of wrath.


C. That Is a part of your pride and self-conceit, to call truth by the name of
wrath, passion and bitterness. And to pretend withal that whosoever speaks any
thing against you, is an enemy of God, unacquainted with Religion, a formal,
superstitious, or moral man. But take it as you will, and think of me as you
please, I say that, in my observation, there is scarce a dram of that virtue
called Modesty to be found, I will not say in one, but in a whole Country of
you. You are generally full of your selves, highly conceited of your own
understanding; impatient of contradiction, in so much that my Lord Bacon tells
us he knew some of your way, who thought it a tempting of God to hear or read
what might be said against them. By which you may see this is no new humor,
but runs in the very spirit of the party: who cannot think that any understand
so much as themselves of the things of God; and imagine the Spirit guides them
which must not submit to reason; and that no man has any true Goodness in him,
that is not one of them. Upon which account they ever supposed all men of whom
they had any good thoughts, to be of their way in their hearts; nay, all other
of any parts to be against them, merely for the love of the World. This I will
evidently prove to have been, a long time, the humor, even of your eminent
Professors; if it shall be contradicted. And it is the cause I believe that
they complain so heavily if any man reprove any of them: as if there could
never be found even in good men, something worthy of Reproof; or as if that
which we reprove in them, were an undoubted part of their goodness. But they
will take the liberty, not only to reprove, but to rail upon us, as much as
they please: and say, when they have done, as Mr. Saltmarsh did to the
Assembly, I bope you will pardon me, Epistle Dedicat. before his Book against
Mr. Fuller.
if zeal for the truth make me see another's faults sooner than my own. Nay,
the ordinary people among you have not the least respect to any of our
Minister's understanding and skill, not to say his Office and Calling: but, as
I told you before, will talk and dispute with him, and after that reprove and
censure him as if they were not only his fellows but his judges. Whereas the
very same men would take it extremely ill, should any Minister take upon him to
control or but direct them in matters of their Trade, to which they have
served an Apprenticeship: though far more easy to understand in a short time,
than the Holy Scriptures in many years. Proud saucy Spirits! who undertake to
teach those of whom they should learn: and slight, nay sit in judgment on
those, to whom they ought to give great honor; and to whose judgment in many
cases they should quietly submit.

It was long since the zealous complaint of a holy man (says C. Burges) that
men could no sooner get up their names in the world, Fire of the Sanct*
uncovered p. 68.
and be able readily and confidently to muster up a few places of holy
Scripture nothing to the purpose; but they thought themselves sufficient to
encounter Moses himself, setting upon him as furiously as Dathan and Abiram
ever did. Happy were this Age, had it none of them. To whom it is in vain to
say any thing, but to them whom moderation has yet some hand over, I say this
of the same ancient Father; Their contumacy I beseech you, let us fly; their
madness let us abhor; lest we perish with them in the same vengeance.


N. C. I confess I know some of this spirit; but you grant there are others of
more Moderation, that are eminent for their Piety and all other things, who do
not forget that they are men.


C. Our ears are almost deafned sometimes (as Mr. Rathband, one whom you
valued, says in another case) with the praise of some of these men's eminent
Learning, Piety, Sincerity, Zeal, etc. And truly I believe several of them are
learned men, and such as are modest, meek, humble, peaceable, and I judge them
sincere. But there are great numbers joined with them, who would be thought the
most eminent because most active in that way; who under color of zeal of Gods
glory, hatred of sin, desire of serving God in sincerity; are thrust by an evil
Spirit that has deceived them, into pride, self love, rashness, unnatural
affection; uncharitable surmises, and most unchristian judgment of their
Brethren.


N. C. Methinks you judge, and that very hardly, of others.


C. See your partiality; and that fond Affection you have to your selves, and
one to another. Those are none of my words, but were long ago spoken by several
Ministers of yours (who had some scruples indeed about Ceremonies, yet never
left our Church) against those that separated from it then, as you do now. Is
not this to reject that very thing, when it comes out of our mouths, which you
readily receive when you hear it from one of your own?

But as to the business of Judging others, since you mention it and it is so
much talked of, I openly declare, that I judge no man in things indifferent; as
you are wont to do, and as the Jews judged the Gentiles, and St. Paul himself.
But it is not indifferent whether a man be humble, modest and peaceable or not*
Such I may censure, who, for instance, are disobedient to Authority and despise
their Betters and Governors: And it is your great fault to censure even those
that are obedient, and in things which they profess to believe to be
indifferent. Is it like good Christians think you, to call those Superstitious,
Will-worshippers, Accomplices of the Beast, who declare they do not believe any
Ceremony they use, to be any part of Divine Worship, nor necessary
circumstances of it; but that they may be altered by Authority, to which they
are bound to yield Obedience: And in the mean time to cry out on those who
reprove you for downright Opposition to Authority, for clamor, evil-speaking,
apparent pride, and such like things; which the Laws of Christ judge and
condemn, and tell us are manifest fruits of the flesh? You cannot think so
(sure) unless your understandings be so strangely blinded by the love of your
selves, that the clearest Truth cannot enter, if it show you your errors.
Indeed if a man merely omits to do those things that are commanded; but is not
unruly, cross, clamorous, an opposer of Laws, a maker of Parties, and separate
Congregations, nor in any other behavior unchristian; I think, I ought to
leave him to be judged by Christ, who searches the secrets of men's hearts, and
who only can tell whether it be Weakness of understanding, Interest, Humor,
Love of reputation, and such like Reasons that keep him from obeying Laws; or
pure Conscience and invincible Ignorance. But if he be turbulent, a railer or
reviler, a slighter of human Laws and a Blasphemer of Dignities; if he be one,
that makes Divisions and Offenses, i. e. Sehisms in the Church; not I, but the
Apostle judges such a man, not to be a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, but of
his own belly. Which that he may provide for, he gives good words, flatters the
rich and the great, and is very compliant with all that he hopes to win to be
his followers and friends: And he uses also fair speeches (or as Mr. Tyndals
translation has it, sweet preaching) he praises and commends those that follow
him, he supposes them to be the people of God, and precious ones; he extenuates
their faults and magnifies their good deeds; and so deceives the heart of the
Innocents (as Mr. Tyndal reads it) or, of the simple people: Read the place in
Romans 16.16, 17. where the Apostle not merely bids, but beseeches them to mark
or observe such men as these; and tells you for what end; that they might avoid
them. But how is that possible, unless we judge that they are unfit persons for
our company; and that walk not according to the rule of the Gospel?


N. C. But you should judge then only for your self; and labor to hide and
conceal the faults or errors of your Brethren, For Love covers a multitude of
Sins.


C. Love is to cover what sins may be covered; but some cannot be hid they are
so publicly committed; and Others may not be hid though they could; because
the concealment of them will do hurt to themselves and others; to the public
and the private Wealth. In which case, it were both against Piety, Charity, and
Prudence to conceal them. And to that pass are things now come among us, that
in both respects I think your courses are not to be covered. First, they
cannot; at least in great part, being long since made public to the world, and
daily are more and more, by your own printing, preaching, and private
instilling them into others. Secondly, they may not if they could, seeing by
forbearance all this while, they have fretted like a Gangrene into the Bowels
both of City and Country: And I fear we have kept their Counsels so long, that
many of them are already past cure, and we almost remediless in our rents
tending unto Ruin. Narration of some Church Courses in New England by W. R. p.
51.
Nay, do not frown, as if I were too sharp and severe: They are not my words,
but some of your own against the Independent Brethren, and may with as much, or
more, justice be now applied to you all.


N. C. I think there are other courses more dangerous than those, that ought to
be looked after. Profaneness, I mean, is the great thing which both you and we
ought to set our selves against; and that, I must tell you, abounds more among
you than any where else.


C. I cannot tell --


N. C. What cannot you tell? Whether profaneness should be opposed by both
with the greatest Vigor?


C. Be not so fierce. First, I cannot tell whether Profaneness abound more
now, than it did in the days when you reigned. I told you the last time what
the Assembly told the Parliament of the sudden growth of wickedness since they
began to sit. And I am sure it was not checked in the following years; but the
seasonable exhortation of the greatest part of the London Ministers complained
no longer ago than 1660. of the great Wickedness broken loose among us; (which
it seems was chained and bound up while the Bishops governed) and, as a great
instance of it, tell us in the conclusion of that sad Lamentation, that some
(as we are credibly informed) are grown to that height of wickedness as to
worship the Devil himself, p. 10. And then, secondly, I cannot tell whether the
Wickedness that has so much abounded beyond that in Elder days, be not in
great part to be imputed to your selves: For all the time you declaimed against
the Ignorance and blindness of the people, you cast many fearful
stumbling blocks before them (as an honest Suffolk-man told you some years
agone) while they could not but see or hear your scornful censuring and
condemning others; greedy panting after and gasping at the Riches, Honors,
Mournful Complaint to the Knights and Burgesses of that County, 1656.
and Preferments of this World; fraudulent circumventing and overreaching your
Neighbors; cruel revenge upon those you judged your Enemies when you had
power; bitter quarrelling and contending one against another: and yet
notwithstanding all those sins, which might have justly caused you to lie in
the Dust, they saw you lifted up, boasting of the glorious times you had made,
proudly appropriating to your selves the honorable name of Christians, Saints,
and the godly Party. Nay, the people were not so blind but they could see how
you measured the Saint-ship of your selves and others, rather by some private
opinions or small punctilio's of worship; than by the great things of Faith,
Righteousness, and Mercy. For they found some men whose profession of
Christianity was attended with these, accounted no better than civil men; while
others were cried up for Saints and Godly, who were much deficient in them.
Besides, your Ministers took no care to Catechize the youth in the Country:
Nay, brought that Ordinance into such Contempt, that to this very day a man is
not thought to do his Duty, who spends the afternoons of the Lords day, in that
instruction. They heard nothing but Orations in the Pulpit morning and evening,
and those (God knows) very sorry ones in most places. As for the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, a great many honest-hearted people were frighted from it. You
made such lofty Rails (as he observes) about the Table, that few or none of the
poor people could come at it: As if you thought it a matter of great piety to
confine the Members of Christ's Body to a little room, and cause his Death and
Passion to be known and remembered only by a few: As if it were an honor to
Christ and an advantage to the world; that his name and memorial should perish
from the hearts and mouths of a great part of the people professing his Name,
and engaged in Covenant to him. Nay, in many places, they never saw it
administered to any at all, for many years: Your Ministers choosing rather to
deprive themselves and others of whom they had a good opinion, of this Heavenly
Banquet; than afford* it to many well-meaning, though no talking people. And so
while they complained of their living in known sins; they themselves lived many
years in a notorious omission of this Duty. Sometimes indeed they would invite
men to this feast; but then by their preaching they hindered and discouraged the
most if not all in a Country-congregation; as if they were too forward to
acknowledge the benefits of Christ, and keep up his remembrance. In short, many
of them accounted the people no better than Heathens, and upon that score would
not baptize their children; and thereby endeavored to make them so, and quite
thrust them out of the flock of Christ. O that you would all search your hearts
(as that honest man said, to find out the true root of this Spirit of
Separation, and observe narrowly whether under other specious pretenses or with
some pious intentions, there were not a bitter root of pride and haughtiness,
causing you to affect singularity, and desire to appear alone to the view of
men; thinking it below your worth to be found in Communion with those, whom in
opinion you have laid so much below your selves.

But let that be as it will; Thirdly, I cannot readily tell which are worse,
the Publicans and Harlots, or the Scribes and Pharisees. This I know, that
there have a long time been a great many of the last, who justified themselves
and looked upon all others as abominable. Dr. Burges Fire of the Sanct. uncov.
an. 1625. in the preface.
I remember tells us with a great confidence, that those who kept heretofore
such a frantic coil about ceremonies, and thought they never took their level
right, but when at every bolt they shot, they struck a Bishops cap sheire off
his head; were more fantastical, Ignorant, Proud, self-willed, negligent and
deceitful in their particular callings, than many whom they despised, and
condemned to hell for Carnal men: As any observing Eye might easily discern.
Now what to think of these men in compare with the other, let honest Martin
Bucer tell you, who was one of the first Reformers, and whose name I know you
cannot but reverence as well as I, on many accounts.


N. C. How do you know what Martin Bucer says?


C. I understand a little Latin; and besides I have seen the latter part of his
Comments on the Prophet Zephaniah translated into our tongue; where he tells
us, toward the Conclusion, That there were some among them under a pernicious
Mistake, abhorring only these gross things, to wear brave clothes, to fare
deliciously, to drink and swill, to whore, to heap up riches carefully, to be
Usurers, and others of the like Kind; but in the mean time, Arrogance,
fastidious disdain of their Brethren, to languish about frivolous questions,
factions, reproach of God's Word, slanders against his Ministers, easily to
believe lies, and being rashly believed or (or perhaps by an evil suspicion
suggested) to spread and scatter them abroad; these and such like things, says
he, pass with them sometimes for Virtues. Nay, they think themselves thrice
Holy, while they walk about with a stoical Superciliousness, bended Brows and
sad Countenance; while they wear mean clothes, and rattle all mortals in the
ear, not so much with grave Words as with claps of Thunder; crying out, that
all is naught and wicked. That which I have experience of, as he goes on, and
have good assurance of its truth by certain observation, why should not I
testify to the Glory of Christ and the Admonition of the Brethren? Of those
who abound so much in accusing the vices of others, whom every Garment that is
a little more neat, every little Entertainment that is more plentiful, every
Word that is more merry and pleasant does much offend, that are always
complaining concerning the want of Excommunication; I have found very few (that
I may not say none) who do not labor with remarkable conceit of themselves,
insufferable contempt of their Brethren, incredible impatience of any neglect
of them, and sometime with other more grievous Evils. Besides that they are in
a manner always addicted to new and strange Opinions; which tend only to Schisms
and nothing to Edification. Now Heresy is a fruit of the flesh, and does far
more mischief than all Drinkings, Whorings, or Adulteries. On the other side,
among those persons whom they detest no less than Heathens because of a life
more remiss, and the riches of the World, and a certain splendour or bravery; I
have found very many who as they acknowledge themselves obnoxious to sin, so
they think of themselves most humbly, and of their Neighbors most Benignly:
they are very candid in their Thoughts and equal in their Judgments concerning
others; always accounting themselves the worst, etc. And when the Cross that
they have deserved lies upon them; nothing is more patient than they; none
hazard themselves more for the Lord. These things I have certain knowledge of,
and why may I not declare them to his Glory? And I call him to witness, that in
speaking this, I mean nothing less than to set any brand on a more severe
mortification of the flesh, and renouncing of worldly things; or to encourage
those that live remisly, or indulge any desire of the flesh: No, I pray the
Lord that he would give me and all his chosen grace, to use still more
sparingly, the things of the body, our selves, that we may impart them more
liberally to the Poor. May we have grace also, so to observe our Tongues that
even a little Idle word do not escape us, but all that is ours may be directed
to Profit and Edification. I have written these things and annexed them to my
Comments (God knows) for no other cause, but that I might admonish the Brethren
who have the grace to live frugally and severely, and to be free from outward
Offenses; first of all, diligently to watch the Devil lest he infest them with
inward ones: and while he permits them to avoid those external Vanities and
Delicacies, he bring them in love with inward and far more mischievous Evils;
that is, to please themselves, and to delight themselves in the condemning of
others; and then to sport themselves, and play the wantons idly in novelty of
opinions; from whence break forth openly, Grudgings and Hatreds; then Factions,
Sects and unspeakable Scandals in the Church. That which follows I shall omit,
as not being so much to my present purpose (though otherwise worthy of your
notice) which was to show what opinion wise and holy men have had of that
Spirit, which now rules in you: and so conclude what we are to direct our zeal
most against, and assault with the greatest vehemence. For your part; it is
manifest you oppose Conformity with might and main; and study by all means to
keep up the Separation: as for Us; it is your desire we would set our selves
wholly against Profaneness, and let you alone. But we cannot thus abandon our
selves, and throw off all care what becomes of our Church. We hate profaneness
and are resolved to oppose it; but we hate Pride and self-conceit and faction
and Separation, and we are resolved to beat down these too. And I must tell you
withal, that our Blessed-Saviour was more frequent and more severe in his
reproofs of the Scribes and Pharisees (how like you and those of Mr. Bucers
time are to them, let the impartial judge) than he was of the Publicans and
Sinners. And, whatsoever you think now, heretofore I am sure your Ministers
granted thus much, that the Devil* Gain's more by Schisms, than by coldness in
Religion; and that he had rather draw men from their first love to a fiery and
indiscreet Zeal, Confut. of the Separat. agreed upon by many Ministers and
published by Mr. Rathband 1644.
than to lukewarmness and indifference. For first, hereby he staggers many
others who were well settled, and makes them children again in understanding,
and turns them about with every wind of Doctrine; and secondly he deprives
those men of the happy means of recovery, which they might have easily enjoyed,
had they remained in the fellowship of the Church. And would to God you would
once more sadly consider, whether those many revolts that since the first
separation have been made from your gathered Congregations, to monstrous
Opinions and filthy Practices, have not been a just Punishment of you, for your
too high Valuation of your selves and uncharitable separation from us. What
construction you make of such things we know not (they are the words of the
Honest man I mentioned before) but to us that are more Ignorant it seems very
strange, that, Mournful Complaint.
whereas you fished with so great a Mash that scarce one of a hundred was taken
by you and admitted into your Churches; out of this hundredth part of yours,
more should be found revolting to absurd, foolish, nay pernicious Opinions,
than of the Ninety nine parts you left behind. It ought in my poor opinion to
put you into a just suspicion, and serious re-examination of that way, from
which there is so easy a transition to so many dreadful delusions; and through
which so many have already passed over unto the enemy.


N. C. Let those examine who are most concerned in it. My mind is full of
something else.


C. What Is that?


N: C. You have repeated so often the Schism (as you call it) or Separation
that is made from your Church; that I perceive it is the great thing that
sticks in your stomach, and which angers and frets you so much. And indeed Mr.
Bridge told us it would do so, in one of those Sermons you mention so often. The
Saints and people of God, Seas. Truths Sermon 6. p. 166.
says he, they withdraw from the men of the World, and do separate from them.
Now when we withdraw from men and from their worship, we condemn their Worship;
and the men of the world do not love to be condemned. To separate from them and
from their Worship, this they cannot bear. The Saints do separate from them,
and therefore there is such a deal of anger and wrath in their hearts against
them.


C. Alas! Good man; Does he think we have such an opinion of him and his
Saints, as they have of themselves? He flatters himself too much. It is one
thing to imitate the Saints, and another thing to counterfeit them. He shall
never persuade me that quicksilver is better than gold; and that turbulent and
affrighted Imagination can be a surer guide either in the choice or exercise of
our Religion, than a calm Reason, and a fixed well-resolved Judgment. Let him
call himself and his party Saints a thousand times, or as often as he breathes;
it shall never move me at all, nor shall I think the worse, but the better, of
my self for being none of them. Let him pride himself in new devices, of a
different worship for the Saints and the rest of the world, I am very well
contented, if they will but withdraw themselves far enough from us, and let us
be out of the hearing of their Gibberish. Let him lead them to the Indies if he
please, and be separated from us by the wide Ocean; it will be a great
satisfaction to enjoy our worship quietly Yet you must not hope for this; For
they must stay to power forth the Vials, which next to the Separating from us,
is the thing that provokes the Antichristian party. For they are to torment the
men of the world, and make them gnash their teeth, and bite their tongues for
pain. As he tells you afterward. page 179.
to our selves. Or rather let him retire into his Closet, and think no company
in the world pure enough for him but his Books, and no Books but his own; his
preciseness, I assure him, shall never trouble me at all. And I suppose I may
pass my word for our whole Church, that they will not complain for want of his
company; nor think it any disgrace to our Worship that such do not like it, or
perhaps abhor it; nor any shame to themselves that they will have no Communion
with us. There were always people of a morese and sour humor whom nothing can
please; no not what they do themselves, when once it pleases others too. They
must be of a contrary Opinion to the whole race of mankind: And hate some
things, only because others love them. And therefore if they not only withdraw
themselves from us, but also slight us and set us at naught; the concern is not
so great, as to require my care. Let them call Us the World, and if they
please, the Dogs that are without the Holy City; I value it no more than the
barkings of an angry Cur: Though in his vain conceit of himself and party, he
imagines we lay their disrespect to us mightily to heart. For this you know is
another cause which he is pleased to assign, why the men of the world are angry
with them. The Saints and people of God do not regard the men of the World; and
the men of the World they think so. Now for high and lofty men to be slighted
and not regarded, this makes them angry. For which he cites Dan 3. and then
repeats it. They cannot bear this, that they should not be regarded; high and
great men, that they should not be regarded: and therefore no wonder there is
such a great deal of wrath and anger in their hearts against the people of God.
But let him repeat it as often as he will; tell him from me, that it moves us not
at all to want their regard; for we do not think our selves honored by their
Esteem and Respect. It is rather a reproach than an honor to be commended and
praised by such mouths, as value a composed countenance and a Set of phrases;
more than the most composed and regular life, and the best sense in the world.
Let them slight us therefore so much, if they list, as not to move their Hat,
or give us the time of the day, or turn their face another way when they chance
to meet us; it is all one, we shall have never the worse opinion of our selves
or of our Worship. We do not think them so able to judge of true worth, or to
discern between true and false, good and bad, as to concern our selves about
their Opinion: these being almost the same thing now adays, and though all
undertake to judge, yet few know the difference. We have something else also to
support us than their favorable opinion of us; and that is, a sincere care
with unblassed affections to search after the Will of God; and a readiness to
receive and do it, whenever we know it. Let him bring us Reasons in stead of
confident assertions, and see if we will not studiously consider them; and if
they be good, yield to them. He spoke admirably who said, that our Reason ought
to yield obedience to nothing but Reason: and that Authority is a yoke which
none but God has a right to impose upon our judgments. If God say it, that is
reason enough: but we shall never be persuaded that they only hear or
understand what he says. Let them talk as if they had not only slept in our
Savior's Bosom (as a Gentleman I remember sometime said) but even watch't in
his heart and soul, and as if there were none of his intentions hid from their
knowledge: They will never gain the greater credit with us, unless we see more
than words and confidence. No, though they should not only contemn and scorn us
as altogether ignorant in the things of God, but pronounce Anathema's and
Curses against us as the limbs of the Apocalyptick Beast; Heaven we know laughs
them to scorn, and we shall smile at their ridiculous presumption. The Wolves
we know will never be reconciled with the Shepherds flock; and when we have
done all that we can, there will be an Envious and Malicious Generation, who
like the Rats and other imperfect Creatures (which it is possible were bred in
the Ark it self) will still be gnawing the reputation, even of the best Church
in the World. Every thing under Heaven is abused; yea, and what Heaven it self
has spoken is not safe from Injury and Violence; and therefore why should we
look to have a general respect, or be cast down or angry either at the neglect
of these men, or, if they please, their Contempt and Reproach?


N. C. You say you are not angry, but methinks you are in a great heat.


C. Not at their slighting us, I assure you.


N. C. What then?


C. I told you, that I professed a just indignation at some things; and more
particularly to see the Scripture so: wretchedly abused and wrested, even in
this very case, to justify their Separation and withdrawing from us.


N. C. You mean, I believe, that to the Corinthians, cited by Mr. Bridge. Come
out from among them, and be ye separate, 2 Page 166.
touch no unclean thing. 2 Cor. 6.17.


C. Yes.


N. C. And does it not require us to have no Communion with the wicked, of
which your Congregations we think are full?


C. But do you think then we are all Pagans and Infidels; i. e. such people as
do not so much as acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the Lord?


N. C. God forbid.


C. Then you apply those words impertinently to us (as you do the rest of the
Scriptures) who are nothing like those, from whom the Apostle would have the
Corinthians withdraw. It is an exceeding great shame that you have been so long
turning over the Bible, and talking of the word of God; and yet not understand
so plain a thing as this. You seem to me to be like those the Apostle speaks of
in another Epistle; who are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of
the Truth. Nay, you are like little children that tear and rend their Book into
little scraps; or like those imperfect creatures, I spoke of before; you nibble
at a bit of the Scripture, and instantly start away, and leave all the rest.
Could you not have cast your eye back but to the 14. verse? There you might
have seen who they are the Apostle speaks of. Be ye not unequally yoked
together with Infidels, says he, i. e. Either do not marry an infidel, or do
not join with them in any of their rites belonging to their Idolatrous service.
Be not at their Idol feasts; the thing he admonisht them of in the former
Epistle, and touches upon here again (as some think) lest they should not be
cautious enough in this particular. For the Apostle having told them an Idol
was nothing, they might hold these festival entertainments to be indifferent
things, and so when their kinsfolk, or friends invited them, not deny that
Civility, to accompany them to their Temples. Stay, says the Apostle, consider
what you do. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, etc.
these things are as contrary as Light and Darkness, you cannot partake of the
Table of the Lord and the Table of Devils too; as he told them in his first
letter. And then he renews his Exhortation, Come out from among them, and be ye
separate (from those Idolatrous Infidels) touch no unclean thing; meddle not
with their Idolatrous services, nor any of their wicked ways. You would be more
assured that this is the sense, if you would but turn to the place from whence
these words are cited (as the Margin directs you) Isa. 52.11. where the Prophet
bids not the more holy sort of Jews to separate from their profane Brethren;
but the whole Body of the Jews to fly out of Babylon; as any body may see that
reads the place: And therefore they cannot be urged without a notorious force
to prove such a separation as you are in, of one part of a society professing
belief in Christ, and baptized into his name, and renouncing all Idols
whatsoever; from the other. And so Mr. Geree I remember, a discreet
Presbyterian, confessed, and explained the words to the same purpose that I do.
And so did a noted person long before him Arin. 1610. Mr. Rich. Bernard plain
evidence p. 140, 141, etc.
and far more largely, in his dispute against the Brownists. For I must tell
you, those old Separatists, condemned by all honest Nonconformists in former
times, sought to justify their Schism, from the Church of Christ from this
very place: and the very truth is, so did the Ancient Donatists. Who, to make a
fair show for their fearful Schism, cried out just as you do now, Come out from
among them, touch no unclean thing: Depart, depart: Separate your selves. Have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. Be not partakers of other
men's sins: What has the Chaff to do with the Wheat? which are the very words
now Ignorantly employed by your Party against us; with as little knowledge of
their sense and meaning, as of their being the rotten Tools wherewith those
Schismatics sought to overthrow the whole Church.


N.C. How come you by more knowledge than other folk in this matter? Can you
tell what the Donatists said?


C. Yes, without reading St. Austin. For I can believe an old English Divine
who lived above half an Age since, that acquainted me with this; and showed
withal that those proud people had the same answer to this place from that
Father, Mr. G. Gyffard. plain Declaration that our Brownists are full
Donatists. p. 19. An. 1590.
which I have now given you. These words, says he, They understanding
carnally, have cut themselves into so many divisions, into little bits; in this
Africa alone. For they do not understand that no man is joined with Infidels,
but he that commits the sins of Pagans, or else does favor those that do such
things, etc. And who has fellowship with darkness, but he that by the darkness
of his consent, forsaking Christ, does follow Belial? Who puts his part with
Insidels, but he which is partaker of that Infidelity? For that way he* cease
to be the Temple of God; neither otherways does he join himself to Idols.


N. C. I am convinced of this. But may we not gather by proportion, that we
ought to separate from the wicked sort of Christians though it be not here
intended?


C. Hear what Mr. John Geree answers to this. No. Resolution of 10 Cases 1644.
All that can be inferred is, that we should avoid needless familiarity with
the wicked, and all s ciety in sin: To keep them from the Sacrament if we can.
But if it be not in our Power; not to omit the Sacrament, because they partake
of it. In which he followed the resolution of St. Austin who immediately after
the words before mentioned, adds these as my Author tells me; B. 2. against
Parmen. cap. 18.
And they which are the Temples of the living God, and in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation appear as lights in the world, having the word
of life; nothing does infect them, which they tolerate for Unities sake; nor
are they pent up in any straight, because God does dwell in them and walk in
them. And they depart in the mean time out of the evil, and are separate, at
least, in heart; lest happily while they would separate by the sedition of
Schism, they should rather be spiritually separated from the good, than
carporally from the bad. This old Divine also admonishes us very well out of
the same. Father, that when the multitude of the Assemblies of the Church are
free from that crime to which Excommunication is denounced, it is very
healthful; and because so many avoid him* he will be stricken with fear, and
healed through shame. But when the same sickness has taken hold of very many,
there remains nothing else to the good, but sorrow and be wailing; that so they
may escape that destruction which is like to come on the multitude of the
wicked. And in very deed, says he, if the contagion of sinning has invaded
the multitude, the severe mercy of Divine discipline is necessary: but the
counsel or enterprises of separation are both vain and pernicious, yea
sacrilegious; because then they become both impious and proud; and give more
trouble to the good which are weak, than they correct the sturdy ones who are
evil. And concluding this point, he gives this Advice; Let a man therefore with
Mercy correct what he can; and that which he cannot, let him bear with
patience: And with love let him mourn and lament, until He from above do either
redress and amend; or else differr until the harvest to root out the tares, and
to winnow out the chaff. And here he alleges the example of St. Cyprian, that
holy Martyr, who had been Bishop of Carthage, and describes the multitude as
full of gross sins, yea many of his fellow Bishops as spotted with very foul
crimes; but yet he communicated with them (though not in their sins which he
evermore reprehended, yet) in the Sacraments and holy Worship of God. Nay, he
shows that our Savior himself did not separate in Body from the Pharisees and
Saduces and multitude of common people, but met with them at the Temple: And it
is also plain, that the African Church in St. Austin's days besides their evil
manners, had some other blemishes which cannot be charged on ours; for by his
own complaint it appears, there were such a multitude of Rites and Ceremonies
then in use, that they were a very great burden, and the Church was oppressed
and groaned under them. And therefore I think your preciseness in separating
from us is more like the disdainful and proud Religion of the Scribes and
Pharisees; than the humble and charitable purity of our blessed Savior.


N. C. If you take these old Fathers for your Guides, they will lead you I now
not whither. They held many strange Opinions.


C. I suppose you would separate from them too, if they were alive. But what
think you of Mr. Calvin? He is a more modern Father, and you may think perhaps
more enlightened; will you stand to his judgment?


N. C. Why? What says he?


C. He tells you, that, Wheresoever the Gospel is purely preached and the
Sacraments administered according to the institution of Christ, there is the
Church of God. Instit. Book 4. Cap. 1. Sect. 9.
And if the very multitude has and does honor these; it deserves without
doubt to be esteemed and judged a Church; because it is certain that these
things are not without fruit. And if you look a little further to the next
Section he repeats it again with much earnestness. Sect. 10.
There appears (in such a multitude as he mentioned before) neither a deceitful
nor doubtful face of a Church: Of which no man may either despise the
Authority, or refuse the Admonitions, or resist the Counsels, or mock at the
Corrections; much less depart from it, break in sunder the Unity of it, and go
unpunished. For the Lord so highly esteems the Communion of the Church that he
counts him for a Traitorous Runaway, and forsaken of Religion, whosoever shall
stubbornly estrange himself from any Christian fellowship; So that it be such a
one as has a true Ministry of the word and Sacraments. He so commends the
Churches Authority, That when it is violated, he judges his own diminished. Do
you hear this?


N. C. Yes. But --


C. To prevent all your exceptions, look further into the 12. Sect. and there
he will tell you that the fellowship of such a Church is never to be cast off,
though it swarm full of many faults. Yea, and there may be some faultiness
crept into it in the Administration, either of Doctrine or of the Sacraments,
yet it ought not to estrange us from the Communion of it. For all the Articles
be not of one sort: And therefore we ought not rashly for every light
dissension forsake the Church, etc. But then, in the next he tells you, that in
bearing with the imperfections of life, our gentle tenderness ought to go much
further. And in the next but one, that it is one thing to shun the private
company of a wicked man; and another for hatred of such to forsake the
Communion of the whole Church: Which is to be more rigorous than St. Paul. And
although this temptation to forsake the Church may by an indiscreet zeal of
righteousness, Sect. 16.
enter into the thought of a good man; yet we shall find that too much
preciseness grows rather out of Pride, Disdainfulness, and false Opinion of
holiness; than of true holiness and true zeal thereof. They that are bolder
than others, and as it were the Standart-bearers to make any departing from the
Church, for the most part do it upon no other cause, but their despising of all
men, to boast themselves to be better than others. But I think I had best let
the rest alone; lest you say I rail upon godliness (of which this Separation is
now grown a great note) though in Mr. Calvin's words.


N. C. We are not to mind what men say? Nor to have their persons in admiration.


C. No? Not what your own Ministers say? Sure their words are another Gospel
with you, or else how come you so to misunderstand the old?


N. C. They are good men, and so we value what they say.


C. I Will show you then that they have said the very same in behalf of our Form
of Divine Service, that I did the last time we talked together: And that they
condemn this withdrawing from us, which Mr. Bridge makes the mark of a Saint.


N. C. Pray let it alone: It will be too long.


C. Let me tell you thus much: That they told their Brethren of New England
heretofore, that if we deny communion with such a Church as ours, there has
been no Church these 1400. years with which a Christian might lawfully join.
Nay, Letter of many Ministers in Old England requesting the judgment of their
Brethren in New Engl, concerning 9. Positions 1637. with their Answer 1639. And
the Reply 1640: Published afterward by Mr. Simeon Ash, and Mr. W. Rathband,
1643.
that if such scruples as are now in your heads may take place, it will be
unlawful to hold communion with any Society under Heaven: And that as for
making an Idol of the Common Prayer (which by the way was a phrase they
themselves made use of afterward) it might be as well said, that they made an
Idol of their conceived Prayers. And therefore what evil spirit is it that now
possesses so many of your Presbyterian Ministers, and has driven them, as if
they were out of their wits, from our Church, and their own Principles, and
from all the Churches of Christ, that now are or ever were?


N. C. Pray do not say so.


C. They have granted me that for 1400. years there never was any Church, with
which we might hold Communion if not with ours: And I will prove that there
has been none for these 1668. years.


N. C. You are strangely bold.


C. No bolder than Mr. Calvin; who will give you good satisfaction, if you read
the Chapter to which I referred you, that the Church of the Jews in our
Savior's time, and the Apostolical Churches afterward, tolerated greater Vices
in manners, and fouler Errors in Doctrine, than were in any Church from which
in his days a separation was made. And I will show you distinctly, either now
or when you will require it, that those Churches planted and watered by the
Apostles, had those Corruptions in Doctrine, Worship, Manners, Discipline, and
Government, which cannot be pretended to be in ours: And yet there was no
separation of some Members from the rest: Nay, the Apostles, notwithstanding
all these, speak very well in general of some They call them all Believers and
Saints: And none knew then any other Men of the World, and Unbelievers, but
Pagans; such as did not acknowledge Jesus to be the Lord.


N. C. I am loath to give you so great a trouble. But I pray answer me one
Scripture which seems to be against this; when it says, The Apostles separated
the Disciples, Act. 19.9.


C. Admirably argued! The Apostles, separated the Disciples from those that
were not Disciples; and therefore we may separate Disciples from Disciples.


N. C. How say you?


C. The Apostles, I say, were sent to preach the Gospel and make Disciples to
Christ, baptizing them into his Name who believed on him. Those who would make
profession of Christ they gathered into a new Church from among the Jews and
Pagans who disowned him. And accordingly here in this City having won some to
believe, and made them Christ's Disciples, they separated them from the rest of
the Jewish Synagogue, who blasphemed Christ and would acknowledge no other
Religion but that of Moses; to be a distinct Society by themselves, and no
longer Members of the unbelieving Synagogue. From whence you would infer, that
one Christian is to be separated from another Christian, and believers gathered
from believers; if one part appear to us Pious, and the other Vicious: Which is
just as if the Apostles, out of those few Disciples separated from the Jews,
had made another lesser Church, separated from the rest of the Disciples.


N. C. I see my Error plainly: And shall remember hereafter if I can, not
merely to nibble at the Scripture, as you called it, but take it altogether.
But Mr. Bridge affrights us horribly with one place, which prophesies he says
of the greatest separation in the latter days, that ever was. It is in the
Revelation, where the Spirit cries, Come out of her my people, that you be not
partaker of her sins. There shall be the greatest separation, and that provokes
the Antichristian party; as his words are, p. 179. of the Book before mentioned.


C. I remember them very well, Rev. 18.4. But do you still take Mr. Bridge for
a Prophet? Have I not shown you what a rare Seer he is in the Revelation?


N. C. I have heard others beside him mention this place. Mr. Case I remember
gave us this reason to hope that God would be gracious to England, Englands
Encouragement to wait on God, p. 69.
and that Babylon should shortly fall; because he had begun with such a
distinct and audible voice from Heaven, to call his people out of Babylon,
saying, Come out of her my people, etc. Rev. 18.4. her Idolatrous bowings,
cringings, Altars, Crosses, and cursed Ceremonies, false Worship, false
Doctrine.


C. You need say no more; I have it perfectly in mind as well as you. And you
were wont I know, in those days to believe that they knew the designs of
Heaven, as well as if they had been Counselors of State in that kingdom: And
conceived the News they told you of what was coming, as sure and certain, as if
they had layn in the Bosom of St. John as he did in our Savior's. But I hope
by this time you are convinced they were only drowsy dreamers, that knew
nothing of his Mind: And see that they are but like a poor Mouse which having
but one hole, is easily caught. Babylon, Babylon was all they had to say then,
and thither they run now. These are the Magical sounds, whereby they would
astonish you: The Mystical words whereby they practice all their Sorceries upon
you. Stop but your ears against these, and you are free from their
Enchantments; for they can never prove that the Church of England is this
Babylon from whence his people are called, or that she has taken so much as
one sip, or kissed the Cup of her Fornications.


N. C. I never asked them, indeed, to prove this.


C. No, You took it very lovingly upon their word: And ran after those whom you
fancied and were inamoured of, with an implicit Faith; as if you had tasted too
deep of the Cup your selves. If you did but hear them say, Mystery, Mystery,
(the very word you know in the forehead of the whore) presently you bowed to
them, and thought you were under the teachings of an infallible Spirit. And you
remember I suppose very well, that those two and all the rest of the Ministers
that were wont to preach before the Parliament, and in the greatest
Congregations, generally chose their texts out of the Old Testament, seldom out
of the New, unless it were the Revelation.


N. C. What of that?


C. By which means they furnished themselves in an abundant measure with such
Comparisons, as did them admirable service. They could easily contrive it so,
that they might seem such a select number as the Jews, the peculiar people of
God; and we like the Egyptians, and Babylonians, or what other accursed Nation
they pleased. And so applying all those places which spoke of them, to us and
our times; they excited in you the same hatred against us that was in the Jews
against those Nations; and made you think it as necessary to separate from us,
as for the Jews to come out of Babylon. Nay by a wonderful Art, or prodigious
Enchantment rather (which argues your great dullness) they first raised your
fancies, put words into your mouths, and taught you to expect all that they had
a mind should shortly come to pass; and then they made the expectation they had
wrought in you an argument that it should come to pass. Thus I remember one of
your Divines encouraged the Parliament to expect the overthrow of Babylon,
because said he, the General talk throughout the Household among the Domestics
is, Mr. H. Wilkinson. Sermon upon Zach. 18.19. page 21.
that Christ their King is coming to take possession of his Throne. This they
not only whisper, but speak publicly. Now you know before Kings go to a place,
their purpose is first known among the Domestic Servants, and talked of within
doors first, and then abroad, and Harbingers prepare the way. This has been
the news throughout the household, and Harbingers have been sent abroad: It is a
sign that he is not far off; it will not be long before be come.


N. C. Cannot you repeat a sentence without laughing?


C. If you had not been very gross you would have either laughed or been angry
at those that did not see or would not take notice of the cheat. How came you,
I beseech you, to whisper this and afterward talk it abroad, that Christ was
coming to sit upon his Throne? Had you any Revelation of it? Did you that are
his Domestics hear Christ the King say so? Or were you not told so by these
pretended Favorites of his, and believed them without asking whence they had
the News?


N. C. Undoubtedly we never thought of it, till we heard it preached and
proclaimed by them.


C. And then when your heads were filled with this conceit, and they had set
your tongues a going, and made this the general Talk; they ask't you (if you
were apt to despond) Why do you doubt of it? Be of good cheer; without question
he is not far off; for otherwise you would never have talked so much of his
coming. Which was no more in plain English than this; you would never have
believed us, if it were not so. Were not these rare devices to support the
people's confidence? And were not the people very blind that could not discern
this foul Imposture? Never talk now of the Sottishness of the multitude in the
Romish Church; for they are cousened by neater Legerdemains than this. Which is
just as if I should entertain a Child a long time with hopes of Plums and fine
Toys coming from some Fair: and when he began to doubt of it, should tell him;
thou have talked of them so long my Child, that without question they will be
here by and by; How is it possible that thou should be in such expectation
of them, if they were not at hand?


N. C. No more words: You have said enough to make a Child understand the
delusion.


C. And yet you suffered your selves to be wheedled and cheated thus over and
over again: as if you would cross the Apostles rule, and be Men in Malice, but
Children in understanding: You heard your Ministers pray, for instance, that
Babylon might fall, and the walls of Jerusalem be built. And then you heard
them stirring you up with the greatest vehemence to give God no rest till
Jerusalem was made a praise in the Earth. And when they had set you all on fire
with these desires, then you were very well contented to be made believe, it
was a certain sign God would do the business, because he had put it into your
hearts to be so earnest for it. How is it possible said they, that there should
be such a spirit of grace and supplication poured suddenly on the Nation, if
Christ were not coming down after it? Since God has knit the hearts of his
people in such a Holy Conspiracy as it were to besiege Heaven with their
Prayers, all is not to be given for lost. God Mr. Case, Engl. Encouragement to
wait on God, p. 77.
has taken off the bridle of restraint from the lips of his people. Page 78.
The Prayers of Gods people are gone up to Heaven in great Assemblies, and have
surrounded the Throne of Grace: God was never so tempted to bow the Heavens and
come down to the rescue of his People. Page 79.
God will bow down his ears to them: if they cannot come to God, he will cause
his ear to come down to them; He will make hard shift (as it were) to hear,
rather than their prayers be lost. Page 80.
.


N. C. You make me blush to think how we have been gulled.


C. So you will be still. And it is no wonder they make so bold with you; since
they were so bold with God and with his holy Word; which they drew to be
instrumental in the Cheat. They sanctified every design with some text of
Scripture or other, and with many prayers: tili they had defaced the certainty
of Holy Writ; and made no other thing of it than a Nose of Wax, which may be
turned any way as will serve our purposes Mr. Knew stubs against the Herefie of
N. N. page 61.
You need not be angry: they are the words of one esteemed here tofore; though
I know not what thoughts you would have of him, or he of you, if he lived now.
If I may pass my conjecture, I think he would take you to be the very spawn of
those Brownists, which were so justly detested in those days, For he would hear
the same words and phrases out of your mouths now, which he heard in those days
from theirs, who cried out upon an Idol Church, and Idol Ministry, an Idol
Government: And, as if they were sure to carry the cause by these outcries,
they never ceased to pour out these Accusations, wherewith the people were
terribly affrighted. For they poor souls never considered that if all were
granted that such words import, it would not prove a separation should be made
from our Assemblies. For in what sense can a Minister be said to be an Idol,
but in such an one as the people of England were called so, by one of you?


N. C. What sense should that be?


C. I Will repeat his words if you please; which you may find in a Book put forth
on purpose to prevent a Peace between the King and Parliament, Plain English,
page 27. 1643.
upon any terms than such, as should make the King yield to all their desires.
We have long pretended zeal (says that Author) against Idolatry, when in the
mean time we are all become one Idol. We have eyes and fee not an Army of
Papists, not only with permission allowed to use their own Religion, but with
Commission appointed (in event) to destroy ours. We have Ears and hear not the
continual Blasphemies against our God, the reproaches and standers against our
Parliament. It cannot indeed be said we have mouths and speak not; for they
that do least, commonly speak most: But I am sure I may say we have Feet and
march not; hands have we, and handle not the Sword and Shield.


N. C. You love still to be rubbing these old sores, as I told you once.


C. Not I. But I love to rub up your memory, that you may reflect how your
beloved phrases are applied to all purposes; and see that an Idol Minister can
signify nothing, but one that does no more of the work of a Minister, than the
people, it seems, did of your work of fighting against the King; till they were
alarmed by such clamours as these, and afraid to be thought Idolaters, or an
Idol-people. In short, he is such a person as the Shepherds of Israel were,
when they neglected their Office, and took no care of the flock committed to
their trust: From whom notwithstanding the People of Israel were not to
withdraw, nor to renounce all communion with them, and obedience to them. But
besides this I would have you know, that if there be any Ministers among us
that are but like Idols and Images of men: there are those (and thanks be to
God good store) who hear and see and speak, and do the will of God, in the
places where they are set.


N. C. I am convinced of all this.


C. But I pray once more observe whether all such Writers and Preachers as Mr.
Bridge and the rest of the separation in which you are engaged, do not take
more pains to prove the danger of Idolatry and the hainousness of the sin; than
to tell you what Idolatry is, and to prove that it is Idolatry to join with us.
Their way always was to prove little and to accuse stoutly; to declaim loudly,
and not to reason; to terrify the people by a dreadful sound of words and
raise great passions in them; not to inform their judgments what they are to do
and what to avoid. And for that purpose nothing has ever done them better
service than Babylon, and Egypt, and the Golden Calves, and Idol Ministers,
Idol Service and such like words of no certain and determinate meaning. And to
say the truth, in this, (as Mr. Can himself could not but observe a great while
ago) consists a great difference between Christ's institutions, and men's
inventions: Whatsoever God will have us do or not do, he lays down the same
openly, precisely, manifestly, but when Satan speaks by his Instruments, he
speaks so ambiguously and cloakedly, that one knows not how to take it, nor
which way to apply it So I find his words cited in Mr. J. Balls book against
him, page 88.
Which if you will but apply (as Mr. Ball told him) to your own manner of
disputing and alleging testimonies, It will discover your-selves to be the
deceivers; who affect ambiguous and equivocal speeches, and seek by mists and
foggs of strange and unusual arguments, and sentences wrest to a contrary
sense, to blind the eyes and puzzle the understandings of the simple. For you
hide your selves under the terms of false Church, false Ministry, false
Prophets, false Worship, flying from Idolatry, taking heed of Idols, etc. which
you have taken up in a peculiar sense, and running along in that strain you
pervert the Scriptures, wrong Authors, confound things to be distinguished,
dispute sophistically; and while you boast of clear proofs, divine precepts,
examples and practices of Forefathers, etc. you only raise a dust to dazzle the
eye. For let the matter be looked into, and you have neither divine Precept, nor
Example of godly Forefathers to justify your separation. What you teach has
been condemned in Schools, cried down in Sermons, disallowed in all the
Churches of the Saints from the very beginning to this day.


N. C. You are heated now to some purpose.


C. It is better you should blame my zeal, than I blame my own chilness; and I
had rather a great deal be condemned of some violence, than of a lazy
indifference in these matters. For who is there that values his Religion, and
reverences the Sacred Scriptures, that can hear them thus abused, and not have
his spirit stirred in him?


N. C. There are those who think they smell something else that stirs the
spirits of your Ministers.


C. What should that be?


N.C. Envy and Anger that any men should be liked better than themselves. It
troubles them to see any body leave their Churches and follow our Ministers;
because they would not be thought less able than they. And it is possible their
congregations may be thin, when so many have withdrawn themselves from them.


C. There is an old saying, that No man ever sought another in the Oven, who
had not been there before himself. Had not your Preachers been heretofore
tickled with the sight of full Congregations and the fancy of having many
followers; they could never think Multitudes and thronged Assemblies (which
many do not want) so necessary to the contentment of any man of worth among us.
And were not you intollerably proud and conceited of your selves, this
imagination could never have entered into your heads, that it dejects our
Ministers to want your company. What are you that they should tremble to hear
you say in a threatening manner, We will never hear him more? Are you the only
men of Wisdom; the sole Beauty of Christian Assemblies? Is all their labor
lost, if you be not there to commend it? Are the rest of the people no better
than the walls and the seats? Speak man: Is it a great courtesy to a Minister
that you will be pleased to hear him? Must he think himself beholden to you
that you vouchsafe him your presence? Nay take it for an honor that you come
and help to make a numerous Auditory; in which you shine, as the precious
stones in a Ring? O prodigious Vanity! I have heard indeed that some of your
Ministers made low reverences to you and studied to humor you, as if they
thought you deserved much of them for honoring their Assemblies; but I know
none of that mind: If you will not come to hear them; you may stay away, and I
wonder who will have the worse of it, you or they?


N. C. If they are not concerned in this, why do they keep such a stir about
Separation? Cannot they let the people do as they will, and say nothing? To
what purpose is it to make so great a noise about such little things?


C. How say you, little things? Hear Mr. J. Ball I beseech you (a person whom
you reverence, I suppose) who tells you in another Book of his; Trial of the
grounds of separation Epistle to the Reader.
that how small soever the things in themselves may seem to be, the evil
consequences that follow thereupon be both many and great. It is no small
matter to bury that under the condemnation of false worship (as Mr. Bridge
does) which the Lord the Author of all Truth, the Determiner of his true
pleasing and acceptable worship, does allow in his service. It is no small
offense to forsake the prayers of the Congregation, to depart from the Table of
the Lord, when he calls to feast with himself; and to break off Society and
communion with the Church of Christ, to fill the hearts of weak Christians with
doubts and distractions, as not knowing what to do, or what way to take; to
spend time in reasonings and disputings of this kind which might much more
profitably be employed in the practice of Repentance and holy obedience; to
expose Religion to contempt, and the truth of God to reproach among them that
delight to speak evil. These are sad effects of this Separation which I oppose:
Which tends not (as he speaks in his Answer to Can,) to the overthrow of
Antichrist, but to the renting of the Church, the disgrace of Religion, the
advancement of Pride, Schism, and contention, the offense of the weak, the
grief of the Godly who are better settled, the hardening of the wicked, and the
Recovery or rising of Antichristianism. As for other evils (which he mentions
not) such as the alienation or abatement of affection even where there is the
nearest bond of Society; and the sowring of men's minds toward their
Governors, in whom they cannot so heartily rejoice as they ought, while they
take them to be the imposers of Idolatrous Ceremonies, or sinful worship; I
will not discourse of them neither: Not because they are light matters; but
because I have many things to add and would not be too tedious.


N. C. I remember something in Mr. Ball to this purpose, and I confess it
affected me then, and made me fearful to fall into the separation: Especially
because of another sad effect which was usually observed in those days to
follow these Divisions, among the people of your Persuasion.


C. What is that?


N. C. I heard some say, that when men saw those who were so well conceited of
their own knowledge, sincerity and piety above others; mistake so grossly, and
be so rigidly precise, as to make that Sin, which God never made so; they fell
into dislike even of all the Good that was in them: And discerning how little
reason they had for this strictness, presently imagined they had as little for
the strictness of their lives and conversation in all other matters.


C. They told you the truth, and you should consider it now. There is nothing
more difficult than to sever good and evil when they are mixed together. The
good is frequently rejected by some for the Evit's sake; and the evil received
by others for the sake of the good. Men are wont either to like or dislike all
that they see in those of whom they conceive a good or ill Opinion. They that
love the Piety of some Ministers, fall in love also with their Preciseness; and
they that hate their Preciseness, may fall into hatred of their Piety.


N. C. I am glad you will allow any thing that I say.


C. Did you think me of so perverse a humor, as to shut my eyes against the
light of the Sun, because an Enemy opens the Windows to let it in? I will ever
embrace and justify a truth, come it from whom it will: And I pray know once
for all, that I do not approve of those who out of hatred to the superstition
of your people, brand all that are of strict and Holy Lives, with the Name of
Presbyterian, Phanatick or some such like. But it would do well if you would
consider, that which was the occasion of this discourse; how much hurt you do
by being so rigid where there is no need. This tempts inconsiderate people on
the one side to think it is but needless scrupulosity that makes you careful in
other things which Christ indeed has tied us unto: at least they will put off
your reproofs for their Debaucheries, by accusing you of more preciseness than
you have reason for. And on the other side; you observing the unexcuseable
looseness of some that are enemies to your superstition; are tempted thereby to
strengthen your selves the more in it, and to stand the more stiffly in your
separation from us. So that both sides are the worse for these differences, and
increase their evil humors by these oppositions.


N. C. I cannot contradict you in this.


C. I must tell you one thing more. While men on both sides have by their
contentions and hatreds gone farther and farther one from the other; they have
fallen at last into most fearful Extremities. On your part, some have proceeded
to that degree of detestation, as to condemn us of Idolatry and
Antichristianism, and have fallen not only into all the dregs of Brownism and
Anabaptism, but into the dotages of the Quakers, and the men of the fifth
Kingdom. And on our part, some have drawn so far from you, as to fall back into
Popery, perhaps into Atheism, at least indifference about Religion; which are
diseases too frequent also among your selves. If therefore the credit of
Religion (as Mr. Ball again speaks) the Glory of God, the Souls of our Brethren
be dear to us, What can we do less than by a just defense of the Truth, seek
the reclaiming of such as are gone astray, the establishing of them that are
weak in judgment, but zealously affected to the ways of God; stop the stream of
seducing, free the Godly from unjust imputations, settle peace and unity in the
Truth among Brethren; I may add, to keep the whole Nation, if it be possible,
from such dangerous precipies as they are drawing toward.


N. C. I hope you have a good meaning: But you should consider that I and the
Presbyterians are not withdrawn to such a distance from you, as you say some
are. We do not separate from the Congregations as Antichristian, nor think that
you are not the Churches of Jesus Christ; which was the error of the Brownists
and such like Schisntaticks.


C. You should have added, of Mr. Bridge and the rest of his partakers as I
have plainly shown you: and I wish I could not say of some Presbyterians too,
who once abhorred such rents as they have now made. For what did they mean to
call us Babylon so often, if they would not have the people think (whatsoever
they thought themselves) that we were Antichristian? Expound to me all the
passages already mentioned; particularly that of Mr. Case just now cited: Tell
me what you think of the distinct and audible voice from beaven which they
heard to call you to come out of Babylon. Why did he make the war between the
King and You, Engl. Encouragements. Page 106.126.
to be the battle between Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his? and
the peace which some wished and was sometime hoped; a combounding of the
business between Christ and Antichrist? Tell me, if you say true, why they took
the liberty to tell you, That when Episcopacy and Liturgy were restored in
Scotland, Preface to the Book of Discipline.
then Willworship and damnable Idolatry was set up? And to pass by the speeches
of your railing Vicars, why did Mr. Fr. Woodcock (in his Lectures at St.
Lawrence before named) call the Bishops and their Partakers I cannot tell how
often, the Popish faction, the Antichristian faction, the Antichristian party who
slew the witnesses, i. e. suspended and silenced some Ministers for not
conforming to the Laws? Lastly, why were these Lectures Ordered to be printed;
and every Pulpit suffered to sound with such like language? If all these things
were said in heat, the better to stir up the people's passions; say so, and we
have done. You shall never hear a syllable of the late times from me; if you do
but ingenuously confess your rashness, and humble your selves for these and
such like faults. Or if any of you were then of the mind that Episcopacy was
Antichristian (as it is affirmed in the view of the Covenant, p. 34.) a Limb or
Claw of the Beast, as the Brownists-phrase was, but now are of another opinion;
let us know it, that we may rejoice in the change. Wise men sometimes change
Opinions and Counsels, though Fools do not. And they will change for the better
as Mr. Bridge has done for the worse. For there was a time when he and his
Brethren made this Declaration before God and all the world concerning the
English Churches, In which, say they, through the grace of God we were
converted; that all that Conscience of the Defilements we conceived to cleave
to the True Worship of God in them, Apologet. Narration 1643. page 6.
or of the unwarrantable power in Church Governors exercised therein, did
neper work in any of us any other Thought, much less Opinion; but that
multitudes of the Assemblies and Parechial Congregations thereof were the true
Churches and Body of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a true Ministry; much
less did it ever enter into our hearts to judge them Antichristian. Why they
should say Multitude, and not all since they had the same form of Divine
service and were under the same Government, I know not; for it cannot be meant
of such. Churches where the Ministers were chosen by the People, which were but
few. Nor am I concerned to know the sense of those words; but I would gladly
know if they please, why they cannot now see multitudes of such Churches; and
by what new light or Revelation Mr Bridge has discoverd our Worship and
Churches to be Antichristian, from which the Saints must come forth and
separate themselves. Or rather (for now you would have me speak to you alone)
why so many Prosbyterians withdraw themselves from our Prayers and Sacraments
and hold separate Assemblies in opposition to ours? You do not make your cause
the better but the worse by this acknowledgment, that you do not depart from us
as no true Churches of Jesus Christ: and stand condemned by your own declared
Principles, and all the writings of your Forefathers. To forsake the true
Churches of Christ says Mr J. Goodwin himself) and the Ministry thereof, where
men have been converted and built up, Letter to Mr. Thomas Good. win from Mr.
Jo. Goodwin before he turned Independent.
and have converted and built up so many, with the setting up of new Churches,
against the leave and will of the Civil Magistrate, without the consent of
those Churches departed from, and to the seandal and grief of so many godly
Manisters and Christians, nay the scandal of all reformed Churches; and this
under the pretense of spiritual power and liberty purchased for them by Christ,
had need have a clear and full proof, and not be built only upon such weak and
slight grounds, as flattering similitudes, witty allusions, remote
consequences, 0 strained and forced interpretations from hard and much
controverted Scriptures. What clear proofs he afterward sound I cannot tell,
but when he had rent himself even from the Presbyterian Churches, he could not
but give this Honorable Testimony to ours; Sion Coll. visited.
That Travelers from all parts confirmed, that there was more of the Truth and
power of Religion in England under the late Prelatical Government, than in all
the Reformed Churches besides. Therefore I must beseech you again to consider
what solid grounds you have for forsaking such a Church as this; which has
been the Mother of so many pious souls, and extorted such praises even from
those undutiful children, who out of I know not what humor, lift up their heel
against her. What spot do you spy in her now, which you could not discern
heretofore? Or if there be any, what soul Monster should it be that thus
affrights you, if indeed we be not the Beast, nor any limb of him? You that
profess so much tenderness of Conscience, should rather methinks, be horribly
afraid, since you think we are a Church still united to Christ, lest by
separating from us, you cut your selves off from him, and run in time to the
greatest extremities, and utterly renounce and disown us. For as Mr. Ball has
well observed, They that have once broken off from us, have run from one error
into another, after the fond imagination of their heart, till they have dashed
themselves against the Rocks. And indeed how can you expect it should be other
wise. There is but one Body, the Church; but one Lord or Head of the Body,
Christ: Whosoever separates from the Body therefore, separates from Christ in
that respect. And if we withdraw our selves from him where he graciously
invites us to feast with him may we not justly fear he will withdraw himself
from us, and make us seek when we shall not find him? This voluntary separation
from the Lords, Table and the Prayers of the Congregation, is a willing
excommunication of our selves from the Visible tokens of the Lords presence and
Love. And if it be a grievous sin in Church Governors to deprive any Member of
the Church of all Communion with the Visible Church upon light and unnecessarv
occasions, is it not a greater sin in the Members to deprive themselves of the
same Communion upon the like or less occasions? Without all doubt, this sin
will be punished with blindness of mind if you persist in it. Such offenders
having run (as I am able to prove) from one thing to another with the greatest
confidence, till they came to think themselves inspired and full of the
Holy Ghost, even when they railed and reviled all other Churches: And when
those heats sailed, to think that all Religion was a mere Hypocondriacal
Delusion. This Mr. Calvin assured you long ago would be the fate of Separatists
from such a Church as Ours; Because they dissolve (says he) the sacred Bond of
Unity; no man shall escape this just punishment of his divorce, that he shall
intoxicate himself with the most pestilent errors, and most foul dotages. Nay,
your own Ministers could admonish you heretofore; that when Religion either by
choice or force is propagated in Corners, Advertisement upon Phil. 1.1. before
the Annot on the Bible 1645.
many Heretical Doctrines are hatched and preached, and afterward, it may be,
printed too; which had not been conceived nor divulged, if the Authors of them
had continued in the society of public Assemblies. And therefore you;
methinks, above all other men should dread the sad effects of this new
separatition; as much as those men do the Sea, who feel themselves yet wet, and
come forth dropping from a wreck. Remember your own sad complaints and
Lamentations, the Shrieks and the Cries, which are yet fresh in our ears;
Remember what Rocks you dash't against when you had once forsaken our Company
and broken the Bond of Unity. Call to mind how many perished; and in what
danger all were to be lost. Did you not pray the five Brethren to consider in
the beginning of the Storm, that in their Church Way into, which many were
running, there would be no end of Schisms: But every two or three members if
they pleased might set up a Church by themselves? Witness the rent in that
Church where Mr. Bridge and Mr. Sympson were teachers at Rotterdam. Where Mr.
Sympson, Antapologia. p. 29. p. 117.
as Mr. Edwards informs us, having only a Merchant and his Wife, joining with
him at the first, separated from Mr. Bridge and set up a new Church of their
own: Of which a Woman (Mrs. White) was the soundress as Mr. Bridge himself has
said. And when they were thus torn in sunder, both parts of the Division fell
together by the cars among themselves. There was a new rent in Mr. Sympsons
company, and Mr. Ward, colleague to Mr. Bridge, was deposed from his Ministry
and office by Mr. Bridge his Church, for some frivolous differences. And such
was the bitterness, revilings and reproaches expressed in the letters that
passed between them, that the Readers ears would tingle should he hear them. In
short, the Jews and the Samaritans were not greater Enemies, than these were
one to another; as my Author affirms.


N. C. Mr. Edwards you mean.


C. Yes and I hope you think him a good one now, as you did heretofore. If not,
I can justify what he says out of a learned Dutch writer if you please.


N. C. I am not much concerned about this.


C. But you are concerned to keep in mind these scandals in separate
Congregations. And it will do you no hurt, I am sure, to reflect a great deal
farther back; and consider what work the ancient Separatists of our Nation made
in the same Country: Johnson and Ainsworth fell out at Amsterdam, and their
Congregation was divided into two, one of which excommunicated the other. The
two Johnsons also, though Brethren in nature as well as Religion, fell into
such a fiery contention upon a small occasion, that George the younger, became
a Libeller and loaded his Brother and others, with many reproaches, and that in
Print; to remain for ever. The Elder broke fellowship with him and with his own
Father (who took part with George and curfed the other with all the curses in
Gods Book) and this breach was confirmed by the heavy sentence of
Excommunication, and both Father and Brother delivered up to the Devil. But
then at Leiden, J. Smith condemned them all, and accused them of Idolatry;
telling them that their Constitution was as very a Harlot as either her Mother
England, or Grandmother Rome; and that the Separation was the youngest and
fairest daughter of Rome the Harlot. The reason was, because they looked into
their Bibles when they preached, and into the Psalter when they sung; For the
Holy Scriptures, he said, were not to be retained as helps before the eyes in
time of worship, and particularly that it was unlawful to have a Book before
them in singing of Psalms. Besides, their Government he thought was
Antichristian; because they joined to Pastors, other Doctors and Rectors, which
was an human invention. And so he fell to the Anabaptists; where he made also a
new sect, by baptizing himself if you please to have some of his words, perhaps
they may be useful to you; When Popish prelacy, says he, was suppressed, and
the Triformed Prebytery (viz. Pastors, Teachers, and Elders) substituted; In
his Book called, the Differences of the Churches of the Sepation.
one Antichrist was put down, and another set up in his place: or the Beast was
suppressed and his Image advanced. And therefore, as they that submit to the
Prelacy are subject to that woe of Worshipping the Beast; so they that submit to
the Triform'd Presbytery, are in like manner liable to that woe, denounced
against them that worship the Image of the Beast.


N. C. I perceive what you are going to say: you would have me mark again, how
every Party paint their Opposites in the shape of this ugly Beast; to terrify
simple people with it, as we do children with Bug-bears.


C. And whosoever reads and considers these things will be, I think, of old Mr.
Bernards mind who told this Nation threescore years ago, that * it is better to
endure Corruptions in a Church, Mr. R. Bern. Plain Evidences, Ann. 1610. p. 6.
than be turmoiled with such Distractions, and to be brought into such
Confusions: even a Babel of Languages, of Opinions, of Assemblies, of
Governing; of Government and what not. It is a blessing to be Well; but a
greater blessing to know it, and so to abide. For besides other Separations
which I could tell you of, the issue and result of all was this; the decay of
all true piety, and a turning all Religion into wrangling, censuring, and
condemning one another. For, as all that have declined to that Schism (mark it
I beseech you, if the character do not concern some of you) are found to be
exceeding proud, Consutation of the separatist agreed upon long since by the
joint consent of many Non-conformists Ministers, published by Mr. W. Rathband,
1644. part. 4. p. 62
and disdainful toward all that are contrary-minded; Yea, even such as (before
they were infected with that leven) were patterns of all love, modesty and
humility to others: So will they not acknowledge nor reverence any of the most
excellent graces that God has given to any of his servants among us, nor so
much respect them, as the very Papists will do. No, they profess greater
detestation and despite to the most godly and most sincere men among us, than
they do to such as are most notorious in Profaneness and Malice to the Truth.
And a Divine, more ancient than these, gave this remarkable Description of the
fruits produced by separate Congregations. Look upon the people, says he, and
you shall see very many who not regarding the chief Christian Virtues and Godly
Duties; as namely to be meek, to be patient, to be lowly, to be full of love
and mercy, to deal uprightly and justly, to guide their families in the fear of
God with wholesome Instructions, Mr. G. Gyfford's plain Declaration in which he
undertakes not to vindicate every thing in our Church, but that there was no
sufficient cause of separation, An. 1590.
and to stand fast in the calling in which God has set them; give themselves
wholly to this, even as if it were, the Sum and Pith of Religion, namely, to
argue and talk continually against matters in the Church, against Bishops and
Ministers, and one against another on both sides. Some are proceeded to this
that they will come to the Assemblies to hear Sermons and Prayers of the
Preacher, but not to the Prayers of the Book: which I take to be a more
grievous sin than many do suppose. But yet this is not the worst; For sundry
are gone further and fallen into a damnable Schism; and the same, so much the
more fearful and dangerous, in that many do not see the Foulness of it: but
rather hold them as godly Christians; and but a little over-shot in some
matters. Which words I have the rather recited, that you may see what thoughts
the most moderate men heretofore had concerning the 0 way into which you are
falling.


N. C. Truly, I can scarce see for what end you have told me all these old
stories.


C. That Is strange! I was admonishing you of the care that you should take
above all others, not to run into these dangerous paths: Who have not only
heard all these things from those before us, but also seen with your eyes, and
felt by dear experience, the great swarms of Sects and Heresies that have come
out of separate Congregations; and the miserable havoc they have made of all
true Religion and Godliness. Now what security I beseech you, have any of you,
that the Congregations you begin to draw from us, apart to your selves; shall
not break in time into as many little fractions, and produce these bitter
fruits which I have mentioned? What charm, what power have you to keep out this
evil Spirit, which always haunted the separation? All the Authority which your
Ministers may think they have, has no foundation but the Passions of the
common people. It depends for the most part on the fancies of rude Artisans,
and Ignorant Mechanics. These will make their Divinity for them; and they must
still be inventing new conceits to entertain their Imaginations. They are
servants to such a world of Masters, that it is evident they have reason to
fear their own side, as much as ours. And when they have done all they can,
they are liable to be thought Impostors, as often as any man thinks he is taught
of God, and has a new light shining into his mind. Then shall you see again
all those wild fancies fly about which are now in great measure fallen to the
ground. Old England may become as mad as the New: And such a woman as Mrs.
Hutchinson, that shall take upon her to repeat your Sermons as she did those of
Mr. Cottons; may be more cried up than all the Ministers you have.


N. C. It is impossible.


C. That which has been done more than once, may be done again. For the Wine
of Separation (as two New England Ministers call it) has such a spirit in it,
as flies up furiously into men's heads, and works with a restless violence
there. It burries them headlong, Mr. Allin and Mr. Shepherds Defense of nine
Positions. p 27.
as they speak, to strange distances; that in separating from public, they
separate from private; in separating from corrupt Churches (as no Churches)
they separate from the purest even those of their own; in separating from
pollutions in Gods Ordinances, at last they fall to the storming of some, if
not the utter renouncing of all the Ordinances themselves. For when rash and
sudden men, are grown Masters of their Consciences; it troubles not them from
whom they divide, nor whither they run in separate ways. At the very next step
they are under the Ministration of the Spirit, as the Phrase was in the late
times. They live upon Pure and Naked God in themselves, unclothed of Flesh and
Form. They are risen and caught up out of the Flesh into Spirit, out of Form
into Power, out of Type into Truth, out of Shadow into Substance, out of the
Sign into the thing Signified. And so they drink wine new in the Kingdom, even
new in the Kingdom; not in the Oldness of the Letter, but in the Newness of the
Spirit.


N. C. I remember how this Wine, as you call it, wrought in the late times, and
there are none figh more than we to think of the spiritual madness that then
raged. And I assure you we bewail and lament with many tears our present
Divisions; and have kept as many days as there are weeks in the year to seek
the Lord for the healing of our sad breaches.


C. To what purpose is that, as long as you keep them wide open, by withdrawing
your selves from the public Assemblies of Gods people? You had better spare
all that breath; for it is as ridiculous, as if a man should cry and roar under
the smart of a wound, and yet would not keep himself from raking in it
continually with his nails. Why do you not use the means of Union if you truly
desire it? What is the cause you follow not such Christian Counsel as I made
bold the last time to leave with you? That would be more effectual than all
those Fasts and Prayers, which in truth serve only to continue the Division and
keep our Wounds gaping. For they are the very things, as you use them, which
make the Schism and yet they persuade the people, that you are not too blame,
but the Bishops only.


N. C. O Sir, that you would but lay the Saddle upon the right Horse. You load
us with many accusations, but the Bishops are in fault who will not remove the
subject of these contentions. If you were not partial you would admonish them,
as well as us: And tell them they ought not to stand so precisely upon
indifferent things, and alter nothing. This would be a short way to remedy all
our evils, to take away the things which are offensive to the weak, and so
become inconvenient, if not unlawful. And you know who said, that Contentious
retaining of Customs is a turbulent thing as Innovations. Why do you not put
them in mind of these things, but spend your time only in telling us our Duty?


C. I am not so well conceited of my self as to think I am alike able to judge,
what is convenient, and what is lawful. For it requires not only great
understanding in the nature of things, but also in the nature and temper of
men, in the state of affairs at home and abroad; together with diligent and
long observation, and indeed all the perfections of a prudent Governor; to be
able to determine what is most expedient for a Church or State: But every
Christian may soon resolve or receive satisfaction about what is sinful, or
permitted to him. Besides, were I never so skilful, I should not have the
confidence (to which it seems you are arrived) to instruct my superiors: It is
enough for me to deal with my equals. Though modest proposals and humble
desires without any noise and stir, I presume, would never be disliked from any
of us: And had you always taken that course from the beginning, it had been
better for you: But you were ever for assertions and positions (as my Lord
Bacon long ago observed) and filled all the Nation, as much as you could, with
displeasure against their Governors; and taught them to esteem the compounding
of controversies to savor of man's Wisdom and human Policy.


N. C. No, we are now for an Accommodation.


C. You do well to put in that word now, for it was ever other ways heretofore,
and Books were written against it (as I will show you if you desire it) when
you hoped to carry all before you. And it is a great argument of your headiness
and passion (to say no more) that when you had power to accommodate Differences
you would not; and now you cry out for it, when it is neither in your power nor
ours. For why do you say the Bishops should remove out of the way the things
that trouble you? Have they power to alter laws and change them at their
pleasure? Are not they bound up and tied to obedience as well as your selves?
All that they can do is but to join their Votes together with many other, to
settle that Religion which is sound and good, it being the foundation of all
Laws and the common bond of human Society: And when it is established to take
the same care that it be preserved from sudden and unnecessary alterations in
any thing belonging to it; which are always dangerous not only to Religion,
but to the Civil Peace. Now since it is plain they judge it not fit to promote a
change because of some men's dislike, and none ought to be desired, in my poor
judgment, against the Opinion and without the consent of our Spiritual
Governors; who have more Wisdom, and not less Piety sure than we, what have
you and I to do but to seek peace and unity some other way without alterations?
A Schism you see is most pernicious, and like to prove most deadly to all
Religion --


N. C. Let me interpose one thing which I forgot before. We are not formed into
Churches, and so do not make a strict separation from you as others do.


C. So much the greater danger of all the mischiefs before mentioned: That men
should grow wild and mad when they are at such liberty, and under no government
but their own fancies. This your Ministers cannot but understand well enough:
And therefore must either come to us, or cast you into a great many little
bodies by your selves.


N C. I wish heartily we were united to the main Body of your Church.


C. I am glad to hear you say so. But if you would have your wishes
accomplished, you must contribute with all your power to the ending our
quarrels, by studying those things that make for peace. Do not talk of the Duty
of your Governors, but think seriously of your own. And since it is manifest,
as I told you, that they judge it not meet to promote any alteration of that
which has been so long settled; and since it is granted by so many of you,
that the things enjoined by Law are not unlawful, and by so many of us they are
thought not to be convenient; leave these earnest endeavors to alter the Laws,
and alter your selves.


N. C. What would you have us do?


C. I would have you settle your selves (and not be thus wavering) in this
persuasion, that it is lawful to join with us in the Worship of God, as now
established: And then resolve that it belongs only to those, to determine of
the Convenience of things, who have power to do what they best like, and wisdom
and judgment to weigh all circumstances and make choice of the best course: And
that if they mistake, their error shall not be imputed to you, who have nothing
to do in such matters. After this, weigh seriously and often, the great
mischiefs of Separation, which far exceed all the Inconveniences which can be
fancied in all our Ceremonies. And then your Ministers must endeavor to make
their acquaintance and followers of this belief; and confirm them in it by
coming to the Common Prayer, and informing them that all the ancient Puritans
(as they were called) did not hold it unlawful to join with with us, but the
contrary; to separate from us. Nay, let them teach them that it is a great deal
better to do somethings which possibly they had rather let alone, than quarrel
and break the peace of the Church of God. They have the Example of Mr. Calvin
for it, who finding, that during his exile from Geneva, they had brought back
the use of the Wafer-Cake of unleavened bread, would not contend about it,
though he did not like it. He knew as well as you, it was not commanded by God,
and that there was no necessity of it; nay, that this sort of bread had been
the invention of the Papists, and abused by them to Superstition and Idolatry;
and that they made unleavened bread necessary to the Sacrament, and urged it as
of Divine Institution, for which causes he disliked it; but yet he would not
strive, though it would not have been to break a custom, but only to go back
where he left them; because he saw it would make a rent. Would you would but
imitate his Discretion, and we should see an end of our Disputes; Especially if
you would not be so peremptory; for there can be no peace while you affirm with
so much confidence, that this and that doubtful thing, is the Mind of the Lord.
St. Paul was content (as my Lord Bacon, I think, somewhere observes) to speak
in this manner in some cases, Thus say I, not the Lord: and according to my
counsel. But now men do so lightly say, Not I, but the Lord, yea, and bind it
with such heavy denunciations of his judgments; that they distract poor souls
that would willingly do all that God would have them, and make Differences so
wide, that we can never come together. Be modest therefore in your affections,
desires, and all your carriage and behavior. Speak well also of the present
Ministers that conform in every thing to the Law, who approve themselves to God
and men by their diligence and piety. Be not ready to proclaim the negligence
or perhaps evil manners of any. Hear all their Instructions with Reverence, and
if your be otherwise minded in any thing, keep it to your selves, and make no
stir about it. In short, Do all that ever you can without sinning; and if you
do not condemn nor separate from those who do more than you; then your
Omissions may be pardoned, and you may more reasonably expect indulgence or
accommodation, when you do your Duty as well as you are able, than now that you
are disobedient, and obstinately refuse to obey Authority in things you
acknowledge not unlawful.


N. C. But there should be some yiedling on both sides.


C. Would you have us yield to those, who will not bend to their own Reason and
Conscience? First do what you can; otherwise we cannot so much as yield that
you are thoroughly sincere and honest hearted. And let me admonish you of this
also; that unless you reform your selves in such things as I have mentioned,
all that can be fairly yielded will not do the business. For when you have any
hope of obtaining all you wish, nothing will serve less than that. It will not
content you to have your consciences satisfied, but we must satisfy your Fancy
too: For I have been informed that there was some inclination even in Queen
Elizabeth's Days, to remove the Ceremonies of the Cross, This Sir Fran.
Walsingham told Mr. Knewstubs who related it to Dr. John Burges.
Surpliss, and Kneeling, if that would give content. But those of your
persuasion who were consulted with, returned this Answer; That they must not
leave a Hoof behind, which Answer, says my Author, made them all the faster.


N. C. It was their Conscience therefore that was unsatisfied.


C. And there is no hopes of satisfying such Consciences, as still say like
Moses to Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord; in every little point. Nothing will
please them, but pulling down all, and rearing another building after a new
model of their own; or, in their phrase, according to the pattern in the Mount.


N. C. I must talk with you about that anon, if I can; but I hope there are few
of these rigid men, now among our Ministers.


C. Then I have told them the way to peace.


N. C. But it is such away I perceive as would make them only hearers of
Sermons, not preachers, unless they conform in all things. It would tie up
their Tongues, and restrain them from the exercise of their Ministry: a thing
they can never consent unto.


C. The ancient silenced Ministers before the War quietly suffered this
restraint: and thought they might, nay, ought to cease preaching when they were
deprived.


N C. I cannot believe it.


C. It is so notorious, that the Brownists observed this to them as a Crime,
that they did acquiesce in the suspension or deprivation of the Bishops. But
they were so far from thinking it a fault; that they justified it to be a
Virtue. For so long, said they, as the Bishops suspend and deprive according to
the Laws of the land, we account of the Action herein, as of the act of the
Church; which we may and ought to reverence and yield unto: if they do other
wise; we have liberty given us by the Law to appeal from them. A most Grave and
modest Confutation of the Errors of the Sect called Brownists or Separatists;
agreed upon long since by the joint consent of many Ministers then standing out
in the cause of Inconformity. Published by Mr. Rath. 1644. part. 2. p. 41.
If it be said, that the Church is not to be obeyed when it suspends and
deprives us, for such causes as we in our Consciences think to be insufficient;
we answer: That it lies in them to depose that may ordain; and they may shut,
that may open. And that as he may with a good conscience execute a Ministry by
the ordination and calling of the Church, who is privy to himself of some
unfitness (if the Church will press him to it:) so may be who is privy to
himself of no fault that deserves deprivation, cease from the execution of his
Ministry; when he is pressed thereunto by the Church. And indeed, if a
guiltless person, put out of his charge by the Churches Authority, may yet
continue in it, what proceedings can there be against guilty persons, who in
their own conceits are always guiltless, or will at least pretend so to be;
seeing they also will be ready always to object against the Churches Judgment,
that they are called of God, and may not therefore give over the execution of
their Ministry at the will of man?


N. C. It is notably observed I must confess: I did not think they had been of
this mind.


C. Your Ministers that are or any learning know this well enough: But either
are a new brood sprung from a mixture of several Sects, or else act directly
contrary to their Principles. Say which you please, it is indifferent to me:
Whether do you think their principles are pure derived from the ancient
Non-comformists; or that they have only some of their Principles, mingled with
others of the old Separatists.


N. C. I am sure they cannot endure the name of those Separatists.


C. Why do they countenance their objections then against their forefathers;
and act more like them than the Non-conformists?


N. C. It is forgetfulness, I believe. And yet, if they thought they might keep
silence, why do they say so often, We be to me if I preach not the Gospel? 1 Cor.
9.16. and, whether it be right to hearken to you, more than to God, judge ye,
Act. 4.19, 20.


C. That Is a question to be asked them, rather than me. And their Forefathers in
Nonconformity, thought such places unskilfully alleged against them by the
Brownists, and that they were nothing to the purpose: Their Case (and so yours)
being so different from the Apostles. For first, They that inhibited the
Apostles (they are the words of those Ministers concerning the last place) were
known and professed enemies to the Gospel. Ib. part. 2. page 42.
Secondly, the Apostles were charged not to teach in the name of Christ, nor to
publish any part of the doctrine of the Gospel; which commandment might more
hardly be yielded unto than this of our Bishops, who are not only content that
the Gospel should be preached, but are also Preachers of it themselves. Lastly,
the Apostles received not their calling and Authority from men, nor by the
hands of men, but immediately from God himself, and therefore might not be
restrained or deposed by men: whereas we, though we exercise a function whereof
God is the Author, and are also called of God to it, yet are we called and
ordained by the hand and ministry of men, and therefore may by men be also
deposed, and restrained from the exercise of our Ministry.


N. C. They seem to speak with great judgment.


C. Would we could but hear you Discourse now thus wisely and solidly: It would
gain you great respect and make every body in love with you, whatsoever
differences there were between us. But to hear men only babble in
Scripture Language; so ignorantly as if they were mere Novices in Christian
Religion, and yet so confidently as if they were Apostles; it cannot but
disgust all rational persons. Besides, would not any man think that many of
your Ministers were carried more by Humor than Piety, and regarded more their
own interest, than that of Religion, when he hears them crying out, necessity
is laid upon us; and woe be to us, if we preach not the Gospel; and yet they
preach it only where there is no need, and that with a greater breach of the
Laws, than if they preached in other places? Why do they not instruct the
country people (if they must preach,) where they say the Cures are worst
served? I doubt they see their condition would be Woeful indeed, if they
preached the Gospel there; and therefore they should have added two words to
the Apostles speech and said, Woe be to us, if we preach not the Gospel, in
LONDON. There is little to be got by preaching it to the poor Country folk.
Those are barren places to sow the seed in, and will bring forth small profit
to themselves. And so they would do well to say in plain English (and I should
think them honester men if they did) Necessity is laid upon us: to tell you the
truth, We must preach to get a living.


N. C. I have heard them say, that they have searched their hearts often --


C. So did the Army as I told you, and were never the better for that.


N. C. And they find that they mean uprightly: And that it does not condemn
them of consulting with flesh and blood.


C. I find that they apishly imitate the Apostles without their spirit: And run
about with their words in their mouths, when they leave the sense behind. As if
when they want the things the Apostles had, it were some comfort to them that
they can keep their glorious Phrase and Style. Did they never consult think you
one with another, what to do?


N. C. Yes without doubt.


C. And what are they, I beseech you? Are they turned on a sudden into Spirits?
Have they left the Body, since they left our Churches; and become separated
Substances, since they became Separatists.


N. C. What do you mean?


C. Nay, what do you mean, thus vainly to affect the Apostles phrase? Who
intended nothing else, when he said, (1 Gal. 16.) that he did not consult with
flesh and blood after God was pleased to give him an immediate commission to
preach Christ, but that he did not conferr and deliberate with any mortal men,
like himself, whether he should go about that work or no. And truly in this
sense I doubt your Ministers consulted too much with flesh and blood, when they
considered whether they should conform to the Orders of the Church or no. They
applied themselves to your humor, and thought whether you would not be
displeased to see them do that which they had rashly condemned or slighted; and
hear them preach up that, which they had destroyed. Saint Paul indeed stood not
upon this, and would not hearken to what men said: But they I doubt had more of
his words than of his mind; and sat listening a great while to the voice of
flesh and blood about this matter. And I wish they did not consult too much
with it about other things: And did not baulk displeasing Doctrines. Otherwise,
why do they not teach you in an honest manner as the Old Non-Conformists did:
That the Ancient Church of God used a Form of Prayer and Praises, as every body
knows There being, say they, confessions, prayers, psalms, reading of the
Scriptures, exhortations, solemn blessing used in their Synagogues.
? And that our Savior bad his Disciples when they prayed to say, Our Father,
etc. which he would never have done, if it had not been lawful for us in making
our Prayers to God, to use the very same Words? And that is an absurd and
frivolous Exception to say, We never read that the Apostles did use a Prescript
Form of Words; For if this be sufficient to excuse us from doing what
Godexpresly commands or manifestly permits, that we never read the Apostles or
Saints did it; then we must not, or need not Baptize in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, because we never find they used those words; or that they
Baptized Infants; or that they prayed, or rendered acknowledgments to the Holy
Ghost. And farther, why do they not teach you that even upon extraordinary
occasions, which require great and special fervency of Spirit, it is lawful to
use a Form of Words, as our Blessed Savior did in his Agony Matthew. 26.42.45.
And so the Prophets had appointed as they gather from 14. Hos. 1. and 2. Joel
17.
? And again, not only those Forms which we frame our selves, but which have
been composed by others? as Solomon, they observed, Jehosophat, Hezekiah, all
used the very words that David had done before. Nay, further yet, that the
people of God have used a set Form of Words in extraordinary occasions, which
were appointed long before those occasions fell out. Daniel for instance used
the words that Solomon had commended in case of Captivity Dan. 9.5. compared
with 1 King 8 47.
: and Ezra uses the Form of Thanksgiving, which Jeremiah had appointed, say
they; to be used after their return from Captivity Vid. Psalm. 136. comp. with
33. Jer. 11. and 3. Ezra. 11.
. And more than this, that it is lawful to use not only those forms which are
in the Scripture, but such as in the compiling and collecting them, the
Invention and such other Gifts of men are used. There being a liberty (as the
Separatists themselves heretofore confessed) left in the Church to do many
things, that tend only to the setting forth Gods Ordinances. As in preaching of
the Word, and in those Prayers, which they call conceived Prayers; the Wit,
Memory, judgment, and such other human gifts are lawfully and necessarily used.
Especially considering, that the peoples Understanding and Memory may be better
helped by that they are well acquainted withal, than by the other. And then, if
forms thus devised by men be found to be lawful and profitable; what sin can it
be, for the Governors of the Church to command that such Forms be used, or for
us to use them (being persuaded of their lawfulnese) when they are imposed?
Unless any body will say, that therefore it is unlawful for us to hear the
Word, receive the Sacraments, believe the Trinity and all other Articles of the
Faith, because we are commanded by the Magistrate so to do: Whereas indeed we
ought the rather to do good things that are agreeable to the Word, when we know
them to be also commanded by the Christian Magistrate. These are the very words
of your ancient Writers against the Brownists or Separatists In the Book
published by Mr. W. Rathband. part 1. but taken, I find; out of a more ancient
writer, Mr. Rich. Bernard's confutation of the errors of Barrow and Greenwood,
Ann. 1608. page 191. 192. etc.
.

Let but your Ministers, not consulting the People's Fancies and desires,
faithfully inculcate these Truths, and endeavor to ingraft them in their
minds; it will give a great Testimony of their Sincerity, and I am sure it will
go a great way to make up our sad Divisions. If they will not press these
things more than any thing else, for the present; (there being such great
necessity of it) we can give no other reason of their silence, but that they
consult their own interest, and are loath to leave their Private Meetings. And
then considering their known and declared Principles, I shall be forced to used
a word of one of their great Enemies (though I protest I am sincerely their
friend) and say, they are of the most ancient Sect of the Auto-catacrites J.
Good-wins obstruction of Justice. p. 68.
[the Self-condemn'd] the worst of all Sectaries.


N. C. I have heard our Ministers acknowledge all this; and therefore, what
needs thus many words?


C. Acknowledge it, man? I would not only have them say so when they are ask't,
(as it were a sorrowful Confession whispered in the Ear) but publish it aloud
on all occasions; that so they may call back those sheep that are gone astray
by their means. Let every one of them, the next time you meet, speak to the
people in their own language and say, Come, let us go up out of this Babel, and
confusion; Let us return to Sion; though it be with weeping and Supplication.
There the Lord dwells, and there he is truly worshipped. For whatsoever they
may acknowledge sometime, the poor people (whom I pity with all my soul) are
strangely and passionately possessed with an opinion of the sinfulness of being
present at our Divine Service. Many of them esteem one of our Ministers, how
well soever qualified and diligent in his calling, however blameless and
exemplary in his conversation; no better than a Corrupt man, a Time-server, a
Formalist, Popishly affected, or at least, a man blinded and deceived through
Ignorance. Nay, there are those who call them the Sons of Perdition and make
them men of no Conscience. Some have questioned whether they may marry a
Conformist; as if they were the people of a strange God. To hear such a
Minister they look upon as a great crime: At least they think, if any other be
to be found, they must go to the Nonconformist, though far the weaker man. And
as if they thought that to be godliness in themselves which they call tyranny
in other men; there are some that impose this upon their Children, never to
hear the Common Prayer: And charge them, as I have heard, upon their blessing,
to obey them in this Command. And when for very shame they 01 cannot but
acknowledge the gifts of some Ministers; then they limit the use of them only to
the information of men's Minds in the letter of the Scripture and discovering
gross sins: But that they may convert Souls, and work Faith and Repentance in
them, they very much doubt, if not flatly deny. Nay, so far does this conceit
carry some of them, that they will scarce give a friendly countenance or
salutation to us: And they commonly call any small company of their own party;
the Church, the people of God, the Christians of such a town: As if we had no
portion in Christ, but they had got him wholly to themselves. These Humors
were observed in the old Separatists; and since they abound in you also, there
is great need to warn you to purge out the old leven lest it be transmitted
from generation to generation.


N. C. But though a set Forum be lawful, yet it is useless; because there is no
able Minister that needs one: and we ought not to provide Crutches for those
that are not able, but rather remove them.


C. You would fain be Governors I see, not subjects; and we should have fine
doings, if you were in the Throne: Unless you were as wise and honest as some
of your Predecessors have been, who made this discreet answer to your
Exception. There may be good Ministers, who want the gift of extemporary
conceptions of Prayer; and by consequence need a Form. For St. Paul setting
down the requisites to a Bishop (says Mr. Geree Resolution of 10. Cases
Licensed by Mr. Cranford and dedicated to Mr. Rith. Capel An. 1644.
) 1 Timothy 3. 1 Tit. Neither names nor intimates this for one of them. And where
the Scripture speaks of Ministerial gifts given to the edification of the
Church; this gift of prayer is never mentioned. 1 Corinthians. 1. to the 11. Romans
12.6.7.8. Ephesians. 4.11.12.
Tell me then, if a man have all that St. Paul requires in a Bishop, and yet
wants this gift, is he a lawful Minister of the Gospel or not? No doubt there
are such, who cannot express themselves without confusion, or to the
edification of others without the help of a Form: And experience tells us, very
excellent men have constantly tied themselves to it. As, Dr. Tailor, a
courageous witness to the Truth, used the Communion-Book even in private when
he was in Prison, and bequeathed it as a Legacy to his Wife. He instances also
in Dr. Sibs and Mr. Hildersham who used constantly one form of Prayer before
their Sermons. And I find indeed the two last Sermons of the Doctor sent abroad
by two eminent men with that Prayer before them Upon 14. John, 1. published by
Mr. Tho. Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, and dedicated to my Lord of Warwick. By
which you may see the Assembly were much out of the way, when they told you,
the Lord Jesus furnishes all those whom he calls to the Ministry with this gift
of Prayer. Or else these men were among the idle and unedifying Ministry, who
did not put forth themselves to exercise their gift. Preface to the Directory.



N.C. I have many things to say about Forms of Prayer, and yours in particular;
especially about the imposing them; if you have the patience to hear me.


C. With all my heart: Only contract what you have to say, because I have some
business stays for me.


N.C. You have seen a Book I perceive which hinders several persons, I am told,
from joining with you; and they think it unanswerable.


C. What Goliath should that be?


N. C. It is called, Common Prayer-Book-Devotions, Episcopal Delusions. Or the
Second Death of the Service Book.


C. A terrible, Giant-like Title.


N.C. The Preface to which seems to call your Ministers the Sons of Perdition,
as you just now noted.


C. O, I remember now; it is said by his Friends to be writ by Mr, J. Goodwin;
and printed in the wonderful year 1666, when they thought to see us tumble down
with a powder.


N.C. It is full of his peculiar phrases, and therefore --


C. I am not concerned at all who was the Author: Let Us consider what he says.
I took it to be a piece so soul and scurrilous; nay so profane and blasphemous
against those Devotions wherein so many thousand Souls offer up themselves to
God; that I never expected to hear you name it without abhorrence.


N.C. You pass a very hard sentence on it.


C. If you had read the two first leaves seriously, you would not say so.
Where, as if he imagined himself in a Tennis-Court when he chanced to peep into
a Church, he rudely calls the Minister's and People's answering one another,
Bandying and tossing of Devotions to and again (a witty expression you think,
but borrowed alas, as the rest of his Book, from the Railers that were before
him It is as old as the Admonition in Qu. Elizabeth's time.
). Nay, his fancy stepped immediately from thence into an Alehouse; and he tells
us that these Devotions much resemble the jolly Scent of a set of Ale-inspired
Companions, chanting their drunken Catches upon a Bench. Which is such a lewd
and impious Scoff at the Devotions inspired by the Holy Ghost (which directed
the Ancient Saints thus to answer one another 15 Exo. 1.21.15. Rev. 3.
) that, to speak in Mr. J. Goodwins phrase, he must be the firstborn of
prophanness, who can deliberately commend such writings.


N.C. But what do you say to the rest of the Book.


C. I say he was in such a Choleric fit, and laid so furiously about him when
he writ it, that neither the admirable Song of St. Ambrose, nor the Creed it
self, (which bears the name of the Apostles) could escape with fair quarter.


N C. Not the Creed?


C. No: For he blames the Liturgy; for injoyning us to make Confession of our
Faith in that form of words: because says he, it contains that, which I
believe no man understands upon any good grounds what it means; viz. the
descent of Christ into Hell.


N.C. Read his words again, Does no man understand --


C. Not one; if his belief be right, which is exceeding large in this point,
though very strait in other things.


N.C. High Presumption, you should say, not belief. Have not our Writers given
a very good account of this Article?


C. I know not so well what yours have done, I am sure ours, both Bishops and
Priests, have explained it; witness the late Primate of Ireland, Bishop Bilson,
and Dr. Pierson in his excellent Book upon the Creed.


N. C. And when the Assembly debated this, among other exceptions brought in
against the three Creeds; a learned Doctor told them (in a Speech of his) that
all the Christians in the World acknowledged Christ's descent into Hell some
way or other: either Locally, as many of the ancient Fathers, Latimer the
Martyr, Bilson, Andrews, Nowel in his Catechism; or Vertually, as Durandus; or
Metaphorically, as Mr. Calvin; or Metonymically, as Tilenus, Perkins, and the
Assembly. And therefore since there are so many ways to explain the words, he
desired that (after the example of the Harmony of Confessions) the Assembly
would content themselves with branding only the Popish Exposition of the
Article, which takes Hell for a part of Purgatory, where they suppose the Souls
of the Fathers to have laid.


C. I remember well the words Sacra Nemesis p. 18.
; it was Doctor Feately who made this Speech: But alas! all these men that we
have named understood nothing. They knew not (poor Souls!) what they said when
they made Confession of their Faith; or they had no reason worth a rush for
what they believed. Nay all the Christian World do but babble in their
Devotions, if you will take the word of this triumphant Writer; excepting always
such as himself, who have no Creed at all, that ever I heard of; I mean make no
confession of their Faith when they meet together.


N.C. They are offended perhaps with those words; else they would use the
Apostles Creed, as it is commonly called.


C. That is not the business; for he scoffs, as I told you, at the Song of St.
Ambrose, though it contain an incomparable acknowledgment of Almighty God, and
the principal points of Christian Faith, and has none of those words in it.
This is no more fit, in his conceit, to be used in Divine-Service, together
with the Psalms of David, than an Ass was to be yoked with an Ox in the same
Plough, under the Law of Moses. Had he the same opinion think you of one of his
own Hymns (or Rimes rather) though never so flat and insipid? No, I warrant
you. They were divinely inspired; heaven-born Songs; no less Canonical than the
Psalms of David.


N.C. They had no such thought of them.


C. Why then did they join them with the Holy Scriptures in Gods Service? How
durst they yoke together things so different, as those made by God and those
made by Man? Or if that were lawful; why are we blamed for using the Song of
St. Ambrose in Divine Service? Nay, why did he call our Liturgy upon this
account, a medley He adds a heap of other words as his manner is, when these
would have been sufficient.
of things, Canonicals and Apocryphals, no more fit to be molded together in
Evangelical worship, than those creatures I mentioned to be coupled in the same
Plough?


N.C. I know no reason for it.


C. Nor will you ever find a Reason why another famous Book Vox Populi, Second
part p. 3.
of yours, in the late times said; that the solemn salutes and demy-adorations
of St. John Baptist, and the Flessed Virgin were left still in the
Common Prayer Book by our Reformers. There is no occasion at all for this
Calumny, unless he thought Magnificat and Benedictus were two Popish Hymns,
whereby we honored those Saints: as it were easy, I think, to persuade many
of their ignorant and credulous Followers. Nay, they who can be content to hear
us compared to a knot of Ale-inspired Companions, when we sing those words of
the Holy Ghost; may, for any thing I know, be taught to rail upon Magnificat
and Benedictus, if as they were but certain Drunken Catches.


N.C. You are too severe.


C. I abhor severity where gentleness is the proper cure. But Saint Paul tells
Titus, that unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers, must be rebuked sharply,
Tit. 1.13. And there needs no other witness that there are such among them (
whose mouths must be stopped) than the Prefacer to the Book we are speaking of: a
confident Ignoramus, who struts as if he were some great man, and makes a
rattling with his big words as if he had some mighty matter to tell us; but in
effect has just nothing, except two or three gross and palpable falsehoods, of
which I will make him ashamed if he have not a very brazen forehead.


N C. Do you think he would lie for Christ?


C. I think he is a bold and vain talker of things he understands not: what
more, do you judge when you have heard what I have to say. If the Book was writ
by the person before named, as his Disciples affirm, then he tells us one
Notorious Tale when he says, The Author ended his days in a kind of Exile, for
adhering to this truth, defended in his Book. viz. That nothing ought to be
imposed in the worship of God. For it is well known by all that understand any
thing of our affairs, that Mr. John Goodwin suffered no banishment of any kind;
but was disabled from his office (though there had been no Common Prayer) for
intermedling so much in the late Civil quarrels, and writing a Book to justify
the horrid murder of our late Sovereign. But to let that pass. He asks us, you
remember, Where were more learned, more godly men in the World, than
Cartwright, Parker, Reynolds, Greenham, Ames? And who knows not that these
and many more of the same heavenly stamp, suffered extreme Persecution,
Deprivations and Banishments, rather than they would touch with the graven
Images, the work of the Craftsmen, that then were, and now are, the snares and
nets upon Mispeh and Tabor?


N C. I remember them very well.


C. And is he not an abominable reviler in reproaching us with Idolatry, and
the worshipping of Graven Images?


N.C. But where are the Falsehoods?


C. Is that none think you? But those I now intend are, that he makes those men
against a stinted form of worship who were for it; and to suffer extreme
persecution on that account who suffered none at all, much less Banishment.
Other untruths there are, but these are sufficient to make him blush, if he
have any of that virtuous color left.


N.C. Was not Cartwright of his mind?


C. No. For he declared his meaning was not to disallow of a prescript form of
Prayer, and an Uniform Order in the Church. His quarrel was only with some
things in our Service Book. But yet he professed he did not oppose the
Ceremonies as simply unlawful, but only as inconvenient. And therefore
persuaded the Pretchers rather to wear the Surpliss than cease their Ministry,
and the people to receive the Sacrament kneeling, if they could not have it
otherways: because though that gesture was, as he conceived, incommodious, yet
not simply unlawful. All which and a great deal more I will prove out of his
own works and other good Authors, if it be contradicted; as also that he lost
his Professors-place at Cambridge upon other accounts, and after all went to
Warwick where he was born, and dyed in the discharge of his Office as their
Minister. And Mr. Edwards I remember tells us that he citing a passage out of
Mr. Cartwright's Comments on the Proverbs, in a Sermon he preached a little
before the Wars to persuade the people to take heed of the White Devil, viz.
the separation upon greater pretense of Purity; Mr. John Goodwin came to him
when he had done, and gave him great thanks for it. As for Mr. Parker, he
indeed went further and said, the Ceremonies were unlawful either to be
imposed, or used. But he was far from being so great a Scholar as this man
fancies; at least his learning was not well digested. For taking upon him to
maintain, that Popish Idolatry is every whit as bad as Pagan, he brings a
passage out of Saint Augustine to justify this, that a Heretic is worse than
a Pagan. Which are the Words of another man, whom Saint Augustine in that place
confutes, and asks him by what rule he concluded this, seeing our Lord said, If
he hear not the Church let him be to thee as an Heathen, not worse than an
Heathen; By which you may see how how forward men of this spirit are; to catch
at any thing that may seem to favor their Opinions, and to make a show of
learning when they think it will serve them, though they slight and undervalue
it as a carnal weapon, when it is in their Adversaries hands. And if I thought
this man understood him, I should imagine he had learnt of Mr. Parker to
magnify those of his own party beyond their deserts: For he extolls the
refusing of conformity as such a singular piece of service done to God, that he
compares such persons as were therefore deprived, to David, Worthies, and the
three hundred men that followed Gideon. Most brave flourishes! How can you
choose but yield your felf captive to such Champions; believing this Preface
upon his word, that those he Musters up were in the number of the Worthies. But
he belies Mr. Greenham too; as I am able to prove from good Testimony, even
from himself. But for brevities sake I shall only let you know that Doctor John
Burges assures us, that on his own knowledge and in his hearing, Mr. Greenham
denied to persuade any man against the use of the Ceremonies; and professed he
would be loath to be put to the solution of this Objection (as he called it)
wear the Surpliss, or Preach not. Which is an argument that though he did not
like them, yet he did not hold them unlawful, much less Idolatrous, as this
Ignorant Writer would persuade us. I can prove also that he abuses Doctor Ames,
but that I make haste to tell you; the most palpable forgery of all, is the
putting Doctor Reynolds into the Catalogue of his Mighty Men. And since he
pretends to understand Latin, I will send him for his more full conviction to
an Author no less learned than that excellent Doctor, and a far better Scholar
than any of the rest; and that is Doctor Richard Crackanthorp, who tells the
Archbishop of Spalato that the Doctor was no Puritan (as he called him) but he
himself a Calumniator. Defens. Ecclsiae Anglicanae, etc. cap: 69: page 419. An.
1529.
For first, he professed that he appeared unvillingly in the cause at Hampton
Court, and merely in obedience to the Kings command. And then, he spoke against
not one word there against the Hierarchy. Nay, he acknowledged it to be
consonant to the word of God, in his conference with Heart. And in an Answer to
Sanders his Book, of the Schism of England (which is in the Archbishops
Library) he professes that he approves of the Book of Consecrating and ordering
Bishops, Priests and Deacons. He was a strict observer also of all the Orders
of the Church and University, both in public and his own College: wearing the
Square Cap and Surpliss, Kneeling at the Sacrament, and he himself
commemorating their Benefactors at the times their Statutes appointed, and
reading that Chapter out of Ecclesiasticus, which is on such occasions used. In
a Letter also of his to Archbishop Bancroft (then in Doctor Crackanthorps
hands) he professes himself conformable to the Church of England, willingly and
from his heart, his Conscience admonishing him so to be. And thus he remained
persuaded to his last breath; desiring to receive Absolution according to the
manner prescribed in our Liturgy, when he lay on his Deathbed. Which he did
from Doctor Holland the King's Professor in Oxford; kissing his hand in token
of his Love and Joy, and within a few hours after resigned up his Soul to God.
What think you now; was Doctor Reynolds one of those that abominated our
Worship, suffered extreme persecution, deprivation and banishment too? Or must
he that lately stood among the most learned and godly men in the World, be now
blotted out, and put in the black list of Idolaters, and touchers with Graven
Images? What say you? Will you never see how these men deceive you? Must the
most knowing men on our side, that report things to us from solid testimony, be
thought liars; and these impudent sots be believed on their bare word?


N.C. I am convinced he understood nothing of these matters.


C. And yet he writes like a Teacher; though I believe he never studied their
own Writers about these points. If he had; the silenced Ministers in those
days would have taught him a great part of what I have said. For they have
told us in Print, Christian Modest Offer (as they call it), of the silenced
Ministers, in which they call for another disputation. Anno 1606.
that Most of those Ministers appointed to speak for them at Hampton Court were
not of their choosing, or Nomination, or Judgment in the matters then in
question; but of a clean contrary. For being entreated at that time to dispute
against those things as simply evil and such as could not be yielded to without
sin, they professed to them, they were not so persuaded, and therefore could
not do so. And being then requested to let his Majesty understand, that some of
their Brethren were further persuaded touching the unlawfulness of those things
than themselves, they refused that also. Now I would fain know of this
Epistler, whether he do not think Doctor Reynolds was one of those Most? and
whether he do not see that such men as he were ashamed the King should know;
that any of the Nonconformists (to whom they wished well) were so weak as to
call the things in difference simply evil?


N.C. I think you had best dismiss this man. What say you to the Arguments in
the Book it self?


C. Where shall we find them? There are strains of railing Rhetoric, ill
applied similitudes (which are the common way of deceiving) abused Scriptures;
loose inconsequent-reasonings; in a word, no arguments, that do not prove a
great deal too much.


N.C. Methinks there is something in that, p. 4. That it is impossible for a
man to keep up his heart so much as in a tolerable posture of Devotion,
reverence and attention to such Prayers, as having been framed by men, and
those no more excellent than their neighbors, are grown familiar to us, and
can be said by roat beforehand, we having heard them a thousand times already.


C. Nothing at all. For by whom are their Prayers framed? Are they Angels or
glorified Saints in the Church Triumphant, that must not have the name of Men?
Or dare they say, the Spirit frames them? And do they not repeat for ever the
same phrases, only not put together always in the same Order? How many thousand
times have you heard them beg, that they might prize Christ more, and
Ordinances more, and Sabbaths more and a number of such like things as these?
And besides all this, what say you to the Psalms of David? Could no man
anciently join devoutly in singing them, because they were so often repeated,
and so well known that the Jews had them by heart?


N.C. I cannot tell; But God himself, he says, judges it necessary to consult
his glory (I mean a Religious awe, reverence and esteem to his counsels and
works from men) by concealing the one and the other, till the time of their
bringing forth, that so they may come fresh and new to them. What say you to
that?


C. I say he does not write sense, for it is as if he had told us, that God
does not reveal his Counsels, till he reveal them.


N.C. But you may guess at his meaning; that God keeps secret what he intends
to do, till he bring it to pass.


C. That Is false. For he foretold many things by the Prophets. But were it
altogether true; it is nothing to the purpose. For though he surprises us
sometimes with events we never thought of, and could not foresee; and will not
always ways let us know what be intends to do: yet he does not judge it
necessary to conceal his will, concerning that which we are to do. No; quite
contrary. He judges it necessary to declare it, and has made no new
Declaration since the Apostles times. And yet we may have a Religious
reverence, sure, to his Counsels revealed in his Word, though they come not
fresh and new to us. If we cannot; all that I have to say is, that then the
same Exception lies against them, which you bring against the Common Prayer.
Nor are your own Prayers so fresh and new as he pretends; but we know
beforehand the most you have to say; only you have some new invented Words and
Phrases which sometimes give us just disgust.


N.C. Does not our Savior say, Mat. 13.52. that every Scribe, every Teacher,
instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, i.e. meetly qualified for the work of the
Ministry of the Gospel, is like to a man that brings forth out of his
Treasures, things new and old?


C. What of all that?


N.C. Doubtless our Savior spoke it upon this Account, as he tells you.


C. Doubtless he was full of fancy (as well as the rest of his Brethren) which
laid hold of every thing without any reason, if it would but make a show, and
serve to countenance their wild opinions. Else he would have easily seen that
our Lord speaks of his Apostles and Evangelists, who were furnished with
abilities to propagate the Gospel, both by their knowledge in the Old
Revelations in the ancient Scriptures, and in the new, which he made unto them.


N. C. But the Liturgy smells rank of the Popish Mass Book which alone is
sufficient to make it the abhorring of their souls that understand any thing of
the severity of the Divine jealousy, etc. page 5.


C. The old N. C. were not affrighted with such terrible Nothings as these. But
told our English Donatists (the Brownists) who objected this: That it was more
proper to say the Mass Book was added to our Common Prayer, than that our
Common Prayer was taken out of the Mass Book. For most things in our
Common Prayer were to be found in the Liturgies of the Church, long before this
Mass Book, you talk of, was heard of in the world. The Mass was patched up by
degrees and added to the Liturgies of the Church; now one piece, then another.
And if a true man may challenge his goods wheresoever he finds them, which the
thief has drawn into his Den; then the Church of God may lawfully lay claim to
those holy things which the Church of Rome has usurped, and snatch them away
from among the trash wherewith they are mingled. A great deal more to the same
purpose you may find in Mr. John Ball Answer to two Treatises of Mr. John Can.
1642. part. 2. page 9.
, which I cannot now stand to tell you. The sum is this; That Popery is a Scab
or Leprosy that cleaves to the Church. It mostly stands in erroneous, faulty,
gross and abominable superstructures upon the true Foundation, whereby they
poison, or overthrow the foundation it self. But take away the superstructures
and the foundation remains: Remove the Leprosy and the man is sound.


N. C. You talk of Liturgies in the ancient Church: We read of none in the
Apostles time.


C. True: But as the same person ingenuously confesses, Ib. part. 2. p. 17.
they might be, though we read nothing of them. For the Apostles have not set
down a Catalogue of all and every particular Order that was in the Church.
However, a set form of Prayer to be used in public meetings is not unlawful,
because it is of the number of things which God has not determined in his
Word, etc. And as to call that Holy which God has not commanded is
Superstitious, so it is erroneous to condemn that as unholy or profane which
God allows, or is consonant to his Word, though not precisely commanded.


N. C. It is a common opinion that the Liturgy is a novel Invention in the
days of blindness and laziness, in favor of Idle and debauched Priests.


C. You are all as learned as the Prefacer to your Book. But you might be more
truly learned if you would read the Author now mentioned; who tells you that
though it is hard to determine the precise antiquity of stinted Liturgies; yet
that they have been in use in the Christian Church for the space of 1400. years
if not above, no man can deny. And that they could not be invented for such
ends as you imagine; because the chief promoters of stinted Liturgies were
renowned for their constant and unwearied preaching every day in the week and
sometimes twice Ib. page 18.
. The New England Ministers would have taught you more; for all they dare say
against the Antiquity of Liturgies is, that for about an hundred years there
were none Letter of Reply and Answer about 9. positions, page 2.
: Then your Dialogue-maker Mr. Hughes, p. 42.
tells you they came in; but has the impudence to add, that Ministers then
grew idle and weary of taking pains.

N. C. It is a sad thing there should be such endless disputes: Surely if they
that composed the Common Prayer bad dreamt that it would create so many
divisions, distractions, tumults, confusions, etc. they would never have found
either heart or hand to lift up toward the promoting of it. page 8.


C. An admirable Argument! As if he had said, The Penmen of Holy Scripture
would never have writ as they have done; if they had but foreseen what ill use
would be made of their words, what Wranglings and Disputes they would raise,
and how they would be wrested and tortured to a sense which they never thought
of. Must the possibility of an inconvenience that may grow, hinder us from
doing good things?


N. C. No. But there is no good comes of this. For they who like this kind of
Worship are generally Ignorant, Profane, Superstiti us, Time-Servers, Fearful,
Unbelievers, Haters of those that are good, Drunkards, Adulterers, etc


C. I know he says so: And repeats it a little after, that they are generally
if not universally persons much estranged from the life of God, affectionate
lovers of this present World. But we know withal that there is a vast number of
Ignorant revilers, railers, liars, false-accusers, covenant Breakers, proud
censurers of their Brethren, uncharitable, contentious, implacable,
self-conceited, greedy scrapers of wealth, etc. Who love the other kind of
Worship, and like no Prayers but those of their own conceiving. Does not this
Argument war strongly (as his phrase is) against such a worship; and is it not
a great presumption of the carnality of it, that it comports with the humors,
fancies and Consciences of men of such an evil Spirit? If you like not such
Reasonings against the Prayers of your invention, let them alone when you
dispute against ours. But I must tell you however that this man, let him be who
he will, has committed a most heinous sin, and is presumptuously uncharitable
in judging the Generality, if not all, of us to be ungodly. We know the
contrary, and are assured that there are more than one of a City, or two of a
Tribe (as he loves to speak) that are truly conscientious, and serve God in
this way which he so scorns, with much satisfaction and joy of heart. And all
sober men I think, will look upon it as an intolerable piece of Pride in him
to say, that it is hardly credible any man fearing God (if there be any such
among us) should partake at any time in this worship with any great
contentment. This is to measure other men's Corn by your own Bushel. A piece of
the old leven of the Scribes and Pharisees, or if you will, the Separatists
here in England before he was born: To whom Mr. Gyfford answered then as we do
now Answer to Mr. Greenwood, page 72. etc. 1590.
. It cannot be denied but that many pray fervently with sighs, and groans, and
tears, who read the Prayer upon the Book, or have it as we use to say, by heart.


N. C. But if your prayer Book were as free from blemish as Absalom, nay, if it
had been composed by a General Council of Elect Angels; the imposing of it
would be imperious Blasphemy, and the use of it as imposed, base and wretched
Idolatry.


C. Go and find some child to fright with your blustering Language.


N. C. It is more than noise. For he tells you ( page 11.) that it is as well
or as much the incommunicable privilege or prerogative of God to prescribe,
appoint and command his own worship, as it is to be worshipped. And therefore
whosoever shall authoritatively under any penalties command any Form, Model,
Method or Manner of Divine Worship makes himself God; and whosoever submits to
such Worship is an Idolater, because he gives that honor to a creature which
is due to God alone. What have you to say against this Argument?


C. I say that as no body doubts but God, who is above all, has a right to
appoint his own Worship, so it is as certain that he has not appointed any
model of Worship or form of words to be used in Prayer and none else. Nor has
he told us that he will not be worshipped by a set Form, or that we must vary
our words and phrases, and conceal what we have to say to him till we bring it
forth. And therefore I say he has left it to our sober and Religious Reason to
determine after what manner that worship which he requires may be best
performed. And if not to every man's reason (which would be absurd) then those
who govern the rest are to consider how christian Societies when they meet
together may most solemnly pray in the name of our Lord Jesus for such things
as are according to Gods will; and give thanks also to God the Father through
him. And consequently it is no incommunicable prerogative to appoint a Form or
Order of Divine Worship, since God has not appointed one himself, and yet must
not be worshipped disorderly. And if it may be appointed, then it may be
appointed under penalties, to keep men from wanton contempt of the public
Reason. Mr. J. G. you remember composed a hymn to be sung on a day of
Thanksgiving in his Congregation. This was a form, and authoritatively imposed;
else every one there might have brought forth his hymn and put all into
confusion: which if they had done they might justly have been censured by him,
if he had had any power. Now I would fain know why the Magistrate may not
prescribe the Song of St. Ambrose, or any other godly Hymn to be sung by all
Congregations committed to his charge; as well as one Minister prescribe an
hymn to his particular Congregation? and why the Magistrate may not use all his
power and punish as he sees cause; as well as such a Minister use all his (who
could only reprove) in case of contempt? I would know also how this Author
could excuse the whole Christian World from being Idolaters, you Presbyterians
not excepted, if his Doctrine be true. For the Parliament prescribed the
Directory, and that not without penalties, as a model or manner of Divine
Worship: and so they usurped the place of God; and you who submitted to their
orders, Worshipped the creature, and said constructively and in effect (if he
reason right) to the Parliament, Thou art my God, or I acknowledge and own thee
for my God.


N. C. I remember the words, page 12.


C. And what would have become of you, if after this dreadful sentence, he had
not in an extraordinary fit of good nature revoked it; and allowed the use of a
prescribed form? For though he say that conceived prayer, for the nature and
kind of it, is that very worship which God Commands. Yet as he does not prove
it, so he affirms it not confidently, without this restriction; at least to
those that are, or by the use of means may be, capable of it, p. 30. Very
kindly said; I perceive this gift then of conceiving prayer is but natural, and
no divine inspiration: and where nature is not ready in its conceptions, it may
be relieved by the help of Art: and some may be incapable of it, whatsoever
means they use to acquire this gift. And consequently conceived prayer is not
the Worship which for the nature and kind of it, God commands; because he does
not command impossible things: but another manner of Worship by a constant form
may be used; nay, imposed too when a Magistrate judges it needful, and sees
that those who are most zealous for conceived Prayers alone, have generally
least abilities to conceive aright. In short he grants, p. 55. that stinted
forms of Prayer in themselves, unto some men, and under some circumstances may
be lawful: He might as well have said needful, for I suppose-he thought them
lawful, in case men could not conceive prayers themselves, as they ought. And
then why may not the circumstances be such that they may be needful to all; at
least at sometimes, when men of the readiest inventions are indisposed? And
mark I beseech you how timerously he begins to speak after all his vapouring,
when he tells us, We shall hardly find in the Scripture, especially in the New
Testament, the same Prayer used by the same person the second time. It seems we
may find it, if we will but take the pains. But to save us a labor he
presently remembers, that Christ prayed the same words a second and a third
time: which he excuses thus; by the same words we are to understand the same in
sense, matter and import, but not in sound, letters or syllables. How he came
to know this I cannot tell; for my part I believe our Savior was not concerned
about new words when he had the same thing to say again. But the like
peremptory conclusion he makes concerning all the exhortations to prayer
delivered by Christ or his Apostles: which he says were intended only of that
kind of prayer which the Saints were to conceive and indite by the help of the
Spirit, which they who believed did receive. To countenance this he cites a
great many Scriptures, and tells us that those places (at least the most of
them) cannot be understood of the Miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, etc.
which is so notoriously false that I wonder he had the confidence to affirm it.
The first is Joh. 7.39. the next, Act. 5.32. which no man I think before him
ever understood otherwise than of the extraordinary gifts bestowed on the day
of Pentecost. And of such gifts the Apostle speaks in the Romans 5.5. 2. Cor.
5.5. Gal. 3.2. Ephesians. 1.13. In short, there is but one place of all that he
musters up, that can with any color be drawn to serve his purpose, viz. Romans
8.14, 15. And yet to me there is no Sense so plain of those words as this; that
all the gifts of the Holy Ghost being a great Evidence of the truth of
Christianity, they that lived accordingly, might be assured of the love of God;
and whether they were Jews or Gentiles might call God Father, though they
observed not the Law of Moses. But I most marvel that he should allege that
place in 1 John 2.27. which the Brownists, I remember, were wont to cite (and
with more show of reason) to prove that every Saint had the Holy Spirit to open
to them, and lead them into every truth. To which if you please you shall hear
what the Old Nonconformist replied.


N. C. I had rather hear what you can reply to the Scriptures which he brings
to prove, that therefore God abominates a worship or a form and manner of
Worship, because he has not commanded it. Though the Worship were in its own
nature abominable, yet he takes no notice of that; but only of its not being
commanded, which is a sign the provocation lies there. Jer. 7.31. Jer. 19.5.
etc. page 19.20.


C. I remember the places very well; and remember withal that this is a
miserable old argument which has been answered many a time before he set pen
to Paper. And it has been proved with plain Evidence, that the meaning of the
words, which I commanded not, is as much as, which I forbad: as he had expressly
their offering their children to Molock of which he speaks in that Jer. 7.31.
So when it is said that they offered strange fire which the Lord commanded not,
Lev. 10.1. all conclude that less is said and more understood, viz. that the
Lord has forbidden it. Mr. Ainsworth himself cannot deny it, who yet makes the
same use of this phrase sometimes that this Author does. And indeed a man must
flatly contradict all reason that opposes this. For when he speaks of those
that should worship other Gods. Sun and Moon which he had not commanded, Deuteronomy.
17.3. it is senceless to interpret it otherwise than this; which he had
forbidden. For if this was the reason why a man sinned in worshipping the Moon,
that he did it without Gods leave or Command; it would suppose that God might
have commanded them to worship it and serve other Gods: which no body imagines.
All those places therefore, which he alleges to prove that Gods not commanding
a thing is enough to make it unlawful, amount to no more but this; that his
forbidding a thing makes it unlawful.


N. C. But we ought to interpret the Scripture according to the very form of
the words; and so, that is unlawful which is not commanded.


C. Just now you were only for the sense and the matter, not the words and
syllables. But to let that pass; I have shown you this is a fashion of Speech
in the Old Testament for a thing forbidden. And besides, the absurdity of your
Interpretation is so great, that the wiser sort of that party who first used
this argument were forced afterward to forsake it: as I can clearly demonstrate
out of Mr. Cartwright. And in deed where has the Lord commanded a Minister to
read a Text and gloss upon it; or the Congregation to sing the Psalms of David
in Meter? Mr. Smith can never be answered by these Disputers, who said that the
Holy Scriptures were not to be retained as helps before the eyes in time of
worship: and that it was unlawful to look upon a Book in singing Psalms. Nor
could they have told what to say to that poor Gentleman in Warwickshire, who
was so deeply possessed with these two fancies, that we must not communicate
with sinners: nor use any humane inventions in Gods Service; that to avoid the
first he shut up himself and children in his house, having no meat but what was
put in at the window; nor suffering any body to come near them when they all
lay sick in great misery: and to avoid the last, he cut out the Contents and
the Titles of every thing in the Bible, leaving nothing but the Text it self
Mr. Ball Answ. to Can. p. 138.



N. C. Does not God say thou shall neither add thereto nor diminish from it?
Deuteronomy. 12.32.


C. What? not add Contents, or Notes for the better understanding of the Bible?


N. C. Nothing to the worship of God, of which his own Word is to be the only
rule, and not the least title to be abused of our own.


C. Why do you only say to his Worship? You learned this of Mr. Ainsworth the
old S'paratist, who most unjustly restrains those words to God's Service:
whereas Moses speaks of every thing he had received from him, whether they were
Statutes or Judgments as you may see, v. 1. In one word, of the whole Law,
which was to direct them not only in Religious but civil Affairs Read the 4
Deuteronomy. 1.2. where he begins his exhortation to observe his Laws; requiring them
not to add or diminish from any of them.
And therefore this place is as effectual to prove that there may be no Law
made to determine our civil controversies, as that there may be none made to
order God's Worship and Service. And then what hinders but those men may obtain
their desires, who told you lately, it will never-be well till the Laws of the
Lord Jesus be received alone? That all our Counselors and Pleaders bring their
Books of Common Law and bestow them as the Students of Curious Arts did theirs
in the Apostles time? That the Godly send out their writs to supersede all
proceedings in Westminster Hall, and judge all things in their Churches?


N. C. The State will never suffer that Folly.


C. Nor this foolish interpretation of Scripture, I hope. The Jews I am sure
(from whom Mr. Ainsworth borrows so many useful expositions) never thought that
no particular Laws might be made agreeable to the General, and for the
preservation and better execution of them. For the Elders made many; and
imposed those commandments on the people as a hedge and security to the Divine
Laws: and in this they did well. All the fault was that in process of time they
grew too numerous, and they equalled the decrees of the Elders with the very
word of God, nay, sometimes made the Law void by them.


N. C. Since you say you are in have to be gone, I Will trouble you no farther
about this Book: though there are many things behind that deserve consideration.


C. I am not of that mind. He has but raked togather all the frivolous
exceptions, with the filthy scoffs and jeers which were answered in the days of
our Forefathers: and are as easy to confute as to tell to Twenty. But let me
tell you this before we part with him, that Mr. J. Goodwin was not wont to
allow reasons drawn from the Jewish Law (though all the lofty Rhetoric in this
Book be drawn from it) because the state of things now is not like what was
then. He tells us for instance in his Hagiomastix, though blasphemers, seducers
to Idolatry, and false Prophets were put to death by that Law, yet we have not
the same reason to do so now; because they might immediately consult with God
in all difficult cases that happened about matters of Religion; but we have no
such infallible directions in all cases, and cannot have disputes so ended. If
this Reasoning be good, then this is I am sure. God directed every thing about
their Sacrifices in the Jewish Law, and therefore no Rite or Ceremony was to be
added by them, because if any more were needful they might still repair to him:
But he has not done so under the Gospel, nor do we know to what Prophet or
Oracle to go for direction in every thing; and therefore we must repair to
Religious Prudence and discretion.


N. C. I marvel he should speak with so much confidence and triumph in a matter
that is so disputable.


C. It was the manner and the custom of the man (if Mr. J. G. were the Author)
as you may be satisfied if you look into his Anticavalerisme. Where he tells
you, There is no occasion Page 6.
for a man to make a stand in matter of conscience, whether he should engage on
the Parliaments side, or no: nothing to detain ones Conscience in suspense; the
righteousness of the Cause being as clear as the light, or as the Sun at noon
day. And to grace the business with Scripture language, he tells you; the Cause
is like the Law of God it self in these excellent qualifications of it; that it
is Holy, just and good.


N. C. I never knew any man speak with such assurance in a thing which all wise
men thought at least doubtful.


C. Well, I put you in mind of it then, that you may not either wonder or be
staggered when you hear men speak with such assurance. For he uses as big and
confident words in another case, in which I am sure you are as confident of the
contrary, viz. about the putting our Late Sovereign to death. This conclusion,
says he, stands like a great mountain immovable; that the justice and honor
of the sentence against the late King are no way impairable by this supposition
that this present Parliament is not a compleatly-legal Parliament. Deferce of
the sentence passed on the King, p. 47.
And in another place; Doubtless never was there any person under heaven
sentenced with death upon more equitable or just grounds, in respect of guilt
and demerit Ib. p. 91. repeated again p. 95. without all controversy, there
never was in any age through the whole world, a sentence more just, etc.
. Thus he boasts also, that he has brought this Conclusion, That there was a
necessity lying on the Army to seclude many Members, into as clear and perfect
light as any the Sun shines at Noonday Reply to Mr. Geree's might overcoming
Right. p. 130.
.


N. C. At midnight he should have said.


C. No; let him say at noonday. They are but words of course; every thing,
though never so dark, is to him as clear as the noonday. And therefore no
wonder it be so clear to him that we are all Idolaters; and that the King in
imposing the Common Prayer has equalled himself unto God, and obtruded himself
as God, to be worshipped by us as Nebuchadnezzars Golden Image was. For he told
us you know in express words, That whosoever shall authoritatively and under a
penalty command any model, method, or manner of Divine worship to be observed
by men, makes himself God, etc. you may read it at large, p. 11. 12. For it is
as clear as the Sun.


N. C. That such Books ought to be burnt.


C. I must add that you are all guilty of too much confidence, and talk as if
you were infallible in your conclusions. When you see therefore the folly of it
in another, mend it in your selves. And do not talk here after as if all Godly
men had ever been of your mind: No man of a tender Conscience but held it
unlawful to prescribe any thing in Gods worship. Every Body knows Cartwright,
Reynolds, Greenham were of this opinion as the Prefacer boldly told you; and it
is a wonder he did not add Dr. Sibbs. For so some of your party took care the
world should believe; and chose rather to corrupt his writings, then have it
thought he was of another Persuasion.


N. C. I shall never believe it.


C. You may choose: But I shall prove that this good man's writings were abused
presently after his death in this very point. For in his Book called the Souls
Conflict, he gave this direction among others to guide a Soul in doubtful
Cases. The Laws under which we live are particular determinations of the Law of
God; and therefore ought to be a rule to us so far as they reach. Though it be
too narrow a Rule to be good only so far as man's Law guides unto; yet Law being
the joint Reason and consent of many men for public Good, has an use for the
guiding of our Actions that are under the same. Where it dashes not against
Gods Law; what is agreeable to Law is agreeable to Conscience. Thus the Rule
stood when the Book first came out First Edition 1635. page 364.
. But in a very short time after, when he was newly laid in his grave, the
first words were changed into these; The Laws under which we live, are
particular determinations of the Law of God in some duties of the Second Table.
In which they made two restrictions of that which he had said in General words;
First, they restrained the Rule to the Second Table, and not to all things
neither, but only some duties. And then they add a whole Sentence, by way of
Example, which was not in the first Edition: which I make no doubt was done on
purpose, lest any man who read the Book should think it was the Doctors
opinion, that we should conform to the Orders of our Governors about the
worship of God, where the Law of God has determined nothing in particular, and
their Laws do not cross his. But what is there done by the Jesuits worse than
this! what greater injury to the dead than thus to play tricks with their
Books, and change their words at your pleasure?


N. C. It is very strange.


C. I have something more to tell you. As they have added here, so they have
taken away in another place just before it. He is Answering I told you this
Question, what course must we take for guidance of our lives in particular
actions wherein Doubts may arise, what is most agreeable to Gods will? And one
Advice is this; we must look to our place wherein God has set us. If we be in
subjection to others, their Authority in doubtful things ought to sway with us.
A dangerous Rule some men thought; and therefore in the next Edition, they left
out those words in doubtful things. And also blotted out this whole sentence
which follows; It is certain we ought to obey ( viz. in doubtful things of
which he is speaking) and if the things wherein we are to obey be certain to
us; we ought to leave that which is uncertain, and stick to that which is
certain: In this case we must obey those that are under God.


N. C. Are you sure of this?


C. As sure as that I see you: though I must tell you there was a neat device
to hide this fraud; for they reprinted the Book speedily with the very same
Title page that was before without giving notice, that it was a second Edition:
And by leaving out those lines; and adding an example, as I told you; to
illustrate the rule as they had restrained it, they made the pages exactly even
as they were at the first. There are two Editions of 1635. one of his own,
another of some bodies else; but so ordered that they seem the same. At least
they reprinted that sheet (wherein these things are contained) with these
alterations, which I add lest I should not be rightly understood by all.
Afterward the Book was divided into Chapters: and in all Editions since you
will find these Rules ( Chapt. 17.) with these alterations.


N. C. By his own appointment, it is like.


C. Why did they not tell us so?


N. C. I know not.


C. I Will tell you then: They were loath to tell a plain lie: For the Doctor dyed
within three days after he had writ his Preface to the first Impression; and
therefore it is most likely made no Alterations. That Preface was dated July the
first 1635. and he dyed July the fourch. So I gather from those who put out his
two last Sermons preached June 21. and 28. and he dyed, say they, the Lords day
following. Immediately after which came out a new impression of the same year
1635. but not called a second Edition: which they would have us believe was not
till 1636. A mere cheat as I confidently affirm, having seen and compared all.


N. C. I see now you are of an imposing Spirit: and have taken a great deal of
pains to show it.


C. What? Am I for imposing on men those words they never said?


N. C. Be not so perverse. All the Reformed Churches are against imposing of
Set Forms, as I have been told.


C. As perverse as I am, I Will follow you for once. So you have been told, I
believe, that they are against all Set Forms though not imposed: I am sure I
have.


N. C. No, I remember in the beginning of the late Wars the Scottish Forms of
Prayer were printed.


C. And so were the French, and those of Geneva, and Guernsea, and the Dutch,
to name no more; all translated into English. Therefore pray satisfy some of
your Ignorant but yet confident Friend, in this matter. As for that of
Imposing; what think you of these words of Mr. Calvin in his letter to the
Protector, October. 22. 1548. As for Forms of prayer and Rites Ecclesiastical, I
do greatly approve that there be a certain one extant, from which it shall not
be lawful for the Ministers in their function to depart, etc. For which he
there gives solid Reasons. And whatsoever is pretended to the contrary, the
Reformed Churches do follow this Counsel; and tie men to a Form in the public
duties of Gods worship, as I can evidently show. But now let me only observe
that heretofore your Ministers thought it no light Argument against the
Separatists, that all Reformed Churches acknowledged the Church of England as
their sister: and consequently did not think her wicked for imposing Forms of
Prayer. So you may read in the Book I told you of before, published by Mr.
Rathband, p. 6. though the truth is those Ministers have taken that Argument
out of the Book of Mr. Bernards Errors of Barrow and Greenwood confuted, 1608
page 178.
; who speaks discreetly when he says, That though we do not make this our only
or chief defense, whereby we seek to approve our selves to God, or the
consciences of his people; yet it is a thing that gives some reputation to us.
For even Saint Paul who received not his calling either from or by men,
alleges for the credit of his Ministry, that three chief Apostles approved
him, and gave him the right hand of fellowship. And which is more, he seeks to
win commendation and credit even to those Orders which he by his Apostolical
Authority might have established, by the example and judgment of other Churches
For which he cites 1 Cor. 7.17.11.15.14.33.16.1.
.


N. C. Then you are for imposing.


C. I am for that which all men of any discretion think necessary, viz. that
every body should not be left to do according to their present humor and
fancy, when they come to worship God in the public Assemblies. Even the famous
Smectymnuus allowed impositions in some cases. For they propound this as an
expedient, that, if it shall appear any Minister proves insufficient to
discharge the duty of prayer in a conceived way, it may be imposed on him as a
punishment to use a set form and no other Answer to the Humble Remonstrance p.
14.
. This was indeed a contrivance to disgrace the Liturgy as if it were fit for
no bodies use, but the duller and heavier sort of People: but yet it shows
their judgment above imposing, which you now complain of. And I would fain know
what they would have done with such insufficient persons as had a good opinion
of their gifts; and thinking themselves wronged in being condemned to the
forenamed Penance, would not obey them: Would they have forced them to
obedience or no? If not; their expedient signified nothing: If they would; then
why should not the Magistrate do it now, who knows that most of those who love
liberty, have a better opinion of their own abilities than they ought?


N. C. We wish the Common Prayer was left at liberty to be used or not, as men
found themselves inclined.


C. Do you so? That Is because you despise it, and think it good for little or
nothing. But were there one of your own Inventions to be established, you would
never leave us at Liberty, if you had power, to make use of it or let it alone.
Nothing should stand in competition with it: but every thing else, as well as
Common Prayer, fall before it, as Dagon before the Ark. Did not the
Independents incur your displeasure for craving an allowance to order a few
Churches after their own fashion? Mr. Dury himself, I remember, a man of peace
and composer of differences resolved their way was not to be tolerated. For it
would lay, said he, Epistolary Discourse, p. 21. Licensed by Mr. Cranford, July
27. 1644.
the foundation of strife and Division in the Kingdom to have two ways of
Church Government: which may agree with some Matchiavilian, but no Christian
Policy. And therefore it will be no wisdom in the State to yield to the Suit of
the five Brethren, except it be induced thereunto by the Necessity of avoiding
some greater inconvenience, than is the admitting of a seed of perpetual
Division within it self, which is in my apprehension the greatest of all other,
and most opposite to the Kingdom of Christ. Now the less the cause of
separation is; the greater is the fault in those that make it, and the less
cause the State has to give way to the making of it. You remember therefore
what Ordinances were made for the electing of Elders: and that all Parishes and
places whatsoever, as well privileged and exempt jurisdictions as others,
should be brought under the Government of Congregational, Classical,
Provincial, and National Assemblies Ordin. of 19. Au. 1645.
. And this was according to their solemn promise of settling Uniformity; which
part of the Covenant, they said (if you will believe them) was always before
their eyes Ordin. 14 Mar. 1645.
. In pursuance of which also the City desired Humble Remonstrance and Petition,
May 26. 1646.
. that some strict and speedy course might be taken for the suppressing of all
private and separated Congregations: And the House of Lords ordered the
Printing of their Petition: which was grounded upon a Remonstrance December. 15.
1642.
of the House of Commons, wherein they declared that it was far from their
purpose or desire to let loose the golden rains of Discipline and Government in
the Church; or to leave private persons or particular Congregations to take up
what form of Divine Service they please. As for the sacred Covenant, that Holy
Ordinance (as Mr. Case calls it) and choice piece of Divine Service; you know
no man could be a Minister, or an Elder, no nor practice as an Attorney or
Solicitor at the Law, unless he took it: and the refusal of it was generally
made a Mark of ungodliness; as I will prove when you please.


N. C. I know not what reasons they went by then.


C. The same whereby they would proceed now; if they had the same power and the
same hopes. And so I believe would the Independents too: who are for imposing
their own things as much as they are able. For they have invented, you must
know, a Model and form of their own heads which is not appointed in Holy
Scriptures. As first, that the Members must be examined and give an account of
the manner of their conversion (which is in a certain Method and Form too in
New England) and that before the Church. Narration of some Church Courses in N.
England by W. R. collected out of their own reports, etc. chap. 4. page 16.
Then, it is required that they enter into a Church Covenant, which is not the
Covenant of grace, but distinct from it: (For they acknowledge a man may be
within the Covenant of Grace, who is not in this, and one may be in this, who
is not in that.) And yet it is a Sacred not a Civil thing: which must be made
public before all the Church, vocal and express; so binding that none can be
loosed from it without the consent of the Church. And then it is held (at least
by many) that the Members must prophesy, i. e. exercise their gifts in and
before the whole Congregation, by preaching, expounding, applying the
Scripture: by instruction, confutation, Reprehension with all Authority Which
they say is an Ordinance perpetual in the Church as we read in Mr. Cottons
Catechism.
Now having devised these things, to name no more, I observe that the Covenant
in the same Church is in one and the same Form of words, as well as matter; and
therefore put into writing; and must be read by the party to be admitted, or he
must hear it read by some other and give his Assent to it. Here is not only a
Form of Holy Covenant (a principal point of worship as W. R. notes) invented by
one or more men; but imposed upon others, even as many as enter into the
Church; and more than that, to be read upon a Book. What is this better, or how
is it more lawful, than a set form of prayer? especially since this Covenant is
imposed as an Ordinance of God, and absolutely necessary; so as no Book-Prayer,
I think, is? I find also that by this Covenant, the Members in some places
Church of Salem in New-Engl.
were restrained and tied up from showing their gifts in speaking or scrupling;
till they were called thereto; that is, they being allowed to prophecy
publicly, and so to propound questions and make objections (which they call
Scrupling) they bound them up in this Covenant, which had the force of Law,
from doing it uncalled. I would fain know whether this be not to limit the
Spirit (as you speak) and to stint it to times, as you say we do it to words?
For if a man be never so full, he must have no vent without a call from the
Church. And how I pray you does this differ from an Ecclesiastical Canon, as to
it is force and obligation; but only that it has another name; and all old
Canons must be laid aside, to make way for this new Covenant. They tell us
also expressly that the Magistrate may compel men to keep their Covenant; though
not to enter into it Ib. Narration of Church Courses, cap. 15.
. And for spreading of infectious Doctrines, Mr. Wheelwright a Minister, and
Mrs. Hutchinson a pretended Prophetess, were banished the Country. Several of
their followers also were some imprisoned, some fined, some disfranchised, some
banished, and all disarmed, for petitioning the Court in behalf of Mr.
Wheelwright, and remonstrating with due submission (so their words were) that
they conceived he deserved no such censure Proceedings of the General Court
holden at New-Town, Oct. 2. 1637. and the Apology in defense of the proceedings
holden at Boston, 1636.
. And great many more remarkable things there are in that story, which I cannot
stand to recite. But must proceed to tell you, that as for others who are not
of their way, there is just no liberty at all. For as they will not grant
communion to members of other Churches not constituted as they are: so if a
company of approved godly people should sit down near them (where their power
reaches) differing from them only in some points of Church Government; some of
them tell us, not only that they shall not be owned as a sister Church, but
also be in danger of severe punishment by the Civil Magistrate Narration etc.
cap. 10.
.


N. C. What is all this to our Independents?


C. They extol both the Men and the ways of New England to the Skies: and
therefore approve of them I suppose, not only as good, but as excelling all
other. The Men, they say; have testified their sincerity to all generations
future by the greatest undertaking, except that of our Father Abraham, viz.
leaving this Country to go thither, merely to worship God more purely
Apologetical Narration, 1643. page 5.
. And as for their ways and practices, they are improved to a better Edition
and greater refinement, than those of other Reformed Churches Ib.
which makes it reasonable to believe, that when they Covenanted to reform
according to the example of the best Reformed Churches, they had New England in
their eyes, as their pattern: For those General words, as Mr. Feak Beam of
Light, p. 25.
rightly observes, left it under suspense and undetermined which of the
Reformed Churches had obtained the highest degree of Reformation. The Scots and
their Friends judged the Kirk of Scotland the best Reformed; the Dissenting
Brethren, approved the Reformation of New England to be most excellent. But be
this as it will, we have learned thus much from what has been related; that
the Churches of a better Edition and greater refinement, do not think it
unlawful to use forms in Gods holy Ordinances; unto which they bind those who
come under their Power; restraining them also from opening their mouths, when
perhaps they think themselves full of the Spirit: and denying leave to others
to set up a different way from theirs, in their Neighborhood. As for our
Independents I can show from their Books, that they think it necessary to be as
severe in a great many Cases (...) and I remember as heavy complaints of them,
as ever they made of the Presbyterians: and have been told that they daily spet
their renom privately and publicly, against those that separated from them
Vanity of the present Churches, p. 3. and 11.
, etc.


N. C. It will be too long to relate all those things. But I would fain know
how this will stand with Christian Liberty?


C. Do you think that it consists in being tied to no Law at all?


N. C. None but Gods.


C. Take heed what you say.


N. C. In matters of worship, I mean.


C. That Is absurd, as I have shown you. Gods Law has only given us the general
rules whereby things to be ordered in the Church: according to which our
Governors are to make particular Laws, and we are to obey them; or else there
will be nothing but confusion. Yet still our Christian Liberty remains;
because, First, we are not tied to this or that pattern or Model, but our
Governors have liberty to establish whatsoever (being in it self indifferent)
shall seem to them most expedient for maintaining comeliness and Order. And
secondly, when any orders are established, this is our Liberty (as our Divines
teach you) that we do not use them as any part of Divine Worship (as some of
you do) nor as meritorious and satisfactory, nor as necessary to justification
or salvation, but only for discipline and good Orders sake. And lastly, by
consequence the same Authority may alter them, and has not so tied up it self
to them, but that it is at liberty to abolish those, in case of inconvenience
arising, and establish others in the room. But such a Liberty as leaves men
loose from all Laws and Orders, save those that they shall choose themselves, is
a wild fancy which your Ministers condemn as well as ours. Mr. Dury for
instance, (a very moderate Presbyterian) tells the Independent Brethren, We
must expect no such Liberty as shall break the Bond of Spiritual Unity, which
by the allowance of a public tolleration of a different Church Government, may
be occasioned. To keep therefore Unity entire, a few must yield unto many,
except they can fairly persuade those many to yield to them Epistolary
Discourse page 22.
.


N. C. But what if they cannot agree?


C. I was going to tell you. If they cannot agree, it is just they should
forfeit their Spiritual right and liberty which Christ has conferred upon
them, and fall under the Arbitriment of the Secular Power, which ought to look
unto its own safety, lest those that make Divisions and multiply Breaches in
the Church about small matters, disturb also by that means the public peace of
the State Ib. p. 24.
. Of this mind also was Mr. John Cotton (a mild Independent) Good Kings, says
he Upon the 1 Canticles v. 10. page 44. Use. 2.
, ought to put upon their people wholesome Laws and straight binding to the
purity of Religion, and the Worship of God. It is no impeachment to their
Christian Liberty, as the Anabaptists dote, but an ornament to their beauty,
making their necks comely as with chains of Gold. And a little after Ib. Use 3.
, It is no impeachment of Christian Liberty to bow to Christian Laws: Yea, it
is the beauty of a Christian Church to wear those chains, those Laws, which
were made for the good of the Church; and it was their profaneness and rebellion
that said; Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.


N. C. He speaks of those purer Laws which they found out, not such as yours.


C. It Is as much to my purpose if he did; for it proves he would have the
people strictly tied to Laws, and wear these chains always about their necks;
and our Governors think theirs as good as any, and so may as innocently bind
men fast to them, as you tie them to yours. And let me tell you, both
Presbyterians and Independents would have their Orders so strict, that their
people should not be allowed the liberty of going to hear where they please.
Mr. Edwards Gangraena 1 part. p. 30. Error 125.
, I remember, in his Catalogue of Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, puts down
this for one, That it is part of men's Christian Liberty, not to hear their own
Ministers, but to go and hear where they will, and whom they think they may
profit most by. And the New England Churches condemned those that said
Catalogue of the Opinions condemned by an Assembly of the Churches, Aug. 30.
1637. Error, 80.
, if a man think he may edify better in another Congregation than in his own,
that is ground enough to depart ordinarily, from Word, Seals, etc.
notwithstanding the offense of the Church, often manifested to him for so doing.


N. C. But why should there be any penalties?


C. You may as well ask me over again, why any Laws? which will be ridiculous
without them. But I wonder you are not ashamed to speak against penalties and
force, who pressed the Covenant with more severity, than ever any body did
Conformity. What crosness is this (as the Bishop of Down said Visitation Speech
at Lis^egarvy, 26. August. 1638.
) that when we press men to conform to the Orders of our Church, they alledg it
is contrary to Christian Liberty to enforce men to the doing of any thing
against their Conscience, and that a man should be fully resolved in his own
mind of the Lawfulness of that which he does; and yet we urge that only under
pain of suspension and excommunication, and that after much patience and
forbearance, using all fair means to persuade them: But they compel men to
subscribe the Covenant against their Conscience by Pike and Pistol: threatening
no less than loss of life, or goods and Lands in case of refusal? By this we
may judge of sincerity, and what they would do in other things, had they Power
in their hands. The truth is one could scarce live among you when you had
power; for all that would not take the Covenant were held to be Malignants, and
if you know not what was to be done with them, an eminent person will tell you.


N. C. Who do you mean?


C. Do you not remember who it was that complemented the Parliament as the
keepers of our Vineyard, and commended them for being wanting in nothing to
their duty --


N. C. What then?


C. You shall hear. He says they had endeavored to fence the Vineyard with a
settled Militia, and then to gather out the Malignants as stones, and to make a
Wine Press therein for the squeezing of Delinquents Epistle before the Sermon
to the Commons, 25. Jan. 1643.
.


N. C. I know not who this was.


C. I Will be so civil to his Memory as to let this pass without naming him. But
he was one of those you call a moderate Presbyterian, by which we may know what
mind the Zealots are of. And as for the Independents, they were for an exact
and thorough Reformation too (for that which they were about had cost God dear,
they said, and he would not lay out so much for an imperfect, poor and low
reformation) and therefore exhorted the Parliament not to spare the lash to
effect it: but do as Jesus Christ did when he came to purge the Temple; not
only chide the money changers, but whip them away, and overthrow the very
Tables, lest they should recover their Trade again See Mr. Bridge Sermon before
the Commons, Nov. 29. 1643. p. 24, 25.
. Which others delivered in this phrase, Dagon is begun to fall before the Ark;
his head is off; but let not so much as the stump remain; i. e. give no Liberty
to these Church of England men; let them not enjoy the least relick of their
worship. And accordingly you know, I showed you the last time, there was an
Ordinance prohibiting the use of Common Prayer under great penalties in any
private family, not excepting the Kings Page 218. Of Friendly debate, 3 Edit.
.


N. C. I remember it; and some say it was an unworthy Construction you make of
the words; there was no such intention.


C. They had better have held their tongues, for I shall prove it to purpose.
When Commissioners were sent down to treat with his Majesty at the Isle of
Wight, he was content, as he had expressed himself before, May 12. that the
worship of God should be performed according to the Directory for three years:
provided only that his Majesty, and those of his judgment who could not in
Conscience submit thereunto, might not be obliged to it, but left free to their
own way This was September. 29. 1648.
. But this would not be granted; for you must know that though the Parliament
had Ordained Ordin. of March 1.4 1645.
; the Chapels or places in the Houses of the King and his Children should
continue free for the exercise of divine duties without any Elders; yet this
was no more than they allowed to every Peer. in the Realm, and those Duties,
also were to be performed according to the Directory, and not otherwise. And
therefore I find his Majesty was fain for the satisfaction of the two Houses
(so his words are) to make a further concession, and to profess he would not
insist upon any provision for continuance of the use of the Book of
Common Prayer in his Majesty's Chapel for himself and his household:
nevertheless he declared he intended to use some other set Form of Divine
Service This was 4. November. 1648.
. But nothing would satisfy, unless he would do according to the Directory;
they would not allow a Set Form in his own House: no, though he declared, in a
further explication of his mind, that he could not with a good Conscience
communicate in a public Form of Divine Service and Administration of
Sacraments, where it is wholly uncertain what the Minister will say to God: and
told them he hoped they would not think it reasonable to offer any violence to
the conscience of their Sovereign. For in their answer November. 20.
; they tell him twice, though they would not force his conscience, yet desire
it may be informed and rectifyed, that so it might agree with theirs, who were
his great Council: that is, they would not call it by that name; but he must
either agree to them, or be as he was: And so in fine he was content to wave
even a Set Form Reply. Nov. 21.
. Do you not see now, how we were deceived by this word Liberty; and that the
King himself could have no benefit of it? Had you not a great care of tender
Consciences, and were exceeding nice in pressing men to that wherein they were
not fully satisfied? Certainly his Majesty had reason to say Declar. of Jan.
18. after votes of no addresses.
, If it be Liberty of conscience they desire, he who wants it, is most ready to
give it. And what do you think of his Majesty's earnest desire to have some of
his Chaplains attend him Which he made February 17. 1646.
? Was it not barbarous to deliberate one moment whether it should be allowed or
no; especially by those who cried up Liberty so much? And yet he was fain to
renew his Message to them the next month March 6.
, and to represent the necessity of it, for the guidance of his Conscience. But
still they stop their ears to his desires; for in his Answers to their
Propositions May 12. 1647.
, he respites his answer to what concerned the Covenant, because he could not
give a resolution in a matter of Conscience, till he might be assisted with the
advice of some of his own Chaplains, which had hitherto been denied him. Nay,
when he was at Carisbrook Message of Aug. 10. 1648.
, I find him complaining that he had none about him (except a Barbar which came
down with the Commissioners) that ever he named to wait upon him. A piece of
rigor and barbarism greater than is ever used by Christians to the meanest
prisoners and greatest Malefactors Icon Basil.
etc.


N. C. I know the words. But what is this to penalties?


C. You led me out of the way; and yet not altogether, for you may see by this
that Christian Liberty is but a Phrase and signifies nothing, when any but your
selve challenges the benefit of it. But if you would hear any more of the
other. I must tell you the Independents were for some punishments though more
mild than yours. For which I must refer you to Mr. Buroughs Irenicum page 36.
and 37.
(and not stay to recite his words at length) who tells you men may be
restrained by Violence from publishing gross Errors, notwitstanding their plea
of Conscience: and that some trouble may be laid in their way who hold Errors
of less moment, so far as to take off the wantonness of their spirits and
neglect of means. Nay, where men by their weakness render themselves less
serviceable to the Commonwealth or Church, he says, they may be denied some
privileges granted to others: of which he gives you instances.


N. C. What? No respect to tender Consciences?


C. Yes. But if a man be proud and turbulent in his carriage and despise his
betters, the same Person tells you, you may be sure the Devil is in his will,
rather than in his Conscience. For though an erroneous conscience may cause one
to hold fast an Error, it does not put him upon proud, scornful and turbulent
behavior. When a man by reason of his Conscience (it may be the weakness of
it) differs from his Brethren, he had need carry himself with all humility and
meekness, and self-denial in all things. Consider how well you follow this
Rule, who are so peremptory and proud, etc.
He should be willing to be a servant to every man in what lawfully he may:
that thereby he may show to all, that it is not from any wilfulness, but merely
tenderness of his Conscience, that he cannot come off to that, which his
Brethren can do; whom yet he reverences, and in his carriage toward them
shows, that he esteems them his betters. But if a man that is weak, very much
beneath others in Parts and Graces (he might have said any one that dissents
from the Generality of Christians, and his Governors where he lives) shall
carry himself high, imperious, contemning and vilifying those who differ from
him, and be contentious with them, there is great reason to think the
corruption is in the will, rather than any where else. And if there should be
some conscience yet in those men, their heart distempers may justly forfeit
their right of pleading their conscience. Those who oppose them, if they do it
in a Christian way, nay, justify what they do before God, and say to him, when
he calls them to an account for their dealing so with those that professed
Conscience; Lord, we were willing to have dealt with them in all tenderness, if
we could have seen conscientiousness in their carriage; But we saw nothing but
scornfulness, pride, imperiousness, turbulency, conceitedness, we could see
nothing of the Spirit of Jesus Christ acting them in their way You may read
this in Mr. Buroughs. Ib. p. 32.
, etc. Thus he also resolves this question, How shall we know a man to be
obstinate, when he opposes the judgment of many more godly and learned than
himself? 1. If he oppose the common principles of Christianity. 2. If in other
matters his carriage be turbulent and altogether unbeseeming a Christian,
differing from his Brethren. 3. Where there is neglect of those means of
Information, which he has nothing to say against. Lastly, If he so cross his
own principles, that he appear to be self-condemned Ib. page 92.
Think, I beseech you, whether this be not your case.


N. C. I have a number of things to say, but I see you are in have, and
therefore will let them alone.


C. You may propound them some other time, if upon consideration of these
things you be not satisfied. And to save you and my self any further labor, I
shall commend a few Directions to you for the guiding of your conscience, and
so conclude.


N. C. Let Us hear them.


C. I cannot expect you should bear any respect to my Advice; therefore I will
speak to you in another man's words; which are so good, that it is pity they
should be forgot. They were writ above threescore years ago by Mr. Rich.
Bernard, in a Book of his, where he teaches you how to carry your self in a
Church or State so as that you may seek the public quiet of it Christian
Advertisements and Counsels of peace, 1608.
.


N. C. How I pray you? I Will study his counsels.


C. First, maintain and uphold all that is manifestly good in it. 2. If there
be any manifest evils, labor in your place by the best means to have them
amended peaceably. 3. Bear with lighter faults for a time till a fit occasion
be offered to have them amended. 4. As for likelihoods of evil make them not
apparent evil by ill interpretation; where neither the State intends it, nor so
maintains it. 5. Take doubtful things ever in the better part. 6. Judiciously
discern between the abuse of a thing and that which may be well used: lest in
abhorring the abuse, thou also do utterly condemn the thing it self and the use
thereof. 7. Let not the flourishing condition (as thou fanciest it) of any
Forain Church or State, make thee unthankful for the present good thou enjoyest
at home, and loath thine own happiness. 8. Mark and hold the difference between
these things; the Equity of Law and the Execution; the truth Generally
established and professed, and the personal Errors of some. Between soundness
of Doctrine and bad Application; between substance and circumstance; between
the very being of a thing, and the well being of it; between what is necessary
and what is only convenient and desirable; between a Commandment and a
Commandment to thee; between what is lawful and what is expedient. 9. Never
presume to reform others, before thou have well ordered thy self. 10. Do not
disobey the evident commandment of God: and when there is nothing but
probability of sinning in obeying the precept of thy Governors, do not set
opinion before judgment. Set aside fancy, and do not refuse to obey Authority,
where it is not plain thou shall sin against God. Be more loath to offend a
lawful Magistrate than many private persons. Where thou can not yield, there
humbly crave pardon. Where thou can not be tolerated, be contented with
Correction for safety of Conscience: and bear what thou can not avoid, with a
patient mind. Remember that to stand more upon avoiding dislike in private
persons, than in offending the public authority, is no better than an
humouring of men to increase discontentedness, rather than to preserve the
public peace and welfare. Nay, it is better to cross some men's affections
without sin to God, than to neglect most certain Duty, let people perish, open
a gap to the enemy, lose thy liberty, and no whit better the Church of God.


N. C. O but in this we must be very tender, and disobey men rather than God.


C. You should be very tender and careful lest you disobey both: by breaking
the commands of your Governors, when in so doing you follow no command of God.
For which end he gives you this Rule. As thou may not out of policy for fear
of trouble, furnish thy self with distinctions and evade thy duty, where the
word is plain: so thou ought not out of scrupulosity to imagine sin where
there is none, and trouble thy Conscience with fear of transgressing, where
there is no Law. The one breeds Atheism, the other is the mother of
Superstition. Therefore in indifferent things make no question for conscience
sake: so it be that neither holiness, merit, nor necessity be put therein, nor
used for any part of Gods worship, but for Decency, Order and Edification.


N. C. But what if I am in doubt; and afraid to use these things you call
indifferent?


C. In this case he has given you such good Directions that I need seek for no
other. The substance of them is this. You would do well to examine your self
whence your Doubt arises, whether from serious consideration and a judgment
convinced; or that it be only a niceness of dislike, coming from a desire not
to be troubled with them, or for that thou have not been used to them, or
because some cannot away with them, or from Ignorance and want of knowledge, or
perhaps from a godly jealousy and fear of doing amiss (I may add from a
natural timorousness and uncertainty of mind which can resolve nothing.) If the
ground be not a judgment enlightened and convinced, it is not trouble of
conscience, but a dislike that works discontentedness upon some of the former
grounds; which must be removed by consideration and settling your judgment upon
the Word of God and sound Reason. Nay, it will be fit to consider, whether this
doubting do not arise through your own default, by looking out Reasons to
increase your dislike, and neglecting to search for Arguments to give you
satisfaction. If this be your Case, as it is certain it is of too many, take as
great pains to resolve your self as you have done to bring your self into
doubting; else you deal but partially. And have a care you be not too highly
conceited of your self, and look upon your own reasons through the vapor of
affection.


N. C. My scruples are grounded upon this reason; that to make a thing lawful
in Gods worship, it is not enough that it is not forbidden but it must be
commanded.


C. Examine well without prejudice what our Divines have replied an hundred
times to this, and you will find it an absurd Principle. Or for the present
only weigh what he says, Why should a man be more scrupulous to seek to have
a plain command for every thing he does in Ecclesiastical matters, even about
things in themselves indifferent, than about matters politic in Civil affairs?
Men in these matters knwo not the ground nor end of many things which they
yield unto, upon a General command to obey Authority; and knowing them not to
be directly against God's will. And yet our obedience in all Civil matters must
be first of Conscience, and, secondly, as serving the Lord; which cannot be
without knowledge and persuasion that we do well even in that particular in
which we obey: which men usually for conscience sake inquire not into, but rest
themselves with a General commandment of obeying lawful Authority, so it be not
against a plain commandment of God. What therefore does let, but that a man may
so satisfy himself in matters Ecclesiastical? I must tell you ("says he) that
the curious searching so particularly into every thing to have full
satisfaction, has so wrought in these days upon men's wits to bring
distinctions; that the more men seek in doubt for resolution, the further they
are from it.


N. C. What shall a man do then?


C. He must observe these Rules of that Good man. 1. Keep all main Truths,
which are most plainly set down in the Word, or by the Law of Nature engraven
on every man's heart. 2. Believe every thing truly and necessarily gathered, by
an immediate consequence from the Text. 3. Follow evident examples fit for him
either as a Christian, or his special calling requires. 4. Avoid that which is
plainly forbidden, or follows necessarily by an immediate consequence. 5.
Follow true Antiquity and the General practice of the Church of God in all
ages, where they have not erred from the evident Truth of God. 6. If thou
suffer (says he) let it be for known Truth and against known wickedness;
for which thou have example in Gods word, or of the holy Martyrs in Church
story: But beware of far fetched consequences, or of suffering for new devices,
and for things formerly unto all Ages unknown, seem they never so holy and just
unto man.


N. C. But what if the thing commanded seem to me a sin?


C. He answers, some things sinfully commanded may be obeyed without sin, as
Joab obeyed David in numbering the People. Secondly, Consider, how do thou
conceive it to be sin? Is it simply so? Show me the prohibition: else where no
Law is there is no Transgression. Or is it so accidentally? that is, in the
abuse, which may be removed; or in respect of the Ignorance of the Lawfulness,
making thee to doubt and fear to offend? Use all diligence for resolution. And
if it be not a known sin to thee certainly but only by probability; consider,
whether probability of sinning may give thee a sufficient discharge for not
obeying a plain Precept, and to neglect necessary Duties otherwise, both to God
and man.


N. C. Would you have me do things while I am full of scruples whether I may or
no? Does not the Scripture say whatsoever is not of Faith is sin? Romans 14.23.


C. He takes no notice of that place; But since you mention it I Will give you an
Answer, not from my self, Mr. John Geree Resolution of 10. Cases Licensed by
Mr. Cranford, 1644.
whose judgment you value not much, but from a Divine, who, we are told,
suffered much under the Bishops. Things wherein doubts arise, says he, are of
a double Nature. First, Such as are merely arbritary and at mine own dispose.
These may be left undone without scruple, but not done with it; because the
inconvenience of Omission is but a little self-suffering. Such are the things
the Apostle speaks off; forbearing the use of our Liberty in eating flesh, or
the like case. If a man doubt whether he may do that, or whether he may play at
Tables or Cards; the omission here being no more but only denying our selves a
little content, the doubt should make a man forbear. But then there are other
things that are not arbitrary but under a command, as coming to the Sacrament,
obedience to the higher powers in things lawful. Now if scruples arise about
these, and a man doubts he sins if he act, and he also doubts he sins if he
forbear; it is neither clear that the thing to be done is sinful, and so to be
forborne, nor perfectly clear that it is a duty and so to be done: In this case
he must weigh the Scales; and where the Soul apprehends most weight of reason,
that way he must incline; though the other scale be not altogether empty. And
this done after humble and diligent search, with bewailing our infirmity that
we are no more discerning, will be accepted of God. God puts not his people on
necessity of sinning; nor can our scruples dispense with his commands.


N. C. Sometime I think this is clear and solid Reason; but many Friends think
otherwise, and I am loath to offend them by doing these things which our
Governors require.


C. But consider, First, they may take offense when none is given, Bern.
Counsels of Peace.
and then the fault is their own, and you not chargeable therewith. Secondly,
the Question is whether they be offended in respect of what themselves know, or
but led by affection, disliking of other men's dislike. Entreat the former to
let thee abound, for such things, in thy own sense; and show them that herein
you may Brotherly disagree: for the latter, inform their judgment, if they will
yield to reason: If not, then consider. Thirdly, whether thou art bound to
nourish up such men in their folly, and to respect their partial affection;
being more carried away with an overweening of some men's persons, than any
thing at all with the right understanding of the cause. And then, Fourthly,
consider the power of the Magistrate, and whether his Authority commanding do
not take away the offense which might otherwise be given by a voluntary Act.
And, Lastly, that a man should not stand more upon avoiding dislike in private
persons, than offense to public Authority; as I said before.

But alas! as he says at the end of his Book Separatis Schism adjoined to the
other p. 161.
, Charity and such like graces are * far to seek now adays. Men on all hands
judge of things perversely. This they will allow, and that again humourously
they will not like. That which maybe justly done well without offense, thereat
will others be unjustly offended. Things doubtful, men take sinisterly; yea
they dare censure what they never saw: condemn as ill, what they knew not:
suspect where they have no cause: gainsay, where there ought to be no
contradiction, partial to themselves and rigorous toward others. Authority
will rule thus and so, Subjects will obey with Exceptions. Judgment from the
word is not so much a Guide, as will and affection in too many are made
Masters. These be ill days and contentious: unhappy times, in which men either
will do, that they will do of themselves; or else fall to humor parties (not
simply receiving a love of the truth for the truths sake) and so come to
pertakings, which does but increase contention, till all come to confusion:
except the Lord in his great mercy prevent the same.


N. C. And turn us all to a more moderate course, and there keep us.


C. You have read the Book: for those are the words that follow.


N.C. No. But I think there is much of truth in what he says: and it had been
well if his Counsels had been then followed.


C. Alas! they who were chiefly concerned in them, were so far from following
them, that they took no farther notice of them than only to revile him that
wrote them.


N. C. Methinks none should be so brutish.


C. It is as I tell you. Mr. Ainsworth making an answer to this Book, wholly
omitted these Counsels of Peace, save only that he once mentioned them, with
this haughty censure, that perhaps the Author knew no more than Caiphas what he
said. Such men will not grant us able to say any good thing --


N. C. But his was an acknowledgment the things were observable.


C. True, but you see the men of that Spirit will not regard excellent things,
if they be said by those whom they do not love. Mr. Bernard in his reply I
think has given a true description: of them. Schismatics are headstrong, they
will not see evident conviction. Preface to plain Evidences and Answer to the
Fore-speech as Mr. Ainsworth terms it. Published by Authority. 1610.
Self-love makes them judge the best of themselves, but their want of Charity,
very badly of others. They beguile themselves with shows of Piety, heat of
affection, and with a strong apprehension of things greatly amiss in others.
These they can see with both eyes, themselves with neither. Our arguments
against them are Paper shot: but their weakest reasons against us (if
themselves may judge) are shot of Cannon. They despise every man's endeavor
against them, and are in admiration of their own works. Let any man confer with
them, and he shall hear it: I my self have sufficient experience of it. All
opposing their way, are men, in their judgment, that have no grace, rebellious
against the Light. They are presumptuous in censuring; and may give sentence
against all men and all Churches in the World; but none may give judgment of
them. I heartily wish you all less pride and more humility; less dislike of
others, and more charity, with greater dislike of your selves: the want whereof
is the present enemy to lovely Unity, that ever accompanies true Piety; which
many pretend, but few truly enjoy. And so farewell.


N. C. Do you hear? pray come back.


C. Will you never have done? what is the matter now?


N. C. I have but one word more. You must not pass too hard a censure upon some
Ministers who come not to Church. You know they cannot appear openly because of
the Act which forbids them to be in Cities, Market Towns, etc.


C. And yet they are there notwithstanding that Act, and kept meetings against
another Act which was lately in force. Why may they not appear any where in
those places as well as in one? In God's house as well as their own or yours?
In the face of all the people, as well as before a party separated from the
rest? You are a fine Advocate indeed: who now have confessed they are more
afraid of the punishment (whatsoever they say) than of the Sin of disobedience.
For they break the Law wheresoever they are in those prohibited Cities or
Towns, and they would but break it, if they were at Church: only it would be
less --


N. C. I will stay you no longer. I did not think of this, when the other came
into my mind.


C. I believe it. You are not wont to lay thing together, and then search them
to the bottom. But you think as you talk; suddenly, in a rambling manner,
without any coherence: which would never trouble me at all (you may think and
speak as you please) if you were not so conceited of your selves, as if you
were the most knowing people, that must give Law and Religion to all others.


N. C. There are those can talk as well as you.


C. No doubt of it. Let them therefore endeavor to mend the rest. And remember
them of such passages as these in your Books, which once they allowed of. No
man endowed with right Reason, An Alarm by way of Answer to the last warning
piece, p. 15. Licensed by Mr. John Downam, with this sentence praefixed. Ye
shall have one Ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that is born in
the Land.
but will say there is a necessity of a Government: if of a Government, then of
an Uniformity, else it will be confused. Therefore there is a neoessity to
suppress all CONVENTICLES; and that all men should observe such Order, Time,
Place, and public Gesture, as the Parliament (by the Advice of the Assembly)
shall appoint. And no man that has any use of Conscience in any thing but will
acknowledge he is bound in Conscience to obey the Laws of the Land in which he
lives, in all indifferent things: Or he is turbulent and deserves censure, even
for matters concerning Worship. He that has the use of Conscience, will make
Conscience of the duties of both Tables, as well as one. There is doubtless a
Conscience toward God, and a Conscience toward man: This was the Apostles
practice, and must be our Rule. Act. 24.16. I exercise my self to have always
a Conscience void of offense, toward God and toward men. Once more Farewell.


N. C. I thank you.


THE END.

